AUXILIO DIVINO SIC PARVIS MAGNA

Drake perorati novit quem terminus orbis,
Et quem bis mundi vidit vterque Polus;
Si taceant homines, facient te Sidera notum,
Sol nescit comitis non memor osse sui.


Sir Francis Drake Revived. Who is or may be a Pattern to stir up all
Heroicke and active SPIRITS of these Times, to benefit their Country and
eternize their Names by like Noble ATTEMPTS. Being a Summary and true Relation
of four several VOYAGES made by the said Sir FRANCIS DRAKE to the
WEST-JNDIES. VIZ. His dangerous adventuring for GOLD and SILVER with the
gaining thereof. And the surprising of Nombre de dios by himself and two and
fifty Men. His Encompassing the WORLD. His Voyage made with Christopher
Carleill, Martin Frobusher, Francis Knollis, and others. Their taking the
Towns of Saint Jago, Sancto Domingo, Carthagena and Saint Augustine. His last
Voyage (in which he dyed) being accompanied with Sir John Hawkins, Sir Thomas
Baskerfield, Sir Nicholas Clifford, with others. His manner of Burial.
Collected out of the Notes of the said Sir Francis Drake; Mastet Philip
Nichols, Master Francis Fletcher, Preachers; and the Notes of diverse other
Gentlemen (who went in the said Voyages) carefully compared together.

Printed at London for Nicholas Bourne, dwelling at the South entrance of the
royal Exchange, 1653.

To the READER.
Courteous READER,
THese ensuing Voyages, and Travels of that adventurous and valiant Worthy, Sir
FRANCIS DRAKE; the Pean^r more trusting to the worth of the Subject it treats
of, then the worthiness of the Collectors performance, have made bold to
become an object to thy eye, not doubting but under the fortitude of the most
ingenious and generous Spirits, this may not only crave, but find a benevolent
shelter from those many envious and injurious detractions which the ignorant
may aspersively cast thereon, rather censuring then commending and following
things of this nature, not knowing what belongs there unto. Things of greatest
profit require least praise; Painting better beseemes rotten Walls then precious
Stones; therefore superfluous eloquence bestowed upon a matter of sufficient
excellence, is rather a testimony of a trifling Wit, then a token of true
wisdom. Vouchsafe therefore (gentle Reader) this ensuing discourse thy
favorable censur, since thou can loose nothing by glancing on former Actions;
for the observation of passed Adventures, may probably advance future
Employments. Caesar wrote his own Commentaries, and this Dooer was partly the
Inditor; Nor is there wanting living testimony to confirm its Truth. For his
sake then cherish what is good, and I shall willingly entertain check for what
is amiss. And if thou can pick out any thing either for thy use or content,
it is thine, and I am pleased.

And whereas Example is the public aim of all; be pleased (Courteous READER)
to take a Character of this heroicke Worthy; and I desire thee to observe with
me in these ensuing Treatises, the power and justice of the Lord of Hosts, who
could enable so mean a Person to right himself upon so mighty a Prince,
together with the goodness and Providence of God very observable, in that it
pleased him to raise this Man not only from a low condition, but even from the
state of Persecution* his Father suffered in it, being forced to fly from his
House (near South Tavistock in Devon) into Kent, and there to inhabit in the
Hull of a Ship, wherein many of his younger Sons were borne; he had twelve in
all, and as it pleased God to give most of them a being upon the Water, so the
greatest part of them dyed at Sea: the youngest, who though he were as far as
any, yet dyed at home, whose Posterity inherites that, which by himself and
this noble Gentleman, the eldest Brother, was hardly yet worthily gotten.

I could more largely acquaint thee with all his four VOYAGES made into the
WEST INDIES, after that his excellent service both by Sea and Land in Ireland,
under WALTER Earl of Essex. His next about the WORLD. Another wherein he took
Saint Iago, Carthagena, Saint Domingo, Saint Augustino; his doings at Cadiz;
besides the first Charricke taught by him to Sail into England. His stirrings
in Eighty seven, his remarkable Actions in Eighty eight; his endeavors in the
Portugal employment; his last Enterprise determined by death, and his filling
Plimmouth with a plentiful stream of fresh Water; But I pass by all these, I
had rather thou should enquire of others then to seem my self a
vainglorious man. I intend not his praise, I strive only to set out the
praise of his and our good God, that guided him in his truth, and protected him
in his courses: my ends are to stir thee up to the worship of God, and
service of thy Country by his example. If any thing be worth thy
consideration, conclude with me, that the Lord only can do great things,

R.D.

SIR FRANCIS DRAKE REVIVED. Calling upon this Dull or Effeminate AGE, to follow
his Noble Steps for GOLD and SILVER.
AS there is a general vengeance, which secretly pursues the doers of wrong,
and ^uffereth them not to prosper, albeit no Man of purpose empeach them: so is
there a particular indignation engraffed in the bosom of all that are wronged,
which cease not seeking by all means possible to redress or remedy the wrong
received. In so much as those great and mighty Men, in whom their prosperous
estate has bred such an overweening of themselves, that they do not only
wrong their inferiors, but despise them being injured; seem to take a very
unfit course for their own safety, and far unfitter for their rest. For as
Aesope teaches, even the Fly has her spleen, and the Emmer is not without
her choler, and both together many times find means whereby though the Eagle
lay her Eggs in Jupiters lap, yet by one way or other, she escapes not
requital of her wrong done the Emmer.

Among the manifold examples hereof, which former Ages have committed to
memory, or our time yielded to sight; I suppose, there has not been any more
notable then this in hand; either in respect of the greatness of the person,
by whom the first injury was offered; or the meannesse of him, who righteth
himself. The one being (in his own conceit) the mightiest Monarch of all the
World; the other an English Captain, a mean subject of her Majesty's Who
(besides the wrongs received at Rio de Hacha with Captain John Lovell in the
years 65.66.) having been grievously indamaged at Saint John de Vllua in the
Bay of Mexico, with Captain John Hawkins, in the years 67.68. not only in the
loss of his Goods of some value, but also of his Kinsmen and friends, and that
by the falsehood of Don Martin Henriquez then the Viceroy of Mexico; and finding
that no recompense could be recoved out of Spain by any of his own means, or by
her Majesty's letters; he used such helps as he might, by two several Voyages
into the West Indies; the first with two Ships, the one called the Dragon, the
other the Swan, in the year 70. the other in the Swan alone in the year 71. to
gain such intelligences as might further him to get some amends for his loss.
And having, in those two Voyages, gotten such certain notice of the persons
and places aimed at, as he thought requisite; and thereupon with good
deliberation, resolved on a third Voyage (the Description whereof we have now in
hand) he accordingly prepared his Ships and Company; and then taking the first
opportunity of a good wind, had such succes in his proceedings, as now follows
further to be declared.

On Whitsunday Eve being the 24. of May, May 24.
in the year 1572. 1572.
Captain Drake in the Pascha of Plimoth of 70. tons his Admiral, with the Swan
of the same Port of 25 tons his Vice Admiral, in which his brother John Drake
was Captain (having in both of them of men and boys seventy three, all
voluntarily assembled, of which the eldest was fifty, all the rest under
thirty: so divided that there were forty seven in one ship, twenty six in the
other; both richly furnished, with victuals and apparel for a whole year: and
no less heedfully provided of all manner of Munition, Artillery, Artificers,
stuff and tools, that were requisite for such a Man of war in such an
attempt, but especially having three dainty Pinnases, made in Plymouth, taken
asunder all in pieces and stowed aboard, to be set up as occasion served: set
sail from out of the Sound of Plymouth, with intent to land at Nombre de dios.

The wind continued prosperous and favorable at Northeast, and gave us a very
good passage, without any alteration of change: so that albeit we had sight of
Porto Santo one of the Maderas, June 3*
and of the Canaries also within twelve days of our setting forth: yet we
never struck sail, nor came to anchor, nor made any stay for any cause,
neither there or else where, until 25. days after; June 28.
When we had sight of the Island of Guadalupe, one of the Islands of the West
Indies, goodly high land.

The next morning we entered between Dominica and Guadalupe, where we descried
two canoas, June 29.
coming from a rocky Island, three leagues off Dominica, which usually repair
thither to fish, by reason the great plenty thereof, which is there continually
to be found. We landed on the South side of it, remaining there three days to
refresh our men, and water our ships, out of one of those goodly rivers, which
fall down off the mountain. There we saw certain poor cottages built with
Palmito boughs and branches, but no inhabitants at that time civil nor savage;
the cottages it may be, (for we could know no certain cause of the
solitariness we found there) serving, not for continual inhabitation, but
only for their uses that came to that place at certain seasons to fish.

July 1.
The third day after, about three in the afternoon, we set sail from thence,
toward the continent of Terra firma, And the fifth day after, we had sight of
the high land of Santa Martha, July 6.
but came not near the shore by ten leagues. But thence directed our course,
for a place called by us Port Phesant, for that our Captain had so named it in
his former voyage, by reason of the great store of those goodly Fowls, which he
and his Company did then daily kill, and feed on, July 12.
in that place. In this course, notwithstanding we had two days calm, yet
within six days we arived at our Port Phesant, which is a fine round Bay, of
very safe harbor for all winds, lying between two high points, not past half
a cables length over at the mouth, but within eight or ten cables length every
way, having ten or twelve fadome water, more or less, full of good fish, the
soil also very fruitful; which may appear by this, that our Captain having
been in this place, within a year and few days before, and having rid the
place with many alleyes and paths made, yet now all was so overgrowne again,
as that we doubted at first, whether this were the same place or no.

At our entrance into this Bay, our Captain having given order to his brother
what to do, if any occasion shoud happen in his absence, was on his way, with
intent to have gone a land, with some few only in his company, because he knew
there dwelt no Spaniards within thirty five leagues of that place. Tolou being
the nearest to the Eastwards, and Nomb^e de dios to the westwards, where any of
that Nation dwelt. But as we were rowing a shore, we saw a smoke in the woods,
even near the place which our Captain had aforetime frequented; therefore
thinking it fit to take more strength with us, he caused his other boat also to
be manned with certain muskets, and other weapons, suspecting some enemy had
been a shore.

When we landed, we found by evident marks, that there had been lately there,
a certain English man of Plymouth called John Garret, who been conducted
thither by certain English Mariners, which had been there with our Captain in
some of his former voyages. He had now left a plate of Lead, nailed fast to a
mighty great tree (greater hen any four men, joining hands, could fathom
about;) on which were engraven these words directed to our Captain.

CAptain Drake, if you fortune to come to this Port, make have away; For the
Spaniards which you had with you here the last year, have bewrayed this place,
and taken away all that you left here. I departed from hence this present 7. of
July 1572.

Your very loving friend JOHN GARRET.


The smoke which we saw, was occasioned by a fire, which the said Garret and
his Company had made before their departure, in a very great tree (not far
from this which had the Lead nailed on it) which had continued burning at least
five days before our arrival.

This advertisement notwithstanding, our Captain meant not to depart, before he
had built his Pinnaces, which were yet aboard in pieces, for which purpose he
knew this Port a most convenient place. And therefore so soon as we had mored
our ships, our Captain commanded his Pinnaces to be brought ashore, for the
Carpenters to set up, himself employing al his other company in fortifying a
place which he had chosen out as a most fit plot of three quarters of an acre
of ground, to make some strength or safety for the present, as sufficiently as
the means he had would afford, which was performed, by felling of great trees
and bowsing and haling them together with great Pulleis and halfers, until
they were enclosed to the waters, and then letting others fall upon them,
until they had raised with trees and boughs thirty foot in height round about,
leaving only one gate to issue at neet the waters side, which every night (that
we might sleep in more safety and security) was shut up, with a great tree
drawn a'rthwart it. The whole plot was built in a Pentagonall form, to wit, of
five equal sides and angles, of which angles two were toward the sea, and
that side between them was left open, for the easy launcing of our Pinnases:
the other four equal sides were cholely (excepting the gate before mentioned)
firmly closed up. Without, instead of a trench, the ground was rid for fifty
foot space, round about. The rest was very thick with trees, of which many were
of those kinds, which are never without green leaves, till they are dead at
the root (exeepting only one kind of tree amongst them, much like to our Ash,
which when the Sun comes right over them, causing great raines, suddenly
casts all their leaves, viz. within three days, and yet within six days
after becomes all green again; the leaves of the other trees do also in part
fall away, but so as the trees continue still green notwithstanding) being of a
marvelous height, and supported as it were with five or six natural buttresses
growing out of their bodies, so far, that three men may so be hidden in each of
them that they which shall stand in the very next buttresse shall not be able
to see them. One of them specially was marked to have had seven of those stays
or buttresses for the supporting of his greatness and height, which being
measured with a line close by the bark and near to the ground, as it was
indented or extant, was sound to be above thirty nine yards about. The wood of
those trees is as heavy or heavier then Brasil or Lignum vitae, and is in
color white.

The next day after we had arrived, July 13.
there came also into that Bay an English Bark of the Isle of Wight of Sir
Edward Horseyes, wherein James Rawse was Capt. and John Overy Master, with
thirty men; of which, some had been with our Captain in the same place the
year before. They brought in with them a Spanish Carvell of Sivell (which he
had taken the day before, athwart of that place, being a Carvell of Adviso
bound for Nombre de Dios) and also one Shallop with Oars, which he had taken
at Cape Blancke. This Captain Rawse understanding our Captains purpose was
desirous to join in consort with him; and was received upon conditions agreed
on between them.

Within seven days after his coming, having set up our Pinnaces, and
dispatched all our business, July 20*
in providing all things necessary, out of our Ships into our Pinnaces: we
departed from that Harbor, seting sail in the morning toward Nombre de Dios,
continuing our course till we came to the Isles of Pinos; where being within
three days arrived, we found two Fregates of Nombre de Dios, lading Planke and
Timber from thence.

The Negroes which were in those Fregates, July 2^*
gave us some particular understanding of the present state of the Town: and
besides, told us that they had heard a report, that certain Soldiers should
come thither shortly, and were daily looked for from the Governor of Panama and
the Country thereabout, to defend the Town against the Symerons (a black
People, which about eighty years past, fled from the Spaniards their Masters,
by reason of their cruelty, and are since grown to an Nation under two Kings
of their own; the one inhabiteth to the West, the other to the East of the way
from Nombre de Dios to Panama) who had near surprised it about six weeks before.

Our Captain willing to use those Negroes well (not hurting himself) set them
a shore upon the maine, that they might perhaps join themselves to their
Countrymen the Symerons, and gain their liberty if they would, or if they
would not, yet by reason of the length and troublesomenesse of the way by land
to Nombre de Dios, he might prevent any notice of his coming, which they
should be able to give. For he was loath to put the Town to too much charge
(which he knew they would willingly bestow) in providing beforehand for his
entertainment, and therefore he hastened his going thither, with as much speed
and secrecy as possibly he could.

To this end, disposing of all his companies, according as they inclined most,
he left the three Ships and the Carvell with Captain Rause, and chose into his
four Pinnases (Captain Rauses Shallop made the fourth) besides fifty three of
our men, twenty more of Captain Rauses company, with which he seemed
competently furnished, to atchieve what he intended: especially having
proportioned, according to his own purpose, and our men's disposition, their
several arms, viz. six Targets, six Firepikes, twelve Pikes, twenty four
Muskets and Callivers, sixteen Bows, and six Partisans, two Drums, and two
Trumpets.

July 28.
Thus having parted from our company, we arrived at the Island of Cativaas, being
twenty five leagues distant; about five days after there we landed all in the
morning betimes; and our Captain trained his men delivering them their several
weapons and arms, which hitherto he had kept very fair and safe in good
caske; and exhorting them after his manner, he declared the greatness of the
hope of good things that was there: the weakness of the town being unwalled,
and the hope he had of prevailing, to recompense his wrongs, especially now
that he should come with such a crew, who were like minded with himself; and
at such a time, as he should be utterly undiscovered.

Therefore even that afternoon, he causes us to set sail for Nombre de dios,
so that before sun set we were as far as Rio Francisco: thence he led us hard
aboard the shore (that we might not be descried of the Watch house) until that
being come within two leagues of the point of the Bay, he caused us to strike a
hull, and cast our grappers, riding so until it was dark night.

Then we weighed again and set sail, rowing hard aboard the shore, with as
much silence as we could, till we recovered the point of the harbor under the
high land: there we stayed all silent, purposing to attempt the town in the
dawning of the day, after that we had reposed our selves for a while.

But our Captain with some others of his best men, finding that our people were
talking of the greatness of the town and what their strength might be,
especially by the report of the Negroes that we took in the Isle of Pinos:
thought it best to put these conceits out of their heads, and therefore to take
the opportunity of the rising of the Moon that night, persuading them that it
was the day dawning. By this occasion we were at the Town a large hour sooner
then first was purposed. For we arrived there by three of the clock after
midnight: at what time it fortuned that a ship of Spain, of sixty tons,
laden with Canary wines and other Commodities, which had but lately come into
the Bay, and had not yet fu^ld her sprit sail, espying our four Pinnases,
being an extraordinary number, and those rowing with many Oars, sent away her
Gundeloe toward the Town, to give warning; but our Captain perceiving it,
our betwixt her and the Town, forcing her to go to the other side of the Bay:
whereby we landed without impeachment, although we found one Gunner upon the
Platform, in the very place where we landed, being a Sandy Bay and no Key at
all, not past twenty yards from the Houses.

There we found six great Pieces of brass Ordnance, mounted upon their
Carriages, some Demi, some whole Culvering: we presently dismounted them, the
Gunner fled, the Town took alarm (being very ready thereto, by reason of
their often disquieting, by their near neighbors the Symerons) as we
perceived, not only by the noise and cries of the people, but by the Bell
ringing out, and Drums running up and down the Town.

Our Captain, according to the directions which he had given over night, to
such as he had made choice of for the purpose, left twelve to keep the
Pinnaces, that we might be sure of a safe retreit, if the worst befell. And
having made sure work of the Platform before he would enter the Town, he
thought best, first to view the Mount, on the East side of the Town, where he
was informed, by sundry intelligences the year before, they had an intent to
plant Ordnance, which might scower round about the Town. Therefore leaving one
half of his company, to make a stand at the foot of the mount, he marched up
presently unto the top of it, with all speed, to try the truth of the report
for the more safety. There we found no piece of Ordnance, but only a very fit
place prepared for such use, and therefore we left it without any of our men,
and with all celerity returned down the Mount. Then our Captain appointed his
Brother, with John Oxnam and sixteen other of his men to go about behind the
Kings treasure-house, and enter near the Easter end of the marketplace:
himself with the rest, would pass up the broad street, into the marketplace,
with sound of Drum and Trumpet.

The Firepikes divided half to the one, and half to the other company, served
no less for fright to the Enemy, then light of our Men, who by this means
might discern every place very well, as if it were near day, whereas the
Inhabitants stood amazed at so strange a sight, marvelling what the matter
might be; and imagining, by reason of our Drums and Trumpets sounding in so
sundry places, that we had been a far greater number then we were.

Yet by means of the Soldiers which were in the Town, and by reason of the
time which we spent in marching up and down the Mount, the Soldiers and the
Inhabitants had put themselves in Arms, and brought their Companies in some
order, at the South-east end of the Marketplace, near the Governors House,
and not far from the Gate of the Town, which is only one, leading toward
Panama, having (as it seems) gathered themselves thither, either that in the
Governors sight they might show their Valor, if it might prevail, or else
that by the Gate they might best take their Vale, and escape readiest.

And to make a show of far greater numbers of shot, or else of a custom they
had, by the like device to terrify the Symerons, they had hung Lines with
Matches lighted, overthwart the Wester-end of the Marketplace, between the
Church and the Cross, as though there had been in a readiness some company
of shot, whereas indeed there was not past two or three that taught these Lines
to dance, till they themselves ran away, as soon as they perceived they were
discovered.

But the Soldiers, and such as were joined with them, presented us with a
jolly hot volley of shot, beating full upon the egresse of that Street in which
we marched, and levelling very low, so as their Bullets oft-times grazed on the
Sand. We stood not to answer them in like terms; but having discharged our
first volley of shot, and feathered them with our arrows (which our Captain
had caused to be made of purpose in England, not great sheafe arrows, but fine
roving shafts, very carefully reserved for the service) we came to the push of
Pike, so that our fire-pikes being well armed and made of purpose, did us very
great service. For our men with their Pikes and short weapons, in short time
took such order among these Gallants, some using the but-end of their Pieces
in stead of other weapons, that partly by reason of our arrows, which did us
there notable service, partly by occasion of this strange and sudden closing
with them, in this manner unlooked for, and the rather for that at the very
instant, our Captains brother, with the other Company, with their fire-pikes,
entered the marketplace by the Easter-street: they casting down their weapons,
fled all out of the Town by the gate aforesaid, which had been built for a
bar to keep out of the Town the Symerons, who had often assailed it, but
now served for a gap for the Spaniards to fly at.

In following and returning, diverse of our men were hurt, with the weapons
which the Enemy had let fall as he fled: somewhat, for that we marched with
such speed, but more for that they lay so thick and cross one on the other.

Being returned, we made our stand near the midst of the market place, where a
tree grows hard by the cross; whence our Captain sent some of our men to
stay the ringing of the alarm Bell, which had continued all this while: but
the Church being very strongly built and fast shut, they could not without
firing (which our Captain forbad) get into the steeple where the Bell hung.

In the mean time, our Captain having taken two or three Spaniards in their
flight, commanded them to show them the Governors house, where he understood
was the ordinary place of unlading the Moyles, of all the treasure which came
from Panamah by the Kings appointment: Although the silver only was kept
there: the gold, pearl and jewels (being there once entered by the Kings
Officer) was carried from thence to the Kings treasure house not far off,
being a house very strongly built of lime and stone, for the safe keeping
thereof.

At our coming to the Governors house, we found the great door (where the
Moyles do usually unlade) even then opened; a Candle lighted upon the top of
the stayers; and a fair Gennet ready sadled, either for the Governor himself
or some other of his household to carry it after him. By means of this light,
we saw a huge heap of Silver, in that nether room: being a pile of bars of
silver, of as (near as we could guess) seventy foot in length, of ten foot in
breadth, and twelve foot in height, piled up against the wall, each bar was
between thirty five and forty pound in weight. At sight hereof our Captain
commanded straightly that none of us should touch a bar of silver, but stand
upon our weapons, because the Town was full of people, and there was in the
Kings treasure house near the waters side, more gold and jewels then all our
four Pinnaces would carry, which we would presently set some in hand to break
open, notwithstanding the Spaniards reports of the strength of it.

We were no sooner returned to our strength, but there was a report brought by
some of our men, that our Pinnaces were in danger to be taken, and that if we
our selves got not aboard before day, we should be oppressed with multitudes both
of Soldiers and towns people. This report had his ground from one Diego a
Negro, who in the time of the first conflict, came and called to our Pinnaces,
to know whether they were Captain Drakes? and upon answer received, continued
entreating to be taken aboard (though he had first three or four shot made at
him) until at length they fetch him, and learned by him, that not past eight
days before our arrival the King had sent thither some hundred and fifty
Soldiers to guard the Town against the Symerons, and the Town at this time
was full of people besides: which, all the rather believed, because it agreed
with the report of the Negroes, which we took before at the Isle of Pinos: and
therefore our Captain sent his brother and John Oxnam to understand the truth
thereof. They found our men, which we left in our Pinnaces, much frighted, by
reason that they saw great Troops and Companies running up and down, with
matches light, some with other weapons; crying Que gente? que gente? which
having not been at the first conflict but coming from the utter ends of the
Town (being at least as big as Plymouth) came many times near us, and
understanding that we were English, discharged their Pieces and ran away.

Presently after this, a mighty shower of rain, with a terrible storm of
thunder and lightning, fell, which powered down so vehemently (as it usually
does in those Countries) that before we could recover the shelter of a certain
shade or pent-house, at the Wester end of the Kings treasure-house (which
seems to have been built there of purpose to avoid Sun and Rain) some of
our bow-strings were wet, and some of our match and powder hurt: which while we
were careful of to refurnish and supply; diverse of our men, harping on the
reports lately brought us, were muttering of the Forces of the Town, which our
Captain perceiving, told them, that he had brought them to the mouth of the
treasure of the World, if they would want it, they might henceforth blame no
body but themselves. And therefore as soon as the storm began to assuage of
his fury (which was a long half hour) willing to give his Men no longer
leisure to demurre of those doubts, nor yet allow the Enemy farther respite to
gather themselves together; he stepped forward, commanding his Brother, with John
Oxnam and the Company appointed them, to break the Kings Treasure-house; the
rest to follow him, to keep the strength of the market place, till they had
dispatched the business for which they came.

But as he stepped forward, his strength and sight and speech failed him, and he
began to faint for want of blood, which as then we perceived, had, in great
quantity, issued upon the Sand, out of a wound received in his leg in the
first encounter, whereby though he felt some pain, yet (for that he perceived
diverse of the Company, having already gotten many good things, to be very
ready to take all occasions, of winding themselves, out of that conceited
danger) would he not have it known to any, till this his fainting, against his
will, bewrayed it, the blood having first filled the very prints which our
footsteps made, to the great dismay of all our Company, who thought it not
credible, that one man should be able to spare so much blood and live.

And therefore even they, which were willingest to have adventured most, for so
fair a booty, would in no case hazard their Captains life; but (having given
him somewhat to drink wherewith he recovered himself, and having bound his
Scarf about his leg, for the stopping of the blood) entreated him to be
content to go with them aboard, there to have his wound searched and dressed,
and then to return a shore again if he thought good.

This when they could not persuade him unto (as who knew it utterly)
impossible, at least very unlikely, that ever they should (for that) return
again, to recover the state in which they now were; and was of opinion, that
it were more honorable for himself, to jeopard his life for so great a
benefit, then to leave off so high an enterprise unperformed:) they joined
altogether, and with ^o^ce mingled with fair entreaty, they bare him aboard
his Pinnace, and so abandoned a most rich spoil for the present, only to
preserve their Captains life, as being resolved of him, that while they
enjoyed his presence, and had him to command them, they might recover wealth
sufficient; but if once they lost him, they should hardly be able to recover
home, no not with that which they had gotten already.

July 29
Thus we embarked by break of the day, having besides our Captain, many of
our Men wounded, though none slain but one Trumpeter: whereupon though our
Chyrurgeons were busily employed, in providing remedies and Salves for their
wounds; yet the maine care of our Captain was respected by all the rest: so
that before we departed out of the Harbor for the more comfort of our Company,
we took the aforesaid Ship of Wines without great resistance. But before we
had her free off the Haven, they of the Town had made means to bring one of
their Culverins, which we had dismounted, so as they made a shot at us, but
hindered not us from carrying forth the Prize to the Isle Bastimientes, or The
Isle of Victuales; which is an Island that lies without the Bay to the
Westwards, about a league off the Town, where we stayed the two next days, to
cure our wounded Men, and to refresh our selves in the goodly Gardens which we
there found, abounding with great store of all dainty Roots and Fruits, besides
great plenty of Poultery and other Fowls, no less strange then delicate.

Shortly upon our first arrival in this Island, the Governor and the rest of
his assistants in the Town (as we afterward understood) sent unto our
Captain a proper Gentleman of mean stature, good complexion, and fair
spoken, a principal Soldier of the late sent Garrison, to view in what state
we were. At his coming he protested he came to us of mere good will, for that
we had attempted, so great and incredible a matter with so few men: and that at
the first they feared that we had been French, at whose hands they knew they
should find no mercy: but after they perceived by our Arrows, that we were
English men, their fears were the less, for that they knew, that though we
took the Treasure of the place, yet we would not use cruelty toward their
persons.

But albeit this his affection gave him cause enough, to come aboard such whose
virtues he so honored, yet the Governor also had not only consented to his
coming, but directly sent him, upon occasion that diverse of the Town
affirmed (said he) that they knew our Captain, who the last two years had
been often on their Coast, and had always used their persons very well. And
therefore desired to know, first, whether our Captain were the same Captain
Drake or no? and next, because many of their men were wounded with our Arrows,
whether they were poisoned or no? And how their wounds might best be cured?
Lastly, what victuals we wanted or other necessaries? Of which the Governor
promised by him to supply and furnish us, as largely as he durst. Our Captain
although he thought this Soldier but a Spy: yet used him very courteously, and
answered him to his Governors demands. That he was the same Drake whom they
meant: it was never his manner to poison his Arrows: they might cure their
wounded by ordinary Chyrurgery: as for wants he knew the Island of Bastimientos
had sufficient, and could furnish him if he listed: but he wanted nothing but
some of that special commodity, which that Country yielded, to content
himself and his Company. And therefore he advised the Governor to hold open
his eyes, for before he departed, if God lent him life and leave, he meant to
reap some of their Harvest, which they get out of the Earth, and send into
Spain to trouble all the Earth.

To this answer unlooked for, this Gentleman replied: If he might without
offense move such a question, what should then be the cause of our departing
from that Town at this time, where was above three hundred and sixty Tun of
silver ready for the Fleet, and much more Gold in value, resting in Iron Chests
in the Kings Treasure-house? But when our Captain had showed him the true
cause of his unwilling retreat aboard; he acknowledged, that we had no less
reason in departing, then courage in attempting: and no doubt did easily see,
that it was not for the Town to seek revenge of us, by manning forth such
Frigates or other vessels, as they had: but better to content themselves and
provide for their own defense.

Thus with great favor and courteous entertainment, besides such gifts from
our Captain as most contented him: after dinner he was in such sort dismissed,
to make report of that he had seen, that he protested, he was never so much
honored of any in his life.

After his departure, the Negroe forementioned, being examined more fully,
confirmed this report of the Gold and Silver, with many other intelligences of
importance, especially how we might have Gold and Silver enough if we would, by
means of the Symerons, whom though he had betrayed diverse times (being used
thereto by his Masters) so that he knew they would kill him, if they gat him:
yet if our Captain would undertake his protexion, he durst adventure his life,
because he knew our Captains name was most precious and highly honored of
them.

This report ministered occasion to further consultation: for which, because
this place seemed not the safest; as being neither the healthiest nor quietest.
The next day in the morning we all set our course for the Isle of Pinos or Port
Plenty, where we had left our Ships, continuing all that day and the next,
till toward night before we recovered it. We were the longer in this course,
for that our Captain sent away his Brother and Ellis Hixon to the westward, to
search the river Chagro, where himself had been the year before, and yet was
careful to gain more notice of, it being a River which tends to the
Southward within six leagues of Panamah, where is a little Town called Venta
Cruz, whence all the treasure, that was usually brought thither from Panamah by
Moyles, was imbarqued in Frigates, down the River into the North Sea, and so
to Nombre de dios. It e^beth and flows not far into the land, and therefore
(...) asks three days rowing with a fine Pinnace to pass from the mouth to
Venta Cruz, but one day and a night serves to return down the River.

At our return to our Ships, in our consultation, Aug. 1.
Captain Rause forecasting diverse doubts, of our safe continuance upon that
Coast, being now discovered, was willing to depart: and our Captain no less
willing to dismiss him: and therefore as soon as our Pinnaces returned from
Chagro, with such advertisements as they were sent for, about eight days
before: Captain Rause took his leave, leaving us in the Isle aforesaid, Aug*
7.
where we had remained five or six days. In which mean time, having put all
things in a readiness, our Captain resolved, with his two Ships and three
Pinnaces to go to Carthagene, whither in sailing we spent some six days, by
reason of the calmes which came often upon us: but all this time we attempted
nothing that we might have done by the way, neither at Tolou nor otherwhere,
because we would not be discovered.

Aug. 13.
We came to anchor with our two Ships in the evening in seven fadome water,
between the Islands of Charesha and Saint Barnards: Our Captain led the three
Pinnaces about the Island, into the Harbor of Carthagene; where at the very
entry, he found a Frigate at anchor, aboard which was only one old Man; who
being demanded, where the rest of his company was? answered, that they were
gone ashoare in their Gundeloe that evening, to fight about a Mistress: and
voluntarily related to our Captain that two hours before night, there past by
them a Pinnace, with Sail and Oars, as fast as ever they could row, calling
to him, whether there had not been any English or Frenchmen there lately? And
upon answer that there had been none: they bid them look to themselves: that
within an hour, that this Pinnace was come to the utter-side of Carthagene,
there were many great Pieces shot off: whereupon one going to top, to descry
what might be the cause? Espied, over the Land, diverse Frigates and small
shipping, bringing themselves within the Castle.

This report our Captain credited, the rather, for that himself had heard the
report of the Ordnance, at Sea, and perceived sufficiently, that he was now
descryed: notwithstanding, in farther examination of this old Mariner, having
understood, that there was, within the next Point, a great Ship of Sivell,
which had here discharged her loding, and rid now with her yards acrosse, being
bound the next morning for Saint Domingo: our Captain took this old Man into
his Pinnace, to verify that which he had informed, and rowed toward this
Ship, which as we came near it, hailed us, asking whence our Shallops were? We
answered, from Nombre de dios: straight way they railed and reviled: We gave no
heed to their words: but every Pinnace, according to our Captains order; one
on the starboord bough, the other on the starboord quarter, and the Captain in
the midship on the starboord side; forthwith boarded her, though we had some
difficulty to enter, by reason of her height, being of two hundred forty Tun.
But as soon as we entered upon the Decks, we threw down the gates and
spardecks, to prevent the Spaniards from annoying us with their close fights:
who then perceiving that we were possessed of their Ship, stowed themselves all
in hold with their weapons, except two or three yonkers, who were found before
the beetes: when having light out of our Pinnaces, we found no danger of the
enemy remaining, we cut their Cables at half, and with our three Pinnaces,
towed her without the Island, into the sound right before the Town, without
danger of their great shot.

Mean while the Town having intelligence hereof, by their Watch, took the
alarm, rung out their Bells, shot off about thirty Pieces of great Ordinance,
put all their Men in a readiness, Horse and Foot, came down to the very point
of the Wood, and discharged their Calivers, to impeach us if they might in
going forth.

The next morning our Ships took two Frigates, Aug. 14.
in which were two, who called themselves the Kings Scrivanos, the one of
Carthagene, the other of Veragua, with seven Mariners and two Negroes: who
had been at Nombre de dios, and were now bound for Carthagene, with double
Letters of Advice, to certify them that Captain Drake had been at Nombre de
Dios, had taken it, and had it not been that He was hurt with some blessed
shot, by all likelihold he had sa^kt it: he was yet still upon the Coast: they
should therefore carefully prepare for him.

After that our Captain had brought all his Fleet together: at the Scrivanos
entreaties, he was content to do them all (...), in setting them and all
their Companies (...); and so (...) thence with the Islands of Saint Bernards,
about three leagues off the ^own; where we found great store of Fish for our
refreshing.

Here our Captain considering that he was now discovered, upon two of the
chiefest places of all the Coast, and yet not meaning to leave it, till he had
found the Simerons, and made his Voyage, as he had conceived, which would
require some length of time, and sure manning of his Pinnaces, he determined
with himself, to bu^ne one of his Ships, and make of the other a Storehouse,
that his Pinnaces (which could not otherwise) might be thoroughly Manned, and so
he might be able to abide any time. But knowing the affection of his Company,
how loath they were to leave either of their Ships, being both so good
Sailors, and so well furnished; he purposed in himself by some Policy, to
make them most vvilling to effect that he intended. And therefore sent for one
Thomas Moon (who was Carpenter in the Swanne) and taking him into his Cabin,
charge him to conceal for a time, a piece of service, which he must in any
case consent to do aboard his own Ship: that was, in the middle of the second
Watch, to go down secretly into the Well of the Ship, and with a great
spikegimlet, to bo^re three hoales, as near the Keele as he could, and lay
something against it, that the force of the Water entering, might make no great
noise, nor be discovered by boiling up. Thomas Moon at the hearing hereof
being utterly dismayed* desired to know what cause there might be, to move him
to sincke so good a Bark, of his own, new, and strong, and that by his
means, who had been in two so rich and gainful Voyages in her with himself
heretofore: If his Brother, the Master* and the rest of the Company should know
of such his fact, he thought verily they would kill him. But when our Captain
had imparted to him his causes, and had persuaded him with promise that it
should not be known, till all of them should be glad of it: he undertook it,
and did it accordingly.

The next morning our Captain took his Pinnace very early, Aug. 15.
purposing to go a fishing (for that there is very great store in all the
Coast) and falling a board the Swanne, calls for his Brother to go with him,
who rising suddenly, answers that he would follow presently, or if it would
please him to stay a very little, he would attend him. Our Captain perceiving
the feat wrought, would not hasten him, but in rowing away, demanded of them,
why their Bark was so deep? as making no account of it: but by occasion of
this demand, his Brother sent one down to the Steward to know whether there
were any water in the ship? or what other cause might be? The Steward hastily
stepping down at his usual skuttle, was wet up to the waste, and shifting
with more haste to come up again as if the water had followed him, cried out
that the Ship was full of water. There was no need to hasten the Company, some
to Pumpe, others to search for the Leake, which the Captain of the Bark
seeing they did on all hands very willingly, he followed his Brother, and
certified him of the strange chance befaln them that night; that whereas they
had not Pumpt twice in six weeks before, now they had six foot water in hold*
therefore he desires leave from attending him in fishing, to intend the search
and remedy of the leake: and when our Captain with his Company proffered to go
to help them, he answered, they had men enough aboard, and prayed him to
continue his fishing, that they might have some part of it for their dinner.
Thus returning, he found his Company had taken great pains, but had freed the
water very little: yet such was their love to the Bark (as our Captain well
knew) that they ceased not, but to the utmost of their strength, labored all
that they might till three in the afternoon, by which time, the Company
perceiving, that though they had been relieved by our Captain himself and
many of his Company, yet they were not able to free above a foot and a half of
water, and could have no likelihood of finding the Leake, had now a less
liking of her then before, and greater content to hear of some means for
remedy: whereupon our Captain consulting with them what they thought best to be
done: found that they had more desire to have all as he thought fit, then
judgment to conceive any means of remedy. And therefore he propounded, that
himself would go into the Pinnace, till he could provide some handsome
Frigate, and that his Brother should be Captain in the Admiral, and the
Master should also be there placed with him, instead of this: which seeing they
could not save, he would have fired, that the Enemy might never recover her:
but first all the Pinnaces should be brought aboard her, that every one might
take out of her whatsoever they lackt or liked. This, though the company at the
first marveiled at, yet presently it was put in execution and performed that
night: our Captain had his desire, Aug. 16.
and men enough for his Pinnaces.

The next morning, we resolved to seek out some fit place, in the sound of
Dorrienne, where we might safely leave our ship at Anchor, not discoverable by
the Enemy, who thereby might imagine us quite departed from the Coast, and we
the mean time better follow our purposes with our Pinnaces; of which our
Captain would himself take two to Rio Grande, and the third leave with his
Brother to seek the Symerons.

Upon this resolution, Aug. 21.
we set sail presently for the said Sound, which within five days we
recovered, absteining of purpose, from all such occasion as might hinder our
determination, or bewray our being upon the Coast. As soon as we arrived,
where our Captain intended, and had chosen a fit and convenient road (out of
all trade) for our purpose; we reposed our selves there for some fifteen
days, keeping our selves close, that the bruit of our being upon the Coast
might cease.

But in the mean time we were not idle: for besides such ordinary works, as
our Captain every Month did usually inure us to, about the trimming and
fitting of his Pinnaces, for their better sailing and rowing: he caused us to
rid a large plot of ground, both of Trees and Brakes, and to build us Houses,
sufficient for all our lodging, and one especially for all our public
meetings, wherein the Negro which fled to us before did us great service, as
being well acquainted with the Country, and their means of Building. Our
Archers made themselves Butts to shoot at, because we had many that delighted
in that Exercise, and wanted not a Fletcher to keep our Bows and Arrows in
order. The rest of the Company, every one as he liked best, made his disport at
Bowls, Quoits, Keiles, etc. For our Captain allowed one half of their
Company to pass their time thus, every other day interchangeably, the other
half being enjoined to the necessary works, about our Ship and Pinnaces, and
the providing of fresh Victuals, Fish, Foul, Hogs, Dear, Conies, etc. whereof
there is great plenty. Here our Smiths set up their Forge, as they used, being
furnished out of England with Anvill, Iron, Coals, and all manner of
necessaries, which stood us in great stead.

Septem. 5
At the end of these fifteen days, our Captain leaving his Ship in his
Brothers charge, to keep all things in order, himself took with him,
according to his former determination, two Pinnaces for Rio Grand; and passing
by Carthagene, Septem. 8
but out of sight, when we were within two leagues of the River, we landed to
the Westwards on the Maine, where we saw great store of Cattle. There we found
some Indians, who asking us in friendly sort, in broken Spanish, what we would
have? and understanding that we desired fresh Victuals in Traffic; they took
such Cattle for us as we needed, with ease and so readily, as if they had a
special commandment over them, whereas they would not abide us to come near
them: And this also they did willingly, because our Captain (according to his
custom) contented them for their pains, with such things as they account
greatly of, in such sort that they promised we should have there of them at any
time, what we would.

The same day we departed thence to Rio Grand, where we entered about three of
the clock in the afternoon. There are two entrings into this River, of which
we entered the Westermost, called Boca Chica. The freshet of this River is so
great, that we being half a league from the mouth of it, filled fresh water
for our Beverage.

From three a clock till dark night we rowed up the stream; but the current
was so strong downwards, that we got but two leagues all that time. We moared
our Pinnaces to a tree that night; for that presently with the closing of the
evening, there fell a monstrous shower of rain, with such strange and
terrible claps of thunder and flashes of lightning, as made us, not a little to
marvel at, although our Captain had been acquainted with such like in that
Country, and told us that they continue seldom longer then three quarters of
an hour. This storm was no sooner ceast, but it became very calm, and
therewith there came such an innumerable multitude of a kind of flies of that
Country called Muskitos (like our Gnats) which bite so spitefully, that we
could not rest all that night, nor find means to defend our selves from them,
by reason of the heat of the Country: the best remedy we then found against
them, was the juice of Lymons.

At the break of day we departed, rowing in the eddy, Septe. 9.
and haling up by the trees where the eddy failed, with great labor, by spells,
without ceasing, each company their half houre-glasse, without meeting any,
till about three a clock after noone, by which time we could get but five
leagues a head. Then we espied a Canow with two Indians fishing in the River;
but we spoke not to them lest so we might be descryed: nor they to us, as
taking us to be Spaniards. But within an hour after we espied certain houses
on the other side of the River, whose channel is twenty five fathom deep, and
his breadth so great, that a man can scantly be discerned from side to side. Yet
a Spanyard which kept those houses, had espied our Pinnaces, and thinking we
had been his countrymen, made a smoke; for a signal to turn that way, as
being desirous to speak with us. After that, we espying this smoke, had made
with it, and were half the River over, he wheaved us with his hat, and his
long hanging sleeves to come a shore: But as we drew nearer unto him, he
discerned that we were not those he looked for, he took his heels, and fled
from his houses, which we found to be five in number, all full of white Ruske,
dried Bacon, that Country Cheese (like Holland Cheese in fashion, but far
more delicate in taste, of which they send into Spain as special Presents)
many sorts of sweet meats, and Conserves, with great store of sugar, being
provided to serve the Fleet returning to Spain.

With this store of victuals we loaded our Pinnaces, and by the shutting in of
the day we were ready to depart; for that we hastened the rather, by reason of
an intelligence given us by certain Indian Women which we found in those
houses: that the Frigates (these are ordinarily thirty, or upwards, which
usually transport the Merchandise sent out of Spain to Carthagene, from thence
to these houses, and so in great Canoas up hence into Nueva Reyno, for which,
the River running many hundred leagues within the land, serves very fitly, and
return in exchange, the gold and treasure, silver, victuals and commodities,
which that Kingdom yields abundantly:) were not yet returned from
Carthagene, since the first alarm they took of our being there.

Sept. 10.
As we were going aboard our Pinnaces from these Storehouses, the Indians of a
great Town called Villa del Rey, some two miles distant from the waters side
where we landed, were brought down by the Spaniards into the bushes, and shot
their arrows; but we rowed down the stream, with the current (for that the
wind was against u^) only one league, and because it was night, anchored till
the morning, when we rowed down to the mouth of the River, where we unladed
all our provisions, and cleansed our Pinnaces, according to our Captains
custom, and took it in again, and the same day went to the Westward.

In this return we descried a Ship, a Bark, and a Frigate, of which the Ship
and Frigate went for Carthagene, but the Bark was bound to the Northwards,
with the wind Easterly, so that we imagined she had some gold or treasure going
for Spain: therefore we gave her chase, but taking her, and finding nothing of
importance in her, understanding that she was bound for Sugar, and Hides, we
let her go, and having a good gale of wind, continued our former course to
our Ship and Company. Sept. 11.


In the way between Carthagene and Tolou we took five or six Frigates, which
were laden from Tolou, with live Hogs, Hens and Maiz, which we call Guy^ny
Wheat: of these having gotten what intelligence they could give, of their
preparations for us, and diverse opinions of us, was dismissed all the men,
only staying two Frigates with us, because they were so well stored with good
Victuals.

Within three days after we arrived at the place which our Captain chose at
first to leave his ship in which was called by our Company Port-Plenty, by
reason we brought in thither continually all manner store of good Victuals
which we took going that way by Sea, for the victualling of Carthagene and
Nombre de Dios, as also the Fleets going and coming out of Spain: so that if
we had been two thousand, yea three thousand persons, we might with our
Pinnaces easily have provided them sufficient victual of Wine, Meal, Ruske,
Cassavy, (a kind of Bread made of a Root called Yucca, whose juice is poison,
but the substance good and wholesome) dried Beef, dried Fish, live Sheep,
live Hogs, abundance of Hens, besides the infinite store of dainty fresh very
easily to be taken every day. Insomuch that he were forced to build four
several Magazines or Storehouses, some ten, some twenty Leagues a sunder,
some in Islands, some in the Maine, providing our selves in diverse places, that
though the Enemy should with force surprise any one, yet we might be
sufficiently furnished, till we had made our Voyage as we did hope. In building
of these, our Negroes help was very much, as having a special skill, in the
speedy erection of such houses.

This our store was such, as thereby we releeved, not only our selves and the
Symerons, while they were with us, but also two French Ships in extreme want.
For in our absence Captain John Drake having one of our Pinnaces as was
appointed, went in with the maine, and as he towed a loofe the shore, where he
was directed by Diego the Negroe aforesaid, which willingly came unto us at
Nombre de dios, he espied certain of the Symerons, with whom he dealt so
effectually, that in conclusion he left two of our men with their Leader, and
brought aboard two of theirs: agreeing that they should meet him again the
next Day, at a River mid way between the Cabezas and our Ships, which they
named Rio Diego.

These two being very sensible men, chosen out by their Commander, did with all
reverence and respect, declare unto our Captain, that their Nation conceived
great joy of his arrival, because they knew him to be an enemy to the
Spaniards, not only by his late being in Nombre de dios, but also by his former
Voyages, and therefore were ready to assist and favor his enterprises against
his and their Enemies to the uttermost: and to that end their Captain and
Company, did stay at this present near the mouth of Rio Diego, to attend what
answer and order should be given them: that they would have marched by land,
even to this place, but that the way is very long, and more troublesome, by
reason of many steep Mountains, deep Rivers and thick brakes: desiring
therefore, that it might please our Captain to take some order, as he thought
best, with all convenient speed in this behalf. Our Captain considering the
speech of these persons, and weighing it with his former intelligences had, not
only by Negroes but Spaniards also whereof he was always very careful: as
also conferring it with his Brothers informations of the great kindness that
they showed him, being lately with them: after he had heard the opinions of
those of best service with him, what were fittest to be done presently;
resolved himself with his Brother and the two Symerons, in his two Pinnaces to
go toward this River, as he did the same evening; giving order, that the Ship
and the rest of his Fleet, should the next morning follow him, because there
was a place of as great safety and sufficiency, which his Brother had found
out near the River. The safety of it consisted, not only in that which is
common all along that Coast from Tolou to Nombre de Dios, being above sixty
leagues; that it is a most goodly and plentiful Country, and yet Inhabited
not with one Spaniard, or any for the Spaniards; but especially in that it
lyerh among a great many of goodly Islands full of Trees, where, though there
be Channels, yet there are such Rocks and shoales, that no Man can enter by
night, without great danger, nor by day without discovery; whereas our Ship
might lie hidden within the Trees.

The next day we arrived at this River appointed, Septe. 14
where we found the Symerons, according to promise; the rest of their number
were a mile up in a Wood by the Rivers side. There, after we had given them
entertainment and received good testimonies of their joy and good will toward
us, we took two more of them into our Pinnaces, leaving our two men with the
rest of theirs, to much by land to another River called Rio Guana, with intent
there to meet with another Company of Symerons, which were now in the
Mountains. So we departed that day from Rio Diego with our Pinnaces toward
our Ship, as marvelling that she followed us not, as was appointed.

But two days after, Septe. 16
we found her in the place where we left her, but in far other state, being
much spoiled, and in great danger, by reason of a tempest she had in our
absence.

Sept. 18.
As soon as we could trim our Ship, being some two days, our Captain sent away
one of his Pinnaces toward the bottom of the Bay, amongst the shoales and
sandy Islands, to sound out the Channel, for the bring in of our Ship nearer
the Maine.

Sept. 19.
The next day we followed, and were (with wary Pilatage, directed safely into
the best Channel, with much ado to recover the Road, among so many flats and
shoales. It was near about five leagues from the Cativaas, betwixt an Island
and the Maine, where we moared our Ship. The Island was not above four Cables
length from the Maine, being in quantity some three Acres of ground, flat and
very full of Trees and Bushes.

Sept. 22.
We were forced to spend the best part of three days, after our departure from
our Port Plenty, before we were quiet in the newfound Road, which we had but
newly entered, when our two Men and the former Troop of Simerons, Sept. 23.
with twelve other whom they had met in the Mountains, came in sight over
against our Ship, on the Maine: whence we fet them all aboard, to their great
comfort and our content: they rejoicing that they should have some fit
opportunity, to wreake their wrongs on the Spaniards: we hoping that now our
Voyage should be bettered.

At our first meeting, when our Captain had moved them, to show him the means
which they had to furnish him with Gold and Silver; they answered plainly, that
had they known Gold had been his desire, they could have satisfied him with
store, which for the present they could not do, because the Rivers, in which
they had suncke great store, which they had taken from the Spaniards, rather to
despite them then for love of Gold, were now so high, that they could not get
it out of such depths for him, and because the Spaniards in these rainy Month
do not use to carry their Treasure by Land.

This answer, although it were somewhat unlooked for, yet nothing discontented
us, but rather persuaded us farther of their honest and faithful meaning
toward us. Therefore our Captain to entertain these five Months, commanded
all our Ordnance and Artillery a shore, with all our other Provisions; sending
his Pinnaces to the Maine, to bring over great Trees, to make a Fort upon the
same Island, for the planting of all our Ordnance therein, and for our
safeguard, if the Enemy in all this time should chance to come.

Our Symerons cut down Palmito boughs and branches, Sept. 24.
and with wonderful speed raised up two large Houses for all our Company. Our
Fort was then made (by reason of the place) triangle wise with maine Timber and
Earth, of which the Trench yielded us good store, so that we made it thirteen
foot in height.

But after we had continued upon this Island fourteen days, our Captain having
determined, October. 7.
with three Pinnaces to go for Carthagene, left his Brother John Drake, to
govern these who remained behind with the Symerons, to finish the Fort which
he had begun: for which he appointed him to fetch Boords and Plancks, as many
as his Pinnace would carry, from the Prize which we took at Rio Grand, and
left at the Cativaas, where she drove a shore and wracked, in our absence; but
now she might serve very commodiously to supply our uses, in making Platformes
for our Ordnance. Thus our Captain and his Brother took their leave, the one
to the Eastward, and the other to the Cativaas.

That night we came to an I Will, which he called Spu^kite Island, because we
found there great store of such a kind a Bird in shape, but very delicate, of
which we killed and roasted many, staying there till the next day midnoone when
we departed thence; Octo. 8.
and about four a clock recovered a big Island in our way, where we staying
all night, by reason that there was great store of Fish, and especially of a
great kind of Shel-fish of a foot long, we called them Whelkes.

Octo. 9.
The next morning we were clear of these Islands, and Shoales, Octo. 13.
and haled off into the Sea. About four days after, near the Islands of Saint
Bernards, we chased two Frigates a shore: Oct. 14.15.
and recovering one of the Islands, made our abode there some two days, to wash
our Pinnaces and rake off the Fish.

Octo. 16.
Thence we went toward Tolou, and that day landed near the Town in a Garden,
where we found certain Indians, who delivered us their Bows and Arrows, and
gathered for us such Fruit as the Garden did veeld, being many sorts of dainty
Fruits and Roots, still contenting them for that we received: our Captains
principal intent in taking this and other places by the way, not being for any
other cause, but only to learn true intelligences of the state of the
Country and of the Fleets.

Hence we departed presently, and rowed toward Charesha the Island of
Carthagene, and entered in at Bocha Chica; and having the wind large, we sailed
in toward the City, and let fall our Grappers betwixt the Island and the
Maine, right over against the goodly Garden Island. In which our Captain would
not suffer us to land, notwithstanding our importunate desire, because he knew
it might be dangerous; for that they are wont to send Soldiers thither* when
they know any Men of War upon the Coast; which we found accordingly: for
within three hours after, passing by the point of the Island, we had a volley
of an hundred shot from them, and yet there was but one of our men hurt.

This evening we departed to Sea, and the day following, being some two leagues
off the Harbor, Octo. 17.
we took a Bark, and found that the Captain and his wife with the better
sort of the passengers had forsaken her, and were gone a shore in their
Gu^delow: by occasion whereof we boorded without resistance, though they were
very well provided, with Swords and Targets, and some small shot, besides four
Iron Bases. She was about fifty tun, having ten Marrines, five or six
Negroes, great store of Soap and Sweet-meates, bound from Saint Domingo to
Carthagene. This Captain left behind him a silk Ancient with his Arms, as
might be thought in hasty departing.

The next day we sent all the Company a shore to seek their Masters, Octo. 18.
saving a young Negrito of three or four years old which we brought away, but
kept the Bark, and in her, bore into the mouth of Carthagene Harbor, where we
anchored.

That afternoon, certain horsemen came down to the point by the Wood side,
and with the Scrivano forementioned came toward our Bark with a Flag of
Truce, desiring of our Captain safe conduct for his coming and going: the
which being granted, he came aboard us, giving our Captain great thanks for
his manifold favors, etc. promising that night before day break to bring as
much victual as they would desire, what shift soever he made, or what danger
soever he incurred of Law and punishment. But this fell out to be nothing but a
device of the Governor forced upon the Scrivano, to delay time, til they might
provide themselves of sufficient strength to entrap us; for which this fellow,
by his smooth speech, was thought a fit mean. Octo. 19.
So by Sun rising when we perceived his words but words, we put to Sea to the
Westward of the Island, some three Leagues off, where we lay at Hull the rest of
all that day and night.

Octo. 20.
The next day in the afternoon, there came out of Carthagene, two Frigates
bound for Saint Domingo, the one of fifty, the other of twelve Tun, having
nothing in them but Ballast: we took them with in a League of the Town, and
came to Anchor with them, within Saker shot of the East Bulwark: there were
in those Frigates some twelve or thirteen common Mariners, which entreated to
be set a shore: to them our Captain gave the great Frigates Gu^delow, and
dismissed them.

Octo. 21.
The next morning, when they came down to the Wester point with a Flag of
Truce, our Captain manned one of his Pinnaces and rovved a shore: when we
were within a Cables length of the shore, the Spaniards fled, hiding
themselves in the Woods, as being afraid of our Ordnance; but indeed to dravv
us on to Land confidently, and to presume of our strength. Our Captain
commanding the Grapnell to be cast out of the stern, veered the Pinnace a
shore, and as soon as she touched the Sand, he alone leapt a shore in their
sight, to declare that he durst set his foot a land, but stayed not among them;
to let them know, that though he had not sufficient forces to conquer them,
yet he had sufficient judgment to take heed of them. And therefore perceiving
their intent as soon as our Captain was aboard, we haled off upon our
Grapner and rid a while. They presently came forth upon the Sand, and sent a
youth, as with a message from the Governor, to know what our intent was to
stay thus upon the Coast? Our Captain ansvvered, he meant to traffic with
them: for he had Tin, Pevvter, Cloth, and other Merchandise that they needed.
The youth svvam back again with this answer; and was presently returned,
with another message: that, the King had forbidden to traffic with any
foreign Nation for any Commodities, except Powder and Shot, of which if we
had any store, they would be his Merchants; he answered, that he was come from
his Country, to exchange his Commodities for Gold and Silver, and is not
purposed to return without his errand. They are like (in his opinion) to have
little rest, if that by fair means they would not traffic with him. He gave
this Messenger a fair Shirt for a reward, and so returned him: who rolled his
Shirt about his head and swamme very speedily.

We heard no answer all that day, and therefore toward night we went aboard our
Frigates and reposed our selves, setting and keeping very orderly all that
night our watch, with great and small shot.

The next morning the wind which had been Westerly in the evening, altered to
the Eastward. About the dawning of the day, we espied two Sails turning
toward us; whereupon our Captain weighed with his Pinnaces, leaving the two
Frigates unmand. But when we were come some what nigh them, the wind calmed,
and we were feign to row toward them, till that approaching very nigh we saw
many heads peering over board. For, as we perceived, these two Frigates were
mand and set forth out of Carthagene, to fight with us: and a^ least to impeach
or busy us, whiles by some means or other they might recover the Frigates
from us: but our Captain prevented both their drifts. For commanding John
Oxnam to stay with the one Pinnace, to entertain these two men of war,
himself in the other made such speed, that he gate to his Frigates which he
had left at Anchor, and caused the Spaniards (who in the mean time had gotten
aboard in a small Canow, thinking to have towed them within the danger of their
shot) to make greater haste thence, then they did thither. For he found that i^
shifting thence, some of them were feign to swim a land (the Canow not being
able to receive them) and had left their apparel, some their Rapiers and
Targets, some their Flaskes and Callivers behind them, although they were
towing away of one of them: therefore considering that we could not man them,
we suncke the one, burnt the other, giving them to understand by this, that we
perceived their secret practices.

Octo. 22.
This being done, he returned to John Oxnam, who all this while lay by the men
of war without proffering of fight. And as soon as our Captain was come up
to these Frigates, the wind blew much from the Sea, so that we being betwixt
the shore and them, were in a manner forced to bear room into the Harbor
before them, to the great joy of the Spaniards who beheld it, in supposing,
that we would still have fled before them. But as soon as we were in the
Harbor, and felt smooth water, our Pinnaces (as we were assured of) getting
the wind, we fought with them upon the advantage, so that after a few shot
exchanged, and a storm rising, they were contented to press no nearer.
Therefore as they let fall their Anchors, we presently let drop our Grapners in
the wind of them, which the Spanish Soldiers seeing, considering the
disadvantage of the wind, the likelihood of the storm to continue, and small
hope of doing any good, they were glad to retire themselves to the Town. But
by reason of the foul and tempestuous weather, we rode there four days,
feeling great cold, by reason we had such sore raines with Westerly wind, and
so little succor in our Pinnaces.

Octo. 27.
The fifth day after, there came in a Frigate from the sea, which seeing us make
toward her, ran her self a shore, unhanging her Rudder and taking away her
Sails, that she might not easily be carried away. But when we were come up to
her, we perceived about a hundred Horse and Foot, with their Furniture, came
down to the point of the Maine, where we interchanged some shot with them. One
of our great shot past so near a brave Cavalier of theirs, that thereby they
were occasioned to advise themselves, and to retreat into the Woods, where they
might sufficiently defend and rescue the Frigate from us, and annoy us also, if
we stayed long about her. Therefore we concluded to go to Sea again, putting
forth through Boca chica, with intent to take down our Masts, upon hope of
fair weather, and to ride under the Rocks called Las Serenas, which are two
leagves off at Sea, as we had usually done aforetime, so that they could not
discern us from the Rocks. But there the Sea was so mightily grown, that we
were forced to take the Harbor again: where we remained six days, Nove. 2.
notwithstanding the Spaniards grieved greatly at our abode there so long, put
an other device in practice to endanger us.

For they sent forth a great Shallop, a fine Gundeloe, and a great Canow, with
certain Spaniards with shot, and many Indians with poisoned Arrows, as it
seemed, with intent to begin some fight, and then to fly. For as soon as we
rowed toward them and enterchanged shot, they presently retired and went a
shore into the Woods, where an Ambush of some sixty shot were laid for us;
besides two Pinnaces and a Frigate warping toward us, which were Mand as the
rest. They attempted us very boldly, being assisted by those others, which from
our of the Wood had gotten aboard the Gundeloe and Canow, and seeing us bearing
from them (which we did in respect of the Ambus^ado) they encouraged themselves
and assured their fellows of the day. But our Captain weighing this their
attempt, and being out of danger of their shot from the Land, commanding his
other Pinnace to be brought a head of him, and to let fall their Grapners each
a head the others, environed both the Pinnaces with Bonnets, as for a close
fight, and then wheaved them aboard them.

They kept themselves upon their Oars at Calliver shot distance, spending
Powder apace, as we did some two or three hours. We had one of our Men only
wounded in that Fight; what they had is unknown to us, but we saw their
Pinnaces shot through in diverse places, and the Powder of one of them took on
fire; whereupon we waighed, intending to bear room, to over-runne them; which
they perceiving, and thinking that we would have boorded them, rowed away
amain to the defense which they had in the Wood; the rather, because they
were disappointed of their help, that they expected from the Frigate which
was vvarping toward us, but by reason of the much Wind that blew, could not
come to offend us, or succor them.

Thus seeing that we were still molested, and no hope remaining of any
Purchase to be had in this place any longer, because we were now so notably
made known in those parts, and because our Victuals grevv scant, as soon as
the Weather waxed somewhat better (the Wind continuing always Westerly, so
that we could not return to our Ships) our Captain thought best to go to the
Eastvvard, toward Rio grand, Nove. 3.
along the Coast, where we had been before, and found great store of
Victuals.

Nove. 5.
But when after two days sailing, we were arrived at the Villages of store,
where before we had furnished our selves with abundance of Hens, Sheep,
Calves, Hogs, etc. Now we found bare nothing, not so much as any people
left, for that they by the Spaniards commandment were fled to the Mountains,
and had driven away all their Cattle, that we might not be releeved by them.
Herewith being very sorry, because much of our Victual in our Pinnaces was
spoiled, by the foul weather at Sea, and raines in Harbor; a Frigate being
descried at Sea revived us, and put us in some hope for the time, that in her
we should find sufficient; and thereupon it may easily be guessed, how much we
labored to recover her; but when we had boorded her, and understood, that she
had neither Meat nor Money, but that she was bound for Rio Grand, to take in
Provision upon Bills, our great hope converted into grief.

We endured with our allowance seven or eight days more, proceeding to the
Eastwards, and bearing room for Santa Martha, upon hope to find some Shipping
in the Read, or Limpets on the Rocks, or succor against the Storm in that
good Harbor. Being arrived, and seeing no Shipping, we anchored under the
Wester point, where is high land, and, as we thought, free in safety from the
Town, which is in the bottom of the Bay, not intending to land there, because
we knew that it was fortified, and that they had intelligence of us. But the
Spaniards knowing us to be Men of War, and misliking that we should shroud
under their Rocks, without their leave, had conveyed some thirty or forty shot
among the Cliffes, which annoyed us so spitefully, and so unrevengedly (for
that they lay hidden behind the Rocks, bur we lay open to them) that we were
soon weary of our Harbor, and enforced, for all the Storm without, and want
within, to put to Sea; which though these Enemies of ours were well contented
withal, yet for a farewell, as we came open of the Town, they sent us a
Culverin shot, which made a near escape; for it fell between our Pinnaces, as
we were upon conference of what was best to be done. The Company advised, that
if it pleased him, they might put themselves a land some place to the Eastward
to get Victuals, and rather hope for courtesy of the Country People, then
continue at Sea, in so long cold, and great a storm in so le^ke a Pinnace. But
our Captain would in no wise like of that advice, he thought it better to
bear up toward Rio de Haca or Corizao, with hope there to have plenty without
great resistance, because he knew, either the Islands were not very populous, or
else it were very likely that there would be found Ships of Victual in a
readiness.

The Company of the other Pinnace answered, that they would willingly follow
him through the World, but in this they could not see, how, either their Pinnace
should live in that Sea, without being eaten up in that storm, or they
themselves able to endure so long time, with so slender Provision as they had,
viz. only one Gammon of Bacon and thirty pound of Biscuit for eighteen Men.
Our Captain replied, that they were better provided then himself was, who had
but one Gammon of Bacon, and forty pound of Biscuit for his twenty four Men;
and therefore He doubted not but they would take such part as He did, and
willingly depend upon Gods Almighty Providence, which never fails them that
trust in him. With that he hoysed his fore-saile, and set his course for
Corizao; which the rest perceiving, with sorrowful hearts in respect of the
weak Pinnace, yet desirous to follow their Captain, consented to take the same
course.

We had not sailed past three leagues, but we had espied a sail plying to the
Westward with her two courses, to our great joy, who vowed together, that we
would have her, or else it should cost us dear. Bearing with her we found her
to be a Spanish Ship of above ninety Tun, which being vvheaved a maine by us,
despised our Summons, and shot off her Ordnance at us.

The Sea went very high, so that it was not for us, to attempt to board her,
and therefore we made fit small sail to attend upon her, and keep her company
to her small content, till fairer vveather might lay the Sea. We spent not past
two hours in our attendance, till it pleased God, after a great shower to send
us a reasonable calm, so that we might use our Pieces, and approach her at
pleasure, in such sort, that in short time we had taken her, finding her laden
with Victual well powdered and dried, which at that present we received, as
sent us of Gods great mercy.

After all things were set in order, and that the wind increased toward
night, we plied off and on till day, at what time our Captain sent in Edward
Hixom, Nove. 13.
who had then charge of his Pinnace, to search out some Harbor along the
Coast: who having found out a little one, some ten or twelve leagues to the
East of Santa Martha, where in sounding he had good ground and sufficient
water, presently returned, and our Captain brought in his new Prize. Then by
promising liberty, and all their apparel to the Spaniards which we had taken,
if they would bring us to Water and fresh Victuals, the rather by their
means, we obtained of the Inhabitants Indians, what they had which was
plentiful. These Indians were clothed and governed by a Spaniard which dwelt
in the nex^ Town, not past a league off: we stayed there all day, watering
and vvooding, and providing things necessary, by giving content and
satisfaction to the Indians. But ^owards night our Captain called all of us
aboard, (only leaving the Spaniards lately taken in the Prize ashoare,
according to our promise made them, to their great content, who acknowledged
that our Captain did them a far greater favor, in setting them freely at
liberty, then he had done them displeasure in taking their Ship) and so set
sail.

The sickness which had begun to kindle amongst us two or three days before,
did this day show it self in Charles Glu^, one of our Quarter Masters, a very
tall man, and a right good Mariner, taken away to the great grief both of
Captain and Company. What the cause of this malady was, we knew not of
certainty, we imputed it to the cold which our men had taken, lying without
succor in the Pinnaces. But howsoever it was, thus it pleased God to visit us,
and yet in favor to restore unto health, all the rest of our Company, that
were touched with this disease, which were not a few.

Nove. 15.
The next morning being fair weather, though the wind continued contrary, our
Captain commanded the Minion his lesser Pinnace, to hasten away before him
toward his Ships at Fort Diego within the Cabezas to carry news of his
coming, and to put all things in a readiness for our Land journey, if they
hear any thing of the Fleets arrival by the Symerons, giving the Minion
charge if they wanted Wine, to take Saint Bernards in their way, and there take
in some such portion as they thought good, of the Wines which we had there
hidden in the sand. Nove. 22.


We plied to windwards, as near as we could, so that within a seven night
after the Minion departed from us, we came to Saint Bernards, where we stayed
many hours, finding but twelve Botijos of Wine, of all the store we left,
which had escaped the curious search of the Enemy (who had been there) for
that they were deep in the ground.

Within four or five days after we came to our Ship, Nove. 27.
where we found all other things in good order, but received very heavy news
of the death of John Drake our Captains Brother, and another young man called
Richard Allen which were both slain at one time, as they attempted the
boording of a Frigate within two days after our departing from them.

The manner of it (a we learned by examination of the Company) was this; when
they saw this Frigate at Sea (as they were going toward their Fort with
Plancks to make the Platformes) the Company were very importunate on him, to
give chase and set upon this Frigate, which they deemed had been a fit booty
for them. But he told them, that they vvanted weapons to assail, they knew
not how the Frigate was provided, they had their boat laden with plancks, to
finish that his Broter had commanded. But when this would not satisfy them,
but that still they urged him with words and supposals: If you will needs said
he adventure, it shall never be said that I will be hindermost, neither shall
you report to my Brother, that you lost your Voyage by any cowardice you found
in me.

Thereupon every man shifted as they might for the time: and heaving their
plankes over board, took them such poor weapons as they had* viz. a broken
pointed Rapier, one old Visgee and a rusty Caliver John Drake took the Rapier,
and made a Gantlet of his Pillow, Richard Allen the Visegee, both standing in
the head of the Pinnace, called the E^on, Ro^ert took the Caliver and so
boarded. But they found the Frigate armed round about with a close fight of
Hides, full of Pikes and Calivers, which were discharged in their face^, and
deadly wounded those that were in the Fo^e ship, J^hn Drake in the belly, and
Richard Allen in the head. But notwithstanding their wounds, they with Oars
shifted off the Pinnace, got clear of the Frigate, and with all haste
recovered their Ship, where within an hour after this young man of great
hope, ended his days, greatly lamented of all the Company.

Thus having moared our Ships fast, our Captain resolved to keep himself
close, without being descried, until he might hear of the coming of the
Spanish Fleet, and therefore set no more to Sea, but supplied his wants, both
for his own Company and the Symerons, out of his aforesaid Magazine, besides
daily out of the woods, with wild Hogs, Phesants and Guanas, continuing in
health (God be praised) all the mean time, which was a Month at least, till
at length about the beginning of January, Janu. 3.
half a score of our Company fell down sick altogether, and the most of them
died within two or three days: so long that we had thirty at a a time sick of
the Calenture, which attached our men, either by reason of the sudden change
from cold to heat, or by reason of brakish water which had been taken in by
one Pinnace through the sloth of their men in the mouth of the River, not
rowing further in where the water was good.

Among the rest, Joseph Drake another of his Brethren died in our Captains
Arms, of the same disease; of which that the cause might be the better
discerned, and consequently remedied, to the relief of others, by our
Captains appointment he was ripped open by the Surgeon, who found, his liver
swollen, his heart as it were sodden, and his guts all fair. This was the first
and last experiment that our Captain, made of Anatomy in this Voyage.

The Surgeon that cut him up, over lived him not past four days, although he
were not touched with that sickness, of which he had been recovered above a
month before; but only of an over-bold practice which he would needs make
upon himself, by receiving an over-strong Purgation of his own device: after
which taken, he never spoke, nor his Boy recovered the health which he lost by
tasting it, till he saw England.

The Symerons, who, as is beforesaid, had been entertained by our Captain in
September last, and usually repaired to our Ship, during all the time of our
absence; ranged the Country up and down, between Nombre de Dios and us, to
learn what they might for us; whereof they gave our Captain advertisement
from time to time, as now particularly, certain of them let him understand,
that the Fleet was certainly arrived at Nombre de Dios.

Therefore he sent the Lion, Ianu. 30.
to the seamost Island of the Cativaas, to descry the truth of the report: by
reason it must needs be, that if the Fleet were in Nombre de Dios, all the
Frigates of the Country would repair thitherwards with Victual.

The Lion within few days descried that she was sent for, espying a Frigate
which she presently boorded and took, laden with Maiz, Hens, and Pompions from
Tolou, who assured us of the whole truth, of the arrival of the Fleet: in this
Frigate were taken one Woman and twelve Men, of whom one was the Scrivano of
Tolou. These we used very courteously, keeping them diligently guarded from the
deadly hatred of the Symerons, who sought daily by all means they could to get
them of our Captain, that they might cut their throats, to revenge their
wrongs and injuries, which the Spanish Nation had done them: but our Captain
persuaded them not to touch them, or give them ill countenance, while they were
in his charge; and took order for their safety, not only in his presence, but
also in his absence For when he had prepared to take his journey for Panama by
land, he gave Ellis Hixom charge of his own Ship and Company, and especially
of those Spaniards whom he had put into the great Prize, which was haled a
shore to the Island, (which we termed slaughter Island, because so many of our
Men dyed there) and used as a Storehouse for our selves, and a Prison for our
Enemies.

All things thus ordered, our Captain conferring with his Company and the
Chiefest of the Symerons, what Provisions were to be prepared for this great
and long journey; what kind of Weapons, what store of Victuals, and what
manner of Apparel; was especially advised, to carry as great store of Shoes
as possibly he might, by reason of so many Rivers, with stones and gravel as
they were to pass; which accordingly providing, prepared his Company for that
journey, Febr. 3.
entering it upon Shrove-tuesday. At what time there had dyed twenty eight of
our Men, and a few whole Men were left aboard with Ellis Hixom, to keep the
Ship and tend the Sick, and guard the Prisoners.

At his departure, our Captain gave this Master straight charge, in any case
not to trust any Messenger, that should come in his name with any Tokens,
unless he brought his hand writing; which he knew could not be counterfeited
by the Symerons or Spaniards.

We were in all forty eight, of which eighteen only were English, the rest
were Symerons, which besides their Arms, bare every one of them a great
quantity of Victual and Provision, supplying our want of Carriages in so long
a March, so that we were not troubled with any thing but our Furniture. And
because they could not carry enough to suffize us altogether, therefore, as
they promised before, so by the way with their Arrows, they provided for us
competent store from time to time.

They have every one of them two sorts of Arrows, the one to defend himself
and offend the Enemy, the other to kill his Victuals. These for fight are
somewhat like the Scottish Arrow, only somewhat longer, and headed with Iron,
Wood or Fish-bones. But the Arrows for Provision are of three sorts; the first
serves to kill any great Beast near hand, as Ox, Stag, or wild Boar; this
has a head of Iron of a pound and a half weight, shaped in form like the
head of a Javelin or Boare-spear, as sharp as any Knife; making so large and
deep a wound, as can hardly be believed of him that has not seen it. The
second serves for lesser Beasts, and has a head of three quarters of a pound;
this he most usually shoots. The third serves for all manner of Birds; it
has a head of an ounce weight. And these heads, though they be of Iron only,
yet are they so cunningly tempered, that they will continue a very good edge a
long time; and though they be turned sometimes, yet they will never or seldom
break. The necessity in which they stand hereof continually, causes them to
have Iron in far greater account then Gold; and no Man among them is of
greater estimation, then he that can most perfectly give this temper unto it.

Every day we were marching by Sunrising, we continued till ten in the
fore-noone, then resting (ever near some River) till past twelve; we Marched
till four, and then by some Rivers side, we reposed our selves in such Houses,
as either we found prepared heretofore by them, when they traveled through
these Woods, or they daily built very readily for us, in this manner.

As soon as we came to the place where we intended to lodge, the Symerons
presently laying down their burdens, fell to cutting of Forkes or Posts, and
Poles or Raf^er^, and Palmi^o boughs, or Plantaine leaves, and with great
speed set up, to the number of six Houses. For every of which, they first
fastened deep into the ground three or four great Posts with forkes; upon them
they laid one Transome, which was commonly about twenty foot, and made the
sides in the manner of the roofes of our Country Houses, thatching it close
with those aforesaid Leaves, which keep out water a long time; observing
always that in the lower ground, where greater heat was, they left some three
or four foot open unthacht below, and made the Houses, or rather Roofes, so
many foot the higher. But in the Hills, where the Air was more piercing, and
the nights colder, they made our Rooms always lower, and ^hatched them close
to the ground, leaving only one Door to enter at, and a lover-hole for a
vent, in the midst of the roof. In every of these they made four several
Lodgings, and three Fires, one in the midst, and one at each end of every
House; so that the Room was most temperately warm, and nothing annoyed with
Smoke, partly by reason of the nature of the Wood, which they use to burn,
yielding very little Smoke, partly by reason of their artificial making of
it; as firing the Wood cut in length like our Billets, at the ends, and joining
them together so close, that though no flame or fire did appear, yet the heat
continued without intermission.

Near many of the Rivers where we stayed or lodged, we found sundry sorts of
Fruits, which we might use with great pleasure and safety temperately, Mammeas,
Guyavas, Palmitos, Pinos, Oranges, Limons, and diverse other; from eating of
which they dissuaded us in any case, unless we eat very few of them, and those
first dry roasted, as Plan^ans, Potatos, and such like.

In journeying, as often as by chance they found any wild Swine, of which those
Hill* or Valleys have store, they would ordinarily, six at a time, deliver
their burdens to the rest of their fellows, and pursue, kill, and bring away
after us, as much as they could carry, and time permitted. One day a^ we
traveled, the Symerons found an Otter, and prepared it to be dressed: our
Captain marvelling at it, Pedro (our chief Symeron) asked him, Are you a man
of war, and in want, and yet doubt whether this be meat that has blood?
Herewithall our Captain rebuked him secretly, that he had so slightly
considered of it before.

The third day of our journey, they brought us to a Town of their own, seated
near a fair River, on the side of a Hill, environed with a dike of eight foot
broad, and a thick mud wall of ten foot high, sufficient to stop a sudden
surprizer. It had one long and broad street* lying East and West, and two other
cross streets of less breadth and length: there were in it some five or six
and fifty households, which were kept so clean and sweet, that not only the
houses, but the very streets were very pleasant to behold. In this Town we saw
they lived very civilly and cleanely: for as soon as we came thither, they
washed themselves in the River, and changed their apparel, which was very fine
and fitly made (as also their Women do wear) somewhat after the Spanish
fashion, though nothing so costly. This Town is distant thirty five leagues
from Nombre de dios, and forty five from Panamah. I^ is plentifully stored with
many sorts of Beasts and Foul, with plenty of Maiz and sundry Fruits.

Touching their affection in Religion, they have no kind of Priests, only they
held the Cross* in great reputation: but at our Captains persw^si^n, they were
contented to leave their Cross^* and to lear^e the Lord prayer, and to be
instructed in some measure concerning Gods true worship. They keep a
continual Watch in four parts, three miles off their Town, to prevent the
mischiefs which the Spaniards intend against them, by the conducting of some
of their own Coats, which having been taken by the Spaniards, have been
enforced thereunto: wherein, as we learned sometimes the Spaniards have
prevailed over them, especially when they lived less careful; but since they
against the Spaniards, whom they kill like Beasts, as often as they take them
in Woods, having aforehand understood of their coming.

Febr. 7.
We stayed with them that night, and the next day till noone: during which time
they related unto us diverse very strange accidents, that had fallen out
between them and the Spaniards, namely one: A gallant Gentleman entertained by
the Governors of the Country, undertook the year last past, with a hundred
an fifty Soldiers, to put this Town to the Sword, Men, Women, and Children,
being conducted to it by one of them, that had been taken prisoner, and won by
great gifts: he surprised it half an hour before day, by which occasion most
of the men escaped, but many of their women and children were slaughtered, or
taken: but the same morning by Sun rising, after that their Guide was slaire,
in following an other man's wife; and that the Symerons had assembled themselves
in their strergth, they behaved themselves in such sort, and drove the
Spaniards to such extremity, that what with the disadvantage of the Woods,
having lost their Guide, and thereby their way, what with famine and want,
there escaped not past thirty of them, to return answer to those which sent
them.

Their King dwelt in a City within sixteen Leagues Southeast of Panama, which
is able to make one thousand seven hundred fighting men.

They all entreated our Captain very earnestly, to make his abode with them
some two or three days, promising that by that time they would double his
strength if he thought good. But he thanking them for their offer, told them,
that he could stay no longer, it was more then time to prosecute his purposed
Voyage: as for strength, he would wish no more then he had, although he might
have presently twenty times as much: which they took as proceeding not only
from kindness, but also from magnanimity, and therefore, they marched forth
that afternoon with great good will.

This was the order of our march: four of those Symerons that best knew the
ways, went about a mile distance before us, breaking boughs as they went, to
be a direction to those that followed: but with great silence, which they
required us all to keep. Then twelve of them were as it were our Vantguard,
and other twelve out Reereward: we with their two Captains in the midst.

All the Way was through Woods very cool and pleasant, by reason of those
goodly and high Trees, that grow there so thick, that it is cooler traveling
there under them in that hot Region, then it is in the most parts of England in
the Summer time. This gave a special encouragement unto us all, that we
understood there was a great Tree about the midway, from which we might at once
discern the North Sea from whence we came, and the South Sea whether we were
going.

The fourth day following we came to the height of the desired Hill, (a very
high Hill, lying East and West, Febr. 11.
like a ridge between the two Seas) about ten of the clock: where the
chiefest of these Symerons took out Captain by the hand, and prayed him to
follow him, if he was desirous to see at once the two Seas: which he had so
long longed for.

Here was that goodly and great high Tree, in which they had cut and made
diverse steps, to ascend up near unto the top, where they had made a
convenient Bower, wherein ten or twelve men might easily sit: and from
thence we might without any difficulty plainly see, the Atlanticke Ocean
whence now we came, and the South Atlantic so much desired: South and North of
this Tree, they had felled certain Trees, that the prospect might be the
clearer: and near about the Tree there were diverse strong houses, that had
been built long before, as well by other Symerons as by these, which usually
pass that way, as being inhabited in diverse places in those waste Countries.

After our Captain had ascended to this Bower, with the chief Symeron, and
having as it pleased God, at that time, by reason of the brize, a very fair
day, had seen that Sea of which he had heard such golden reports: he besought
Almighty God of his goodness, to give him life and leave to Sail once in an
English Ship in that Sea: and then calling up all the rest of our men,
acquainted John Oxnam especially with this his petition and purpose, if it
would please God to grant him that happiness: who understanding it, presently
protested, that unless our Captain did beat him from his Company, he would
follow him by Gods grace.

Thus all thoroughly satisfied with the sight of the Seas, descended, and after
our repast, continued our ordinary march, Febr. 13.
through Woods, yet two days more as before, without any great variety. But
when we came to march in a Champion Country, where grass grows, not only
in great length as the k^otgrasse grows in many places, but to such height,
that the Inhabitants are feign to burn it thrice in the year, that it may be
able to feed their Cattle, of which they have thousands. For it is a kind of
Grass with a stalk, as big as a great wheaten reed, which has a blade
issuing from the top of it, on which, though the Cattle feed, yet it grows
every day higher, until the top be too high for an Ox to reach. Then the
Inhabitants are wont to put fire to it, for the space of five or six miles
together, which notwithstanding after it is thus burnt, within three days
springs up fresh like green Corn. Such is the great fruitfulness of the
soil, by reason of the evennesse of the day and night, and the rich Dewes
which fall every morning.

In these three last days march in the Champion, Febr. 14
as we past over the Hills, we might see Panama five or six times a day, and the
last day we saw the Ships riding in the road.

But after that we were come within a days journey of Panama, our Captain
understanding by the Symerons, that the Dames of Panama are wont to send forth
Hunters and Fowlers, for taking of sundry dainty Foul, which the Land
yields, by whom if we Marched not very heedfully, we might be descryed;
caused all his Company to March out of all ordinary way, and that with as great
heed, silence and secrecy, as possibly they might, to the Grove, which was
agreed on four days before; lying within a league of Panama, where we might
lie safely undiscovered near the Highway, that leads from thence to Nombre
de Dios.

Thence we sent a chosen Symeron, one that had served a Master in Panamah
before time, in such Apparel as the Negroes of Panama do use to War, to be
our Espiall, to go into the Town, to learn the certain night, and time of
the night, when the Carriers laded the Treasure from the Kings Treasure-house
to Nombre de Dios.

For they are wont to take their journey from Panama to Venta Cruz, which is
six leagues, ever by night, because the Country is all Champion, and
consequently by d^y very hot: but from Venta Cruz to Nombre de Dios, as often as
they travel by Land, with their Treasure, they travel always by day and not
by night, because all that way is full of Woods, and therefore very fresh and
cool; unless the Symerons happily encounter them, and make them sweat with
fear, as sometimes they have done; whereupon they are glad to guard their
Recoes with Soldiers, as they pass that way.

This last day our Captain did behold and view, the most of all that fair
City, discerning the large Street which lies directly from the Sea into the
Land, South and North. By three of the clock we came into this Grove, passing
(for the more secrecy) along a certain River, which at that time was almost
dried up.

Having disposed of our selves in the Grove, we dispatched our Spy an hour
before night, so that by the closing in of the evening, he might be in the
City; as he was: whence presently he returned unto us, that which very happily
he understood by Companions of his; That the Teasurer of Lima, intending to
pass into Spain in the first adviso (which was a Ship of three hundred and
fifty Tun, a very good Sayler) was ready that night, to take his journey
toward Nombre de Dios, with his Daughter and Family; having fourteen Moyles
in company, of which, eight was laden with Gold, and one with Jewels. And
farther, that there were two other Recoes, of fifty Moyles in each, laden with
Victuals for the most part, with some little quantity of Silver, to come forth
that night after the other. There are twenty eight of these Recoes, the
greatest of them is of seventy Moyles, the less of fifty, unless some
particular Man hyre for himself, ten, twenty or thirty, as he has need.

Upon this notice, we forthwith Marched four leagues, till we came within two
leagues of Venta Cruz; in which March, two of our Symerons which were sent
before, by scent of his Match, found and brought a Spaniard, whom they had
found a sleep by the way, by scent of the said Match, and drawing near
thereby, heard him taking his breath as he slept; and being but one, they fell
upon him, stopped his mouth from crying, put out his Match, and bound him so,
that they well near strangled him by that time he was brought unto us. By
examining him, we found all that to be true, which our Spy had reported to us,
and that he was a Soldier entertained with others by the Treasurer, for the
guard and conduct of this Treasure, from Venta Cruz to Nombre de Dios.

This Soldier having learned who our Captain was, took courage, and was bold
to make two requests unto him; the one, that he would command his Symerons,
which hated the Spaniards (especially the Soldiers) extremely, to spare his
life, which he doubted not but they would do at his charge: the other was,
that seeing he was a Soldier, and assured him, that they should have that
night, more Gold, besides Jewels and Pearls of great price, then all they
could carry (if not, then he was to be dealt with how they would) but if they
all found it so, then it might please our Captain to give unto him, as much as
it might suffize for him and his Mistress to live upon, as he had heard our
Captain had done to diverse others: for which he would make his name so famous,
as any of them, which had received like favor.

Being at the place appointed, our Captain with half of his men, lay on one
side of the way, about fifty paces off in the long grass; John Oxnam with the
Captain of the Symerons, and the other half, lay on the other side of the
way, at the like distance: but so far behind, that as occasion served, the
former Company might take the foremost Moyles by the heads, and the other the
hindmost, because the Moyles tied together, are always driven one after
another; and especially that if we should have need to use our weapons that
night, we might be sure not to endamage our fellows. We had not lain thus in
ambush much above an hour, but we heard the Recoes coming from the City to
Venta Cruz, and from Venta Cruz to the City, which has a very common and
great trade, when the Fleetes are there: we heard them, by reason they
delight much to have deep sounding Bells, which in a still night are heard very
far off.

Now though there were as great charge given as might be, that none of our men
should show or stir themselves* but let all that came from Venta Cruz to
pass quie^ly: yea their Recoes also, because we knew that they brought
nothing but Merchandise from thence: yet one of our men called Robert Pike,
having drunken too much Aqua vitae without water, forgot himself, and
entising a Symeron forth with him, was gone hard to the way, with intent to
have shown his forwardness on the foremost Moyles. And when a Cavalier from
Venta Cruz well mounted, with his Page running at his stirrup, past by
unadvisedly he rose up to see what he was; but the Semeron of better
discretion pulled him down, and lay upon him, that he might not discover them
any more* Yet by this the Gentleman had taken notice by seeing one all in
white: for that we had all put our shirts over o^r other apparel, that we
might be sure to know our own men in the pell mell in the night. By means of
this sight, the Cavalier putting spurs to his horse, r^de a false Gallop, as
desirous not only himself to be free of this doubt; which he imagined, but
also to give advertisement to others that they might avoid it.

Our Captain who had heard and observed (by reason of the hardness of the
ground and stillness of the nigh) the change of this Gentleman's trot to a
gallop, suspected that he was discovered, but could not imagine by whose fault,
neither did the time give him leisure to search. And therefore considering that
it might be, by reason or the danger of the place, well known to ordinary
Travelers: we lay still in expectation of the Treasurers coming, who was by
this time within half a league, and had come forwards to us, but that this
Horseman meeting him, and (as we afterward learned by the other Recoes) making
report to him, what he had seen presently that night, what he heard of
Captain Drake this long time, and what he conjectured to be most likely: viz.
that the said Captain Drake, or some for him, disappointed of his expectation,
of getting any great Treasure, both at Nombre de dios and other places, was by
some means or other come by land, in covert through the Woods unto this place
to speed for his purpose: and thereupon persuaded him to turn his Reco out of
the way, and let the other Recoes, which were coming after to pass on. They
were whole Recoes, and laden but with Victuals for the most part, so that the
loss of them were far less if the worst befell, and yet they should serve
to discover them as well as the best.

Thus by the rechlesnesse of one of our Company, and by the carfulness of
this Traveller, we were disappointed of a most rich booty, which is to be
thought God would not should be taken, for that by all likelihood it was well
gotten by that Treasurer.

The other two Recoes were no sooner come up to us, but being stayed and seized
on, one of the chief Carriers, a very sensible fellow, told our Captain by
what means we were discovered, and counseled us to shift for our selves
betimes, unless we were able to encounter the whole force of the City and
Country which before day would be about us.

It pleased us but little that we were defeated of our Golden Recoe, and that
in these we could not find past some two Horse-load of Silver: but it grieved
our Captain much more, that he was discovered, and that by one of his own
men. But knowing it bootlesse to grieve at things past, and having learned by
experience, that all safety in extremeties consists in taking of time: after
no long consultation with Pedro the chief of our Symerons, who declared that
there were but two ways for him: the one to travel back again the same
secret way they came, for four leagues space into the Woods: or else to march
forward by the high way to Venta Cruz, being two leagues, and make a way with
his Sword through the Enemies. He resolved; considering the long and weary
Marches that we had taken, and chiefly that last evening and day before: to
take now the shortest and readiest way; as choosing rather to encounter his
Enemies while he had strength remaining, then to be Encountered or chased when
we should be worn out with weariness; principally, now having the Moyles to
ease them that would, some part of the way.

Therefore commanding all to refresh themselves moderately with such store of
Victual, as we had there in abundance, he signified his resolution and reason
to them all: asking Pedro by name, whether he would give his hand not to
forsake him (because he knew that the rest of the Symerons would also then
stand fast and firm, so faithful are they to their Captain.) He being very
glad of his resolution, gave our Captain his hand, and vowed that he would
rather dye at his foot, then leave him to the Enemies, if he held this course.

So having strengthened our selves for the time, we took our journey toward
Venta Cruz, with help of the Moyles, till we came within a mile of the Town,
where we turned away the Recoes, charging the Conducters of them, not to follow
us upon pain of their lives.

There the way is cut through the Woods, about ten or twelve foot broad, so as
two Recoes may pass one by another. The fruitfulness of the soil causes
that with often shredding and ridding the way those Woods grow as thick as our
thickest hedges in England that are oftnest cut.

To the midst of this Wood, a Company of Soldiers which continually lay in
that Town, to defend it against the Simerons were come forth, to stop us if
they might on the way, if not to retrait to their strength, and there to expect
us. A Convent of Friars, of whom one was become a Leader, joined with these
Soldiers, to take such part as they did.

Our Captain understanding by our two Simerons, which with great hee^fulnesse
and silence, marched now, but above half a flight-shot before us, that it was
time for us to arm and take us to our weapons, for they knew the Enemy was at
hand, by smelling of their match and hearing of a noise: had given us charge
that no one of us should make any shot, until the Spaniards had first spent
their volley, which he thought they would not do before they had spoken, as
indeed fell out: For as soon as we were within hearing, a Spanish Captain
cried aloud, Hoo, our Captain answered him likewise, and being demanded, Que
gente? replied Englishmen. But when the said Commander charged him in the name
of the King of Spain his Master, that we should yield our selves, promising in
the word and faith of a Gentleman Soldier, that if he would so do, he would
use us with all courtesy; our Captain drawing somewhat near him, said; That
for the honor of the Queen of England his Mistress, he must have passage
that way: and therewithal discharged his Pistol toward him.

Upon this, they presently shot off their whole volly, which, though it lightly
wounded our Captain and diverse of our men, yet it caused death to one only
of our Company called John Harris, who was so powdered with Haile-shot (which
they all used for the most part as it seemed, or else quartered, for that our
men were hurt with that kind) that we could not recover his life, though he
continued all that day afterward with us. Presently as our Captain perceived
their shot to come slacking, as the latter drops of a great shewer of rain;
with his Whistle he gave us his usual signal, to answer them with our shot
and arrows, and so march onwards upon the Enemy, with intent to come to
handy-strokes, and to have joined with them: whom when he sound retired as to a
place of some better strength, he increased his pace to prevent them if he
might. Which the Symerons perceiving (although by terror of the shot
continuing) they were for the time stepped a side, yet as soon as they discerned
by hearing that we marched onward, they all rusht forwards one after another,
traversing the way, with their Arrows ready in their Bows, and their manner
of Country Dance or Leap, very lustily, singing Yo peho, Yo peho, and so got
before us, where they continued their Leap and Song, after the manner of their
own Country Wars, till they and we over-tooke some of the Enemy, who near
the Townes-end had conveyed themselves within the Woods, to have taken their
stand at us, as before.

But our Symerons now thoroughly encouraged, when they saw our resolution, brake
in through the thickst, on both sides of them, forcing them to fly, Friars and
all, although diverse of our Men were wounded, and one Symeron especially was
run through with one of their Pikes, whose courage and mind served him so
well notwithstanding, that he revenged his own death ere he dyed, by killing
him that had given him that deadly wound.

We with all speed, following this Chase, entered the Town of Venta Cruz, being
of about forty or fifty Houses, which had both a Governor and other Officers,
and some fair Houses, with many Storehouses large and strong for the Wares
which were brought thither from Nombre de Dios, by the River of Chagro, so to
be transported by Moyles to Panama, besides the Monastery, where we found above
a thousand Bulls and Pardons newly sent thither from Rome.

In those Houses we found three Gentlewomen, which had lately been delivered
of Children there, though their dwelling were in Nombre de Dios, because it
has been observed a long time, as they reported to us, that no Spaniards or
White Woman could ever be delivered in Nombre de Dios with safety of their
Children, but that within two or three days they dyed; notwithstanding that
being borne and brought up in this Venta Cruz or Panama five or six years, and
then brought to Nombre de Dios, if they escaped sickness the first or second
Month, they commonly lived in it as healthily as in any other place; although
no Stranger (as they say) can endure there any long time, without great danger
of death or extreme sickness.

Though at our first coming into the Town with Arms so suddenly, these
Gentlewomen were in great fear; yet because our Captain had given straight
charge to all the Symerons (that while they were in his Company, they should
never hurt a Woman, nor Man that had not weapon in his hand to do them hurt,
which they earnestly promised, and no less faithfully performed) they had no
wrong offered them, nor any thing taken from them, to the worth of a garter;
wherein, albeit they had indeed sufficient safety and security, by those of
his Company, which our Captain sent unto them, of purpose to comfort them; yet
they never ceased most earnestly entreating, that our Captain would vouchsafe
to come to them himself for their more safety: which when he did, in their
presence reporting the charge he had first given, and the assurance of his Men,
they were comforted.

While the Guards which we had (not without great need) ser, as well on the
Bridge which we were to pass over, as at the Towns end where we entered (they
have no other entrance into the Town by Land, but from the Waters side there
is one other, to carry up and down their Merchandise from their Frigates)
gained us liberty and quiet to stay in this Town some hour and half; we had
not only refreshed our selves, but our Company and Symerons had gotten some
good Pillage, which our Captain allowed and gave them (being not the thing he
looked for) so that it were not too cumbersome or heavy in respect of our
travel, or defense of our selves. A little before we departed, some ten or
twelve Horsemen came from Panama, by all likelihood, supposing that we were
gone out of this Town, for that all was so still and quiet, came to enter the
Town confidently; but finding their entertainment such as it was, they that
could, rode faster back again for fear, then they had ridden forwards for hope.

Thus we having ended our business in this Town, and the day beginning to
spring, we Marched over the Bridge, observing the same order that we did
before. There we were all safe in our opinion, as if we had been environed with
Wall and Trench; for that no Spaniard without his extreme danger could follow
us. The rather now, for that our Symerons were grown very valiant. But our
Captain considering that he had a long way to pass, and that he had bin now
well near fortnight from his Ship, where he had left his Company but weak by
reason of their sickness, hastened his Journies as much as he might, refusing
to visit the other Symeron Towns (which they earnestly desired him) and
encouraging his own Company with such example and speech, that the way seemed
much shorter. For He Marched most cheerfully, and assured us, that he doubted
not but ere he left that Coast, we should all be bountifully paid and
recompensed for all those pains taken. But by reason of this our Captains
haste, and leaving of their Towns, we marched many days with hungry
stomachs, much against the will of our Symerons; Who if we would have stayed
any day from this continual journeying, would have killed for us Victual
sufficient.

In our absence, the rest of the Symerons had built a little Town within three
leagues off the Port where our Ship lay. There our Captain was contented, upon
their great and earnest entreaties, to make some stay; for that they alleged,
it was only built for his sake. And indeed he consented the rather, that the
want of Shoes might be supplied by means of the Symerons, who were a great
help unto us: all our Men complaining of the tenderness of their feet, whom
our Captain would himself in their complaint accompany sometimes without
cause, but sometimes with cause indeed, which made the rest to bear the
burden the more easily.

These Symerons, during all the time that we were with them, did us continually
very good service, and in particular in this Journey, being unto us instead of
Intelligencers, to advertise us; of Guides in our way, to direct us; of
Purveyors, to provide Victuals for us; of Housewrights to build our Lodgings;
and had indeed able and strong Bodies, carrying all our necessaries; yea, many
times when some of our Company fainted with sickness or weariness, two
Symerons would carry him with ease between them two miles together; and at
other times, when need was, they would show themselves no less valiant then
industrious, and of good judgment.

Febr. 22.
From this Town, at our first entrance in the even on Saturday, our Captain
dispatched a Symeron with a token and certain order to the Master, who had
this three weeks, kept good watch against the Enemy, and shifted in the woods
for fresh Victual, for the relief and recovery of our men left aboard.
As Soon as this messenger was come to the shore, calling to our Ship, as
bringing some news, he was quickly fet aboard, by those which longed to
hear of our Captains speeding: but when he showed the Tooth-pike of Gold,
which he said our Captain had sent for a token to Edward Hixom, with charge to
meet him at such a River: though the Master knew well the Captains
Tooth-pike: yet by reason of his admonition and caveat given him at parting, he
(though he bewrayed no sign of distrusting the Symeron) yet stood as amazed,
least something had befallen our Captain otherwise then well. The Symeron
perceiving this, told him, that it was night when he was sent away, so that
our Captain cold not send any letter, but yet with the point of his Knife, he
vvrote something upon the Tooth-pike, which (he said) should be sufficient to
gain credit to the Messenger.

Thereupon the Master looked upon it, and savv written, By me Francis Drake,
wherefore he believed, and according to the message, prepared what provision
he could, and repaired to the mouth of the River of Tortugos, as the Symerons
that went with him then named it.

That afternoon toward three a Clock, we were come down to that River,
not past half an hour, before we savv our Pinnace ready come to receive us;
which was unto us all a double rejoicing: first, that we savv them, and next
so soon: our Captain with all our Company praised God most heartily, for
that we saw our Pinnace and fellows again.

We all seemed to these who had lived at rest and plenty all this while aboard,
as men strangely changed (our Captain yet not much changed) in countenance and
plight: and indeed our long fasting and sore travel might somewhat sore pine
and waste us: but the grief we drew inwardly, for that we returned without
that Gold and Treasure we hoped for, did no doubt show her print and footsteps
in our faces.

The rest of our Men which were then missed, could not travel so well as our
Captain, and therefore were left at the Indian new Town: Febr. 23.
and the next day we towed to another River in the bottom of the Bay and took
them all aboard.

Thus being returned from Panama, to the great rejoicing of our Company, who
were thoroughly revived with the report we brought from thence: especially
understanding our Captains purpose, that he meant not ^o leave off thus, but
would once again attempt the same journey, whereof they also might be
partakers: our Captain would not in the mean time suffer this edge and
forwardness of his men to be dulled or rebated, by lying still idely
unimployed, as knowing right well by continual experiences, that no sickness
was more noisome to impeach any enterprise then delay and idleness.

Therefore considering deeply the intelligences of other places of importance
thereabouts, which he had gotten the former years: and particularly of
Veragua, a rich Town lying to the Westward, between Nombre de Dios and
Nicaragua, where is the richest Mine of fine Gold, that is on this North side:
he consulted with his Company touching their opinions, what was to be done in
this mean time, and how they stood affected? Some thought that it was most
necessary to seek supply of Victuals, that we might the better be able to
keep our men close and in health till our time came: and this was easy to be
compassed, because the Frigates with Victual went without great defense,
whereas the Frigates and Barks with Treasure, for the most part were wafted
with great Ships and store of Soldiers. Others yet judged, we might better
bestow our time in intercepting the Frigates of Treasure: first, for that our
Magazines and Stor-houses of Victual were reasonably furnished, and the
Country it self was so plentiful, that every man might provide for himself
if the worst befell: and Victual might hereafter be provided abundantly as
well as now: whereas the Treasure never floteth upon the Sea, so ordinarily as
at this time of the Fleetes being there, which time in no wise may be neglected.

The Symerons being demanded also their opinion, for that they were experienced
in the particularities of all the Towns thereabouts, as in which, some or
other of them had served: declared that by Veragua Sinnior Pezoro sometimes
their Master from whom they fled, dwelt not in the Town for fear of some
surprise, but yet not far off from the Town, for his better relief: in a
very strong House of stone, where he had dwelt nineteen years at least, never
traveling from home, unless happily once a year to Carthagene or Nombre de
Dios when the Fleetes were there: he keeps a hundred Slaves at least in the
Mines, each Slave being bound to bring in daily clear gain (all charges
deducted) three Pezoes of Gold for himself and two for his women (eight
shilligs three pence the Pezo) amounting in the whole, to above two hundred
pound sterling each day: so that he has heaped a mighty Mass of Treasure
together, which he keeps in certain great Chests of two foot deep, three
broad, and four long: being, notwithstanding all his Wealth, hard and cruel,
not only to his Slaves, but unto all men, and therefore never going abroad but
with a Guard of five or six men to defend his person from danger, which he
fears extraordinarily from all Creatures. And as touching means of
compassing this purpose, they would conduct him safely through the Woods, by the
same ways by which they fled, that he should not need to enter their Havens
with danger, but might come upon their backs altogether unlooked for. And
though his house were of stone, so that it could not be burnt, yet if our
Captain would undertake the attempt, they would undermine and overthrow, or
otherwise break it open, in such sort as we might have easy access to his
greatest Treasure.

Our Captain having heard all their opinions, concluded so; that by dividing
his Company, the two first different sentences, were both reconciled, both to
be practiced and put in ure. John Oxnam appointed in the Bear, to be sent
Eastwards toward Tolou, to see what store of Victuals would come athwart his
half, and himself would to the Westwards in the Minion, lie off and on the
Cabezas, where was the greatest trade and most ordinary passage of those which
transported Treasure from Veragua and Nicaragua to the Fleet: so that no time
might be lost, nor opportunity let slip either for Victual or Treasure. As for
the attempt of Veragua or Sinior Pezoros House by land, by marching through the
Woods, he liked not of, least it might over-weary his Men by continual labor,
whom he studied to refresh and strengthen, for his next service fore named.

Therefore using our Symerons most courteously, dismissing those that were
desirous to go to their Wives, with such Gifts and favors as were most
pleasing, and entertaining those still aboard his Ships, which were contented
to abide with the Company remaining, the Pinnaces departed, as was determined,
the Minion to the West, the Bear to the East.

The Minion about the Cabezas met with a Frigate of Nicaragua, in which was
some Gold, and a Genoway Pilot, of which Nation there are many in those Coasts,
which had been at Veragua not past eight days before, he being very well
entreated, certified our Captain of the State of the Town, and of the
Harbor, and of a Frigate that was there ready to come forth within few days,
aboard in which there was above a Million of Gold, offering to conduct him to
it, if we would do him his right, for that he knew the Channel very
perfectly, so that he could enter by night safely without danger of the Sands
and Shallowes (though there be but little Water) and utterly undes^ryed, for
that the Town is five leagues within the Harbor, and the way by Land is so
far about and difficult through the Woods, that though we should by any
casualty be discovered, about the point of the Harbor, yet we might dispatch
our business and depart, before the Town could have notice of our coming. At
his being there, he perceived they had heard of Drakes being on the Coast,
which had put them in great fear, as in all other places ( Pezoro purposing to
remove himself to the South Sea) but there was nothing ^one to prevent him,
their freare being so great, that, as it is accustomed in such cases, it
excluded Counsel and bred despair.

Our Captain conferring with his own knowledge and former intelligences, was
purposed to have returned to his Ship, to have taken some of those Symerons
which had dwelt with Sinior Pezoro, to be the more confirmed in this point. But
when the Genoway Pilot was very earnest to have the time gained, and warranted
our Captain of good speed, if we delayed not; he dismissed the Frigates
somewhat lighter, to hasten her journey, and with this Pilots advice, labored
with Sail and Oars to get this Harbor, and to enter it by night accordingly;
considering that this Frigate might now be gained, and Pezoros House attempted
hereafter notwithstanding.

But when we were come to the mouth of the Harbor, we heard the report of two
Chambers, and farther off about a league within the Bay, two other, as were
answering them. Whereby our Genowaise Pilot conjectured that we were
discovered; for he assured us, that this order had been taken, since his last
being there; by reason of the advertisement and charge, which the Governor of
Panama had sent unto all the Coast, which even in their Beds lay in great and
continual fear of our Captain, and therefore by all likelihood, maintained
this kind of Watch, at the charge of the rich Gnuffe Pezoro, for their
security.

Thus being defeated of this expectation, we found that it was not Gods will
that we should enter at that time: the rather for that the Wind, which had all
this time been Easterly, came up to the Westward, and invited us to return
again to our Ship; where on sheere Thursday we met according to appointment
with our Bear, and found that she had bestowed her time to more profit then we
had done. For she had taken a Frigate in which there were ten men, whom they
set a shore; great store of Maiz, twenty eight fat Hogs, and two hundred
Hens. Our Captain discharged this Frigate of her lading, and because she was
new, strong, and of a good mould, the next day he tallowed her to make her a
Man of War: disposing all our Ordnance and provisions that were fit for such
use in her. For we had heard by the Spaniards last taken, that there were two
little Galleys built in Nombre de Dios, to waft the Chagro Fleet to and fro,
but were not yet both lanched: wherefore he purposed now to adventure for that
Fleet. And to hearten his Company, Marc. 20.
he feasted them that Easter Day with great cheer and cheerfulness, setting
up his rest upon that attempt.

The next day with the new tallowed Frigate of Tolou and his Bear, Marc. 21.
we set sail toward the Cativaas, where about two days after we landed, and
stayed while noone: at what time seeing a sail to the Westwards, as we deemed
making to the Island: we set sail and plied toward him, who descrying us,
bare with us, till he perceived by our confidence, that we were no Spaniards,
and conjectured that we were those Englishmen, of whom they had heard long
before. And being in great want, and desired to be releeved by us, he bare up
under our Lee, and in token of amity, shot off his Lee Ordnance which was not
unanswered.

We understood that he was Tetu a French Captain of New Haven, a Man of War
as we were: desirous to be releeved by us. For at our first meeting the
French Captain cast abroad his hands, and prayed our Captain to help him to
some water, for that he had nothing but Wine and Cider aboard him, which had
brought his Men into great sickness. He had sought us ever since he first
heard of our being upon the Coast, about this five weeks. Our Captain sent
one aboard him with some relief for the present, vvilling him to follovv us
to the next Port, where he should have both Water and Victuals. At our coming
to Anchor he sent our Captain a Case of Pistols, and a fair guilt Symeter,
(which had been the late Kings of France, whom Monsieur Mongomery hurt in
the eye, and was given him by Monsieur Stroffe) our Captain requited him
with a Chain of Gold, and a Tablet which he wore.

This Captain reported unto us the first news of the Massacre at Paris, at
the King of Navarres marriage on Saint Bartholomewes day last, of the Admiral
of France slain in his Chamber, and diverse other Murders; so that he thought
those Frenchmen the happiest that were farthest from France; now no longer
France but Frenzy, even as if all Gaul were turned into Worme-wood and Gall.
Italian practices having over-mastered the French simplicity. He showed what
famous and often reports he had heard of our great riches. He desired to know
of our Captain which way he might compass his Voyage also. Though we had him
in some jealousy and distrust, for all his pretense, because we considered
more the strength he had, then the good will he might bear us; yet upon
consultation among our selves, whether it were fit to receive him or no; we
resolved to take him and twenty of his Men, to serve with our Captain for
halfes: in such sort as we needed not doubt of their Forces, being but twenty,
nor be hurt by their Portions, being no greater then ours; and yet gratify
them in their earnest suit, and serve our own purpose, which without more
help we could very hardly have achieved. Indeed he had seventy Men, and we
now but thirty one: his Ship was above eighty tun, and our Frigate not past
twenty, our Pinnace nothing near ten tun; yet our Captain thought this
proportionable, in consideration that not number of Men, but quality of their
judgments and knowledge, were to be the principal actors herein; and the
French Ship could do no service, nor stand in any steed to this enterprise
which we intended, and had agreed upon long before, both touching the time when
it should take beginning, and the place where we should meet, namely at Rio
Francisco. Having thus agreed with Captain Tetu, we sent for the Symerians, as
before was decreed; two of them were brought aboard our Ships, to give the
French assurance of this agreement.

As soon as we could furnish our selves and refresh the French Company, which
was within five or six days (by bringing them to the Magazine which was the
nearest, where they were supplied by us in such sort, as they protested they
were beholding to us for all their lives) taking twenty of the French, and
fifteen of ours with our Symerons, leaving both our Ships in safe Road, we
Mand our Frigate and two Pinnaces (we had formerly sunk our Lion, shortly
after our return from Panama, because we had not Men sufficient to Man her)
and went toward Rio Francisco, which because it had not water enough for our
Frigate, caused us to leave her at the Cabezas, Mand with English and French,
in the charge of Robert Dohle, to stay there, without attempting any chase,
until the return of our Pinnaces. Marc. 13.
And then bear to Rio Francisco, where our Captains landed with such Force as
aforesaid; and charged them that had the charge of the Pinnaces, to be there
the fourth day next following without any sail.

And thus knowing that the Cariages went now daily from Panama to Nombre de
Dios, we proceeded in covert through the Woods, toward the Highway that
leads between them. It is five leagues accounted by Sea, between Rio
Francisco and Nombre de Dios; but that way which we marched by land, we found
it above seven league. We marched, as in our former journey to Panama, both
for order and silence, to the great wonder of the French Captain and Company,
who protested they knew not by any means how to recover the Pinnaces, if the
Symerons (to whom what our Captain commanded was a law, though they little
regarded the French, as having no trust in them) should leave us: our Captain
assured him, there was no cause of doubt of them, of whom he had had such
former trial. When we were come within an English mile of the Way, we stayed
all night, refreshing our selves in great stillness in a most convenient place,
where we heard the Carpenters, being many in number, vvorking upon their
Ships, as they usually do by reason of the great heat of the day in Nombre de
Dios, and might hear the Moyles coming from Panama, April 1.
by reason of the advantage of the ground. The next morning, upon hearing of
that great number of Bells, the Symerons rejoiced exceedingly, as though there
could not have befallen them a more joyful accident, chiefly having been
disappointed before. Now they all assured us, we should have more Gold and
Silver then all of us could bear away, as in truth it fell out. For there came
three Recoes, one of fifty Moyles, the other two of seventy each, every of
which carried three hundred pound weight of Silver, which in all amounted to
near thirty Tun. We putting our selus in readiness, went down near the Way to
hear the Bells, where we stayed not long, but we saw of what Metal they
were made, and took such hold on the heads of the foremost and hindmost
Moyles, that all the rest stayed and lay down, as their manner is.

These three Recoes were guarded with forty five Soldiers, or thereabouts;
fifteen to each Reco, which caused some exchange of Bullets and Arrows for a
time; in which conflict the French Captain was sore wounded with Hayle shot in
the Belly, and one Symeron slain. But in the end these Soldiers thought it the
best way to leave their Moyles with us, and to seek for more help abroad; in
which mean time we took some pain to ease some of the Moyles, which were
heaviest laden, of their carriages. And being weary, we were content with a
few bars and quoits of Gold, as we could well carry: burying about fifteen tun
of Silver, partly in the Boroughs which the great Land-crabs had made in the
earth, and parrly under old trees which are fallen thereabout, and partly in
the Sand and Gravel of a River, not very deep of water.

Thus when about this business we had spent some two hours, and had disposed
of all our matters, and were ready to March back, the very self same way that
we came, we heard both Horse and Foot coming, as it seemed to the Moyles, for
they never followed us, after we were once entered the Woods; where the French
Captain, by reason of his wound, not able to travel farther, stayed, in hope
that some rest would recover him better strength. But after we had marched some
two leagues, upon the French Soldiers complaint, that they missed one of their
Men also, examination being made whether he were slain or no; it was found
that he had drunk much Wine, and over-lading himself with Pillage, and
hasting to go before us, had lost himself in the Woods. And as we afterward
knew, he was taken by the Spaniards that evening, and upon torture, discovered
unto them where we had hidden our Treasure.

We continued our March all that and the next day toward Rio Francisco, in
hope to meet our Pinnaces; but when we came thither, Apr. 2.3.
looking out to Sea, we saw seven Spanish Pinnaces, which had been searching
all the Coasts thereabout. Whereupon we mightily suspected that they had taken
or spoiled our Pinnaces, for that our Captain had given so straight charge,
that they should repair to this place this afternoon from the Cabezas where
they rode, whence to our sight, these Spaniards Pinnaces did come.

But the night before, there had fallen very much rain, with much Westerly
Wind, which as it enforced the Spaniards to return home the sooner, by
reason of the Storm; so it kept our Pinnaces, that they could not keep the
appointment, because the Wind was contrary, and blew so strong, that with
their Oars they could all that day get but half the way. Notwithstanding, if
they had followed our Captains direction in setting forth over night, while
the wind served, they had arrived at the place appointed with far less
labor, but with far more danger, because that very day at noone, the Spanish
Shallops mand out of purpose from Nombre de Dios, were come to this place to
take our Pinnaces? imagining where we were, after they had heard of our
intercepting of the Treasure. Our Captain seeing the Shallops, feared least
having taken our Pinnaces, they had compelled our men by torture, to confess
where his Frigate and Ships were. Therefore in this distress and perplexity,
the Company misdoubting that all means of return to their Country were cut
off, and that their Treasure then served them to small purpose: our Captain
comforted and encouraged us all, saying: We should venture no farther then he
did, it was no time now to fear, but rather to haste to prevent that which was
feared: if the Enemy have prevailed against our Pinnaces, which God forbid, yet
they must have time to search them, time to examine the Mariners; time to
execute their resolution after it is determined; before all these times be
taken, we may get to our Ships if ye will, though not possibly by land, because
of the Hills, Thickets and Rivers, yet by water. Let us therefore make a Raft
with the trees that are here in readiness, as offering themselves being brought
down the River, happily this last storm, and put our selves to Sea, I will be
one, who will be the other? John Smith offered himself, and two Frenchmen that
could swim very well, desired they might accompany our Captain, as did the
Symeron likewise (who had been very earnest with our Captain to have marched
by land though it were sixteen days journey, and in case the Ships had been
surprised, to have aboard always with them) especially Pedro, who yet was
feign to be left behind, because he could not row. The Raft was fitted and fast
bound; a Sail of a Biscuit Sack prepared; an Oate was shaped out of a young
Tree to serve instead of a Rudder, to direct their course before the wind. At
his departure he comforted the Company, by promising, that if it pleased God,
he should put his foot in safety aboard his Frigate, he would God willing, by
one means or other get them all aboard, in despite of all the Spaniards in the
Indies. In this manner putting off to the Sea, he sailed some three leagues
sitting up to the waste continually in water, and at every surge of the wave to
the armepits, for the space of six hours, upon this Raft, what with the
parching of the Sun, and what with the beating of the Salt water, they had
all of them their skins much fretted away. At length God gave them the sight of
two Pinnaces turning toward them with much wind, but with far greater joy to
him, that could easily conjecture, and did cheerfully declare to those three
with him, that they were our Pinnaces, and that all was safe, so that there was
no cause of fear. But see, the Pinnaces not seeing this Raft, nor suspecting
any such matter, by reason of the wind and night growing on, were forced to run
into a cover behind the point, to take succor for that night: which our
Captain seeing, and gathering, because they came not forth again, that they
would Anchor there, put his Raft a shore, and ran by land about the point,
where he found them, who upon sight of him, made as much haste as they could to
take him and his Company aboard. For our Captain of purpose to try what haste
they could and would make in extremity, himself ran in great haste, and so
willed the other three with him, as if they had been chased by the Enemy: which
they the rather suspected, because they savv so few with him. And after his
coming aboard, when, they demanding, how all his Company did? he answered
coldly, well: they all doubted, that all went scarce well. But he willing to
rid all doubts, and fill them with joy, took out of his bosom a Quoit of
Gold, thanking God that our Voyage was made. And to the Frenchmen he declared,
how their Captain indeed was left behind, sore wounded and two of ^his Company
with him: but it should be no hinderance to them.

That night our Captain with great pain of his Company, rowed to Rio
Francisco: where he took the rest in, and the Treasure which we had brought
with us: making such expedition, that by dawning of the day, we set sail back
again, to our Frigate, and from thence directly to our Ships: where as soon as
we arrived, our Captain divided by weight, the Gold and Silver into two even
portions, between the French, and the English.

About a fortnight after, when we had set all things in order, and taking out
of our Ship all such necessaries as we needed for our Frigate, had left and
given her to the Spaniards, whom we had all this time detained, we put out of
that Harbor, together with the French Ship, riding some few days among the
Cabezas. In the mean time our Captain made a secret composition with the
Symerons, that twelve of our men and sixteen of theirs, should make another
Voyage, to get intelligence in what case the country stood, and if it might
be, recover Monsieur Tetu the French Captain, at leastwise to bring away that
which was hidden in this former surprise and could not then be conveniently
carried. John Oxnam and Thomas Sherwell were put in trust for our service, to
the great content of the whole Company, who conceived greatest hope of them
next our Captain, whom by no means they would condescend to suffer to
adventure again this time, yet he himself rowed to set them a shore at Rio
Francisco, finding his labor well employed both otherwise, and also in saving
one of those two Frenchmen that had remained willingly to accompany their
vvounded Captain. For this Gentleman having escaped the rage of the Spaniards,
was now coming toward our Pinnace, where he fell down on his knees,
blessing God for the time that ever our Captain was borne, who now beyond
all his hope, was become his deliverer.

He being demanded what was become of his Captain and other fellow, showed
that within half an hour after our departure, the Spaniards h^d over gotten
them, and took his Captain and other fellow: he only escaped, by flight,
having cast away all his Carriage, and among the rest one Box of Jewels, that
he might fly the swifter from the Pursuers: but his fellovv took it up and
burdened himself so sore, that he could make no speed, as easily he might
otherwise, if he would have cast down his Pillage, and laid aside his
covetous mind; as for the Silver, which we had hidden thereabout in the Earth
and the Sands, he thought that it was all gone, for that he thought there had
been near two thousand Spaniards and Negroes there, to dig and search for it.
This report notwitstanding, our purpose held, and our Men were sent to the said
place, where they found that the Earth, every way a mile distant had been
dug and turned up in every place of any likelihood, to have any thing hidden
in it. And yet nevertheless, for all that narrow search, all our Men's labor
was not quite lost: but so considered, that the third day after their
departure, they all returned safe and cheerful, with as much Silver as they
and all the Symerons could find, ( viz. thirteen bars of Silver, and some few
Quoits of Gold, with which they were presently embarked without
empeachment, repairing with no less speed then joy to our Frigate. Now was it
high time to think of homewards, having sped our selves as we desired: and
therefore our Captain concluded to visit Rio Grand, once again; to see if he
could meet with any sufficient Ship or Bark, to carry Victual enough to serve
our turn homewards, in which we might in safety and security embarque our
selves.

The Frenchmen having formerly gone from us as soon as they had their shares at
our first return with the Treasure, as being very desirous to return home into
their Country, and our Captain as desirous to dismiss them, as they were to
be dismissed: for that he foresaw they could not in their Ship avoid the danger
of being taken by the Spaniards, if they should make out any Men of War for
them, while they lingered on the Coast, and having also been then again
releeved with Victuals by us: Now at our meeting of them again, were very
loath to leave us, and therefore accompanied us very kindly as far up as Saint
Barnards, and farther would, but that they durst not adventure so great danger,
for that we had intelligence that the Fleet was ready to set sail for Spain,
riding at the entry of Carthagena. Thus we departed from them, passing hard by
Carthagena, in the sight of all the Fleet, with a Flag of Saint George in the
maine top of our Frigate, with silk Streamers and Ancients down to the water,
sailing forward with a large wind, till we came within two leagues of the
River, being all low land, and dark night: where to prevent the over shooting
of the River in the night, we lay off and on bearing small sail, till that
about midnight the wind veering to the Eastward, by two of the Clock in the
morning, a Frigate from Rio Grand passed hard by us, bearing also but small
sail. We saluted them with our shot and Arrows, they answered us with Bases;
but we got aboard them, and took such order, that they were content against
their wills to depart a shore and to leave us this Frigate which was of twenty
five Tun, loaded with Maiz, and Hens and Hogs, and some Honey in very good time
fit for our use: for the Honey especially was a notable releever and preserver
of our crased people. The next morning as soon as we set those Spaniards a
shore on the maine, we set our course for the Cabezas without any stop,
whether we came about five days after. And being at Anchor, presently we hove
out all the Maiz aland, saving three Buts which we kept for our store: and
carrying all our provisions a shore, we brought both our Frigates on the
Carine, and new tallowed them.

Here we stayed about a seven night, trimming and rigging our Frigates,
boarding and stowing our Provisions, tearing abroad and burning our Pinnaces,
that the Symerons might have the Iron-worke. About a day or two before our
departure, our Captain willed Pedro and three of the chiefest of the Symerons,
to go through both his Frigates, to see what they liked, promising to give it
them whatsoever it were, so it were not so necessary as that he could not
return into England without it. And for their Wives, he would himself seek
out some Silks or Linen that might gratify them; which while he was choosing
out of his Trunkes, the Cymeter which Captain Tetu had given to our Captain,
chanced to be taken forth in Pedroes fight, which he seeing grew so much in
liking thereof, that he accounted of nothing else in respect of it, and
preferred it before all that could be given him; yet imagining, that it was no
less esteemed of our Captain, durst not himself open his mouth to crave or
commend it, but made one Francis Tucker to be his mean to break his mind,
promising to give him a fine quoit of Gold, which yet he had in store, if he
would but move our Captain for it; and to our Captain himself, he would give
four other great quoits, which he had hidden, intending to have reserved them
till another Voyage. Our Captain being accordingly moved by Francis Tucker,
could have been content to have made no such exchange, but yet desirous to
content him, that had deserved so well, he gave it him with many good words,
who received it with no little joy, affirming that if he should give his Wife
and Children (which he loved dearly) in liev of it, he could not sufficiently
recompense it, (for he would present his King with it, who he knew would make
him a great Man, even for this very Gifts sake) yet in gratuity and steed of
other requital of this Jewel, he desired our Captain to accept these four
pieces of Gold, as a token of his thankfulness to him, and a pawn of his
faithfulness during life. Our Captain received it in most kind sort, but
took it not to his own benefit, but caused it to be cast into the whole
Adventure, saying, If he had not been set forth to that place, he had not
attained such a Commodity; and therefore it was just, that they which bare part
with him of his burden in seting him to Sea, should enjoy the proportion of
his benefit whatsoever, at his return.

Thus with good love and liking we took our leave of that People, setting over
to the Islands of (...) whence the next day after, we set sail toward Cape
Saint Anthony, by which we past with a large wind; but presently being to
stand for the Havana, we were feign to ply to the windward some three or four
days. In which plying, we fortuned to take a small Bark, in which were two or
three hundred Hides, and one most necessary thing, which stood us in great
stead, viz. a Pumpe, which we set in our Frigate; their Bark, because it was
nothing fit for our service, our Captain gave them to carry them home. And so
returned to Cape Saint Anthony, and landing there we refreshed our Selves, and
besides great store of Turtles eggs, found by day in the (...) we took two
hundred and fifty Turtles by night; we powdered and dried some of them, which
did us good service, the rest continued but a small time. There were at this
time, belonging to Carthagene, Nombre de dios, Rio gran^, Santa Martha, Rio de
Hacha, Venta Cruz, Veragua, Nicaragua, the Henduras, Iamaica, etc. above two
hundred Frigates, some of one hundred twenty Tons, other but of ten or twelve
Tun, but the most of thirty or forty Tun, which all had intercourse between
Carthagene and Nombre de dios; the most of which, during our abode in those
parts we took, and some of them twice or thrice each, yet never burnt or sunck
any, unless they were made out Men of War against us, or laid as stals to
entrap us. And of all the men taken in these several Vessels, we never offered
any kind of violence to any, after they were once come under our power, but
either presently dismissed them in safety, or keeping them with us some longer
time, (as some of them we did) we always provided for their sustenance as for
our selves, and secured them from the rage of the Symerons against them, till at
last, the danger of their discovering where our Ships lay being overpast, (for
which only cause we kept them prisoners) we set them also free. Many strange
Birds, Beasts and Fishes, besides Fruits, Trees, Plants, and the like, were
seen and observed of us in this Journey, which willingly we pretermit as
hastening to the end of our Voyage, which from this Cape of Saint Anthony we
intended to finish, by sailing the directest and speediest way homeward, and
accordingly, even beyond our own expectation most happily performed. For
whereas our Captain had purposed to touch at New Foundland, and there to have
watered, which would have been some let unto us, though we stood in great want
of Water; yet God Almighty so provided for us, by giving us good store of
Raine-water, that we were sufficiently furnished; and within twenty three days
we past from the Cape of Florida, to the Isles of Silley, and so arrived at
Plymouth on Sunday about Sermon-time, August the ninth 1573. at what time the
news of our Captains return brought unto his, did so speedily pass over all
the Church, and surpass their minds, with desire and delight to see him, that
very few or none remained with the Preacher, all hastening to see the evidence
of Gods love and blessing toward our Gracious Queen and Country, by the fruit
of our Captains labor and success.

Soli Deo Gloria.
FINIS.
THE WORLD ENCOMPASSED BY SIR FRANCIS DRAKE. Offered now at last to Public
view, both for the honor of the Actor, but especially for the stirring up of
heroicke Spirits, to benefit their Country, and eternize their Names by like
noble attempts. Collected out of the Notes of Master Francis Fletcher Preacher
in this employment, and compared with diverse others Notes that went in the same
VOYAGE.

Printed at London for Nicholas Bourne, dwelling at the South entrance of the
royal Exchange, 1652.

SIR FRANCIS DRAKE his Voyage about the WORLD.
EVer since Almighty God commanded Adam to subdue the Earth, there has not
wanted in all Ages, some heroical Spirits, which in obedience to that high
mandate, either from manifest reason alluring them, or by secret instinct
enforcing them thereunto, have expended their wealth, employed their times and
adventured their Persons to find out the true circuit of the World.

Of these, some have endeavored to effect this their purpose, by conclusion and
consequence, drawn from the proportion of the higher Circles, to this
nethermost Globe, being the Center of the rest. Others not contented with
School Points and such demonstrations (for that a small error in the
beginning, grows in the progress to a great inconvenience) have added
thereunto their own History and experience. All of them in reason have deserved
great commendation of their own Ages, and purchased a just renown with all
posterity. For if a Surveyor of some few Lordships, whereof the bounds and
limits were before known worthily deserve his reward, not only for his travel,
but for his skill also, in measuring the whole and every part thereof: how much
more above comparison, are their famous Travels by all means possible to be
eternized, who have bestowed their studies and endeavor, to survey and measure
this Globe almost unmeasurable? Neither is here that difference to be objected,
which in private Possessions is of value. Whose Land Survey you? forasmuch as
the main Ocean by right is the Lords alone, and by nature left free, for all
men to deal withal, as very sufficient for all men's use, and larg enough for all
men's industry.

15^^
And therefore that valiant enterprise, accompanied with happy success, which
that right rare and thrice worthy Captain Francis Drake achieved, in first
turning up a furrow about the whole world, does not only overmatch the ancient
Argonauts, but also outreacheth in many respects, that noble Mariner
Magellanus, and by far surpasses his crowned Victory. But hereof let Posterity
judge.

It shall for the present, be deemed a sufficient discharge of duty, to
register the true and whole history of that his Voyage, with as great
indifferency of affection as a history does require, and with the plain
evidence of truth, as it was left recorded by some of the chief, and diverse
other Actors in that Action.

The said Captain Francis Drake, having in a former voyoge, in the years 72,
and 73, (the description whereof is already imparted to the view of the world)
had a sight, and only a sight of the south Atlantik, and thereupon either
conceiving a new, or renewing a former desire, of sailing on the same, in an
English bottom; he so cherished thenceforward, this his noble desire and
resolution in himself, that notwithstanding he was hindered for some years
partly by secret envy at home, and partly by public service for his Prince
and Country abroad (whereof Ireland under Walter Earl of Essex gives honorable
testimony) yet against the year 1577. by gracious commission from his
Sovereign and with the help of diverse friends Adventurers* he had fitted
himself with five Ships.

1. The Pelican, Admiral, burden 100. tons. Captain general Francis Drake.
2. The Elizabeth, Vice admiral, burden 80. tonnes. Captain John Winter. 3.
The Marigold, a Bark of 30. tons. Captain John Thomas. 4. The Swan, a Fliboat
of 50. tons. Captain John Chester. 5. The Christopher, a Pinnace of fifteen
tonnes. Captain Thomas Moon*
These Ships he mand with 164. able and sufficient men, and furnished them also
with such plentiful provision of all things necessary as so long and dangerous
a Voyage did seem to require: and amongst the rest, with certain Pinnaces
ready framed, but carried aboard in pieces, to be new set up in smoother water,
when occasion served. Neither had he omitted, to make provision also for
ornament and delight, carrying to this purpose with him expert Musicians, rich
furniture (all the vessels for his Table, yea many belonging even to the
Cooke-roome being of pure Silver) and diverse shows of all sorts of curious
Workmanship, whereby the civility and magnificence of his native Country, might
amongst all Nations whithersoever he should come, be the more admired.

Being thus appointed we set sail out of the sound of Plimmouth, about five of
the Clock in the afternoon November 15. Nov. 15.
of the same year, and running all that night Southwest, Nov. 16.
by the morning were come as far as the Lyzard, where meeting the wind at
Southwest (quite contrary to our intended course) we were forced with our whole
Fleet to put in to Falmouth.

The next day toward evening, there arose a storm, Nov. 17* 18.
continuing all that night, and the day following (especially between ten of
the Clock in the forenoone, and five in the afternoon) with such violence,
that though it were in a very good Harbor, yet two of our Ships, viz. the
Admiral (wherein our General himself went) and the Marigold were fain to cut
their maine Masts by board, and for the repairing of them, and many other
damages in the tempest sustained (as soon as the Weather would give leave) to
bear back to Plimmouth again, where we all arrived the thirteenth day after
our first departure thence. Nov. 2^.


Whence having in few days supplied all defects with happier sails we once
more put to Sea December 13. 1577. Dece. 13. 1577*


As soon as we were out of sight of Land, our General gave us occasion to
conjecture in part, whither he intended, both by the directing of his course,
and appointing the Randevous (if any should be severed from the Fleet to be the
Island Mogadore. And so sailing with favorable winds, the first Land that we
had sight of, was Cape Cantine in Barbary December 25. Dece. 25.
Christmas day in the morning. The shore is fair white Sand, and the inland
country very high and mountainous, it lies in 32. degrees. 30. min. North
latitude, and so coasting from hence Southward, about 18 leagues, we arrived
the same day at Mogadore the Island before named.

This Mogadore, lies under the dominion of the King of Fesse in 31. degrees. 40. m.
about a mile of from the shore, by this means making a good harbor between the
Land and it. It is uninhabited, of about a league in circuit, not very high
Land, all overgrowne with a kind of shrub Breast high, not much unlike our
privet, very full of Doves and therefore much frequented of Gosh ^ukes, and
such like Birds of prey, besides diverse sorts of Sea-foul very plenty. At the
South side of this Island are three hollow Rocks, under which are great store
of very wholesome but very ugly fish to look to. Lying here about a mile from
the m^ine, a Boat was sent to sound the Harbor, and finding it safe, and in the
very entrance on the north side about five or six fathom water (but at the
Souther side it is very dangerous) we brought in our whole Fleet December 27.
and continued there till the last day of the same Month, employing our leisure,
the mean while, in setting up a Pinnace, one of the four brought from home in
pieces with us. Dece^b.
Our abode here was soon perceived by the Inhabitants of the country, who
coming to the shore by signs and cries made show, that they desired to be
fetched a board, to whom our General sent a Boat, in which two of the chiefest
of the Moors were presently received, and one man of ours, in exchange, left a
land, as a pledge for their return.

They that came aboard were right courteously entertained with a dainty
banquet, and such gifts as they seemed to be most glad of, that they might
thereby understand, that this Fleet came in peace and friendship, offering to
Traffic with them for such commodities as their country yielded, to their own
content. This offer they seemed most gladly to accept, and promised the next
day to resort again, with such things as they had to exchange for ours. It is a
law amongst them to drink no wine, notwithstanding by stealth it pleases them
well to have it abundantly, as here was experience. At their return ashoare,
they quietly restored the pledge which they had stayed, and the next day, at
the hour appointed, returning again, brought with them Camels, in show laden
with wares to be exchanged for our commodities, and calling for a boat in have,
had one sent them, according to order, with our General (being at this present
absent, had given before his departure to the Island.

Our boat coming to the place of landing (which was among the rocks) one of our
men called John Fry, mistrusting no danger; nor fearing any harm pretended by
them, and therefore intending to become a pledge, according to the order used
the day before, readily stepped out of the boat and ran a land, which opportunity
(being that which the Moors did look for) they took the advantage of, and not
only they which were in sight laid hands on him to carry him away with them,
but a number more, which lay secretly hidden, did forthwith break forth from
behind the rock, whether they had conveyed themselves (as seems the night
before) forcing our men to leave the rescuing of him that was taken as captive,
and with speed to shift for themselves.

The cause of this violence, was a desire which the King of Fesse had, to
understand what this fleet was, whether any forerunner of the Kings of
Portugal or no, and what news of certainty the fleet might give him. And
therefore after that he was brought to the K. presence, and had reported that
they were English men, bound for the Straights, under the conduct of general
Drake, he was sent back again with a present to his captain and offer of great
courtesy and friendship, if he would use his country. But in this mean time,
the general being grieved with this show of injury* and intending, if he
might, to recover or redeem his man, his pinnace being ready, landed his
company, and marched somewhat into the country, without any resistance made
against him: neither would the Moors, by any means come nigh our Men, to
deal with them any way; wherefore having made provision of wood, as also
visited an old fort, built sometime by the King of Portugal, but now ruined by
the King of Fesse, we departed December 31. Dec. 31.
toward Cape Blank, in such sort, that when Fry returned, he found to his
great grief, that the fleet was gone: but yet, by the Kings favor, he was sent
home into England not long after, in an English Merchants ship.

Shortly after our putting forth of this harbor, we were met with contrary
winds and foul weather, which continued till the fourth of January: yet we
still held on our course, and the third day after, Ian. 7.
fell with cape De Guerre in 30. degrees. minutes where we lighted on 3. Spanish
fishermen called Caunters, whom we took with our new pinnace, and carried along
with us, Ian. 13.
till we came to Rio Del Oro, just under the Tropic of Cancer: Ian. 15.
where with our pinnace also we took a carvell. From hence, till the 15. day,
we sailed on toward cape Barbas, where the Marigold took a carvill more, and
so onward to cape Blanck till the next day at night. Ian. 16.


This cape lies in 20. degrees. 30. min. shows it self upright like the corner
of a wall, to them that come toward it from the North, having between it and
cape Barbas, low, sandy, and very white land all the way. Here we observed the
south Guards, called the Crosiers 9. degrees. 30. min. above the Horizon. Wherein
the cape, we took one Spanish ship more riding at anchor (all her men being
fled ashoare in the boat save two) which with all the rest we have formerly
taken, we carried into che harbor, 3. leagues within the cape.

Here our General determined, for certain days to make his abode, both for
that the place afforded plenty of fresh victuals, for the present refreshing of
our men, and for their future supply at sea (by reason of the infinite store of
diverse sorts of good fish, which are there easy to be taken, even within the
harbor, the like whereof, is hardly to be found again, in any part of the
world) as also, because it served very fitly, for the dispatching of some other
businesses that we had. During the time of our abode in this place, our
general being a shore was visited by certain of the people of the country,
who brought down with them a woman a Moore (with her little babe hanging upon
her dry dug, having scarce life in her self, much less milk to nourish her
child) to be sold as a horse, or a cow and calf by her side, in which sort of
merchandise our general would not deal. But they had also Ambergris, with
certain gums of some estimation, which they brought to exchange with our men
for water (whereof they have great want) so that coming with their Allforges
(they are leathern bags holding liquor) to buy water, they cared not at what
price they bought it, so they may have to quench their thirst. A very heavy
judgment of God upon that coast! The circumstances whereof considered, our
general would receive nothing of them for water, but freely gave it them that
came to him, yea and fed them also ordinarily with our victuals, in eating
whereof, their manner was not uncivil, and unsightly to us, but even inhumane
and loathsome in it self.

And having washed and trimmed our ships, and discharged all our spanish prises,
excepting one Caunter (for which we gave to the owner of our own ships, viz.
the Christopher) and one carvell formerly bound to Saint Jago, which we caused
to accompany us hither, where she also was discharged: after six days abode
here, we departed, directing our course for the Islands of cape Verde, where
(if any were) we were of necessity to store our fleet with fresh water, for a
long time, Ian* 22.
for that our general intended from thence to run a long couse (even to the
coast of Brasill) without touch of land. And now, having the wind constant at
North East, and E. North E. which is usual about those parts, because it
blows almost continually from the shore. January the 27. we coasted
Bonavista, and the next day after we came to anchor under the Wester part
(toward St. Jago) of the Island Maio, Ian. 28.
it lies in 15. degrees. 00. high land, saving that the North-west part strecheth
out into the sea, the space of a league very low, and is inhabited by subjects
to the King of Portugal.

Ian. 29.
Here landing, in hope of traffic with the inhabitants for water, we found a
Town not far from the waters side, of a great number of desolate and ruinous
houses, with a poor naked Chapel or Oratory, such as small cost and charge
might serve and suffice, being to small purpose, and as it seems only to make
a show, and that a false show, contrary to the nature of a scarecrow, which
fears birds from coming nigh; this entiseth such as pass by to hale in, and
look for commodity, which is not at all to be found there; though in the inner
parts of the Island it be in great abundance.

For when we found the Springs and Wells which had been there (as appears)
stopped up again, and no other water, to purpose to be had to serve our need,
we marched up to seek some more convenient place to supply our want, or at
least to see whether the people would be dealt withal, to help us therein. In
this traveling, we found the soil to be very fruitful, having every where
plenty of fig trees, with fruit upon most of them. But in the valleys and low
ground, where little low cottages were built, were pleasant vineyards planted,
bearing then ripe and most pleasant grapes. There were also trees, without any
branch till the top, which bare the Coco nuts. There were also great store of
certain lower trees, with long and broad leaves, bearing the fruit which they
call Plantanes, in clusters together like puddings, a most dainty and wholesome
fruit. All of these trees were even laden with fruit, some ready to be eaten,
others coming forward, others over ripe. Neither can this seem strange, though
about the midst of winter with us, for that the Sun does never withdraw
himself farther off from them, but that with his lively heat he quickneth and
strengthens the power of the soil and plant; neither ever have they any such
frost and cold, as thereby to loose their green h^w and appearance.

We found very good water in diverse places, but so far off from the road, that
we could not with any reasonable pains enjoy it. The people would by no means
be induced to have any conference with us, but keeping in the most sweet and
fruitful vallie among the hills, where their Towns and places of dwelling were,
gave us leave without interruption to take our pleasure in survewing the
Island, as they had some reason, not to endanger themselves, where they saw
they could reap nothing sooner then damage and shame, if they should have
offered violence to them which came in peace to do them no wrong at all. This
Island yeildeth other great commodities, as wonderful herds of goats, infinite
store of wild hens, and salt without labor (only the gathering it together
excepted) which continually in a mavelous quantity is increased upon the
sands by the flowing of the sea, and the heat of the Sun kerning the same.
So that of the increase thereof they keep a continual traffic with their
neighbors in the other adjacent Islands. We set sail thence the 30. day. Ian.
30.


Being departed from Maio, the next day we passed by the Island of Sain Jago,
Ian. 31.
ten leagues west of Maio in the same latitude, inhabited by the Portugals and
Moors together. The cause whereof is said to have been in the Portugals
themselves, who (continuing long time Lords within themselves, in the said
Island) used that extreme and unreasonable cruelty over their slaves, that
(their bondage being intolerable) they were forced to seek some means to help
themselves, and to lighten that so heavy a burden; and thereupon chose to fly
into the most mountany parts of the Island: and at last, by continual escapes,
increasing to a great number, and growing to a set strength, do now live, with
that terror of their oppressors, that they now endure no les bondage in mind
then the Forcatos did before in body: besides the damage that they daily
suffer at their hands in their goods and cattle, together with the abridging of
their liberties in the use of diverse parts of the fruitful soil of the said
Island: which is very large, mavelous fruitful (a refuge for all such ships
as are bound toward Brasill, Ginny, the East Indies, Binny, Calecut, etc.) and
a place of rare force, if it were not for the cause afore-recited, which has
much abated the pride, and cooled the courage of that people, who (under
pretense of trafique and friendship) at first making an entrance ceased not,
practicing upon the poor Islands) the ancient remainders of the first planters
thereof, as it may seem from the coast of Guinea) until they had excluded them
from all government and liberty, yea almost life.

On the South-west of this Island, we took a Portugal laden the best part with
wine, and much good cloth, both linen and woollen, besides other necessaries,
bound for Brasill, with many Gentlemen and Merchants in her.

As we passed by with our fleet, in sight of 3. of their towns, they seemed
very joyful that we touched not with our coast; and seeing us depart
peaceably, in honor of our fleet and General, or rather to signify that they
were provided for an assault, shot off two great pieces into the sea, which
were answered by one given them again from us.

South-west from Saint Jago in 14. degrees. 30. min. about twelve leagues distant,
yet, by reason of the height seeming not above three leagues lies another
Island, called of the Portugals Fogo, viz. the burning Island, or fiery furnace,
in which rises a steep upright hill, by conjecture at least six leagues, or
eighteen English miles from the upper part of the water: within the bowels
whereof, is a consuming fire, maintained by sulphur matter, seeming to be a
mavelous depth, and also very wide. The fire shows it self but four times
in an hour, at which times it breaks out with such violence and force, and
in such main abundance, that besides that it gives light like the Moon a
great way off, it seems, that it would not stay till it touch one heavens
themselves. Herein are engendered great store of prumice stores, which being in
the vehement heat of the fire carried up without the mouth of that fiery body,
fall down, with other gross and slimy matter upon the hill, to the continual
increasing of the same. And many times these stones falling down into the sea
are taken up and used, as we our selves had experience by sight of them
swimming on the water. The rest of the Island is fruitful notwithstanding, and
is inhabited by Portugals, who live very commodiously therein, as in the other
Islands thereabout.

Upon the South side, about two leagues off this Island of burning, lies a
most sweet and pleasant Island, the trees thereof are always green and fair
to look on, the soil almost full set with trees, in respect whereof its named
the brave Island, being a storehouse of many fruits and commodities, as figs
always ripe, cocos, plantons, orenges, limons, cotton, etc. from the banks
into the sea do run in many places the silver streams of sweet and wholesome
water, which with boats or pinnaces may easily be taken in. But there is no
convenient place or road for ships, neither any anchroaching at all. For after
long trial, and often casting of leads, there could no ground be had at any
hand, neither was it ever known (as is reported) that any line would fetch
ground in any place about that Island. So that the top of Fogo burns not so
high in the air, but the root of Brava (so is the Island called) is buried and
quenched as low in the Seas. The only inhabitant of this Island is an Hermit,
as we suppose, for we found no other houses but one, built as is seemed for
such a purpose; and he was so delighted in his solitary living, that he would
by no means abide our coming, but fled, leaving behind him the relics of his
false worship; to wit, a cross, with a crusifix, an altar with his superaltar,
and certain other Idols of wood of rude workmanship.

Here we dismissed the Portugals taken near Saint Jago, and gave to them in
exchange of their old ship, our new pinnace built at Mogadore: with wine,
bread, and fish for their provision, and so sent them away, Feb. 1. Feb. 1.


Having thus visited, as is declared, the Island of cape Verde, and provided
fresh water as we could, the second of Feb. we departed thence, Feb. 2.
directing our course toward the Straights, so to pass into the South Sea;
Feb. 17. (...).
in which course we sailed 63. days without sight of land (passing the line
equinoctial the 17. day of the same month) till we fell with the coast of
Brasill, the fifth of April following. Apr. 5.


During which long passage on the vast gulf, where nothing but sea beneath us
and air above us was to be seen, as our eyes did behold the wonderful works
of God in his creatures, which he had made innumerable both small and great
beasts, in the great and wide Seas: so did our mouths taste, and our natures
fed on, the goodness thereof in such fullness at all time, and in every place,
as if he had commanded and enjoined the most profitable and most glorious works
of his hands to wait upon us, not alone for the relief of our necessities, but
also to give us delight in the contemplation of his excellence, in beholding
the variety and order of his providence, with a particular taste of his fatherly
care over us all the while.

The truth is, we often met with adverse winds, unwelcome storms, and to us
(at that time) less welcome calms, and being as it were in the bosom of the
burning zone, we felt the effects of sultring heat, not without the affrights
of flashing lightning, and terrifyings of often claps of thunder; yet still
with the admixture of many comforts. For this we could not but take notice of,
that whereas we were but badly furnished (our case considered) of fresh water
(having never at all watered (to any purpose, or that we could say we were much
the better for it) from our first setting forth out of England till this time,
nor meeting with any place where we might conveniently water, till our coming
to the river of Plate, long after) continually, after once we were come within
four degrees of the line on this side, viz. after. Feb. 10. and till we were
past the line as many pegrees toward the South, viz. till Feb. 27. there was
no one day went over us but we received some rain, whereby our want of water
was much supplied.

This also was observable, that of our whole fleet, 1577.
being now 6. in number, notwithstanding the uncouthnes of the way, and what
ever other difficulties, by weather or otherwise we met withal, not any one,
in all this space, lost company of the rest; except only our Portugal prise
for one day, who March 28. was severed from us, but the day following March 29.
she found us again, to both her own, and our no little comfort: she had in her
28. of our men, and the best part of all our provision for drink; her short
absence caused much doubting and sorrow in the whole company, neither could she
then have been finally lost, without the overthrow of the whole voyage.

Among the many strange creatures which we saw, we took heedfull notice of one,
as strange as any; to wit, the flying fish, a fish of the bigness and
proportion, of a reasonable or middle sort of Pilchards: he has finnes, of the
length of his whole body, from the bulk to the top of the tail, bearing the
form, and supplying the like use to him, that wings do to other creatures. By
the help of those fins, when he is chased of the Bonito, or great mackrel (whom
the Aurata or dolphin likewise pursues) and has not strength to escape by
swimming any longer, he lifts up himself above the water, and flies a pretty
height, sometimes lighting into Boats or Barks as they sail along: The quils
of their wings are so proportionable, and finely set together, with a most
thin and dainty film, that they might seem to serve for a much longer or
higher flight, but the dryness of them is such, after some 10. or. 12. strokes,
that he must needs into the water again to moisten them, which else would grow
stiff and unfit for motion. The increase of this little and wonderful
creature is in a manner infinite, the fry whereof lies upon the upper part of
the waters, in the heat of the Sun, as dust upon the face of the earth, which
being in bigness of a wheat straw, and in length an inch more or less, do
continually exercise themselves in both their faculties of nature: wherein, if
the Lord had not made them expert indeed, their generation could not have
continued, being so desired a prey to so many, which greedily hunt after them,
1578.
forcing them to escape in the air by flight, when they cannot in the waters
live in safety. Neither are they always free, or without danger in their
flying; but as they escape one evil, by refusing the waters, so they sometimes
fall into as great a mischief, by mounting up into the air, and that, by means
of a great and ravening foul, named of some a Don or Spurkite, who feeding
chiefly on such fish as he can come by at advantage, in their swimming in the
brim of the waters, or leaping above the same, presently cease upon them with
great violence, making havoc, especially among these flying fishes, though
with small profit to himself.

There is another sort of fish, which likewise flies in the air, named a
Cuttill: its the same, whose bones the Goldsmiths commonly use, or at least not
unlike the sort, a multitude of which, have at one time, in their flight,
fallen into our ships, amongst our men.

Passing thus, in beholding the most excellent works of the eternal God in the
seas, as if we had been in a garden of pleasure. April 5. April 5.
we fell with the coast of Brazil, in 31. degrees. 30. mi. toward the pole
Antartick, where the land is low near the sea, but much higher within the
country; having in depth not above 12. fathom, 3. leagues off from the
shore: and being descried by the inhabitants, we saw great and huge fires,
made by them in sundry places. Which order of making fires, though it be
universal, as well among Christians as Heathens, yet is it not likely that
many do use it to that end, which the Brasilians do: to wit, for a sacrifice to
Devils, whereat they intermix many and diverse ceremonies of conjurations,
casting up great heaps of sand, to this end, that if any ships, shall go about
to stay upon their coasts, their ministering spirits may make wrack of them,
whereof the Portugals by the loss of diverse of their ships, have had often
experience.

In the reports of Magellanes voyage, it is said, that this people pray to no
manner of thing, but live only according to the instinct of nature, which if it
were true, there should seem to be a wonderful alteration in them, since that
time, being fallen from a simple and natural ereature, to make Gods of Devils;
but I am of the mind, that it was with them then, as now it is, only they
lacked then the like occasion, to put it in practice, which now they have: for
then, they lived as a free people among themselves, but now, are in most
miserable bondage and slavery, both in body, goods, wife, and children, and
life it self to the Portugals, whose hard and most cruel dealings against
them, forces them to fly into the unfruitful parts of their own land, rather
there to starve, or at least live miserably with liberty, then to abide such
intolerable hondage, as they lay upon them, using the aforesaid practices with
Devils, both for a revenge against their oppressors, and also for a defense,
that they have no further entrance into the country. And supposing in deed,
that no other had used travel by sea in ships, but their enemies only, they
therefore used the same at our coming: notwithstrnding, our God made their
divelish intent of none effect; for albeit there lacked not (within the space
of our falling with this coast) forcible storms and tempests, yet did we
sustain no damage, but only the separating of our ships out of shore, but we
could find no harbor in many leagues. And therefore coasting along the land,
toward the south, April 7. April 7.
we had a violent storm, for the space of 3. hours, with thunder, lightning,
and rain in great abundance, accompanied with a vehement south wind, directly
against us, which caused a separation of the Christopher (viz. the Caunter
which we took at cape Blank, in exchange for the Christopher, whose name she
hence forward bore) from the rest of the fleet.

After this, we keep on our course, sometime to the seaward, sometimes toward
the shore, but always southward, as near as we could: till April 14. April 14
in the morning, at which time we passed by Cape Saint Mary, which lies in 35.
degrees. near the mouth of the river of Plate: and running within it about 6. or
7. leagues along by the maine, we came to anchor in a bay, under another cape
which our General afterward called cape Joy, Apr. 16.
by reason of the second day after our anchoring here, the Christopher (whom we
had lost in the former storm) came to us again.

Among other cares which our General took in this action, next the main care
of effecting the voyage it self, these were the principal and chiefly
subordinate: to keep our whole fleet (as near as possible we could) together;
to get fresh Water which is of continual use; and to refresh our men wearied
with long toyls at sea, as often as we should find any opportunity of effecting
the same. And for these causes it was determined, and public notice thereof
given at our departure from the Islands of cape Verde; that the next randevouze
both for the recollecting of our navy (if it should be despersed) as also
watering, and the like, should be the river of Plate: whether we were all
to repair with all the convenient speed that could be made, and to stay one
for another, if it should happen that we could not arrive there altogether;
and the effect we found answerable to our expectations, for here our severed
ship (as has been declared) found us again* and here we found those ^ther
helps also so much desired. The country here about is of a temperate and most
svveet air and pleasant to behold, and besides the exceeding fruitfulness of
the soil, its stored with plenty of large and mighty Dear.

Notvvithstanding that in this first bay we found svveet and wholesome water
even at pleasure; April 1^
yet the same after the arrival of Caunter, we removed some twelve leages
farther up into another; where we found a long rock, or rather Island of rocks,
not far from the main; making a commodious har^^^, specially against a
southerly wind: under them we anchored, and rode till the 20. day at night; in
which mean space we killed diverse Seals, or sea-wolves (as the Spaniard calls
them) which resorted to these rocks in great abundance. They are good m^at, and
were an acceptable food to us for the present, and a go^d supply of our
provision for the future.

Hence April 20. April 2^
we waighed again and sailed yet further up into the river, even till we found
but three fadome deep, and that we road with our ships in fresh water; but we
staid not there, nor in any other place of the river, because that the winds
being strong, the shoals many, and no safe harbor found, we could not without
our great danger so have done. April 27.
Hailing therefore to seaward again, the 27. of the same month (after that we
had spent a just fortnight in that river, to the great comfort of the whole
fleet) we passed by the south side thereof into the main. The land here lies
south, south W. and N.N.E. with shole water, some 3. or 4 leagues off into the
sea: its about 36. degrees. 20. min. and somewhat better south latitude. April 27.


At our very first coming forth to sea again, to wit, the same night our
fly-boat the Swan lost company of us: whereupon, though our General doubted
nothing of her happy coming forward again to the rest of the fleet; yet because
it was grievous to have such often losses, and that it was his duty as much as
in him lay, to prevent all inconveniences besides, that might grow; he
determined to diminish the number of his ships, thereby to draw his men unto
less room; that both the fewer ships might the better keep company, and that
they might also be the better appointed with new and fresh supplies of
provision and men, one to ease the burden of another: especially, for that he
saw the coast (it draws now toward winter here) to be subject to many and
grievous storms: and therefore he continued on his course, to find out a
convenient harbor for that use; searching all that coast from 36. to 47. degrees.
(as diligently as contrary winds and sundry storms would permit) and yet sound
none for the purpose. And in the mean time, viz. May 8. by another storm the
Caunter also was once more severed from us. May 12. we had sight of land, in
47. degrees. where we were forced to come to anchor in such road as we could find
for the time. Nevertheless our General named the place cape Hope, by reason
of a bay discovery within the h^dland, which seemed to promise a good and
commodious harbor. But by reason of many rocks lying off from the place, we
durst not adventure with our ships into it without good and perfect discovery
beforehand made.

Our General, especially in matters of moment, was never wont to rely only on
other men's care, how trusty or skillful soever they might seem to be; but
always contemning danger and refusing no toil, he was wont himself to be one
whosoever was a second at every turn, where courage, skill, or industry was to
be imployeb; neither would he at this time entrust the discovery of these
dangers to another pains, but rather to his own experience, in searching out
and sounding of them. A boat being therefore hoised forth, himself with some
others the next morning, May 13. May 13.
rowed into the bay; and being now very nigh the shorae, one of the men of the
country showed himself unto him seeming very pleasant, singing and dancing,
after the noise of a rattle which he shook in his hand, expecting earnestly his
landing.

But there was suddenly so great an alteration in the weather, into a thick and
misty fogge; together with an extreme storm and tempest, that our general being
now 3. leagues from his ship, thought it be better to return, then either to
land, or make any other stay and yet the fog thickened so mightily, that the
sight of the ships was bereft them, and if Cap. Thomas (upon the abundance of
his love and service to his general) had not adventured with his ship to enter
that bay, in this perplexity, where good advice would not suffer our ships to
bear in, while the winds were more tolerable, and the air cleerer: we had
sustained some great loss, or our general had been further endangered, who was
now quickly received aboard his ship; out of which, being within the bay, they
let fall an anchor, and rode there (God be praised) in safety: but our other
ships, rideing without, were so oppressed with the extremity of the storm, that
they were forced to run off to the sea for their own safeguard, being in good
hope only of the good success of that ship, which was gone in to relieve our
general; before this storm arose, our Caunter formerly lost, was come in the
same day unto us in the same road, but was put to sea again the same evening
with the rest of the fleet.

The next day May 14. May 14
the weather being fair, and the winds moderate, but the fleet out of sight,
our general determined to go ashoare, to this end, that he might, by making of
fires, give signs to the dispersed ships, to come together again into the
road: whereby at last, they were all assembled, excepting the Swan, lost long
time before, and excepting our Portugal prise, called the Mary; which waying in
this last storm, the night before, and now lost company, and was not found
again in a long time after.

In this place (the people being removed up into the country, belike for fear
of our coming) we found near unto the rocks, in houses made for that purpose,
as also in diverse other places, great store of Ostriches at least to the number
of 50. with much other foul; some dried and some in drying for their
provision, as it seemed, to carry with them to the place of their dwellings.
The Ostriches thighs were in bigness ^quall to reasonable legs of mutton,
they cannot fly at all; but they run so swiftly, and take so long strides,
that it is not possible for a man in running by any means to take them,
neither yet to come so nigh them, as to have any shot at them either with bow
or piece: whereof our men had often proof on other parts of that coast, for all
the country is full of them; we found there the tools or instruments which the
people use in taking them. Among other means they use in betraying of these
Ostriches, they have a great and large plume of feathers, orderly compact
together upon the end of a staff; in the forepart beareing the likness of the
head, neck, and bulk of an Ostrich; and in the hinder part, spreading it self
out very large, sufficient (being holden before him) to hide the most part of
the body of a man: with this it seems they staulk, driving them into some
strait or neck of land close to the sea side; where spreading long and strong
nets, with their dogs which they have in readiness at all time^^^ (...)
overthrow them, and make a common quarry. The country is very pleasant, and
seems to be a fruitful soil.

Being afterward driven to fall with this place again, we had great
acquaintance and familiarity with the people, who rejoiced greatly in our
coming, and in our friendship, in that we had done them no harm. But because
this place was not fit or convenient harbor for us, to do our necessary
business; niether yet to make provision of such things as we wanted, as Water,
Wood, and such like, we departed thence the 15. of May. May 15.


At our departure thence, we held our course South and by West, and made about
9. leagues in 24. hours; bearing very little sail, that our fleet might the
easier get up with us, which by reason of the contrary winds, were cast a stern
of us.

In 47. degrees. 30. min. we found a bay, which was fair, safe, and beneficial to
us, very necessary for our use; into which we haled, and anchored May 17. May
17.
and the next day, May 18. May 18.
we came further into the same bay, where we cast anchor, and made our abode
full 15. days.

The very first day of our arrival here, our general having set things in
some order, for the dispatch of our necessary business, being most careful for
his 2. ships which were wanting, sent forth to the southward, Captain Winter in
the Elizabeth vice admiral; himself in the Admiral, going forth northvvard,
into the sea, to see, if happily they might meet with either of them: at which
time, by the good providence of God, he himself met with the Swan, formerly
lost at our departure from the river of Plate, and brought her into the same
harbor, the same day: where being after unloaden, and discharged of her
freight, she was cast off, and her iron work, and other necessaries being
saved, for the better provision of the rest; of the remainder was made
firewood, and other implements which we wanted. But all this while, of the
other ship which we lost so lately, in our extremity, we could have no news.

While we were thus employed, after certain days of our stay in this place,
being on shore in an Island nigh unto the main, where a low water was free
passage on foot, from the one to the other; the people of the country did show
themselves unto us, with leaping, dancing, and holding up of their hands, and
making outcries after their manner: but being then high water, we could not go
over to them on foot. Wherefore the general caused immediately a boat to be in
readiness, and sent unto them such things as he thought would delight them; as
knives, bells, bugles, and whereupon they being assembled together upon a hill,
half an English mile from the waters side, sent down two of their company,
running one after the other with a great grace, traversing their ground as it
seemed after the manner of their wars, by degrees descending toward the waters
side very swiftly. Notwithstanding drawing nigh unto it, they made a stay,
refusing to come near our men-which our men perceiving, sent such things as
they had tied with a string upon a rod, and stuck the same up a reasonable
distance from them, where they might see it. And as soon as our men were
departed from the place, they came and took those things, leaving in stead of
them, as in recompense, such feathers as they use to wear about their heads,
with a bone made in manner of a toothpick, carved round about the top, and in
length about six inches, being very smoothly burnished. Whereupon our General,
with diverse of his Gentlemen and company, at low water went over to them to the
maine.

Against his coming they remained still upon the hill, and set themselves in a
rank, one by one; appointing one of their company to run before them from the
one end of the rank to the other, and so back again, continually East and West,
with holding up his Hands over his Head, and yiedling forward his body in his
running toward the rising and setting of the Sun: and at every second or third
turn at the most, erected his body against the midst of the rank of the
people, lifting himself vaulting-wise from the ground toward the Moon, being
then over our heads: signifying thereby, as we conceived, that they called the
Sun and Moon (whom they serve for gods) to witness, that they meant nothing
toward us but peace. But when they perceived that we ascended the hill apace,
and drew nigh unto them, they seemed very fearful of our coming.

Wherefore our General not willing to give them any way any occasion to
mislike, or be discomfited, retired his company; whereby they were so allured,
and did so therein confirm themselves of us, that we were no enemies, neither
meant them harm, that without all fear, diverse came down with great speed after
us, presently entering into trafique with our men; notwithstanding they would
receive nothing at our hands, but the same must be first cast upon the ground,
using this word, zussus for exchange, toytt to cast upon the ground. And if
they misliked any thing, they cried coroh, coroh, speaking the same with
rattling in the throat. The wares we received from them were arrows of reeds,
feathers, and such bones as are before described.

This people go naked, except a skin of furre which they cast about their
shoulders, when they sit or lie in the cold: but having any thing to do, as
going or any other labor, they use it as a girdle about their loins. They
wear their hair very long, but lest it might trouble them in their travel,
they knit it up with a roll of Ostrich feathers, using the same rolls and hair
together for a quiver for their arrows, and for a store house, in which they
carry the most things which they carry about them. Some of them within these
rolls stick on either side of their heads (for a sign of honor in their
persons) a large and plain feather shows like horns afar off: so that such a
head upon a naked body (if Devils do appear with horns) might very nigh
resemble Devils.

The whole bravery and setting out themselves stands in painting their bodies
with diverse colors, and such works as they can devise. Some wash their faces
with sulphur, or some such like substance: some paint their whole bodies
black, leaving only their necks behind and hefore white, much like our Damsels
that wear their squares, their necks and breasts naked. Some paint one
shoulder black, another white, and their sides and legs interchangeably with
the same colors, one still contrary to the other. The black part has set upon
it white moons, and the white part black Suns, being the marks and characters
of their gods, as is before noted.

They have some commodity by painting of their bodies, for the which cause they
use it so generally: and that I gather to be the defense it yeildeth against
the piercing and nipping cold. For the colors being close laid on upon their
skin, or rather in the flesh, as by continual renewing of these juces which
are laid on, soakt into the inner part thereof, does fill up the pores so
close that no air or cold can enter, or make them once to shrink.

They have clean, comely, and strong bodies: they are swift of foot, and seem
very active. Neither is any thing more lamentable (in my judgment) then that so
goodly a people, and so lively creatures of God, should be ignorant of the true
and living God. And so much the more is this to be lamented, by how much they
are more tractable, and easy to be brought to the sheepfold of Christ: having
in truth a land sufficient to recompense any christian Prine in the world, for
the whole travel and labor, cost and charges bestowed in that behalf: with a
wonderful enlarging of a kingdom, besides the glory of God by increasing of
the Church of Cstrist.

Its wonderful to hear, being never known to Christians before this time, how
familiar they became in short space with us,; thinking themselves to be joined
with such a people, as they ought rather to serve, then offer any wrong or
injury unto: presuming that they might be bold with our general as with a
father, and with us as with brethren and their near friends; neither seemed
their love less toward us. One of the chiefest among them having on a time
received a cap off our generals head, which he did daily wear, removing
himself but a little from us, with an arrow pierced his leg deeply, causing
the blood to stream out upon the ground: signifying thereby, how unfainedly he
loved him, and giving therein a covenant of peace: the number of men which here
did frequent our company, were about fifty persons. Within, in the Southermost
part of this bay, there is a river of fresh water, with a great many profitable
Islands; of which, some have always such store of seals or sea-wolves as were
able to maintain a huge army of men. Other Islands being many and great, are so
replenished with birds and foul, as if there were no other victuals, a
wonderful multitude of people might be nourished by the increase of them for
many posterities. Of these we killed some with shot, and some with staves, and
took some with our hands, from men's heads and shoulders upon which they
lighted. We could not perceive that the people of the country had had any sort
of boat or canow, to come to these Islands. Their own provision which they eat,
for ought we could perceive, was commonly raw. For we should sometimes find the
remnants of Seals all bloody which they had gnawn with their teeth like dogs:
They go all of them armed with a short bow of about an ell in length in their
hands, with arrows of reeds, and headed with a flint stone, very cunningly cut
and fastened.

This bay by reason of the plenty of Seals therein found (insomuch that we
killed two hundred in the space of one hour) we called Seal bay. And having
now made sufficient provision of victuals and other necessaries, as also
happily finished all our businesses, June 3. June 3.
we set sail from thence; and coasting along toward the pole Antartick June
12. June 12.
we fell with a little bay, in which we anchored for the space of two days
spent in the discharging of our Caunter, the Christopher, which we here laid
up.

The 14. day we waighed again, and kept on our course southward till the 17.
and then cast anchor in another bay in 50. d. 20. min. lacking but little more
then one degree, June 14. June 17.
of the mouth of the Straights, through which lay, our so much desired passage
into the south sea.

Here our general on good advice determined to alter his course; and turn his
stern to the Northward again, if happily God would grant we might find our
ship and friends whom we lost in the great storm, as is beforesaid. Forasmuch
as if we should enter into the Straight without them into our company) it must
needs go hard with them; and we also in the mean time as well by their absence,
as by the uncertainty of their state, must needs receive no small discomfort.

And therefore June 18. June 18*
in the morning putting to sea again with hearty and often prayers, we joined
watchful industry to serve Gods good providence: and held on our purpose to
run back toward the line into the same height, in which they were first
dissevered from us.

The 19. day of June toward night, June 19.
having sailed within a few leagues of port St. Julian, we had our ship in
sight: for which we gave God thanks with most joyful minds. And forasmuch as
the ship was far out of order, and very leake, by reason of extremity of
weather which she had endured, as well before her loosing company as in her
absence: our General thought good to bear into St. Julian with his fleet,
because it was so nigh at hand, and so convenient a place: intending there to
refresh his wearied men, and cherish them which had in their absence tasted
such bitterness of discomfort besides the want of many things which they
sustained.

Thus the next day the 20. of June we entered port Saint Julian: June 20.
which stands in 49. degrees. 30. mi. and has on the South side of the harbor
picked rocks like towers, and within the harbor many Islands, which you may
ride hard aboard off, but in going in you must borrow of the North shore.

Being now come to anchor, and all things fitted and made safe aboard, our
General with certain of his company, viz. Thomas Drake his brother, John
Thomas, Robert Winter, Oliver the Master Gunner, John Brewer, and Thomes Hood)
June 22. June 22
rowed further in with a boat to find out some convenient place which might
yield us fresh water, during the time of our abode there, and furnish us with
supply for provision, to take to sea with us at our departure. Which work as it
was of great necessity, and therefore carefully to be performed; so did not he
think himself discharged of his duty, if he himself bestowed not the first
travel therein, as his use was at all times in all other things belonging to
the relieving of our wants, and the maintenance of our good estate, by the
supplying of what was needful. Presantly upon his landing he was visited by
two of the inhabitants of the place, whom Magellane named Patagous or rather
Pentagours from their huge stature, and strength proportionable: these as they
seemed greatly to rejoice at his arivall, so did they show themselves very
familiar, receiving at our generals hands whatsoever he gave them, and taking
great pleasure in seeing Master Oliver the master Gunner of the Admiral, to
shoot an English arrow: trying with him to shoot at at length, but came nothing
near him.

Not long after, came one more of the same last, but of a sowrer sort, for he,
misliking of the familiarity which his fellows had used, seemed very angey with
them, and strove earnestly to withdraw them, and turn them to become our
enemies; Which our general with his men not suspecting in them, used them as
before: and one Mr. Robert Winter, thinking of pleasure to shoot an arrow at
length. as Mr. Oliver had done before, that he which came last might have a
sight thereof, the string of his bow brake; which, as before it was a terror
unto them, so now broken, it gave them great encouragement, and boldness, and
as they thought, great advantage in their treacherous intent and purpose; not
imagining that our callivers, swords, and targets, were any munition or weapon
of war.

In which persuasion (as the general with his company were, puietly without
any suspicion of evil, going down toward his boat) they suddenly being
prepared, and gotten by stealth behind him, shot their arrows; and chiefly at
him which had the bow, not suffering him to string the same again, which he was
about to have done, as well as he could: but being wounded in the shoulder at
the first shot, and turning about, was sped with an arrow, which pierced his
lungs, yet (...) fell not. But the Mr. Gunner being ready to shoot of his
calliver, which took not fire in levelling thereof, was presently slain
outringht. In this extremity, if our general had not been both expert in such
affairs, able to judge, and give present direction in the danger thereof, and
had not valiantly thrust himself into the dance, against these monsters, there
had not one of our men, that there were landed, escaped with life. He therefore
giving order that no man should keep any certain ground, but shift from place
to place, encroaching still upon the enemy, using their targets, and other
weapons for the defense of their bodies, and that they should break so many
arrows, as by any means they could come by, being shot at them; wherein he
himself was very diligent, and careful also in calling on them, knowing that
their arrows being once spent, they should have these enemies at their devotion
and pleasure, to kill or save, and this order being accordingly taken, himself
I say with a good courage and trust in the true and living God, taking and
shooting off the same piece, which the same Gunner could not make to take fire,
dispatched the first beginner of the quarrel, the same man which slew our Mr.
Gunner. For the piece being charged with a bullet, and hail shot, and well
aimed, tare out his belly and guts, with great torment, as it seemed by his
cry, which was so hideous and horrible a roar, as if ten bulls had joined
together in roaring, wherewith the courage of his partners was so abated, and
their hearts appaled, that notwithstanding, diverse of their fellows and
countrymen appeared out of the woods, on each side yet they were glad, by
flying away to save themselves, quietly suffering our men either to depart or
stay. Our general chose rather to depart, then to take further revenge of
them, which now he might, by reason of his wounded man, whom for many good
parts he loved dearly; and therefore would rather have saved him, then slain an
hundred enemies, but being part recovery, he dyed the 2. day after his being
brought aboard again.

That night our Mr. Gunners body being left ashoare, for the speedier bringing
of the other aboard, our general himself the next day, with his boat well
appointed, returned to the shore, to fetch it likewise* which they found lying
where it was left, but stripped off his uppermost garment, and having an English
arrow struck in his right eye.

Both of these dead bodies were laid together in one grave, with such
reverence, as was fit for the earthen tabernacles of immortal souls; with
such commendable ceremonies, as belong unto soldiers of worth, in time of war,
which they most truly and rightfully deserved.

Magellane was not altogether deceived, in naming of them Giants; for they
generally differ from the common sort of men, both in stature, bigness, and
strength of body, as also in the hideousness of their voice: but yet they are
nothing so monstrous, or Giantlike as they were reported; there being some
English men, as tall as the highest of any that we could see, but peradventure,
the Spaniards did not think, that ever any English man would come thither to
repove them; and thereupon might presume the more boldly to lie: the name
Pentagones, five cubits, viz. 7. foot and half, describing the full height (if
not some what more) of the highest of them.

But this is certain, that the Spanish cruelties there used, have made them
more monstrous, in mind and manners, then they are in body; and more
inhospitable, to deal with any strangers that shall come hereafter. For the
loss of their friends (the remembrance whereof is assigned and conveyed over
from one generation to another, among their posterity) breeds an old grudg,
which will not easily be forgotten, with so quarrelsome and revengefull a
people. Notwithstanding the terror which they had conceived of us, did
henceforward so quench their heat, and take down their edge, that they both
forgot revenge, and seeming by their countenance, to repent them of the wrong
they had offered us, that meant them no harm, suffered us to do what we would,
the whole space of two months after this, without any interruption or
molestation by them, and it may perhaps be a means to breed a peace in that
people, toward all that may hereafter this, come that way.

To this evil, thus received at the hands of Infidels, there was adjoined and
grew another mischief, wrought and continued closely among our selves, as
great, yea far greater, and of far more grievous consequence then the former:
but that it was, by Gods providence, detected and prevented in time, which else
had extended it self, not only to the violent shedding of innocent blood, by
murdering our general and such others as were most firm and faithful to him:
but also to the final overthrow of the whole action intended, and to diverse
other most dangerous effects.

These plots have been laid before the voyage began in England: the very model
of them was showed and declared to our General in his garden at Plimmouth,
before his setting sail, which yet he either would not credit, as true or
likely, of a person whom he loved so dearly, and was persuaded of to love him
likewise unfainedly, or thought by love and benefits, to remove and remedy it,
if there were any evil purposes conceived against him.

And therefore, he did not only continue (to this suspected and accused person)
all countenance, credit, and courtesies, which he was wont to show and give
him; but increased them, using him in a manner as another himself, and as his
most inmost friend: lodging him with himself; giving him the second place, in
all companies, in his presence; leaving in his hand, the state as it were of
his own person, in his absence; imparting unto him all his counsels; allowing
him free liberty in all things that were reasonable; and bearing often at his
hands great infirmities; yea, despising that any private injury, should break
so firm a friendship, as he meant toward him. And therefore, was he oftentimes
not a little offended, even with those, who upon conscience of their duty, and
knowledge that otherwise they should indeed offend) disclosed from time to time
unto him, how the fire increased, that threatened his own, together with the
destruction of the whole action.

But at length, perceiving that his lenity and favors did little good; in that
the heat of ambition was not yet allayed, nor could be quenched, as it seemed,
but by blood; and that the manifold practices grew daily more and more, even to
extremities; he thought it high time, to call these practices into queston,
before it were too late, to call any question of them into hearing. And
therefore setting good watch over him, and assembling all his Captains, and
gentlemen of his company together; he propounded to them, the good parts which
were in the gentleman, the great good will, and inward affection, more then
brotherly, which he had ever, since his first acquaintance born him, not
omitting the respect which was had of him, among no mean personages in England;
and afterward delivered the letters, which were written to him, with the
particulars from time to time, which had been observed, not so much by himself,
as by his good friends; not only at sea, but even at Plimmouth; not bare words
but writings; not writings alone, but actions, tending to the overthrow of the
service in hand, and making away of his person.

Proofs were required and alleged, so many, and so evident, that the
Gentleman himself, stricken with remorse of his inconsiderate and unkind
dealing, acknowledged himself to have deserved death, yea many deaths; for that
he conspired, not only the overthrow of the action, but of the principal Actor
also, who was not a stranger or ill-willer, but a dear and true friend unto
him: and therefore in a great assembly openly besought them, in whose hands
justice rested, to take some order for him; that he might not be compelled, to
enforce his own hands, against his own bowels, or otherwise to become his own
executioner.

The admiration and astonishment hereat, in all the hearers even those which
were his nearest friends, and most affected him was great, yea in those, which
for many benefits received from him, had good cause to love him: but yet the
general was most of all distracted; and therefore withdrew himself, as not
able to conceal his tender affection, requiring them that had heard the whole
matter, to give their judgments, as they would another day answer it unto
their Prince, and unto Almighty God, judge of all the earth. Therefore they
all, above 40. in number, the chiefest in place and judgment in the whole
fleet, after they had discussed diversely of the case, and alleged whatsoever
came in their minds, or could be there produced by any of his other friends,
with their own hands, under seal adjuged that: He had deserved death: and that
it stood, by no means with their safety, to let him live: and therefore, they
remitted the manner thereof, with the rest of the circumstances to the general.

This judgment, and as it were assize, was held a land, in one of the Islands
of that port; which afterward, in memory hereof was called, the Island of true
justice and judgment.

Now after this verdict was thus returned unto our general (unto whom, for his
company, her Majesty before his departure, had committed her sword, to use for
his safety, with this word: We do account that he which strikes at thee Drake,
strikes at us) he called for the guilty party, and caused to be read unto him,
the several verdicts which were written, and propounded of him, which being
acknowledged for the most part (for none had given heavier sentence against
him, then he had given against himself, our General proposed unto him this
choice: Whether he would take to be executed in this Island? or to be set a
land on the main? or return into England, there to answer his deed before the
Lords of her Majesty's Counsel?

He most humbly thanked the General for his clemency, extended toward him in
such ample sort: and craving some respit to consult thereon, and so make his
choice advisedly: the next day he returned this answer, that, Albeit he had
yielded in his heart, to entertain so great a sin; as whereof now he was justly
condemned: yet he had a care, and that excelling all other cares, to dye a
christian man, that whatsoever did become of his clay body, he might remain
assured of an eternal inheritance, in a far better life. This he feared, if he
should be set a land among Infidels, how he should be able to maintain this
assurance, feeling in his own frailty, how mighty the contagion is of lewd
custom. And therefore he besought the General most earnestly, that he would
yet have a care, and regard of his soul; and never jeapard it amongst heathen
and savage Infidels. If he should return into England, he must first have a
ship, and men to conduct it, with sufficient victuals: two of which though they
were had, yet for the third, he thought no man would accompany him, in so sad
a message, to so vile an issue, from so honorable a service. But if that there
were, which could induce their minds, to return with him; yet the very shame of
the return, would be as death, or grievouser if it were possible: because he
should be so long a dying, and dye so often. Therefore he professed, that with
all his heart, he did embrace the first branch of the Generals proffer;
desiring only his favor, that they might receive the holy communion, once
again together before his death; and that he might not dye other then a
Gentleman's death.

Though sundry reasons were used by many to persuade him to take either of the
other ways: yet when he remained resolute in his former determination, both
parts of his last request were granted: and the next convenient day, a
communion was celebrated, by Mr. Francis Fletcher, preacher and pastor of the
fleet at that time. The General himself communicated in this sacred ordinance,
with this condemned penitent Gentleman; who showed great tokens of a contrite
and repentant heart, as who was more deeply displeased with his own act, then
any man else. And after this holy repast, they denied also at the same table
together, as cheerfully in sobriety, as ever in their lives they had done
aforetime: each cheering up the other, and taking their leave, by drinking each
to other, as if some journey only had been in hand.

After dinner, all things being brought in readiness, by him that supplied the
room of the provost Marshall; without any dallying, or delaying the time, he
came forth, and kneeled down, preparing at once, his neck for the axe, and his
spirit for heaven: which having done, without long ceremony, as who had before
digested this whole Tragedy, he desired all the rest to pray for him, and
willed the Executioner to do his offices not to fear nor spare.

Thus having by the worthy manner of his death (being much more honorable by
it, then blameable for any other of his actions) fully blotted out, what ever
stain, his fault might seem to bring upon him; he left unto our fleet, a
lamentable example of a goodly Gentleman, who in seeking advancement unfit for
him, cast away himself: and unto posterity a monument, of I know not what fatal
calamity, incident to that port, and such like actions, which might happily
afford a new pair of parallels, to be added to Plutarchs: in that the same
place, near about the same time of the year, witnessed the execution of 2.
gentlemen, suffering both for the like cause, employed both in like service,
entertained both in great place, endued both with excellent qualities, the one
58. year after the other.

For on the main, our men found a gibbet, fallen down, made of a spruce mast,
with men's bones underneath it, which they conjectured to be the same gibbet,
which Magellane commanded to be erected, in the year 1520. for the execution
of John Carthagene the Bishop of Burgos Cosen, who by the Kings order, was
joined with Magellane in commission, and made his Vice Admiral.

In the Island, as we dug to bury this gentleman, we found a great
grinding-stone, broken in two parts, which we took and set fast in the ground,
the one part at the head, the other at the feet, building up the middle space,
with other stones and turfes of earth, and engraved in the stones, the names of
the parties buried there, with the time of their departure, and a memorial of
our Generals name in Latin, that it might the better be understood, of all
that should come after us.

These things thus ended, and set in order, our general discharging the Mary,
viz. our Portugal prise, beause she was leake and troublesome, defaced her; and
then left her ribs and keel upon the Island: where for two months together we
had pitched our tents. And so having wooded, watered, trimmed our ships,
dispatched all our other businesses, and brought our fleet into the smalest
number, even 3. only, besides our pinnaces, that we might the easier keep our
selves together, be the better furnished with necessaries, and be the stronger
mand, against whatsoever need should be, Agust 17. we departed out of this
port, and being now in great hope, of a happy issue to our enterprise, which
Almighty God hitherto had so blessed and prospered, we set our course for the
Straights, southwest.

August 20. we fell with the Cape; near which lies the entrance into the
Sraight, called by the Spaniards, Capo virgin Maria, appearing 4. leagues
before you come to it with high and steep gray cliffs, full of black stars,
against which the sea beating, shows as it were the spoutings of Whales,
having the highest of the cape, like cape Vincent in Portugal: at this cape our
General caused his fleet, in homage to our sovereign lady the Queens Majesty,
to strike their top-sailes upon the bunt, as a token of his willing and glad
mind, to show his dutiful obedience to her highness, whom he acknowledged to
have full interest and right in that new discovery; and withal, in remembrance
of his most honorable friend, Sir Christopher Hatton, he changed the name of
the ship, which himself went in, from the Pelican to be called the golden
Hind; which ceremonies being ended, together with a sermon, teaching true
obedience, with prayers and giving of thanks for her Majesty, and most
honorable counsel, with the whole body of the commonweal, and church of God,
we continued our course on into the said frete, where passing with land in
sight on both sides, we shortly fell with so narrow a strait, as carrying with
it much wind, often turnings, and many dangers-requireth an expert judgment in
him that shall pass the same, it lies W.N.W. and E. south East: but having
left his strait a stern, we seemed to become out of a river of two leagues
broad, into a large and main sea; having the night following, an Island in
sight, which (being in height nothing inferior to the Island ^ogo, before
spoken of) burning (like it also) aloft in the air* in a wonderful sort,
without intermission.

It has formerly been received as an undoubted truth, that the seas, following
the course of the first mover, from the east to west, have a continual current
through this strait, but our experience found the contrary: the ebbings and
flowings here, being as orderly (in which the water rises and falls more then 5.
fathoms upright) as on other coasts.

The 24. of August being Bartholomew day, we fell with 3. Islands, bearing
trianglewise one from another, one of them was very fair and large, and of a
fruitful soil, upon which being next unto us, and the weather very calm, our
General with his Gentlemen, and certain of his Mariners, then landed; taking
possession thereof in her Majesty's name, and to her use, and called the same
Elizabeth Island.

The other two, though they were not so large, nor so fair to the eye, yet were
they to us exceeding useful, for in them we found great store of strange
birds, which could not fly at all, nor yet run so fast, as that they could
escape us with their lives, in body they are less then a goose, and bigger then
a mallard, short and thick set together, having no feathers, but instead
thereof, a certain hard and matted down; their beakes are not much unlike the
bills of crows, they lodge and breed upon the land, where making earths, as the
conies do, in the ground, they lay their eggs, and bring up their young; their
feeding and provision to live on, is in the sea, where they swim in such sort
as nature may seem to have granted them no small prerogative in swiftness, both
to prey upon others, and themselves to escape from any others that seek to
cease upon them, and such was the infinite resort of these birds to these
Islands, that in the space of 1. day, we killed no les then 3000. and if the
increase be according to the number, it is not to be thought, that the world
has brought forth, a greater blessing in one kind of creature in so small a
circuit, so necessarily and plentifully serving the use of man, they are a very
good and wholesome victual: our General named these Islands, the one
Bartholomew, according to the day; the other Saint Georges, in honor of
England, according to the ancient custom there observed.

In the Island of Saint George, we found the body of a man, so long dead
before, that his bones would not hold together, being moved out of the place
whereon they lay.

From these Islands, to the entrance into the south sea, the frete is very
crooked; having many turnings, and as it were shutings up, as if there were no
passage at al, by means whereof, we were often troubled with contrary winds, so
that some of our ships recovering a cape of land, entering another reach, the
rest were forced to alter their course, and come to anchor where they might. It
is true which Magellane reports of this passage: namely that there be many
fair harbors, and store of fresh water; but some ships had need to be
fraughted with nothing else, besides anchors and cables, to find ground in most
of them, to come to anchor; which when any extreme gusts or contrary winds do
come (whereunto the place is altogether subject) is a great hindrance to the
passage, and carries with it no small danger.

The land on both sides is very high and mountainous, having on the North and
west side the continent of America, and on the south and East part, nothing but
Islands: among which, lie innumerable fretes or passages into the south sea.
The mountains arise with such tops, and spires into the air, and of so rare a
height, as they may well be accounted amongst the wonders of the world; environed
as it were, with many regions of congealed clouds, and frozen meteors, whereby
they are continually fed and increased, both in the height and bigness, from
time to time, retaining that which they have once received, being little again
diminished by the heat of the sun, as being so far from reflection, and so
nigh the cold and frozen Region.

But notwithstanding all this, yet are the low and plain grounds very
fruitful, the grass green and natural, the herds that are of very strange
sorts, good and many; the trees for the most part of them always green; the
air of the temperature of our country; the water most pleasant; and the soil
agreeing to any grain which we have growing in our country: a place no doubt,
that lacks nothing, but a people to use the same to the Creators glory, and
the increasing of the Church: the people inhabiting these parts, made fires as
we passed by in diverse places.

Drawing nigh the entrance of the south sea, we had such a shutting up to the
northward, and such large and open fretes toward the south, that it was
wonderful which way we should pass, without further discovery: for which
cause, our General having brought his fleet to anchor under an Island; himself
with certain of his Gentlemen, rowed in a boat to descry the passage, who
having discovered a sufficient way toward the North, in their return to their
ships, met a Cannow under the same Island, where we rode then at anchor, having
in her diverse persons.

This Cannow or Foate was made of the bark of diverse trees, having a prow and
a stern standing up, and semicirclewise yielding inward, of one form and
fashion; the body whereof was a most dainty mould, bearing in it most comely
proportion, and excellent workmanship; insomuch as to our General and us, it
seemed never to have been done, without the cunning and expert judgment of art,
and that not for the use of so rude and barbarous a people, but for the
pleasure of some great and noble personage, yea of some Prince: It had no other
closing up or caulking in the seames, but the stichin with thongs, made of
Sealeskins, or other such beast, and yet so close that it received very little
or no water at all.

The people are of a mean stature, but well set and compact in all their parts
and lims; they have great pleasure in painting their faces, as the others have,
of whom we have spoken: before. Within the said Island they had a house of mean
building of certain poles, and covered with skins of beasts; having therein
fire, water, and such meat, as commonly they can come by: as Seals, Mussels,
and such like.

The vessels wherein they kept their water, and their cups in which they drink,
are made of barks of trees, as was their canow: and that with no less skill
(for the bigness of the thing) being of a very formal shape and good fashion.
Their working tools, which they use in cutting these things and such other, are
knives made of most huge and monstrous mussel shells (the like whereof have not
been seen or heard of lightly by any travelers; the meat thereof being very
savoury and good in eating) which after they have broken off the thin and
brittle substance of the edge, they rub and grind them upon stones had for the
purpose, til they have tempered and set such an edg upon them, that no wood is
so hard but they will cut it at pleasure with the same: whereof we our selves
had experience. Yea they cut therewith bones of a mavelous hardness; making
of them fisgies to kill fish, wherein they have a most pleasant exercise with
great dexterity.

Sept. 6.
The sixth of September we had left astern us all these troublesome Islands, and
were entered into the south sea, or Mare del zur* at the cape whereof, our
general had determined with his whole company to have gone a shore, and there
after a sermon to have left a monument of her Majesty engraven in metal, for a
perpetual remembrance, which he had in a readiness for that end prepared: but
neither was there any anchoring, neither did the wind suffer us to make a stay.

Only this by all our men's observations was concluded; that the entrance, by
which we came into this strait, was in 52. degrees. the midst in 53. degrees. 15. m.
and the going out in 52. d. 30. m. being 150. leagues in length: at the very
entry, supposed also to be about 10. leagues in breadth. After we were entered
ten leagues within it, it was found not past a league in breadth: farther
within, in some places very large, in some very narrow: and in the end found to
be no strait at all, but all Islands.

Now when our General perceived that the nipping cold, under so cruel a
frowning winter, had impaired the health of some of his men; he meant to have
made the more have again toward the line, and not to sail any farther toward
the pole Antartick, lest being farther from the Sun, and nearer the cold, we
might happily be overtaken with some greater danger of sickness. But God
giving men leave to purpose, reserveth to himself the disposition of all
things: making their intents of none effect, or changing their meanings often
times clean into the contrary, as may best serve for his own glory and their
profit.

For September 7. Sept. 7.
the second day after our entrance into the South sea (called by some Mare
pacificum, but proving to us rather to be Mare furiosum.) God by a contrary
wind and intolerable tempest, seemed to set himself against us: forcing us not
only to alter our course and determination, but with great trouble, long time,
many dangers, hard escapes, and final separating of our fleet, to yield our
selves unto his will. Yea such was the extremity of the tempest, that it
appeared to us as if he had pronounced a sentence, not to stay his hand, nor to
withdraw his judgment till he had buried our bodies and ships also, in the
bottomless depth of the raging sea.

In the time of this incredible storm, the 15. of September, Sept. 8
the Moon was eclipsed in Aries, and darkened about three points, for the space
of two glasses: which being ended, might seem to give us some hope of
alteration and change of weather to the better. Notwitstanding, as the
ecclipticall conflict could add nothing to our miserable estate, no more did
the ending thereof ease us any thing at all; nor take away any part of our
troubles from us, but our eclipse continued still in its full force so
prevailing against us, that for the space of full 52. days together, we were
darkened more then the Moon by 20. parts, or more then we by any means could
ever have preserved, or recovered light of our selves again, if the Son of
God which laid this burden upon our backs, had not mercifully born it up with
his own shoulders, and upheld us by his own power, beyond any possible strength
or skill of man. Neither indeed did we at all escape, but with the feelling of
great discomforts through the same.

For these violent and extraordinary flawes (such as seldom have been seen)
still continuing, or rather increasing, September 30. Sept. 30.
in the night, caused the sorrow separation of the Marigold from us, in which
was Captain John Thomas, with many others of our dear friends: who by no
means that we could conceive could help themselves, but by spooming along
before the sea. With whom albeit we could never meet again, yet (our general
having aforehand given order, that if any of our fleet did loose company, the
place of resort to meet again should be in 30. degrees. or thereabouts, upon the
coasts of Peru, toward the Equinoctial) we long time hoped (till experience
showed our hope was vain) that there we should joyfully meet with them:
especially for that they were well provided of victuals, and lackt no skillful
and sufficient men (besides their Captain) to bring forwards the ship to the
place appointed.

From the seventh of September (in which the storm began) till the seventh of
October we could not by any means recover any land (having in the mean time
been driven so far South, (...).
as to the 37. degrees. and somewhat better) on this day toward night, somewhat to
the Northward of that Cape of America, (whereof mention is made before in the
description of our departure from the strait into the sea) with a sorry sail
we entered a harbor: where hoping to enjoy some freedom and ease till the
storm was ended we received within few hours after our coming to anchor, so
deadly a stroke and hard entertainment, that our Admiral left not only an
anchor behind her, through the violence and fury of the flaw; but in departing
thence, also lost the company and sight of our Vice-Amirall, the Elizabeth:
partly through the negligence of those that had the charge of her, partly
through a kind of desire that some in her had to be out of these troubles, and
to be at home again* which (as since is known) they thence forward by all
means assayed and performed. For the very next day October 8. October. 8.
recovering the mouth of the straits again (which we were now so near unto)
they returned back the same way by which they came forward, and coasting
Brasil, they arrived in England June 2. the year following.

So that now our Admiral if she had retained her old name of Pelican, which
she bare at our departure from our country, she might have been now indeed said
to be as a Pelican alone in the wilderness. For albeit our General sought
the rest of his fleet with great care, yet could we not have any sight or
certain news of them by any means.

From this bay of parting of friends, we were forcibly driven back again into
55. degrees. toward the pole Antartick. In which height we ran in among the
Islands before mentioned, lying to the Southward of America, through which we
passed from one sea to the other, as has been declared* Where coming to
anchor, we found the waters there to have their indraught and free passage, and
that through no small guts, or narrow channels, but indeed through as large
fretes or straits, as it has at the supposed streights of Megellane through
which we came.

Among these Islands, making our abode with some quietne^ for a very little
while, ( viz. two days) and finding diverse good and wholesome herbs together
with fresh water; our men which before were weak, and much empaired in their
health* began to receive good comfort: especially by the drinking of one herb
(not much unlike that herb which we commonly call Penny-leaf) which purging
with great facility afforded great help and refreshing to our wearied and
sickly bodies. But the winds returning to their old wont, and the seas raging
after their former manner, yea every thing as it were setting it self against
our peace and desired rest, here was no stay permitted, neither any safety to
be looked for.

For such was the present danger by forcing and continual flaws, that we were
rather to look for present death then hope for any delivery, if God almighty
should not make the way for us. The winds were such as if the bowels of the
earth had set all at liberty; or as if the clouds under heaven had been called
together, to lay their force on that one place: the seas, which by nature and
of themselves are heavy, and of a weighty substance, were rolled up from the
depths, even from the roots of the rocks, as if it had been a scroll of
parchment, which by the extremity of heat runs together: and being aloft
were carried in most strange manner and abundance, as feathers or drifts of
snow, by the violence of the winds, to water the exceeding tops of high and
lofty mountains. Our anchors, as false friends in such a danger, gave over
their holdfast, and as if it had been with horror of the thing, did shrink down
to hide themselves in this miserable storm; committing the distressed ship and
helpless men to the uncertain rolling seas, which tossed them, like a ball in
a racket. In this case, to let fall more anchors would avail us nothing; for
being driven from our first place of ancoring, so unmeasurable was the depth,
that 500. fathom would fetch no ground: so that the violent storm without
intermission; the impossibility to come to anchor; the want of opportunity to
spread any sail; the most mad seas; the lee shores; the dangerous rocks; the
contrary and most intolerable winds; the impossible passage out; the desperate
tarrying there; and inevitable perils on every side, did lay before us so small
likelihood to escape present destruction, that if the special providence of
God himself had not supported us, we could never have endured that woeful
state: as being environed with most terrible and most fearful judgments round
about. For truly, it was more likely that the mountains should have been rent
in sunder, from the top to the bottom, and cast hedlong into the sea, by these
unnatural winds; then that we, by any help or cunning of man, should free the
life of any one amongst us.

Notwithstanding the same God of mercy which delivered Jonas out of the Whales
belly and hears all those that call upon him faithfully in their distres;
looked down from heaven beheld our tears, and heard our humble petitions,
joined with holy vows. Even God (whom not the winds and seas alone, but even
the Devils themselves and powers of hell obey) did so wonderfully free us, and
make our way open before us, as it were by his holy Angels still guiding and
conducting us, that more then the affright and amaze of this estate, we
received no part of damage in all the things that belonged unto us.

But escaping from these straites and miseries, as it were through the
needlesey (that God might have the greater glory in our delivery) by the great
and effectual care and travel of our General, the Lords instrument therein;
we could now no longer forbear, but must needs find some place of refuge,
as well to provide water, wood, and other necessaries, as to comfort our men,
thus worn and tired out, by so many and so long intolerable toyls: the like
whereof, it to be supposed, no traveller has felt, neither has their ever
been such a tempest (that any records make mention of) so violent, and of such
continuance, since Noah's flood, for as has been said it lasted from September
7. to October 28. full 52. days.

Not many leagues therefore to the southwards of our former anchoring, we ran
in again among these Islands; where we had once more better likelihood to rest
in peace: and so much the rather, for that we found the people of the country
traveling for their living, from one Island to another, in their canows, both
men, women, and young infants wrapped in skins, and hanging at their mothers
backs; with whom he had trafique for such things as they had, as chains of
certain shells and such other trifles; here the Lord gave us three days to
breath our selves, and to provide such things as we wanted, albeit the same was
with continual care, and troubles to avoid imminent dangers, which the
troubled seas and blustering winds did every hour threaten unto us.

But when we seemed to have stayed there too two long, we more rigorously
assaulted by the not formerly ended, but now more violently renewed storm; and
driven them also with no small danger; leaving behind us the greater part of
our cable with the anchor; being chased along by the winds, and buffeted
incessantly in each quarter by the seas (which our General interpreted, as
though God had sent them of purpose to the end which ensued) till at length we
fell with the uttermost part of land toward the south pole, and had certainly
discovered how far the same does reach southward, from the coast of America
aforenamed.

The uttermost Cape or hedland of all these Islands, stands near in the 56.
degrees. without which there is no main, nor Island to be seen to the southwards:
but that the Atlantic Ocean, and the south sea, meet in a most large and free
scope.

It has been a dream through many ages, that these Islands have been a maine,
and that it has been terra incognita; wherein many strange monsters lived.
Indeed it might truly, before this time, be called incognota, for howsoever the
maps and general descriptions of Cosmographers, either upon the deceiveable
reports of other men, or the deceitful imaginations of themselves (supposing
never herein to be corrected) have set it down, yet it is true, that before
this time, it was never discovered, or certainly known by any traveller, that
we have heard of.

And here as in a fit place, it shall not be a miss to remove that error in
opinion, which has been held by many, of the impossible return, out of Mar del
zur, into the West Ocean; by reason of the supposed Eastern current, and
leavant winds: which (say they) speedily carry any thither, but suffer no
return. They are herein likewise altogether deceived: for neither did we meet
with any such current, neither had we any such certain winds, with any such
speed to carry us through; but at all times in our passage there, we found more
opportunity to return back again into the west Ocean, then to go forward into
Mar del zur, by means, either of current, or winds to hinder us, whereof we
had experience more then we wished: being glad oftentimes to alter our course,
and to fall a stern again, with francke wind (without any impediment of any
such surmised current) farther in one afternoon, then we could fetch up, or
recover again in a whole day, with a reasonable gale. And in that they allege
the narrowness of the frete, and want of sea-rome, to be the cause of this
violent current; they are herein no less deceived, then they were in the other
without reason: for besides, that it cannot be said, that there is one only
passage, but rather innumerable; it is most certain, that a sea-board all these
Islands, there is one large and main sea, wherein if any will not be satisfied,
nor believe the report of our experience and eyesight, he should be advised to
suspend his judgment, till he has either tried it himself, by his own travel,
or shall understand by other travelers, more particulars to confirm his mind
therein.

Now as we were fallen to the uttermost part of these Islands October 28. Octo
28*
our troubles did make an end, the storm ceased, and all our calamities (only
the absence of our friends excepted) were removed, as if God, all this while,
by his secret providence, had led us to make his discovery; which being made,
according to his will he stayed his hand, as pleased his majesty therein, and
refreshed us as his servants.

At these Southerly parts we found the night, in the latter end of October, to
be but 2. hours long: the Sun being yet above 7. degrees distant from the
Tropic: so that it seems, being in the Tropic, to leave very little, or no
night at all in that place.

There be few of all these Islands, but have some inhabitants, whose manners,
apparel, houses, Cannows, and means of livings, is like unto those formerly
spoken of, a little before our departure out of the Straight. To all these
Islands, did our General give one name, to wit, Elizabethides.

After two days stay, which we made in and about these Islands, the 30. of
October we set sail; Octo. 30.
shaping our course right Northwest, to coast along the parts of Peru (for so
the general maps set out the land to lie, both for that we might wi^h
convenient speed, sal with the height of 30. degrees. being the place appointed,
for the rest of our fleet to re-assemble; as also that no opportunity might be
lost, in the mean time to find them out, if it seemed good to God to direct
them to us.

In this course, we chanced (the next day) with two Islands, being as it were
storehouses, of most liberal provision of victuals for us, of birds; yeiding
not only sufficient and plentiful store, for us who were present, but enough to
have served all the rest also which were absent.

Thence (having furnished our selves to our content) we continued our course
November 1. Nove. 1.
still Northwest, as we had formerly done, but in going on, we soon espied,
that we might easily have been deceived: and therefore casting about, and
steering upon another point, we found that the general maps did err from the
truth, in setting down the coast of Peru, for 12. degrees. at least to the
Northward, of the supposed strait; no less then is the Northwest point of the
compass, different from the Northeast, perceiving hereby, that no man, had
ever by travel, discovered any part of these 12. degrees. and therefore the
setters sorth of such descriptions, are not to be trusted; much less honored
in their false and fraudulent conjectures; which they use, not in this alone,
but in diverse other points of no small importance.

We found this part of Peru, all along to the height of Lima which is 12.
degrees. South of the line, to be mountenous and very barren, without water or
wood, for the most part, except in certain places inhabited by the Spaniards
and few others, which are very fruitful and commodious.

After we were once again thus fallen with the land, we continually coasted
along, til we came to the height of 37. degrees. or thereabout: and finding no
convenient place of abode, nor likelihood to hear any news of our ships, we ran
off again with an Island, which lay in sight, named of the Spaniards Mucho, by
reason of the greatness and large circuit thereof.

At this Island coming to anchor, Novem. 25. Nov. 25
we found it to be a fruitful place, and well stored with sundry sorts of good
things, as sheep, and other cattle, maize, which is a kind of grain whereof
they make bread, potatoes, with such other roots: besides that, it is thought
to be wonderful rich in gold, and to want no good thing for the use of man's
life. The inhabitants are such Indians, as by the cruel and most extreme
dealing of the Spaniards, have been driven to fly from the maine, here to
relieve and fortify themselves. With this people, our General thought it meet
to have traffic, for frew victuals and water: and for that cause, the very
same night of our arrival there, himself with diverse of his company went a
shore, to whom the people with great courtesy came down, bringing with them
such fruits and other victuals as they had, and two very fat sheep, which they
gave our General for a present. In recompense whereof, we bestowed upon them
again many good and necessary things; signifying unto them, that the end of his
coming was for no other cause, but by way of exchang to traffic with them for
such things as we needed, and they could spare: and in particular, for such as
they had already brought down upon us, besides fresh water, which we desired
of them. Herein they held themselves well contented, and seemed to be not a
little joyful of our coming: appointing where we should the next morning have
fresh water at pleasure, and withal signifying that then also they would bring
us down such other things as we desired to serve our turns.

The next day therefore very early in the morning (all things being made ready
for traffic, as also vessels prepared to bring the water) our general taking
great care for so necessary provision, repaired to the shore again; and
setting a land two of his men, sent with them their Bar^icoes to the watering
place assigned the night before. Who having peaceably past on one half of the
way, were then with no small violence set upon by those traitorous people, and
suddenly slain and to the end that our general with the rest of his company
should not only be stayed from rescuing them, but also might fall (if it were
possible) into their hands in like manner, they had laid closely behind the
rocks an ambushment of (as we guessed) about 500 mer, armed and well appointed
for such a mischief. Who suddenly attempting their purpose (the rocks being
very dangerous for the boat, and the sea-gate exceeding great) by shooting
their arrows hurt and wounded every one of our men, Sept. 30.
before they could free themselves, or come to the use of their weapons to do
any good. The general himself was shot in the face, under his right eye, and
close by his nose, the arrow piercing a mavelous way in, under basis cerebri,
with no small danger of his life; besides that, he was grievously wounded in
the head* The rest being nine persons in the boat, were deadly wounded in
diverse parts of their bodies, if God almost miraculously had not given cure to
the same. For our chief Surgeon being dead and the other absent by the loss of
our vice admiral, and having none left us but a boy, whose good will was more
then any skill he had, we were little better then altogether destitute of such
cunning and helps as so grievous a state of so many wounded bodies did require.
Notwithstanding God, by the good advice of our General, and the diligent
putting too of every man's help, October. 7
did give such speedy and wonderful cure, that we had all great comfort
thereby, and yielded God the glory thereof.

The cause of this force and injury by these Ilanders, was no other but the
deadly hatred which they bear against their civil enemies the Spaniards, for
the bloody and most tirannous oppression which they had used toward them. And
therefore with purpose against them (suspecting us to be Spaniards indeed, and
that the rather, by occasion that though command was given to the contrary,
some of our men in demanding water, used the spanish word aqua, sought some
part of revenge against us. Our general notwithstanding he might have revenged
this wrong with little hazard or danger; yet more desirous to preserve one of
his own men alive* then to destroy 100. of his enemies, committed the same to
God: wishing this only punishment to them, that they did but know whom they had
wronged; and that they had done this injury not to an enemy but to a friend;
not to a Spaniard, but to an Englishman; who would rather have been a patron to
defend them, then any way an instrument of the least wrong that should have
been done unto them. The weapons which this people use in their wars, are
arrows of Reeds, with heads of stone, very brittle and indented, but darts of a
great length, headed with iron or bone.

The same day that we received this dangerous affront, in the afternoon we set
sail from thence; and because we were now nigh the appointed height, wherein
our ships were to be looked for, as also the extremity and crasie state of our
hurt men advising us to use expedition, to find some convenient place of
repose, which might afford them some rest, and yield us necessary supply of
fresh victuals for their diet; we bent our course, as the wind would suffer us,
directly to run in with the main. Where falling with a bay, called Philips bay,
in 32. de. or thereabout, Nov. 30. Nov. 30
we came to anchor: and forthwith manned and sent our boat to discover what
likelihood the place would offer to afford us such things as we stood in need
of.

Our boat doing her utmost endeaver in a diligent search, yet after long travel
could find no appearance of hope for relief, either of fresh victuals, or of
fresh water: huge heads of wild buffs they might discern, but not so much as
any sign of any inhabitant thereabout. Yet in their return to us, they descryed
within the bay, an Indian with his Canow as he was a fishing: him they brought
aboard our general, canow and all as he was in it. A comely personage, and of
a goodly stature* his apparel wss a white garment, reaching scarcely to his
knees; his arms and legs were naked; his hair upon his head very long; without
a beard, as all the Indians for the most part are. He seemed very gentle, of
mild and humble nature, being very tractable to learn the use of every thing,
and most grateful for such things as our General bestowed upon him* In him we
might see a most lively pattern of the harmless disposition of that people; and
how grievous a thing it is that they should by any means be so abused as all
those are, whom the Spaniards have any command or power over.

This man being courteously entertained, and his pains of coming double
requited; after we had showed him, partly by signs, and partly by such things
as we had, what things we needed, and would gladly receive by his means, upon
exchang of such things as he would desire; we sent him away with our boat and
his own canow (which was made of Reed straw) to land him where he would. Who
being landed, and willing our men to stay his return, was immediately met by
two or three of his friends; to whom imparting his news, and showing what gifts
he had received, he gave so great content, that they willingly furthered his
purpose; so that after certain hours of our men's abode there, he with diverse
others (among whom was their head or Captain) made their return; bringing with
them their loadings of such things as they thought would do us good: as some
hens, eggs, a fat hog, and such like. All which (that our men might be without
all suspicion of all evil to be meant and intended by them) they sent in one
of their canows, a reasonable distance from off the shore, to our Boat, the
sea-gate being at the present very great, and their Captain having sent back
his horse, would needs commit himself to the credit of our men, though
strangers, and come with them to our General, without any of his own
acquaintance or countrymen with him.

By his coming as we understood, that there was no mean or way, to have our
necessities relieved in this place; so he offered himself to be our Pilot, to a
place and that a good harborough, not far back to the Southward again: where,
by way of traffic, we might have at pleasure, both water, and those other
things which we stood in need of. This offer our General very gladly received,
and so much the rather, for that the place intended, was near about the place
appointed, for the Randevouse of our fleet. Omitting therefore our purpose, of
pursuing the buffs formerly spoken of, of which we had otherwise determined, if
possible to have killed some; this good news of better provision, and more
easy to come by, drew us away: and so the 5. day after our arrival, viz.
December 4. Dece. 4.
we departed hence, and the next day December 5. Dece. 5.
by the willing conduct of our new Indian Pilot, we came to anchor in the
desired harbor.

This harbor the Spaniards call valperizo, and the town adjoining St. James of
Chinly, it stands in 35. degrees. 40. min. where albeit we neither met with our
ships, nor heard of them, yet there was no good thing which the place afforded,
or which our necessities indeed for the present required, but we had the same
in great abundance: amongst other things we found in the town diverse
storehouses of the wines of Chilie; and in the harbor, a ship called the
Captain of Moriall, or the grand Captain of the South, Admiral to the Islands
of Salamon; laden for the most part, with the same kind of liquors: only
there was besides, a certain quantity of fine gold of Baldivia and a great
cross of gold beset wit Emeraulds, on which was nailed a god of the same
metal, we spent some time in refre^hing our selves, and easing this ship of
sol easy a burden: and on the 8. day of the same month (having in the mean
time, sufficiently stored our selves with necessaries, as wine, bread, bacon
etc. for a long season) we set sail, returning back toward the line; carrying
again our Indian pilot with u^* whom our general bountefully rewarded, and
enriched with many good things, which pleased him exceedingly, and caused him,
by the way, to be landed in the place where he desired.

Our necessities being thus to our content relieved, our next care was the
regaining (if possible) of the company of our ships, so long severed from us:
neither would any thing have satisfied our general, or us so well, as the happy
meeting, or good news of them, this way therefore (all other thoughts, for the
present set apart) were all our studies and endeavors bent* how to fit it so,
as that no opportunity of meeting them might be passed over.

To this end, considering that we could not conveniently run in with our ship
(in search of them) to every place where was likelihood of being in harbor; and
that our boat was to little, and unable to carry men enough, to encounter the
malice or treachery of the Spaniards (if we should by any chance meet with any
of them) who are used to show no mercy, where they may overmaster; and
therefore meaning not to hazard our selves to their cruel courtesy; we
determined, as we coasted now toward the line, to search diligently for some
convenient place, where we might in peace and safety, stay the triming of our
ship, and the erecting of a pinnace, in which we might have better security,
then in our boat, and without endangering of our ship, by running into each
creek, leave no place untried, if happily we might so find again our friends
and countrymen.

For this cause December 19. Dece. 19.
we entered a bay, not far to the Southward of the town, of Cyppo now inhabited
by the Spaniards, in 29. degrees, 30. min. where having landed certain of our men,
to the number of 14, to search what convenience the place was likely to afford
for our abiding there; we were immediately descried by the Spaniards, of the
town of Cyppo aforesaid, who speedily made out 300. men, at least whereof 100.
were Spaniards, every one well mounted upon his horse; the rest were Indians,
running as dogs at their heels, all naked and in most miserable bondage.

They could not come any way so closely, but God did open our eyes to see them,
before there was any extremity of danger, whereby our men being warned, had
reasonable time to shift themselves as they could; first from the main, to a
Rock within the sea; and from thence into their boat: which being ready to
receive them, conveyed them with expedition, out of the reach of the
Spaniards fury, without the hurt of any man: only one Richard Minivy, being
over bold and careless of his own safety, would not be entreated by his
friends, nor feared by the multitude of his enemies, to take the present
benefit of his own delivery: but chose either to make 300. men by outbraving of
them to become afraid, or else himself to dye in the place; the latter of
which indeed he did, whose dead body being drawn by the Indians from the Rock
to the shore was there manfully by the Spaniards beheaded, the right hand cut
off, the heart pluct out, all which they carried away in our sight, and for the
rest of his carkase, they caused the Indians to shoot it full of arrows, made
but the same day, of green wood, and so left it to be devoured of the beastts
and fowls, but that we went a shore again and buried it: wherein as there
appears a most extreme and barbarous cruelty, so does it declare to the
world, in what miserable fear the Spaniard holds the government of those
parts; living in continual dread of the foreign invasion by strangers, or
secret cutting of throats, by those whom they kept under them in so shameful
slavery, I mean the Innocent and harmles Indians. And therefore they make sure
to murder what strangers soever they can come by, and suffer the Indians by no
means to have any weapon longer then they be in present service: as appeared by
their arrows cut from the tree the same day, as also by the cred^ble report of
others who knew the matter to be true. Yea they suppose they show the wretches
great favor, when they do not for their pleasures whip them with cords, and day
by day drop tkeir naked bodies with burning bacon: which is one of the least
cruelties, amongst many, which they usually use against that Nation and people.

This being not the place we looked for, nor the entertainment such as we
desired; we speedily got hence again, and December. 20. Dece. 20.
the next day, fell with a more convenient harbor, in a bay somewhat to the
Northward of the forenamed Cyppo* lying in 27. degrees. 55. min. South the line.

In this place we spent some time in trimming of our ships, and building of our
pinnace, as we desired: but still the grief for the absence of our friends
remained with us, for the finding of whom, our General having now fitted all
things to his mind, intended (leaving his ship the mean while at anchor in the
bay) with his pinnace and some chosen men, himself to return back to the
Southwards again; to see if happily he might either himself meet with them, or
find them in some harbor or creek; or hear of them by any others, whom he might
meet with, with this resolution he set on, but after one days sailing, the
wind being contrary to his purpose, he was forced whether he would or no to
return again.

Within this bay, during our abode there, we had such abundance of fish, not
much unlike our Gurnard in England, as no place had ever afforded us the like
(Cape blank only upon the coast of Barbary excepted) since our first setting
forth of Plymmouth until this time, the plenty whereof in this place was such,
that our gentlemen sporting themselves day by day, with 4. or 5. hooks and
lines, in 2. or 3. hours, would take sometimes 400. sometimes more at one time.

All our businesses being thus dispatched, January 19. Ian. 19,
we set sail from hence; and the next place that we fell withal, Jan. 22. Ian*
22.
was an Island standing in the same height, with the north cape of the province
of Mormorena, at this Island we found 4. Indians with their canows, which took
upon them to bring our men to a place of fresh water on the aforesaid cape; in
hope whereof, our general made them great cheer (as his manner was to all
strangers) and set his course by their direction, but when we came unto the
place, and had traveled up along way into the land, we found fresh water
indeed, but scarce so much as they had drunk wine in their passage thither.

As we sailed along, continually searching for fresh water; we came to a place
called Tarapaca, and landing there we lighted on a Spaniard who lay asleep, and
had lying by him 13. bars of silver, weighing in all, about 4000. Spanish
duccats, we would not (could we have chosen) have awaked him of his nap; but
seeing we, against our will, did him that injury, we freed him of his charg,
which otherwise perhaps would have kept him waking, and so left him to take out
(if it pleased him) the other part of his sleep in more security.

Our search for water still continuing, as we landed again not far from thence,
we met a Spaniard with an Indian boy* driving 8. Lambs or Peruvian sheep: each
sheep bare two leathern bags, and in each bag was 50. pound weight of refined
silver, in the whole 800. weight: we could not endure to see a gentleman
Spaniard turned Carrier so; and therefore without entreaty, we offered our
service, and became drovers* only his directions was not so perfect, that we
could keep the way which he intended; for almost as soon as he was parted from
us, we with our new kind of carriages, were come unto our boats.

Farther beyond this cape forementioned lie certain Indian towns, from whence
as we passed by, came many of the people in certain bawses made of Seals skins;
of which two being joined together of a just length, and side by side, resemble
in fashion or form of a boat: they have in either of them a small gut, or some
such thing blown full of wind; by reason whereof it floateth, and is rowed very
swiftly, carrying in it no small burden. In these upon sight of our ship, they
brought store of fish of diverse sorts, to trafique with us, for any trifles we
would give them: as knives, margarites, glasses, and such like, whereof, men of
60. and 70. years old, were as glad as if they had received some exceeding rich
commodity, being a most simple and plain dealing people. Their resort unto us
was such, as considering the shortness of the time, was wonderful to us to
behold.

Nor far from this, viz. in 22. degrees. 30. min. lay Mormorena, another great town
of the same people, over whom 2. Spaniards held the government, with these our
general thought meet to deal; or at least to try their courtesy, whether
they would, in way of traffic, give us such things as we needed ^r no, and
therefore Jan. the 26. Ian. 26.
we cast anchor here, we found them (more for fear then for love) somewhat
tractable, and received them by exchange many good things, very necessary for
our uses.

Amongst other things which we had of them, the sheep of the country ( viz.
such as we mentioned before bearing the leathern bags) were most memorable.
Their height and length was equal to a pretty cow, and their strength fully
answerable if not by much exceeding their size or stature. Upon one of their
backs did sit at one time three well grown and tall men, and one boy, no man's
foot touching the ground by a large foot in length, the beast nothing at all
complaining of his burden in the mean time. These sheep have necks like
Camels; their heads bearing a reasonable resemblance of another sheep. The
Spaniards use them to great profit. Their wool is exceeding fine, their flesh
good meat, their increase ordinary, and besides they supply the room of horses
for burden or travel: yea they serve to carry over the mountains, mavelous
loads, for 300. leagues together, where no other carriage can be made but by
them only. Hereabout, as also all along, and up into the country throughout
the Province of Cusko, the common ground wheresoever it be taken up, in every
hundred pound weight of earth, yeildeth, 25. s. of pure silver, after the rate
of a crown an ounce.

The next place likely to afford us any news of our ships (for in all this way
from the height where we builded our pinnace, there was no bay or harbor at all
for shipping) was the p^rt of the town of Arica, standing in 20 d. whether we
arrived the 7. of February. Feb* ^.
This town seemed to us to stand in the most fruitful soil that we saw all
along these coasts: both for that it is situate in the mouth of a most pleasant
and fertile valley, ^^ounding with all good things; as also in that it has
continual trade of shipping, as well from Lyma as from all other part^ of
Peru. It is inhabited by the Spaniards. In two barks (...) of the (...) about
20. pounds) of which we took the burden on our selves to ease them, and so
departed toward Chowley; with which we fell the second day, viz. Feb. 9. Feb.
9.
and in our way to Lima, we met with another Bark, Ariquipa, which had begun to
load some silver and gold, but having had (as it seemed from A^ica by land)
some notice of our coming, had unloaden the same again before our arival. Yet
in this our passage we met another bark laden with linen: some of which we
thought might stand us in some stead, and therefore took it with us.

At Lima we arrived Feb. 15. Feb. 15.
and notwithstanding the Spaniards forces, though they had 30. at that present
in harbor there, whereof 17. (most of them the especial ships in all the
south sea) were fully ready, wen entered and anchored all night in the midst
of them, in the Calao: and might have made more spoil amongst them in few
hours if we had been affected to revenge, then the Spaniards could have
recovered again in many years. But we had more care to get up that company
which we had so long mist, then to recompense their cruel and hard dealing by
an evil requital, which now we might have took. This Lima stands in 12. degrees.
30. minutes south latitude.

Here albeit no good news of our ships could be had, yet got we the news of
some things that seemed to comfort, if not to countervaile our travels thither,
as namely, that in the ship of one Migkell Angel there, there were 1500. bars
of plate, besides some other things (as silks, linen, and in one a chest full
of Royals of plate) which might stand us in some stead in the other ships;
aboard whom we made somewhat bold to bid our selves welcome. Here also we heard
the report of some things that had befallen in and near Europe, since our
departure thence; in particular of the death of some great personages; as the
K. of Portugal, and both the Kings of Morocco and ^e^e, dead all three in one
day at one battle: the death of the K. of France and the Pope of Rome: whose
abominations as they are in par^^^ off from some Chri^tian Kingdoms, (...) his
(...) is manifest, so do his vassals and accursed instruments labor by all
means possile to repair that loss, by spreading the same the further in these
parts, where his divelish illusions and damnable deceivings are not known. And
as his Doctrine takes place any where, so does the manners that necessarily
accompany the same, insinuate themselves together with the doctrine For as its
true that in all the parts of America, where the Spaniards have any government,
the poisonous infection of Popery has spread it self; so on the otherside it
is as true, that there is no City, as Lima, Panama, Mezico, etc. no Town or
Village, yea no house almost in all these provinces, wherein (amongst other the
like Spanish virtues) not only whordome, but the filthiness of Sodom, not to be
named among Christians, is not common without repoof: the Popes pardons being
more rise in these parts then they be in any part of Europe, for these
filthinesses whereout he sucketh no small advantage. Notwithstanding the
Indians, who are nothing nearer the true knowledge of God then they were
before, abhor this most filthy and loathsome manner of living; showing
themselves in respect of the Spaniards, as the Scythians did in respect of the
Grecians: who in their barbarous ignorance, yet in life and behavior did so*
far excel the wise and learned Greeks, as they were short of them in the gifts
of learning and knowledge.

But as the Pope and Antichristian Bishops labor by their wicked factors with
tooth and nail to deface the glory of God, and to shut up in darkness the light
of the gospel; so God does not suffer his name and religion to be altogether
without witness, to the reproving both of his false and damnable doctrine as
also crying out against his unmeasurable and abominable licentiousness of the
flesh, even in these parts. For in this City of Lima, not two months before
our coming thither, there were certain persons, to the number of twelve
apprehended, examined and condemned for the profession of the Gospel, and
repro^ing the doctrines of men, with the the filthy manners used in that City*
of which twelve, six were bound to one stake and burnt, the rest remained yet
in prison, to drink of the same cup within few days. Lastly, here we had
intelligence of a certain rich ship, which was laden with gold and silver for
Panama, that he had set forth of this haven the 2. of February. Feb. 16.


The very next day therefore in the morning ( viz. the 16. of the said month)
we set sail, as long as the wind would serve our turn, and towed our ship as
soon as the wind failed; continuing our course toward Panama, making stay no
where, but hastening all me might, to get sight if it were possible, of that
gallant ship the Cacafuego. the great glory of the south sea; which was gone
from Lima 14. days before us.

We fell with the port of Paita in 4. de. 40. in. Feb. 20. Feb. 20.
with port Saint Hellen, and the River and part of Guiaquil, Feb. 24. Febr. 24.
we past the line the 28. and first of March we fell with cape Francisco:
where, about midday, we descried a sail, Feb 28. March 1.
a head of us, with whom after once we had spoken with her, we lay still in the
same place about six days; to recover our breath again which we had almost
spent with hasty following* and to recall to mind what advantages had past us
since our late coming from Lima; but especially to do John de Anton a
kindness, in freeing him of the care of those things with which his ship was
laden.

This ship we found to be the same of which we had heard, not only in the Calao
of Lima, but also by diverse occasions afterward (which now we are at leisure to
relate, viz. by a ship which we took between Lima and Paita: by another which
we took laden with wine in the port of Paita: by a third laden with tackling
and implements for ships (besides 80. pound weight in gold) from Guiaquil. And
lastly, by Gabriel Al^arez, with whom we talked somewhat nearer the line) we
found her to be indeed the Catasuego: though before we left her, she were new
named by a boy of her own the Cacaplata. We found in her some Fruit, conserves,
sugars, meal and other victuals, and (that which was the especiallest cause of
her heavy and slow sailing) a certain quantity of jewels, and precious stones,
1^. chests of Ryals of plate; 80. pound weight in gold; 26. tun of un^oyned
silver; two very fair guilt silver drinking-bouls, and the like trifles,
valued in about 360000. pezoes. We gave the Master a little linen and the like
for these commodities; and at the end of six days we bad farewell and parted.
He hasting somewhat lighter then before to Panama, we plying off to sea, that
we might with more leisure consider what course hence forward were fittest to
be taken.

And considering that now we were come to the northward of the line ( Cape
Francisco standing in the entrance of the bay Panama, in 1. degrees. of North
latitude) and that there was no likelihood or hope that our ships should be
before us that way by any means; seeing that in running so many degrees. from the
southermost Islands hitherto, we could not have any sign or notice of their
passage that way, notwithstanding that we had made so diligent search, and
careful enquiry after them, in every harbor or creek almost as we had done; and
considering also that the time of the year now drew on, wherein me must
attempt, or of necessity wholly give off that action which chiefly our General
had determined: namely, the discovery of what passage there was to be found
about the northern parts of America, from the south sea, into our own Ocean
(which being once discovered and made known to be navigable, we should not only
do our country good and notable service, but we also our selves should have a
nearer cut and passage home* where otherwise we were to make a very long and
tedious voyage of it, which would hardly agree with our good liking, we having
been so long from home already, and so much of our strength separated from us)
which could not at all be done, if the opportunity of time were now neglected:
we therefore all of us willingly hearkened, and consented to our Generals
advice: which was, first to seek out some convenient place, wherein to trim our
ship, and store our selves with wood and water and other provisions as we could
get: and thenceforward to hasten on our intended journey, for the discovery of
the said passage, through which we might with joy return to our longed homes.
1579.


From this cape before we set onward March the 7. March 7.
shaping our course toward the Island of Caines, with which we fell March 16.
Marc. 16.
settling ourselves for certain days, in a Fresh river, between the main and
it; for the finishing of our needful business as is aforesaid. While we abode
in this place, we felt a very terrible earthquake, the force whereof was such,
that our ship and Pinnace, riding very near an English mile from the shore,
were shaken and did quiver as if it had been laid on dry land: we found here
many good commodities which we wanted, as Fish, Fresh water, Wood, etc. besides
Alagartoes, Munckeyes and the like, and in our journey hither, we met with one
ship more (the last we met with in all those coasts) loaded with Linen
China-silk, and China-dishes, amongst which we found also a Faulcon of gold,
handsomely wrought with a great Emerald set in the breast of it.

From whence we parted the 24. day of the month forenamed, Marc. 24.
with full purpose to run the nearest course as the wind would suffer us,
without touch of land along time; and therefore passed by port Papagaia; the
port of the Vale of the most rich and most excellent balmes of Jericho,
Quantapico, and diverse others; as also certain gulphes hereabouts, which
without intermission, send forth such continual and violent winds, that the
Spaniards, though their ships be good, dare not venture themselves too near
the danger of them.

Notwithstanding, having notice that we should be troubled with often calms,
and contrary winds, if we continued near the coast, and did not run off to sea
to fetch the wind; and that if we did so, we could not then fall with land
again when we would: our General thought it needful, that we should run in
with some place or other, before our departure from the coast; to see if
happily we could by traffic, augm^nt our provision of victuals, and other
necessaries: that being at s^a, we might not be driven, to any great want or
necessity, albeit we had reasonable store of good things aboard us already.

The next harbor therefore which we chanced with, on Apr. 15. April 15
in 15. de. 40. min. was Guatulco so named of the Spaniards who inhabited it,
with whom we had some intercourse, to the supply of many things which we
desired, and chiefly bread etc. And now having reasonably, as we though
provided our selves, we departed from the coast of America for the present: but
not forgetting, before we gate a shipboard, to take with us also a certain pot
(of about a bushel in bigness) full of royals of plate, which we found in the
town: together with a chain of gold, and some other jewels, which we entreated
a gentleman Spaniard to leave behind him, as he was flying out of town.

From Guatulco we departed the day following, viz. April. 16. Apr. 16.
setting our course directly into the sea: whereupon we sailed 500. leagues in
longitude to get a wind: and between that and June 3. 1400. leagues in all,
till we came into 42. degrees. of North latitude, where in the night following, we
found such alteration of heat, into extreme and nipping cold, that our men in
general did grievously complain thereof; some of them feeling their healths
much impaired thereby, neither was it, that this chanced in the night alone,
but the day following carried with it, not only the marks, but the stings and
force of the night going before, to the great admiration of us all, for besides
that the pinching and biting air, was nothing altered; the very ropes of our
ship were stiff, and the rain which fell, was an unnatural and frozen
substance, so that we seemed rather to be in the frozen Zone, then any way so
near unto the sun, or these hotter climates.

Neither did this happen for the time only, or by some sudden accident, but
rather seems indeed, to proceed from some ordinary cause* against the which the
heat of the sun prevails not, for it came to that extremity, in sailing but 2.
degrees. farther to the northward in our course: that though seamen lack not good
stomachs, yet it seemed a question to many amongst us, whether their hands
should feed their mouths, or rather keep themselves within their coverts, from
the pinching cold that did benum them. Neither could we impute it to the
tenderness of our bodies though we came lately from the extremity of heat, by
reason whereof we might be more sensible of the present cold insomuch as the
dead and senlesse creatures, were as well affected with it as our selves, our
meat as soon as it was removed from the fire, would presently in a manner be
frozen up; and our ropes and tackling, in few days were grown to that
stiffness, that what three men before were able with them to perform, now six
men with their best strength, and uttermost endeavor, were hardly able to
accomplish: whereby a sudden and great discouragement seized upon the minds of
our men, and they were possessed with a great mislike, and doubting of any good
to be done that way, yet would not our general be discouraged, but as well by
comfortable speeches of the divine providence, and of Gods loving care over his
children out of the scriptures; as also by other good and profitable
persuasions, adding thereto his own cheerful example, he so stirred them up,
to put on a good courage, and to quit themselves like men, to endure some short
extremity, to have the speedier comfort, and a little trouble, to obtain the
greater glory; that every man was as thoroughly armed with willingness, and
resolved to see the uttermost, if it were possible, of what good was to be done
that way.

The land in that part of America, bearing farther out into the west, then we
before imagined, we were nearer on it then we were aware; and yet the nearer
still we came unto it, the more extremity of cold did sease upon us. The 5. day
of June we were forced by contrary winds, to run in with the s^^are, which we
then first descryed; and to cast anchor in a bad bay: June ^*
the best road we could for the present meet with: where we were not without
some danger, by reason of the many extreme gusts and flaws that beat upon us;
which if they ceased and were still at any time, immediately upon their
intermission, there followed most vile, thick and stinking fogs; against which
the sea prevailed nothing, till the gust of wind again removed them* which
brought with them, such extremity and violence when they came* that there was
no dealing or resisting against them.

In this place was no abiding for us; and to go further North, the extremity of
the cold (which had now utterly discouraged (...)) would not permit us and the
winds directly bent against (...) having once gotten us under sail again,
commanded us to the southward whether we would or no.

From the height of 48. de. in which now we were, to 38. we (...) the land by
coasting along it to be but low and reason^^^ plain: every hill (whereof we saw
many, but none very (...) though it were in June, and the Sun in his nearest
appr^ach unto them being covered with snow.

In 38. degrees. 30. min. we fell with a convenient and fit harborough, and June
17. June 17.
came to anchor therein: where we continued till the 23. day of July following.
During all which time notwithstanding it was in the height of Summer, and so
near the Sun* yet were we continually visited with like nipping colds, as we
had felt before: insomuch that if violent exercises (...) ^ur bodies* and busy
employment about our necessary lab^r^ had not sometimes compeld us to the
contrary, we could very well have been contented to have kept about us still
our winter clothes; yea (had our necessities suffered us) to have kept ^^r
beds; neither could we at any time in whole foureteen days together, find the
air so clear as to be able to take the height of Sun or star.

And here having so fit occasion, (notwithstanding it may seem to be besides
the purpose of writing the history of this our voyage) we will a little more
diligently inquire into the causes of the continuance of the extreme cold in
these parts: as also into the probabilities or unlikelihoods of a passage to be
found that way. Neither was it (as has formerly been touched) the tenderness
of our bodies, coming so lately out of the heat, whereby the pores were opened,
that make us (...) of the colds we here felt: in this respect, as in many
others, we found our God a provident Father, and careful physician to us. We
lacked no outward helps nor inward comforts, to (...) and Fortify nature, had
it been decayed or weakened in us; neither was there wanting to us the great
experience of our General, who had often himself proved the (...), the burning
zone; whose advice always prevailed much to the preserving of a moderate
temper in our constitutions: so that even after our departure from the heat, we
always found our bodies, not as sponges, but strong and hardened, more able to
bear out cold* though we came out of excess of heat, then a number of chamber
companions could have been, who lie on their Featherbed, till they go to sea,
or rather whose teeth in a temperate air do beat in their heads at a cup of
cold Sack and sugar by the fire.

And that is was not our tenderness, but the very extremity of the cold it self,
that caused this sensibleness in us, may the rather appear in that the natural
inhabitants of the place (with whom we had for along season familiar
intercourse, as is to be related) who had never been acquainted with such heat;
to whom the country, air, and climate was proper; and in whom custom of cold
was as it were a second nature: yet used to come shivering to us in their warm
furs, crowding close together body to body, to receive h^^t one of another; and
shelting themselves under a (...) bank if it were possible and as often as they
could, laboring to shroud themselves under our garments also, to keep them
warm. Besides how (...) and deformed appeared the face of the (...) trees
without leaves, and the ground (...) those months of June and July. The (...)
not daring (as we had great experience to (...) so much as once to arise from
their (...) laid, till it with all the rest be (...) strength of nature* able
to help it self (...) has nature afforded them, that the heat of their own
bodies being exceeding great, it perfecteth the creature with greater
expedition, and in shorter time then is to be found in many other places. As
for the causes of this extremity they seem not to be so deeply hidden, but that
they may at least in part be guessed at: the chief^^ of which we conceive to be
the large spreading of the Asian and American continent, which (somewhat
northward of these parts) if they be not fully joined, yet seem they to come
very near one to the other. From whose high and snow-covered mountains, the
north and northwest winds (the constant visitants of those coasts) send abroad
their frozen nimphs, to the infecting of the whole air with this insufferable
sharpnes: not permitting the Sun, no not in the pride of his heat, to dissolve
that congealed matter and snow, which they have breathed out so nigh the Sun,
and so many degrees distant from themselves. And that the north and north-west
winds are here constant in June and July, as the north wind alone is in August
and September; we not only found it by our own experience, but were fully
confirmed in the opinion there of, by the continued observations of the
Spaniards. Hence comes the general squalidness and barranness of the country;
hence comes it, that in the midst of their summer, the snow hardly departs
even from their very doors; but is never taken away from their hills at all;
hence comes those thick mists and most stinking foggs, which increase so much
the more, by how much higher the pole is raised: wherein a blind pilot is as
good as the best director of a course. For the Sun striving to perform his
natural office, in elevating the vapors out of these inferior bodies; draws
necessarily abundance of moisture out of the sea: but the nipping cold (from
the former causes) meeting and opposing the Suns endeavors, forces him to give
over his work imperfect: and instead of higher elevation, to leave in the
lowest region, wandering upon the face of the earth and waters, as it were a
second sea: through which its own beams cannot possibly pierce, unless
sometimes when the sudden violence of the winds does help to scatter and
break through it; which thing happens very seldom, and when it happens, is
of no continuance. Some of our mariners in this voyage had formerly been at
Wardhouse, in 72 degrees. of north lat. who yet affirmed, that they felt no such
niping cold there in the end of summer, when they departed thence, as they did
here in those hottest months of June and July. And also from these reasons we
conjecture; that either there is no passage at all through these northern
coasts (which is most likely) or if there be, that yet it is unna^igable. Add
hereunto, that though we searched the coast diligently, even unto the 48. degrees.
yet found we not the land, to trend so much as one point in any place toward
the East, but rather running on continually northwest, as if it went directly
to meet with Asia: and even in that height when we had a frank wind to have
carried us through, had there been a passage, yet we had a smooth and calm sea,
with ordinary flowing and reflowing, which could not have been, had there been
a Frete* of which we rather infallibly concluded then conjectured, that there
was none. But to return. June 18.


The next day after our coming to anchor in the aforesaid harbor, the people of
the country showed themselves; sending off a man with great expedition to us in
a canow. Who being yet but a little from the shore, and a great way from our
ship, spoke to us continually as he came rowing on. And at last at a reasonable
distance staying himself, he began more solemnly a long and tedious oration,
after his manner: using in the delivery thereof, many gestures and signs;
moving his hands, turning his head and body many ways; and after his oration
ended, with great show of reverence and submission, returned back to shore
again. He shortly came again the second time in like manner, and so the third
time* when he brought with him (as a present from the rest) a bunch of
Feathers, much like the Feathers of a black crow, very neatly and artificially
gathered upon a string, and drawn together into a round bundle, being very
clean and finely cut, and bearing ^n length an equal proportion one with
another; a special cognizance (as we afterward observed) which they that
guard their Kings person, wear on their heads. With this also he brought a
little basket made of rushes, and filled with an herb which they called Tabah.
Both which being tied to a short rod, he cast into a boat. Our general
intended to have recompensed him immediately with many good things he would
have bestowed on him: but entering into the boat to deliver the same, he could
not be drawn to receive them by any means: save one hat, which being cast into
the water out of the ship, he took up (refusing utterly to meddle with any
other thing, though it were upon a board put off unto him) and so presently
made his return. After which time, our boat could row no way, but wondering at
us as at gods, they would follow the same with admiration.

I^^^. 21.
The 3. day following, viz. the 21, our ship having received a leake at sea, was
brought to anchor near the shore, that her goods being landed, she might be
repaired: but for that we were to prevent any danger that might chance against
our safety* our general first of all landed his men, with all necessary
provision to build tents and make a fort for the defense of our selves and
goods: and that we might under the shelter of it* with more safety (whatever
should befall, end our business; which when the people of the country perceived
us doing, as men set on fire to war, in defense of their country, in great have
and companies, with such weapons as they had, they came down unto us, yet with
no hostile meaning, or intent to hurt us: standing when they drew near, as men
ravished in their minds, with the sight of such things as they never had seen,
or heard off before that time: their errand being rather with submission and
fear to worship us as gods, then to have any war with us as with mortal men.
Which thing as it did partly show it self at that instant, so did it more and
more manifest it self afterward, during the whole time of our abode amonst
them. At this time, being willed by signs to lay from them there bows and
arrows, they did as they were directed and so did all the rest, as they came
more and more by companies unto them, growing in a little while, to a great
number both of men and women.

To the intent therefore, that this peace which they themselves so willingly
sought, might without any cause of the breach thereof, on our part given to be
continued; and that we might with more safety and expedition, end our
businesses in quiet; our General with all his company, used all means
possibly, gently to entreat them, bestowing upon each of them liberally, good
and necessary things to cover their nakedness, withal, signifying unto them,
we were no gods but men, and had need of such things to cover our own shame;
teaching them to use them to the same ends: for which cause also we did eat
and drink in their presence, giving them to understand. that without that we
could not live, and therefore were but men as well as they.

Notwithstanding nothing could persuade them, nor remove that opinion which
they had conceived of us, that we should be gods.

In recompense of those things which they had received of us, as shirts, linen
cloth, etc. they bestowed upon our general, and diverse of our company, diverse
things, as Feathers, Cawls of network, the quivers of their arrows made of
Fawns-skins, and the very skins of beasts that their women wore upon their
bodies. Having thus had their fill of this times visiting and beholding of us,
they departed with joy to their houses, which houses are dug round within
the earth, and have from the uppermost brims of the circle, clefts of wood set
up, and joined close together at the top, like our spires on the steeple of a
church: which being covered with earth, suffer no water to enter, and are very
warm, the door in the most part of them, performs the office also of a chimney
to let out the smoke: its made in bigness and fashion, like to an ordinary
scuttle in a ship, and standing slopewise: their beds are the hard ground, only
with rushes strewed upon it, and lying round about the house, have their fire
in the midst, which by reason that the house is but low vaulted, round and
close, gives a mavelous reflection to their bodies to heat the same.

Their men for the most part go naked, the women take a kind of bulrushes, and
kembing it after the manner of hemp, make themselves thereof a loose garment,
which being knit about their middles, hangs down about their hips, and so
affords to them a covering of that which nature teaches should be hidden* about
their shoulders they wear also the sikn of a dear, with the hair upon it.
They are very obedient to their husbands, and exceeding ready in all services:
yet of themselves offering to do nothing, without the consents, or being called
of the men.

As soon as they were returned to their houses, they began amonst themselves a
kind of most lamentable weeping and crying out; which they continued also a
great while together, in such sort, that in the place where they left us (being
near about 3. quarters or an English mile distant from them) we very plainly,
with wonder and admiration did hear the same: the women especially, extending
their voices, in a most miserable and doleful manner of shreeking.

Notwithstanding this humble manner of presenting themselves, and awful
demeanor used toward us, we thought it no wisdom too far to trust them (our
experience of former Infidels dealing with us before, made us careful to
provide against an alteration of their affections, or breach of peace if it
should happen) and therefore with all expedition we set up our tents, and
entrenched our selves with walls of stone: that so being fortified within our
selves, we might be able to keep off the enemy) if they should so prove) from
coming amonst us without our good wills: this being quickly finished we went
the more cheerfully and securely afterward, about our other business.

Against the end of two days (during which time they had not again been with
us (there was gathered together a great assembly of men, women, and children
(invited by the report of them which first saw us, who as it seems, had in that
time, of purpose dispersed themselves into the country, to make known the
news) who came now the second time unto us, bringing with thrm as before had
been done, Feathers, and bags of Tobal^ for presents, or rather indeed for
sacrifices, upon this persuasion that we were gods.

When they came to the top of the hill, at the bottom whereof we had built our
fort, they made a stand; where one (appointed as their chief speaker) wearied
both us his hearers, and himself too, with a long and tedious oration:
delivered with strange and violent gestures, his voice being extended to the
uttermost strength of nature, and his words fall so thick one in the neck of
another, that he could hardly fetch his breath again: as soon as he had
concluded, all the rest, with a reverend bowing of their bodies (in a dreaming
manner, and long producing of the same) cried oh: thereby giving their
consents, that all was very true which he had spoken, and that they had uttered
their mind by mouth unto us: which done, the men laying down their bows upon
the hill, and leaving their women and children behind them, came down with
their presents; in such sort, as if they had appeared before a God indeed:
thinking themselves happy, that they might have access unto our general, but
much more happy, when thew say that he would receive at their hands, those
things which they so willingly had presented: and no doubt, the thought
themselves nearest unto God, when they sat or stood next to him: in the mean
time the women, as if they had been desperate, used unnatural violence against
themselves crying and shreeking pit^ously, tearing their flesh with their
nails from their che^k, in a monstrous manner, the blood streaming down along
their breasts, besides spoiling the upper parts of their bodies, of those single
coverings they formerly had, and holding their hands above their heads, that
they might not rescue their breasts from harm, 1578.
they would with fury cast themselves upon the ground, never respecting
whether it were clean or soft, but dashed themselves in this manner on hard
stones, knobby hillocks, stocks of wood, pricking bushes, or what ever else lay
in their way, itterating the same course again and again: yea women great with
child, some nine or ten times each, and others holding out till 15. or 16.
times (till their strength failed them) exercised this cruelty against
themselves: a thing more grievous for us to see, or suffer, could we have holpt
it, then trouble to them (as it seemed) to do it.

This bloody sacrifice (against our wills) being thus performed, our general
with his company in the presence of those strangers fell to prayers: and by
signs in lifting up our eyes and hands to heaven, signified unto them, that
that God whom we did serve, and whom they ought to worship, was above:
beseeching God if it were his good pleasure to open by some means their blinded
eyes; that they might in due time be called to the knowledge of him the true
and everliving God, and of Jesus Christ whom he has sent, the salvation of the
Gentiles. In the time of which prayers, singing of psalms, and reading of
certain chapters in the Bible, they sat very attentively; and observing the
end of every pause, with one voice still cried, oh, greatly rejoicing in our
exercises. Yea they took such pleasure in our singing of psalms, that
whenever they resorted to us, their first request was commonly this, Gnaah,
by which they entreated that we should sing.

Our general having now bestowed upon them diverse things, at their departure
they restored them again, none carrying with him any thing of whatsoever he had
received, thinking themselves sufficiently enriched and happy, that they had
found so free access to see us.

Against the end of three days more (the news having the while spread it self
farther, and as it seemed a great way up into the country) were assembled the
greatest number of people, which we could reasonably imagine, to dwell within
any convenient distance round about. Amongst the rest, the King himself, a man
of a goodly stature and comely personage, attended with his guard, of about
100. tall and warlike men, this day. viz. June 26. came down to to see us.

Before his coming, were sent twe Ambassadors or messengers, to our general,
to signify that their Hioh, June 26.
that is their K. was coming and at hand. They in the delivery of their
message, the one spoke with a soft and low voice, prompting his fellow: the
other pronounced the same word by word after him, with a voice more audible:
continuing their proclimation (for such it was) about half an hour. Which
being ended, they by their signs made request to our General, to send something
by their hands to their Hioh or King, as a token that his coming might be in
peace. Our general willingly satisfied their desire; and they glad men, made
speedy return to their hioh. Neither was it long before their K (making as
princely a show as possibly he could) with all his train came forward.

In their coming forwards they cried continually after a singing manner, with a
lusty courage. And as they drew nearer and nearer toward us, so did they more
and more strive to behave themselves with a certain comeliness and gravity in
all their actions.

In the forefront came a man of a large body and goodly aspect, bearing the
Septer or royal mace (made of a certain kind of black wood, and in length
about a yard and a half) before the King. Whereupon hanged two crowns, a
bigger and a less, with three chains of a mavellous length, and often doubled;
besides a bag of the herb Tabah. The crowns were made of knitwork, wrought upon
most curiously with Feathers of diverse colors, very artificial placed, and of
a formal fashion, The chains seemed of a bony substance; every kind or part
thereof being very little, thin, most finely burnished, with a hole pierced
through the midst. The number of links going to make one chain, is in a
manner infinite: but of such estimation it is amongst them, that few be the
persons that are admitted to wear the same: and even they to whom its lawful
to use them, yet are stinted what number they shall use; as some ten, some
twelve, some 20. and as they exceed in number of chains, so are they thereby
known to be the more honorable personages.

Next unto him that bare this Scepter, was the King himself with his guard
about him: his attire upon his head was a cawl of knitwork, wrought upon
somewhat like the crown, but differing much both in fashion and perfectness of
work, upon his shoulders he had on a coat of the skins of conies, reaching to
his wast: his guard also had each coats of the same shape, but of other skins,
some having cawls likewise such with feathers, or covered over with a certain
down, which grows up in the country upon an herb much like our lectruce;
which exceeds any other down in the world for finenesse, and being laid upon
their cawls by no winds can be removed: of such estimation is this herb amonst
them, that the down thereof is not lawful to be worn, but of such persons as
are about the king (to whom also it is permitted to wear a plume of Feathers
on their heads in sign of honor) and the see^s are not used but only in
sacrifice to their gods. After these in their order, did follow the naked sort
of common people; whose hair being long, was gathered into a bunch behind, in
which stuck plumes of Feathes, but in the forepart only single Feathers like
horn, ever one pleasing himself in his own device.

This one thing was observed to be general amonst them all, that every one had
his face painted, some with white, some with black, and some with other colors,
every man also bringing in his hand one thing or other for a present: their
train or last part of their company consisted of women and children, each woman
bearing against her breast a round basket or two, having with them diverse
things, as bags of Tabah, a root which they call Petah, whereof they make a
kind of meal, and either beak it into bread, or eat it raw; broyled fishes
like a pilchard; the seeed and down before named, with such like.

Their baskets were made in fashion like a deep boale, and though the matter
were rushes, or such other kind of stuff, yet was it so cunningly handled, that
the most part of them would hold water; about the brims they were hanged with
pieces of the shells of pearls, and in some places with two or three links at a
place, of the chains forenamed: thereby signifying that they were vessels
wholly dedicated to the ontly use of the gods they worshipped: and besides this,
they were wrought upon with the matted down of red Feathers, distinguished into
diverse works and forms.

In the mean time our General having assembled his men together (as
forecasting the danger, and worst that might fall out) prepared himself to
stand upon sure ground, that we might at all times be ready in our own defense,
if any thing should chance otherwise then was looked for or expected.

Wherefore every man being in a warlike readiness, he marched within his fenced
place, making against their approach a most warlike show (as he did also at all
other times of their resort) whereby if they had been desperate enemies, they
could not have chosen, but have conceived error and fear, with discouragement
to attempt any thing against us, in beholding of the same.

When they were come somewhat near unto us, trooping together, they gave us a
common or a general salutation: observing in the mean time a general silence.
Whereupon he who bare the Scepter before the king, being prompted by another
whom the King assigned to that office, pronounced with an audible and manly
voice, what the other spoke to him in secret: continuing, whether it were his
oration or proclamation, at the least half an hour. At the close whereof,
there was a common Amen, in sign of approbation given by every person: and the
King himself with the whole number of men and women, the little children only
remaining behind, came further down the hill, and as they came set themselves
again in their former order*

And being now come to the foot of the hill and near our fort, the
Scepter-bearer with a composed countenance and stately carriage, began a song,
and answerable thereunto, observed a kind of measures in a danc: whom the Ki.
with his guard, and every sort of person following, did in like manner sing and
dance, saving only the woman who danced but kept silence. As they daunced they
still came on: and our General perceiving their plain and simple meaning, gave
order that they might freely enter without interruption within our bulwark:
where after they had entered, they yet continued their song, and dance a
reasonable time: their women also following them with their wassaile boales in
their hands, their bodies bruised, their faces torn, their dugs, breast, and
other parts bespotted with blood, trickling down from the wounds, which with
their nails they had made before their coming.

After that they had satisfied or rather tired themselves in this manner, they
made signs to our general to have him sit down; unto whom, both the king and
diverse others made several orations, or rather indeed if we had understood
them, supplications, that he would take the province and kingdom into his
hand, and become their King and patron: making signs that they would resign
unto him their right and title in the whole land, and become his vassals in
themselves and his posterities: which that they might make us indeed believe
that it was their true meaning and intent; the King himself with all the rest
with one consent, and with a great reverence, joyfully singing a song, set the
crown upon his head: enriched his neck with all their chains* and offering unto
him many other things honored him by the name of Hyoh. Adding thereunto (as it
might seem) a song and a dance of triumph: because they were not only visited
of gods (for so they still judged us to be) but the great and chief god was now
become their god, their king and patron, and themselves were become the only
happy and blessed people in all the world.

These things being so freely offered, our General thought not meet to reject
or refuse the same: both for that we would not give them any cause of mistrust,
or disliking of him (that being the only place, wherein at this present we were
of necessity enforced to seek relief of many things) and chiefly, for that he
knew not to what good end God had brought this to pass, or what honor or
profit it might bring to our country in time to come.

Wherefore in the name and to the use of her most excellent Majesty, he took
the Scepter, Crown and dignity of the said country into his hand: wishing
nothing more then that it had layen so fitly for her Majesty to enjoy, as it
was now her proper own, and that the riches and treasure thereof (where with in
the up-land countries i^ abounds) might with as great convenience be
transported, to the enriching of her kingdom here at home, as it is in plenty
to be attained there: and especially, that so tractable and loving a people, as
they showed themselves to be, might have means to have manifested their most
willing obedience the more under her, and by her means, as a mother and nurse
of the Church of Christ, might by the preaching of the gospel be brought to the
right knowledge, and obedience of the true and ever living God.

The ceremonies of this resigning, and receiving of the kingdom, being thus
performed, and the common sort but of men and women, leaving the king and his
guard about him, with our general, dispersed themselves among our people,
taking a diligent view or survey of every man; and finding such as pleased
their fancies (which commonly were the youngest of us) they presently enclosing
them about, offered their sacrifices unto them, crying out with lamentable
shreeks and moanes, weeping and scratching, and tearing their very flesh off
their faces with their nails, neither were it the woman alone which did this,
but even old men, roaring, and crying out, were as violent as the women were.

We groaned in spirit to see the power of Satan so far prevail, in seducing
these so harmless souls, and labored by all means, both by showing our great
dislike, and when that served not, by violent withholding of their hands from
that madness, directing them (by our eyes and hands lift up toward heaven) to
the living God whom they ought to serve: but so mad were they upon their
Idolatry, that forcible withholding them would not prevail (for as soon as
they could get liberty to their hands again, they would be as violent as they
were before) till such time, as they whom they worshipped, were conveyed from
them into the tents, whom yet as men besides themselves, they would with fury
and outrage seek to have again.

After that time had a little qualified their madness, they then began to show
and make known unto us their griefs and diseases which they carried about them,
some of them having old aches, some shrunk sinews, some old sores and cankred
ulcers, some wounds more lately received, and the like, in most lamentable
manner craving help and cure thereof from us: making signs, that if we did but
blow upon their griefs, or but touched the diseased places, they would be whole.

Their griefs we could not but take pity on them, and to our own desire to
help them: but that (if it pleased God to open their eyes) they might
understand we were but men and no gods, we used ordinary means, as lotions,
emplaisters, and unguents most fitly (as far as our skils could guess)
agreeing to the natures of their griefs, beseeching God, if it made for his
glory, to give cure to their diseases by these means. The like we did from time
to time as they resorted to us.

Few were the days, wherein they were absent from us, during the whole time of
our abode in that place: and ordinarily every third day, they brought their
sacrifices, till such time, as they certainly understood our meaning, that we
took no pleasure, but were displeased with them: whereupon their zeal abated,
and their sacrificing, for a season, to our good liking ceased: notwithstanding
they continued still to make their resort unto us in great abundance, and in
such sort, that they ofttimes forgot, to provide meat for their own
sustenance; so that our general (of whom they made account as of a father) was
feign to perform the the office of a father to them, relieving them with such
victuals as we had provided for our selves, as Muscles, Seals, and such like,
wherein they took exceeding much content; and seeing that their sacrifices were
displeasing to us, yet (hating ingratitude) they sought to recompense us, with
such things as they had, which they willingly enforced upon us, though it were
never so necessary or needful for themselves to keep.

They are a people of a tractable, free, and loving nature, without guile or
treachery; their bows and arrows (their only weapons, and almost all their
wealth) they use use very skilfully, but yet not do any great harm with them,
being by reason of their weakeness, more fit for children then for men, sending
the arrow far off, nor with any great force: and yet are the men commonly so
strong of body, that which 2. or 3. of our men could hardly bear, one of them
would take upon his back, and without grudging carry it easily away, up hill and
down hill an English mile together: they are also exceeding swift in running,
and of long continuance; the use whereof is so familiar with them, that they
seldom go, but for the most part run. One thing we observed in them with
admiration: that if any time, they chanced to see a fish so near the shore
that they might reach the place without swiming, they would seldom, or never
miss to take it.

After that our necessary businesses were well dispatched, our general with his
gentlemen, and many of his company, made a journey up into the land, to see the
manner of their dwelling, and to be the better acquainted with the nature and
commodities of the country: their houses were all such as we have formerly
descrbed, and being many of them in one place, made several villages here and
there. The inland we found to be far different from the shore, a goodly
country and fruitful soil, stored with many blessings fit for the use of man:
infinite was the company of very large and fat Deer, which there we saw by
thousands as we supposed in a herd: besides a multitude of a strange kind of
conies, by far exceeding them in number: their heads and bodies, in which they
resemble other Conies, are but small; his tail like the tail of a Rat,
exceeding long; and his feet like paws of a Want or Moale; under his chin, on
either side, he has a bag, into which he gathers his meat, when he has
filled his belley abroad, that he may with it, either feed his young, or feed
himself, when he lifts not to travail from his burrow: the people eat their
bodies, and make great account of their skins, for their Kings holidayes coat
was made of them.

This country our General named Albion, and that for two causes, the one in
respect of the white banks and cliffes, which lie toward the sea: the other,
that it might have some affinity, even in name also, with our own country,
which was sometime so called.

Before we went from thence, our general caused to be set up a monument of our
being there; as also of her Majesty's, and successors right and title to that
kingdom, namely, a plate of brass, fast nailed to a great and firm post:
whereon is engraven her graces name, and the day and year of our arrival
there, and of the free giving up, of the province and kingdom, both by the
king and people, into her Majesty's hands: together with her highness picture,
and arms in a piece of sixpence ^ntrant English money, showing itself by a hole
made of purpose through the place: underneath was likewise engraven the name of
our General, etc.

The Spaniards never had any dealing, or so much as set a foot in this country:
the utmost of their discourses, reaching only to many degrees Southward of
this place.

And now, as the time of our departure was perceived by them to draw nigh, so
did the sorrows and miseries of this people, seem to themselves to increase
upon them; and the more certain they were of our going away, the more doubtful
they showed themselves, what they might do; so that we might easily judge that
that joy (being exceeding great) wherewith they received us at our first
arrival, was clean drowned in their excessive sorrow for our departing: for
they did not only loose on a sudden all mirth, joy, glad countenance, pleasant
speeches, agility of body, familiar rejoicing one with another, and all
pleasure whotever flesh and blood might be delighted in, but with sighs and
forrowings, with heavy hearts and grieved minds, they powered out woeful
complaints and moanes, with bitter tears and wringing of their hands,
tormenting themselves. And as men refusing all comfort, they only accounted
themselves as castawaies, and those whom the gods were about to forsake: so
that nothing we could say or do, was able to ease them of their so heavy a
burden, or to deliver them from so desperate a strait, as our leaving of them
did seem to them that it would cast them into.

Howbeit seeing they could not still enjoy our presence, they (supposing us to
be gods indeed) thought it their duties to entreat us that being absent, we
would yet be mindful of them, and making signs of their desires, that in time
to come we would see them again, they stole upon us a sacrifice, and set it on
fire ere we were a ware: burning therein a chain and a bunch of feathers. We
labored by all means possible to withhold or withdraw them, but could not
prevail, till at last we fell to prayers and singing of Psalms, whereby they
were allured immediately to forget their folly, and leave their sacrifice
unconsumed, suffering the fire to go out, and imitating us in all our actions;
they fell a lifting up their eyes and hands to heaven as they saw us do.

The 23. of July they took a sorrowful farewell of us, but being loath to
leave us, they presenly ran to the tops of the hills to keep us in their sight
as long as they could, making fires before and behind, and on each side of
them, burning therein (as is to be supposed) sacrifices to our departure.

Not far without this harborough, bid lie certain Islands (we called them the
Islands of Saint James) having on them plentiful and great store of Seals and
birds, with one of which we fell, July 24. July 24.
whereupon we found such provision as might competently serve our turn for a
while: we departed again the day next following, viz. July 25. July 25.
And our General now considering, that the extremity of the cold not only
continued but increased, the Sun being gone father from us, and that the wind
blowing still (as it did at first) from the northwest, out off all of finding a
passage through the northern parts, thought it necessary to loose no time; and
therefore with general consent of all, bent his course directly to run with
the Islands of the Moluccas. And so having nothing in our view but air and
sea, without sight of any land for the space of full 68. days together, we
continued our course through the main Ocean, till September 30. Sept. 30.
following, on which day we fell in kenne of certain Islands, lying about eight
degrees to the Northward of the line.

From these Islands presently upon the discovery of us, came a great number of
canows, having each of them in some four, in some six, in some foureteen or
fifteen men, bringing with them Coquos, fish, Potatoes, and certain fruits to
small purpose.

There canows were made after the fashion, that the canows of all the rest of
the Islands of Moluccas for the most part are: that is, of one tree, hollowed
within with great art and cunning being made so smooth both within and without,
that they bore a glass, as if it were a harness most finely burnished: a prow
and st^rn they had of one fashion, yiedling inward in manner of a semicircle,
of a great height, and hanged full of certain white and gistering shells for
bravery: on each side of their canows, lay out two pieces of Timber about a
yard and halflong, more or less according to the capacity of their boat. At the
ends whereof was fastened crossewise a great cane, the use whereof was to keep
their canows from overthrowing, and that they might be equally born up on each
side.

The people themselves have the nether parts of their ears cut round or
circlewise, hanging down very low upon their cheeks, wherein they hang things
of a reasonable weight: the nails on the fingers of some of them, were at least
an inch long and their teeth as black as pitch; the color whereof they use to
renew by often eating of an herb, with a kind of powder, which in a cane they
carry about them for the same purpose. The first sort and company of those
canows being come to our ship (which then by reason of a scant wind made a
little way) very subtly and against their natures, began in peace to
traffic with us, giving us one thing for another very orderly, intending (as
we perceived, hereby to work a greater mischief to us: entreating us by signs
most earnestly to draw nearer toward the shore, that they might (if possible)
make the easier prey both of the ship and us. But these passing away, and
others continually resorting, we were quickly able to guess at them what they
were: for if they received any thing once into their hands, they would neither
give recompense nor restitution of it, but thought what ever they could finger
to be their own: expecting always with brows of brass to receive more, but
would part with nothing: yea being rejcted for their bad dealing, as those with
whom we would have no more to do* using us so evilly, they could not be
satisfied till they had given the attempt to revenge themselves, because we
would not give them whatsoever they would have for nothing: and having stones
good store in their canows, let fly a many of them against us. It was far from
our Generals meaning to requite their malice by like injury. Yet that they
might know he had power to do them harm (if he had listed) he caused a great
piece to be shot off, not to hurt them but to affright them. Which wrought the
desired effect amongst them, for at the noise thereof; they every own leaped
out of his canow into the water, and diving under the keele of their boats,
stayed them from going any way till our ship was gone a good way from them.
Then they all lightly recovered into their canows* and got them with speed
toward the shore.

Notwithstanding other new companies (but all of the same mind) continually
made resort upon us. And seeing that there was no good to begot by violence
they put on a show of seeming honesty, and offering in show to deal with us
by way of exchange; under that pretense they cunningly fell a filching of what
they could, and one of them pulled a dagger and knives from one of our men's
girdles, and being required to restore it again, he rather used what means he
could to catch at more. Neither could we at all be rid of this ungracious
company, till we made some of them feel some smart as well as terror: and so
we left that place by all passengers to be known hereafter by the name of the
Island of Thieves.

October 3
Till the 3. of October we could not get clear of these consorts, October. 16.
but from thence we continued our course without sight of land till the 16. of
the same month, when we fell with four Islands standing in 7. de. 5. mi. to
the northward of the line. October. 21*
We coasted them till the 21. day, and then anchored and watered upon the
biggest of them called Mindanao. October. 22.
The 22. of October as we past between 2. Islands, about six or eight leagues
south of Mindanao, there came from thence two cannows to have talked with us,
and we would willingly have talked with them, but there arose so much wind that
put us from them to the southwards. October 25. October. 25.
we passeb by the Island named Talao. in 3. degrees. 40. min. we saw to the
Northward of it three or four other Islands, October. 30.
Teda, Selan, Saran, (3. Islands so named to us by an Indian) the middle whereof
stands in 3. degrees. we past the last save one of these, Novem. 1
and 1. day of the following month in like manner, Novem. 3
we past the Isle Suaro, in 1. degrees. 30. mi. and the the 3. of November we came
in sight of the Islands of the Moluccaes as we desired.

These are four high picked Islands, their names, Tirenate, Tidore, Maetchan,
Batchan, all of them very fruitful, and yiedling abundance of Cloves, whereof
we furnished our selves of as much as we desired at very cheap rate. At the
East of them lies a very great Island called Gillola.

We directed our course to have gone to Tidore, but in coasting along a little
Island belonging to the King of Terenate, November. 4. his Deputy or Viceroy with
all expedition came off to our Ship in a Canow, and without any fear or
doubting of our good meaning came presently aboard. Who after some conference
with our General, entreated him by any means to run with Terenate, not with
Tidore, assuring him that his King would be wondrous glad of his coming, and
be ready to do for him what he could, and what our General in reason should
require: For which purpose he himself would that night be with his King to
carry him the news: with whom if he once dealt, he should find, that as he was
a King so his word should stand; whereas if he dealt with the Portugals (who
had the command of Tidore) he should find in them nothing but deceit and
treachery. And besides that if he went to Tidore before he came to Terenate,
then would his King have nothing to do with us, for he held the Portugal as
an Enemy. On these persuasions our General resolved to run with Terenate,
where the next day very early in the morning we came to anchor: And presently,
our General sent a messenger to the King with a velvet cloak for a present and
token that his coming should be in peace: and that he required no other thing
at his hands, but that (his Victuals being spent in so long a Voyage) he might
have supply from him by way of traffic and exchange of Merchandise (whereof he
had store of diverse sorts) of such things as he wanted. Which he thought he
might be the bolder to require at his hands, both for that the thing was
lawful, and that he offered him no prejudice or wrong therein, as also because
he was entreated ^o repair to that place by his Viceroy at Mutir, who assured
him of necessary provision in such manner as now he required the same.

Before this, the Viceroy according to his promise had been with the King,
signifying unto him what a mighty Prince and Kingdom we belonged unto, what
good things the King might receive from us, not only now; but for hereafter by
way of traffic; yea what honor and benefit it might be to him, to be in
league and friendship with so noble and famous a Prince as we served: And
farther what a discouragement it would be to the Portugals his Enemies to hear
and see it. In hearing whereof the King was so presently moved to the well
liking of the matter, that before our Messenger could come half the way, he had
sent the Viceroy with diverse others of his Nobles and Counselors to our
General, with special message that he should not only have what things he
needed, or would require with peace and friendship, but that he would willingly
entertain amity with so famous and renowned a Prince as was ours, and that if
it seemed good in her eyes to accept of it, he would sequester the commodities
and traffic of his whole Island from others, especially from his enemies the
Portugals (from whom he had nothing but by the Sword) and reserve it to the
intercourse of our Nation, if we would embrace it: In token whereof he had now
sent to our General his Signet, and would within short time after, come in his
own person with his brethren and Nobles with Boats or Canows into our Ship,
and be a means of bringing her into a safer Harbor.

While they were delivering their message to us, our Messenger was come unto
the Court, who being met by the way by certain noble personages, was with
great solemnity conveyed into the Kings presence; at whose hands he was most
friendly and graciously entertained, and having delivered his errand together
with his present unto the King, the King seemed to him to judge himself
blameworthy that he had not sooner hasted in person to present himself to our
General, who came so far and from so great a Prince; And presently with all
expedition, he made ready himself with the chiefest of all his States and
Counselors to make repair unto us.

The manner of his coming as it was Princely, so truly it seemed to us very
strange and marvelous; serving at the present not so much to set out his own
royal and kingly state (which was great) as to do honor to her Highness to
whom we belonged wherein how willingly he employed himself, the Sequel
will make manifest.

First therefore, before his coming, did he send off three great and large
Canovves, in each whereof, were certain of the greatest personaegs that were
about him, attired all of them in white Lavvn, or cloth of Calecut, having
over their heads, from one end of the Canovv to the other, a covering of thin
and fine mats, born up by a frame made of Reeds, under which every man sat in
order according to his dignity; the hoary heads of many of them, set forth the
greater reverence due to their persons, and manifestly showed, that the King
used the advice of a grave and prudent Counsel in his affairs. Besides these,
were diverse others, young and comely men, a great number attired in white as
were the other, but with manifest differences: having their places also under
the same covering, but in inferior order, as their calling required.

The rest of the men were Soldiers, who stood in comely order round about on
both sides; on the outside of whom, again did sit the rowers in certain
galleries, which being three on each side all along the Canow, did lie off
from the side thereof, some three or four Yards, one being orderly builded lower
then the other: in every of which Galleries was an equal number of Ba^cks,
vvhereon did sit the Rowers, about the number of fourscore in one Canow: In the
forepart of each Canow, sat two men, the one holding a Tabret, the other a
piece of Brass, whereon they both at once stroke; and observing a due time and
reasonable space between each stroke, by the sound thereof, directed the
Rowers to keep their stroke with their Oars; as on the contrary, the Rowers
ending their stroke with a song, gave warning to the others to strike again;
and so continued they their way with marvelous swiftness: neither were their
Canows naked or unfurnished of warlike munition, they had each of them, at
least one small cast piece of about a yard in length mounted upon a stock,
which was set upright; besides every man except the Rowers, had his Sword,
Dagger, and Target, and some of them some other weapons, as Lances, Callivers,
Bows, Arrows, and many Darts.

These Canowes coming near our Ship in order, rowed round about us one after
another; and the men as they pass by us, did us a kind of homage with great
solemnity, the greatest Personages beginning first, with reverend countenance
and behavior to bow their bodies even to the ground: which done, they put our
own messenger aboard us again, and signified to us that their King (who
himself was coming) had sent them before him to conduct our Ship into a
better road, desiring a Halfer to be given them forth, that they might employ
their service as their King commanded, in towing our Ship therewith to the
place assigned.

The King himself was not far behind, but he also with six grave and ancient
Fathers in his Canow approaching, did at once together with them, yield us a
reverend kind of obeisance in far more humble manner, then was to be expected;
he was of a tall stature, very corpulent and well set together, of a very
Princely and gracious countenance; his respect amongst his own was such, that
neither his Viceroy of Mutir aforenamed, nor any other of his Counselors,
durst speak unto him but upon their knees, not rising again till they were
licenced.

Whose coming as it was to our General, no small cause of good liking, so was
he received in the best manner we could, answerable unto his state: our
Ordnance thundered, which we mixed with great store of small shot, among which
sounding our trumpets and other instruments of music, both of still and loud
noise, wherewith he was so much delighted, that requesting our music to come
into the Boat, he joined his Canow to the same, and was towed at least a whole
hour together, with the boat at the stern of our Ship: Besides this our
General sent him such presents, as he thought, might both requite his
courtesy already received, and work a farther confirmation of that good
liking and friendship already begun.

The King being thus in musical paradise, and enjoying that wherewith he was
so highly pleased; his brother named Moro with no less bravery, then any of
the rest, accompanied also with a great number of gallant followers, made the
like repair, and gave us like respect; and his homage done he fell a stern of
us, till we came to anchor* neither did our General leave his courtesy
unrewarded, but bountifully pleased him also before we parted.

The King as soon as we were come to anchor, craved pardone to be gone, and so
took leave, promising us, that the next day he would come aboard, and in the
mean time would prepare and send such Victuals as were requisite and necessary
for our provision.

Accordingly the same night, and the morrow following, we received what was
there to be had, by way of traffic, to wit, Rice in pretty quantity, Hens,
Sugarcanes, imperfect and liquid Sugar, a fruit which they call Figo (
Magellane calls it a Fig of a span long, but is no other then that which the
Spaniards and Portugals have named Plantanes) Cocoes and a kind of meal* which
they call Sago, made of the tops of certain trees, tasting in the mouth like
sour curdes, but melts away like Sugar; whereof they make a kind of cake
which will keep good at least ten years; of this last we made the greatest
quantity of our provision: for a few Cloves we did also traffic, whereof for
a small matter, we might have had grearer store, then we could well tell where
to bestow: but our Generals care was that the Ship should not be too much
pestered or anoyed therewith.

At the time appointed our General (having set all things in order to receive
him) looked for the Kings return, who failing both in time and promise, sent
his Brother to make his excuse, and to entreat our General to come on shore;
his brother being the while to remain aboard, as a pawn for his safe
restoring: our General could willingly have consented, if the King himself
had not first broke his word the consideration whereof, bred an utter disliking
in the whole company, who by no means would give consent, he should hazard
himself, especial, for that the Kings Brother had uttered certain words, in
secret conference with our General aboard his Cabin, which bred no small
suspicion of ill intent; our General being thus resolved not to go a shore at
that time, reserved the Viceroy for a pledge, and so sent certain of his
Gentlemen to the Court, both to accompany the Kings Brother, and also with
special message to the King himself.

They being come somewhat near unto the Castle, were received by another
Brother of the Kings, and certain others of the greatest States and conducted
with great honor toward the Castle, where being brought into a large and
fair house, they saw gathered together a great multitude of people, by
supposition at least a thousand, the chief whereof were placed round about the
House, according as it seemed to their degrees and calling, the rest remained
without.

The House was in form four square, covered all over with cloth of diverse
colors, not much unlike our usual Pentadoes borne upon a frame of Reeds, the
sides being open from the groundsell to the covering, and furnished with seats
round about: it seems it was there Councell*house and not commonly employed to
any other use.

At the side of this house next unto the Castle was feared the chair of state,
having directly over it, and extending very largly every way, a very fair and
rich Canopy, as the ground also for some ten or twelve paces compass, was
covered with cloth of Arias.

Whilst our Gentlemen attended in this place the coming of the King, which
was about the space of half an hour, they had the better opportunity to
observe these things; as also that before the Kings coming, there were already
set threescore noble grave and ancient personages, all of them reported to be
of the Kings privy Council; at the the nether end of the house were placed a
great company of young men, of comely personage and attire. Without the house
on the right side, stood four ancient comely hoare-headed men, clothed all in
red down to the ground, but attired on their heads not much unlike the Turks;
these they called Romans, or Strangers, who lay as Lidgiers there to keep
continual traffic with this people: there were also two Turks one Italian as
Lidgiers; and last of all one Spaniard, who being freed by the Kings out of the
hands of the Portugals, in the recovering of the Island, served him now in
stead of a Soldier.

The King at last coming from the Castle with 8. or 10. more grave Senators
following him, had a very rich Canopy (adorned in the midst with Embossings
of Gold) borne over him, and was guarded with 12. Lances the points turned
downward: our men (accompanied with Moro the Kings brother) arose to meet him,
and he very graciously did welcome and entertain them.

He was for Person, such as we have before described him, of low voice,
temperate in speech, of Kingly demeanor, and a Moore by Nation. His attire was
after the fashion of the rest of his Country, but far more sumptuous, as his
condition and state required: from the Waste to the ground, was all Cloth of
Gold, and that very rich; his Legs bare, but on his Feet a pair of Shoes of
Cordivant died Red: in the attire of his head, were finely wreathed in diverse
rings of plated Gold, of an inch, or an inch and half in breadth, which made a
fair and princely show, somewhat resembling a crown in form; about his neck
he had a chain of perfect Gold, the linkes very great and one fold double; on
his left hand was a Diamond, an Emerald, a Ruby; and a Turkey, four very fair
and perfect jewels; on his right hand in one Ring, a big and perfect Turkey, and
in another Ring many Diamonds of a smaller size, very artificial set and
couched together.

As thus he sat in his Chair of State, at his right side there stood a Page
with a very costly fan (richly embrodered and beset with Saphires) breating and
gathering the air to refresh the King, the place being very hot, both by
reason of the Sun, and the assembly of so great a multitude. After a while our
gentlemen having delivered their message, and received answer, were licenced to
depart, and were safely conducted back again, by one of the chief of the
Kings Council, who had charge from the King himself to perform the same.

Our Gentlemen observing the Castle as well as they could, could not conceive
it to be a place of any great force two only Canons they there saw, and those
at that present untraversable because unmounted. These with all other furniture
of like sort which they have, they have gotten them from the Portugals, by whom
the Castle it self was also builded, whiles they inhabited that place and
Island. Who seeking to settle a tyrannous government (as in other places so)
over this people, and not contenting themselves with a better estate then they
deserved (except they might (as they thought) make sure work by leaving none
of the royal blood alive, who should make challenge to the Kingdom) cruelly
murdered the King himself (father to him who now reigns) and intended the
like to all his sons. Which cruelty instead of establishing brought such a
shaking on their usurped estate, that they were fain, without covenanting to
carry away Goods, Munition, or any thing else to quit the place and the whole
Island to save their lives.

For the present King with his brethren in revenge of their fathers murder, so
bestirred themselves, that the Portugal was wholly driven from that Island,
and glad that he yet keeps footing in Tidore. These four years this King has
been increasing, and was (as was affirmed) at that present, Lord of an hundred
Islands thereabout; and was even now preparing his forces to hazard a chance
with the Portugals for Tidore it self.

The People are Moors, whose Religion consists much in certain superstitious
observations of new Moons, and certain season^ with a rigid and strickt kind
of fasting. We had experience hereof in the Viceroy and his retinue who lay
aboard us all the time for the most part during our abode in this place: who
(...) their prescribed time, would neither eat not drink, not (...) as a cup
of cold water in the day (so zealous are they in their self devised worship)
but yet in the night would eat three times and that very largely. This
Terenate stands in 27. min. North latitude.

While we rode at anchor in the harbor of Terenate, besides the Natives there
come aboard us another, a goodly Gentleman, very well accompanied with his
Interpreter, to view our Ship, and to confer with our General; he was
apparelled much after our manner most ^eat and Courtlike; his carriage the most
respective, and full of discreet behavior that ever we had seen; He told us
that he was himself but a stranger in those Islands, being a natural of the
Province of Paghia in China; his name, Pausaos of the family of Hombu; of which
family there had 11. reigned in continual succession these two hundred years,
and King Boxog by the death of his elder brother (who died by a fall from his
Horse) the rightful heir of all China, is the twelfth of this race, he is 22.
years of age; his Mother yet living: he has a Wife, and by her one Son: he is
well beloved, and highly honored of all his subjects, and lives in great peace
from any fear of Foreign invasion: but it was not this man's fortune to enjoy
his part of this happiness both of his King and Country, as he most desired.

For being accused of a capital crime whereof (though free) yet he could not
evidently make his Innocence appear, and knowing the peremptory justice of
China, to be irrevocable, if he should expect the sentence of the Judges; he
before hand made suite to his King, that it would please him to commit his
trial to Gods providence and judgment, and to that end to permit him to
travel, on this condition, that if he brought not home some worthy
Intelligence, such as his Majesty had never had before, and were most fit to
be known, and most honorable for China, he should for ever live an Exile, or
else dye for daring to set foot again in his own Country: for he was assured
that the God of Heaven had care of Innocence.

The King granted his suite, and now he had been three years abroad, and at
this present came from Tidore (where he had remained two Months) to see the
English General, of whom he heard such strange things, and from him (if it
pleased God to afford it) to learn some such Intelligence as might make way
for his return into his Country, and therefore he earnestly entreated our
General, to make relation to him of the occasion, way, and manner of his
coming so far from England thither, with the manifold Occurrences that had
happened to him by the way.

Our General gave ample satisfaction to each part of his request; the stranger
harkned with great attention and delight to his discourse, and as he naturally
excelled i^ memory (besides his help of Art to better the same) so he firmly
printed it in his mind, and with great reverence thanked God, who had so
unexpectedly brought him, to the notice of such admirable things. Then fell he
to entreat our General with many most earnest and vehement persuasions, that
he would be content to see his Country before his departure any farther
Westward, that it should be a most pleasant, most honorable, and most pofitabe
thing for him that he should gain hereby the notice, and carry home the
description of one of the most ancient, mightiest and richest Kingdoms in the
world. Hereupon he took occasion to relate the number and greatness of the
Provinces, with the rare Commodities and good things they yielded; the number,
stateliness, and riches of their Cities, with what abundance of Men, Victuals,
Munition, and all manner of necessaries and delightful things they were stored
with: In particular, touching Ordnance and great Guns (the late invention of a
scab shind Friar amongst us in Europe) he related that in Sunuien (by some
called Quinzai) which is the chiefest City of all China, they had brass
Ordnance of all sorts (much easier to be traversed then ours were, and so
perfectly made that they would hi^ a shilling) above two thousand years ago.
With many other worthy things which our Generals own experience (if it would
please him to make trial) would (better then his relation) assure him of. The
brize would shortly serve very fitly to carry him thither and he himself would
accompany him all the way. He accounted himself a happy man, that he had but
seen and spoken with us; the relation of it might perhaps serve him to recover
favor in his Country; but if he could prevail with our General himself to
go thither, he doubted not but it would be a means of his great advancement,
and increase of honor with his King. Notwithstanding our General could not on
any such persuasions be induced, and so the stranger parted sorry, that he
could not prevail in his request, yet exceeding glad of the Intelligence he
had learned.

By the ninth of November having gotten what provision the place could afford
us, we then set sail; Nov. 9.
and considering that our Ship for want of trimming was now grown foul, that
our caske and vessels for water were much decayed; and that diverse other things
stood in need of reparation; our next care was, how we might fall with such a
place where with safety we might a while stay for the redressing of these
inconveniences. The calmnesse of the winds, which are almost continual before
the coming of the brize (which was not yet expected) persuaded us it was the
fittest time that we could take.

With this resolution we sailed along till November 14. Nov. 14.
at what time we arrived at a little Island (to the Southward of Celebes)
standing in 1. degrees. 40. min. toward the pole antarticke; which being without
Inhabitants, gave us the better hope of quiet abode. We anchored, and finding
the place convenient for our purposes (there wanting nothing here which we
stood in need of, but only water which we were feign to fetch from another
Island somewhat farther to the South) made our abode here for six and twenty
whole days together.

The first thing we did, we pitched our Tents and entrenched our selves as
strongly as we could upon the shore, least at any time perhaps we might have
been disturbed by the Inhabitants of the greater Island which lay not far to
the Westward of us; after we had provided thus for our security, we landed our
Goods, and had a Smiths Forge set up, both for the making of some necessary
Shipworke, and for the repairing of some Iron-hooped Caskes, without which they
could not long have served our use: and for that our Smiths Coals were all
spent long before this time; there was order given and followed for the burning
of Charcoale, by which that want might be supplied.

We trimd our Ship, and performed our other businesses to our content. The
place affording us not only all necessaries (which we had not of our own
before) thereunto, but also wonderful refreshing to our wearied bodies, by the
comfortable relief and excellent provision that here we found, whereby of
sickly, weak, and decayed (as many of us seemed to be before our coming
hither we in short space grew all of us to be strong, lusty, and healthful
persons. Besides this, we had rare experience of Gods wonderful wisdom in
many rare and admirable creatures which here we saw.

The whole Island is a through grown wood, the trees for the most part are of
large and high stature, very straight and clean without bows, save only in
the very top. The leaves whereof are not much unlike our Brooms in England:
Among these Trees, night by night did show themselves an infinite swarm of
Firie-seeming worms flying in the air, whose bodies (no bigger then an
ordinary Fly) did make a show, and give such light as if every twig on every
Tree had been a lighted Candle: or as if that place had been the Starry
Sphere. To these we may add the relation of another, almost as strange a
creature, which here we saw, and that was an innumerable multitude of huge Bats
or Reare-mice, equalling or rather exceeding a good Hen in bigness. They fly
with marvelous swiftness, but their flight is very short; and when they light,
they hang only by the bows with their backs downward.

Neither may we without ingratitude (by reason of the special use we made of
them) omit to speak of the huge multitude of a certain kind of Crayfish, of
such a size, that one was sufficient to satisfy four hungry men at a dinner,
being a very good and restorative meat; the special means (as we conceived it)
of ou^ increase of health.

They are as far as we could perceive, utter strangers to the Sea, living
always on the Land, where they work themselves earths, as do the conies, or
rather they dig great and huge caves under the roots of the most huge and
monstrous Trees, where they lodge themselves by companies together. Of the same
sort and kind, we found in other places, about the Island Celebes some that for
want of other refuge, when we came to take them, did clime up into trees to
hide themselves, whether we were enforced to climb after them, if we would have
them, which we would not stick to do rather then to be without them: this
Island we called Crab-Island.

All necessary causes of our staying longer in this place being at last
finished, our General prepared to be in a readiness, to take the first
advantage of the coming of the brize or wind which we expected; and having
the day before, furnished our selves with fresh water from the other Island,
and taken in provision of Wood and the like: December 12. Dec. 12.
we put to Sea directing our course toward the West: the 16. day we had sight
of the Island Celebes or Silebis, but having a bad wind, Dec. 16.
and being entangled among many Islands, encumbered also with many other
difficulties, and some dangers, and at last meeting with a deep Bay, out of
which we could not in three days turn out again, we could not by any means
recover the North of Silebis, or continue on our course farther West, but were
enforced to alter the same toward the South; finding that course also to be
both difficult and very dangerous, by reason of many shoales, which lay far off
here and there among the Islands, insomuch, that in all our passages from
England hitherto, we had never more care to keep our selves a float, and from
sticking on them: thus were we forced to beat up and down with extraordinary
care and circumspection till January 9. Jan. 9.
at which time, we supposed that we had at last attained a free passage, the
land turning evidently in our sight about to Westward, and the Wind being
enlarged followed us as we desired with a reasonable Gale.

When lo on a sudden, when we least suspected no show or suspicion of danger
appearing to us, and we were now sailing onward with full sails, in the
beginning of the first watch of the said day at night, even in a moment our
ship was laid up fast upon a desperate shoal, with no other likelihood in
appearance, but that we with her must there presently perish: there being no
probability how any thing could be saved, or any Person s^^pe alive.

The unexpectedness of so extreme a danger, presently roused us up to look
about us, but the more we looked, the less hope we had of getting clear of it
again, so that nothing now presenting it self to our minds, but the ghastly
appearance of instant death, affording no respite or time pausing, called upon
us to turn our thoughts another way, to renounce the World, to deny our
selves, and to commend our selves into the merciful hands of our most gracious
God; to this purpose we presently fell prostrate, and with joined prayers sent
up unto the throne of grace, humbly be sought Almighty God, to extend his mercy
unto us in his Son Christ Jesus; and so preparing as it were our necks unto the
block, we every minute expected the final stroke to be given unto us.

Notwithstanding that we expected nothing but iminent death, yet (that we might
not seem to tempt God, by leaving any second means unattempted which he
afforded) presently as soon as prayers were ended, our General (exhorting us to
have the especiallest care of the better part, to wit, the Soul, and adding
many comfortable speeches of the joys of that other life, which we now alone
looked for) encouraged us all to bestirre our selves, showing us the way
thereto by his own example; and first of all the Pump being well plied, and the
ship freed of Water, we found our Leakes to be nothing increased, which though
it gave us no hope of deliverance, yet it gave us some hope of respite,
insomuch, as it assured us that the Bulk was sound, which truly we
acknowledged to be an immediate providence of God alone, insomuch, as no
strength of wood and I^on could have possibly born so hard and violent a shock,
as our Ship did, dashing herself under full sail against the Rocks, except
the extraordinary hand of God, had supported the same.

Our next assay was for good ground and anchor-hold, to Seaward of us (whereon
to hale) by which means if by any, our General put us in comfort, that there
was yet left some hope to clear our selves; in his own person, ^e therefore
undertook the charge of sounding, and but even a Boats length from the Ship,
he found that the bottom could not by any length of line be reached unto; so
that the beginnings of hope, which we were willing to have conceived before,
were by this means quite dashed again* yea, our misery seemed to be increased,
for whereas at first we could look for nothing but a present end, that
expectation was now turned, into the awaiting for a lingering death, of the two,
the far more fearful to be chosen; one thing fell out happily for us, that
the most of our men did not conceive this thing, which had they done, they
would in all likelihood have been so much discouraged, that their sorrow would
the more disable them, to have sought the remedy; our General with those few
others, that could judge of the event wisely, diss^mbling the same, and giving
in the meantime cheerful speeches, and good encouragements unto the rest.

For whiles it seemed to be a clear case, that our Ship was so fast moared, that
she could not stir; it necessarily followed, that either we were there to
remain on the place with her; or else leaving her to commit our selves in a
most poor and helpless state to seek some other place of stay and refuge,
the better of which two choices, did carry with it the appearance of worse then
one thousand deaths.

As touching our Ship this was the comfort that she could give us, that she her
self lying there confined already upon the hard and pinching Rocks, did tell
us plain, that she continually expected her speedy dispatch, as soon as the
Sea and winds should come, to be the severe Executioners of that heavy
judgment, by the appointment of the eternal judge already given upon her, who
had committed her there to Adamantine bounds in a most narrow prison, against
their coming for that purpose: so that if we would stay with her, we must
perish with her; or if any by any yet unperceivable means, should chance to be
delivered, his escape must needs be a perpetual misery, it being far better
to have perished together, then with the loss and absence of his friends, to
live in a strange Land: whether a solirary life (the better choice) among wild
Beasts, as a Bird on the Mountains without all comfort, or among the barbarous
people of the Heathen, in intolerable bondage both of body and mind.

And put the case that her day of destruction should be deferred, longer then
either reason could persuade us, or in any likelihood could seem possible (it
being not the power of Earthly things to endure what she had suffered already)
yet could our abode there profit us nothing, but increase our wretchedness,
and enlarge our sorrows, for as her store and Victuals were not much
(sufficient to sustain us only some few days, without hope of having any
increase, no not so much as a cup of cold water) so must it inevitably come to
pass, that we (as children in the Mothers Womb) should be driven even to eat
the flesh from of our own Arms, she being no longer able to sustain us; and
how horrible a thing this would have proved, is easy by any one to be
derceived.

And whither (had we departed from her) should we have received any comfort;
nay the very impossibility of going, appeared to be no less, then those other
before mentioned: our Boat was by no means able at once to carry above 20.
persons with any safety, and we were 58 in all, the nearest Land was six
leagues from us, and the wind from the shore directly bent against us; or
should we have thought of setting some a shore, and after that to have fetched
the rest, there being no place thereabout without Inhabitants, the first that
had landed must first have fallen into the hand of the Enemy, and so the rest
in order, and though perhaps we might escape the Sword, yet would our life have
been worse then death, not alone in respect of our woeful captivity, and bodily
miseries, but most of all in respect of our Christian liberty, being to be
deprived of all public means of serving the true God, and continually
grieved with the horrible impieties and divellish Idolatries of the Heathen.

Our misery being thus manifest, the very consideration whereof must needs have
shaken flesh and blood, if faith in Gods promises had not mightily sustained
us, we past the night with earnest longings that the day would once appear,
the mean time we spent in often prayers and other godly exercises, thereby
comforting our selves, and refreshing our hearts, striving to bring our selves
to an humble submission under the hand of God, and to a referring our selves
wholly to his good will and pleasure.

The day therefore at length appearing, and it being almost full Sea about that
time, after we had given thanks to God for his forbearing of us hitherto, and
had with tears called upon him to bless our labors; we again renewed our
travel, to see if we could now possibly find any anchor-hold, which we had
formerly sought in vain. But this second attempt proved as fruitless as the
former, and left us nothing to trust to, but prayers and tears seeing it
appeared impossible that ever the forecast, council, policy, or power of man
could ever effect the delivery of our Ship, except the Lord only miraculously
should do the same.

It was therefore presently motioned, and by general voice determined to
commend our case to God alone, leaving our selves wholly in his hand; to spill
or save us as seem best to his gracious wisdom. And that our faith might be
the better strengthened, and the comfortable apprehension of Gods mercy in
Christ be more clearly felt; we had a Sermon, and the Sacrament of the body and
blood of our Savior celebrated.

After this sweet repast was thus received, and other holy exercises adjoined
were ended* lest we should seem guilty in any respect for using all lawful
means we could not invent; we fell to one other practice yet unassayed, to wit,
to unloading of our Ship by casting some of her goods into the Sea; which thing
as it was attempted most willingly, so was it dispatched in very short time. So
that even those things which we before this time nor any other in our case
could be without, did now seem as things only worthy to be despised; yea, we
were herein so forward, that neither our munition for defense, nor the very
meal for sustentation of our lives could find favor with us, but every thing
as it first came to hand went overboard, assuring our selves of this, that if
it pleased God once to deliver us out of that most desperate strait wherein we
were, he would fight for us against our Enemies, neither would he suffer us to
perish for want of bread. But when all was done, it was not any of our
endeavors, but Gods only hand that wrought our delivery; 'twas he alone that
brought us even under the very stroke of death; it was he alone that said unto
us, Return again ye sons of men; 'twas he alone that set us at liberty again,
that made us safe and free, after that we had remained in the former miserable
condition, the full space of twenty hours, to his glorious name be the
everlasting praise.

The manner of our delivery (for the relation of it will especially be
expected) was only this. The place whereon we sat so fast was a fi^me Rock in
a cleft, whereof it was we stuck on the Larboardside, at low Water there was
not above six foot depth in all on the Starboard, within little distance as you
have heard no bottom to be found, the Brize during the whole time that we thus
were stayed, blew somewhat stiff directly against our broad side, and so
perforce kept the Ship upright: It pleased God in the beginning of the tide,
while the water was yet almost at lowest, to slack the stiffnesse of the Wind;
and now our Ship who required thirteen foot water to make her fleet, and had
not at that time on the one side above seven at most, wanting her prop on the
other side, which had too long already kept her up, fell a heeling toward the
deep Water, and by that means freed her Keele and made us glad men.

This shoale is at least three or four leagues in length, it lies in two degrees.
lacking three or four minutes South latitude. The day of this deliverance was
the tenth of January. Jan. 10


Of all the dangers that in our whole Voyage we met with, this was the
greatest, but it was not the last as may appear by what ensues. Neither could
we indeed for a long season free our selves from the continual care and fear
of them; nor could we ever come to any convenient anchoring, but were
continually for the most part tossed amongst the many Islands and shoales (which
lie in infinite number round about on the South parts of Celebes) till the
eighth day of the following Month.

Jan. 12. Jan. 12.
being not able to bear our sails by reason of the tempest and fearing of the
dangers, we let fall our anchors upon a shoal in 3. degrees. 30. min. Ian. 14. Jan.
14.
we were gotten a little farther South, whereat an Island in 4. degrees. 6 min. we
again cast anchor and spent a day in watering and wooding. After thi^ we met
with foul weather, Westerly winds, and dangerous shoales for many days
together; insomuch, that we were utterly weary of this coast of Sillebis, and
thought best to bear with Timor. The Southermost cape of Sillebis stands in 5.
degrees. that side the line.

But of this coast of Sillebis we could not so easily clear our selves. The 20.
of Janu. we were forced to run with a small Island not far from thence; Jan. 20.
where having sent our Boat a good distance from us to search out a place where
we might anchor: we were suddenly environed with no small extremities, for
there arose a most violent, yea an intolerable flaw ^^d storm out of the
Southwest against us, making us (who were on a Lee shore amongst most dangerous
and hidden shoales) to fear extremely not only the loss of our Bo^t and Men,
but the present loss of our selves, our Ship and good^, or the casting of
those men whom God should spare into the hands of Infidels. Which misery could
not by any Power or Industry of ours have been avoided, if the merciful
goodness of God had not (by staying the outrageous extremities wherewith we
were set upon) wrought our present delivery, by whose unspeakable mercy our men
and Boat also were unexpected, yet safely, restored unto us.

We gat off from this place as well as we could, and continued on our course
till the 26. day, when the wind took us, very strong against us, Jan. 26.
West and West Southwest, so as that we could bear no more sail, till the end
of that Month was full expired.

February 1. Feb. 1.
we saw very high land, and as it seemed well inhabited, we would feign have
borne with it to have got some succor, but the weather was so ill, that we
could find no Harbor, and we were very fearful of adventuring our selves too
far, amongst the many dangers which were near the shore. The third day also
we saw a little Island, but being unable to bear any sail, (...).
but only to lie at Hull, we were by the storm carried away, and could not
fetch it. February 6. Feb. 6.
we saw five Islands, one of them toward the East, and four toward the West
of us, one bigger then another, at the biggest of which we cast anchor, and the
next day watered and wooded.

After we had gone hence on February 8. Feb. 8.
we descried two Canowes, who having descried us as it seems before, came
willingly unto us, and talked with us, alluring and conducting us to their
Town not far off, named Barativa, it stands in 7. degrees. 13. min. South the line.

The People are Gentiles of handsome body, and comely stature, of civil
demeanor, very just in dealing, and courteous to strangers, of all which we
had evident proof, they showing themselves most glad of our coming and
cheerfully ready to relieve our wants, with whatsoever their Country could
afford. The men go all naked save their heads and secret parts, every one
having one thing or other hanging at his ears. Their women are covered from
the middle to the foot wearing upon their naked arms Bracelets, and that in no
small number, some having ^i^e at least upon each arm, made for the most part
of horn or brass, whereof the lightest (by our estimation) would weigh two
ounces*

With this People linen cloth (whereof they make roles for their heads and
girdles to wear about their loins) is the best Merchandise and of greatest
estimation. They are also much delighted with Margaretas (which in their
language they call Saleta) and such other like trifles.

Their Island is both rich and fruitful, rich in Gold, Silver, Copper, Tin,
Sulpher, etc. neither are they only expert to try those metals, but very
skillful also in working of them artificially, into diverse Forms and Shapes, as
pleases them best. Their fruits are diverse likewise and plentiful, as
Nutmegs, Ginger, long-Pepper, Limons, Cucumbers, Cocoes, Figoes, Sagu, with
diverse other sorts, whereof we had one in reasonable quantity, in bigness
form and husk, much like a bay-berry, hard in substance, but pleasant in
taste, which being sod becomes soft, and is a most profitable and nourishing
meat; of each of these we received of them, whatsoever we desired for our need;
insomuch, that such was Gods gracious goodness to us) the old Proverb was
verified with us, After a storm comes a calm, after war peace, after
scarcity follows plenty; so that in all our Voyage ( Terenate only excepted)
from our departure out of our own Country hitherto, we found not any where
greater comfort and refreshing, then we did it this time in this place, in
refreshing and furnishing our selves; here we spent two days, and departed
hence February 10. Feb. 10.


When we were come into the height of 8. degrees. 4. min. Feb. 12. Feb. 12.
in the morning we espied a green Island to the Southward; not long after, two
other Islands on the same side, and a great one more toward the North; they
seemed all to be well inhabited, but we had neither need nor desire to go to
visit them, and so we past by them. Feb. 14.
The 14. day we saw some other reasonable big Islands, and February 16. Feb. 16.
we past between four or five big Islands more which lay in the height 9.
degrees. 40. min.

The 18. we cast anchor under a little Island, whence we departed again the
day following; we wooded here, Feb. 18*19
but other relief except two Turtles we received none.

The 22. day we lost sight of three Islands on our Starboard side which lay in
ten degrees. and some odd minutes. Feb. 22.


After this, we past on to the Westward without stay or any thing to be taken
notice of, Mar. 9.
till the ninth of March when in the morning we espied land, some part thereof
very high in 8. d. 20. m. South latitude; here we anchored that night, and the
next day weighed again, Mar. 10.
and bearing farther North, and nearer the shore we came to anchor the second
time.

The eleventh of March we first took in water, and after sent our Boat again
to shore, where we had Traffic with the people of the Country; Mar. 11. Mar.
12.
whereupon the same day, we brought our Ship more near the Town; and having
settled our selves there that night, the next day our General sent his man a
shore, to preset the King with certain Cloth both Linen and Woollen, besides
some Silks, which he gladly and thankfully received, and rerurned Rice,
Cocoes, Hens, and other Victuals in way of recompense. This Island we found
to be the Island Java the middle whereof stands in 7. degrees. and 30. min. beyond
the Equator.

Mar. 13.
The 13, of March our General himself with many of his gentlemen, and others
went to shore, and presented the King (of whom he was joyfully and lovingly
received) with his music, and showed him the manner of our use of Arms, by
training his men with their Pikes and other weapons, which they had before him,
for the present we were entertained as we desired, and at last dismissed with a
promise of more Victuals to be shortly sent us.

In this Island there is one chief, but many under-governors or petty kings,
whom they call Raias, who live in great familiarity and friendship one with
another. The 14. day we received Victuals from two of them, Mar. 14. Mar. 15.
and the day after that, to wit, the 15 three of these Kings in their own
Persons came aboard to see our General, and to view our ship and warlike
munition. They were well pleased with what they saw, and with the entertainment
which we gave them. And after these had been with us, and on their return had
as it seems related what they found, 1579.
Raia Donan the chief King of the whole land bringing Victuals with him for our
relief; he also the next day after came aboard us. Few were the days that one
or more of these kings did miss to visit us, insomuch, that we grew acquainted
with the names of many of them, as of Raia Pataira, Raia Cabocapalla, Raia
Mangbango, Raia Bocabarra, Raia Timbanton; whom our General always
entertained with the best cheer that we could make, and showed them all the
commodities of our Ship, with our Ordnance and other Arms and Weapons, and the
several furnitures belonging to each, and the uses for which they served. His
music also and all things else whereby he might do them pleasure, wherein they
took exceeding great delight with admiration.

One day amongst the rest, viz. March 21. Mar. 21.
Raia Donan coming aboard us, in requital of our music which was made to
him, presented our General with his Country music, which though it were of a
very strange kind, yet the sound was pleasant and delightful: the same day he
caused an Ox also to be brought to the waters side, and delivered to us, for
which he was to his content rewarded by our General, with diverse sorts of very
costly Silks which he held in great esteem.

Though our often giving entertainment in this manner, did hinder us much in
the speedy dispatching of our businesses, and made us spend the more days
about them, yet here we found all such convenient helps, that to our contents
we at last ended them; the matter of great Importance which we did (besides
Victualling) was the new trimming and washing of our Ship, which by reason of
our long Voyage was so overgrowne with a kind of a shellfish sticking fast
unto her, that it hindered exceedingly, and was a great trouble to her sailing.

The People (as are their Kings) are a loving, a very true and just dealing
People. We traffiqued with them for Hens, Goats, Cocoes, Plantons, and other
kind of Victuals, which they offered us in such plenty that we might have laden
our Ship if we had needed.

1580.
We took our leaves and departed from them the 26. of March, Mar. 26.
and set our course West South West, directly toward the cape of good hope, or
Bon Esperance, and continued without touch of ought, but air and water, till
the 21. of May, May 21.
when we espied land (to wit a part of the maine Africa) in some places very
high under the latitude of 31. degrees. and half.

We coasted along till June 15. June 15.
on which day, having very fair weather, and the Wind at Southeast, we past
the Cape it self so near in sight, that we had been able with our pieces to
have shot to land.

July 15. July 15.
we fell with the land again about Rio de sesto, where we saw many Negroes in
their Boats a fishing, whereof two came very near us, but we cared not to stay,
nor had any talk or dealing with them.

July 22.
The 22. of the same month, we came to Sierra Leona, and spent two days for
watering in the mouth of Tagoine, and then put to Sea again; July 24.
here also we had Oisters, and plenty of Lemmons, which gave us good refreshing.

We found our selves under the Tropic of Cancer August 15. Aug. 15. Aug. 16.
having the wind at Northeast, and we 50 leagues off from the nearest land.

The 22. day we were in the height of the Canaries.

Sep. 26.
And the 26 of Sept. (which was monday in the just and ordinary reckoning of
those that had stayed at home in one place or Country, but in our co^putation
was the Lords day or Sunday) we safely with joyful minds and thankful hearts
to God, arived at Plimoth, the place of our first setting forth after we had
spent 2. years 10 months and some few odd days beside, in seeing the
wonders of the Lord in the deep, in discovering so many admirable things, in
going through with so many strange adventures, in escaping out of so many
dangers, and overcoming so many difficulties in this our encompassing of this
nether Globe, and passing round about the World, which we have related.

Soli rerum maximarum Effectori,
Soli totius munai Gubernatori,
Soli suorum Conservatori,
Soli Deo sit semper Gloria.
FINIS.
A SUMMARIE AND TRUE DISCOURSE OF SIR FRANCIS DRAKES WEST-INDIAN Voyage.
Accompanied with Christopher Carleill, Martin Frobusher, Francis Knollis, with
many other Captains and Gentlemen. Wherein were taken, the Towns of Saint
Jago, Sancto Domingo, Cartagena and Saint Augustine.

Printed at London for Nicholas Bourne, dwelling at the South entrance of the
royal Exchange, 1652.

A SVMMARY AND TRVE DISCOVRSE OF SIR FRANCIS DRAKES West-Indian VOYAGE: Wherein
were taken the Towns of Saintiago, Sancto Domingo, Cartagena and Saint
Augustine.
THIS worthy Knight, for the service of his Prince and Country, having
prepared his whole Fleet, and gotten them down to Plymouth in Devonshire, to
the number of five and twenty sail of Ships and Pinnaces; and having assembled
of Soldiers and Mariners to the number of two thousand and three hundred in
the whole, embarked them and himself at Plimmouth aforesaid, the twelfth day
of September 1585. being accompanied with these Men of name and charge, which
hereafter follow:

Master Christopher Carleil Lieutenant General; a man of long experience in
the War as well by Sea as Land, and had formerly carried high Offices in both
kinds in many Fights, which he discharged always very happily, and with great
good reputation.

Anthony Powell Sergeant Major.

Captain Matthew Morgan, and Captain John Sampson, Corporals of the Field.

These Officers had Command over the rest of the Land Captains, whose names
hereafter follow: Captain Anthony Plat. Captain Edward Winter. Captain John
Goring. Captain Robert Pew. Captain George Barton. Captain John Merchant.
Captain William Cecill. Captain Walter Bigs. Captain John Hannam. Captain
Richard Stanton.


Captain Martin Frobusher Vice Admiral, a man of great experience in
Seafaring actions, and had had chief command of many Ships himself, in
sundry Voyages before, being now shipped in the Primrose.

Captain Francis Knollis, Rere-admirall in the Gallion Leicester.

Master Thomas Venner, Captain in the Elizabeth Bonadventure, under the
General.

Master Edward Winter Captain in the Aid.

Master Christopher Carleill the Lieutenant General, Captain in the Tygar.

Henry White, Captain of the Sea- Dragon. Thomas Drake, Captain of the Thomas.
Thomas Seely Captain of the Minion. Baily Captain of the Bark Talbot.
Robert Cross Captain of the Bark Bond. George Fortescute Captain of the
Bark Bonner* Edward Careless Captain of the Hope. James Erizo Captain of
the White Lion. Thomas Moon Captain of the Francis. John Rivers Captain of
the Vantage. John Vaughan Captain of the Drake. John Varney Captain of the
George. John Martin Captain of the Benjamin. Edward Gilman Captain of the
Skout. Richard Haukins Captain of the Galliot, called the Ducke. Bitfield
Captain of the Swallow.
After our going hence, which was the fourteenth of September, in the year of
our Lord, one thousand five hundred eighty and five; and taking our course
toward Spain we had the Wind for a few days somewhat skant, and sometimes
calm. And being arrived near that part of the coast of Spain, which is called
the Moors, we happened to epsy diverse Sails, which kept their course close by
the shore, the weather being fair and calm. The General caused the
Vize-admirall to go with the Pinnaces well manned to see what they were; who
upon sight of the said Pinnaces approaching near unto them, abandoned for the
most part all their Ships (being Frenchmen) laden all with Salt, and bound
homewards into France; amongst which Ships (being all of small burden) there
was one so well liked, which also had no man in her, as being brought unto the
General, he thought good to make stay of her for the service, meaning to pay
for her, as also accordingly performed at our return; which Bark was called the
Drake. The rest of these Ships (being eight or nine) were dismissed without any
thing at all taken from them. Who being afterward put somewhat farther off from
the shore, by the contrariety of the wind, we happened to meet with some other
French Ships, full laden with Newland Fish, being upon their return homeward
from the said Newfound land; whom the General, after some speech had with
them, (and seeing plainly that they were Frenchmen) dismissed without once
suffering any man to go aboard of them.

The day following, standing in with the shore again, we descried another tal
Ship of twelve score tuns or therabouts, upon whom Master Carleill the
Lieutenant General being in the Tygar, undertook the chase, whom also anon
after the Admiral followed; and the Tygar having caused the strange Ship to
strike her sails, kept her there without suffering any body to go aboard
until the Admiral was come up; who forthwith sending for the Master, and
diverse others of their principal Men, and causing them to be severally
examined, found the Ship and Goods to be belonging to the Inhabitants of Saint
Sebastian in Spain, but the Mariners to be for the most part belonging to
Saint John de Luce, and the Passage. In this Ship was great store of dry
Newland Fish, commonly called with us Poor John, whereof afterward (being
thus found a lawful Prize) there was distribution made into all the Ships of
the Fleet, the same being so new and good as it did very greatly bestead us in
the whole course of our Voyage.

A day or two after the taking of this Ship, we put in within the Isles of
Bayon, for lack of favorable wind, where we had no sooner anchored some part
of the Fleet, but the General commanded all the Pinnaces with the Ship-boats
to be Manned, and every man to be furnished with such arms as was needful for
that present service; which being done, the General put himself into his
Galley, which was also well furnished; and rowing toward the City of Bayon,
with intent, and the favor of the Almighty to surprise it. Before we had
advanced one half league of our way, there came a Messenger, being an English
Merchant, from the Governor, to see what strange Fleet we were; who came to
our General, and conferred a while with him, and after a small time spent, our
General called for Captain Sampson, and willed him to go to the Governor of
the City, to resolve him of two point. The first, to know if there were any
Wars between Spain and England? The second, why our Merchants with their Goods
were imbarred or arrested? Thus departed Captain Sampson with the said
Messenger to the City, where he found the Governor and People much amazed of
such a sudden accident.

The General with the advice and counsel of Master Carleill his Lieutenant
general, who was in the Galley with him, thought not good to make any stand,
till such time as they were within the shot of the City, where they might be
ready upon the return of Captain Sampson, to make a sudden attempt if cause
did require before it was dark.

Captain Sampson returned with his Message in this sort. First, touching Peace
or Wars, the Governor said he knew of no Wars, and that it lay not in him to
make any, he being so mean a Subject as he was. And as for the stay of the
Merchants with their Goods, it was the Kings pleasure, but not with intent to
endammage any man: and that the Kings counter-mand was (which had been received
in that place some seven nights before) that English Merchants with their
Goods should be dsicharged: for the more verifying whereof, he sent such
Merchants as were in the Town of our Nation, who trafficked in those parts;
which being at large declared to our General by them, counsel was taken
what might best be done: and for that the night approached, it was thought
needful to land our Force, which was done in the shutting up of the day; and
having quartered our selves to our most advantage, with sufficient guard upon
every straight, we thought to rest our selves for that night there. The
Governor sent us some refreshing, as Bread, Wine, Oil, Apples, Grapes,
Marmalad, and such like. About midnight the vveather begins to overcast,
insomuch that it was thought meeter to repair aboard, then to make any longer
abode on land, and before we could recover the Fleet, a great tempest arose,
which caused many of our Ships to drive from their ancour hold, and some were
forced to Sea in great peril, as the Bark Talbot, the Bark Hawkins and the
Speedwell, which Speedwell only was driven into England, the others
recovered us again; the extremity of the storm lasted three days, which no
sooner began to assuage, but Master Carleill our Lieutenant General, was sent
with his own Ship and three others, as also with the Galley and with diverse
Pinnaces, to see what he might do above Vigo, where he took many Boats and
some Carvels, diversely laden with things of small value but chiefly with
househould stuff, running into the high Country, and amongst the rest, he
found one Boat laden with the principal Church-stuffe of the high Church of
Vigo, where also was their great Cross of Silver, of very fair embossed
work, and double gilt all over, having cost them a great Mass of money. They
complained to have lost in all kind of Goods above thirty thousand Ducats in
this place.

The next day the General with his whole Fleet went up from the Isles of
Bayon, to a very good harbor above Vigo, where Master Carleill stayed his
coming, as well for the more quiet tiding of his Ships, as also for the good
commodity of fresh watering, which the place there did afford full well. In
the mean time the Governor of Gallisia had reared such forces as he might,
his numbers by estimate were some two thousand foot, and three hundred horse,
and marched from Bayon to this part of the Country, which lay in sight of our
Fleet, where making stand, he sent to parle with our General, which was
granted by our General, so it might be in boats upon the water: and for
safety of their persons there were pledges delivered on both sides; which done,
the Governor of Gallisia put himself with two others into our Vice-Admirals
Skiffe, the same having been sent to the shore for him. And in like sort our
General in his own Skiffe, where by them it was agreed, we should furnish our
selves with fresh water, to be taken by our own people quietly on the land,
and have all other such necessaries, paying for the same, as the place would
afford.

When all our business was ended, we departed, and took our way by the
Islands of Canaria, which are esteemed some three hundred leagues from this
part of Spain, and falling purposely with Palma, with intention to have taken
our pleasure of that place, for the full digesting of many things in order, and
the better furnishing our store with such several good things as that
affoorded very abundantly, we were forced by the vile Se^ gate which at that
present fell out, and by the naughtiness of the landing place, being but one,
and that under the favor of many Platformes, well furnished with great
Ordinance, to depart with the receipt of many their Canonshot, some into our
Ships, and some besides, some of them being in very deed full Canon high. But
the only or chief mischief, was the dangerous sea surge, which at shore all
alongest, plainly threatened the overthrow of as many Pinnaces and Boats, as
for that time should have attempted any landing at all.

Now seeing the expectation of this attempt frustrated by the causes aforesaid,
we though it meeter to fall with the Isle Ferro, to see if we could find any
better fortune; and coming to the Island, we landed a thousand men in a valley
under a high Mountain, where we stayed some two or three hours, in which time
the Inhabitants, accompanied with a young fellow borne in England, who dwelt
there with them, came unto us, showing their state to be so poor, that they
were all ready to starve, which was not untrue: and therefore without any thing
gotten, we were all commanded presently to imbarke, so as that night we put off
to Sea South South-east along toward the coast of Barbary.

Upon Saturday in the morning, being the thirteenth of November, we fell with
Cape Blancke which is a low land and shallow water, where we catched store of
fish, and doubling the Cape, we put into the Bay, where we found certain
French Ships of War whom we entertained with great courtesy, and there left
them. The afternoon the whole Fleet assembled, which was a little scattered
about their fishing, and put from thence to the Isles of Cape Verde, sailing
till the sixteenth of the same Month in the morning, on which day we descried
the Island of Saint Jago, and in the evening we anchored the Fleet between the
Town called the Play or Pray and Saint Jago, where we put on shore a
thousand men or more, under the leading of Master Christopher Carleill
Lieuetenant General, who directed the service most like a wise Commander. The
place where we had first to March did afford no good order, for the ground was
Mountains and full of Dales, being a marvelous stony and troublesome passage,
but such was his industrious disposition, as he would never leave, until we
had gotten up to a fair Plain, where we made stand for the assembling of the
army. And when we were all gathered together upon the Plain, some two little
miles from the Town, the Lieutenant General thought good not to make attempt
till day light; because there was not one that could serve for Guide or giving
knowledge at all of the place. And therefore after having well rested, even
half an hour before day, he commanded the Army to be divided into three
special parts, such as he appointed, whereas before we had marched by several
Companies, being thereunto forced by the naughtiness of the way as is
aforesaid.

Now by the time we were thus ranged in a very brave order, daylight began to
appear, and being advanced hard to the Wall we saw no Enemy to resist,
whereupon the Lieuetenant General appointed Captain Sampson with thirty shot,
and Captain Barton with other thirty, to go down into the Town which stood
in the Valley under us, and might very plainly be viewed all over from that
place where the whole Army was now arrived, and presently after these Captains
was sent, the great Ensign which had nothing in it but the plain English
Cross, to be placed toward the Sea, that our Fleet might see Saint Georges
cross flourish in the Enemies fortress. Order was given that all the Ordinance
throughout the town, and upon all the Platformes, which was above fifty Pieces
all ready charged, should be shot off in honor of the Queens Majesty's
Coronation day, being the seventeenth of November, after the yearly custom of
England, which was so answered again by the Ordinance out of all the Ships in
the Fleet which now was come near, as it was strange to hear such a thundering
noise last so long together. In this mean while the Lieutenant General held
still the most part of his Force on the hill top, till such time as the Town
was quartered out for the lodging of the whole army, which being done every
Captain took his own quarter, and in the evening was placed such sufficient
guard upon every part of the Town that we had no cause to fear any present
Enemy.

Thus we continued in the City the space of fourteen days, taking such
spoils as the place yielded, which were for the most part, Wine, Oil, Meal,
and some such like things for Victual, as Vinegar, Olives, and some such other
trash, as Merchandise for their Indian trades. But there was not found any
Treasure at all, or any thing else of worth besides.

The situation of Saint Jago is somewhat strange, in form like to a triangle,
having on the East and West sides two Mountains of Rock and Cliffie, as it
were hanging over it, upon the top of which two Mountains was builded certain
fortifications to preserve the Town from any harm that might be offered, as
in this Plot is plainly showed. From thence on the South side of the Town is
the maine Sea, and on the North side, the valley lying between the foresaid
Mountains, wherein the Town stands: the said Valley and Town both do grow
very narrow, insomuch that the space between the two cliffes of this end of
the Town is estimated not to be above ^en^e or twelve score over.

In the midst of the Valley comes down a riveret, Rill or Brook of fresh
Water, which hard by the Sea side makes a Pond or Poole, whereout our Ships
were watered with very great ease and pleasure, Somewhat above the Town on
the North side between the two Mountains, the valley waxes somewhat larger
then at the Towns end which Valley is wholly converted into Gardens and
Orchards well replenished with diverse sorts of Fruits, Herbs and Trees, as
Lymons, Oranges, Sugar Canes, Cochars or Cochos-Nuts, Plantens, Potato-^oots,
Cocombers, small and round Onyons, Garlike, and some other things not now
remembered, amongst which the Chochos-nuts and Plantens are very pleasant
Fruits, the said Cochos having a hard shell and a green Husk over it, as has
our Walnut but it far exceeds in greatness, for this Cochos in his green
husk is bigger then any man's two Fists, of the hard shell many drinking Cups
are made here in England, and set in Silver as I have often seen.

Next within this hard shell is a white rine, resembling in show very much,
even as any thing may do, to the white of an Egg when it is hard boiled. And
within this white of the Nut lies a water, which is whitish and very clear,
to the quantity of half a pint or there abouts, which water and white rine
before spoken of, are both of a very cool fresh taste, and as pleasing as any
thing may be. I have heard some hold opinion, that it is very restorative.

The Planten grows in Cods, somewhat like to Beans, but is bigger and longer,
and much more thick together on the stalk, and when it waxes ripe, the meat
which fills the rine of the Cod becomes yellow, and is exceeding sweet and
pleasant.

In this time of our being there, happened to come a Portugal to the Westermost
Fort, with a Flag of truce; to whom Captain Sampson was sent with Captain
Goring; who coming to the said Messenger, he first asked them what Nation they
were; they answered, Englishmen; he then desired to know if Wars were
between England and Speine; to which they answered that they knew not, but if
he would go to their General, he could best resolve him of such particulars;
and for his assurance of passage and repasse, these Captains made offer to
engage their credits; which he refused, for that he was not sent from his
Governor. Then they told him, if his Governor did desire to take a course for
the common benefit of the People and Country, his best way were to come and
present himself unto our Noble and merciful Governor Sir Francis Drake,
whereby he might be assured to find favor, both for himself and the
Inhabitants. Otherwise, within three days we should March over the Land, and
consume with fire all inhabited places, and put to the Sword all such living
souls as we should chance upon; so thus much he took for the conclusion of
his answer and departing, he promised to return the next day, but we never
heard more of him.

Upon the four and twentieth of November, the General accompanied with the
Lieutenant General and six hundred men, marched forth to a Village twelve
Miles within the Land, called Sancto Domingo, where the Governor and the
Bishop with all the better sort were lodged and by eight of the Clock we came
to it, finding the place abandoned, and the people fled into the Mountains, so
we made a stand a while to ease our selves, and partly to see if any would come
to speak to us.

After we had well rested our selves, the General commanded the Troops to
match away homewards, in which retreat the Enemy showed themselves, both Horse
and Foot, though not such Force as durst encounter us: and so in passing some
time at the gase with them, it waxed late and toward night, before we could
recover home to Saint Jago.

On Monday the six and twentieth of November, the General commanded all the
Pinnaces with the Boats, to use all diligence to imbarke the Army into such
Ships as every man belonged. The Lieuetenant General in like sort commanded
Captain Goring and Lieutenant Tucker with one hundred shot to make a stand in
the Marketplace, until our Forces were wholly embarked, the Vice Admiral
making stay with his Pinnace and certain Boats in the harbor, to bring the
said last company aboard the Ships. Also the General willed forthwith the
Gallie with two Pinnaces to take into them the company of Captain Barton, and
the Company of Captain Bigs, under the leading of Captain Sampson, to seek
out such Munition as was hidden in the ground, at the Town of Pray or Play,
having been promised to be showed it by a prisoner, which was taken the day
before.

The Captains aforesaid coming to the Play, landed their men, and having
placed the Troop in their best strength, Captain Sampson took the Prisoner
and willed him to show that he had promised, the which he could not, or at
least would not* but they searching all suspected places, found two pieces of
Ordinance, one of Iron and another of Brass. In the afternoon the General
anchored the rest of the Fleet before the Play, coming himself ashoare,
willing us to burn the Town and make all haste aboard, the which was done by
six of the clock the same day, and our selves embarked again the same night,
and so we put off to Sea Southwest.

But before our departure from the Town of Saint Jago, we established Orders
for the better government of the Army, every man Mustered to his Captain, and
oaths ministered to acknowledge her Majesty supreme Governor, as also every
man to do his uttermost endeavor to advance the service of the Action, and to
yield due obedience unto the directions of the General and his Officers. By
this provident council, and laying down this good foundation beforehand, all
things went forward in a due course, to the atchieving of our happy enterprise.

In all the time of our being here, neither the Governor for the King of
Spain, (which is a Portugal) neither the Bishop, whose authority is great,
neither any of the Inhabitants of the Town, or Island ever came at us (which we
expected they should have done) to entreat us to leave them some part of their
needful provisions, or at the least to spare the ruining of their Town at our
going away. The cause of this their unreasonable distrust (as I do take it)
was the fresh remembrance of the great wrongs they had done to old Master
William Haukins of Plymouth, in the Voyage he made four or five years before,
when as they did both break their promise, and murdered many of his Men,
whereof I judge you have understood, and therefore needless to be repeated.
But since they came not at us, we left written in sundry places, as also in the
Spittle-house, (which building was only appointed to be spared) the great
coffeehouse and scorn we took at this their refraining to come unto us, as
also at the rude manner of killing, and savage kind of handling the dead body
of one of our Boys found, by them straggling all alone, from whom they had
taken his head and heart, and had stragled the other bowels about the place, in
a most ^^^itish and beastly manner.

In revenge whereof at our departing we consumed with Fire all the houses, as
well in the Country which we saw, as in the Town of Saint Jago.

From hence putting over to the West Indies, we were not many days at Sea,
but there began amongst our people such mortality, as in few days there were
dead above two or three hundred men. And until some seven or eight days after
our coming from Saint Jago, there had not dyed any one man of sickness in all
the Fleet: the sickness showed not his infection wherewith so many were
stricken, until we were departed thence, and then seized our people with
extreme hot burning and continual ague, whereof some very few escaped with
life, and yet those for the most part not without great alteration and decay of
their wits and strength for a long time after. In some that dyed were plainly
showed the small sports, which are often found upon those that be infective
with the Plague; we were not above eighteen days in passage between the sight
of Saint Jago aforesaid, and the Island of Dominica, being the first Island of
the West Indies that we fell withal, the same being inhabited with Savage
People which go all naked, their skin colored with some painting of a reddish
tawney, very personable and handsome strong men, who do admit little
conversation with the Spaniards: for as some of our people might understand
them, they had a Spaniard or twain prisoners with them, neither do I think
that there is any safety for any of our Nation, or any other to be within the
limits of their commandment, albeit they used us very kindly for those few
hours of time which we spent with them, helping our folks to fill and carry
on their bare shoulders fresh Water from the River to our Ships Boats, and
fetching from their houses, great store of Tobacco, as also a kind of Bread
which they fed on, called Cassado, very white and savery, made of the roots of
Cassania. In recompense whereof, we bestowed liberal rewards of Glass,
colored Beads, and other things which we had found at Saint Jago, wherewith
(as it seemed) they rested very greatly satisfied, and showing some sorrowful
countenance when they perceived that we would depart.

From hence we went to another Island Westward of it, called Saint Christophers
Island, wherein we spent some days of Christmas, to refresh our sick People,
and to cleanse and air our Ships. In which Island were not any People at all
that we could hear of.

In which time by the General it was advised and resolved, with the consent of
the Lieutenant general, the Vice Admiral, and all the rest of the Captains to
proceed to the great Island of Hispaniola; as well for that we knew our selus
then to be in our best strength, as also the rather allured thereunto, by the
glorious fame of the City of Saint Domingo, being the ancientest and chief
inhabited place in all the tract of Country there abouts. And to proceed in
this determination, by the way we met a small Frigot, bound for the same place,
the which the Vice Admiral took, and having duly examined the Men that were in
her, there was one found by whom we were advertized, the Haven to be a barred
Haven, and the shore or Land thereof to be well fortified, having a Castle
thereupon furnished with great store of Artillery; without the danger whereof,
was no convenient landing place within ten English miles of the City; to which
the said Pilot took upon him to conduct us.

All things being thus considered on, the whole Forces were commanded in the
evening to embarke themselves into Pinnaces, Boats and other small Barks,
appointed for this service. Our Soldiers being thus embarked, the General put
himself into the Bark Francis as Admiral, and all this night we lay on the
Sea, bearing small sail until our arrival to the Landing place, which was
about the breaking of the day; and so we landed, being New Years day, nine or
ten miles to the Westwards of that brave City of Saint Domingo: for at that
time, not yet is known to us, any landing place, where the Sea surge does not
threaten to overset a Pinnace or Boat. Our General having seen us all landed
in safety, returned to his Fleet, bequeathing us to God, and the good conduct
of Mr. Carliell, our Lieutenant General: at which time, being about eight of
the clock, we began to March, and about noonetime, or toward one of the
clock we approached the Town, where the Gentlemen and those of the better
sort, being some hundred and fifty brave Horses, or rather more, began to
present themselves; but our small shot played upon them, which were so
sustained with good proportion of Pikes in all parts, as they finding no part
of our Troop unprepared to receive them (for you must understand they viewed
all round about) they were thus driven to give us leave to proceed toward the
two Gates of the Town, which were the next to the Sea-ward. They had manned
them both, and planted their Ordnance for that present, and sudden alarm
without the Gate, and also some Troops of small shot in Ambuscado upon the
hye-way side. We divided our whole Force, being some thousand or twelve hundred
Men into two parts, to enterprise both the Gates at one instant; the Lieutenant
General having openly vowed to Captain Powell (who led the Troop that
entered the other Gate) that with Gods good favor he would not rest until our
meeting in the Marketplace.

Their Ordnance had no sooner discharged upon our near approach, and made some
execution amongst us, though not much, but the Lieutenant General began
forthwith to advance both his voice of encouragement and pace of Marching; the
first Man that was slain with the Ordnance, being very near unto himself, and
thereupon hasted all that he might to keep them from recharging of the
Ordinance. And notwithstanding their Ambuscadoes, we marched or rather ran so
roundly into them as pell mell we entered the Gates, and gave them more care
every Man to save himself by flight, then reason to stand any longer to their
broken fight; we forthwith repaired to the Marketplace: but to be more truly
understood, a place of very fair spacious square ground before the great
Church; whether also came (as had been agreed) Captain Powell with the other
Troop; which place with some part next unto it, we strengthened with
Barricadoes, and there (as the most convenient place) assured our selves, the
City being far too spacious for so small and weary a Troop to undertake to
guard. Somewhat after midnight they who had the guard of the Castle, hearing
us busy about the Gates of the said Castle, abandoned the same; some being
taken prisoners, and some flying away by the help of Boats, to the other side
of the Haven, and so into the Country.

The next day we quartered a little more at large, but not into the half part
of the Town, and so making substantial trenches, and planting all the Ordnance
that each part was correspondent to other: we held this Town the space of one
Month.

In the which time happened some accidents more then are well remembered for the
present; but amongst other things, it chanced that the General sent on his
Message to the Spaniards a Negro Boy with a Flag of white, signifying truce,
as is the Spaniards ordinary manner to do there, when they approach to speak
to us; which Boy unhappily was first met with, by some of those who had been
belonging as Officers for the King in the Spanish Galley, which with the Town
was lately fallen into our hands, who without all order or reason, and contrary
to that good usage wherewith we had entertained their Messengers, furiously
struck the poor Boy through the body with one of their Horsemens staves, with
which wound the Boy returned to the General, and after he had declared the
manner of this wrongful cruelty, dyed forthwith in his presence; wherewith the
General being greatly passioned, commanded the Provost Martial to cause a
couple of Friars, then prisoners, to be carried to the same place where the Boy
was stricken, accompanied with sufficient guard of our Soldiers, and there
presently to be hanged, dispatching at the same instant another poor prisoner,
with this reason wherefore this execution was done; and with this Messenger
further, that until the party who had thus murdered the Generals Messenger,
were delivered into our hands, to receive condign punishment, there should no
day pass, wherein there should not two prisoners be hanged, until they were
all consumed which were in our hands.

Whereupon the day following, he that had been Captain of the Kings Galley,
brought the Offender to the Towns end, offering to deliver him into our hands,
but it was thought a more honorable revenge, to make them there in our fight,
to perform the execution themselves; which was done accordingly.

During our being in this Town, as formerly also at S. Jago there had passed
justice upon the life of one of our company for an odious matter: so here
likewise was there an Irish man hanged, for the murdering of his Corporal.

In this time also passed many Treaties between their Commissioners and us,
for ransom of their City, but upon disagreements, we still spent the early
mornings in firing the outmost houses: but they being built very magnificently
of stone, with high lofts, gave us no small travel to ruin them. And albeit
for diverse days together, we ordained each morning by day break, until the
heat began at nine of the Clock, that two hundred Mariners did naught else
but labor to fire and burn the said houses without our trenches, whilst the
Soldiers in like proportion stood forth for their Guard: yet did we not or
could not in this time consume so much as one third part of the Town. And so
in the end, what wearied with firing, and what hastened by some other respects,
we were contented to accept of five and twenty thousand Ducats of five
shilling six pence the piece, for the ransom of the rest of the Town.

Amongst other things which happened and were found at S. Domingo, I may not
omit to let the world know one very notable mark and token, of the unsatiable
ambition of the Spanish King and his Nation, which was found in the Kings
house, wherein the chief Governor of that City and Country is appointed
always to lodge, which was this: In the coming to the Hall or other rooms
of this house, you must first ascend up by a fair large pair of stairs, at
the head of which stairs is a handsome spacious place to walk in, somewhat
like unto a gallery, wherein upon one of the Walls, right over against you as
you enter the said place, so as your eye cannot escape the sight of it, there
is described and painted in a very large Scutchion, the arms of the King of
Spain, and in the lower part of the said Scutchion, there is likewise
described a Globe, containing in it the whole circuit of the Sea and the Earth,
vvhereupon is a Horse standing on his hinder part within the Globe, and the
oher forepart without the Globe, lifting up (as it were) to leap, with a
scrole painted in his mouth, wherein was written these words in Latin Non
sufficit orbis: which is as much to say, as the World suffices not, whereof
the meaning was required to be known of some of those of the better sort that
came in Commission to treat upon the ransom of the Town, who would shake their
heads, and turn aside their countenance in some smiling sort, without
answering any thing, as being greatly ashamed thereof. For by some of our
company it was told them, that if the Queen of England would resolutely
prosecute the Wars against the King of Spain, he should be forced to lay aside
that proud and unreasonable reaching vain of his; for he should find more
then enough to do, to keep that which he had already, as by the present
example of their lost Town they might for a beginning perceive well enough.

Now to the satisfying of some men, who marvel greatly that such a famous and
goodly builded City so well inhabited of gallant People, very bravely
apparelled (whereof our Soldiers found good store for their relief) should
afoord no greater Riches then was found there, wherein it is to be understood
that the Indian people, which were the naturals of this whole Island of
Hispaniola (the same being near hand as great as England) were many years
since clean consumed by the Tyranny of the Spaniards, which was cause, that
for lack of people to work in the Mines, the Gold and Silver Mines of this
Island are wholly given over, and thereby they are feign in this Island to use
Copper money, whereof was found very great quantity The chief trade of this
place consists of Sugar and Ginger, which grows in the Island, and Hides of
Oxen and Kine, which in this waste Country of the Island are bred in infinite
numbers, the soil being very fertile: and the said Beasts are fed up to a very
large growth, and so killed for nothing so much, as for their Hides aforesaid.
We found here great store of strong Wine, sweet Oil, Vinegar, Olives and other
such like provisions, as excellent Wheat-meale packed up in Wine pipes and
other caske, and other commodities likewise, as Woollen and Linen cloth, and
some Silks; all which provisions are brought out of Spain and served us for
great relief. There was but a little Plate or Vessel of Silver, in comparison
of the great Pride in other things of this Town, because in those hot
Countries they use much these earthen Dishes finely painted or varnished, which
they call Parsellina, and is had out of the East- India; and for their
drinking, they use Glasses altogether, whereof they make excellent good and
fair in the same place. But yet some Plate we found, and many other good
things, as their household garniture very Gallant and Rich, which had cost them
dear, although unto us they were of small importance.

From S. Domingo we put over to the maine or firm Land, and going all along
the Coast, we came at the last in sight of Cartagena, standing upon the Sea
side so near as some of our Barks in passing along, approached with the reach
of their Culverin shot, which they had planted upon certain Platformes. The
harbor mouth lay some three miles toward the Westward of the Town, whereinto
we entered about three or four of the Clock in the afternoon without any
resistance of ordinance, or other impeachment planted upon the same. In the
evening we put our selves on Land toward the Harbor mouth, under the leading
of Master Carleill our Lieutenant General, who after he had digested us to
march forward about the midnight, as easily a^ foot might fall, expressly
commanding ^o keep close by the Sea w^sh of the shore for our best and surest
way, whereby we were like to go through, and not to miss any more of the way,
which once we had lost within an hour after our first beginning to March,
through the slender knowledge of him that took upon him to be our Guide,
whereby the night spent on, which otherwise must have been done by resting. But
as we came within some two miles of the Town, their Horsemen which were some
hundred, met us, and taking the ala^um, retired to their towneward again upon
the first Volley of our Shot that was given them: for the place where we
encountered being Woody and bushy even to the water side, was unmeet for their
service.

At this instant we might hear some Pieces of Artillery discharged, with
diverse small shot toward the Harbor, which gave us to understand, according
to the Order set down in the evening before by our General, that the
Vice Admiral accompanied with Captain Venner, Captain White, and Captain
Cross, with other Sea Captains, and with diverse Pinnaces and Boats should
give some attempt unto the little Fort standing on the entry of the inner
Haven, near adjoining to the town, though to small purpose, for that the place
was strong, and the entry very narrow was chained over: so as there could be
nothing gotten by the attempt, more then the giving of them an Alarm on that
other side of the Haven being a mile and a half from the place where we now
were. In which attempt the Vice Admiral had the Rudder of his Skiffe stricken
through with a Saker-shot, and little or no harm received elsewhere.

The Troops being now in their March, half a mile be hither the town or
less, the ground we were on grew to be straight, and not above fifty paces
over, having the maine Sea on the side of it, and the Harbor water or inner
Sea (as you may term it) on the other side, which in this Plot is plainly
showed. This straight was fortified clean over with a stone Wall and a ditch
without it; the said Wall being as orderly built with flancking in every part,
as can be set down. There was only so much of this straight unwalled, as might
serve for the issuing of the Horsemen, or the passing of the carriage in time
of need: but this anwalled part was not without a very good Barricado of Wine
Buts or Pipes, filled with earth, full and thick as they might stand on end
one by another, some part of them standing even within the maine Sea.

This place of strength was furnished of six great Pieces, demi-Culverins and
Sakers, which shot directly in front upon us as we approached. Now without this
wall upon the inner side of the straight, they had brought likewise two great
Galleys with their prowess to the shore, having planted in them eleven pieces
of Ordnance, which did beat all cross the straight, and flanked our coming
on. In these two Galleys were planted three or four hundred small shot, and on
the land in the guard only of this place, three hundred shot and pikes.

They in this their full readiness to receive us, spared not their shot both
great and small. But our Lieutenant general, taking the advantage of the dark
(the day light as yet not broken out) approached by the lowest ground,
according to the express direction which himself had formerly given, the same
being the Sea-wash-shore, where the water was somewhat fallen, so as most of all
their shot was in vain. Our Lieutenant general commanded our shot to forbear
shooting until we were come to the wall side; and so with Pikes roundly
together we approached the place, where we soon found out the Barricadoes of
Pipes or Buts, to be the meetest place for our assault; which notwithstanding
it was well furnished with Pikes and shot, was without staying attempted by us:
down went the buts of earth, and pell mell came our Swords and Pikes together,
after our shot had first given their volley, even at the enemies nose. Our
Pikes were somewhat longer then theirs, and our bodies better armed, for very
few of them were armed; with which advantage our Swords and Pikes grew too hard
for them, and they driven to give place. In this furious entry, the Lieutenant
general slew with his own hands, the chief Ensigne-bearer of the Spaniards,
who fought very manfully to his lives end.

We followed into the Town with them, and giving them no leisure to breath,
we won the Marketplace, albeit they made head, and fought a while before
we got it; and so we being once seized and assured of that, they were
contento suffer us to lodge within their Town, and themselves to go to their
Wives, whom they had carried into other places of the Country before our
coming thither.

At every Streets-end they had raised very fine Barricadoes of Earth-vvorkes,
with trenches without them, as well made as ever we savv any work done;
at the entering whereof was some little resistance, but soon overcome; it was
with few slain or hurt. They had joined with them many Indians, whom they had
placed in corners of advantage, all Bow-men, with their Arrows most
villanously empoysoned, so as if they did but break the skin, the party so
touched dyed without marvel: some they slew of our People with their Arrows,
some they likewise mischieved to death with certain Pricks of small sticks
sharply pointed, of a foot and a half long, the one end put into the ground,
the other empoysoned, sticking fast up, right against our coming in the way,
as we should approach from our landing toward the Town, whereof they had
planted a wonderful number in the ordinary way, but our keeping the
Sea-wash-shore missed the greatest part of them very happily.

To let pass many particular matters, as the hurting of Captain Sampson at
sword blows in the first entering, unto whom was committed the charge of the
Pikes of the Vantgard by his lot and turn; as also of the taking of Alonzo
Bravo (the chief Commander of that place) by Captain Goring, after the said
Captain had first hurt him with his Sword; unto which Captain was committed the
charge of the Shot of the said Vantgard.

Captain Winter was likewise by his turn of the Vantgard in this attempt,
where also the Lieutenant general marched himself: the said Captain Winter
through a great desire to serve by Land, having now exchanged his charge by Sea
with Captain Cecill, for his Band of Footmen.

Captain Powell the Sergeant Major had by his turn the charge of the four
Companies which made the Battle.

Captain Morgan, who at S. Domingo was of the Vantgard, had now by turn his
charge upon the Companies of the Rere-gard.

Every Man as well of one part as of another, came so willingly on to the
service, as the enemy was not able to endure the fury of such hot assault.

We stayed here six weeks, and the sickness with mortality before spoken of,
still continuing among us, though not with the same fury as at the first; and
such as were touched with the said Sickness, escaping death, very few or
almost none could recover their strength, yea many of them were much decayed in
their memory; in so much that it was grown an ordinary judgment, when one was
heard to speak foolishly, to say, he had been sick of the Calentour, which
is the Spanish name of their burning Ague: for, as I told you before, it is a
very burning and pestilent Ague. The original cause thereof, is imputed to the
evening or first night air, which they term La serena, wherein they say and
hold very firm opinion, that who so is then abroad in the open air, shall
certainly be infected to the death, not being of the Indian or natural race of
those Country People; by holding their Watch, were thus subjected to the
infectious ^yre, which at S. Jago was most dangerous and deadly of all other
places.

With the inconvenience of continual mortality, we were forced to give over
our intended enterprise, to go with Nombre de Dios, and so over-land to
Pannama, where we should have stricken the stroke for the Treasure, and full
recompense of our tedious travailes. And thus at Cartagena we took our first
resolution to return homewards.

But while we were yet there, it happened one day, that our Watch called the
Sentinel, upon the Church-Steeple, had discovered in the Sea a couple of small
Barks or Boats, making in with the Harbor of Cartagena, whereupon Captain
Moon and Captain Varney, with John Grant the Master of the Tiger, and some
other Seamen, embarked themselves in a couple of small Pinnaces, to take them
before they should come nigh the shore, at the mouth of the Harbor, lest by
some straggling Spaniards from the Land, they might be warned by signs from
coming in; which fell out accordingly, notwithstanding all the diligence that
our Men could use: for the Spanish Boats, upon the sight of our Pinnaces
coming toward them, ran themselves a shore, and so their Men presently hid
themselves in Bushes hard by the Sea side, amongst some others that had called
them by signs thither. Our Men presently without any due regard had to the
quality of the place, and seeing no man of the Spaniards to show themselves,
aboorded the Spanish Barks or Boats, and so standing all open in them, were
suddenly shot at by a troop of Spaniards out of the Bushes; by which volley of
shot there were flaine Captain Varney, which dyed presently, and Captain
Moon, who dyed some few days after, besides some four or five others that
were hurt; and so our folks returned without their purpose, not having any
sufficient number of Soldiers with them to fight on shore. For those Men they
carried were all Mariners to row, few of them armed, because they made
account with their Ordinance to have taken the Barks well enough at Sea, which
they might full easily have done, without any loss at all, if they had come in
time to the Harbor-mouth, before the Spaniards Boats had gotten so near the
shore.

During our abode in this place, as also at S. Domingo, there passed divets
courtesies between us and the Spaniards; as Feasting, and using them with all
kindness and favor: so as amongst others, there came to see the General, the
Governor of Cartagena, with the Bishop of the same, and diverse other Gentlemen
of the better sort.

This Town of Cartagena we touched in the out parts, and consumed much with
fire, as we had done Saint Domingo upon discontentments, and for want of
agreeing with us in their first Treaties touching their Ransom, which at the
last was concluded between us, should be one hundred and ten thousand Ducats
for that which was yet standing, the Ducket valued at five shillings six pence
sterling.

This Town, though not half so big as S. Domingo, gives as you see, a far
greater ransom, being in very deed of far more importance, by reason of the
excellency of the Harbor, and the situation thereof, to serve the Trade of
Nombre de Dios and other places, and is Inhabited with far more richer
Merchants. The other is chiefly inhabited with Lawyers and brave Gentlemen,
being the chief or highest appeal of their suits in Law of all the Islands
about it, and of the maine Land coast next unto it. And it is of no such
account as Cartagena, for these and some other like reasons which I could give
you, over long to be now written.

The warning which this Town received of our coming toward them, from S.
Domingo, by the space of twenty days before our arrival hither, was cause
that they had both fortified and every way prepared for their best defense. As
also that they had carried and convayed away all their Treasure and principal
substance.

The Ransom of one hundred and ten thousand Ducats thus concluded on, as is
aforesaid, the same being written, and expressing for nothing more then the
Town of Cartagena, upon the payment of the said Ransom, we left the said
Town, and drew some part of our Soldiers into the Priory or Abbey, standing a
quarter of one English mile below the Town upon the Harbor water side, the
same being walled with a wall of stone, which we told the Spaniards was yet
ours, and not redeemed by their Composition: whereupon they finding the defect
of their Contract, were contented to enter into another Ransom for all places,
but specially for the said House, as also the Blocke-house or Castle, which is
upon the mouth of the inner Harbor. And when we asked as much for the one as
for the other, they yielded to give one thousand Crowns for the Abbey, leaving
us to take our pleasure upon the Block-house, which they said they were not
able to ransom, having stretched themselves to the uttermost of their powers;
and therefore the said Block-house was by us undermined, and so wirh Gunpowder
blown up in pieces.

While this latter Contract was in making, our whole Fleet of Ships fell down
toward the Harbor mouth, where they Anchored the third time, and employed
their Men in fetching of fresh Water aboard the Ships, for our Voyage
homewards, which Water was had in a great Well, that is in the Island by the
Harbor mouth; which Island is a very pleasant place as has been seen, having
in it many sorts of goodly and very pleasant Fruits, as the Orange trees and
others, being set orderly in Walks of great length together. Insomuch as the
whole Island being some two or three miles about, is cast into grounds of
Gardening and Orchards.

After six weeks abode in this place, we put to Sea the last of March, where
after two or three days, a great Ship which we had taken at S: Domingo, and
thereupon was called The new years gift, fell into a great leake, being laden
with Ordnance, Hides, and other Spoils, in the night she lost the company of
our Fleet; which being miss^d the next morning by the General, he cast about
with the whole Fleet, fearing some great mischance to be happened unto her, as
in very deed it so fell out; for her leake was so great, and her Men were all
tired with Pumping. But at the last having found her, and the Bark Talbot in
her company, which stayed by great hap with her, was ready to take their Men
out of her, for the saving of them. And so the General being fully advertised
of their great extremity, made sail directly back again to Cartagena with
the whole Fleet, where having stayed eight or ten days more, about the
unlading of this Ship, and the bestowing thereof and her Men, into other Ships;
we departed once again to Sea, directing our course toward the Cape S.
Anthony, being the Eastermost part of Cuba, whether we arrived the seven and
twentieth of Apil. But because fresh water could not presently be found, we
weyed ankor and departed, thinking in few days to recover the Mattances, a
place to the Eastward of Havana.

After we had sailed some fourteen days, we were brought to Cape S. Anthony
again, thorough lack of favorable wind: but then our scarsity was grown
such, as need made us look a little better for water, which we found in
sufficient quantity, being indeed, as I judge, none other then rain water
newly fallen, and gathered up by making pits in a plot of marrish ground, some
three hundred pases from the Sea side.

I do wrong if I should forget the good example of the General at this place,
who to encourage others, and to hasten the getting of fresh water aboard the
Ships, took no less pain himself then the meanest, as also at S. Domingo,
Cartagena, and all other places, having always so vigilant a care and
foresight in the good ordering of his Fleet, accompanying them, as it is said,
with such wonderful travel of body, as doubtless had he been the meanest
person, as he was the chiefest, he had yet deserved the first place of honor:
and no less happy do we account him, for being associated with Master
Carleill his Lieutenant General, by whose experience, prudent counsel, and
gallant performance, he achieved so many and happy enterprises of the War, by
whom also he was very greatly assisted, in setting down the needful Orders,
Laws, and course of Justice and for the due administration of the same upon
all occasions.

After three days spent in watering our Ships, we departed now the second time
from this Cape of S. Anthony the thirteenth of May, and proceeding about the
Cape of Florida, we never touched any where, but coasting along Florida, and
keeping the shore still in sight, the eight and twentieth of May early in the
morning, we descried on the shore a place built like a Beacon, which was indeed
a Scaffold upon four long Mastes, raised on end for men to discover to the
Seaward, being in the latitude of thirty degrees, or very near thereunto. Our
Pinnaces manned, and coming to the shore, we marehed up along the River
side, to see what place the Enemy held there: for none amongst us had any
knowledge thereof at all.

Here the General took occasion to march with the companies himself in
Person, the Lieutenant General having the Vantguard, and going a mile up or
somewhat more by the River side, we might discern on the other side of the
River over against us, a fort, which newly had been built by the Spaniards, and
some mile or three about above the fort, was a little Town or village without
walls, built of wooden houses, as this Plot here does plainly show: we
forthwith prepared to have Ordnance for the battery, and one Piece was a little
before the evening planted, and the first shot being made by the Lieutenant
General himself at their Ensign, struck through the Ensign, as we
afterward understood by a Fenchman, which came unto us from them. One shot
more was then made, which struck the foot of the fort Wall, which was all
massive timber of great trees like Mastes. The Lieutenant General was
determined to pass the River this night with four Companies, and there to
lodge himself entrenched as near the Fort, as that he might play with his
Muskets and smallest shot upon any that should appear; and so afterward to
bring and plant the battery with him, but the help of the Mariners for that
sudden to make Trenches could not be had, which was the cause that this
determination was remitted until the next night.

In the night the Lieutenant General took a little rowing Skiffe, and half a
dozen well armed, as Captain Morgan, and Captain Sampson, with some others
besides the rowers, and went to view what guard the Enemy kept, as also to take
knowledge of the ground. And albeit he went as covertly as might be, yet the
Enemy taking the Alarm, grew fearful that the whole Force was approaching to
the assault, and therefore with all speed abandoned the place after the
shooting of some of their Pieces. They thus gone, and he being returned unto us
again, but nothing knowing of their flight from their Fort, forthwith came a
Frenchman being a Phipher (who had been prisoner with them) in a little Boat,
playing on his Phiph the tune of the Prince of Orange his song, and being
called unto by the Guard, he told them before he put foot out of the Boat, what
he was himself, and how the Spaniards were gone from the Fort, offering either
to remain in hands there, or else to return to the place with them that would
go.

Upon this Intelligence, the General, the Lieutenant General, with some of
the Captains in one Shiffe, and the Vice Admiral with some others in his
Skiffe, and two or three Pinnaces furnished of Soldiers with them, put
presently over toward the Fort, giving order for the rest of the Pinnaces to
follow. And in our approach, some of the Enemy bolder then the rest, having
stayed behind their company, shot off two pieces of Ordnance at us; but on
shore we went, and entered the place without finding any man there.

When the day appeared, we found it built all of Timber, the Walls being none
other but whole Masts or bodies of Trees set upright and close together, in
manner of a Pale, without any Ditch as yet made, but who intended with some
more time, for they had not as yet finished all their work, having begun the
same some three or four Months before: so as to say the truth, they had no
reason to keep it, being subject both to fire and easy assault.

The platform whereon the Ordnance lay, was whole bodies of long Pine trees,
whereof there is great plenty, laid a cross one on another, and some little
earth amongst. There was in it thirteen or fourteen great pieces of brass
Ordnance, and a Chest unbroken up, having in it the value of some two thousand
pounds sterling, by estimation of the Kings treasure, to pay the Soldiers of
that place, who were one hundred and fifty Men.

The Fort thus won, which they called S. John Fort, and the day opened, we
assayed to go to the Town, but could not by reason of some Rivers and broken
ground which was between the two places; and therefore enforced to imbarke
again into our Pinnaces, we went thither upon the great maine River, which is
called, as also the Town by the name of S. Augustine.

At our approaching to land, there was some that began to show themselves, and
to bestow some few shot upon us, but presently withdrew themselves. And in
their running thus away, the Sergeant Major finding one of their Horses ready
sadled and bridled, took the same to follow the chase, and so overgoing all his
Company, was (by one laid behind a Bush) shot through the head, and falling
down therewith, was by the same and two or three more, stabbed in three or
four places of his body with Swords and Daggers, before any could come near
to his reskue. His death was much lamented, being in very deed an honest wise
Gentleman, and a Soldier of good experience, and of as great courage as any
man might be.

In this place called S. Augustine, we understood the King did keep, as is
before said, one hundred and fifty Soldiers, and at another place some dozen
leagus beyond to the Northwards, called S. Helena, he did there likewise keep
one hundred and fifty more, serving there for no other purpose, then to keep
all other Nations from Inhabiting any part of all that Coast, the Government
whereof was committed to one Pedro Melendez Marquess, Nephew to that Melendez
the Admitall, who had overthrown Master John Hawkins in the Bay of Mexico some
fifteen or sixteen years ago. This Governor had charge of both places, but
was at this time in this place, and one of the first that left the same.

Here it was resolved in full assembly of Captains, to undertake the
enterprise of S. Helena, and from thence to seek out the Inhabitation of our
English Countrymen in Virginia, distant from thence some six degrees Northward.

When we came thwart of Saint Helena the shols appearing dangerous, and we
having no Pilot to undertake the entry, it was thought meerest to go hence
along. For the Admiral had been the same night in four fadome and a half
three leagues from the shore: and yet we understood by the help of a known
Pilot, there may and does go in Ships of greater burden and draught then any
we had in our Fleet.

We passed thus along the Coast hard aboard the shore, which is shallow for a
league or two from the shore, and the same is low and broken land for the most
part.

The ninth of June upon fight of one special great fire (which are very
ordinary all along this coast, even from the Cape of Florida hither) the
General sent his Skiffe to the shore, where they found some of our English
Country men (that had been sent thither the year before by Sir Walter Raleigh)
and brought one aboard, by whose direction we proceeded along to the place
which they make their Port. But some of our Ships being of great draught
unable to enter, we anchored all without the Harbor in a wild Road at Sea,
about two miles from shore.

From whence the General wrote Letters to Master Ralph Lane, being Governor
of those English in Virginia, and then at his Fort about six leagues from the
Road in an Island which they call Roanoac, wherein is specially he showed how
ready he was to supply his necessities and wants which he understood of, by
those he had first talked withal.

The morrow after Master Lane himself and some of his company coming unto
him, with the consent of his Captains he gave them the choice of two offers,
that is to say: either he would leave a Ship, a Pinnace, and certain Boa^es
with sufficient Masters and Mariners, together furnished with a Months
Victual to stay and make farther discovery of the Country and coasts, and so
much Victual likewise that might be sufficient for the bringing of them all
(being an hundred and three Persons) into England if they thought good after
such time, with any other thing they would desire, and that he might be able to
spare.

Or else if they thought they had made sufficient discovery already, and did
desire to return into England, he would give them passage. But they as it
seemed, being desirous to stay, accepted very thankfully, and with great
gladness that which was offered first. Whereupon the Ship being appointed and
received into charge, by some of their own Company sent into her by Master
Lane, before they had received from the rest of the Fleet, the Provision
appointed them, there arose a great storm (which they said was extraordinary
and very strange) that lasted three days together, and put all our Fleet in
great danger to be driven from their ankoring upon the coast. For we brake many
Cables, and lost many Ankors. And some of our Fleet which had lost all of which
number was the ship appointed for Master Lane and his company) was driven to
put to Sea in great danger, in avoiding the Coast, and could never see us
again until we met in England. Many also of our small Pinnaces and Boats were
lost in this storm.

Notwitstanding after all this, the General offered them (with consent of his
Captains) another Ship with some Provision, although not such a one for their
turns, as might have been spared them before, this being unable to be brought
into their Harbor. Or else if they would, to give them passage into England,
although he knew he should perform it with greater difficulty then he might
have done before.

But Master Lane with those of the chiefest of his company he had then with
him, considering what should be best for them to do, made request unto the
General under their hands, that they might have passage for England: the which
being granted, and the rest sent for out of the Country and shipped, we
departed from that coast the eighteenth of June.

And so God be thanked, both they and we in good safty arrived at Portsmouth in
July 28. 1586. to the great glory of God, and to no small honor to our Prince,
our Country and our selves.

The total value of that which was gotten in this Voyage, is estimated at
threescore thousand pounds, whereof the Companies which have traveled in the
Voyage were to have twenty thousand pounds, the Adventurers the other forthy.
Of which twenty thousand pounds (as I can judge) will redound some six pounds
to the single share.

We lost some seven hundred and fifty Men in the Voyage.

The Men of name that dyed and were slain in this Voyage, as I can presently
call to my remembrance, are these: Captain Powell. Captain Varney. Captain
Moon. Captain Fortescute. Captain Bigges. Captain Cecill. Captain Hannam.
Captain Greenefield. Thomas Tucker a Lieutenant. Alexander Starkey a
Lieutenant. Master Escot a Lieutenant. Master Waterhouse a Lieutenant. Master
Nicholas Winter. Master Alexander Carleill. Master Robert Alexander. Master
Scroope. Master James Dier. Master Peter Duke.


With some other, who for haste I cannot so suddenly think on.

The Ordnance gotten of all sorts Brass and Iron were about two hundred and
forty, whereof the two hundred and some more were Brass, and were thus found
and gotten.

In S. Jago some two or three and fifty Pieces.

In S. Domingo about four score, whereof was very much great Ordnance, as
whole Cannon, Demi-Cannon, Culverins, and such like.

In Cartagena some sixty and three Pieces, and good store likewise of the
greater sort.

In the Fort of S. Augustine were fourteen Pieces, the rest was Iron Ordnance,
of which the most part was gotten at S. Domingo, the rest at Cartagena.

FINIS.
A Full RELATION Of another VOYAGE INTO THE WEST INDIES, MADE BY SIR FRANCIS
DRAKE; Accompanied with Sir John Hawkins, Sir Thomas Baskerfield, Sir Nicholas
Clifford, and others. Who set forth from Plymouth on the 28. of August 1595.

Printed at London for Nicholas Bourne, dwelling at the South entrance of the
Royal Exchange. 1652.

A FULL RELATION OF Another Voyage made by Sir FRANCIS DRAKE and others to the
WEST INDIES; who set forth from Plymouth the 28. of August, 1595.
THIS Valiant and Heroic Worthy, having many years faithfully served his
Prince and Country, does yet more apparently manifest his impartial integrity
to both, as may appear by this Relation following of another Voyage made by him
into the West Indies, accompanied with other Gentlemen, whose names and Offices
immediately ensue: Sir Francis Drake Chief Generals. Sir John Hawkins Chief
Generals. Sir Thomas Baskerfield Coroner General. Sir Nicholas Clifford
Lieutenant General. Captain Arnold Baskerfield Sergeant Major. Captain
Nicholas Baskerfield. Captain Barkley. Captain Grinstone. Captain Rush.
Captain Boswell. Captain Platt. Captain Chichester. Captain Stanton.
Captain Fenton.


In the thirty seventh year of the reign of Queen Elizabeth, being the eight
and twentieth of August one thousand five hundred ninty five, we embarked at
Plymouth, thence we sailed toward the Grand Canadoes, in which passage, Sep. 6.
about noon, we descri'd a French man of War (in the height of the Northern
Cape) whom we chasing immediately overtooke, after him a ( Rochellor) having
been at New Foundland, whom we quietly let pass: after that we overtooke two
Biskners bound for Barbara, who accompanied us until they could take their
course thither.

The ninth of September we espied a Ship of Weymouth, whom we chased and
fetched up, who speaking with our General accompanied us to the Grand
Canadoes. Presently after we discovered twenty of the King of France's men of
War, who chased us but could not fetch us up, and therefore left us.

The nineteenth of September we met with a Frigate of the Earl of Cumberlands
who brought us word that the Kings men of War were going homewards.

The twenty five of September we descried two Islands, the one called
Hamseroth, West and by South; The other Forta fontura, both standing in 28
degrees, and are distant one from the other 4 or 5 leagues Inhabited only by a
savage people. These Islands from the Grand Canadoes are distant ten leagues.

The twenty sixth of September we anchored in the aforesaid port of Canadoes
otherwise called S. John Decrus, and about ten of the clock in the forenoone we
were embarked into Boats and Pinnaces, endeavoring with the greatest celerity
to attain to land, but were frustrated of our intentions by the Enemies
vigilance, who waiting our coming had entrenched themselves in the very place
where we should have put to shore, who upon our approach plied us so fast with
great and small shot, both from the Castle and town, and from the other side
of us, that we were constrained to retire with the loss of some few men unto
our Ships again.

The Enemy were in number between three or four hundred strong.

The same day being all embarked in our Ships again, we departed to a certain
place where we watered, it lies West and by North from the town, and was in
times past a great and famous River. But now it is overgrown with grass, it
comes from the Rocks, and runs to the Sea.

The people of this Island being a barbarous people and Mountaneers; we had
slain at this watering place by them, of our men which stragled into the
Country, amongst whom was Captain Grinston and four more with him, the
which were wounded very sore and torn with dogs, which they keep of purpose
to destroy our men when any of them come there to water. This Island yields
much Wine, as Canadoe Wine, and diverse kind of grain, as Wheat and such like,
great store of Conies, and Partredges, and Tresse, which have a joyce like Milk
but rank poison.

This Island has many mighty Rocks in it; there is about twenty leagues distant
from this Island another Island called the Tenereffe or Peak of Tenereffe. It
is a mighty high land.

Sunday the twenty eight of September a little before night we departed from
the aforesaid watering place toward the Oriental Indies, we took our course
South West and by West. September. 29 being Michaelmas day, we sailed South west
and by South, the thirtieth we sailed South west, the first of October we
sailed West and by South, the thirteenth we sailed West in the height of
sixteenth degr. the fourteenth the wind was southernly: the five and twentieth
of this Month, the Hope and the Adventure fell foul on one another about ten
of the clock in the night, so that they of the Adventure were constrained to
cut down their Nisson Maste, and to fling it overboord. The night being very
dark and there arising a great tempest of Hail and Rain, at the same time
they were in extreme Jeopardy of their lives, which caused in them a very great
terror. The twenty seventh of October we espied the Island of Martinino, which
lay from us toward the West. This Island is inhabited by a Barbarous people
called Canibals. We were thirty days sailing between the Canadoes and
Martinino. From this Island we sailed toward an Island called Dominica where
is great store of Tobacco. It is distant from Martinino about ten or twelve of
our English miles, and bears West and by North. The people of this Island be
not altogether so rude as other peopl are; for they would traffic with us for
hatched Knives and such like Commodities in exchange for their Tobacco which is
the chiefest commodity this Island yields. The Weapons used by these people
are Bows and Arrows made of a Reed, with a sharp piece of Braseilon the end
thereof; they to use wear their hair very long, cut round by their shoulders.
The thirtieth of this instant October, we came to another Island called
Gordelowpa which is distant from that of Dominica ten leagues; we went unto a
certain River of that Island; on the West side there be many Rivers issuing
out of the Mountains with great force into the Sea. This Island is not
inhabited, but is a very Wilderness wherein are many wild Beasts; amongst the
rest there is one worthy of your observation in shape of a Serpent. We
continued there from the thirtieth of October to the fourth of November. From
thence we sailed toward the River della hatch, and struke our course North
West and by North. The seventh of November we descried three Islands of the
Trigonies which lies between Gordelowpa and Saint John de Portrizo; the first
is called Mononalla, the second Rotmido, the third Savoa; we sailed within
three or four leagues of them, where we found it in depth sometimes five
otherwhiles eight fathom; the shoal bears from us North east. The eight of
November our General set on shore all the Land-men, to the end that every
Captain might know his own men. The tenth of November we departed from that
Harbor to another, three or four English miles distant, where we continued
until tuesday the eleventh of November, and then set sail for Saint John de
Portrizo West and by North.

These Islands belonging to Virginia be many in number, we cannot name them
because they be without Inhabitants; there are many fair Harbors in them, in
some whereof one thousand Ships may ride at anchor; on every side the
Mountains are very high. Thence we went to some passages not far of. The
twelfth of November being Wednesday, we anchored within three or four English
miles of the Town of Portricho, against a great Fort, where was placed a great
piece of Ordnance, which plied us with shot diverse times. The same day Sir John
Hawkins dyed at the place aforesaid; whose death, in regard that he was one of
our chief Commanders, a wise, discreet and careful Man for his Company, was
no little grief^ unto us all. The same day also was Sir Nicholas Clifford,
Captain Stratford, Master Brutt Brown were wounded with the same piece of
Ordnance from the said Fort, all at one time, sitting at Supper with our
General Sir Francis Drake and Sir Thomas Baskerfield; the stool that Sir
Francis Drake sat on was struke from under him, as he was drinking of a cup of
Beer, yet by Gods providence he escaped with all the rest, but only them
three before mentioned; the same night Sir Nicholas Clifford dyed of the same
wound; and the same night we went against the Town, where we anchored.

The next day, which was thursday, the 13. of November, our General called a
Council. The night following, about nine of the clock in the night, certain
shot being appointed to be embarked in our Pinnaces and Boats, with Gunners
and Fire-workes; there were to the number of five hundred Men which went within
the Harbor to burn the five Men of War which rode within the Harbor, one
of them was of the burden of four hundred tun, the rest not so big; in this
Ship was planted great store of great Ordnance, which played upon our Men
exceedingly, besides great store of small shot, likewise great store of great
shot from the shore, with others, as Hargabushes of crocke, and Muskets, and
such like, which played at us on both sides most valiantly in the time of this
Encounter. They had planted on this plot of great Ordnance one hundred and
three score (besides small shot) as were to be numbered. This assault, although
it brought unto us no great profit, in respect of the loss of one of our
Ships, called the Little Francis, which was taken by them before our approach
which gave them intelligence of our coming; also the loss of some of our Men
at that time; the which was a most valiant attempt and worthy to be Chronicled.
There was of the Enemy burned, and slain, and drowned all the men in the great
Ship, but some three or four that we took up out of the water, to the intent
that they should reveal somewhat unto us; they informed us, that they having
intelligence of our coming by our Ship that was taken by them, our end and
intent was frustrated.

This Town was of great force to the Spaniards, and had in it three millions
of Treasure of the King of Spaines, which those five men of War came of purpose
for it; and they told us also, that they kept our men at Portricho, the which
they took in the Ship called the Little Francis; whereupon our General wrote
unto the chief Governor of the Town ^o be good unto our men, and to deal
with them as he should do the like with their men, and to send them for
England again in safety. Also we understood that there was three hundred
Soldiers in this Town of Saint John de Portrizo. This town stands on a
very small Island, and is compassed with the Sea on the one side, and a great
River on the other side; we could not come nigh the town to view the
proportion of it, because it stands in a Valley, and has a great Fort new
built betwixt us and it. We could not come within the sight of the maine
Island, which joyneth to the Town (so far as we could discern) it seems
to be of a vast longitude and latitude.

The fifteenth of November, being saturday, Sir John Hawkins and Sir Nicholas
Clifford were thrown overboord: the same day we espied a Spanish Carvill
coming toward Saint John de Portricho, but from what place we knew not; our
General sent with all speed, and embarked some Men in Pinnaces with all haste
to meet with him; but when the men in the Castle of Portricho espied it, they
shot off a great piece of Ordnance as a warning to them not to approach any
nearer; the Carvill perceiving, ran himself on the breach and ashore, and
saved their men, which fled away into the Mountains, so that we could not come
to them.

The sixteenth being Sunday we departed from Saint John de Portricho at which
place we Mustered all our Men, and every Captain knew his Men in more ample
manner then they did before.

The same day we embarked our selves in our Ships again, and with all speed we
sailed to a place called Saint John Jermans Bay, there we landed, it is distant
from Portricho thirty six leagues, there we landed certain of our Companies to
guard our Carpenters that did build our Pinnaces; not far from this place is a
House called an Ingeneroide, where is great store of Sugar made; it is
inhabited with Spaniards. The same day Master Brut Brown dyed.

On Saturday the three and twentieth of November our General held a Court
Marshall; to which John Standley was called to answer to some matters objected
against him. The two and twentieth Sir Thomas Baskerfield took two men of this
Island, a Negroe and a Clemeronne.

The twenty fourth day being Monday, the Ship called John of Trollony of
Plimmouth was burned in the same Bay of Saint John Jermans: the same day we
sailed to another Island called Crusao. The five and twentieth being Tuesday
we sailed South and by East, and South and by West; on Wednesday the twentieth
six we sailed South and by West, in which course stands Hispaniola and an
Island called Mono did bear from us West and by North.

The twenty seven being thursday, we sailed South and by West. The twenty
ninth being Saturday, we came to the Island called Crusao which is distant
from the Bay of Saint Jermans about one hundred and fifty leagues; from
Portricho we sailed South South East: at this place we stayed three or four
hours because we could get no good Harbor to anchor at by reason we were
constrained to depart. Our General did suppose this Island to be another
Island called Arewha.

The twenty ninth of November on the Larbordside it bears South South East,
it is distant some eight or nine leagues; the same day we espied the maine land
called the West Indies, which bore from us North North East, and it is a very
high land; we sailed along this Coast to a certain town called River Della
Hatch, the same day at night we anchored within nine or ten leagues of the
^owne of River Della Hatch.

The second of December being Monday all our Soldiers being embarked in Boats
and Pinnaces, we sailed to the town all that day; about one of the clock in
the night we entered the town, the Enemy fled into the Country before, leaving
some of their Soldiers in the town to the number of ten or twelve, which gave
us a volley of shot, and two of them were taken prisoners, the rest fled away.
We found nothing in the town of any account; they had carried all away into
the Woods, and hid them there, neither was there any Victuals, but what we went
into the Country for our selves, for they had droven all their Cattle away,
because they heard of our commming a week before we came thither.

December the third, being tuesday the Spaniards came to parley with us for a
certain sum of Treasure for ransom for the said town. The fourth of December
they brought Pearl, etc. but less in value then was compounded for, which our
General Sir Francis Drake refused, and thereupon ordered that it should be set
on Fire and burned, which accordingly was done at our departure.

The fifteenth of December being Friday, the Enemy made fair promises to our
General, which was only to have us to stay as we supposed, till they had sent
word to other places, as afterward the Governor confessed.

The sixteenth of December the Governor came to parley and to tell us his
determined purpose of his delay, which was as aforesaid; our companies marched
diverse times for Victuals and so met with the Governor. We took some more of
their men prisoners, and found some of their Goods afterward which we carried
away. But when we saw that they would not come to any fair correspondence or
agreement, our General commanded us to burn all places where ever we came.

The day before our departure we left the town of a light Fire, unless it was
a new Religious house not finished, and another house that they use to bring
all the Kings treasure and Merchandise.

In this House we found some of their treasure and Merchandise with other
things which was brought in, as Pearl and such like, which was brought unto
the Genenerall. The Country yields great store of Cattle, as Oxen, Beeves,
Goats, Sheep, Horses, and Asses, as also great store of grass. The people
that Inhabit this Country are Idians and Negroes, they live in the Mountains
being wild and savage People, but only such as the Spaniards keep under
subjection; those wild People do War against the Spaniards; in this Country
are great store of Fowls, as Pellicans, and other red Fowls, being Sea Fowls in
the proportion of a Crane.

There is distant from the town some ten leagues a mighty great Mountain
bearing toward the West from the town of River Della Hatch. This Hill seems
to be far higher then the Glorodel. Upon it snow remains continually through
the coldness of its situation.

The nineteenth of December being Saturday, we came to another town called
Sancta Martha, the which we entered and there we found the Enemy with their
Wives and Children fled out of the town into the Mountains, but our men
following them into the Woods found some Treasure with other things of some
value. The same day we took one of the chief Cavaliers of the town, he was
the Governors Deputy of the town, the which we brought away with us; we
departed from Santa Martha, the twentieth of December being Sunday, at our
departure from the town (leaving it on fire,) we were informed by the
Spaniards that we were within three leagues of a Golden Mine.

The twenty five of December being thursday, we sailed toward another town
called Nombre de dios. The same day being Christmas day we came within the
sight of the Island called Pinos, distant from us twelve leagues. The twenty
seventh of December we anchored before the face of the town of Nombre de dios;
the same day Captain Arnold Baskerfield being Sergeant Major dyed; we being
embarked we landed all our men an English mile from the town, and so marched
toward the town, where the Enemy gave us a brovadoe of shor, and so they ran
away into the Woods, all their Goods and Treasure was gone before, they left
none but what was the Soldiers and that lay in a great Fort. They had but three
great Pieces of Ordnance, and one of them broke with the Shot, some of the
Soldiers we took prisoners.

The King usual sends all his Treasure and Merchandise to this place, and to
that end has Boats and Pinnaces, which continually bring his Treasure from
Panama to this place. We found some treasure in the Woods as Oil, Wine,
Vinegar, Meal, and Linen Cloth. Our General having intelligence of the
Governors going toward Panama. The monday after Sir Thomas Baskerfield our
Coriner General with six hundred men went by land, with intent to have
surprised him. The way was extreme dangerous to travel in, not only in regard
of the Enemy but also of the water and Rocks, insomuch that often times we went
in peril of our lives. In our march we saw great store of Munkyes, Apes, and
could hear Lions. This town of Panama stands upon the South Sea, and is
distant from Nombre de dios eighteen leagues; we marched nine leagues but could
get no farther, the Enemy preventing us by a Fort which they made on the top
of a Rock, which we of necessity must march through. It was so narrow that but
one man could go before another, which they taking the advantage of, slew our
men as fast as they ascended up; there being no other way ^o pass we were
constrained to retire with the loss of some of our best men, and with little
Joy unto us that we missed of our intended purpose. Coming to Nombre de dios
we seeng all of it almost consumed with fi^e, we hasted with all speed unto
our Ships again. In this March a pair of Shoos was sold for thirty
shillings, and a Biscuit Cake for ten Shillings; so great was our want both of
Clothing and Victuals.

The chief Captains and Commanders in this March was Sir Thomas Baskerfield,
Captain Nicholas Baskerfield our Lieutenant General, who was hurt in this
march; Captain Stanton, Captain Boswell, Captain Christopher, Captain Power
and Captain Bartley. The night before we came to Nombre de dios our men had
burned the great House wherein the Kings Treasure used to lie, when it came
from Panama; also there was burnt a town Inhabited by Negroes, which is distant
two leagues from Nombre de dios; at our coming thither they of the town gave
us a volley of shot, and so ran away leaving the town on fire.

The fifth of January being monday, we departed out of the Harbor toward
Scoday; the tenth of January being saturday, we came to Scoday, it beare^h
from Nombre de dios North and by West. The same day we gave chase to a Spanish
Frigate which came from this Island, the which we took: the eleventh being
sunday we brought the Frigate to our General, we found in him four Spaniards
and three Negroes, and not any thing of any account; she was found to be a
spy coming from Nombre de dios, and going to the towns there to give
intelligence of us.

The same day our General commanded all our sick Men to be carried a shore
and to have the best comfort we were able to give them to strengthen them;
also we builded four Pinnaces, and took in fresh water.

This Island is a Wilderness without any Inhabitants, but great store of
wild Beasts, as Bears, Nelegatures, Guanoes; the Nelegature is in form like
to a Serpent, the Guanoe like to a Snake, having four legs and along rail,
o^^ (...) are many pricks; these live on the Trees a^ (...) Squirrils do, the
Nelegature lives in (...) sweet meat, and in his bladder (...) steth
accordingly, its of the big* (...), we did eat very many of them. The (...)
^^^ntieth of January we departed from this Island of Sc^day bearing back
again toward Nombre de dios to an Island where we continued two days,
afterward we went to Porta Vella, being five days sailing between Scoday and
Porta Vella. The same day Sir Francis Drake our General departed this life,
whose death was exceedingly deplored, his interment was after this manner; His
Corpse being laid in a Cophin of Lead, he was let down into the Sea, the
Trumpets in doleful manner echoing out this lamentation for so great a loss,
and all the Cannons in the Fleet were discharged according to the custom of
all Sea Funeral obsequies. We continued here until the eighth of February
watring and ballasing our Ships. In this Horbor are some few houses Inhabited
with Spaniards, they beginning to build a new Town and a great Bulwark, which
we spoiled and burned; we found many Chests full of Carpenters tools with many
Iron Bars and other necessaries for building, which we brought away with us.
The day before we came away the Enemy came down and took some six of our Men
at the watring place. Certain of our Men were sent in Boats up the South side
of the River, where we found some more of their Carpenters tools. This Harbor
is very commodious for Shipping, having a good anchoring place and ten or
twelve fathom deep in water; we landed great store of Spaniards and Negroes at
this Island, giving the Enemy to understand that he would use our Men well
which they took prisoners coming from Panama, and sent a Messenger not
hearing any answer again, yet at our departure the Governor was come down with
many Soldiers with him who wrote to our General. The eighth of February we
came away from this Harbor of Porta Vella beating up to the height of
Cartagena, which was ten days after, we took our course for Gemico North
North and by West; within seventeen or eighteen leagues of Cartagena there
lies shoales ^en or twelve fathom deep. The second of February being
Thursday, we descried certain Islands called the Gourdanes which is distant
from Porta Vella two hundred leagues North North East, and Gemica bears from
these Islands of Gourdanes toward the East, they are very high land, and to
the West very low even land; we sailed all along to the Cape Corenthus; toward
the West of this low Land is shoales sometimes three fathom, which one of our
Ships hardly escaped. The twenty seventh of this month we passed these shoales
by reason of a great gale of wind, and took our course North North East. The
saturday being the one and thirtieth of February, we espied the Islands of the
Pines West North west on the starbordside; these Islands are without
Inhabitants. The first of March we espied twenty sail of the Kings men of
War, we chased them and about three of the clock in the afternoon we began
to fight with them and continued three hours in fight, the Viseadmirall gave us
a shot, then the Elizabeth Boneventure gave her a shot again, then the
Boneventure came in and gave him ^ bravadoe with all her broad side that she
shot through and through, then came up our General and gave them a brave
volley of shot, next came the Defiance and she laid on most bravely, next the
Adventure she laid on that we could see through and through; it was a most
brave attempt, but God be thanked we had the upper hand of them, we plying the
Viseadmirall so fast that if she had not born up from us she had sunk, and
another that was near her; we drove them into such a puzell that with stopping
their leakes as we judged, their Powder being loose fired all the Ships as we
did behold, within two hours after we had done the fight. The next day we
sailed toward Cape S. Anthony there following us but thirteen of our gallants,
they kept their course and would not come at us, but at length they came
somewhat nigh us and the Defiance and the Adventure bore up to them, but they
made away as soon as ever they were able, and so we were rid of our gallants.
The fourth of March we descried the Cape of S. Anthony, it is distant from Cape
Corents eighty leagues, from thence to the Havana, eighty leagues from thence
to the Gulf. The same day we descried the Cape Florida, which is low Land and
did bear from us North West and by North, our course being North East, the
same day we entered the Gulf the wind being at East South East, leaving the
land on the larbordside; the Gulf is in length one hundred leagues, from the
Havano eighty league, the next night we passed the Gulf about twelve of the
clock in the night. The ninth of March we passed the Barmothies, we had mighty
tempestuous weather. The eighth of April 1596. we came to the Islands of
Flowers and Cores. It is inhabited with Potugals and such like, where we stayed
and watered, and traffiqued with them for Victuals or what we vvanted, using us
very kindly with fresh Fish, Hens and Bacon and such like, which refreshed us
vvonderfull well; and in short time after we gained the English Coast.

FINIS.

