SAMSON, OR THE Unhappy Lover. A POEM.

By Gerard De Gols, T. C. C. S.

LONDON, Printed for Robert Battersby at Staple-Inn-Gate near the Bars in
Holbourn, 1696.

To my Honored Brother, Philip De Gols, Gent.
SIR,
I Have for some time waited to express my Respects unto you, but having had
nothing worthy, I have hitherto stood out; nor do I presume now to build my
Security on Merits; but since kind Heaven has designed you for my Mecaenas, I
kneel at You the Shrine, and offer up the Unhappy SAMSON unto You, unhappy
indeed, deluded by them tempting Women, then still imitating the first
Delusion: Nor truly, though it is a long time since, do I think it is out of
Date, or that the Ladies have forgot it, (the less the more pity;) Or there is
no sign for it yet. But I would not have the Ladies think hard of me, because I
pity poor SAMSON's Case, and his Mistresses Infidelity; not that I suppose all
Ladies Faithful alike neither. But why do I Carp at the Ladies? those tender,
soft, sweet, harmless Creatures. Sure, as to outward Appearance, there cannot be
much harm in that Sex: But stay, and since SIR You admire 'em too, I shall not
speak against them, but only court your Condescension to accept this: And I
could wish that it was worthy You, who Fortune and Nature conspiring, have made
you the happiest Man: Fortune gave Quality, Nature Generosity, Wit, and all
Virtuous Qualifications, whereby You are successful in the Hearts of the Fair,
Obliging to all, esteemed beloved, adored by all; You, You alone, the Darling
of Mankind. And these uncommon Endowments have all their Center in Your Breast,
unmixt with Vices to sullen Your Glory; But besides, Your Ingenuity so gently
shown in Your softness of Poetry, seems to derive its Original from the
sweetness of Your Disposition; and sure, Your Favor to, and acquaintance with
Poetry, is so Great, that You alone deserve to claim the Laurel. I hope You
will accept this, and that it may give You some Recreation in the Perusal; and
so I beg leave to gratify my Ambition, to subscribe my self,

Honored BROTHER, Your humble, and obedient devoted Servant, Gerard De Gols,
T. C. C. S.

SAMSON, OR THE Unhappy Lover.
SO God has wrought the Deed, now Ruins lay
Where e're Triumphant Israel cut their way;
Whilst with his Strength the Almighty led 'em on,
Robbed other Nations, to give them the Throne:
Protected them where e're their Arms displayed,
And Strengthened in a Clouds refreshing Shade*
Yes, in the Deserts, Health and Safety made.
Now Pharaoh's might, with his bright Chariot's hurled,
And sent beneath to the Underwatty World:
Where is his Power, Gods People to Inslave?
While Israel dug, they dug Pharaoh's Graye*
Sihon, with mighty Og, for Death decreed,
And Median Kings, like Hecatombs did bleed*
Kings numberless, were vanquished all around,
And Walls were rooted up by Trumpet Sound.
Thus God destroyed, and with his powerful Hand
Led Israel safe unto his promised Land:
Now did the Wars and bloody Slaughters cease,
Encircled with the hopes of Lasting Peace.
But Ah! Where Is Peace, when God the Javelin throws?
The Peace with Canaan, Israel overthrows;
To Idols now they run; Ah Joshua's Dead!
They sacrifice to Baal, forget their God;
Uncircumsised, they mix with Sacred Blood.
Then God enraged, did Lighten every Flash,
Brought burning Flames, and struck the Face
With mighty Thunder, mixed of the Universe.
At stake their Honor and their Glory lay,
For God had left 'em for Devourers Prey.
The Heathen Monsters roul'd the Swelling Tide,
Raging they came, and gaped Destruction wide:
Israel then tattered in their rusty Steel,
With broken Bows and Darts, they stoop and kneel;
And from the Almighty's Throne of Justice fly,
And to his Mercy Seat for Pardon cry:
God he hears Prayers, with Prayers we God may move,
He stopped his Hand, was mindful of his Love.
Here the Almighty, awful Majesty,
Curbs his hot Wrath, he casts a pitying Eye,
With Mercy moved, he could not see 'em Dye;
Though all their Glory was as't were intom'b,
Though all their Honor was unwing'd, unplum'd:
Though Moses, Joshua dead, their Friend's above,
And Judges now shall more auspicious prove;
Judges shall judge the Tribes, their Wars they will wage,
Destroy their Foes, and even with Death engage.
Such was the mighty SAMSON, whose great Birth
By Heavenly Quire was sung, twice told on Earth;
Eager and Young, in the valiant list he came,
The God of War push't on the Noble Game;
In his Veins Blood, with eager Zeal would rise,
His tender Cheeks did Glow, with Sparkling Eyes.
War his first Mistress was, for War alone
Designed by God, to fight for Isreal's Crown:
Great were the Ideas of his Yet Young Soul,
'Twas Honor, and Ambition all, War whole.
Great were the Labors he would already done,
And now was called for Judge to Israel's Throne:
A Nazarite by Birth, with eager Zeal
To free his Nation, seek Revenge with Steel.
And now ascending to the Judgment Seats,
In Mighty Words his faithful Mind repeats:
Thus Isreal's God with Conquest crowns my Head,
By fragrant Zeal, and true Devotion led,
With mighty Victory my Foes I Slay,
And Thousands by this Hand do vanquished lie
Winged with Success, the Philistines I invade,
Philistines to all Ill, by me betrayed:
Fields with their Carcasses I covered over,
And urge my self through Floods of Humane Gore.
Inspired by Vengeance, still they will feel my Arm,
With spilling of their Blood, my Blood I Will warm:
This Hand shall make 'em fear; I Will bring 'em low;
Their dismal Ruins all on heaps I Will throw,
Though they are stiff to kneel, too tall to bow:
Yet on their Necks I Will set my lofty Throne,
And place my Chariot with the Rising Sun.
No Priest shall e're here Baals Altar load,
No Fragrant Gums shall burn t'a barbarous God;
No Heathen State shall for Alliance sue,
Though Nations shall with Courting Friendship woo;
No Crown with all its taudry tempting Pride,
No Coronet shall ever move this Head;
For God I fight; God shall reward the Deed.
To nothing shall my fixed Soul give way,
No Lust shall tempt, nor Wanton Women's Eye:
Women! (kind Heaven forbid!) though all her Gems,
And beauteous Face, out shines the Suns Radiant Beams;
I Will conquer sordid Lust, so vile, so foul:
Ah wretched thought! too mean for my Great Soul;
God's Nazarite I am, and Judge of Israel.
Isreal's Laws I Will write, and mark in Blood,
And bear the Mandates of Great Jacob's God.
Thus spoke the mighty Hero; at whose Word
The Tribes astonished, drew their Warlike Sword:
He with his Courage led the Glorious Train,
To free 'em from the base Philistines Reign:
And while he spoke, Fame did her Trumpet Sound,
And flew with his mighty Name to all around.
All Nations with a fearful Reverend Awe,
Adored his Name, as Heaven revered him too;
And in the Sky, on wavering Wings she hung,
And his Great Deeds in moving Notes she sung.
Blessed be the Hero, who Gods Quarrel takes,
Oh Heaven! thy Wrongs his justest Vengeance wakes,
Who ready strove, and strives, and e're shall toil,
To Conquer Philistines, to lead their Spoil:
And whilst he lives, due Wrath shall swell his Soul.
So have I seen him, when in Timnath's Plain,
A Lion roared, unto whose Breast he ran,
And rent his hardened Flesh with his Hands alone.
And thirty Men at Askelon he threw,
Brought forth their Spoil, and sent 'em down Below,
So deep to Hell, as to Heaven his Fame does Go.
Here Samson, Zorah shall thy Deeds proclaim,
And sing thy Matchless ever-living Fame;
While Brands with Foxes, as your Ensigns fly,
And Olives, Corn do burn, before your Eye,
And make the Vineyards as the Deserts lie.
He roused again by Wrongs, his Sword he draws,
And weds his Mighty Hand to a spotless Cause:
Now the Great SAMSON, he could hold no more,
Here his winged Wrath, his flaming Lightning bore;
He Crush't, and Conquered, filled the Fields with Gore.
A while the Labors of our Hero stay,
While he fixed Grounds, for Glorious Triumphs lay,
To Etams Rock he is gone, to bring the Day.
No, the Great SAMSON cannot take his Rest;
No little time for him's in Halcyons Nest:
Philistines Wrath again him, cause Affords,
Judah betrays him, bind his Hands with Cords;
And in Philistines Camp they SAMSON lead,
Unhappy SAMSON! now ordained to bleed.
Great was the Quire, and long Tuned was their Joy,
Their Shouts were Mighty, up to Heaven they fly,
With Trumpets, Cimbals, sung the Victory.
Thus tied and bound, the Mighty SAMSON stood,
His mighty Hand still by his Courage led,
He wrung his Arms, and strait the People sled.
His Hands he did unfold, he broke the Cords,
His Foes he did pursue, his Rival Lords:
An Asses Jaw Bone from the Ground he took,
His Foes the Great Philistines, then he struck;
With mighty Slaughter and Confusion Grew,
With loud Alarms the fearful People Flew,
So loud, so dismal Cry, did e're where Roll,
As caused Amazement into every Soul;
Heaven it self as an Admirer stood,
Grew Pale to see his Hands so stained in Blood.
While he with Conquest winged, and thus inspired,
Pursues his haughty Foes, with Zeal untir'd;
Pusht on their Fates to the utmost point of War,
Nor thought he could have scattered Death too far,
While Thousand Souls cried Vengeance through the Air.
Thus sung the Goddess, but confined She was
To Numbers; his great Deeds were Numberless:
Then strait She flew, to assail the lofty Sky,
While her aspiring laboring Thoughts let fly,
These Words she left, and then she flew away.
Religion is his great Ambitious Aim,
No Object of a tempting Lustful Flame;
No Love shall ever clasp him in her Arms,
No Love shall move, endeared with Thousand Charms:
No Beauty ever, with its killing Eyes,
Shall cause his Soul a Bleeding Sacrifice.
This Cupid heard, who from his Throne above,
'Twixt Heaven and Earth, did on his Pinions move;
Pampered with Pride, with powerful Lust was fed,
With Envy burned, and with Ambition led:
Enraged, his Blood did boil, and wrung his Hands,
And cried, Not Heaven denis my Great Commands:
And shall a Mortal here my Strength despise?
Though he be great, his Name to Heaven does rise;
Yet I Have in Heaven my Throne, fixed far above,
Where mortal Reach, aspiring Thought can move.
And shall my Glory thus abused lie?
My Name thus scorned, and I a Mortals Play?
Or what extravagant Thought dares soar so high!
As to dispute my Worlds Supremacy?
Or who does dare deny me, Heaven too?
In Heaven, or Earth, I will no room afford,
Nor Hell it self shall boast a Rival Lord.
Who dares behold, and face me unador'd!
By this my Dart, all hardened Hearts shall bleed,
I Will vanquish Triumph, all to Love I Will lead,
Even SAMSONS Heart's for Sacrifice decreed.
Though he rejects a thousand Amorous Charms,
Or vilifies Loves tender sacred Arms.
Yet here is his Fate, he shall to love obey,
His haughty Soul I will in Ruins lay:
How dares a Mortal scorn a Deity?
Though Cords cannot bind, no Chains his hands can close,
Though with his naked hands he a Lion throws.
On heaps casts Men, a Thousand at a Blow,
Yet one poor Dart sent from my mighty Bow,
Shall melt his Heart, and love alone he will bear,
And be as great in Love as he is in War:
No Thought but Love shall ever reach his Mind,
Through Love, with Love, like Love, he shall be blind.
Thus spoke the mighty Love, and straight he fled,
In's hand his Bow, on's side his Quiver laid:
To Gaza then he flew, whereas he past,
On a Notorious Fair his Eyes he cast:
Then spoke the God, This shall the Conqueress be,
And she shall lead Great SAMSONS Soul astray;
Then eager in his Thoughts, his Mind inspired,
And with an ardent Soul her Heart he fired:
And Flaming Javelins in her Breast he threw,
Yes, common sordid Lust he gave her too.
Here Our Great Hero's Soul does him invite,
At Gaza now to show, his wondrous Might,
His Name must greater be, his Trophies infinite,
But SAMSON, stay, Ah! Whither do you run?
From Gaza flee, Ah! Love is in the Town;
Love seeks your heart, will rob you of your Crown.
Mean time, when Samson's noble Thoughts were high,
And thought on Slaughters, Battles in the Way;
When all his Mind was only Victory,
Love see the Warlike Hero as he came,
And in his Eyes moved first a gentle Flame;
Then in his Mind he kindled a soft heat,
The Idea of his Soul waxt all Delight;
At last he farther tried the Noble Guest,
He drew, and shot a Dart into his Breast.
Now gently, the fierce Monarch grew more kind,
And all his Strength was whole for Love designed;
On Women thinks, and throws the Jaw away,
And naught but Women's Heart shall be his Prey.
At Gaza, mighty Samson he arrives,
He knows not whether he be dead, or lives;
His Mind is Roving, thinking on soft Charms,
He wished him Blessed, clasp't round in Lovers Arms:
And thus, whilst laboring with these Thoughts oppressed,
His Eye, then Wanton Eye, spied room for Rest.
What must poor Samson do? his Heart does burn,
Love does him draw, from Gaza he cannot turn;
He Will venture on, and to the Fair One fly,
Bless the short Night, and love the Sun shall stay.
Away he goes, wrapped with loves Dearest Charms,
Looses the Night within her tender Arms;
But still his Soul is laboring with a Care,
He cannot rest, Ah, he is come too far!
So Faults with Sweets indear'd, yet Tortures bear.
His Thoughts did tell him, how Philistines laid,
And watched to Murder him, even as they did;
His very Soul did cry, You are betrayed.
Then from his Sleep and Slumb'rings he did rise,
He see all Dark, no sprinkling Stars in the Skies;
All things were hush't, no little Birds repair,
No Murmuring Notes do sound through the dusky Air:
All Nature sleeps, yes, wakes he and his Foe,
He dares not stay, he must, yes, he will go;
He went, and like a Martial Eagle flew:
No Thunder from the Skies so swift e're rod,
And carried Vengeance from the angry God.
In vain they VVatch, in vain with hopes they Feed,
In vain their Arms, and all their Snares are spread;
VVings on his Feet, and Lightning in his Eyes,
By Fears and Hopes, and with his wrath he flies:
Not Lucifers Armado could engage
The Glorious Michael with more hellish Rage,
Both by his VVishes, and hot Blood inspired,
Thundered when e're he Breathed, and when he looked he fired.
The City Gates at length our Samson spies,
He see the VVatch, he thought himself the Prize;
The Gates were shut, the Guards stood all about,
Now Courage leads his vigorous Arm, he stout,
Does urge himself through Death; and as he flew,
He clasp't the Gates, and took the Pillars too,
With Posts and Bars, he on his Shoulders threw:
And left the Guard astonished at the Sight,
Fear shook their Limbs, more dreadful the Night.
Away he fled to Hebron; now he Goes,
He leaves on the Hill his Load, and mocks his Foes.
His Thoughts did swell with dangerous Amorous Care,
He Will never more encounter in that War.
His Mind was heavy; how the Almighty Power
Which he would abused, forgot should help him more;
No more by Heaven, he swears, that VVanton Pride,
Nor VVomans Eyes shall call his Soul aside;
He scorns to see an Amorous Lustful Bride.
But stay, the God of Love, his Fall will cause,
No War lies in his Breast; he lives in Peace,
The fairer time to conquer him with ease,
Your Fate is firm, your self Oh Samson's Snare,
Lest Love destroys you quite, with wanton Air,
And burn you more than with Promethean Fire.
But see, Great Samson's Mind is still in Love,
He tugs with Charms, those Sweets he cannot leave;
Those pleasant Thoughts he cannot again possess,
Those sacred Bonds of humble innocent Peace;
Still he does Labor in his Royal Mind,
His Will, and yet his Oath, cannot be joined;
He would, but dares not now to Gaza Go,
He Will go another way, those Charms to flee;
To Zoreck he will run, sure there is no Love,
He bids the VVind those wretched Thoughts remove:
Yes, Samson yes! at Zoreck there is Love,
Ah! see it does not to you fatal prove.
God Cupid for you Snares, there too has laid,
And shot the heart of every tender Maid;
To Zoreck now he goes, with Thoughts oppressed,
He fears lest cursed Love should fire his Breast;
And he again Despise, forget his God,
Deep laboring Cares do vex his drooping Head:
Still on he Goes, and to the place draws nigh,
Nor had he long cast round his dazzled Eye;
But see Delilah, as she passed by:
Neat was her Shape, and gentle was her Mien,
Her Face was Charming Fair, no Spot was seen;
Like Stars in the Firmament did shine her Eye,
More Amorous Flames than burning Comets show:
Would fire Mortals, and to love them frame,
Yes, Hearts more fierce than Lions gently tame.
Then Cupid shook his Wings; and from above,
On his poor Breast, threw wretched drops of Love:
Love Courage gave, to Love he did prepare,
And Love now cures all his uneasy Care;
Where e're she goes, still follows Samson on,
Her lovely Mien, and glorious Face drew on,
The Eyes and Heart of our great Champion.
Here he does act a Real Lovers part,
Expresses lively to her Soul his Heart,
Till she with him did sympathize the Smart.
Again the Hero, Oh unhappy sight!
In beauteous Masks, and wanton Balls delight,
And with their Sports they loose the Amorous Night.
Then God enraged, and Wrath his Hand did move,
His Lightning Flasht, sent Thunder from above;
Black Night cloak't Heaven over, Earthquakes he made*
And Desolation was by 's Nodding laid:
No Stars did in the Firmament appear,
They silent were, and hid themselves for fear.
Then God arose, and his long Silence brake,
And with his mighty Voice from Heaven he spoke:
How dares a mortal Worm thus raise his Head?
How dares he thus despise, forget his God?
I ever Living God, Great Majesty,
Who governs Heaven and Earth, who gives the Day,
And sends the Night; by this my Hand alone,
I raised the Heavens, the Earthly Bull laid down,
I Am God alone, who dares dispute my Crown?
I moved with Love, created Human Kind,
In's Face I placed the Image of my Mind;
Gave him what Heaven and Earth e're could afford,
Of the whole Universe I made him Lord:
But straight the cursed Man rebellious grew,
He sinned against me, and despised me too.
Still pity moved my Breast, and I again
The wretched Mortals gave a second Reign;
Abraham's Seed I for my Darling chose,
Where e're he trod, there was he blessed in Joys:
How many Nations have I for him stain?
Pulled down their Thrones, and caused them to Reign.
Ungrateful Israel, the more I bless,
Still the more stubborn they, they prize the less;
Here now my Judge, my Samson, who I loved,
With who I was with dear Compassion moved,
Forgets me quite, his Glory he pulls down,
And wastes my Image, making of his own;
Forgets his God, to Women he gives ear,
Once I already freed him from that care,
When he at Gaza was, but now no more;
Though he should pray, I heard his Prayers before.
A thousand fatal Hardships this shall prove,
I Will leave him quite, let him go on in Love;
As he did me, I will forget him now,
I Will not regard his Cries, as he his Vow:
I swear, and't shall be true, he his Reward shall have,
And with this Love he will find himself a Grave.
Thus the Almighty God in Anger spoke,
His thundering Voice the Crystaline did shake;
Earthquakes were raised, the Sea tempestuous grew,
Leviathan stretched the Billows as he flew,
And Hurricanes around the Mountains blew:
Dismal the Noise, and horrid was the Sound,
The Winds still bursted as they touched the Ground;
All things conspired, as't were to loose their hold,
And bring Confusion dreadful, as of Old.
This Samson heard, dread Terror struck his Soul,
Amazement struck him Dumb, like Dead, so Foul
With wretched Sin, Ah! Samson now does hide
His Face, ashamed of what he lately did,
Ashamed of what no one did know beside.
So Sin to the Conscience bears a horrid sting,
And thinks each whisling Wind revenge does bring;
Now Samson's struck by God, how fain he would quit
Those foolish Joys, be blessed in Gods sight.
What must poor Samson do? Alas! he is dead,
He thinks, if he does come again to God,
And if in sin he stays, he will still increase
His cursed Crime, sure then can hope no Peace.
But God has left him now, his Strength's too weak,
Those Bonds by Cupid tied, he cannot break;
Those Love-tyes tie too fast; Ah wretched Man!
Philistines know you're here, they seek again.
Oh! Samson you will be tried, keep the Secret given,
And Oh! let no one know, but you and Heaven.
Now Samson slumbering, eased his mighty Cares,
Love has its Toyls, as well as laboring Wars;
Philistine Princes came, and Dow'rs they bring,
Sure Baits for an unguarded Heart to fling:
They will reward Delilah, if she knew
What mighty Samsons Force could stay, and how?
All things may fix, but none more surer hold,
Than what is made by the well-try'd magic Gold.
She Is Charmed, and willing the Hero betray,
And now she will only strive for Victory.
Now had soft Sleep yet left his drowsy Eyes,
And he Enjoyed a gentle slumbering Ease;
But then the Delilah with her Amorous Charms,
Encircled him around with tender Arms;
And swears by Baal her God, may Curses fall,
And in her Breast be all the Plagues of Hell:
All Tortures ever thought, she will be true,
May she but only that great Secret know.
His mighty Strength, and what his hand may bind,
Yet Samson's loath to tell his anxious Mind;
Thinks this a sin again; Ah! he doubts now,
If any thing he will tell, or false, or true:
At last Green Withs, he says, around me tie,
Will tame my Strength, and all my Power stay.
So Samson spoke, with Withs his hand she tied,
(And Watchmen Armed she in her Chamber hid,)
Philistines over thee, Delilah cried.
Then Samson rose, for God was not yet gone,
The Withs he brake, straight when his hands he wrung.
Again Delilah, she does not yet know,
Again she will try what kinder Words may do;
Kind Words, says she, may move a stony Heart,
Now Samson say, Why should you False impart
For Truth, resolve the Question, let me know,
New Ropes, says Samson, never used, may bow;
And stay my Force. Delilah then she tried,
But found that vain, she found she was belied.
Yet once more Delilah will try with Words,
Deluding Words may bind more strong than Cords:
Oh Samson! how can e're thy Bosom bear,
To hear my Cries, and not regard my Prayer;
I pray, if ought you care, if ought you love,
If any dearment can your Passion move:
Dear Soul, I pray, let me no longer crave,
If seven of my Locks with a Web you weave;
Will stay my Power; Oh Samson save your Head!
See what you do, you are almost betrayed.
Let not her moving Words gain you too far,
Oh! don't reveal the Secret of your Hair:
God*s not yet gone, who knows but he may stay;
Kind Heaven forbid, you should your self betray.
Then Delilah his Hair did tie to a Pin,
And fastened to a Beam; Alas all vain!
He rose, and see, he broke the hold again.
Then Delilah her Heart was grieved, she su'd,
She wept, and with her Tears she Samson wooed;
Cold trickling Tears on her fair Cheeks did roll,
In Sighs revealed the Sorrow of her Soul.
How can you say you love me? Samson say,
When you still mock, and keep me for your Play;
Where is that Love, which you so often did swear?
Ah! where is the Passion which for me you bear?
And your Heart from me still, yes, though I cry,
And beg in Tears, you mock me still all day;
Is this your Love, kind Heaven? mine other it;
Oh that I knew what could complete thy Bliss!
With Words and Sighs, and Kisses I Would relate;
Surely, this is no Love, but sign of Hate:
This only thing you from my Soul do hide,
As Heaven is true, and I your faithful Bride,
The Secret I will keep, and none shall know beside.
Now Samson's moved, his Heart does melt away,
Who can deny, when whining Women pray?
His very Soul was grieved to hear her Sigh,
With open Heart unto her Arms he will fly,
Reveal the Secret now, though he should die.
My Dear, Ah! do not grieve too much; arise,
And wipe the trickling Tears from your Bright Eyes.
Why should you vex your self, and Sorrow wear,
Am I not Samson, your Beloved here?
The Secret you shall know, to you I Will tell,
What e're my Heart does know, you will know it all:
I am a Nazarite, by God decreed,
No Razor ever touched my rigid Head;
My Hair was never cut; and if it be,
My Strength departs, and all my Powers flee;
My Hands are weak, unfit for Victory.
Now she rejoiced, and now he is e'ne betrayed,
While Samson on her Knees himself had laid,
To take a little Rest, a soft Repose;
Delilah sent for the Princes, Samson's Foes:
And in her hand, his rigid Hair she had,
Whilst others with a Razor shaved his Head.
Arise Great Samson, rise, but Ah too late!
See now the Secret of your faithful Bride,
Bewail not her, bewail your dismal Fate;
Philistines over you. Then straight he rose,
But Ah! his Strength was fled, he see his Foes:
He thought as ever now, to wrest him free,
But now God's gone, he is in Captivity;
The unhappy cause of Love now Samson found,
Her heart does first entice, and then she will wound:
A heart deserving more, his Doom then his,
His Crimes are here outdone, by her Victories.
Here all the depth of Love he finds, all Air
Her Vows, her Frowns all Blood, her Smiles all snare.
Samson he is conquered, Ah! what must he do?
Alas! to Dungeons, Prisons, he must go:
While's Enemies are glad, and do rejoice,
And fill the Air with a victorious Voice.
Their Altars now they load, Dagon he too,
For this mistaken Conquest, has his due.
Philistines they so loud their Dagon sung,
Till through the hollow Skies the Echo rung;
And Samson too, they to the Altar bring.
They bind and tie him fast, put out his Light,
And leave the Body Dark as blackest Night,
And to their Dagon offer up his Sight.
To Gaza they poor Samson led; Ah! there
In dismal Dungeons cast, must Shackles wear;
In Fetters closed he lives, Oh! might he live
In Peace and Quiet, and his sad Fate there grieve:
Oh! no hard Labors now he undergoes,
Blind, in a Mill he Grinds, is struck by's Foes;
Where as to rest himself a while, he sat,
And thus in Tears bewailed his Wretched Fate.
Unhappy me! deprived of all what is good,
My Joys are gone, and all my Pleasure fled;
My Hopes are snatched, for I am left by God.
In Dungeons here, in Fetters bound I lie,
Oh that I were so happy as to Die!
My Feet with Chains are torn, I Shackles bear,
Am desolate, my very Life I fear.
But most unhappy yet, in Darkness creep,
Blind, Eyeless, Dark as Night, or Death-like Sleep.
O loss of Sight! for thee I pine away,
Eclipse Eternal, and no hopes of Day;
No hopes of Light!
Among Inhumane Foes at Gaza's Mill,
Labors more hard than all the Pangs of Hell:
At Gaza's Mill I grind, my Foes a Slave,
Unhappy me, my Tomb, my self my Grave.
Oh! had I never seen that tempting Fair,
Heard those deluding Words, or see that Air;
Oh! had I never seen those Eyes, that mighty Light,
Which blinded me, and dimmed me more than Night;
Night hopes for Day, but I cannot hope for Sight:
I Would not forgot, no not despised my God,
In Glory I had lived, enjoyed all Good.
What must I do? my God I did displease,
Oh that he was my Friend! All my Enemies
Were Chaff unto my Hands; I Would draw my Sword,
And in the Dust with Blood, their Fates record.
But he is fled, to who now must I fly?
I dare not rise, and him for Pardon Pray;
Heaven against me's shut, no Grace is left
For wretched me, of all my Joys bereft.
Yet I will rise, though Thunder strikes me dead,
And Lightning blasts my Soul, I Will rouse my Head;
And with my Prayers I Will break quite through the Air,
Until my Prayers shall reach the Almightys Ear.
Thus Samson spoke, and Sighing, down he lay,
His Griefs were many, and his Sorrows true;
Grief vexed his Breast, he could no longer Cry,
But in deep Sighs, his Soul would Pardon pray.
Now Princes joined again, they the People call,
To Celebrate another Festival,
To sing to Dagon our Great Champions Fall.
Samson is called for, he must be their Play,
He Is struck at's Work, and mocked at all the Day;
Betwixt the Pillars, he does stand for public View.
Once more he will try if Prayers ought can move,
He Will pray once more, for Vengeance from above;
All he desires is Death, that he might have
One Blow, and give himself and's Foes a Grave:
War his true Friend, he prays, may leave him last,
Whilst living he adored, her still embraced,
And in his dying Pangs he will hold her fast.
Now he is in hopes that God has cast an Eye;
An Eye of Pity reconciled him too;
He grasped the mighty Pillars where he stood,
Joined in his Prayers, with all his Strength he bowed,
And over-threw the House, a fatal Fall,
Whilst in confusion many a thousand Soul:
In their own Sables, hellish black Arrayed,
Were hurled headlong to the Eternal Shade.
Whilst our Great Hero in a Chariot rod,
And shook the Christaline where e're he trod;
To Heaven he flies, where waiting Angels stayed,
Prepared his Throne, prepared his Diadem laid:
Fragrant he came, with Vengeance of his Foes,
As Radient as the Sun, to Heaven he goes.
With fresh Repentance, Newborn now he came,
No Spot is on his Breast, a sacred Flame
Is Ardent in his Soul, he sees the Joys,
Eternal Bliss, is eager in his ways;
Now reconciled, to his God he flies.
FINIS.
ADVERTISEMENTS.
SYlvia's Revenge, Or a Satyr against MAN, in Answer to the Satyr against
WOMAN. The Second Edition.

SYlvia's Complaint of her Sexes Unhappiness. A Poem. Being the Second Part of
Sylvia's Revenge, or a Satyr against MAN. To which is added, the Emulation, a
Pindarique ODE. The Second Edition.

Both Printed for Robert Battersby at Staple-Inn Gate near the Bars in
Holbourn.


