DEFENSIO LEGIS: OR, The Whole STATE OF ENGLAND Inquisited and Defended FOR
General Satisfaction.

LONDON: Printed by Andrew Clark, and are to be sold by William Cooper, at the
Pelican in Little Britain, MDCLXXIV.

Collegium S.S. et Individuae Trinitatis in Academia Cantabrigiensi
bookplate

Defensio Legis.
Section I.
Paragraph 1. The occasion of this Discourse.
I Could willingly have still shaded my self within the Bower of silence: Being
no apt Disputant for a weighty Cause. But seeing this dangerous Weed, Sedition,
unthankful and perverse: bloom saucily unconform'd.

I could not restrain from giving the world some Glimmerings of this Glittering
Saint: shrowding a devout Fraud under the Crimson Mantle of the Spirit: some
filthy Fiend crept in at (...) back door; enraging Vulgars to scoff at Law, and
taunt at Majesty: And if the Tree be known by the Fruit, this Ghost without
Galilaeou's Glass, to pry into the Gisard: may prove an apparent Impostor, or
whiffling Cheat; leavened with a greater Dose of the Conspirator, than
Phanatick; when Designs are mellow, to foal Rebellion.

Par. 2. A good Spirit is tractable to Law.
A Righteous spirit sent from Heaven is pliant, and passive, submissive to
Thrones: and for favors kisses the hand, with an humble and prostrate knee:
But this ugly Bold face, this Carrion Hagg, through cockering is become most
haughty, and rages Aloft, stark Rude, up in the Boughs, and over Rampant; even
vapouring and kicking at Authority.

When Sedition grows mutinous and hairy, gibing at Law, and frumping
Magistracy; near sledg'd to fly into Empires face: It Is high time for
Governors to look about them, lest the State be overmuch Disquieted and
Distempered by too long forbearings.

I shall not be Blithe with the Amused, the poor mislead Wanderers: only blush
some shameless Deluders, that will take no warning, but like resty Bulls of
Bashan, over hedge and ditch, that no Ecclesiastical Canon, nor Secular Fence
can hold them.

Par. 3. The most Prosperous ever moaning.
WHen I travel the Region of Frailty, viewing the many slidings that attend
humane nature, I find none so Doltish and Inexcusable as the Pantings of the
most Happy, to whine and pretend Infelicity: like Crocodiles that blubber much,
when most Designing to devour. The Boorishness of others, now their heads are
well fastened to their shoulders; to flurt and abuse Clemency, I much lament:
after the Gratitude of Harpies, to repay Favors with Fury; at the long run to
destroy themselves.

Such is the unhappiness of some unquiet and peevish Moaners; glutted with the
Dowries of Heaven, Preedom, Peace and Plenty: blessings which does not only
disoblige our Ecclesiastic Amusers, the Chatterers against Monarchy, but even
distract them: being sadly unthankful and pettishly Blinded, without veneration
for either. And without a straight hand, the Fretful, the Sucklings of
Sedition, will rabble on in this testy heat against the State, and stand in
little awe of an Ordinance Royal.

Par. 4. Their Exceptions mere sandy Cavils not worth Answering.
THeir rombling Schism has been shamefully refuted by their own Tribe, it is
bootless for me to undertake such Hobbyhorse whimbles: the Cross in Baptism a
Popish remain: the Surplice and Hood dangerous Mormo's and Limbs of the Beast;
Congying toward the East, Cringes learnt from Rome; the scrapes of Antichrist.
Pretty flim-flams, more impertinent and Camelion, than querying why Grass is
green, or Blood red: no brand-new Brawls, but the musty Relics of our doughty
Brablers: the old Disobedients, which by the abetments of Liberty and Malice,
bud afresh, to the fretting of Religion.

Par. 5. Recedings from Law are Retraits from Reason.
I AM grieved for wincing Scorners, the Kickers against Authority; with what
Frothiness and Fury some foam to Rent and Rip all asunder; to Patch and Botch
what is so modishly suited and exactly fitted; to hurry the Church in sensum
Reprobum, or desperate Estate, as the 35 E. 1. adjudges it.

But why this Elopement, or causless Revolt from the Mother Church? for our
good Redoubbors or holy Patchers well know without a Bath-koll, or an Echo
from Heaven, that what is now settled, is by Act of State, no Canon of the
Church; no introductive new Law, an Explanatory Reviver only of the Old.

Par. 6. The cause of this Distractiveness.
CErtainly this crump and scurvy Temper springs from the Tickley Tree: wholly
crook'd through overmuch Fondness, in listening to the night Crow: with an
unmanly easiness, in obeying her Croaks, as Head; whom nature ordered though
not as Neife or Heel, at best but as Heart, to associate in Amity: and not to
domineer as sole Commandress. And though their Lips are not sealed up, God
ordained their Tongues to be silent: And not to be at Rovers, to gossop beyond
the Milk-pale, or Dresser-board.

This titling Bed-parot, must on necessity (there is no disputing with Fire and
Brimstone) reign as Absolute as the Mogul, and be Mistress Controuleress:
otherwise the house must ring of Brawlings; and after a Tempest, a Shower may
happen. If Cow-spirited in lacking the common Lerry of Thunder and Lightning,
or the art of Chiding and Brabling: then the Mumps and Sullens, must be the
Henbane Rally, to set the man beside Himself, to buckle to her Zeal.

Doleful Doctrine, that the subject, ordained to rock Cradles; and slop between
the Kitchen and the Dairy, should be lectur'd; to dare not only punch the
Governor, but contrary to nature, to prowl and pout even for the Scepter: For
Man by Precepts from Heaven, and Commands of Nature, is Sovereign: and the
Female by both subjected to his very will, and born to obey.

Domineerings per force are morally Essoinable.

This prattling Nightingale, is in part excusable, and may come off without a
white sheet: for she is not only sermon'd, and privily buzzed in the ear; but
conjured, indeed over-haunted, even worried out of her wits, under Threats of
future Fire, by our Church-Ravens, to promote the bonny Old Cause, with Curtain
Lectures. And if Passion may not rule the roast, or she wear the Breeches, for
the Confessor to pick out the Pictures: then to turn Rantress, scold Reason off
the Perch, and hawk with her own Spaniels.

No Ministress of State unless justly Entitled.

Out of Tenderness to the Sex, and for several other causes, the Law does wave
the feebler Vessel in all public Employments: being never so much as called or
sworn to the Law, only entrusted with the care of the Family, which is no
Niefty or home Drudgery, nor the Italian or Spanish Mew, but Promotion and
Favor: for she is left as domestic Princess, with the power of Cover and Key,
to rule within doors; which is the female calling, the main end of their
Creation: House-matters the Spit and the Boiler, being too womanish and
Abasing, beneath the Dignity of Man, to cumber himself with.

But in case Authority, or inheritable Honor be annexed to the Blood and
Progeny: as the Crown, or other descendable Dignity; then for the regard to the
right the Salick Law takes no place: the Sex is not distinguishable, Presuming
they will never adventure Abroad, to transact public Concerns, unless ushered by
virile Gravity.

The Factious Female commonly a Tyraness.

For quietness sake the soft-pated are usually Hen-peckt, and overcome with
night Twattles, and quite mump'd of their manliness: they tell us they are
enforced to sit down by this blockishness, or to be tired out of their lives
with scolding and pouting, and the house quickly too hot to hold them.

Par. 7. The reason of this plainness.
THE opening this window, with hasty Readers may be thought too great an
Airiness, unbecoming the Gravity of a politic Arguer, indeed the modesty of an
advised Pen, fitter for light-pated Pantalooners, quiblers, or quaffers.

For Proselytism not Table-talk.

I call God to witness I write not floutingly, out of a frumpish humor, to
raise Passion in some, or Pleasantness in others: but seriously, in obedience
to truth, to unseduce the poor enslaved souls: in showing the fraud and
weakness of their Teachers; on what slender and fallacious Wyres their Doctrine
hangs: to the Hazard of their highest Welfare, if not timely Prevented, by
broken Hearts and a full Reversion to the Church of England.

Neither Wanton nor Rancorous.

This may suffice for my smoothness of heart, in speaking thus plainly; for
it is well known, their cause not being so current, to endure the open Light;
they are fain to dispense with small creepings: And glad to take into their
assistance, the shestickler.

SECT. II.
Par. 8. Prelacy a graceful Prop or Column to Nobless.
WHen I consider the use and Gracefulness of Learning, with the necessity of
the Priesthood, or we might degenerate into Brutism: I greatly admire Coranto,
or by what color of Law or Prudence any well-bred person, especially the Tribe
of Honor, should discover a routish spirit in roving from Prelacy: to uncrown
the King and unnoble themselves.

That which corresponds best with Monarchy must needs garnish and strengthen
their order: It checks the sauciness of the Perones, those boggy flouters, or
fronts of Impudence; and thereby offers Incense to Honor. For should the
Church be reduced to that Beggary and Meanness: to quiet the rage of some
pudling Elopers, the grumblers against Prelacy, Monarchy would soon be
darkened, the eyes of the Church being put out, and Nobility must then on
course be totally eclipsed: If the substance fail, the shadow must vanish.
Majesty being the Sun and Temple of Honor, and that but the Reflex or
Adjective of Sovereignty. In nature the Accident will perish, without the
coherence of the Subject.

Par. 9. Scoffings are usually retalliated.
AS some in their grim Taunts have erred too deeply against the very Interest
of Learning: and must respond one day for their Treachery unbecoming Scholars:
I fear others having sinned against the Rules, and very Instinct of Honor, may
suffer for their frowardness, beneath Gentlemen, in their sharp Essays, and
quipping Brawls, to crucify the Church; the sojourner of the soul, and
Buttress of their own quality.

Caution to the Worthy.

In a word, let the well-born take Prudence by the hand, and counsel with the
concerns of Greatness: And they shall find it is Debitum Honoris, a Law and Duty
levant on generous Blood, to have a care of Monarchy, the soul of Honor: in
that they must leave nipping the Church, the comely Auxiliary to the Crown.

Par. 10. Calvinism calculated only for Commonwealths.
The cried up Discipline well becomes Geneva or Amsterdam; popular States:
where the Muses live under Hatches, with Winter usage. And mudling Bartery,
Hogen Mogen, capeering on the top of the wheel, bearing all the sway: But for
great Britain, the Region of the Graces, and Climate of Dignity; more congruous
with some is the Regiment of Rome, and less bitter than to groan under a Mytre,
in every Ham.

Prelates must abound in good Works.

I find by the Statute of Carlisle, that the end of Prelacy was not to be
always Hammering in Pulpits, solely to grammar us in Grace: But for the
Conductors of the Soul, to be hospital, dolers of Alms, and samplers of Piety:
duties not feasible without Temporals. But to fortify the Church in her
Estate, smells of Papistry; to dismantle her, and eject the Revenue, smacks of
Zeal, and nods from Heaven.

Par. 11. Monarchs ought to be Masters of both Tables.
No Prelate, no Prince, is a true Maxim of State, though much vilified and
scoffed at, by Anti-Kings and back-friends to Dignity: It Is as hard for
Monarchy to live without its Image, or Representative in the Church: as for
humane Nature to breath without the Elements. Sovereignty is a replete
compacted Body, and Impartible, if the Church interfere and clash with the
State, and struggle for a joynt-partnership, how can the Scepter continue its
Prerogative, or the People their Privileges?

In Polyarchy a parity in the Church may be tolerated; neither there safely,
for the Temporal Sword must strike to the Pastoral Staff. How this will relish
with some Anti-Romanists, that flash High, and scorn to stoop at small game,
let the Judicious determine.

Thus Prelacy, if the Interest of Monarchy be duly adjusted, is a sine quo non,
so needful an assistant; without which Monarchy would soon be abridg'd and
fettered, and the first file of Subjects tric'd of their Peerage: a truth with
the remotest allies to Honor, elemented but with a grain of Sobriety. In
brief, Opponents of Prelacy are Foes to Order, on course frigid Amigo's to
Dignity, the gradual scheme of order; in truth, as frosty to Sovereignty, being
too near akin to Polyarchs; cousin-germans to Anarchy.

I write not thus warmly to claw; Ad^hiring none, though some are richly
qualified, and adorn the consulage. But barely in Defense of the Order, the
Catholic Cause of Gentlemen; for should the supernal Power but deal justly
with us, in punishing our ungratefulness, for not uniting and lauding his
mercies, and suffer Monarchy to be once more expelled: what then will soon
become of Gentlemen, and all sober persons; the leanest pate that never
schooled farther then Puerilis or the Accidence must needs be sensible.

Par. 12. Virtue not courted but for the Golden Fleece.
WHat makes this odds, these Windy Tootings, fighting with shadows? if a
Prelate be any way peccant, let him be dethroned and punished: if the Curates
be tardy, if dumb or vicious, let them be chastised and Deprived: this must
needs end the Quarrel, and make up the Breaches, in Charity and Peace: for the
Function to suffer were horridly shameful, even beyond Barbarism. England is a
very cold clime for Virtue, were not the Genius sweetened by Preferment; few
would sweat to crawl up so craggy a mountain, should the Government then be
Anniented or thrown off; nay, at all more clipped and embased, for no Crime or
Booty imaginable, but purely to humor Churlishness, and Avarice of Novelty:
Learning will soon decline, the Monarchy wither; all Gradations of Honor fall
in Contempt and Derision.

Let me Adventure to advise noble Persons not to be entrap'd with the Sirens of
Division, whom they will find inwardly Hocus-pocusses, and Antipodes to Honor,
hasty to inter the existent Array of the Church, as the swiftest medium, to
intomb Nobility; thrust out Religion, and in troduce tyranny and blindness.

Par. 13. A Pey-bald Government no good Fashion for Princes.
A Sweet motley Ruling Monarchy in the State, and Democracy in the Church: I
wonder what Goblin does prompt some to hearken to these infectious Charmers,
the Fatlings of Sedition; when it is visible by late Practices, their weedy
Positions are ugly Spiders, though wrapped in webs of Musk, crusted over with
specious Disguises, and sented over strong (to catch the weak) with feigned
Zeal: And no Sorcery so out-ragious and hard to be expelled, as the venom of
Sedition.

It had been a proper sentence for Darius's Guard to have quered the strength
of Sedition; but to have Bequeathed to Posterity the aculeate and aptest
Receipt, to cure the Mockers against Majesty; lest from the Driping-pan we leap
into the Fire: would have merited a Princely Advance indeed: even beyond the
Honor of being Darius's Cousin.

Par. 14. Flagellets of Faction Pipings dangerous for Princes.
ILLVD possumus quod secure possumus: that is to be done, which is Consistent
with safety: is a Cordial of State: and Majesty is not to be Decoyed and
Whistled asleep, with Flutes of Fraud: for were Boutefeus, and fomenters of
Broils gratified in their Demands, 'twould not quench the Flame: they would
still be Mining, never give over blowing the Cole, till they had blown up the
Hierarchy, and so Dethroned Monarchy. Which verifies the Maxim at Common Law:
Once Pravous, in Presumption of Law, for ever so, in the same kind of Pravity.

The Vena Porta, and master-vein of Monarchy is Jurisdiction Ecclesiastical:
which the Surrogates of Strife, will as soon permit, as Fire to Cohabit with
Water. And if the Hooters against Prelacy, hagg the soul; Instilling what
Principles into the Laity they please: Sovereignty must soon fade, the Power of
the Keys being in them to lock and unlock the holy Portal; or to Absolve and
Retain, as they list. As is the Driver, so must be the Drove: for who dares
Disobey Sub poena of Trouble and Shame here, and hereafter lest the Key be
turned against Him.

Therefore on necessity of State, Ecclesiae Interesse Regum Tutela: the
Tutelage of the Church must be Sovereign Care: to keep out the Slighters of
Discipline, that would soon Devour both; if they once get but the Mastery of
either.

Par. 15. The Interest of England: the Protestant.
KIngs must die and States determine: but the Interest of either, like the fair
Diana and Mistress of the world, Truth; neither alters nor dies: Now, The
Interest of the Sovereignty of England is the Protestant: and the Elegant^st
Regency, of that Church is Prelateship: that is the natural Element, to lead a
quiet and divine life: any other way the gayest, will prove as uncouth and
Hag-like to continue: As to stive up Fish without water, or Socrates without
Air.

In fine. The Spiritual and Temporal Grandiship are wreathed in the Diadem,
without either it will not be worth wearing.

Par. 16. The State marred in the mashing of the Church.
PRelaticide Confounds not the Church alone, with Parity; but the State
likewise with Ovelty, or brutish Equality: Contrary to Nature, which has
ordained, a Presidency and better Hand among all Created Excellencies: which I
guess no Peer, nor generous Person, can well Digest: to have every pedei
Creeping Fellow, every dunghill Skip, Crow over Him: And become his Superior
and Chancellor, in Church Censures.

Lay-Eldering mere Lumber.

Such Trash are their Lay Elders, unfit to sit with the Hines of their Flock: a
peerless Chancellorship, or modish Form; for blue Aprons, and every buffoon
Pedestral, or high-shun Boor: to visit Nobles, and inspect Gentlemen; more
narrowly then the severest Inquisition.

Their Discipline Tyrannous.

A sweet Religion for a Prince, to crouch to a Crop-ear'd Bramble: to be within
the Lash of every Jack-straw, and snivelgut Changeling; not only to be
sentenced, to the Lockerum or Cambrick Penance: But to be unhors'd and
Disceptred too, when his Rebelship pleases: And what is this but kneeling to
Moloch, that we so much rave against; overt Popery without a visard Mask, or
dark Lanthorn: which would quickly be more detested and cried out on; then the
Focage, or the pedling Brocage of Lombard Street: Rising to a greater Timpany
of Dish-clout Bondage; then ever Athens, Rome, or even Egypt endured.

Strandings Eschewable.

Therefore Princes had need beware of these Quicksands: and the worthy take
Heed, they halter not themselves: And whet a Knife, to cut the Thread of their
own Honor; Ducking to the Dagons of Sedition, will inevitably do the Work.

SECT. III.
Par. 17. Tidlings over-Fond and Dangerous.
BUT some Regard must be had to the Herb-Eaters? were not the scruple more
Toying, than Marveils or Push-pin; 'twere Debatable: but to strain at straws,
and swallow horseloads, is most unsufferable.

Admitting a Tenderness indeed, with some brainsick Professor: It Is safer and
more Consonant to Christian Policy; to imitate the Fundaments of the Common
Law: in suffering rather a mischief, than an Inconvenience: in exposing our
Feeble Brother to be Felo de se, to Pine and Perish too: then to affect the
Church, with the least spark of Schism: in dancing after a Geneva Taber, or
Northern Bag-pipe; in Tolerating his Folly.

All Is whiteness and sanctimony no Offensiveness offered.

But what stumbling Blocks offend the Cripples? The Road, as even and easy, as
if Paved with Ice, or strow'd with Dowl: more fragrant then Perfumes of Myrrh.

Pulers to be tutored not Tidled.

If any offense it is Taken not Given: if an Humorist will not eat of good Food,
when set before him; but out of Doggedness, Pule at the one as unclean, at the
other, as Polluted: reject All and Starve, his suicide or Capricious Ruin, may
(without Blame to Church or State) fall on his own Head, being his own
Destroyer.

Cautionary Laws Requisite.

But will not this blockish Coyness, enforce a Law? to prevent the like
Humorous Novice, from self-Homicide.

Conscience not reduceable by Storm.

They say there is no storming the Conscience: a starry Fort, that cannot be
Reduced by Force: but by the Spiritual Militia, on precarious Terms, with
flying Colors: leaving it still, to bask in its own Frenzy; waiting the good
Hour of S^rmacida's Victory.

Apt Doctrine, to be Prostrated to Diana; but the Feet of Gamaliel will brook
no such Oblation.

Par. 18. Miseration no good Medicine for Stubbornness.
IF a mad man will not be ruled; is it not lawful to use Force, and Corporal
Pains, by breaking his Limbs, or more; to preserve Him and others, if Danger
command it? may we not Reason from the Body to the Soul: must we meet our
Brother, Posting to Hell full speed; with Blasphemy in his Mouth, and Apostasy
in his Heart; and not stop his Career? If fair means will not do it, why not
foul (as some call it) or Enforcement of Law: with the Apostle, to save his
soul from Death: And his Body too from vials of wrath, that otherwise might
overtake Him, should He wallow, in that damnable Estate: And others too for
their Recreancy and Remissness, in Permitting so much Deadliness to live: which
by the Judicials was severely Punished, and ought to be with us, with an harder
Penance, then Sandals, or an hair Shirt.

Righteousness mistaken.

Thus if the Church enjoin Unique Consort in Divine Worship: a wrigling
Conscience (to live lewdly at his own Rate) chops in; to go his own way, though
it lead to Hell: if the Law arrest this Caitif, to drive him into the Right:
this is Persecution. O blessed God, what prodigious natures, does thy Poor
Spouse meet with? all Decencies must be Abandoned: the very Bible burnt and the
Alcoran professed; to tiddle every Crack-brain'd Dissembler, every sniveling
Tony: otherwise to be Branded with Tyranny and Persecution.

Par. 19. The wildish Pretender possessed with waspish Rudeness; scourgable by
Law.
I AM inclined to Piteousness and Civil Quarter: but if the Hold of Blasphemy,
may not be Assailed, but the Reduction left to the Spirit; I doubt of a
Convert, obstinacy being a Misplea, in the Leet of Piety, not issuable in
Heaven: the Magistrate being Sworded, not to trifle with Domitian; but to
uphold Hezekias, and suppress Shelomithes.

Neither is this Presidentless, for the potent Master of Holofernes, enjoined
universal Worship to the God of Shadrack and his Comartyrs, Sub-poena Capitis,
on Pain of Death. Unto Daniels God, was Ascribed the like Devotion.

Par. 20. Blasphemy Brandable by the Civil Law Capital.
BY the Common Law, the Blasphemer is Infamous, and therefore grievously
marked; with a Print of Horror: By the Civil Law He Is punished with ultimum
supplicium, even Death: the executing Hand (according to the Father) is
sanctified by the Blow.

Vagrancy from the settled Church: in Law, Partial Apostasy.

By some Books, I find wanderings from their Habit, or Order of Religion; to be
Revoltings, or legally Apostacies: And that the Law, has Provided, a special
Capias to restrain such Gaddings by Reducing them, to their Canonical Obedience.

Par. 21. Conscience in some sort Governable by Law.
THus the Supreme (as Vice King of the Soul) may Command the inward Man:
There Is no Demurring to his Edicts, Contempt is no less than Damnable: if a Bur
to the Soul, or truly nauseous to the Judgment; Passiveness must be the Cure,
and ultimate Appeal.

Unity in Religion Inforcible in Conscience.

It cannot be Denied, by any Civil Christian in his right senses, but that The
Magistrate has Power in omnia mala. The best Conscience is too bad and
mendable, On consequence then, the Magistrate has Conusance over the
Conscience.
Which is but Reasonable, for temporal Rulers are bound to have a Care of
Souls, as well as of Bodies: And must Answer if they Perish, through their
neglect.

Par. 22. The Guardianship or Charge over the Conscience not Dispensable.
WHich we may more lively illustrate by a

Decision.

A Minor or one under 25 years of Age, is Inspected; and by false Proof,
Adjudg'd to be at full Age: under this Pretext of Plenarty of Age, He receives
a Debt due to Him: which He spends loosely or squanders away.

2 Questions.

1. Whether the Debtor be sufficiently Discharged.

2. Whether the Curator be Released: or still bound, to oversee the Trust: and
so liable to account for the wasting.

Payment Real a full Discharge.

1. For the first: I find the Debtor safe enough, being fully Acquitted: the
Common Law, by the 26 Eliz. does in some sense, quadrare or readily Assent, in
case of Infancy: As in an Executor, if Payment be actually Proved, it shall
Bind. But Regularly in most Cases, infra aetatem or Nonnage, is a good Plea, to
avoid all Acts and Deeds.

And the Civil Law is as Cautelous, the Minor being incapable, to oblige
Himself: without the leave and Concurrent assent of the Curator.

Dispensing unseasible.

2. For the second, (the great Point in Controversy with us) the Guardian is
liable, to answer the wasting: for that He should still have continued the
Charge: which truly seems strange, till the Fraud were discovered; being done
by Power of Law.

At Common Law, I agree the Guardian would hardly be Acquitted; though with the
Privity and Entreaty of the Infant: if a waste were Committed. But if by Order
or Act of Law, I conceive the Laches were purged; and he totally Indempnified,
because Act of Law, Can do no Wrong: And in that Case, the Law is bound to
protect Him.

Religion unalterable. Princes must keep to Unity.

This strongly proves, that the Magistrate is still obliged (as the Committee
of Souls) to Continue his Tutorship over the Conscience; in Holding to
sincerity in Religion: sub periculo Animae, as He will tender the future
welfare of his own soul: Though in foro Civili, here on Earth he may be
Absolved; I doubt of his Acquittal in Heaven: for that no Instrument or humane
Power imaginable, can dispense with the Charge of Souls (though with their own
Consent) in suffering them to pursue the Road to Damnation.

Par. 23. Wavering in Religion unlawful.
TO explain this Thesis more clearly by a

Case.

A. and B. 2 Co-Rogues or Comrades in Villainy: consult how they may more
Colourably, Beg or Steal: They Agree, that B shall Cripple A by Maiming his
Hand or Foot: which is accordingly, most Audaciously done.

2 Points.

1. Whether A. may have an Action or an Appeal of Mayhem against B. 2. Whether
B. not Inditable, for mutilating or maiming his fellow Subject or Brother
Rogue.
1. To the first, Damnum sine Injuria, because of Consent will be presently
pleaded.

It Is much doubted, whether it be good: for that there is no Justifying, Malum
in se; being a most nefarious and unnatural Act.

2. By the 11. Jac. Consent will not free the Mangler or Maimer; from being
soundly Fined, and otherways well ordered: for his Rascalness, in Mangling the
Kings Subject: for

Instance.

C. kills D. with his Consent, and upon his Entreaty and passionate Request:
this will not excuse C. from Murder, and Hanging is too good for Rogues in
Grain.

Now if we have no Power, over our Persons; to Disable or Spoil at will: much
stronger are we Disabled, to Bopeep or trifle with Souls.

Verity not sickle, but solid and unchangeable.

Truth is Immutable: and will admit of no change, no varying: without the
Hazard of Heaven. And therefore Princes being Delegated by God, to oversee and
govern the Soul; must not turn Waverers, by Tolerating Weavers of new Gods:
they cannot allow of an Alteration of Religion, by jeoparding the spirit to
Hell: by any mortal Consent, or legal Contrivance.

The Apostle is full in the Point, by saying the Magistrate, is Dei Minister
tibi in Bonum, that is, the substitute of Heaven, for the safeguard of the
Soul, as well as for the Tuition of the outward Man: And therefore the same
Apostle, enjoins subjection, not only for Wrath, but for Conscience.

SECT. IV.
Par. 24. To pride our selves sager than Law: Is both vain and unmannerly.
IT IS a Maxim with Lawyers, that none ought to plume Himself wiser then the
Law: with sober Heads Oracle-like, being Unquestionable: many Acts of Law (as
common Assurances of the Realm) are sagely to be Agreed; and not finically
Pried into by peevish Eyes: The like Compliance is to be Rendered, in Church
Discipline, if once settled and Established by Law. But Ephesian Disciples, as
Careless of the Gospel, as Regardless of the Law; otherwise they would leave
Bellowing against Order, and stoop to Power; they must be Lawless: And down
with those easy Mounds, and moral Regulations; which the Masters of Skill,
joyously treat with thankful Arms: Let some jocous Ramblers take Heed how they
gibe with Law, to hector Majesty! it is not good Joking with Edged Tools, Deity
has a large stride to take off Scoffers at a Distance: And haughty Saints are
sooner snapt, by the black Tempter; than poor Frierly or Barefooted ones,
pallisadoed with Humility: which like Rampires of Fire, will shield them,
against the sharpest Conflict.

Spiritual Trivantings Censurable.

By Martial Law, every slide is a Crime in a Soldier; contrary to express
Command, or Common Discipline: the like by the Law Canon, Behavior besides the
Church Rules is scandalous; Enquirable by the Censures of the Ordinary:
Emansion or Military Loitering, is often sentenced to the Wooden Horse, or to
run the Gantlet: if our Church Trivanters, find the same Consideratum est, or
sage Rule awarded against them, let them Pack the right Horse, and laud their
own Stubbornness.

Par. 25. The Forceableness of a Statute.
IN a civil sense, with Legal Heads; an Edict framed by the King, and the
Common Council of the Realm: resembles (in State) an Instrument or Charter at
Law. And can any at Pleasure, vary or Revoke his own Deed? A Deed is ever taken
forcibly and with Effect; a Rule very trite and Common, yet of great Depth and
Elegancy; founded on the very Pithiness of Reason, which instructs us, to set a
Guard on our Tongues, and Hands too, that nothing escape either, but what is
Judicious: it likewise quiets men's Possessions, and leads the Judge and Jury to
Certainty, in Avoiding a sudden and Catching Opinion.

Hence arises the Principle in Law: None shall be received to Stultifie or
Disable Himself: that is, to play fast and loose, to nullify or defeat his own
Act.

For an Example

The actual Delivery of an Instrument, without words is good: if given as an
Escrow to take effect, as a Deed, on Conditions performed; this binds not: or
delivered triflingly, it invalidates not the Act: in both Cases, the Deed
absolute; otherwise Deliveries by the speechless, would signify nothing: and
many Deeds and Devises frustrated and Avoided. Therefore if the Obligee bail a
Bond, to the Obligor, to Rebail; yet the Obligee may retain it.

For a more vulgar Instance in Honor of the Common Law.

If J. S. grant an Annuity to J. N. with a clause of Distress, in his Manor of
Dale; Provided it shall not bind his Person: And in truth the Grantor has no
such Manor; however the Grant good, and the Proviso void: for by the Maxim,
That none shall derogate from his own Grant; the Person of the Grantor is
Chargeable: I find the Civil Law not so Ample in this Point

As by Decision

Titus devises to Caius twenty pound, out of such a Coffer, or Closet in such a
place: And in truth, there is neither Money, Coffer, nor Closet in that place;
the Bequest is void. But at Common Law, this Circumstance would not frustrate
the Gift; if Assets elsewhere could be found.

The Effectualness of Deeds.

If a Deed defective, in the usual Forms, be Janus-like bifronted, bearing a
double Aspect: Having two Intendments, the one with Law and Right, the other
against Both: it shall be taken in that reasonable sense, it will bear; never
be void, if in any Congruity of Reason, it may stand good.

As in an obligation, solven'd to the Obligor; this slip is excusable, and
shall not avoid this Deed Poll: the Law shall expound the solvend to the
Obligee.

Regularly in Law, if an Act will operate Diversely: either by way of Interest,
or Authority; the Law not delighting in Images and Shadows, but in Certainty,
the nurse of Quietness; shall ascribe it to the Interest, and not to the Power:
Fiction must vail Bonnet to Reality.

To explain this by a Case.

If J. N infeoffe J. S. and his Heirs of sale: And by another Deed, instate
Him, and the Heirs of his Body, of the same Land: giving seisin according to
the Purport of both Deeds: Quid inde operatur.

Limitations very Prickley, that pose the best Students: that the Deed may not
be impeached, but hold forcible and good against the Maker: And if not Holdable
by Intireties, the Law will Marshal it, to Enure by Moities: that is, an
Entailement in one Half, with the Fee Expectant: And a Fee Absolute in the
other. Thus Livery Expounded Effectually, against the Grantor.

The like in a Syntax of State; we are Tied up, from Whiffling and Grinning,
against Uniformity: And must give Obedience.

Par. 26. Denying of ones Hand not Available.
IF any plead nient son fait; Hoping thereby to slip the Collar, in Avoiding
their own Deed: unless by Nonage, Manasse, Duresse and the like (being formally
Pleaded:) it is more then Imprudent; frivolous in Law and Equity.

To Exemplify this by Troynovants Case.

If A. owner of a Toft, or demolished Message in Cheapside; Converted into
Ashes, by the late Fire: let a Lease Indented, for a Century or Milliary of
years, of this Land to B. ex mero Jocu, jocosely out of a Frolic and Disport
only: without any Terms to Rebuild, after the prescribed Form, rendering Rent:
Here Is a good Estate vested in B.

This sportful blind Bargain, shall work by way of Estoppel: And the Lessor
(A.) during the Term Concluded; from Pleading the Act was Jocular, by way of
Merriment: not at all serious, or in Earnest; ever legally intended, and so
nudum Pactum, a naked and void Grant.

Mal-a-wise or Nescience invincible of the Law will nothing avail: so of the
Universal Deed, the Statute: to which every one is a Party: It Is more than
Turbulent, even Disloyal; in Ruffling against the Stream, to repeal our own
Act: to baffle Authority.

Par. 27. Law binding, though not solemnly Divulged, by open Publication.
A Charter (in Judgment of Law) is no more, then a fair Copy, of the minds of
the Contractors: to prevent mistake and strife, Recorded into Paper or
Parchment: when Executed, that is, sealed and Delivered, made Authentic;
baptized a Deed: which is a private Law between the Parties. So the Public
Charter, the Statute; in Construction of State, is no more then the Resolves of
the Supreme, declared in Print: to which every Subject breathing, within or
without the Kings Dominions (though never Proclaimed) is bound to give
Obedience: for if a Law be Proclaimed, it is of Favor, not of Necessity, it
being Presumable, none are Ignorant of their own Acts.

Par. 28. The Blessedness of the Change.
GOD be thanked that after a long and base War, we are now in a Stable Peace:
nothing unsettled in Church or State, but mutinous minds. The petty Princes of
the Country, may ride out and take the Air; to Hawk and Hunt, and visit each
other; without the least Danger, of Sword or Pistol: And the meanest Clown,
walk abroad, to overlook his Pecora Campi or Grasing Creatures; without being
bid stand: Pot and Pipe on his smoaky Hearth, and chat blind Stories of the old
Wives of Windson, Guy, and Colbrond: And his Brother Swain, requite him with the
like Stultery, of Bevis and St. George: And Ethically like the Tatlings of
Busy Bodies, or Bickerings of Shrews; go for a Gossops Tale, as inarticulate
blank sounds.

The Sereness of a Record.

The like judicially, with the Hond on the Book, as our Bacon-folk phrase it:
Jamee may depose in the Affirmative, and Tomee evidence a Negative: and neither
Conclude Court or Jury. But if a Record once interpose, no Averments or
Brawlings; of the High-Plyers, or better sort of Rusticks: and the sparks of
all other Conditions, shall never Contradict it.

For Example.

If two Conservators, or Justices of the Peace, assemble to view and suppress a
Riot: if they Record the Offense, though in truth there was none; but All in
Pace Dei, in Sobriety and Peace.

However by 15 R. 2. and 8 H. 6. there is no Traverse or Creeping Hole, to get
out of this Judgment: the Parties are for ever estop'd, and without Remedy.

I learn by Hildebrands Case, that what passes during the Term; it is in the
Justices breasts and Alterable: But the Term ended, Adjudicatum est, it is only
in the Rolls; of which after the Course of the Medes and Persians, there is no
variance, no controulment.

Wilful Blotting a Record, Capital.

Writings may be blurred, and Deeds defaced and cancelled; and the Purse only
smart for it, Ratably as the Damage will amount unto: But the Embesiling and
Rasing a Record, will cost ones life. In brief, an Inrollment or Record, is a
Memorial of that Commanding Veneration and Verity: that if Pleaded null tell
Record, it shall be Tried only by it self, being Incontroublable: otherwise
there would be no result of Argument, and Controversy endless.

Now a Statute is the Highest Record; against whom there is no Prescribing, nor
Alleging a Custom: being the Convincing'st Evidence, and soundest Proof in
Law: And to endeavor the subversion, of the Fundamental Laws of the Land, is
High Treason: And what more Positive and Fundamental than a Statute?

Par. 29. Improbable to be bound to Tyranny or Superstition.
CAN it be thought, that a National Act, resulted by a Convent of Honor:
Kneaded into Form, by the Critical Care of both Houses; on whom all Power is
Collated: first the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, in Presumption of State, All
Worthies: After recluse Debates, digested into a Bill; in the Form of Law,
with Le Seigneurs ont assentes: with the Concurrence of the Commons by the
Direction of the Writ, no Triflers; but De gravioribus and discretioribus
viris, the Eagles of the Country; with Les Communes sont assentes: thus
strictly Refined, by Grave Traverses and Forms of State; and lastly Completed,
with Le Roy le Voet, the Royal Assent: should savor of Madrid or Argiers?

Privity of Assent Obligatory.

Thus no Act to bind, unless made per l' Assentments of the three Estates: But
in Law every one is Privy to an Act of Parliament, and Consent judicially does
toll Error: that is, no Excuse or Evasive Pretension, shall be Admitted against
our own Agency.

To Expound this by a Case.

Lessee for years, at Common Law, makes a Feoffment in Fee, and deputeth the
Lessor by Deed; to give livery and seisin, who pursuantly Executes it.

Now though the Lessor, or owner of the Land; acts only as an Instrument; to
Complete the Tortiousness of the Lessee: yet done of his own Accord, the Law
intends it; as walking Hand in Glove with the Lessee: with a full Assent, to
pass the whole Inheritance.

A stronger Instance.

The Pleading of a Feoffment in Fee, on Condition; without Deed and Reentry is
good: if the Adversary will agree the Condition.

Complotments against Law, unsafe and end in Ruin.

I wonder now, with what Confidence, Les Misfesants, the Affronters of
Authority dare toot Sedition: in standing out against Sovereignty, and
Picqueering the Law.

This sad Frowardness, toward the Church; is to every good Subject, an object
of Mournfulness: that of all People we should be most unsettled, as the Vivary
of Faction: in struggling against Law, to reduce this famous Empire, this
Angleland, to a Green Apron Government.

Section V.
Paragraph 30. Sophistical Cavils or idle Belchings against the Common Law.
THE Honor of England, the Common Law; with some Dissenting quaggey Heads: is
overfull of Meanders and Intricate; too Tartish for some nice Craws: Though
Admired in times past, by the Romans, Saxons, Danes, and Normans: And still
Venerable with the World of Learning.

The usual Reproachings against the Law.

1. It Is tatled by Cavillers, the Law being the Clock that we must go by; ought
to be more Legible and Plain, to the Vulgar: not couched so Darkly, in mere
Gibberish or Pedlers French; understood by few but Lawyers. Neither is this
Fault alone found by them, but Complained on likewise (as an Abuse) by one,
Learned in the Profession.

2. Secondly, if the Law, be Radiant Reason, streaming pure Excellency; why
visarded or bound up, in hard uncoth words, Discoverable by none, but the
Professors? which is no better than Tyranny by Authority: for in nature Quod
omnes tangit, ab omnibus Intelligendum est, That which Concerns all, ought to
be Intelligible by All.

3. Besides, it is too Prolix and tedious in Form; the Pleadings being drilling
Criticisms, or talkative niceties: indeed with some plain Canting, over
Draining the Purse; before we come to an Issue; to be put out of our Pain.

4. If through vast charge, we hap to Catch a verdict; motion will be Allowed,
to arrest the Judgment; and vacate all Proceedings.

5. If we shoot this Gulf, and get Judgment, marking the Roll for Error, will
supersede it: And then we must begin again, so that there is no End of Law.

6. If for Testamentary, Matrimonial, or Seafaring matters; we Repair
(according to Custom) to Doctors Commons: we must Expect Rubbs too, the Checks
of Prohibitions: so that with the Advice, of the ablest Sternsman, the Law is
Shelfs and Sands; both chargeable and altogether uncertain.

These and the like toothless Rablements, with the unadvised (the Tooters
against Excellency) are the Moles and Warts of the Common Law.

Par. 31. The Cavillations Defeated and Satisfied.
1. FOR Horn's Complaint; that the Law is written in a brackish Tongue, and
speaks not good English; for every giddy-pated Runner, to read and understand;
by the Wise it is thought the better, to prevent suits: for small knowledge
would set the Vulgar a Gigg, and fill the Courts with mere Brables: If they
Doubt, let them down with their Dust, to the Noble Lawyers, they will soon Resolve
them.

Divinity is much in the Mother Tongue, with Astrology and other Arts; but
who is the abler Divine, or better Astrologer? if Coverted in Characters,
uncipherable by none, but the Learned; 'twere the Better.

The Law not Blind-folded, but visible to Discerning Judgments.

2. That the Law is Lovely; and out of Dispute a Paragon: but Hooded too close,
and not Discernable by some open Eyes: Is no Dis-worship and so slanderous.

Law-Terms words of Art, and most significant.

The 36 of E. 3. allows of those Veils, as Shades and Airs, incident to
Science: vocables (though obscure) very Emphatical, and most Expressive of the
Law; and best known to Lawyers: the like in use with other Professions, and so
Incorporated with Law; that they are now become very Essentials: therefore words
of Art, shall not be supplied, by words aequipollent, or that tantamount, to
the same sense and force: though in many other Cases it hold good.

For Example.

A. voluntarity without any Provocation or Abuse offered, And of precogitated
malice slew B. Is not sufficient, in an Indictment (in favorem vitae) without
murdravit.

In brief to throw by the Terms, as too crusty for lay Teeth; were an
overhasty Inspection: And might Endanger the whole Firmament of Law.

Pleadings Graceful and most Necessary.

3. For Pleading, if mere Fidling and nugation; strange the Ingenium sine
Exemplo Maximum, or Advocate Laureat at Common Law; should Counsel the Student,
to set his Courage chiefly; to learn the Art of good Pleading; as the most
Honorable and Beneficial Part of the Law.

The use of Pleas: The Inveigler Imprisonable and Finable.

The end of Pleading, is to unfold the Intrigues of the Case; to Evidence the
matter of Fact: for Ex facto Oritur Jus, that the Court might more smoothly,
and certainly Pronounce the Law. If not pertinent and close, to the Point in
Debate; Advantage may be taken by Demurrer: And for the Falsity of the Plea,
the Judgment is Capiatur; for which the Pleadant shall be Fined and Imprisoned.
But if Conscious of his Error, He waive his Plea; He shall only be in
Misericordia, or Amerc'd.

Fraud and Falsehood Prohibited by Law.

Hence to avoid Fourching, or Circuity of Action, Negative Pregnants,
Departures; with Duplicity and Multiplicity of matter; are Rejected: Because of
Inveigling, that is, wavering the Judgment, from one single Point: which would
render Causes, vexatious and Endless.

The benefit of Pleading: The Right Apparanted.

Many chance Cases happen, which prima facie seem Rugged and Knotty; but thrown
into Form and legal Method, by orderly Pleading: The matter is unknotted, and
appears more smooth and Glib; for the Judge and Jury, to arbitrate Justice:
Thus Pleading is no Inveiglement, wasting of Time, Prattling, nor Prating: But
the chief Ornament and Skill of Law, in unravelling the Knottiness, to reduce
it to an Issue.

The Law no Art without Form.

In brief, Pettishly or sowrly (for I find both Passions boiling Hot against
the Lawyers) to reject all Form; were not only a great Take off, and Lessening
its true luster and Dignity; but on the matter doltishly Debasing it, as no
Science.

The Fairness of Legal Forms.

In E. 3. Reign, Pleadings arrived to a Compleatness; neither Limping nor
Picked: Counts were not Abateable, if the matter or Cause of Action were fully
Declared: And now nice Janglings, with all Ambushments pur Enginer; the
substance of the matter appearing, are Rejected.

Viciousness in Pleading Disallowable.

1. Every Plea shall be taken most strongly against the Pleader: it being
Presumeable, that every one is best Apprised of his own Right. 2. That none are
so Idle and Coltish, wilfully to vitiate their own Cause. 3. That every one
will turn, the best side of his Coat outward: that is, make the best of his
own Case. 4. By a false or vicious Plea, the Pleadant loses the Advantage of
the Law; and must pay Costs.
Deluding Pleas Illegal. Small Faults mendable.

By W. 1. shifting and beguiling Pleas, are Prohibited: and a late Act of the
Qu. does provide, that want of Form shall not prejudice; except what the Party
Demurring, does specially show: so that Pleadings at present, are not
Prevarications or gingling quiddities; mere Quirks or Quillets of Fraud: But
Forms of Art richly useful, and more stately than Studs of Gold. In fine,
Beau-pleader or Care in Pleading, would prevent the Chancery of Trouble, and
save many sweet Pounds in the Clients Purse.

4. By Arrest of Judgments, many are thereby Dismis'd from being oppressed: the
Circumstance of Fact by Error in Pleading, more clearly Arising; and Justice
more safely and speedily Administered.

5. For a Writ of Error; which is no more then a Commission, to discuss and
reverse Mistakes; I see no mischief thereby: for the Manucaptors must stare
Juri, that is, satisfy the Condemnation, if the Judgment be Affirmed: neither
will the Principal, rendering his Body, answer the Law, without Satisfaction; as
in other Cases.

6. The Inhibitions so much Exclaimed on, and voted obstructive: by heady weak
Judgments; the Law is therein Defamed, because Mistaken: for in their right
Constitution, they are of admirable use and necessity: To prevent Interfering of
Courts, keeping every Judicatore, within its proper Bounds: That the Cause be
not wrested ad aliud Examen, before a remediless Trier: And the Client thereby,
between two stools fall to the Ground, and be crushed to pieces: on good Cause
showed that the Court has been mis-inform'd; a Consultation by the 24 E. 1. is
granted on Course, and the Cause Remanded, to its proper Court.

SECT. VI.
Par. 31. Complainings against Equity.
ADmitting the Common Law, the Son and Heir apparent of Reason; pretty Just and
of easy Address: the Courts of Equity, with Dissenters are Burdenous, sucking
Shavers and gilded iniquity: Being direct whirpools, one order begets Another;
and we are still swung round, Tossed from Pillar to Post; from Report to
Exceptions: Till our Pockets are turned outward, and at last Drowned; for want
of white Earth to wade through.

For a Cause to be Depending, several Revolutions of Mercury; 3 or 4
Prentiships is frequent: It Is better to put up an Injury, and throw our Right
down Thames, then pray Relief in Equity: The charge so great, the Delay
Intolerable.

The Freekishness Responded.

For the sluggishness of Equitable Courts; in Killing the Orator Piecemeal,
with swooning Fits: and Reviving Him again, as long as there is any Life, left
in the Pouch: is an ignorant Mistake.

They Are Rivers of Mercy, in Asswaging the Grimness of the Law: the Causes are
often weighty, having been long at Law; and they usually put in at Equity, for
a Breathing; as well as for a final Dispatch: if they find some Pause, they may
fall out, with their own Comitial Spirit, or litigious Itch, that will wrangle
with Goliath for a wisp of straw: not blame the Court, that dare not to be over
spurring in their Hearing, lest they assign the Child to the wrong Mother.

Equity Limited.

Neither are Courts of Equity, a sic volo sic Jubeo; altogether Boundless and
Arbitrary: Decrees must be Sana Discretio, founded on Discretional Piles, after
the Form of Law: for should Equity meddle with matters, properly Issuable at
Common Law, savouring of Freehold; it is Prohibitible: by Hussy Chief Justice,
should Equity venture, to sheak a Judgment: And Fleet the Parties for Contempt,
a Court of Law, will discharge them. But in some special Cases it is held
Unlimitable.

Law unerrable: Juries when Attaintable.

If a Court of Law judge amiss, Error leys to redress it; if a Jury wilfully
pervert Justice, against their Evidence: they are Punishable by an Attaint.

For an Example.

If a Feoffment in fee, or an Estate for life, be vested in John a Nokes, and
they find Kim Kam, quite Cross from the Fact; though Ignorant of the Law in
that Point: they are in Danger of an Attaint.

The like in Equity, Decrees wrested beyond the Standard of a good Conscience:
it is Reversible by Review, or Bill in Parliament. So that the Law is Absolute,
the Firstborn of Excellency, and near Infallible.

Par. 32. Chancery legally Stated.
THe world is generally out in their Conceptions of that Court; for properly
it is not at all made up of Conscience: of a mixed nature I Agree it, and so
Conscience may come into the Chorus, and sit by Equity in some Cases; to allay
and swage the Summum Jus, or severity of Law: But for the most part their
Stalls are several.

For Example.

If a non Compos mentis give away his Goods, or pass his Lands by Record: it
shall not only bind Him, but All others for ever: Because of a Maxim in Law,
and it is Ruled that the Keeper of the Kings Conscience, shall afford no Relief
against a Maxim.

Yet He shall not suffer on a Criminous Account, because the Law pities his
Infirmity: why not the like in the other Case? now, can it Accord with
Conscience, that a Driveler or Fool natural, should make a good Grant in Law;
that knows not the Right Hand from the Left; nor hardly an Hog from a Dog? or
that the Gift of an Infant, though given by his own Hand; that happily cannot
tell Twenty; nor a nine Pence from a shilling, should not be void in Equity?
several other Instances, that I could Cite, seem to weigh much against
Conscience.

Law not always Meetable by Conscience.

I confess my self a great Admirer of the Law, and therefore shall be Hush:
Though as to Lawyers there are invincible Reasons given, in Defense of it; and
should it be otherwise, it might shake the whole Course of Law: let this tutor
us then, that Law must not altogether be measured by Conscience: If Enacted it
must be obeyed.

Par. 33. More clamorous Censures and Lowings against the Chancery; Discepted
and Taken off.
THE Chancery is the Commanding Court, and out of Dispute, of undeniable use
and Excellency: when kept within its Bounds: otherwise the Law would prove in
many Cases, an absolute Tyrant; and not to be Endured. The Consequences are so
vulgar and easily to be Conjectured, that I need not Englarge on so obvious a
Truth.

1. Were the Proceedings shortened; and the Flippancy of Motions, to multiply
order upon order, and Report upon Report; with other out-slips, Revised and
Amended: the Court would be abundantly Honored, and the oppressed much
Rejoiced and Repaired.

2. A peremptory Time should be Assigned to Answer; otherwise the Bill to be
Decreed, as Taken pro Confesso: And why should it be otherwise? since it is
natural for the weakest Person living, to Appear and make his Defense, if
wrongfully charged: And to be Reimburs'd of the Complainer, if unjustly vexed:
And therefore Shifting by Buying of Attachments, and Dallying with the Court;
implies clearly Guilt: And so no Injustice (though unheard) if the Cause be
Given, against Him.

3. The same at Common Law, is the Constant Practice upon Issue: for if the
Defendant will not Appear and Plead, Judgment on nient Dedire, or by Default on
Course is Ruled against Him. Which proves as Forcible, as if obtained on full
Evidence.

Nay in Criminal Concerns, if the Party Encoup'd or Arraigned; stand mute and
refuse to Plead: He Is usually sentenced to Peine fort and Dure, or Pressed to
Death. A grievous Punishment, which certainly none but the Mescrue or Desperate
in Guilt, would undergo. If by Pleading, or Palliating their Crimes by a Civil
Defense; they might probably find Favor.

4. A set Time likewise in their Commissions, to prove their Allegations: with
the like to the Defendant, to Discharge and Acquit Himself: would strike off
much Fraud and Delay. And not to be suffered, to move for Commission upon
Commission, and Examinings upon Examinings: the usual Practice, with the
wealthy and vexatious, to weary out the poor Adversary; and thereby obtain
their Ends.

5. Some conceive that Attachments, Writs of Rebellion, Sergeants at Arms, and
the like, are not of absolute necessity; especially to the Ends they are now
Commonly made use of.

Neither can they Divine, if such Times be Peremptory upon them, to Appear per
se, or per Alium; in Person or by Attorney: what mischief can Ensue. Unless
good Cause be showed, to induce the Court, to Enlarge the Time.

6. Sequestrations may be necessary, in case of Disobediences to Decrees: But
what need of tedious Proceedings; which are mighty Expensive and Dilatory: and
in effect a kind of negation or Denial of Justice.

This with all dutiful Reverence, to the Supreme Court: conceiving what I
humbly offer, will in no Respect, retard Justice; nor blemish Equity.

SECT. VII.
Paragraph 34. The supposed Deformities and very Freckles of the Common Law:
Inspected and washed off.
IF the 25 E. 3.17. were Reviewed; and the Common Law reduced, to its old
Constitution, of Summons, Attachment and Distress Infinite: according to Magna
Charta, nullus liber Homo Capiatur, the Law would be eased of many Exclaimings:
and the Tout le Commune, or poor Subject much enlarged in his Immunities.

Par. 35. To the Insolvent a Capias hard Justice.
IF the Fortune cannot Pay, for the Body by suffering, to imp it out; Appears
somewhat Cruel: There being no mean or valuation between a man's Person, and a
sorry Debt. It Is true, no Fault can be Assigned in the Law; because it does but
perform its office: And the Life of the Law is the Execution thereof. Yet
surely the Intent of the Law, is mistaken and abused: the Law Designing the
Body to Custody, only as a Pledge, to avoid Fraud: that if no Estate can be
Retriv'd, then the Body to be Dismissed: for so I find by the Perusal of
several Records: more expressly in 14 E. 3. Rot. 106. where the Debtor being
long Imprisoned, and by Inspection being found Decrepit; and much stricken in
years, unable to undergo a longer Durance: the Judges awarded an Ire sine Die,
or an absolute Discharge.

41 E. 3. Rot. 27 the Duressee being Adjudg'd unfit, to undergo Paenam
Carceralem, or immuring Hardships: the like Rule was Pronounced, and the Party
set at Liberty. From both I infer, that the Law primitively never intended to
Enslave the Body.

Persons and Lands Originally free.

The Common Law, on Judgment for Debt or Damages, gave only a levari facias:
which way of Execution was also Limited, Leviable only on Goods and Chattels:
the merum Jus, or Freehold was still Protected; and the Body too for two
Reasons.

1. For every one to follow his Calling: and the painful Tiller, to pursue his
Georgical Drudgeries: for without the Plough we cannot live. 2. For the Body,
to be in a Readiness, to serve the King and Country: And without Officers and
Servants the State cannot subsist.
Par. 36. The Body not Punishable: nor Pawnable for Debt.
THE proper Remedy, Provided for Debt, by W. 2. C. 18. is by Fieri facias, or
Eleg. so that the Body by that Law, is somewhat excused: if the Law can be
served otherwise. But the 39 Eliz. an Authority in very Point, declares the
Body only as a salvo Custodias or Pawn, that if He die in Execution, without
satisfying: Recourse may be had to the Estate, Heir, unless Riens per Descent,
or Executor, if Assets intermains; because the Law has not its End, which is
Payment of the Debt; or satisfaction.

The Administrator Released, if the Party die in Execution.

I find by a latter Judgment, Trin. 10 Jac. Rot. 38. by three Judges one only
Dissenting: though the Body be no actual satisfaction, such as is expected: yet
it is an Assimilary one or satisfaction in Law; for should the Prisoner give up
the Ghost in Execution, the Creditor must Acquiesce; and the Administrator no
further Chargeable: because of his Election, the Law being satisfied.

Par. 37. The Ancientness of this Hardness.
WE read that the Debtee, would seize not only the Body, but the Children too
of the Debtor: as Bond: to pay the Due in servage. Which is better then a
Prison; for there is Possibility of an Enlargement to the one: and of some
satisfaction to the other. Nay the arcta Custodia is hinted as a Carceral
Punishment for Debt; by our Saviors Utmost Farthing.

I Agree such servitude was Connived at, propter Duritiem Cordis; but whether
Agreeable with the Law of nature, or the Law written I much doubt: for surely
none so sottish, to be content of Bonds and Restraints: if without Covering and
purely naked, having nothing wherewith to satisfy.

Unconscionable to Pen up the Body: If unable to Pay.

To speak Heartily without Mincing or Dawbing, doubtless Dives is strictly
bound in Conscience to set poor Lazarus at Liberty, though not Compellable by
Law.

An horrid Cruelty to Cut the Body in Pieces, and to distribute it among the
Creditors: which some father upon the Romans. A most ridiculous and brutish
Custom, and Impossible to be thought Executible by rational Creatures.

Par. 38. The surmised conveniences of Arrests.
IT IS weakly Conceited by the steel-heartded and some Doters; that if this Hank
be Removed, the world will cease to be Honest, and People will never come by
their own: so that there is a necessity in Preservation of Trade; to Continue
this severe Course.

A Capias disadvantagious to Trade.

Truly no: How did the Nation flourish many Hundred of years; when the Law was
otherwise: why should we Conceive, that virtue has seen its best Days; or that
Honesty is quite Extinct and lost? 'twere more Commodious and safe for the
Rich; for then they would be wary, whom they Trust; and call for their Dues in
Time: before the Debt run too High, and become unpayable.

Tenuity of Fortune if unavoidable, not Imprisonable in Conscience.

Many become Insolvent, by the Act of God: as our Savior said of the blind
man, that neither He, nor his Parents had sinned; only to show the Pleasure of
the Almighty.

The like in many men's slenderness of Estate, God is pleased to Afflict them in
this Life with Poverty: though the Heart be willing, yet their smallness of
Condition, will not permit them to Attest it: To punish then the Afflicted, by
sultering and sotting Him up in a noysom Hole; because Poor and unable to Pay;
is stern Justice, and most Extorcious: not Practisable with Christians, or
indeed moral Persons.

Par. 39. Shufflers and Sharks deserve Prisons.
FOR the deboyst spender, with mere Rooks, that riotously Disable themselves:
or those that Conceal their Estates, and out of sharking Corrupt Principles,
will not satisfy: It Is no matter if their Bodies suffer, and be Exposed to
shame; as spectacles of wickedness.

Better set them at large to work: then keep them as sots.

It Is Conceived more Advantageous for the Common Good; they were Employed,
either at Home or elsewhere: under an Assurance of such services duly
Performed; of an Enlargement: which would create in them a future Honesty, in
making them wary; how they inwrap'd themselves, in the like Bondage.

Par. 40. Suretiship questionable in Conscience.
SOme Conceive it Canvas Justice, for the surety to make Good the Debt; in case
the Principal fail, or will not.

For more sureness Sureties Demanded.

Where the Law does not Distinguish, Distinguendum non est, we must not
separate: now in Law they are all Principals, All Equally and Jointly Bound: And
each liable in solidum to the whole Debt, at the Election of the Lender. And
though it fall often Heavy on some, who are forced to Discharge the whole:
though they never shared in the Loan, nor so much as Drank for it. Yet in
Justice it is their Debt, and the Creditor left to his Choice, to take it of
whom He will: 'Twas their misfortune, or rather Folly to Engage for a Pauper;
or the ungentle, that would leave them in the lurch. The Obligee is out of
Purse, and had not others Engaged, would not have lent at all; and so does no
wrong.

Gentle usage due to Sureties.

The Civil Law is very Gentleman-like, and Conscionable in this Point, in
sadling the right Horse: for the Creditors must first sue the Principal, and
levy their Debt on him: and if a nulla Bona be Returned, then to try the
strength of the Sureties.

Ferreting the Surety most Afflictive and Partial Dealing.

But at Common Law Generally, they deal very Ruggedly; in Hunting after the
Surety, and plague Him to purpose: leaving the Principal as unconcerned, when
the charge, and easiness of Reaping their Due, on the Principal; were the same.

Par. 41. Peers why Exempted from an Attachment on Civil Process.
THE Peers of the Realm, are Priviledg'd from this ill-favored snapping way,
of being Caught by the Poll: on the Presumption of Law, that the most
Honorable, are the likeliest, to be Right Honest: and will Pay even before
Demand. And likewise that their Fortunes, are sufficient to satisfy; without
Attaching the Person.

The Comminalty blamed, for Enthralling themselves.

The Commons of England, some Conceive were much overseen and unadvised: when
they mingled their Wine with Water; in subjecting themselves as Bond: in
Exposing their Bodies, to be Enslaved; when the Law, Proclaimed them Free.

Par. 42. Reasons why the Body should not be Distrain'd.
1. IN Nature, Consequently in Judgment of Law, nothing is Distrainable but
what can satisfy: now nothing can satisfy, but what is Marketable and of
value; and that must be an Estate either in Lands or Goods: If neither, then
Impotentia excusat Legem, even the King must lose his Due: for the Body is
neither Saleable nor Eatable; without we turn Cannibals, and deviate into
Brutes.

2. In Discretion the Debtee stands in his own Light; and renders his Debt more
Desperate: by Disabling the Debtor. Shutting Him up in a languishing Condition,
which if at large, happily his Industry or good Fortune, might enable Him, to
afford Satisfaction in Part: and some Bread better then no Loaf.

3. In State, they deprive the Sovereign of his Subjects; able Bodies
(according to the Intent of the Common Law) that might be serviceable in Peace
or War.

4. In Justice, it is very untoward and against Conscience: for the Debtor when
He Is laboring, to discharge his Duty; to be snap'd upon an Utlawry, and put to
a great and unnecessary charge, to Reverse it: when if forborne, He might
perchance, satissie the Debt. I find the Civil Law very Candid in this Point,
by their Dies Justi, or Days of Respite: a certain Time of Forbearance, for the
Debtor to turn Himself in, the better to enable Himself for Payment.

5. In Divinity: the Body being useless, not vendible even for a Farthing; it is
more than unwise, with some, even Barbarous and Inhumane, racking the Body; to
Dice the Bones: and pray God one Day it be not laid to their Charge.

Par. 43. The Known Inconveniences.
1. MAny mischiefs fall out, on the strict executing a Capias: more then Brawls
and Batteries, oftimes Effusion of Blood. A very unchristian thing, and ought
to be Redressed.

2. The Debtor is frighted, and debarred of his Liberty, in Traversing his
occasions, which might accommodate his Debts.

3. The Tickers finding the Law on their side, that they can Command the
Person, when they list: they are more Enticed to Trust, and so hand-smooth help
many Swillers, and Swaggerers out of their Estates.

4. It Creates spend-thrifts, Knowing their Lavishness may be Pomp'd up:
They Are more Allured to Rookings, and so never mind to check their Runnings
out: which does occasion many men's Ruin, and the overthrow of great Families.

5. I could wish there were no Cause, for the Law to use these Pinchings: for
Running on Tick proves but ugly shifting and Ruffian-like; and ends in
Bitterness: a sweet Comfort to peep through a Grate: some chuck down, with care
to Keep the Wolf from the Door; will spoil the Trade of Userers and Fetterers.

The Dolefulness unravel'd.

6. The Truth is, the Confidor or trusting Dealer, is but smoother'd in his own
Feathers: for to pack off his Wares at any Rate, He readily Books the loose
Gallant; beyond the Reach of his Purse: And if his Fortune fall short, then He
Curses his Confidence, and in wrath takes out a Capias for his Carcass, to
piece it out: And this pays as much as Throwing his Cap against the Sky: for
where one Crawls out, Twenty stick and are stifled.

7. 'Twere more Quiet and Credit, for both Parties, to sever their Horses: the
one wave Ticking, the other not to want; till he has got Bayard in the Stable,
ready chink to pay.

Par. 44. The unsufferable Abusiveness of an Attachias.
THese Capia's are so exorbitant, that they will even Attach a Corse: and if the
Attacher be not Compounded with, continue the Attachee above Ground; to the
shame of Christianity, and Poisoning of the Quick: this I have seen, and the
Body kept unburied in the Church, under pretense of Debt: foolishly Conceiting
the Friends would redeem it. Many on this Jealousy, interr their Friends
skulkingly like Dogs? whose Bodies when living were the Temples of the Holy
Ghost: for fear forsooth of Arresting the Hearse.

A Corse not Attachable for Debt.

A most horrid and simple Impudence: and the Law most egregiously Dishonored,
and mistaken: for in speculation of Law, a Capias Can serve but, 1. Ad
Respondendum, or, 2. Ad Satisfaciendum.
either to Procure an Answer, or make satisfaction: Now what Answer can a mute
Corse or liveless Corpse make; or what satisfaction can it render: Just as Good
and sensible to demand Dues of a Stone, as of a dead Person: neither can the
Law be so simple and unreasonable, as to expect it: It Is warranted by the
Statute, to take the Body in the aforementioned Cases, but Lex non praecepit
vana and inutilia.

1. The Law does never Enjoin Impertinencies: therefore on necessity, it must
be reasonably understood, of an animate living Body; not an inanimate and dead
one.

2. Besides when Dead, it ceases to be a Body; it is properly then (at most) but
Cadaver, a Carcass or Frame of Dust and Ashes: so that after the Dissolution,
naturally and so Legally it is no Body: the Writ then on Course is superseded,
because not Executible: There being no such Body then in Rerum natura,
according to the intended Tenor of the Caption.

3. In Judgment of Reason; no Benefit reapable by the Exeuction: But a
Cadaverous and Shadowy one: which the Law (the great Administer of Wisdom and
Piety) will never offer: It being more Collusive and Absurd, then Barbarous and
Uncivil.

Thus the Law is most unworthily shamed and Abused, through Ideocy and Malice.

Par. 45. Not molestable by every Parochian Demander of Dues, besides Law.
ANother Exorbitancy is likewise as frequent and Conjectured for Law by the
Clergy: to stop the Corse, if Travailing through their Parish, offering to
interr it, or pay Duties.

A brave custom to enforce a man, to be Buried where some please: or to
satisfy their simple Avarice: They had as Good, and quite as Reasonable;
Prescribe to draw their Testaments, and Carve to themselves, like the Friars
and Devouters: what Part of the Fortune they think best.

Suppose one die in London, and desire to have his Bones laid, at the Mount in
Cornwall, in Cumberland, or the remotest Part in Wales: let any modest Person
Compute, what an easy Charge it will amount unto; happily the Defunct, Dying
but small in Estate, or worse then nothing: If every Parish must be satisfied,
merely for passing through.

A sweet nonsencestical Custom, and against Law: and so I find it Adjudg'd in
point. Trin. 15 Jac. in a Prohibition.

Staying or Disturbing the Bier, under the prementioned Pretensions: is
Detestable in Law.

Neither can we Conceive, that the Mirror of Justice and Piousness, the Law;
altogether so lame and Defective: But that the offender herein, is more then a
grand Trespasser; and cannot escape unpunished: without all Doubt, He Is many
ways Punishable.

1. By Action of the Case, for the uncivil Abuse: Conceivable by the Heir, or
Trustee for the Sepulture or Burial. 2. In the Court Christian, pro
Reformatione morum, by Ecclesiastical Censures, the Law of Christ, will not
suffer such impious Assaults, to go unpunished. 3. By Indictment at Common Law,
at the Kings suit: for Debarring his Subject, the Common Benefit, of the Law of
Nature.
Par. 46. The Duties we owe unto the Dead are chiefly three.
Sepulture a natural Debt.

1. FUneralia; decent Interrment, a Common office of nature; unto which we are
mutually Bound, to each other to perform; as Due unto Humanity: for that
assuredly, it must be one Day, our own Turn unavoidably to pray the same.
Therefore Administration by a Stranger for the Sepulture is Allowed by Law.

This moral Courtesy was taught from Heaven, which induced our Ancestors to
Erect their peculiar Sepulchers, for themselves and Family. Therefore an
undecent Funeral, or any rude and freekish Directions, tending thereunto: like
unto that of the Stoical Vaunter

Sepelit natura Relictos,

Are Inhumane and Disallowable by Law.

As by a Decision.

Maevius made Lucius his Heir by Will, sub Pacto, or Conditionally: to throw
his Ashes and Bones into the Sea.

Two Questions.
1. If Lucius did forbear (out of Loyalty to humane Decency) Performing the
Condition: whether He could hold the Inheritance as Heir. 2. Whether the
Condition not Insane and void.
Resolved.

1. To the first, that the non-performing of the Condition, was rather
Commendable then Questionable; in Committing the Body, to civil Burial. And
hence interring Rites are called Justa, because Due by the free unwritten
Justice of Nature, or Law of Civility.

2. To the second, That the Condition was more then Windy: if the Testator in
true senses very wicked, most Absurd, and so void: However the Estate
Completely Holdable, in Law and Conscience.

The Ground Hallowed by Funeral Obsequies.

Burial is so highly Indulged, and strictly observed by the Canon Law: That the
very Place, where an humane Body or Head is interred; is instantly Consecrated
and adopted Religious: And for the future, rendered unsaleable; even
unmorgageable, only Demisible.

What good Christians were some Railers against Decency, of late with us:
scornfully refusing, the harmless Celebration of the Liturgy. Throwing the Body
into the earth, as Rudely as Pigs into a Stey; without Reverence or Devotion.

Pompous Interring I agree is undecent, because vain and often overchargeable:
many times obtruding a Fast on the poor Creditor, for other Peoples Feastings.

Censuring Petty and Base.

2. Civil Memory: in point of generous Breeding, we should keep a watch on our
mouths; and suffer nothing to escape us, even of the Living; but Reservedly:
And not make it a Common Practice, like Titlers, and Story-mongers; merely for
Discourse sake, to defame the Absents without Cause: unless we are particularly
Consulted with in Private or Public, to give an Account of any man's Credit and
manners: Then we ought to be free, and deal Heartily; otherwise silence is our
Duty in Civility and Conscience.

No speaking of the Dead but Candide and Cast.

But for the Departed we must never mention them, but with Honor: a good Fame
being the only Interest, and Right of Nature, which they still Retain below: to
violate those dues, were most ungracious and superlatively Profane, beyond the
Cursedness of Charles Martel.

No biting the Absent, nor wrestling with Spirits.

If Bad, let their unhappiness die with them: if good, let them be Remembered,
with a joyful Applause; for so bright a Saint.

Devises Choicely Regardable in Law and Conscience.

3. Performance of the Will: for the Good of his Soul, as some Books term it:
or rather for the safety of the Party, entrusted to interr Him; that He do
Righteous things: that his own Spirit might find Rest in the other Life. For
God is Just, and let Him expect, What Measures he gives, the same will be
meated unto Him.

Paganism very Precise in Executing Wills.

The very Paynims though in the Dark, yet (by the Peeps of nature) were ever
most Curious, in Gratifying the Request of the Decedent.

As by a Decision.

A famous Wit, on his Deathbed willed with a very passionate Desire that his
Works might be burnt.

Two Questions.
1. Whether the Devise not void; because Injurious to public Interest; and the
Advance of Learning. 2. Admitting it good: whether private Request, should be
preferred before the Common Good, or General Advantage.
Resolved.

1. That the Devise may be Conceived valid and soberly Consistent, with Law and
Conscience: It cannot be Denied, but in Law, every one may do with his own as
he pleases: if otherwise, the Law deserves to be Coated and Bibb'd, to talk of
Propriety. If so, why Published against the Vote and Direction of the Devisor.

2. Every one is best skilled to take measure of Himself: And what Judges
Civilly Construed Modesty, as to the oblivious sense: perchance the Requester
knew it more fit and Requisite to be taken literally: Because of Imperfections
best known to Himself, not so easily Conceived by others.

Therefore I cannot but Applaud, the Judgment of the Emperor: that held the
Concealing more Civil, than the Divulging.

The Common Law Favorable to Wills.

Testaments as the final and Consummate Acts of Mortality, are very preciously
Esteemed by all Laws: They are Alterable and may be nulled by a latter, and
invalidated by Eschetable Misdeeds: yet they shall never be void, if by any
Consistency of Reason; the Intent of the Devisor, can possibly be Picked out.

As by a Case.

A. devises all that he has to B. to do with it, at his will and Pleasure.

Three Points.
1. Whether a good Devise, because not so legally Amplified; according to the
usual Form. 2. Whether Lands and Tenements, as well as Chattels do pass: for
want of apter words. 3. What Interest passes; whether an Inheritance Absolute,
or modal and Qualified.
Resolved.

1. In other Conveyances, Demur might be made what Right passed: But in Devises
the best shall be taken, to fulfill the Will of the Testator: Therefore the
Bequest good.

2. By the Intent, a fee simple passed of all Reversionary, as well as present
Rights.

3. It will be objected by the Learned, that there want Essential words to
create an Inheritance: and happily not Published Animo Testandi, and so void.

1. The Devisor shall be Presumed, to lie in Extremis, and likewise Inops
Consilii, altogether destitute of Counsel: And so Disabled, to give in that
Exactness of Form: which in his Convalescence, he might have done.

2. It must be granted, that the Testator was Cited by an irresistible Summons
to his long Home; and there to Abide: And so cannot appear, to Defend or
Explain his own Act. Therefore what he Declares shall be taken Valedissime,
most favorably and forcibly; for the Benefit of the Devisee.

Par. 47. The Inducement to this Freedom.
I Write not this Dogmatically, to teach the Seniors in Wisdom, or Overseers of
State: nor Captiously, in finding Fault with the Law: only Piteously, out of
Tenderness; that the poor Languisher might be Relieved, and the Law Explained.

And likewise that the Unchristian Abuses, of Disturbing the Dead; unless
sentenced to Infamy by Law, may be Redressed: whose Bodies when Alive, were the
Receptacles of Gods Holy Spirit.

SECT. VIII.
Par. 48. The whole Scheme of Law Disquisited and Affirmed.
LET Frumpers shut their Lips, and forbear Carping at Lex Terrae, or the Common
Law of England? that has tenter'd the prime Wits of all Ages, in Polishing and
Trimming: that it is now a little Decayed, or at all out of Fashion; needing a
new Whamp, or even an underlay, is not Possible: Examine the Law Books, they will
Endure the severest Test; some sneaked out in Rude Times to prop up broken
Printers; may be flat and sapless: But the licensed ones, the old Vouchers;
Codes gravely learned and Philosophical. The meanest may well be Read, by the
Wisest; being altogether Weedless.

The Vprightness of the Law.

The Common Pleas of Meum and Tuum, or Commutative Justice; are so Plain and
Indifferent, with a Saunce Regard de nulluy, that hardly any Judgment so
Hollow, to open his mouth against it.

The Graciousness of the Law.

For those of the Crown; the nicest Concern, there is no Law under Heavens, of a
greater Clearness, than the Law of England, without the Cruelty of the Torture,
or that which is near as Bad, a tedious Languishment; before offenders are
called, in order to their Deliverance: Therefore Deserving better Language,
than some clamorous Aspersers; are pleased to Afford it.

For Example.

An Indictment or Verdict, that B. killed C. so Defended, in Preservation of
his own Life; is not sufficient: without Reciting the special matter. That the
Court might adjudge of the Inevitableness of the Necessity: to direct the Jury
accordingly.

Par. 49. Law the Pandect of Perfection.
IN fine, without Playing the Panegyric, or Magnifier of Excellency; the Law
has the Qualifications of an Angel; in being on every side, most Civil,
Reasonable and Honest.

1. The Civility of the Law.

If the Defendant be summoned to appear peremptory at a Day, and mischances
interpose as Mayhem, sickness, with other lets, which hinder from appearance at
the precise time; if He appear by his Responselis or Attorney, (the Law hating
surprise) He shall be Essoin'd or excused from the Penalty of the Default, and
a longer Day granted Him.

And if an Essoin be once cast, no ne Recipiatur can be entered, only
Adjourning it, and looking to the Continuances.

2. The Reasonableness of the Law.

One shall be Tenens per legem Angliae, or Tenant by the Courtesy; of a Rent,
though the Wife die, before the day of Payment: And of an Advowson, though she
slip away; before the Avoidance. Nay, if the Advowson, become void by Lapse,
during the Coverture; and the Wife dies after the sixth months pass; before any
Presentment by the Husband: And the ordinary Collares to the Avoidance, yet the
Husband shall have the Benefit, of the next Avoidance: as le Tenant par le
Courtesy.

Reviver of the Courtesy.

A. marries B. an Heiress, and has Issue: and afterward commits Treason or
Felony, and be thereof Attainted; but pardoned: yet the courtesy is lost. If he
chance to have any Issue after the Pardon, such is the suavity of the Law to
the Coverture: the Privilege is Revived.

If the Dowress encroach, and hold more then her Due; or the Commoner by
Appendancy or Vicinage, surcharge the Common; which is but foul sharking in
both: Therefore by W. 1. they shall be Admeasur'd. The Writs are Vicountel, the
matter Discussible and Determinable by the Sheriff.

3. The Honesty of the Law.

A Nude Promise binds not, and why otherwise; for what loss can the Defendant
sustain; when he neither gave, nor Assumed any Considerable Return. But if one
bid another, Heal such a Wound, or Repair such an Highway: Admitting both
Contracts made, without any Promised Recompense: In such Cases the Law
(Abhorring Baseness) shall create a Promise, and imply a Reward; with full
Damages: should the Contractor approve Himself so unworthy, in denying
satisfaction.

The like if any specialty be executed beyond Sea; to avoid a Fayler of Right,
it is Triable at Common Law: the Plaintiff may suggest, 'twas done at Toledo in
Spain, at Todington in the County of G. whether any such Place in that ville,
it is not material: the Issue will be singly whether the Parties Act and Deed.

In brief, (if one grant the vesture or the Herbage of his Lands; though no
Inheritance passes the Grantee may enter and maintain an Action of Trespass:
But if he grant the Profits of such Manor to J. S. and his Hs. with Livery;
the whole Land passes.

Par. 50. The nobleness of the Law.
THus according to the 2 E. 3.14 E. 3. Common Right, the Maintainer of the
Crown, the Law: must be Agreed, a deep science and mistical Beauty. For had not
the Law, been as secure for the Subject, as safe for the Sovereign: There Is no
Doubt (as has been observed) but those several Revolutions of Conquerors; with
the late fidling Usurpers, that ever had an Aching Tooth at the Law, would
assuredly have altered it: If not wholly laid it aside, and Introduced their
own. Which is a satisfaction very full to any Civil Judgment; of its Gravity
and sufficiency: That it is truly Excellent, and beyond compare.

SECT. IX.
Par. 51. Groundless Cries against the Pontificial and Civil Law.
THE Roman Law with Don Whyners, is a Choak-pear too and needless; and may well
be thrown aside: I have been an unhappy Porer, in all Polemical Learning,
Discovering little: but by the smattering that I have of that Noble Science; I
cannot but deem it Imperial: well suting with the Flavor, or goldy Locks of
Monarchy.

Why necessary.

Neither is the Regency Municipal, Completed with Law; without Ecclesiastical
and Civil Law Courts: without their Company a Decay of Justice and Feebleness
in the Crown, would ensue: for Causes merely Spiritual, are exempted from
Westminster Hall.

All Contracts and Querels, made superaltum Mare on the Ocean; append' a loy
d'oleron, belong to the Admiralty: An Ennoblement to the Crown, to be served
with general Lawyers.

The great Reverence the Law ascribes, to Hallowed Places.

I wish our Heterogeneous Brethren (the Ravers against Monarchy) were meeker
spirited: setting the same value on the Church; as the Law has done in all
Times: for at Common Law, if one be Assaulted and Beaten too, in a Church, or
Churchyard: It Is not Justifiable to return Blows in his own Defense. By H. 12
Jac. B. R. de son Fort demesne, will not Excuse, which the Statute of E. 6.
Confirms.

Par. 52. The Antiquity of Ecclesiastical Law.
NEither are the Halimots or Ecclesiastic Courts at all Encroachers: any new
Crept up Jurisdictions, but as Fundamental and Ancient as Justice it self: for
we read, that Jehosaphat, in his visiting of Judah; to redress many Enormities,
in Church and Commonwealth, ordained Judges not only secular: But at Jerusalem,
for the mere Spiritualia, He erected a Gourt Christian: for so is the Text,
positive in the Point. Amariah in Causes Spiritual, was Chief Determiner: And
in Civil, Zebediah the Head-Decider.

Why called Ordinary.

Hence it is that the Law, most Emphatically styles the Bishop Ordinary:
Because the great Minister of Decency or Judge of Order, in Ecclesiastical
Affairs.

These distinct Consistories are likewise Assis'd and Ascertained, by our
Saviors Comforting the Apostles against Persecutions: of Delivering them up to
Councils, and scourging them in Synagogues: several other Proofs I could bring,
to prove the Pontifical Jurisdiction. But in so clear a Text, 'twere casting
Water into the Sea.

Par. 53. Foreign Transactions Impleadable.
TRansmarine Contracts, or Bargains made Beyond Sea, are triable before the
Constable or Marshal: for the Admiralty is solely confined to the Sea, Extra
Corpus Comitatus, out of any County.

Derogations of the Common Law Prohibitible.

But any specialty or Contract, made for Payment of money, or Doing any Act;
wherein the Common Law can administer Justice. Then by 8 R. 2.13 R. 2. and
several other Laws; neither Constable, Marshal, nor Admiral; must intermeddle:
because Derogatory to the Law Paramount, and they Act without Authority:
Therefore Countermandable by Prohibition.

Par. 54. Transmarine Acts how Triable.
IF any be killed beyond Sea, an Appeal by 1 H. 4.13 H. 4. and the 25 Eliz.
Douties Case, lies by the Wife or Heir, before the Constable or Marshal: whose
Proceedings are by Witnesses or Combat.

Pyracy, with other Misdemeanors on the Sea, belong to the Admiralty: or
Attaintable at Common Law by the Statute: The same Law reaches to Ireland,
because but one Admiral in both Kingdoms. So that the Law is Transcendently
Complete and Just: Healing every Gangrene Perfectly, but Pettishness and Malice.

Par. 55. Prejudice Requited.
BUT ruat Coelum, all Excellencies must be strangled, that stand in their way:
Transcendencies Devasted or laid waste, that matches not their Froppishness:
without Droling, well Apaid are some of both Professions, for their spiteful
Declaimings and snappings against Prelacy.

Thus the Law, the Protectress of Life and Doneress of Fortune: is well
Rewarded: not only a Mock with some Psalter Scholars; but a byword and Wake of
Mirth with the Sisterhood. I wish from my soul for their own sakes, they would
give over Tatling against Law, and Pecking against Majesty.

SECT. X.
Par. 56. Murmurs against the Meritorious.
AS to the Exceptions against Minority: that it is Jeopardous, to trust the
State-Pinnace; with a green-Headed Steerer.

By Copley's Case I agree it has been Practiced, and some Colorable Reasons
may be Rendered: And the Practice not so Perilous, because no Judges of Record:
though I fear the Law will hardly justify it.

Infancy a Conceived Disablement.

1. In Common sense and Reason, can it be Imagined, that an Infant that cannot
govern himself; being so Adjudg'd in Law, therefore incapable of all Judicial
Acts: should be Ripe enough for Ponderous Affairs, to personate his Country,
not only to bind Himself and them; but likewise the whole Kingdom.

Why not Elective.

2. If a Minor be Arrayed on a Jury, He Is Challengeable: much stronger must the
Law be, if Impanell'd on the grand Enquest of State: If deemed unfit to try, a
private Cause; the Law can never be so weak, as to adjudge him sufficient, for
the Exitus Reipublicae, or public Issue of the whole Nation: therefore we may
invincibly Conclude him, non-Eligible, because unserviceable.

Par. 57. Every Member a National Agent.
'TWill be Replied, having a free Choice; they may send whom they please: if
their Grievances are lamely Represented, or their Interest sorrily managed: the
Loss will be solely to themselves. This is neither Law nor Reason. I agree in
Point of Freedom; if I have Business to France, I may send whom I please to
Cross the Sea: But if my Errand be of Importance and skill in Managing; it is no
small Error, to entrust a venterous undertaker, without Language or Experience:
there being no thoughts but the business must miscarry.

Much more if of Public Concern, wherein a whole Nation must suffer; what
Discretion can it be, to employ a Youth in Affairs, that require the greatest
Maturity. For when Returned and actually sitting, he is no Procurator, for a
single Interest; but the universal: the general Concern of England. And
therefore if nient suffisant, not fully Accomplished, according to the Summons:
he is unduly Elected and Rejectible.

Par. 58. Mis-elections occasioned, by Treating of Tumults.
BUt how is the Law faulty? if any Miscarriage, they may thank themselves; and
not the Law: being most Curious of public Welfare. Therefore if any Mischief,
it is a Chick of their own Hatching: for by the Directives of Law, the choosing
of les Grandees des Counties, as the 27 E. 3. calls them, should be De
Probioribus and Potentioribus, the Civil'st and most Potent; that is, in
suppute of Law, the most literate and virtuous: not the strongest in the
Beef-pot, or the most Powerful, with the spells of Bacchus; to Canvas and Feast
Multitudes; stuffing their Guts to idle Purpose, and against Law; to shout and
bluster for them. By which means the most Personable, capable to serve, may be
beaten off the Pit; and so Bolted out.

Par. 59. Non-officiating, an Abuser Inditeable or Expellable.
THE miscarriage is very bad; for many out of Pomp and Vainglory, may covet to
be Senators: Who, when they come to Act, may altogether find themselves
impatient of the life of State, which is Diligence: And never attend. Plays and
Taverns affording them no spare Time for public matters; which doubtless is
redressable, by Information, or by vote of their own House; either by
Commitment, or Expulsion for the neglect of their Office.

Par. 60. Diligence and Intendance Requirable by Law.
THis Cavil resembles Silenus Statue: they can never be good Patriots, that
prefer Masquing and Bibbing, before the Discharge of their Office: Being sent
to supervise, that Ascanius live safe, and Coridon at Hearts ease: and
non-Attendance has been the loss of Monarchy. But in this the Choosers,
wilfully Confound themselves; by their Hastiness of not resolving upon a Stanch
Senate.

Par. 61. The Qualification. Non-Resiancy Dubitable.
IN Result of Law, the Elected are the Chief Visitours of State: and therefore
ought to be Qualified, as the 14 H. 8. describes some Professors, Grave and
sadmen, well Experienced and Sober, Most Pregnant and Prudent: according to the
23 H. 6.15. the notablest Knights and Resiants: from which two Doubts may arise.

1. It may be quaeried, whether any under the Degree of a Knight be Chusable.
3. Whether Non-Commorancy, be not a Non-Ability; Rendering the Candidate
unqualified: and so incapable to be Elected.
1. To the first, I conceive very clearly, that the Law is not to be Taken
literally: Confining the choice to that Degree. If the Election be made De
magis sufficientibus; of a Person duly Qualified; it will be sufficient enough.
2. For the second, it may be doubted, like that of a Jury which must be of the
Vicinage: Because presumed to have the best Knowledge of the Issue; and so most
apt and Capable, to be a Trier or Judge of the Fact: The like in this Point,
some Conceive the Elected ought to be, Commorant or Demurrant, on or near the
Place; for which he serves. On the Presumption, that he best knows their
Griefs, and so best able to negotiate. By that Law, the Chusers ought likewise
to be Residents. From this also another Query arises. 3. Whether any but the
Constant Inhabitants may Choose: Because they are Adjudg'd to be best Knowing, to
instruct their Referees. 3. For this I find the Practice various, or rather out
of Dispute: and therefore may pass undebated.
By the 7 H. 6.12. W. 1.5. and the 7. H. 4. the Election of those High
Inquisitors of Redress ought to be free and Indifferent: without Prayer or
Precept.

Par. 62. Members of Parliament Friendly and Grave. No Clashers nor Clinchers.
THE Demeanor of the House, Consists principally in four Respects.

1. Serious and reverent Speeches, without the least spice of Sedition, against
Settlements: or any by-Dartings on the Mien or Movings of any Member: which is
Disgraceable by the Bar. Clashing being a mighty Dishonor, that the public
Emissaries, sent to be the great Keepers of the Peace; should not only break
their Trust, but give bad Example, to tremble the Nation. 2. To avoid Curiosity
of Speech: in Coveting to show Rhetoric, to be blown up for Orators; to loose
the matter. Therefore plain and sincere Delivery most Pithy and Grave; best
befitting so great an Assembly. Strains of Wit, often rambles into more then
Quibling and Clinching; sometimes Clashing by altercation of words: Therefore
not serious and apposite enough; for the Gravity and Deliberateness of weighty
Debates. 3. Slowness in speaking to a Bill, at the first Reading; or rather
wholly silence: let them weigh and thoroughly digest it in themselves, e're they
offer a Debate. 4. Lastly, not to be Cavillous and vain in spending time in
needless Orations: but to Hear with Patience, and speak with Deliberation; as
the matter shall require. The Remedy. The Suffrage Enlargeable.
Were the Suffrage of 40. s. per Annum, enlarged to 40 l. or more: and the
Suffragers to appear at their own Charge (and why not? it being their own
Interest) as at other public Concerns: otherwise the Election to be void, and
the Elisors or Chusers, well mulcted for their Partiality and Bribing. Co-peers
or grave Endowments, would be elected, and the Nation well served.

Neither will the limiting the choice, to an hundred Pounds; with the Excluding
of Missive-Labourings and foolish Topings: be any Debarring of a Common Vote.
If the Statute of 40 s. how Lands then went, and the value of them now; with
the Motives of Altering the Law, from general shoutings, be duly Perused and
Considered. But unless this Excess of Tumulting and Entertainings be Redressed:
He that will pamper Folly highest, though he run in Debt for his Feather; shall
be Elected: And the Subnobles or well ballasted Gentlemen, passed by; as
useless shrubs. More might be said of this Point, but without Artemons Buckler,
a busy Espyal may occasion Trouble.

Par. 62. Their Rights Maintained.
FOR their Privilege, being wholly Exempt from an Attachias or Common Arrest
at the suit of a 'Subject: liable only ad sectam Regis, at the Pleas of the
Crown. Freed likewise from other molestations at Law; as ad Testificandum, but
barely to appear as an evidence; it is but Reasonable and most necessary.
Otherwise the Public might be at an Hazard: and it is fitter (according to the
Maxim of Artificial Reason) that, Private ones should suffer, then the whole be
Endamag'd.

This Privilege no Entail, or perpetual Exemption: only Temporary, while
they are imbusied about Affairs of the first Magnitude: which by Trewinnards
Case, is founded on Prescription: And in Law, Every Prescription, which tends
to the general Welfare, is good: though positively prejudicial to single
Persons.

Neither is this Peering any Discharge of the Debt; only a suspension of the
suit, during the Session: therefore no mischief. And there is no Law Enforces
People, to book or bond priviledg'd Persons.

Par. 63. Servants Protectible.
FOR their menial Servants, or usual Attendants: to live likewise unmolested,
is no way unreasonable but fitting: It being but Convenient, that public
Ministers, or the Lower Nobles, as the 35 of E. 1. styles them, should enjoy
all accommodable Rights, according to the Rule of Law, Cedant Privata Publicis,
Privates must dispense with Wrenches, and Falls too, for the general Interest:
therefore the Speaker (after his Complement of Disabling) in his Oration to the
Sovereign: more eminently pitches on four Petitions.

1. For Freedom of Speech. 2. That all Privileges incident to themselves, or
Servants, might be kept Inviolable. 3. For Access to his Majesty, on Emergency
of occasion. 4. That their Debates, might be Construed with Candor; as tending
to the general Good.
The Bona fide Servants only Priviledg'd.

To protect others, under Color of Regardants, or Retainers, is against
Law-Disregarding such Protections, according to some Lawyers, is strictly no
Contempt.

Par. 64. Their Debates bounded.
NEither are the lower or upper Walls (according to some loose opinions) by
Lewknor's and Wentworth's Case; any Sanctuary for licentious Tongues: for
should any futile Person fly into Impertinencies, either against the Power,
that Convened them, or the Orders of his own House: He Is usually punished with
more then Kneeling, happily Tower'd for his Pains. The one being never called,
nor the other sent, ad Rixandum, to brawl and brabble, in being Factious: to
alter the Law, or squabble with Majesty. But barely ad Consulendum, to Consult
and Advise; to offer their Pressures, and with all Humbleness, pray Redress.

Par. 65. The end of the Convention.
TO what end are they Convented? in Custodiam Pacis, in Custody and Defense of
the prime Blessing of Body and Soul; to wit, Peace: for without it an Angel
newly lanch'd from Heaven, will be put to no small Trumps, to Win the Game of
Content: for if Peace be out of the Pack, Happiness is discarded, and no Life
can be had. Therefore on necessity, the skilful should only be Elected; to that
Sage and Regal Council: in brief, by Constitution of Law the Worthy only
Eligible, and Capable of the Trust.

Should weak ones, as it has been seen and felt too (through Fraud and Tumult)
creep in: I Conceive the Return not good: but the Eslier or Election undue and
void; being not Pursuant to the Writ: therefore by the Burgess of Westbury's
Case, the Party Elected is Ejectible; who for his shallowness of Judgment and
other Misdemeanors was voted out, and another chosen in his Place: for Laws
ought to be Coined by the Wisest; otherwise we may be Edicted to hard
obedience, nay impossible.

If Flusterers (through the Bribings of strong Bub) will hoot in Ciphers;
Contrary to Law, and Design of State: the Roll never quite foul and Blotted.
Figures enough are still sent to cast up the Ardua Negotia, or Popular Grievings.
All merit Knightly, in this great Inquisition for their Pains of Voting and
Attendance.

These Wide-mouth and Wooden Objections at present are Absurd; and may be well
thrown over the Horse Main; being as impertinent as the King that scourged the
Hellespont: for by their Actings, I find naught but Gravity and Wisdom: And
therefore to be Embraced with Bone-fires of Joy, for so Picked an Assembly.

Par. 66. No Parliament without an Act.
IT IS held in strictness of Law, properly no Parliament, only an Assembly;
unless some Act pass, or Record be made thereof: though all Formalities
(requisite in State, as one would think, has been performed) to denominate it
a Parliament.

1. No Meeting on their own Heads, without a lawful Citation: being summoned by
orderly Precept to the Sheriff. 2. No surprise without due notice of his Writ
to the Country: who by virtue of his Warrant Royal, Convene such a Day, at the
usual Hours, directed by Law, to appear and Elect. 3. They personally appear,
and make their Choice: the Party Elected accepts the Trust, and is formally
Returned. 4. The two Houses meet at the Day, set in the Writ: with the
Appearance of his Majesty, or his Chancellor; (if in Remotis) to signify his
Call. 5. Imagine several Sittings, with interlocutory Discourses and
Conferences of both Houses: the Journal full of Movings and Debates, with Bills
past, ready for the Royal Hand.
Now what shall hinder, but according to the meaning and Common Acceptance of
the Word; here is a Complete Parliament; yet in Law without, some Act passed,
strictly it is no Parliament, only a Convention: And so several times Agreed by
all the Judges of England.

I confess this is no small Nicity: for in Law, in case of an Arbitrament, if
once a Controversy be submitted by Deed, or by Parol, and Arbitratours
actually Chosen; and they meet and Debate, laboring to Reconcile: though their
Labors prove successless, making no Award; yet it is proper to averr an
Arbitration; as in Pleading to say, the matter was submitted to Arbitrament:
The Arbitrours meet and Consulted, Examining the matter in variance, in order
to end all Differences; but could not Agree to make an Award: in this fense
it is good enough, to allege an Arbitrament and Arbitours, though nullum
fecerunt Arbitrium: why not the like in the Parliamentary Point?

Obsequiousness Applied.

No: I find the Modern Authorities clear against it: though by the 18 R. 2. a
Judgment given in B. R. was reversed, but no Statude made, yet Adjug'd a
Parliament.

Let this lesson us, how vain and Impudent, Conscience is; to winnel, and nose
Law: if Law, there is no Disputing.

Par. 67. Whether the whole Establishment, may be subverted.
IT IS scrupled by ome Constultors, or gingling Enquirors, whether perverting
Acts are Binding: I shall not trouble my Head in stating this Curiousness: But
at Common Law, if one depute a Proxey, to give seisin on Condition; and he
delivers it Absolute, it is void: or if the Warrant be absolute, and He deliver
it Conditionally, it is the same: The like in this Point, the Members of that
Consultation, are no Com-peers of Sovereignty: at most, the one but the Princes
Advisers, the other the Peoples Delegates; both limited and Controulable: being
Entrusted ad tractandam de quibusdam urgentibus, to treat of certain Arduous
and Important Affairs: and therein to use their Power Prudently; in preserving
Fundamentals, and accommodating the State by redressive Acts; in lopping of all
Excrescencies, or annoying Stems, inconvenient or oppressive: but not at all
Authorized, to mangle Settlements, or dispute with Princes.

Par. 68. Their Privileges not Disputable.
BY Thorps Case, the Privileges of these High Counselors, are not to be
touched on: much less to be described or determined. To busy then our Pates in
designing the Form or Jurisdiction, of that transcendent Court; is for silly
Questionists: for every sober Person is bound, to shape his Conceptions
thereof; with an humble and obedient Reverence.

Par. 69. The Privilege not Releasable, Transferrable, nor Extinguishable.
I Conceive the Privilege neither suspendible nor Abateable, by any private
nor even judicial Act, of the Person Priviledg'd: without notorious Breach of
Trust; and the Peril too of the Public safety.

Neither can this admit of any Curiosity or wonder, when his Condition is
thoroughly viewed, and in what capacity he moved.

The capacity being public: so not to be quitted, on a personal Account, or
Privacy of Design: And therefore if weary of his Procuratorship, He ought to
signify his Debility or Weariness to Continue: And the Delegators or Parties
Electing, left to their choice, to depute another in his stead.

Not Deputable or Assignable.

Hence it is Regularly in Law, that he cannot Depute a Proxy, or Assign:
because chosen and Trusted by others, Moving in auter Droit; and so not Master
of himself, to Assign or transfer the public Deligacy or Trust to others.

Trusts not Delegable.

To illustrate this more plainly by the Common Practice: If A. be entrusted by
B. for the use of C. and others; and he accept the Trust: He can hardly
transfer this Trust, without the consent of the Parties entrusting: should he
do it without their Privity and Assent, Equity (as well as common Civility)
will take it ill: and award the Parties Damages, the Injury being Relievable by
Action.

The Case of Factorship or Common Attorneyship makes it plainer: for if either
undertake more, then what they can well perform, if the Clients receive loss,
it is Remediable by Action: so they are Confined to Mediocrity, though they
usually moyl themselves, over shoes and Boots, and engross more then they can
well grasp.

Much stronger in the Parliamentary undertaking; there is no Remedy over, if
any, the Damage may be so Immense: that it is Impossible for a single fortune,
to satisfy: therefore on necessity, the Privilege not Quittable: otherwise
the Public shall be in a worse Condition, then the Private: which no Law will
admit, but still on the Contrary, the Rule being undeniable over the whole Face
of the Earth, Better one suffer then the whole.

The Case lately of the Lord S. in B. R. was strange, where on a Trial by
Consent the Privilege was Halted at: though He affirmed very positively a
surprise, being fain to attend public Affairs, wholly taken up therewith, and
so Disabled, to fit himself for a Trial; And therefore Prayed a further Day:
'twas Denied; with some judicial Assertion, that the Privilege was wayv'd:
which may be Doubted; because I take the Lords to sit, on the Behalf of the
whole Nation, as well as the Commons: and therefore their Hinderance as
publicly Damageable.

Neither can Consent in Adjournment, though a vacancy from the public Employ,
quit the Privilege: because Demandable at the Royal Pleasure, before the time
appointed.

In Prorogations I agree the Privilege suspended: But that is by Act of Law,
and a quasi Dissolution for the time: and so no Right violated, the Public at
no Detriment or Danger.

Should any be so easy in Relinquishing the Privilege, I Conceive it is a
Contempt, and no small Dishonor to the House: no way to extinguish it but by
Act, and I much question, whether that can do it, because of Entailing a Wrong
on Posterity.

With the Wiseman, Silence seldom hurts, but Openness is a certain Damage: I
shall therefore Conceal my thoughts, and Conclude the Privilege better
Preserved, then Exposed to suspension or Dispute.

SECT. X.
Par. 70. Captious Brablings against Courtiers.
IT IS pretended that some Courtiers are very strait fingered; no Holywater
gratis on free-Cost; without some Pounds secured aforehand: And the Mediation
costs more, then the Suit is worth.

Tell them of a Prize, huge kind, and Courtly till the Business be well Beaten
into their Heads: then they fairly leave the Starters the Bag, and Beg it for
themselves; shifting them off, that they came to late the Birds were sold.

Their Ironies retorted or the Brabler muted.

I have heard such Jiggs have been danced, and thought no Breach of Trust or
Honesty: only a Raillery of Wit, or small Court Frolic, to boast over a Bottle
of Wine: but rarely, no Common Gallyard.

Let not the Right Noble, Knit the Brow at these Carpings: Railings against
Eminency, being the fifth Element, and Odes of Course with loose Tongues: for I
know none Concerned, unless Soberness and Virtue, the Ornaments of virility,
are Crimes unpardonable.

Par. 71. The Court Vindicated.
FOR Courtiers to be Broggers or Bargain-drivers, is an Employment too much
below Stairs, for that noble Sphere: but the Presents that we bestow, for Doing
of Courtesies; 'twere gross Clownship to style them Exactions or Bribes: only
Civil Gratifications, and reciprocal Dues, for Benefits received: For surely
when the Fish is Caught with their Busses, to fry some in their own Pan, is not
immodest nor unreasonable. In fine, it cannot enter into my noddle, to conceive
a Courtier bound, to beg for another; spend his Interest, that should feather
his own neast: And not share in the Concession.

But to leave these little Slips; the by-Corants or coarse Complements of some
thin and hungry Stomachs: the Gallant stand in too much Dread, of the Throne of
Honor, to Commit a Rape on Honesty.

Par. 72. The Royal Liberties Justifiable.
FOR Court Privileges, that the Royal Waiters, are excepted, from the beastly
Hugg; without leave: it is but 1. Decent, and 2. Just.


1. 'Twere very undhansome and low, indeed most ugly and Contemptible, that the
Attendants on the Head, should not be badg'd, from the Common Crowd: no more
indulged and Respected in Law, then a Ragman or a Tinker.

2. In strictness of Right, it is but fit and suting that great Service: for
should Majesty be stripped of his Servants, without notice; by that Liberty, All
by peace-meal, might be caught from Him: and so left alone in the Vocative
Case, to sing his vae soli: without officers of State, or Common Convenience.

3. If ordinary Members by Law, claim these Privileges; much more may the
Head, all Privilege being the Indulgence of Majesty.

Par. 73. To rectify the Mistake.
A Place in the Family Royal, is not altogether a bare Employment, as to Common
Subjects: but doubtless in Law of State, by Influx of Dignity, an office of
Honor: And ought to be of note and value in Law, otherwise Whitehall were in a
sadder Condition, then Courts at Westminster and elsewhere: where the Officers
are Privileged, because the Courts will not be deprived of their Waitings,
without notice. Nay, in Law some Advocates and their Clerks too, are free from
this ugly surprise of Arrests: Certainly, much juster is the Law, to protect
the Household Royal: the least Disturbance there, being a mischief universal.
For if the Head be at all Amiss, the whole Body will instantly Complain.

Neither is the Privilege clasped so fast, but by Address on good Cause, leave
will be obtained, with a nulli neg. that the Law may reach them: the Noble
Judge of Appeals in these matters, I conceive, may adjudge of the
Reasonableness of the Case: for weighty Circumstances, may still stave off the
smartings of a Suit; and continue the Protection, without any offense to
Justice.

Par. 74. No suspension of Privilege.
I Have known it, come in Debate in the great Hall; whether the Privilege out
of waiting be then Prorogued or suspended; and the Person Attachable without
leave: the Court was near divided, some couceiving no notice or leave
requisite: Because then it is Holy Day time with them; and no Attendance is
expected. But the better opinion was clearly for the Privilege; nothing
positively resolved, only that the Privilege of the Hostel Royal, was no
Venice-Glass, dashable against the Walls: And to be broken, when every snuffey
Confidence thought fit.

Strangers why Privileged.

On this Reason of State and Prerogative of Honor, are Ambassadors with their
Retainers; exempted from a Capias: and Protectible by the Lord Chamberlain.

In brief, if the Privilege fall out Inconvenient, let the Folly hang on the
right Shoulders: for I know no Law, that Enjoins the Complainants, to truck on
Trust with Superiors.

Par. 75. The Privilege not Dischargeable.
IT IS generally, but very groundlesly conceived, that the Privilege, may be
wayv'd and nulled too by judicial Consent: As by entering into a Judgment and
the like? And then the Person is laid open, and may be Horsed up at will: the
Lord Chamberlain hardly offended, he seldom Protecting in such Cases.

2. Misprision of Prerogative.

An abusive Error and most Injurious to the Droit le Roy, as W. 1. terms it, or
Wounding of Prerogative: for the Servants contrary to Oath and Civil Breeding,
to quit their Service: without Request and leave.

3. No nuller or even wayver of Privilege, justifiable in Law or State.

1. In Law. I conceive the Privilege, neither nullable, nor even wayvable; by
an Act or Deed whatever: Being ossibus Affixa, as the Civilians speak,
indelibly Affixed to the Person: that without the Consent of the Lord
Chamberlain, it cannot be put off: like that of the Priesthood, which is held
not Devestible; no looking back without great sin: sickness or Infirmity may
Excuse Execution of the Office; but not a voluntary Wayver.

2. By the ordinary Rules of Justice: every Common Interest keeps entire and
whole; without the Act of the owner: no way vulnerable by a third Person. Much
more I hope the right of the Sovereign.

3. The Party is under Bonds, and not at his own Disposal: therefore his
Paravail Acts, unjustifiable and void in Law.

4. He that is Bound must obey: and what obedience can he Render, if Disabled:
But if Bound and Sworn too, how can he Disoblige himself: without the
Releasement of the Superior, to whom he is tied; without Breach of Covenant and
violation of his Oath?

Indented Servants not Contractable.

As by a Case.

A. is obliged to B. to serve him sedulously such a Term: the Obligee can
hardly on any shift or Extremity waive the bounden Time: but at his Peril, must
hold on and perform his Covenant. Should he be so Dirty as to Contract with
another, it is void: Because of the Disability or prior Interest, being not free
to Indent. And should any be so uncivil as to accept him; it is an Abuser of
Justice, and Rightble by Action.

Not Relinquishable in State.

1. Can the Ruffest Person be so Doltish, so lamentably clownish: to Conceive
it Handsome, or at all Just, for his Majesty to be evicted of his Servants
without leave: or to Dispense with a Discharge, to incur an Inconvenience;
without his Privity.

2. A fine Comeliness in Honor, for the Servants to be snatched up: and the
Prince to wait on himself.

3. Once Sworn, it is Conceived; the Party can by no Devise, of his own Head;
for self Ends: Relinquish, Discharge, or Forfeit his Attendance.

4. That his Majesty may choose, to allow of any such Disabling: without his
Knowledge and Assent.

5. Both Punishable, for Attempting to disaccommodate his Majesty: by nulling,
or indeed waiving the Privilege.

No way Dispriviledgable without Leave.

A Fondness or rather Dotishness of Conceit strongly reigns with some, that
Outlawry after Judgment will Attach a Courtier: Being then Judicially outed of
all Aulical Indulgence, or indeed Protection of Law.

This is Commonly Received for Law, and many times Practiced too: but Communis
Error, non facit Jus, is a Maxim in Law, and a Canon in Politiques: And
therefore Conceived by some, a gross Error, and Solecism of State: a very
uncivil and irregular Practice, and strictly a surprise without leave; and so a
Contempt and Punishable.

To the Head-Officers, the Deemsters of Privilege.

Some may be over-noble, and easy, in giving leave: others too Importuning, in
Requesting more, then Justice or Civility can possbly grant.

It Is thought they may still Protect the Servant, from being Impleaded for any
Act, though voluntary and with Consent: because incapable to Contract; and a
third Person is mischief'd thereby, which the Law will not suffer.

The Relinquisher deserves little Protection, for wilfully Intangling Himself:
however it is not Just nor Civil that his Majesty should be disserv'd for
another Folly.

Par. 76. The Sequel of Vulgar Oversights.
THese mistakes, have begot a general Prejudice on Monarchs: and some Greeks;
in chief the Physicians Son, tumbling in muckey Republiques have somewhat
besmeared Monarchy: writing not only coldly, but depravedly thereof: perchance
more out of Ignorance then Envy; because they knew no better: But it has been
found true enough, by woeful wringings, that no Last will fit an English Foot,
but the Rule by a single Person.

Monarchy the best Government.

To speak unbiasly, it is the Exactest Platform, and freest from Corruption:
least inclined to twinge the Purse, or wrench the Conscience; because not given
to Faction and great Parties. In brief, the speediest Termination of Justice:
and if Credit may be given to Scripture, the Pattern of Heaven: and therefore
most universally received, by all Mankind.

Par. 77. The Easiness of living under Princes.
NEither can Monarchy be so Burdenous, and subject to Groanings, as other
species of Regency: if fierce and chargeable, it is safer to dread one Tiger
than many: And less smoking the Purse, to feed one spendal then a Multitude.
One or two Counselors in Physic or Law, their Judgments mellow'd by
Experience, are more cheap and safe than many: Variety of opinions seldom
unite, and do but retard the Cure.

Par. 78. Princes Reclaimable.
IF a Monarch should chance to be Raw and Riotous, if Advice and Honor cannot;
Age must on Force reclaim: But a Senatory or Popular State, grows feverish and
worse; and ever continues so, to the end of the Chapter: And when all Medicines
are Essayed, no Remedy by Hook nor Crook can be found out; but the Scab totally
given over by Counsel and Patience: Death will assuredly help the one by
Remove, and there is Hopes a better may spring up; and please every Tooth, but
what is perished with the Phanatick Worm: But the other is for ever succourless,
because out of reach of Vicissitude; being swathed with Eternity.

Par. 79. Supremacy Hereditary, more safe then Elective.
IT IS stiffly disputed by some Athenian whifflers, that post-pone Monarchy, to
hold a Trencher to a popular Elbow: whether Supremes by Descent or Choice, are
the aptest Rulers, and most Available for the People: it is said by the Railers
against Succession, that a Prince may happen to be a Minor, unable to govern;
and Guardians will but make Hay, while the Sun Shines: Taking Advantage of the
Guardianships, to Christen their own Child, and neglect the public Good.

Secondly, if at ripe years, the Prince may prove a waster; and in Dandling his
Affection, destroy the People: And therefore the Scepter is best bestowed on
the Sharpest Sword, or the Worthiest.

Par. 80. A settled Monarchy; not Damageable by Infancy.
THE Disputers against Election, may rejoyn and Allege in case of Minority;
the Council will supply the Defect, and be more watchful, for the Shame will be
theirs; if the Prince suffer through Slothfulness or sinister Conduct.

An Elective State proves more Heavy and Chargeable; for the Party Elected, to
gratify his Faction must impair the Crown, by large Donatives: And to raise
his own Stock, pull much from the Domain Royal: Knowing his Regency is no
Entail, but must Terminate in him; which is often practiced, by Electives and
Usurpers, as lately with us by H. 4.

Par. 81. The Monarchy of England Avowed.
IT IS said by the Stormers against Sovereignty, that the King cannot Reverse a
Decree, nor Countermand a Judgment at Law: therefore no Complete Monarch.

That Judicial Acts, are not Countermandable, it is not for want of Omnipotency
in the King, but Possibility in the Affair: for the King in operation of Law,
is ever Present in Court: and hence by the 28 E. 1. En Presence del Roy is
taken for the Kings Bench; because He is there Virtually, though not
Presentially; therefore cannot be nonsuit, because not Demandable; in Judgment
of Law, being never Absent: but still Potentially Sitting.

For Instance.

A stroke within the Resiancy of the Royal Person; unless Blood thereupon
Ensue: is no Amputation or loss of the Hand. But in the Iudgment-Hall, by the
41 E. 3.280. 22 E. 3.13. but the 1 Trin. E. 4. Rot. 3. is in point, the Courts
sitting, for very striking, the Hand must be Amputated or Cut off: which I find
by that Record was accordingly executed on the striker: Apud le Standard de
Cheap: the Reason of the severity is rendered; Because in Judgment of State,
Majesty is Present: And the Law, the great Preserver of Peace, and Reverence to
the Sovereign; will not away with such an Insolence.

Now the Lords Justices, represent the Sacred Person, and what is Pronounced by
them is tacitly Declared by him. And so to reverse or control, what is Decreed
by Himself; were Absurd: and Acts of Justice more changeable then the Moon; no
Body ever safe, and the Glory of England, the Law; more useless then scribled
Paper.

I Am loath to let my Pen run, in Discussing this Point; a fit Theme for an
Hubert de Burgo: for though welted never so Heartily, and Warrantably too; by
Studied Reason, Law: I shall hardly slip the Censure of Dodging, as a Clawer of
the one, and an Abaser of the other.

Dotings against Prerogatives.

Some baffling over-wise Mooters, Cankered with Schism; to Crop the Crown and
beat the Scepter into a Spade: talk much of mixed Empire, which in strictness of
Law, is oppositum in objecto, mere Quibbling and Repugnant: making two
Supremes, being equally opposite, as simple and Compound: Fellowing the Prince
and Subject, as Co-Rulers, or Partners in Power: which by the Laws of State are
Contradictions most Absurd, being altogether inconsistent in one Body, Creating
a Penetration of Supremacy, or distinct Regalities; as diverse as those of
Naples and Denmark.

Indeed this equalness of Sceptring, or Coordinateness of Power does not only
Clip the Wing, but even debase the Sovereign: And make Him more subordinate,
and less free then the Subject.

To make a gay show of Potency, but in effect no more Considerable, or indeed
Regarded then the King of the Frogs; which made a noise, and some Bluster, but
when it appeared a mere Apparition or Nonentity of Sovereignty: the Subjects
became more than Familiar, and somewhat Saucy; even leaped upon their King, and
instead of obsequious Reverence; afforded him naught but Sleights and Revilings.

That Laws are framed by Concurrency, in some Nations, it is more out of
Discretion; then of strict Right and Necessity: Because the Subject is best
Conusant of himself, and ablest to sit his own Condition. And so a general
Convention, royal Bounty and more of Ease, to the Prince; then of Constraint
and obligation in Law: neither is this incongruous with sense or Liberty; for
the Prince to be Good to Himself, must on Force be Gracious to the Subject. The
prosperity of the Subject, being the best Revenue, and Glory of the Sovereign.

The Primitive Lawgivers.

Originally Princes stamped Laws themselves, and altered them at Will; for the
best Avail of State: there is no saying to a Prince, quare Ita facis, what do
thou? being the Auditor alone of Heaven, and so needless of the Allocations, or
poor Pidlings of Earth.

Sovereignty Defined.

This Jus Regium, or Right of the Scepter, called Prerogative; is a large
Field: and according to the word, a Privilege of the mightiest Amplitude: its
Bounds and Extents, best proved by Records and Constant Practice: However we
may safely Conclude, without the Fear of an Errata; the Government an
harmonious Regency, omnia in omnibus, (with the advice of the general Council)
absolute: no Homager or Feudatory to any earthly Power, though not a Crum
Arbitrary; because sweetened with the Cadencies of Justice, to wit, the
Goodliness of Aristocracy, and the Frankness of Democracy: Being in all things
directed by Clarified Reason, Law; but not a mite Coordinate, Conditional or
Deposable: According to the beguilings of some seditious Gagglers, but purely
single and Independent, without a State-Helper, or Part-owner.

England the Commote of Honor, the Pearl of the Terrene Globe.

Let Us not cry up this Country, nor brag of the other; but magnify and admire
our own mercies, and ascribe the praise unto Deity: for none under the Sun, by
the 45 E. 3. c. 4. de Talleg. non Concedend. are endowed with that Freedom and
safety like unto us: Prerogative and Parliament keeping an equal Pace, going
Hand in Hand (according to Fundamentals) they cannot Err:

Prerogative no Cormorant in Swallowing another Right.

As by a Case.

By the 1. H. 7. all Liberties, Preheminences, and Regal Franchises, were given
to Him in Tail generally: without any Limitation or special saving.

Whereupon a great Question arose, Whether inferior Franchises and private
Liberties were not likewise transmitted to the King?

Adjudg'd, Per tout le Coife d' Angleterre, by all the Judges, that every
private Right was impliedly saved, by Provisoe of Law, though not particularly
excepted: for that Prerogative can be no wrong Doer.

For Example.

The Estate and Persons of Idiots and Lunaticks are by Law, Entrusted with the
Supreme: should the Sovereign Trustee Commit the Body or Estate of either of
them to J. S. to do with them as Absolutely and Inordinately as he Pleases; the
Grant were void, because Breach of Trust; and the Committee punishable for any
Exorbitant usage.

In other places, if any (though Poor) are but suspected to be Rich, or but
well to Pass; they shall be presented, with a Basket of Fruit, with Empty Bags;
which if not returned Filled, the Presentee must certainly Expect the
Bow-string, or an harder Cruelty. Thus elsewhere Ruling is Lording, manuforti
by Force; will is Law, and Tyranny Freedom: the Prince when most Bountiful but
a Pharaoh, and the Leigh though most Deserving; but Egyptian: yet Dalliance of
Liberty, Peace and Honor, will not still the Thankless; but Sampson-like all
must be shouldered down, though they perish in the Fall.

SECT. XI.
Par. 82. Kingdoms resembled to Families, where the Troublesome are thrown out.
IN a private Family (the Type of Empire) is not Rule necessary? can it stand
unless bound up by the Ligaments of order? And if the Domestics will turn
Ribaws, Ruffins, and Damme Boys; slight the orders of the Master: Dismission
(in this Epicycle of Sovereignty) is the lightest Censure, that can be Expected.

By parity of Reason, in the public Family; if the Erraticks (in Contempt of
Mastership) will not lowre, and bow to the spiritual Form: not Dictated by the
State-Master, the King; not Enacted by the Church: But affeer'd and pronounced
too, by their own Consent; Expulsion and Restraint, are the softest Blows that
can be inflicted.

Outward Worship ordainable by the Church.

In Law, Rituals are Positivi Juris, matters of humane Make; the Modification
or Rite left wholly to Church Discretion: and Rites of distinct or diverse
Forms, do no way stain or impair the Doctrinals.

Law-maxims the Quintessence of Reason and unquestionable.

By our learned Masters of the Common Law, it is not required to assign an
Answer; why the Maxims were first ordained, and admitted as the Pillars of the
Law, and the Resolves of Reason: that may not be impeached nor impugn'd, by
brainless Searchers; that will pick Holes, in a seamless Coat: But ever owned
with silence and veneration; as the uncontrollable Results of Science Test
seipso, Magisterially as Authorities of themselves; though not provable by
Argument, or ocular Conviction: being Compounded beyond logical Touch, or
mathematical Demonstration; Infallible by the Allowance of the Exquisit'st
Advisings. In brief, of the same Powerfulness and strength in Law as Statutes;
therefore Triable alone, whether Maxims or no, by the Judges; and not per
Pais, by the Judgment of twelve men.

For Example.

A. has issue two Sons by several venters, B. and D. B. purchases green Acre,
and dies without Issue: D. shall never succeed as Heir, being barred by a Maxim
or Principle in Law.

An harder case, with the Clamorous, near a Kin to Barbarity.
Father and Son: and the Son acquires Lands in fee, and dies Brotherless,
Sisterless, and Issuless too: the Father, that in Law is pluis prochein de
sank, of the immediat'st Degree of Blood, the Cause of his Being, and so the
occasion of the Purchase: shall not lick his lips, of this Windfal, but the
Uncle. Nay if the Uncle dies without Entry, the Father shall not have the Land
at all: in this Case too He Is rebutted by another Maxim.
Let Us invert the Case.

Father, Uncle and Son, and a Lease is made to the Son, Remainder proximo de
sanguine: Here the Father shall take by way of Purchase.

Let the Critical'st Wits, that can pore into a Millstone; tell me the
Diversity in Conscience: in the first case, what natural or moral Defect,
there is in D.; but that He might be step-Heir, and slip into the devolved
Estate: or in the second Case, why Collateral Alliance should be preferred
before the nearest, proximity of Blood: in the last, why the Father shall take
as Heir, and not in the second case: more then that He Is disabled by an Axiom,
that is founded on Reason, and indisputable: for What Is not Consonant with
Reason, is Repugnant to Law.

Thus it is sufficient, that the Postulata's or Principles of the Law, the
Maxims; are received as Law, and do no way batter Reason, nor assault the Rule
Divine: the like may be applied, to outward Governance in the Church; the
Discipline as well as the Doctrine being fashioned after the soberest Dress of
Morality; and equipped by the Word of God, ought to live in Peace, from sour
and bubble Disputes: unless with wayward natures we must take a Pride in
chopping: Counting it the Supremest of Servitudes, to be Constant to settled
Sobriety.

SECT. XII.
Par. 83. Ceremonies Expostulated and Asserted.
IN Law Traditio loqui facit Cartam; Delivery is the very Essence or life of a
Deed; without this Ceremony, in Judgment of Law, no Instrument; only un
Escrovet or scrowl: so in a Feoffement unless executed by livery of Seisin, a
nude Circumstance, or bare Formality, though as ancient as Abraham; the
Conveyance invalid: for if the Feoffee enter, He Is but Tenant at Will, and
oustable at Pleasure: the bare Deed, without the Cooperation of Livery; will
not Create a firm Estate of Inheritance, to Him and his Heirs: only a
Possession ad placitum, Determinable at Will.

On this ground in Law, a Charter of Feoffment, or Demise for life; by a
Copyholder without Livery; is no Forfeiture: because no Alienation.

Stipulations perfected by Formal Acts.

So Tenants by the Verge, can neither take nor surrender their Estates; without
the Ceremony of the Rod, which is seisin in Law. In some Manors a Straw is
used, in some a Glove: according to the Maxim, Custom must ever be observed:
the like in some places, the sale of an Horse, or any other Contract; is
Completed Per traditionem stipulae, by the Delivery of a Rush. And in the
passing of these Estates, if the word Surrender be wanting, being Vocabulum
Artis, a Term of Law or Word of Art: though the Grant be stuffed thick enough,
with all other Conveying Force, it is ineffectual and void.

The Customary binding in Law.

The same I take the Law to be; if a Copyholder were minded, to part with his
Right; offering in Court, to pass it by words of Grant, Bargain, Sale, or Gift:
no Estate will pass, for as He Is tied to one peculiar Form of Assurance;
singular to his Tenure alone: so He Is restrained to special Words, proper to
that Conveyance.

Regularly, a Fee or Freehold, all Corporeal Hereditaments (but in some few
Cases) will not pass, without this solemnity: a Ceremony the Law has enjoined,
for the better Caution and security of the Purchasor; in case the Feoffee or
Donee should fail of their Evidence, this solemnity shall supply the Proof of
the Gift.

So in a Grant, le chose grantus, the thing granted (but in the Royal Case)
will not pass, unless the Terretenant attorn.

To break this Cloud by a Case.

Lord and Tenant, if the Lord grant the Services of his Tenant to A. and after
by Deed, bearing a latter Date, grant the same to B. and the Tenant attorn: the
Lawyers tell me, the Grant to A. is out of doors: should the Tenant afterward
attorn, 'twill not a rush mend the Title of A.

Was the Israelitish Seisin by the Shoe, unseemly because Customary and
required by Law? or did Boaz conceive his Purchase not strong enough, unless
Elimelech's Attorney did execute the same? was there any Impertinency or
undecency in either? Is the Royal Charity on Maundy Thursday (imitating the
lowliness of our Savior) an ostentous Humility, not becoming the Majesty of so
great a Prince? if not; why stagger then some taunting Make-bates, at harmless
Ceremonies; which banquet the Soul, and grace Devotion.

Par. 84. Why more Agriev'd at Ceremony then Common Civility.
LET them render a Reason, why white Habits are more frightful and noysom then
Black? or Cassocks more unseemly then dragling Cloaks: why Lawn-sleeves more
Absurd, then Collars of Essences; or Corner Caps with fur'd Robes; or gold
Chains with scarlet Gowns: both worn by Magistrates of Honor.

Is the notifying Induction, by taking the Keys of the Church, and ringing of
the Bells, Boy-like? though a Ceremony enjoined by Law. Is the Pall, Surplice,
or Hood, more superstitious and silly, then the Lawyers, Tippet, or Coif? both
surely by way of Decency, as Robes of Distinction, and Ornaments of Gravity.

Was the Countess of Godina's Riding, as plain as ever she was born, Wild, or
Wanton? Is the walking bare-Headed to Governors, in Quadrangles Idolatrous? or
a Ceremony any way Petulant, and unbecoming youth? by some Statutes, to empty
Courts and bare Walls (which I have often seen) unsightly, for Freshmen, and
juniour standing?

In brief, is the Cursew Bell instituted originally by notion of State; and
still continued in Discretion, as of civil use; as childish as Rattles or
Cymbols?

Why then this filthy smoke, this shameless Pother, about Atoms or mere
nothings; or more truly necessary Duties? Pray God this Fierceness prove not
the Prologue, of their Revolving to the Scarlet Hat; against whom our blessed
Infatuates, pretend the forked Arrow of their molten zeal?

Par. 85. Homage justifyable in State and Breeding.
WHat will our Church Squablers, say of Manhood; a Service consisting of many
Ceremonial and Strange Postures: is the Performance merely Foppish, and Pastime
for Owls? which if learned Lawyers may be believed, (and Every one must be
credited in his Art) is of admirable significancy, and necessity in Law: which
our careful Ancestors ordained, under shadows, the better to illustrate, and
retain substances.

What is the Tenure by Cornage, an hanging sleeve Hooting, though ordained for
the Defense of the Realm? what will some Ramblers think of Feaultie? when the
Tenant in the obsequiousest manner, shall swear Fidelity to his Lord, with
Sicome moy aid Dieu and ses Saints, so help me God and his Saints: is this
Dotage? which a Text Advocate, advises Fee-Lords not to neglect: it being a
sufficient Seisin of all Services.

Par. 86. Reasons apparent to the Blindest.
TO argue per notiora, by easy similies; Trunck Breeches or Trowses, and open
or close kneed Hose; so a Ruff or a Cravat; with a Collar Band or a large one
with a narrow or broad Hem; Plain or Laced: the like of an Hat or Mounteer Cap;
with a Wast Belt or Shoulder: All of them in nature are Indifferent; the one
equally as Decent and Rich as the other: But if the Arbiter of Modes, the
Court; affect one more then the other, the Indifferency is Decided: then one is
become Handsomer then the other, because more Modish: being worn by Sophies of
State, whom in Indifferency, Regis ad exemplum; it is our Duty in manners, to
imitate and obey: The like in Church Discipline, the peevish must content
themselves; with the Fiat, and Injunction of their Betters: throw by all
Dunstical dogged Humors, and comply with the present Form.

Are Garments that cover our nakedness, and defend us from the Rudeness of the
Air, the less Decent and serviceable for modest Trimmings? is Cloth or Serge
spoiled, less useful, if Guarded for some: or not Graceful, if Gymp'd for
others of better Rank, and costly Fringed? the cloth continues the same,
doubtless much better, being decently set off; unless slovingliness and
sluttery; are more sweet and seemly, then neatness and sober Attire: After the
same Comparative; how can the Doctrine be vitiated with polite Ceremony; purl'd
by Order. But with unshorn souls of an high nap, All Is Fantastical and
superstitious, that is not slutter'd and slubber'd with unholy Peevishness.

Thus Ceremony is the very soul of Order, and Order the Governess of Humanity:
for let but Order turn out, and urbanity dissolves.

Par. 87. The lawfulness of useful Ceremonies.
AS to Divinity: we must not conceive them in their own natures simply
unlawful: for if so, God would not have ordained them under the Law: And under
the Gospel I find none Prohibited: but such as are Enthralling, to exchange the
Liberty of Grace, for the Tyranny of the Law: The Apostle indeed does condemn
Circumcision, Jewish observings of Days, Months, Times, and years; which are no
less then superstitious, because unprofitable: However we are bound by the
Gospel, to retain those, that Conduce to Edification, Order, and outward
Decency in the Church. Otherwise the same Apostle would never have commended
the Corinthians for their Care, in keeping the Ordinances, which he delivered
to them: which Canons were (after the opinion of the best Doctors) concerning
the outward Worship; not about the Essentials, as Faith and Repentance, but
reverent Behavior and Gravity, the Adjuncts of Religion.

It Is true, our Savior reproves the Samaritane, saying, that He must be
Worshipped in Spirit and Truth, and no more Idolatrously, after the accustomed
Samaritan Worship: But in Truth not in Types and Shadows, but in Christ the
substance: And no longer in Respect of Promises and Predictions, which were
fulfilled by the Coming of Christ: Thus Spirit and Truth, the often wheasings
of our Dissenters, I conceive very clearly, are not opposed to Ceremonies in
General; only to legal ones which were Typical: and to cease on the full
Manifestation of our Savior.

Let some Mouchers from the Church of England, resolve us, what more Damage or
Hurt they can be to Gods Service now, then when God expressly enjoined them, if
the Heart be Righteous? for unto the pure all things are pure. But Momus when
he could not spy any Blemish in the Picture of Venus, picked a quarrel with the
Slipper.

Par. 88. Discipline framed by Princes, Allowable by Law.
A Christian Prince is out of all Doubt in Right of Divinity; Episcopus extra
Ecclesiam, the righful Overseer (as to Externals) and Orderer of Ecclesiastical
Concernments: though no Bishop in the Church, to exercise the Priestly
Function, without a Call. King Vzziah might not burn Incense, nor offer
Sacrifice. He may order and Command the Persons of the Clergy: and enjoin them
their Task: so King Jehosaphat commanded the Levites and Priests to teach the
Law, in the Cities of Judah.

As Princes have Power, over outward Concerns; so it is their Devoir, and ought
to be their principal Care, to promote the Service of God: They must not act
against Gods Law, nor reign with a loose Hand, that may be injurious to his
Rites, or Worship: They Are bound to down with all false Worship, to Prohibit
and Resist all Attempts; that have but the least Tincture of Tendency
thereunto, in securing the Church, from being a Puppey-slave to a Foreigner: So
did Hezekiah, Josiah, and all other good Kings of Judah.

Par. 89. Sovereigns are Erectors and Judges of Ceremony.
THus after the Warrant in Divinity: the King in Law is Censor Morum, the
Modeler and Controuler of Discipline: Beneplacito Regis quoad Ritus, tanquam
legi obtemperandum est: His Majesty's Mandamus quoad Ceremonials is Law: and in
this sense, An Order of State has been Adjudg'd Equipollent, to an Act of
Parliament.

Therefore if Lex Loquens the Oral Law, or Supreme in this Case, delegate his
Power to the Church; for these outward Ministrations, it is good and obliging:
if quadrated by the Apostles Rule, in Decency and Order: who but a Miscreant,
will bend his Brow, to deprave and Disobey.

Hence may Copes and Bowing, not to, but toward the Altar, and the like, be
Binding; because Decent and Harmless, if the Church enjoin it: though I confess
I am not much for either; but if the Church adjudge it fit, then my
Indifferency is circumscribed: I must obey in obedience to the Church, as
matter of Decency. That it is bad, because a Dalilah or Fondling at Rome, is
Lobster Logic: Papists eat and drink, therefore we must padlock our mouths,
and throw the Creature to the Dunghill. Nay, Indian-like, even abandon Heaven,
because they profess to land at that Port; as the Haven of Souls: I Am as
resolvedly against the Fucusses of Rome, as Ridley or Cranmer; and shall
venture more, then the Digging up my Bones, for the Reformed Truth.

In fine, if any Bracks in the Discipline, to the Blemishment of Christ's
Church: 'twere but mannerly zeal for the Taunters against Decency, to discover
them; in order to be handsomely Dern'd up and Amended: without Renting the
whole Piece.

SECT. XIII.
Par. 90. The Pilot of the Soul, for his careful steerage: is worthy of Double
Honor.
BY the Canon Law, an Office requires a Benefit: a Position in nature, for each
member to aid and requite the other: most Absurd then for the Caterers of the
Soul, to be at great charge, and baulk all worldly Hits, to live otherwise; to
fit themselves, to administer Spiritual Food: and be grudged for their
Catership, a Carnival Return. It Is but Common Barter, nothing of Bounty: the
bruted misers of the world, Lawyers and Physicians; the one to frisk and capeer
the Body, the other to ravel and tangle the Estate; are greased with fat
Thanks: But the manciple of the Soul, for his Guidage and Pasturing of the
Spirit; must fare hard, and nibble upon a Rock.

But how can their Revenues, be ravin'd or repined at, without Sacrilege or
the grossest Impiety? their Demeans (most Hippo's or poor Pittances and empty
Casks) being as undoubtedly firm in Law; as any lay Inheritance.

The Cleronomy not saleable.

Concessum Templo, Concessum Coelo; a Concession to the Church is a Grant to
Heaven, and so unalienable: should then this Cutthroat Sacrilege be suffered,
to out-riot the Goths and Vandals, and have its will: where shall Escheat the
spoil? to the Corporation Royal, the King: no; he scorns to handle Church
Rapine; and 1 Jac. backs his holy Worthiness, to Continue the Intent of the
Founders; for the Lands to demur in succession, for the maintenance of
Religion. It being the Dowre of Heaven, lent only for the use and support of
the Church: no living man's Gift, and in none now alive; that can pretend to a
Reverter or Re-assumption: so that should so bloody a Blow be given to
Monarchy; as the order taken off: the holy Patrimony, as the Lawyers say, must
rest in Abeiance, in suspense or Intendment of Law.

No Alienation intendable by Law.

I conceive Gallio and Tenants Paravail, will not meddle with the Spiritual
Commodation, de queux, ils nont pas Cognizance, without the temporal Road;
being directum Dominium, an independent Seigniory, and the simple Fief, or pure
Inheritance, properly in none; but with the Lawyers in nubibus, in the
Contemplation, or Expectancy of Law.

The Prudence of the Law, has invested the Glebe-Holders, but with a qualified
Estate; in prevention of a Discontinuance, to bar the successor: Hence is
prohibited the Benefit of a Deads-year; that the succeeding Incumbent, might
find Temporal Bread for his Spiritual: in brief in Law, Regularly for
Advantage, to benefit the Church, the Parson has a Conditional Fee: for
prejudice but an estate for Life.

Par. 91. The Right of Tithes manifestly proved.
FOR Tithes, whether Jure Divino, as to the Quotity or tenth Part, it matters
not: since as Maintenance, by all Laws it is agreed to be of Divine Right: And
pursuant to the Articles of nature, which binds us (as Tenants by sufference)
to honor Diety, with all worldly Enjoyments: the Decimation then or Tenth,
which circumspect Agat. styles Decimae Debitae, that we afford the Pastor of
the Soul; is no will-offering or Pious Benevolence, but payable as a Debt, due
to Heaven: to speak Lawyer-like as a Fee-Farm, or Reservation Divine, in Token
of whom we Claim.

The Proto-Rent Ecclesiastical.

We read that Cain and Abel brought their Offerings, which certainly was
prompted to them, either by parental Practice, or natural Light: now God was
not offended at the one because He offered; but because his obvention was not
seasoned with Faith; which made the other's more Acceptable.

The offerings of the Patriarchs, must needs proceed from Divine Command,
either impliedly directed by Gods Candle, the light of nature; or expressly from
the Constant Tradition, of the first universal Parent. Otherwise we may
Conceive them grossly guilty of Will Worship.

The Firstlings due to the Heavenly Steward.

Since we cannot present our First Fruits to the right Landlord: we must
tender it to his Seneschal and Proxey; the terrestrial Feoffee for the Cure of
Souls: And the Glory of the other world, being not Revealable, but by the
Hallowed mouths of Mortals: and they unable to live, without partaking of the
lay-Blessing; a Provision in necessity of nature is most due, and none so
Covenable, apt and Agreeable to Scripture, as the ancient Salary, and yearly
Income, approved and settled by Law.

Were I as Hotspur'd and Heathenish, as some Gablers churling against Tithes; I
would out with my Tongue; and off with my Hand too, before I would substract
them. In Law Denial of Rent is a Disseisin, and non-Attendance to pay it, is a
Denial in Law, and an actual Disseisin: In some Cases Forfeiture, in most good
cause of Re-entry. All Blessings are properly the Demeans of Heaven, and we at
most but Feudaries al volunt, Tenants at will: Let the mutterers then against
Tithes, beware the chief Lord; meet not the same measure; by seizing the whole:
on non-payment of his Due, to his Ambassador on Earth.

Par. 92. Tithes not Alienable because a Divine Property.
SInce our Dissenting Consciences, are generally for the starving of the
Church: To throw down Religion and set up Atheism. Whether Tithes may de jure
be alienated, and the Clergy turned to Pentioners and Alms-men: will be worth a
Discussing.

1. I Am full in the negative: first by the usual Laws of Civil Barter among
men, nothing will Rightfully pass from the true owner: without his Privity and
Consent.

2. We must not then deal, more Injuriously and Impudently with God; to pull
from Him: and transfer it to another, without his leave and Approbation.

3. For his Approving and good will, to any motion of that Horridness, we must
not expect a voice from Heaven, but seek his Word for the same. And there we
shall not find a syllable, of his willingness of parting with his Estate: But
the contrary expressly, Prohibited by Joseph's taking a more special Care; That
the Lands of the Priests should be Hallowed, and particularly exempted from
Sale.

Par. 93. Whether Due Jure Divino.
I Conceive Tithes not only Lawful and Due, as all other Proprieties, confirmed
and Established by Law: But likewise Just and most Indispensable, by the Right
of Divine Precept, and Practice of holy men: which in all Ages ever made a
Conscience, to pay them.

Payable under the Law.

We find that God had a Respect, and was somewhat more Favorable, to the
younger Brother and his offering: nor do we read, that God by any Act, did ever
give up or part with his Right to Tithes: no surrender or Alienation, visible
in the Case.

Impleadable under the Gospel.

Under the Gospel, Christ and his Apostles, are so far from Dis-owning, or
non-claiming them: That we find them expressly Required, Matthew. 23.23. And in
the same Evangelist, that Christ by that Precept, of first reconcile thy self
to thy Brother, then come and offer thy Gift: that he Approves of the Payment
thereof.

Necessary Purveyings are Jure Divino. Tithes are most necessary ones for the
maintenance of Gods Church: Therefore Tithes Jure Divino.
Par. 94. A Titheable President.
I Find Abraham very Punctual in Paying of Tithes, even of his uncertain
Revenue, his very spoils: now he did this by Command, and so a Pattern to us;
otherwise we may tax him of Will Worship: of which the Scripture is altogether
silent.

Par. 95. Compulsory Maintenance better then Voluntary.
IT IS mis-objected, that Contributions were Better: leaving every one to his
Mouldiness of Spirit, to pay what he lists.

A swift way to turn the Clergy, into that heinous and abominable Sin of
Flattery: To have the Rich in Admiration, to be amply Allowed; but the Poor in
scorn, to feed upon Husks; because there is no Hopes of Reward.

Why Contributions should not be still Continued, which was the old Livelihood;
before the Church was Inducted into Tithes: is demanded by some.

As by a Case.

J. S. has Red-acre in Possession with a Right to Black-Acre; but no seisin:
Does he by the actual Enjoyment of the one, forfeit his Interest to the other.

Par. 96. Why Demandable.
IN fine, the Reason of Tithes, was the Instructing of the People, in the
Service of God: with Continual Intercessions, for their chiefest Blessing;
which must continue to the end of the world; and so then on necessity, as well
as Precept; must Tithes be perpetually Paid, and freed from Alienation:
otherwise the Service of God must cease, and all precious souls dearly bought
by Christ; be Exposed to Damnation.

Par. 97. Due by the Law of Reason.
BY the Injunctions of Reason, can Civility be so beetle-headed, so very a
Dolt; as to dream that Scholars, ex Debito, or of Course, by bounden tie of
Conscience: are obliged to be up early and late, Threshing at Study; enjoy no
more Ease, then Hedgers and Ditchers; but still Carking to Purvey, and lay up
for the Soul: wasting themselves, and parting with their Stoage of Oil, as
shining Lamps, to lighten the Laity to Heaven: And with the Apostle, The
Workman not worthy of meat.

Par. 98. The People Vnedified, so no Pay due.
IF Tithes due and well deserved: how comes the Church to be thus Rent asunder,
overspread with Schism and Heresy: were the People better Taught, more
Godliness and Unity would Shine: Popery depressed, and the Orthodox on the Top
of the Hill.

The Estovers of the Church, why Payable.

This is a bungling Cavil, and not worth a Reply: Tithes were paid to the
Levites, because set apart to give Attendance, at the Altar: so the Clergy now
Claim Tithes, because separated to the Gospel: And not on the Account of
success. One may Plant, and the other Water; but Heaven alone must give the
Increase.

The Brachium seculare must instruct, for Mucro Ecclesiae is no more Dreaded,
then a Pot-gun: the Clergy may Preach, and labor their Hearts out, for the
Spiritual Peace: to stubborn Hearers, that will stop their ears; or if
Instructed, will not Practice. How can our good Spiriters, the Spurners of the
Clergy be edified? that Routously trivant after untemper'd Mortar; and refuse
the Church.

The Justness of the Law to the Church.

Not to belie the Common Law, it bears a just tenderness to the Church: it is
true a layman may be discharged of Tithes, by Grant or Composition; but not by
Prescription: that is, the Law will not suffer, to prescribe, in non Decimando,
in Exoneration or Discharge of Tithes; only for the modus, the same with the
Canon Law, where a Prescription is not Allowable: And the Decimae Consuetae, or
the manner of Decimation, so it amount to a Muneration, or Competent Portion;
does not enervate or weaken, the Decimable Right: Payment of a sum in half
Crowns or Shillings will not vary or prejudice the Duty; in Discharge of
Predial, or mixed Tenths.

Par. 99. The Decimal Right, formerly Appendant to the Spiritual Conusans.
ANciently, if Tithes were subtracted: 'twas suable in Court Christian: But
then if the Right of Tithes had come in question, by W. 2. 'Twas Triable only
at Common Law. For Pensions they may sue in the Spiritual Court; but if they be
Prescriptible, by the 13 E. 1. it must on Fine-force, be claimed at Common Law.

After the Norman the first Law in behalf of Tithes was the 18 E. 1. Art. sup.
chapter a Declaratory of the Common Law, with a Ratifying of the 9 E. 2. under the
Royal Assurance.

18 E. 3. by sc. fac. out of the chief Court, as old as the Nation: the Clergy
were sub-paena'd to render their Dues there: this was Conceived an Encroachment
on the Church: so Remedied with a salvo jure Regio, or special saving to Regal
Rights.

2 R. 2. Churchmen were Decimated by secular Courts: This was likewise
Redressed, without demonstratively Proving it, to be a Lay-Chattel.

15 E. 3. 'twas Declared, that Pursuing of Tithes, of Right did properly,
pertain to the spiritual Court: Thus in all Ages, by the 14 E. 3. 25 E. 3. 6 R.
2. 7 R. 2. 2 H. 4. and several other Modern Laws: the Church was relieved, and
the Maintenance preserved.

For Blessings Renovant, Tithes most Due.

For Winchelsies Canon, it is by some questioned; but for growing Profits, I
meet with no Doubtings, at all among Lawyers: Tithes in Law are not nakedly a
Lay Profit apprender, barely a Rent Charge, or Canonical Allowance: But an
Ecclesiastical Inheritage, the Fee sure more then Positive, without doubt
Divine: a Provisional Due, Recoverable under the Gospel, as well as the Law; as
of Divine Right.

The Moral Law is Jure Divino under the Gospel. Tithes are of the Moral Law.
Therefore Tithes Jure Divino under the Gospel.
By the National Law, this quota Pars, as the 13 E. 1. calls it, is usually
defined, a Church Inheritance, Collateral to the Estate of the Land: and
therefore not Extinguishable by Feoffment.

For Example.

If a Manor be alien'd by Fine, the solemn'st instrument in Law; this shall
not Extinguish Tithes: the Alienee must to Confession, with the Parson for his
titheable Interest.

Par. 100. None Indecimable or Tithe-free.
NEither are Tithes, extinct by unity of Possession; as other Charges issuing
out of Lands, are subject unto: Therefore,

If a Parson, purchase the Manor of Dale, of which He Is Incumbent: by this
Acquest and unity of seisin, the Land (by Act of Law) is become non-Decimable:
But if the Parson infeoff or Lease out his Parsonage to A. He shall have
Tithes, against his own Peoffee or Lessee: for Tithes were not discharged, only
uncharg'd or suspended.

At Common Law, put the case, that

A. does demise his Rectory to B. Rendering Rent; in lieu and satisfaction of
all Demands; as well Spiritual as Temporal: It Is quaeried whether now Titheable.

Though the word Demand be cutting in Law, indeed very Chain-shot in most
cases, of the mightiest extent and operation: yet I conceive, it shall not
exonerate or acquit, the Demisee of Tithes: being more then common Reserves of
Rent, Duties inevitably due, as Debentures to the Diety.

Let the Bargain be more closely worded.

As a Demise of Land cum Proficuis, with all Perquisites and Avails: whether
now due.

I conceive the amplest Grant, without particularly named, will not pass
Tithes; because Spiritual Duties, and Collateral to the Estate of the Land. By
Law a Tribute Parochial, for the support of Religion; for which the Parson
Imparsonee, or Purveyor of the Soul, may take of Common Right, without any
Customary or Civil Provision: the Duty lying in Prender, as well as Render. For
can the Judicious imagine, that after we are spiritually treated; God intended
that his Suffragan, should with Cap in Hand, scrape to Mister, or Gadfer for
his Wages: and be foxtail'd, without even Romescot, or a penny for his Balm.
Like the laboring Be, to fill the Hive of the soul with Honey; and not to be
vouch-saf'd the Wax for his Candle, but to be even smothered for his Pains.

Par. 101. No Duty, no Pay.
THis clerical Estate, or divine Exhibition, though of absolute Tenure and
sacredness in Law; yet Abusable: the Incumbency consisting chiefly in Feasance,
or active services: for should the Curate, play the bestial Churl, refusing
Celebrare Divina, to execute his Curacy. Nonsolvence of his Dues, on Course is
Absolvable in Law and Nature. Like an Annuity at Common Law, granted pro
Consilio impendendo, and the Grantee refuses to give Counsel; the Annuity
ceases. For that a Benefit ought to be mutual, otherwise as a nude Compact, it
binds no faster then a Girdle without a Buckle. This under submission is
thought by many grand Lawyers, the Statute of nature: a Doctrinal instincted,
and revealed by Reason.

So many leaves has been spent on this Point: And the 27 and 32 of H. 8.
particularly the 2 E. 6. has been so good a Protestant, to settle the Payment
in Peace: that to warble more on this note, were as useless now as an Attempt,
to drain or check the Sea.

SECT. XIV.
Par. 102. To be Incumbent of Livings is neither Gluttonous nor Greedy.
PLuralities much annoys the Squemish, as the Spawners of Idleness; the Bane of
Virtue: Batlers overfed prove Cromming Punchey's or mere Belly-Gods and
Trivants in their Function. Insiniteness is not favored in Law, as excessive
Damage, Distress infinite.

An apsey stammer, will escape this leash; Wisdom surely was not nodding and
Dormant, in the 21 H. 8. nor in the least slumber or Drowsiness; when this
Duplicate or Faculty of Grace was ordained: In Law the worthiness of Acts, are
measured by the object, about which they are Conversant; or by the Tendency
unto the End, for which they are framed: Now the object, was Transcendency of
Parts; the end, Chaplets of Honor, for indefatigable Merit.

But supernumerary Cures thwarts the Canons of Lateran: Gawdies that repast not
the Body, but surfeit the mind: tallow indeed the Sides, but breaks the Back of
Reason: a Rudeness in Breeding beyond the Lording of the Popes tot quot, or
wadling Gutlings; for some overgrown Paunches, their Heads usually lank and
homely furnished: to gourmandise and engross the whole Table, leaving no Room
for many, whose Parts entitle them; to be Guests at the Holy Battles: Besides
non-Residence must needs march in, it being miraculous, to recubate and supply
two Cures, without ubiquity.

The squintings of Envy not Regardable.

Dis-foresting and Scarcity of Wood, will neither Cool, nor Chill thickscul
malice: Staves will be found to strike Virtue.

We agree the Statute, to be stricti Juris, taken very closely against
non-Residents, Faculty-Favours, and Gulliguts: and therefore if a Bishop be
translated to an Archbishop, holding both Dignities: or a Baron created an
Earl, although both Honors be consolidated in one Person: yet shall they not
qualify more, then what an Archbishop or an Earl singly might have done. And
the 21 of H. 8. with some Exceptions, confirmed the Lateran Canon: However when
Popery was here in Pomp, the King and others too, might have dispensed with it:
for stricto Jure, at Common Law, there was no Cession, the first Benefice not
void, voidable only by the Lateran order: As the Law of those Times, of a
secular Priest; if he had taken Wife, leaving Issue and died: the Issue
Inheritable, the Coverture being not void, voidable only by Divorce.

Par. 103. Privileges of Favor.
ANoblemans Chaplain may be doubly Beneficed with Cure, without suing out any
special License or Dispensation: But I find it doubted by the 14 Eliz. whether
the Law Spiritual will allow of the same.

If a Nobleman by his Letters Testimonial qualify six, when in Right of Law,
He should have but three: the three first Promoted shall only stand, and the
rest put by: otherwise the Clergy, that of all men should not be Raking and
Covetous, but rather Liberal and Self-denying, would be (near as bad as
Simonists) Monopolists, and Engrossers: And the Intent of this Indulging Law,
Abused and Defrauded.

But I think were the matter well examined by the Quaerent, the Plaint would
cease, without any more ado: the Grapes are only sour, because not within the
Pull, of some pedantical Clutches.

Indulgences to Dignity.

May not Plenarty of virtue, the Top-Pregnants of the George and Garter, for
goodly Excellencies; claim by geometrical Justice, the Priority of Choice, with
Benjamin's mess? nay Plurals and Exceedings, with a Trialty; if Major Domo, or
Majesty think fit? Besides, should this Hill be taken down, and laid flat:
Nobility would find some smart in the Tumble; for Qualifications, Privileges
of Honor, inherent to Noblemen; must fall to the ground, incorporate with the
Dust, and be seen no more: thus their stutting to level this Mount, will
defraud the Church of its Magnetism or fair Allurements, to encourage the
climing Graduates. And also the Upper Nobles, of their Statutal Right, to
gratify their Chaplains, and promote elegant Desert.

SECT. XV.
Par. 104. A Curious Conscience Condemned.
ON the seriousest Debate within my self, with the Aid of the strictest
scrutiny in Policy; the narrowest search, into the sacred Tomes: I cannot find,
but the Counselor of the Soul, Conscience; may be as well over Touchey, as
Tender: And therefore by the Commands of both, ought to be modeled after the
Rules of State; that is, Law.

Positive Law mislik'd and Maunder'd at, because mis-understood.

That the Eldest Son at Common Law, should sweep stakes; or go away with all:
And though he die, living the Father, his Issue by the Fiction of
Representation; still to be Entitled to All. And if the Parent chance to pop
away, without a legal Setting out, or Disposing of the Fortune: Then for the
young Gallanter, as some call him, to flant and tear with a witness; turn the
Brothers and Sisters a Begging, and set the whole Covey: And that in
Conscience is Hard to some; unreasonable with others: Nature being an impartial
Carver to All: a Meliority then, that is, the primer Choice, or better Part; to
the eldest were fair and sufficient. But for one, usually a Lurdane, or the
least worthy; to loll and take up the whole Chariot; and guzzle alone: And the
rest to foot it and starve. To many Discernments, is an heavier Doom, then to
the Mines or Galleys; a very Garlic Law, unknown to the very Blacks: contrary
to that of old, which was but the bigger Stake, or fatter Collup; and not for
one hovering Greedigut, or gutling Hebler; to Crom and Cubboard the whole
Belly-Timber, keep Spoon and Broth and All to Himself: a very sodden Custom,
and not becoming Humane nature.

Par. 105. The Law justified, and the Maunderer checked and Refuted.
TO couching Gutlers, lobbing in the Chimney Corner, that would gladly Catch
Fish, without wetting the Foot; with the snout continually in the Porridge Pot;
this Noble Law, borrowed from the Saxon, (as per chapter J. B. in 1 and 2 of Ph.
and M.) is thought smoothless and over-smart: But with the braver Allay, most
Politic and Rare; for the Preservation of Families, the Quickening of Industry;
but chiefly for the Flourishing of Monarchy.

The Intirety or whole Dish questioned by the wisest.

Neither is this the Cloggy Maunderings of some Mopsey Heads, but the Doubting
of Causidical ones, Judgments of the first Rate; as not strictly maintainable
by the Law of Reason, though Reasonable: a very nice Reasoning, which does not
attach the Reasonableness of the Custom: For should the Fortune be Hutspotted,
or sliced into Driblets; the whole Class of Honor, would soon moulder away,
and in a short time come to an Alms: In fine, the Monarchy Rebate much of
Ornament in Peace, and strength in War: go very low, and shrink into Splinters.

Thus with severer Judgments, it is no unconscionable or foul Dealing, to Horse
the Eldest, and to leave the younger to seek out for a Steed.

Par. 106. The Casual Promotion, or Right of Descent.
IN nature this Gourmond, Flanting of Eldership, or Repeek of Primogeniture; is
but the Chance or lot of being the Firstborn: Hence Inheritance is the
fortuitous Dole, and Favor of Fortune; and Godee Fortune, a plain Lotteress:
where usually the solar or most Excellent, are fobb'd off with Blanks: But the
Saturnine or Gaffer Souls graced with the Prize: in Justice happily no hard
measure, since Idiots would trouble the Door; if not buoyed up by the Imagery
of Happiness: And since others are enriched with Arras, the Goods of the Mind,
they may well be Content, they enjoy more; then what feathery Revellers can
ever hope to attain.

However the Moderator, or Vmpire of the Law, Equity; which should relax and
qualify, the severity of Justice; will give no Redress: But Capuchin-like,
leave the Children, to seek their Bread; exposing them to pittiless Charity:
for the Chancellor is bound, according to the Maxim: To order the Kings
Conscience, according to Law.

Par. 107. Estates partible by some Sanctions.
BY the Civil Law generally, the Inheritance is Divideable among Males: At
Common Law, if the Estate be Personal; it is likewise shareable: But
Primogeniture, is a gracious Minion of the Common Law.

For Example.

If an Advowson, descend to Coparceners: And they cannot agree to Present; the
eldest shall have the first turn: And the Assignee: By Right of Seniority, or
Priority of Birth.

Par. 108. Customary Law consists with Reason.
BY Godmanchester or Borough English, for the youngest Son, to come Peeping:
after the Inheritance, is more then lustily promised, perchance orderly settled;
justling out the eldest, and snap all into his Claw: is a Pertness with most
over-bold, and unmannerly.

I confess this Law by many, is adjudg'd very odd and crabbed; against the very
Course in nature: For by the steps in Nature, the first in Being, as eldest in
Knowledge; in Justice ought not to be youngest, or last in Love: But first in
Preferment. According to Philosophy, there being no Motives in nature; for a
moral Tenderness, for what is unknown: In Discretion to leave a Swan for a
Gosling, is a strange Levity; Having eaten no Salt with the one, the recent
Companion, may prove old in viciousness, though young in years: And so no good
Angel for our Embrace.

Though the right Hand, was indulged by Jacob to Ephraim before Manasses: which
Joseph would have conferred on the eldest. But it seems the younger was the
Tidling, Dads nown Child, or Mams White Boy: or according to Law; the least
thought on, the most unable to shift for himself, but as much a Gentleman. And
so merited the more Pity and better Portion.

Mootable Doubts.

1. But whether Lands of this Tenure, in case the youngest shall die without
Issue; shall still descend to the younger: And not to the eldest, after the
Course at Common Law, are fine Moots for Utter-Students.

2. Whether one seized of these Lands, leaving Sons the Wife Inseint; whether
the Son in Esse, shall Inherit by virtue of the custom: or the Posthumus or
Afterborn shall oust him; as in Shelley's Case: is a quaere for the
under-Mooters: For by the 11 of Car. 1. I find the Court, Divided in both
Points.

Par. 109. The Inheritable Levellers or Brotherly Sharers a warrantable Custom.
IN Gavelkind, that the Brothers only Doient ouellement Inheriter, should shoal
together, to share alike; and run away with the whole Blessing: And put by the
poor Sisters, to pick sticks, to make their Pot boil: And happily go without
the Price, of Esau's Birthright; for their Pains: to Blunderbusses is very
Hog-like, and almost Incredible.

Owelty of Partition Reasonable.

This Parcenary or Co-Heirship of Lands, has been along Time in usage, because
built on the clearest Reason: for that every Son by the Verdict of Heraldry, is
a Gentleman alike; and in Possibility of Law Coheir, or equally born to the
Blessing: who happily through honest Strivings, may not only make Himself; but
even enlarge the Family, if turned abroad with Powder and Shot, to bird for a
living: that is, somewhat fledged with Res relicta, a Competency; which
probably may render the Flight Prosperous: But if thrown off with a Spar-Hawk,
and four Nobles Rent, when he can catch it: or kept at Home all his Prime, as a
Drudge; and when the Parents turn is served, shak'd off without Hands or Legs,
naked into the world: his House can expect no Advantage or Credit; by this
scanty cruel Purparty, and unnatural Nurture; but Calamity and Shame: for that
Brick cannot be had without Straw, nor even mud Walls daubed up by Drudging,
without Materials.

The Egalty of Sharing no new practice.

Neither is this Shashton or shifting, without President; for the whole world
became a Divident among three: happily imitated by the first British King, and
so continued: But this Co-Heritage or Partnership of Estate, was very
provisionally to make good Families, by the 31 H. 8. made indivisible, after
the Course of the Common Law: this Inheritance pro Indiviso, or dribleting
usage, proving very devouring: As the Child of Idleness, and the Decay of brave
Descents.

Law Ruleable by Custom.

A stranger Custom I have from our ancient Writers; that if a Freeman took a
Villein to a Freehold and libero Thoro or Free-bed: And they had Issue two
Daughters, one should be Free, the other Villein.

The servil'st Condition of Servitude.

The Substantialis which Bracton speaks of; that what is the Servants either by
Descent or Acquest, shall be the Masters: is a Law fuller of strangeness.

Par. 110. Custom Patron'd by Law.
THat the Heir at 15 by Feoffment may alien; but not by Devise: nor by Lease
and Release, which in Law of Charter Lands, amounts to a Feoffment.

By some custom, when He can measure an Ell of Cloth, or tell twelve pence;
with crawling scruplers, savours of the Cross and Pile, or Span-Counter: for a
mere youngster, just out of the Shell; may perform so easy a Task: And yet to
be enabled, to do the solid'st and gravest of Acts; is strange up to the Hilts:
for so we must adjudge the Parting with the Temporal Blessing; for without it,
the soul can hardly solace, in a quiet Sphere, to mind Heaven.

Par. 111. A Concession void, if not Pursuant to the Custom,
IN Copyhold Lands, if the Custom be not strictly pursued, the Grant may be
Avoided.

As by a Case.
Concesso the Ancient Rent, has ever been in Gold: and on a Renewing, the
Reserve is in Silver: this variance in Quality only, is enough to dash the
Grant. I find by an old year-book, that at Common Law, If one fell a Tree, and
at the same Instant carry it away; the Law will charge but Trespass: But if the
Tree be suffered, to lie some Time, and then be taken away: the Prisant or
Taking will be Death.
In brief, Customary Lands not forfeitable for Felony; as descendible Estates
at Common Law: but the Father to the Bough, and the Son to the Plough: with the
severe tastes, of the Cherry-Pitt, and is mavelous.

Par. 112. The Female Inheriting masculine Reason: Because Indulged by Law.
AT Common Law; For the Females to have All; by some Custom the Eldest, by some
by Right of Propinquity or Proximity of Blood, the Youngest Alone: And not the
next Heir Male by Right of Honor, or Course of Nobility, to prevent Absaloms
Bewailing, and continue the Name and Memory of the Ancestour: are the Stumbles
of the Wise, and Strange in Conscience. Which put the great Judge to a
nonplus, in that famous Case of Salphaads Daughters; and for a Decision,
enforced an appeal to Heaven.

Par. 113. Thirds the usual Jointure of the Common Law.
1. AT Common Law, the Wife Indowable only of the third Foot; of the Tenements
of which her Husband, died seized during the Espousals: to hold in severalty
during Life. Which is but reasonable though she brought nothing, (a virtuous
Woman being more valuable then Rubies;) otherwise in case of a rude or Careless
Husband, she and her Children may beg.

Par. 114. Dowable of the Moity by Custom.
2. BY some Customs, the Wife to have Half of the Lands; which is not
unreasonable: it being Intendable, not for her self alone, to Gallant it; to
cast off the Children to moan for an Alms: but to breed them in the Fear of
God, and when grown up and capable, to settle them in civil Callings.

Par. 115. The Free Bench Indulged by Custom.
3. BY the Bounty of some Customs, to have l'entiertie, or the whole without
Paying one Groat of Debt; with many is thought very unfitting, and too large a
Portion: to be left at Liberty to marry again, or turn Gallantress; to undo Her
self, and beggar the Children: which is directly against the Civil Law, and the
Canons of modest Reason. One would think Dowment de la pluis Beale, of the
fairest or best Part, should satisfy the Law: and not suffer the Relict, to
swallow the whole.

This Favor of Law is called Frank Bank, because the Free Gift or Provision of
the Law: without the Care and Contract of the Parent, or Covenant of the
Husband.

But this Boon of Law, is without doubt, violently intended, to pay Debts, for
the mutual Benefit of the Children. Neither can I Imagine any Reason, but
Equity may enforce it: And not for the Wife to soop All, and set it Flying
idly and lavishly; in Mistressing or Masquing.

Imprisonable before the Debt be due.

4. By the 5 E. 4. if a Debtor become incerti laris, of uncertain Abode; He Is
Arrestable, before the Day of Payment: this seems against natural Reason; for
one through the variousness of Fortune, may unavoidably be put to his shifts;
to abscond and live Privately; on Purpose to satisfy the world: the wearer
best knows where the Shoe pinches; every one is the best Justice of Himself,
and what will better his own Condition: and therefore Hard, to fore-Judge any
man's Integrity; till a Failer does appear.

Contracts Obligable by Custom.

5. By Custom if one Citizen be indebted to another, in a single Contract; it
shall inure as good and Forcible, as if by Bond: and the Administrator liable:
which I find adjudg'd in point, 37 Eliz. Nay this Custom shall bind Strangers.

To be Jury and Judge in their own Cause is Allowable by Custom.

6. For the Metropolis or Head-City, to certify their Customs by the Recorder,
or their own mouths; for it is no better in effect; without subjecting it to the
Trial of a foreign Jury: whether Reasonable or no, and so Judges in their own
Cause; is usual.

It Is Conceived not so full Justice, to be Party and Judge in their own
Concerns: though Confirmed by Statute, does not mend the matter: for Acts of
Parliament in Diameter or Thwarting, natural Equity, and Common Right; and in
several other Cases are void.

Ceremonies, that gives more solemnity to Law, Approvable.

7. By the Course of some Manors, Sales not valid and of absolute strength in
Law; unless Presented at the next Court: By 41 Eliz. it gives more notice of
the Alienation, and therefore the Custom beneficial and good.

Now should the Steward, refuse the Presentment; it is scrupled what Remedy the
Buyer may have, against the Refuser or Seller: the same of a Bargain and sale,
if the Clerk deny an Inrollment of the Deed; to Complete the Assurance: what
Relief the Bargainee shall have.

In both Cases I find the Law doubtful, with a Caveat Emptor; which is but cold
Comfort and no satisfaction: the Party grieved will be forced to fly to Equity,
and take his Chance in Conscience: which some think may pity his Case, and give
Relief.

The Remedy against the Unjust and the Uncivil.

8. The 41 Eliz. is silent of the sufficiency of the Law in both Points: and
leaves it as Casus omissus, not thought on and unprovided for by Law? But by
the Favor of the learned Reporter, I conceive the Law very Remedial in both
Cases.

1. To the Copy land, the Acts of Law, Requirable by the Custom, on the
Vendor's side are not sufficient; till Perfected by the Presentment, and the
Acceptance of the Steward: who officiates but as a servant, and Removeable at
will. Therefore 'twill be at the Peril of the seller, if he Play the Jack:
there is no sense why the Purchaser should be at any loss.

The like to the Clerk of the Inrollments, it is a forfeiture of his Office; for
Denying Justice to any: in both Cases they are liable for what Damages the
Abused have sustained through their Default.

If a Sheriff deny a Return, or make a false one, it is vindicable by Action.
Nay, a greater Minister of Justice, then such petty Abjects, as Green Bags, or
Black Boxes; if He delay the Presentee in his Institution, He Is Compellable by
Law: otherwise he might take Advantage of his own wrong: an Absurdity the Law
will not suffer.

A Bishop bound to show the Cause of his Refusal. For a shifting Plea He Is
Amerceable.

9. Neither is a Bishop by 32 Eliz. Allowed to trifle with Justice: for on a
qua. Imp. brought for Refusing a Clerk: his Plea must be certain and full; his
bare Alleging that the Clerk is Schismaticus Inveteratus will not satisfy:
without showing in Particular, How and in what, that the Court might (with the
Assistance of Divines) determine the matter before them. And therefore for a
Dilatory Plea, the Bishop is generally Amerc'd.

Permissive waste unpunishable.

10. If one Demise a Farm, with a fair House, and fruitful Herbage thereunto
Belonging, at will: And the Tenant prove an ill Husband, over slothful and
Base: suffering Both to go to Ruin.

The House to fall down for want of timely Repairs; or Burnt through
Carelessness: And the Land to be Juncose or become Rushed over, even overrun
with Weeds and chok'd up. 'Twill soon be Demanded, How the owner shall right
Himself, of so wretched a Fellow.

At Common Law, by the 42 and 43 Eliz. B. R. I find it Adjudg'd in Point, no
Relief: And the Statute of Gloucester, leaves it Incurable.

Neither do I find it Curable at all: for by the Pliers in Equity, I Am Assured
the Chancellor is not sworn, to make Fools Wise.

If men dread any After game, a Gods name let them Away to the learned Lawyers,
and for a good wholesome Fee, they will secure them against such unlucky
Rentors.

Voluntary Vastation Punishable.

11. For spontaneous waste, as pulling down of Houses, Ploughing Meadows,
Destroying Woods; which alters Evidences, and so tends to a Dis-inheriting: I
conceive it, Punishable by Action of Trespass: It amounting to the Determining
of his Interest, without Entry of the Lessor.

Par. 116. Conscience must be Submiss and Silent, to the Digest of Policy: Law.
NOW there is no Mooting for Conscience in these Points, it must Conform and
agree it for Law: And if Law, then Justifiable at the grand Sise; for if not
Connatural, or of the like Dimension, with the Law eternal; it is monstrous and
not to be practiced.

To clear this by a Case.

If J. S. infeoffe J. N. of all his Lands in London and Middlesex: And give
Livery only in London, the Lands in Middlesex will hardly pass: Had they lain
all in one Shire, though Remote, it had been a good seisin of All.

In natural Conscience, doubtless they are Conveyed, by the same Intent,
Comprised in the same Deed; and the Consideration the same: yet the great
Oracle of Polity, the Law; will not allow of the one, though it tolerate the
other.

Conscience guidable by Law.

A Bond defeasanc'd, to murder J. S. is void: but a Feoffment, Conditioned that
the Feoffee, take a Purse on Black Heath: the Estate is indefeatable, though
the Condition be impudent and bindless. So A Grant, that the Grantee shall not
Alien, nor be Pernor of the Profits: the Estate Completely good, though the
Provisoe be trifling and illegal: an obligation in both Cases, Concords with
Law.
For a more Familiar Diversity.
If an Infant or Madman, steal or kill; unless wittingly and maliciously: they
shall not be impeached: But in Trespass for a Corporal Hurt, they may be
impleaded and punished too. So In Felony, if the Principal die, or be pardoned
before Conviction; the Accessory is quit: But in Trespass, it is simply
otherwise. For If J. S. abett his servant, to strike J. N. or burn his House:
if the Abettee die, yet the Action of Trespass or Conspiracy, stands good
against the Abettor.
In these Points, according to the sages of Political Reason, Law; from
Diversity of Law, arises the Diversity in Conscience: which ought to be lead,
by the Amber Chain of Reason, that is, Law; And not by the Hempen Cord of
Fanatic Opinion.

Thus may we see with half an Eye, indeed if blinder then a Beetle; how
Insolent and Groundless, Pretense of Conscience; is represented by the
Perspective, of Refined Reason: that clean and blanched Reason, does not regard
every Scullion frantic Humor; nor will it be ruled by the Distaffe: so it
respects the safety of the Church, the Common Peace; it is sufficient to be
engraved in every Breast, and obeyed by All: but Rebels and Pagans.

Par. 117. A good Conscience Regulable by Law.
TO come more close to the Saints, to prevent rude Sallies on Divinity: let us
agree the Conscience, the Reflex of the soul, or Nuntio of the Diety; garbling
the good Objects from the Bad; the white Angels from the Tawny: Ad vulgus or in
a secular sense, it is still but Winnowed or Exalted Reason, Law: which must be
Hammered and Regulated by Magistracy; and since Oracles are ceased, the voice
of God silent; what other Asyle can there be? it is true, the Power Divine (in
the Throne of Diety, the Soul) is still vocal: though not Articulately to the
Ear; yet Intrinsically by the Impulsives of Nature, to the Conscience: his
speaking by Supremacy, must be Recorded; and as to Externals, the Dictates of
Fanned Reason, Law; ought to be obeyed.

A Citation before an Incompetent Judge, dangerous.

To instance this by a Case.
If J. S. be Excommeng'd in the Court spiritual, for matter of Temporal
Cognizance: which properly belongs to the Crown, and Dignity Royal: He must be
Assoil'd, without making satisfaction: if the Plea be continued, a Praemunire
may endanger, the Party litigant and Judge too. So If a roguish Royster, lay
violent paws on a Clerk, Handling Him somewhat roughly with Blows, the Battery
is soly Determinable in the Court Temporal: the Rudeness to the Person, Pour
ingetter les violent mains sur luy, in the Court Christian. At Common Law. Dato
that a Lease by Deed, is made to J. N. Remainder to the Right Hrs of J. S. with
Livery too, according to the Form of the Charter: Here Is a good Estate, to
vulgar Reason, in Conscience; but in Law, the Remainder: if J. S. be then
living, flutters without a Wing, and is void. The like. Lessee for 40 years,
takes another Lease for 20 years: Conscience intends to enlarge his Interest to
60: to make it up a round number of years, equivalent to a solid Estate:
However his Condition is worsted, and in Law here is but an Estate for 20 years.
Thus Conscience must comply with Law; if not, the Law will be more then Angry,
fling and bite too.

Par. 118. No Faultiness in the Law.
WHY should sublimated Reason, the Law, be stormed or flouted at? being no way
Factious, having no side; no by-ends, no leaning or Respect to any? I confess
it is past ordinary Cunning, to encounter this Monster, to reduce Schism, to the
lines of Mediocrity; to submit to legal Prudence and Authority.

Spuriousness of Zeal to spurn at Law.

The world is come to a fine pass, huge Hopes of Saint-like Times; when the
Spindle and the Prong, every blober-lip'd Wise-acre, not a Flight quoad
Intellectuals above a Plant-Animal; must question Acts of State: And not only
demur in Obeying, but manfully jocund Himself, in Resisting: it is neither grave
nor safe, to romp and wherle, through Thick and Thin, lege inconsulta, without
Advising with legal Discretion: to plunge themselves in needless Troubles. The
Law marches slow, but discharges swifter then Pegasus.

Par. 119. Single Conscience must Conform to the Universal.
I Am ignorant of the Reason, why a Private Conscience should not comply with
the Public, that is, the Law: Provided it be no way Pernicious, overtly
polluted, with superstition; not Incongruous with the Word of God: ought any be
suffered to adore their own Phantasms, the swiftest slide to Perdition?

Ragers against Order not Tameable by Mildness.

And since our Restraints are not keen enough, to quiet this Divine Rage:
whether we ought not, to Contrive stricter Shackles, to curb and tame
unruliness: let Ignoramus Judge?

The stifest Doves if Decimated, will Bend rather then Bent.

Aliud Plectrum, Aliud Sceptrum: Commutation or round Mulcts may reform; since
Deporting or Corporal Pains will not prevail: The Pigeon knows no woe,
Till a Benting she does go.
They Peacock themselves in the one, but would hardly brustle or brag of the
other: when they return home and find all clean Swept; nothing left to nurse
their Cynical Zeal, they will then bethink themselves, and resolve, that
moderate Obedience is much better then traping Sedition.

SECT. XVI.
Par. 120. Mis-conceivings, and mis-Teachings, Dissected and Resolved.
IT IS misconceiv'd and Precepted too, by some Tripanning Wits; the Trumpets of
Vproar and Drums of Rebellion: That 1. No Theft ought to be Capital. 2. No War
can be lawful. 3. Going to Law, is not Warrantable. 4. That the Centurion of
the Soul, Conscience; is purely spiritual: And strictly by Divine Right, ought
not to be Butted or bounded by Law.


1. For the first: because Pains in Law, must be inflicted Egalment, or equally
to pace the Offense: And there can be no Analogy, between the thing stolen, and
man's life: And to punish, beyond the Damage, is cruel and outrageous.

2. For the second, That according to Christ, if one cheek be smitten, the
other must be turned: And that Revengement belongs not to Mortals.

3. For the third. That St. Paul in some Rage, chides the Corinthians for Going
to Law: And enjoins them, rather to take Wrong, and be Defrauded.

4. For the fourth. That it is more then a Purpresture, or foul Encroachment, on
the divine Privilege: the Conscience being a noli me tangere, a kind of
Deified Essence: that must not be touched, but by the Spirit of Souls, the
Celestial King: And that Civil Laws bind no faster then Shashes and Garters;
that may be loosened, and thrown by at Will.

Punishing Theft with Death Consists with Conscience.

1. For the first. I conceive the Mosaical Laws, are not simply, only modally;
not Absolutely, only Directorily Binding to us: therefore Christian States,
have decoll'd or taken off capitally, Malefactors; mulcted by them only by
Retaliation, or like Damage.

That there is no Parity between Humane Life, and the Purloin or thing stolen; I
agree it, taken materially: But in the Pilfery, we must Consider, not the
Beguiling alone our neighbor; but the Breach of the Peace: And therein not
only setting at naught, but Resisting the whole State. And that the Public
Peace, is much dearer and valuable; then any single Tear-grounds life: no Brow
formed of Brass will deny.

But other Pains (they say) might be Inflicted, not Death; and in every petty
slide, the Peace is equally broken, as in weightier matters.

Laws must be modeled, according to the Temper of the Clime: And the Sword of
Justice is soly at public Discretion. And therefore among the Arabians, where
Thieving (if some write true) is almost as much in use as Eating; doubtless
stricter Pains justifiable: Hence our Hallifax Law, may not be Amiss, in favor
of Property, to promote Trade.

The Diversity of Laws.

By some Laws Stealing an Ox or an Horse is not Felony: But for a Capon or
Pig, I find the Stealer must be Pandue or suffer Death.

At Common Law, originally Cutting on the Road, no suspend' per Coll. an Hempen
Truss; only a moral Failing, or Trespass: afterward the loss of the Thumb. Now
by necessity in State, a Tyburn Chook; otherwise Property nor Life could not be
preserved: which Divines agree lawful.

So formerly Counterfeiting the Great Seal, but Felony; now Treason: Rape at
Common Law, no ten Groats mulct, according to Solon's Ordinance; but the loss
of Eyes and Testicles: now by Westminster the first, Felony.

By the Civil and Common Law, to Steal a Sheep out of the Fold, or an Ox out
of the Herd, it is Theft: by Vlpian to rob a Dovecote it is Larceny. But at
Common Law, Beasts untamed may be Taken without the Danger of Felony: But if
Tame and Domestical, the Taker is by the Common Law, no better then a Felon.
Maliciously to crop or cut a Vine, by the Civil Law; it is Punishable as Theft.
Thus Pains vary (according to occasion, and necessity of Affairs) by the
Prudence of Divines and Lawyers.

At Common Law generally, such is the Candor of Justice; the Pain must
resemble the Offense: for if the Damage be assess'd too Excessively, in Arrest
of Judgment, as outrageous; a new Trial on Course by motion will be Awarded, to
qualify the Excess: in Reducing the Damages answerable to the Trespass.

As Preventives against future Mischiefs, sometimes Punishments are not
Ouelment or evenly imposed: As the Statute for waste, gives valorem vasti in
Triplo, treble Damage with the Place Wasted.

The like for Defrauding spiritual Duties, treble Amends: otherwise farewell
Religion; the Church Door may be nailed up; signifying indeed no more then a
Steeple-House; when the Pastor is famished, by substracting his Livelihood.

War ought not to be made, but on just Cause.

2. For the Ground of War, Divinity and Politics, sever much in opinion: the
one limiting it Strictly, for Wrongs first sustained; the other takes it more
largely, conceiving a deliberate Fear, of an Approaching Danger, good Cause of
unsheathing the Sword. Which certainly by the Practice of State, may
warrantably set the Soldier on work: It being Commendable in all Fray's to get
the best end of the Staff, in being before Hand: And not by Supine Trifling, to
suffer Advantage, to give us the slip.

War Lawful.

For the lawfulness of it: for Defensive or Reparative Causes, few Divines
doubt: for Avengement and Enlarging Dominion, with little sleights; mere Fumes
of Honor; there Coeli Injuria, Coelo Cura: an Appeal to Heaven, is the only
Cure, I should Advise. Every public Abuse being Recorded above, as done to the
Vicegerents, of the Omnipotent. And such are most Proper, for the great
Judicatory, not Impleadable below. But that the Calling of a Soldier is
totally unlawful; a common Conceit with the Cross-grained, I cannot Agree: For
then the Centurion's Faith, would not have been Applauded; nor that famous
Convert, secured Himself, against the Perfidiousness of the Jews, by the aid of
Swordmen.

War not fair and King-like, without warning by Proclaiming.

In Peace if at Civil Warfare, notice by Summons and Citations be peremptorily
Required: that Dodgers take no Advantage, with Covinous Tricks, by Packing the
Cards: the like in Military, by noble Spirits it is thought Cowardly and mean,
to sneak upon the Injuror, without Denouncing open Defiance: for this I find
the Authority an Ipse Dixit, enjoined by God himself. David indeed for the
Abuse to his Ambassadors, did wage War against the Ammonites: But not without
giving them notice, of his Intention; to vindicate his Honor.

Herein I find the Concurrence of the Law of England, in Pascatia's de la
Fountains Case a Spaniard; whom the Judges conceived no Enemy, to be denied
the Benefit of Justice; till open War were proclaimed, between both Kingdoms;
though several Acts of Hostility were Committed.

Arms justifiable if Repairs be Refused.

By this we may Collect, that a Prince may justify Arms; if satisfaction by
amicable Demands be denied: But to snatch and pilfer a Booty; by Law Military,
without Proclaiming War, and Throwing of the Dart, is doubtless very
un-Prince-like and unjustifiable: strictly by the Law of Honor, no victory;
only oppression by Surprise and Rapine: no valianter then to Draw, on a naked
man; or to Creep on a slumberer, to prevent his Wake. In both Cases, by the
Gallant, Hen Heartedness and unwarrantable.

Law neither Costly nor Uncivil.

3. For the third. Going to Law, not simply unlawful: for then not only the
Coat, but the Cloak too, would soon be gone; And the Body left over naked,
without Leaves. Unlawful only sub modo, by Circumstance of malice, oppression
or the like: That with the Apostle, is utterly a Fault; and no Darling of Law.

The Law, like the Deputy of Heaven, the King; has no gloting Eyes: petty
offenses are not only Traversable, but not Actionable: Regularly the Law will
never fester, where it can cure: Being the Physician General of the State, to
prevent strife, and not to beget it: therefore words of Heat and Choler,
though uttered by a small member, yet often sharper then a two-Edged Sword, the
Law will not heed: without Temporal Damage.

Would to God the Factious knew their own Happiness, Frolicking in Goshen, that
even over-flows with Wealth, and overmuch Freedom: then they would leave
Flouting Magistracy, and Backbiting their best Friend; the Law: for the Law
more tenderhearted, then the Empress, that hatched an Egg in her Bosom: like a
good Master, to whom we have All sworn Allegiance; principally aims at a triple
Avowment, to make the Subject Completely Happy.

The threefold Protection. 1. To Guard the Person. 2. To defend the Estate. 3.
To preserve that, which is more Precious, and of a Nobler Preise then both; to
wit, the Good name.


1. If the Person be menaced, and but in Dread of an Assault; the Bear may be
muzled at Common Law as a Trespasser: As well as Justiced by Surety, de bono
Gestu, for the good Abearing.

For Example.

If A. slay B. though necessario (as the Civil Law terms it) in safeguard or
Defense of his own Life: the Town shall be Amerc'd, with the loss of his Goods.

Though Justifiable even by the Law of Nature, and Commendable too: to kill
rather then be killed: yet the Law will Punish, in Testification of Tenderness;
that heretofore was Death.

At Common Law, Killing by Misadventure though not Destinato, with a
man-slaying Intent; 'twas Murder: nay by 21 E. 3.16. a Manslayer though se
defendend', was Hangable: and estate forfeitable in both cases as of Murder.
Neither is there any great Injustice or strangeness in this, without a
slaughterous Intent; or malice prepense: for the same was at the Judicial Law,
before Sanctuaries and Cities of Refuge were Erected. But these Mischiefs at
Common Law, were Remedied by the 25 H. 3. the St. of Marlebridge.

This strictness without malice preconceived, was the Law of mercy, in
Prevention of Blood: ut Dolor ad nullos, Terror ad Cunctos perveniat: to fright
All and punish none.

2. For the Fortune, one's more safe, by a Quare clausum fregit, then if
surrounded by Xerxes Host.

3. For the Good name: Repairs will be bad against Defamatory Bullets, snagled
by malice; by Action on the Case: which will still keep the worthy more
Shot-free then Caeneus.

Par. 221. Property Demonstrated.
THat ambulatory Trespass may be brought, it is on necessity of municipal
Reason, to avoid a public Inconvenience: For in supputation of boulted and
seirs'd Reason, all Lands are mounded, though they be Campaign, or lie
unhedg'd: which among Lawyers, is Reason not far fetched, much strained or
Imaginary; if we Consult the Dominion of the Sea: which by Reason of its
floting Currency, cannot be walled or Paled in: nor limited per metas and
Bundas, by meets and Bounds, after the good Husbandry and Usage, of our Mother
Element: yet in Contemplation of Law, it is deemed shut and Enclosed; though the
Fence be not pointed out, by an Isthmus, Rock, or any other known Buttal, like
an Agrarian Mound.

By the Marine Law, any kind of Putative Boundary, by oblique Lines, Turnings
and Angles, does Express Shutting and Enclosure: And in nicety of Law, annote
as great a Right on the Sea; as any Arcifinious mark, or visible Bound, on
Terra firma: in a legal Meaning, those Extracluse Buttings, notifying a
bounding Frontire or bordering Royalty.

The Lordship of the Sea, Debated and Avouched.

On this Notion in Law, it is not hard to Conceive, a Naval Sovereignty: though
Exposed with open Arms, Catholic and Common to All. Yet may the Pischary, as
in private Rivers, with other navigable Privileges, be claimed and enjoyed;
without Encroachment, or Infringing the Universal Rule, or Law of Nations.

The famous Civilian, that labors to have it in Common; argues more like a
Philosopher, then a Lawyer: when he draws his Flourishes, from the Freedom of
the Air; with others of the same strain, which are merely Rhetorical, and not
Topical: For what is in Occupation, Custom, or Command, there is Property in Law:
or within the Reach or Protection, of our Timber Walls; the Law will create a
Property: But that some Waters are positively so, none can gainsay. Therefore
Community without leave is a Disseisin, an Encroachment or Breach of Civil
Peace: and good Cause of War, if Reparations cannot be had otherwise.

Tokens of a Maritine Interest.

The Constant Homage of Loring the Sails, does imply Dominion: otherwise
Strangers, of as high Insteps as our selves, and stand much on the Tiptoe of
Honor: would hardly be so Civil, signifying in Law, as Flags and Marks of
Sovereignty.

Christ-Dole Demandable and Due.

In a Pond, Mote, or several Piscary, Tithe payable as a Predial; and ought to
be set forth, as the 2 of E. 6. directs: of Fish taken in the Sea, as Decimae
minutae, like Herbs, some Doubt has been made; because ferae naturae; and the
Sea within no Parish; which are but Tiffany Reasons, and not at all Convincing:
for Aquatiles in fresh Rivers, are just as Haggard or unreclaim'd: And Lands
though Extra-Parochial, are held clearly Tytheable, to the mixed Person: it is
granted a sum of money, shall be paid in lieu of Tithes; which infers
sufficiently, the Law thereby adjudges an owner-ship: If Exotic and purely
Personal, why then more Tytheable, then Spices and Lemmons? But by a late
Prohibition, I find very Tithe demandable, for Fishing in the Sea, on their
Landing: And that the Spiritual Court, might warrant such a Libel.

The Bi-partite Property of the Earth.

At Common Law, the Earth has a twofold Entire Property: the one
Subterraneous or Downwards, of all Waters and Mines, within its Bowels: the
other Supra-terreous or upwards, of Air and all other Benefits, to the topmost
Sphere: For if an Hawk reclaimed, come into Sale, and light on a Tree; the
owner cannot take his own Chattel, without leave; but will be a Trespasser:
which shows there is Property in speculation of Law, in the very Air: And surely
Waters are more Mainorable, that is Manageable, then Air.

To enlarge this matter By a Decision.

Maevius hindered Caius, from Fishing in a public Water.

Two Questions.
1. Whether the Obstructing were Injurious. 2. Whether Damageable, or suable at
Law.
Pomponius liken'd the Abuse, to the Denying one, the use of the Common Bath,
or Public Theater: unto both (by him) All are promiscuously Entitled by Law.

He conceives the Sea in no Propriety; but that all are jointly Entitled
thereunto: As Tenants in Common. And that Fishing is no more Prohibitible, then
shooting at Wild-Fowl in another Ground: which by Vlpian is Received for Law,
by Common use and Practice; although grounded on no Positive Law.

It Is agreed one may have a special Right, to a Part or Creek of the Sea: and
in case of Disturbance, an Injunction to quiet the Possession, is Purchaseable
on Course: which proves that Sovereignty may extend over Water, as well as
Land: though it be seldom or never Decided by Law, but by that unhappy Trial,
of the longer Sword.

The Sovereignty provable by usage at Common Law.

As by a Case.

E. a sole Trader, born on the Coasts of Flanders: Is married to F. a Citizen
of London; born in the Port of Deep.

Two Points.
1. Whether E. were born within the Ligeance of England. 2. Whether the Birth
of F. shall not be Construed of a Ship, Anchoring in that Port.
Resolved.

I find both Points held in the Affirmative: And that the Sea is within the
Kings Ligeance, and Parcel of the Crown of England.

The Immensity of Water makes no Signiory in Common.

The vast wideness or immense Mightiness of Sea-Room: Elbow Room enough to
satisfy All, with Lawyers is a very babish Plea: And makes nothing against
Dominion. For in Law, there is as much Propriety in the largest Fields; as in
Crofts or Pitles: Pety Closes or small Paddocks.

Therefore the great Civilian, though a Complete Marksman in all Learning; in
this Point, has failed of his Aim: and hits not the Bird in the Eye.

Par. 122. The Right of Chattels Discussed and Defended.
AS Lands are Adjudg'd in Law, to be Bounded; though Fenceless: the like does
the Law conceive of Goods, though Subdiale, or out of Doors: not under Lock and
Key. Yet in Construction of Law, they are Conceived in Manual Custody; by the
secundary Conclusion, of the Law of Reason: to Conserve Property.

Hence in Law Regularly, an Entry into the Freehold of another; even but to
Hawk or Hunt, or barely to walk out, to take a mouthful of Air; without Leave
of the owner, or of the Law, is not Congeable or safe: And such Entry with the
smallest Hurt, of Fishing Waters, or Cutting Grass, is a Disseisin vi and Armis.

The Prerogative or special Privilege the Law ascribes to the House.

Beyond Controversy, in Law every man's House is his Castle; as well against
violence, as for his Repose.

For Instance.
If J. S. happens to be slain, by J. N. se Defendendo, or Permisfortune:
without any mischievous Intent. Yet it is Felony, Goods and Chattels will be
forfeited: for the high Regard, the Law has to man's life. But in Defense of
his House, if Thieves, or any other Assailants, are Knocked on the Head: it is
Justifiable; without any Forfeiture.
The neighborhood may assemble, to Guard an House, without a Riot: And in all
Civil Causes, at the suit of a Subject, not Forcible even by the Sheriff: But
on Recovery in Ejectment, by virtue of the Writ. For after Judgment, in Right
and operation of Law, the House is not the Tenants, or Defendants: but the
Recoverors or his Assigns.

In brief, as the House is the Citadel or Fortress of the Owner: so the
Estovers or fuel appendant to the House, the Lands; plenarily His: with the
Conterminous or neigbouring Air, and all Avails, usque ad Coelum, to the
uppermost Elevation.

Conscience Commandable by Law.

4. For the fourth. I cannot conceive, the Keeper or Guard of the Soul,
Conscience; so nice and Immaterial: But that Sovereign Power, may limit it;
without Infringing the Royalty of Heaven.

By what has been Premised, comes up full to our Case; for the Opiniatives in
Religion, a Depression, is violently Required, by necessity in Prudence:
otherwise not only Religion, but the whole Peace of the Nation, will soon be in
Jeopardy: For by the self-same Forehead, they scoff and pick Quarrels at the
Church; they may upbraid and fall out in Earnest, with the Civil Authority: And
in Hurling and Heaving at the one, the other is desperately Abused and Despised.

A queasie Conscience mightily Tolerated.

By Martial Law Mutiny, which is but Sedition in the Law Civil, is Death: if
then the Mutineers, that is, the Seditious; come off with Paring of the nails,
when the offense requires the Hand: or Cropping the Ears, when the Crime
deserves the Head: nay, with pecuniary Pains or Exilement, it is most easy, a
vast Toleration.

Roysters Drownable, and the Shipper not questionable.

By the Maritine Law, in case of Jetsam maris, for the safeguard of the vessel;
the Goods of the choicest value, may be thrown into the Sea: Nay, the Mariners
and Passengers, if not conformable to the marine Rules, may be thrown
Overboard: And no Appeal of Homicide, by the Prochein Amey, or next a Kin,
shall impeach this Judgment. The like in a Calm of Regency, if roisterous
Obstinates will on design raise a Storm: if they suffer in their Estates, nay
their Persons lie by the Lees; they may praise their own Freekishness.

Militants most strict in Discipline.

By the Civil Law, if the Soldier did but ward off some Blows, 'twas
cashierable: But if the least show of violence, or resistance were offered;
'twas expiable with no less then Death.

Disorderly Crasiness Condemnable.

Thus by Reason in State, may Blades of Rhadamanth; the Tores, Moss-Troopers,
Kidnappers, with Burglars and Highway Lads: be rewarded with the Gallows, to
prevent a public Mischief: And likewise Hocquetours and Suborners, with
Scoffers and Flatterers, Rumpers and Roarers against Monarchy: be scourged with
Keener Tools, then Bullrushes, or snipping the Lugs; to maintain Property and
Peace.

SECT. XVII.
Par. 123. Church Disquieters Prosecuted, not Persecuted.
Let Us suppose our selves in the Schools, and put the Wrangle into Mood and
Figure. To be dragged to Prison, for Divine Worship: is barberous and
Persecution. But our Church Wranglers (as they give out) are Duress'd for no
other Crime. Ergo Handled over Rudely and Persecuted.
Were the minor per se nota, and evidently true; 'twere Hardness indeed and
Persecution: but the Law takes them as Rioters; not as divine Communicants: but
as Rebel Meeters, yelping against Law. And the manner of their Worship, being
not only turbulent and irregular, against the express Commands of Law: But the
matter Irreligious, against the Known Current of Salvation: with the nicest,
it is not Persecution; but the Profession and Duty, of the Sub-Diety or
Sovereign Magistrate: according to some opinions, to cut out the Tongue, if
sowing up the Lips, will not restrain Profaneness.

Par. 124. Garden-Gods not Adorable
WEre the Adorers of Bell and the Dragon; the Sun or Moon, Stock or Stone; fit
to be accounted Idolaters, or divine Worshipers? if silenced and crushed under
foot, can the weakest that never Studied farther, then the Horn-book; adjudge
it Persecution? being not whipped as Saints, but paid off as Routers, in
Blinching and snuffing against Law.

The Diseased why Imprisonable.

Leprosy Corporeal, by the Judicials was murable, and to be shut up: to keep
the Broken from the Whole; in Reference to public safety. On this President,
are the Pestilential with us, Padlock'd and Guarded: And once marked by Law,
should the visited adventure Abroad without Leave; the Watch may resist them as
Felons: How then can Divines take it ill, if for Leprosy spiritual, the Law be
the same.

Par. 125. Profane Mutes seldom Disturbed.
FOR Persecution it is an impudent Fable, raked from the bottomless Pit, to mire
the Church: I know no Inquisitive Law, to pick the Conscience; if the Poison be
locked up, all is quiet: But if like mad Brutes, they will up and down, and
spread their Frenzy; to draw Disciples: then the Law Catches them, not as
misguided Zealots, but as outward Disturbers, and Violators of the Peace.

Our great Ancestors, were not expelled Paradise, for Chawing the Apple: but
for the breach of the Precept, because prohibited by the Lord of the Garden:
now Nonconforming is the Forbidden Fruit, the eating thereof, in defiance to
the Church, is dangerously Contemptuous, against the State, and so against God;
for Laws made by lawful Authority, are ordained by God, and ought not to be
slighted or disputed; but Reverenced and obeyed.

Par. 126. Laws uncharitable or Idolatrous, bind not.
LAws to inhibit Alms, in extreme necessity; or to enjoin Worship to Baalpeor,
are void quantum ad Deum, in the Court Above: And not astringent to the
Conscience. For humane Laws, which are no more then formal Astrictions,
ordained for the Political Rule of the People: repugnant to Reason or
Scripture; are not properly Laws, but Corruptions. As Customs unreasonable, are
Usurpations, and not legitimated by Usage.

The Law moral, the Transcript of natures Law.

ALL Regencies, though never so rude and Devilish, are sounded upon Laws; as
Bars and Boundaries of Native Liberty: the Ground of those Laws, is the Law of
Nature; whose intrinsic Principles we obey, because imprinted in our souls, by
the Original of Nature, the Diety: now the Law of Nature, and the Moral Law,
differ only Notionally; the Moral Law being but the gloss or Explanation, of
the Law of Nature: Hence all Laws are framed in imitation of Nature, otherwise
not pleadable at the Bar of Reason. In brief, because man's nature is corrupt,
and diverse from the Community of nature; these Artificial Restrictions of
humane Laws, on necessity were devised: as Locks and Bolts upon the Soul, for
the Weal of Unity and Peace.

Par. 127. Disquisitive Theft.
WHether blinking Sleights, Deluding the People with Wheedles, more counterfeit
then St. Martins ware? Pilfering their Hearts from Legal Forms, be not a Theft
of a more dangerous concern: then the sliness of the Peepers, that spirit only
the Body, they Kidnap the soul: And more Theevish then the Larceny, of a Sheep
or an Ass; or a Clout from off the Hedge: are Problems that sink deep, with the
Well-wishers of Monarchy, and Lovers of Religion.

In Law, to withdraw the People from their Allegiance, is Treason: And there is
as much Ligeance due, to the Spiritual Law, as to the Temporal: for in Truth
they are Politically Identical, one and the same Bond; the King equally
interested, and Supreme in both.

Par. 128. Polytheism Confounding.
IT IS a sure Theorem in State, that Diversity of Opinions; lets in Atheism, and
Shifts off Regality: And strictly in speculation of State, what are Wincings
against Law, and Pawings against Prelacy, but Seditious Practices against the
Crown, and mere Confusions; which by Law in some sense may be Treasonable? on
this Presumption of State by the 27 Eliz. the Romish Priests are Hurdled and
Quartered; not for their Priesthood, but Plottings against Majesty: who holds
the Scepter, by inherent Birth right, or Descent of Inheritance. No
Crown-Holder at will, or on Condition: if his Actings out-skim a Fanatic
Scull, or Romish Oars; his Barge in Law, is absque Compoto, Controulable by
none but God: And in Law, though Process in Ecclesiastical Courts and Temporal
too, are not in the Kings name: However they are the Kings Courts, and the
Proceedings are for the Crown.

To instance these Droitz Royaux, or Regal Rights, by an Example.

Every Leet or view of Frank-pledge, holden by a Subject, is kept in the Lords
name: yet no Student at Law, but knows it to be the Kings Court: many Subjects
hold Courts of Record and other Courts; yet their Proceeds must Conform with
the Law Royal, and National usage.

SECT. XVIII.
Par. 129. Severity no unadvised Precept or Club-Law.
IT will be objected, that Christian Laws, are not intentionally Newgate
Tyranny; that is, Chains and Fetters: but Silken Yoaks, Rules written by a soft
Hand, and easy Finger, and shall ever be taken Favorably: with some latitude
of mildness, as to the Darling of the Soul. As the Statute of E. 3. that
prohibits Relief, to a valiant Beggar, able to labor, on Pain of Imprisonment:
shall not be taken literally, or in Extremity of Justice: But according to the
Feature of Reason, and the Spirit of Charity: otherwise the observance, may
prove a greater Bondage, then that of Tripolee, or Tunis; more then Homicidial,
even murdrous.

Posito we meet this lazy Rogue, or valiant Beggar, on the midst of
Salisbury-Plain; in the Nones of December, or Calends of January: Remote from
Hovel or Bush, in sleeking tert Weather, the Air more piercing Cold, then in
Russia or Greenland, enough to engender Crystal: Pitifully jag'd and torn, so
Back-beaten and Belly too; near famished, more then one leg in the Grave:
without a noggen shift, or even a Patch, to cover his Carcass, or a scrap to
subtle his Panch: And before this Sturdy Villein, or Incorrigible Rogue, can
probably get to a Barn, to roost in; or a Crust to Know, He must perish: now if
one out of Pitifulness fodder, this filthy Loyterer, or dingy Shab; with Offal
or dry Crumbs: on Design only to succor his Rogueship, from the sharp Stings of
Hunger and Cold: taking this fusty Lob, and poisoning Lout, but just before the
last Gasp, e're He be quite gut-founder'd and Defunct: to prevent his Funeral
in a Ditch. Whether this can be a Breach of Law, and so an Offense in
Conscience, is much doubted.

Laws how Expoundable.

It Is said special Pleading, and the Prudence of the Court, on the Intent and
Equity of the Law; may do much: It must be granted, that such Exposition, must
ever be had of Laws; as not to permit them, to be Elusory: in Exposing them to
Mockery and Contempt. And that Conditions are taken straightly in Law, without
Equity; especially made to redress a public Mischief: And that it is malum
Prohibitum, a Positive Law, then a concessis, the Breach malum in se, and so
not justifiable in Conscience: in that Magistracy is resisted, which according
to the Apostle, is Damnable.

Thus Regularly whatever is Prohibited by Law, is forbidden by Conscience:
otherwise Laws are mere Cobwebs, to be swept down at Pleasure: as Ridiculous
with some as the Dance of a Goose.

Par. 130. All Destined to Industry.
IF Bread must be earned, by the Sweat of the Brow, which is the Precept
Divine: in its proper Colors without a Paint, the very Intent of this Law:
that is, that those that refuse to work, are graceless Lobs, worse then Rogues,
even very Brutes; and shall not eat: on this ground may Equity and Charity too
(by Solons Scale) with other Reasons of State, be well thrust out of Doors: the
Law strictly observed no Duressor, and the foolhanded Almner that gives but
Leavings, to the vaging Mendicant; legally Duressed, and thrown into the Hole:
with good Allegiance to Conscience. For in Law Negative Statutes bind ad
semper, and shall ever be taken literally, and exclusively with the Strictest.
But not with that closeness, like a dry verbalist, in pumping after Froth; mere
words: for the best Paraphrase in Law, is Consequence of Reason; and not the
Bark or outward Rind, the letter.

Reason the best Interpreter of Law.

For Instance.

If the Sheriff return a Rescous against A. and B. by Baptismal names; without
Heeding the descriptive Statute: an outlawry will thereupon lie, without any
further Additament.

A more home Case, to lopping Scruplers, dagger Reason, and not to be bottomed
by a Festraw.

If A. strike B. the first of June, the striker for a small stub of Gilt;
(through the Intercedings of Friendly Natures, to skreen his Fault and secure
the Event) is pardoned the second of June, all Misdemeanors: then made safe;
out of Gunshot. The third of June the Bell Towls for B. then A. startles: but
the Ringing out, puts him into a panick Quake; lest he pay sauce, for his
Pot-valour.
But in Law, He Is more afraid then Hurt: for by the second of June, by the 13
Eliz. the Felony was pardoned: in brief, Niceties and verbal Extremities are no
Favorites of Law.

Par. 131. The legal Distinction of Rogues.
BUT to return to our good Skim-Devil, or as the 39 of Eliz. calls Him,
dangerous Rogue: these ranging Beagles, or lousie Vagrants, are distinguished
in Law, into Rogues of the first and second Degree.

A Rogue of the first Floor, when an iron piping Hot, has inch'd his Luggs: to
be banished, or Committed to the Galleys. By a latter Law, to be branded in the
left Shoulder, with a Roman R. as the Notary of his Ranging. His Shaging on in
languishing Insolence, is styled in Law, Incorrigible, or a Rogue of the Second
Story: to undergo a lusty swing at Tyburn, to be secured against the Pity, of
Physic or Charity.

Par. 132. Relief to Laziness the worst of Profuseness.
NOW Relieving this wandering Villain, or Roguing Infidel, cannot be Casting
Bread on the Water, but more Profuse then Epostracism, or money Duck'd or
Drak'd: for in nature, Consequently in Law; a lazy-bone Shagrag, or Gally-Slave
Counterfeit, of an able sane Bulk: that will neither Row, Plough, nor Cart;
has defaced the Divine Image, attainted his Soul: And his wilful Attainder,
forfeited his liberam legem, all Immunities and Easements in Law and Nature:
Rendered Himself even unworthy the Sun or Elements: And after a Turn at Tyburn,
fit Carrion for the Crows.

Neither is this Sentence over Tart; unbecoming a Christian Tribunal: for the
Image of God, Consists not outwardly in Humane shape: But inwardly in the
Functions of the Soul, to wit, Industry, Piety and Reason: if these operations
cease Cessat Causatum, the Privilege of the Divine Essence is lost: And the
Luggage of Bones and Flesh or semblance of Humanity: which this Rambler or foul
Lubber, shags about with; more regardless then the outsides of dumb Animals:
the one affording sustenance, the other the Cause of Famine. For without labor
our Pilgrimage here, cannot be performed; with the Benefit of the Heavens, and
the Installment of posthume Glory.

Relief then of this Canary Impudence, or gabering Land-leaper; doubtless is
the worst of Prodigalities: Victualling his Camp, but fostering a Roguery
Errant; and so Cramming his Gob, Causa Causati, guilty of the Vagabondage.

Most Laws for Punishing Rogues and Sturdy Beggars, were Repealed by 1 E. 6.
and the 39 of Eliz. by the 7 Jac. and so the Law stands at present: which is
sharp enough if duly executed.

SECT. XIX.
Par. 133. Vnpractical Actings ill Presidents, and Dangerous to Resolve.
BUT to leave this loutish Patchcoat, in his Swinish Ramble; to mump upon
Acorns: by the 2 H. 6. I find a great Peer Condemned, without Arraignment or
Answer. The like in 32 H. 8. one Attainted (though living and forthcoming) of
H. Treason; without being so much as called to Judgment: The Legality whereof
was scrupled, and Demanded of the Judges; whether the Act were void or no. With
some Pause they adjudg'd it Perilous, and of bad Example to Inferior Courts:
But all Agreed, if Condemned by that all-Commanding Court, 'twas Indisputable:
And it could not afterward come into Doubt, whether he were called to Answer
or no.

Though by M. Chapter and the 5 E. 3.28 E. 3. no Condemnation ought to pass,
without a quid fecisti, or all due Proceedings at Law.

The like case was very Hard, as some conceive, against the late Favorite; for
Accumulation of Misdemeanors, to take away his Life: Degrading and Disgracing
had been Severity Enough, for an Accumulative Crime. And truly by the
Proceedings I do not observe any flat Treason, clearly Proved: But where
Extremity of Passion, infir'd by malice, is the Prosecutor, and sole Proof;
there little of Justice can be expected.

Par. 134. Unlawful Acts Executed, become Lawful.
THus in Law quod fiori non debet, that which ought not of Right to be done,
Factum valet, yet done, it is Good and of Force in Law: The Civil Law Principle
harps the same Tune.

As by a Decision.

A slave running away from his Master, fled to Rome, and there (his Condition
unknown) arriv^d, to the Dignity of Pretour.

Two Questions.
1. Whether he were truly and lawfully Pretour: a Bondman being incapable of
that Office. 2. Whether all Acts and Decrees, made by Him, were of Force and
Binding.
Resolved in both, Quod Tenent facto.

1. Though the Chancellor was Promoted by Error, the Office not void. 2.
Therefore the Decrees very Forcible and Just.
Par. 235. The validity of Prohibitible Acts.
TO unlock the Maxim by an Instance at Common Law; to Conscience very
Bull-beef, as tough as Whitleather to Common Reason, and mere oppression.

As by a Case.
If J. S. be Disseis'd of Black Acre, the Disseisor aliens: the Alienee knowing
of the Disseisin, ex Animo, to bind the Right: obtains a Release, with Warranty
of an Ancestor Collateral; Conscious too of the Tort: the Warrantor dies, the
Warranty descends on the Disseisee. Now whether the Title of the Alienee be
good to the Tenderling in Conscience, is a a Quaere: beyond Dispute in Law it is
indefeasible and clear.
Because this Case is somewhat Opacous, very Duskish and Dark; to most but
Lawyers.

For an easier Instance.

If a Woman Covert, for Dread of her Husband, levy a fine; if declared 'twill
not be Accepted: if past, after the Husbands Death, unlacing her mind wide
open: that 'twas Compulsory and by fraud, shall never reverse her own Act; that
is, annibilate the Feoffment upon Record.

The like useful for the Vexatious entangled in Law.

The Sheriff at a private man's suit, on Request to open the Door, and Denial
thereof: cannot break open the House to execute any Judicial Process; but He Is
a Trespasser: yet if Execution be done, it is good.

Confiscation without any Crime Committed.

For Wreck at Sea, the violent Event of Tempest and Water; the Goods to be
forfeited, it is to afflict the Afflicted: pouring Bitumen into the Wounds, to
inflame the Sore: so if J. S. be slain, with the Sword of J. N. the Weapon as a
Deodand is lost: yet no Crime can be assigned in J. N.

Par. 136. The Guiltless Mulctable for the Guilty.
IN Law one shall be beaten for another's Stroke; for if a Stranger Commit
waste in the Tenement of Tenant for life; the Holder for life, shall suffer in
a Devastavit, or Action of waste: according to the Maxim, Tenants by Act of
Law, shall do no Waste, nor suffer none to be done: So shall the Master be
wrung, and must be Responsible, for the uneven Steps of the Servant.

The Lord answerable for the Hireling.

For Example.
If a Servant through negligence burn his Masters house, and the Neihbours too,
the Master is obliged to make reparations. The like by the Civil and Common
Law, of an Inholder, if a Traveller be robbed by his Servants, or Guests,
though against his will, and privity, yet he must answer the Damage.
At Common Law by the 22 of H. 6. the difference is very rational, that if a
Guest take another to bed with him out of courtesy, without the Entreaty of
the Host, and be by Him, or through his Treachery robbed, the Host is free;
but if on the request of the Host he lodge with him, the Law is otherwise.

To illustrate this more evidently by a Case.

Lord and Tenant by certain Rent, the Tenant Teases for a year; then the Lord
grants ouster his Signiory: And the Tenant ceases for another year.

Here the Tenant is Culpable sufficient, yet Justice cannot hit Him: being
Law-free: And neither shall have a Cessavit.

Conscience measurable by Law.

A closer Case, to All, but Students, very Rare and Incredible.
L. mortally wounds P. on the Deep or Main Sea, with which wound P. Lands at
Dover, there languishes and dies. Here Is apparent Felony, if not Murder; and by
Law Death: yet L. in spite of Justice, will not care a Button for the
Homicide: for some think no Law can attach Him: no great Justice with the
shivering Conscience, that Murder should go unpunished.
Par. 137. Sinderisis the Divine Faculty of the Soul, Inhibiting Vice and
Injuncting Virtue.
THus the Monitor of the mind, or Lanthorn of the Soul, Conscience; after the
definition of a great Lawyer; is but the Law of Reason: for that it resembles
and ministers the notions of Reason, implan^ed in every reasonable Creature:
let us give it a more beamy style, and call it the Envoyee from Above; or Lidger
of the Soul: Private Conscience, must stoop to the National Conscience, which
is Law: And natural Reason, to the Regulated Reason: the Statute of the Realm.

As briefly by a Case.

If Titius bid his Bravo, examine the Pockets of Sempronius; on his Journey to
Bristol Fair: And He acts this Braving, Burglarly in Cheapside. Conscience may
Conceive the Encitor Principal, but the Law not even Accessory.

A stranger Case.

J. at Styles Conspires with the Husband to poison the Spouse: to effect the
Design, furnishes Him with Poison: the Husband tempers it with Syrup, and gives
it, to the Wife to Eat: who nescious of the Poison, gives it to an Infant; who
Eats thereof and dies. Here Is plain Murder: yet in Law, J. at Styles, not even
Accessory.

This Case is to many very rare and wonderful:

For,

If one lie in wait; to beat J. at Nokes; and J. at Downs, coming in the way,
be assaulted and slain: though a Mistake and never intended; it is Murder.

For the Law couples the Event, with the Intent: and Interprets the mind
accordingly.

The same.

If A. out of an old Grudge to B. shoot at Him, and C. his bosom Friend,
instead of A. meet with the Shot, and be killed: it is adjudg'd Murder.

A closer Case.

If A. and B. casually meet, and from Words, out of malice prepense fall foul
on each other: And a Stranger to part the Affray, to prevent mischief,
interposes: And is slain in the Scuffle, or Hurt whereof He dies: And it is not
certainly known, who struck Him: it is murder in both the Affrayors.

In the first Case, Murder (Animo) or mentally, was originally designed; that
is, a Person to be destroyed: the same individual Person, scaping the Trap,
another being Caught and Killed: one would think, should not vary the Law, as
in the other Cases.

SECT. XX.
Par. 138. Mistakes Examined, and the Truth Cleared.
SOme short-sighted Hungerers after Change, Conceive and Assert; for an
habitual Abuse of Prelacy, the Temporalties, are seisable and Estreatable; into
the Royal Coffers.

Mighty news indeed: the Effect and Consequence of Law, Familiar to every Idiot.

Nay when the State, pants under any Exigency; it may be Spirited and supplied,
by the Rapine of the Church: the Order thrown down, and the Lands sold.

A most Corruptive Witchery, of the ugliest Pollution: Brewed from the very
Kennels of Impurity.

But whether the Temporals, for Personal Crimes or State Indigence; may be
pleno jure, or in Purity of Justice; Transferred unto a secular use: and
thereby the Function quite cashiered.

They offer not the least color, out of Scripture, Authority or Reason; in
Proof of this Desperateness.

Par. 139. The Mistaker lost in his own Maze.
IN Law, if the Church be Endowed, with a Chalice or Bell: the Donor cannot at
will, or if Abused (without Sacrilege) Defeat or Recall the Gift.

The like if one set up an Organ, or Erect a Pew; these Devout Presents, are
instantaneously Dedicated to the Church. The Benefactor cannot repent of his
good Deed; by Taking down the one, or Removing the other, at his Pleasure.

The lay Property, like a Church-loom and Inheritances Executed; being
instantly and for ever, Transubstantiated into a Spiritual. For a Divine Right;
nullius est in Bonis, Knows no Temporal owner.

For Example.
If a Coat Armor (the Ancient Pendants of Honor) Hanging over a Tomb, be
stolen: The Indictment runs de Asportatis Bonis Executoris, for the Taking of
the Executors Goods: But for a Grave Stone, or other Church Standard: pro Bonis
Ecclesiae. And in Law, the stabbing Proofs, are borrowed from the Right of
Entries, and course of Pleading.
Neither does a Defeasance or Condition in Law; as Chooses in Action and
Executory, lie in the Case: and why should it be otherwise, since the Abusers
are to be Removed and Punished. And the Donative Abused, settled in better
Hands; to perform the holy Trust: the Service of Almighty God.

Par. 140. Trusts Abusable and Forfeitable.
AT Common Law, if a Trust be Abused; as what more usual (Debtees defrauded,
and Portions never Paid) is the Trust forfeited?

Agreeing the Breach, and that Deservingly: and that the Fiduciaries or
Trustees, must respond the Damage, to cestuy qui Trusts, be Accountable to the
Trustors: And if non habent in aere, their Estates be too Feeble, to make
Amends; luant in corpore, their Persons must visit the Fleet: and there
continue, till they clear their Scores.

2. But is the matter of the Trust, to wit, the Debts and Portions, Thereby
lost; Transferable elsewhere, for the Misfeasance and Fraud of the Person
Entrusted?

If the Simile do not Halt, but Dictum de omni, sound on all Four: which no
Ideocy so faceless to Deny. Surely this railing Head, bound with Schism, is
Burst: his Brains fallen into his Heels, otherwise his Pen could not Endite so
leadenly: in filling the world, with such dangerous Absurdities, for the
supputed Crimes of the Clergy, to blow up the whole Profession: quite to Kick
off Religion, by Tumbling us Headlong, into a new Chaos of Deformity and
Darkness.

To lead the Blind out of the way, is dirty Morality; but to wander them in
Sectarism and Disobedience: Beguiling them with currish Libels, which by the
Civil Law, was Death; is the Blackest Divinity.

Par. 141. Blottings shamed and Discomfited.
THat a Profession or Trade, must be Dissolved; for the Delict or Crime of the
Professors: Is a Consequence Illogical and Inhumane.

If a Lay office be neglected and Abused, the Office (by Condition in Law) is
Forfeited: The offender to be Deraign'd, and Punished according to Demerit.

But is the very Office, for this Abuser; Deraignable or worthy of Dissolution?
Non-user, as well as Abuser, in the Officials of a Judge; is without Dispute a
Forfeiture: If the Justice be Careless or Corrupt, must we therefore Exile all
Judicatore? throw up Property, and suffer Confusion to rage over us.

If a Bishop be Faulty, in Executing the Pontifical Duty; is not Deraignment,
or Removal, with legal Castigation; a sufficient Sentence? But the very order
must be stocked up, for a Personal Mall-feasance.

By this Crookedness, Prince and People, the Innocent must hang with the
Nocent: the whole Government torn to Pieces, for some few men's misdoings.

Par. 142. Faulterings of Governors is no Fault of Law.
IN all Ages happily on a narrow search, some Bishops have been Blameable, and
Justices Corrupt; a facto ad Jus, is lamentable Sophistry: Therefore Law and
Gospel, must both be Renounced; Atheism and Confusion, take the Rains: for the
wry Actings, of some ungracious Persons.

Scriblers Chastiseable.

I Am wounded to my soul, that men of flowing Gifts and Rising Fortunes; should
detect such an Ebbing, or neediness of Grace; even inbred Prudence: in snaring
poor Mechanics, with dogged Positions; to scrat and tare the Church: to the
Startle and Discomfort of their Fellow Creature, with the Peril of their own
Souls.

Thus from a Disposition in none, to infer a Denomination in All; is Botley
Logic. Because some are Roarers, and have Espows'd Debauchery; a Catholic
Ruin, must be Designed for Humanity: for the Male Port, or Goings askew; of
some blustering Swashers.

Par. 143. Perversion of Maintenance, the Horrid'st Persecution.
DIoclesian is storied, for a Church Murderer, in Killing Ministers: But not to
be scaled, for Bloodiness with Julian; that gave the Fatal Stab or Death's
Wound to Religion: Taking away their Temporalties, Butchering at one Blow, the
whole Ministry. By the one, the Church (though mangled) was multiplied: But by
the other, at one Stroke, cut off and totally subverted.

Blood is a Crying sin, and without a full Atonement, will not be Assoil'd
here, nor hereafter: To assacinate the Body is Murder, but Enchanting men's
minds, with Sedition and Blasphemy: A Crime of a more frightful Aspect; like to
the Fable of the Italian Attempt; even to oust us of the life to come.

Par. 144. Reprobous opinions not mortal, but too long lived, even Deathless.
THat Heresies Condemned, Ditch'd and staked through, should Appear again; is
the curiou'st Mystery in Nature: like the Craving unsatisfied Element, what
they lose in one Place, they Commonly sneak and get in another: And though the
Authors go the way of all Flesh, and their opinions ocularly Die, and rot with
Them: yet it falls out they are not Commortal, or of alike Dissolution.

Leaving such a sting, and Sperm of Poison, still behind; that they Revive and
sprout again, many Ages after; in more dangerous shapes then Before: That the
Philosophers Revolute year (wherein the world should come about again) the
Interlude the same, the Actors only shifted: proves no Fiction, but a plain and
visible Truth.

How Reprobates Creep up: why suffered.

Surely God has raised ex gratia, out of pure Favor; these Factionists, as
Goads in our Eyes to keep us waking: Lest the Church, Drowsy with Unity,
Idolatry might steal upon us; like Burglars or night Thieves, and endanger our
souls.

Par. 145. None Priviledg'd from Infirmities.
NO wonder if the Evangelical Light depart, and Blindness Crowd in upon us: The
Church thus thumb'd and slober'd, with impious Vomitings against order:
Creating a Theater of Horridness, more Dreadful; then the Fate of Catania:
Though tap'd by a Bohemian Sufferer or Attested by a British Second: which on a
strict Enquest, may be Verdicted, Flashes of Pride and Choler; not Fumigations
of Exemplary Zeal.

We reverence Church Worthies, whose Sufferings improved the Reformed Colony:
for which their memory, as a Relic of Sacredness, is very Dear.

If holy Combatants, therefore Infallible, exempt from all Carnalities;
Coincident to Frailty: is a quaking Inference.

They might be Essences, in one Degree; as very Drugs, in Another: There being
no Salt or absolute Spirit of Truth, in this Life; the Heat and Sharpness of
Passion, meeting with Affronts and Hardships, might edge them; beyond a sober
Byas, of Gospel-Zeal; and the Cool Breaths, of a Saving Angel: And therefore
their Reformings, not of that prolifique Influence; that we must incontinently
quit the Church, and the Star of Prudence: And Embrace their dark Anthems, as
the clearest Sonnets of Sobriety and Truth.

Par. 146. The pettish Revolter, Christianly Admonished against Apostasy.
WIlfully, in despite, of the Checks of Reason, and Chidings of Spirit; to
serve from the professed Known Truth: Is an Imp of Apostasy Total. Never
getting up to its Reprobate Mounts, but ever effecting a fatal Downfall in the
Climer. Let me Counsel then some Margent-Stuffers, the Vomiters of Cursed
Speculations; to keep their Venime to themselves: And forbear Spawning, such
hellish Whimsies; to the Deflowring of Virtue, and Strumpetting Religion.

Shiness Required, in Putting forth, the child of the Brain.

As Words are the Images of the Thoughts, so Books (the Calender of the Brain,
and Dial of the Soul) Pointing out the inward Man: Therefore Heads of the
finest Mould, and choicer Forms, whom some style Scholars: should be nice and
wary, how they send Abroad, infectious Ramishness; to dirt Religion, soil and
slaughter too their own Souls.

In brief, discreet and modest Persons, for very Reputation's sake, will hardly
bring up their Issue reprobately: But if desperately Disposed, Contrary to all
good nurture and Manners; they will be Ashamed to send them out, and scarcely
own them.

The like of the Intellectual Offspring, as of the Corporal: All but
Crazy-brain'd Virtuoso's, mere Blurrers; will hate and defy, to father any
Progeny, but what is Perfect: and Consentaneous with Civility and Law.

Seditious Scriblings blot the Soul.

In fine, at the great Day, a single sheet of Conformity, Composed in Charity;
will inherit a larger Mansion of Glory: Then Voluminous Tracts, ronk of the
Comedy or Satyr; against Church or State.

Par. 147. Extraordinary Acts not Imitable.
THat David did eat of the shewbread, and our Savior of the Ears of Corn, at
the uttermost Pinch; to avoid Famine: is not to de drawn in President, to
justify Sacrilege or Rapine. The one was an Humane Diety, and the other
divinely Inspired, or Minister of Heaven: and might act more Transcendently
then Carnality now adays, ought or dare to imitate.

Besides 'twas Necessity, which Advocates cannot restrain; but legum Vincula
irridet, breaks through the strongest Fastnesses of Law: that necessity in
Epikay, by the Rules of Extremity; might vacate the Propriety, and legitimate
the Act.

But to speak strictly, according to the Mosaical Indulgence, and the Law of
Nations: 'twas neither Felonious, nor even Trespassable; and so in a manner
Lawful.

Necessity considerable in Law.

It Is a Topic in Law, that this swaddling of Extremes, necessity; creates a
Privilege or Indemnity, quod Jura Privata, against private Bonds: Therefore
in Defense of life, some say Alimony may be made Bold with; without Breach of
Law, Municipal or Moral.

If a Prison casually happens on Fire, the Flight of the Prisoners, is neither
Escape, nor Breach of Prison. In case of an Assault, in Preservation of Life
and Limbs; to keep in a whole skin: one may fly over another Ground, without
the Riscoe of a Trespass.

Hence the Conjunction and necessity of obedience, between Baron and Femme; in
Felony shall Excuse the Trull, from being Principal or Accessory: In Judgment
of Law, having no will; that is, during the Coverture, no free Agency in her
self. But wholly sub Imperio, under the Rod; to most Intents in Law, much
Inferior to the state of an Infant.

In brief, by Fogassa's Case, this imperious Governess of Humanity, necessity;
is very Absolute and Lawless: And will dispense, even with the very Letter of a
Statute.

Pety Larceny Condonable in Conscience and Law.

But the Gathering an Apple, or a Grape, will not warrant Larceny: Though by
the Law of Moses, it escape the Judgment of Thievery. In Construction of Law,
because of the Implicit Consent, or tacit Persuasion; that the owner will not
be distasted at so sleacy a Damage: And so Intentionally, and Consequently in
Sereness of Justice, no Theft. And hence the Law of Nations did indulge a
Traveler, to take some Grapes, to relieve his Hunger, but not to Carry away:
But the Pernancy of Taking, when gathered by the owner, or to his use; as
Chattels severed, may alter the Case, and amount to Felony.

May this justify a Backberond, or Common Thiever; with all Lewdness and
Wantonness of Heart, merely for Spoil and Lucre, to rob Orchards, and waste
Vineyards? We read that Israel Robbed Egypt, and Elisha slew the Mockers; will
this warrant Stealing, or Murder? as Adlely can the former Case, be urged as a
President, to inthral or despoil the Church: to strip her of an Estate,
Ratified by Law.

Ingratitude no Venial Sin.

I Am tormented, some manumitted Students, void of Thankfulness; the noblest
Predication of a Gentleman: should forget their Manumission and Pardon, to
merit the Censure of Ascendants from the Dog Star; for their Shoving and
Snarling against Law.

SECT. XXI.
Par. 148. The Ministers of Devotion, by the Minstrels of Sedition, Tabered
down: As the Dormitories of Owls and Gorguts.
THat the holy Tabernacles, or Religious Houses; were thrown down in furious
Times: Are not Paths that we must necessarily tread in. However I shall not
scruple, the Sageness of those Footsteps; because Affirmed by Law. Distingue
Tempora, Ponder but the Touchiness of some Times, and their Actings not so
Oraculous; as to be Querpo Justice, and Picquant Patterns.

To judge of Colors by an half Light, or Commonly as some do, in the Dark, or
Mistiness of Humor: implies Feebleness of Judgment. A Discussing altogether
Fallacious, and no way satisfactory.

Par. 149. Voluptuousness not the End of their Erection.
THat Monkeries and Frieries, became Luxuriant, and a Byword to Sanctimony:
And so dug their own Graves, cannot be Denied. However the Design (by the 35
E. 1. apud Carliolen) of Founding those secluse and solitary Enjoyments;
without Doubt was not at all Voluptuous nor Owlish: But with much Stanchness of
Wisdom, and most Divine.

Reasons why Monasteries were Erected.

1. As Colleges of Rules and Retiredness, to advance Learning and plant
Devotion: to fit the Clergy, the better to purge and purify the Lay Soul: the
safer to Insure it to Heaven.

2. To declaim incessantly for the Church; to keep Centry for secular Souls:
Continual Watch and Ward, for their Spiritual Concerns. That were clogged with
worldly Slaveries, and could not so aptly Mediate themselves.

3. To be a Pharo's or Blazing Stars of Holiness of Life; not Sleepers or
Chambering Bubbers.

4. For the Retirement of great Spirits, wearied out with public Toil: to
withdraw from the Drummings and Broils of the World: To wait for the nunc
Dimittis, or Call to the other Life.

A Cloister an apt Counting House for the Soul.

For after we are mounted, to the Alps of Honor: the great Ends that we are
born for, being Attained; in serving the Prince and Country: even Achilles
being not Death-free, we must to Dust; the Shooting of that Arrow, being
uncertain; to arm against its stroke; the next and proper Flight, is Solitude:
to go off in Peace, in Contemplating the Sphere of Glory.

No Aerie of Dormice.

For this the devout Fathers of the Church, retired to a Monastic life; to
Compute their Frailty: to set All even for the other World.

Par. 150. Dronery no Founder of Seclusories or Academies of Sanctity.
THus doubtless the End, of those Religious Anchorisms, or Cells of Piety; was
most Angelique: not dronishly ordained, as Hives for pot-bellied Buzards, or
Dortours for Swill-bowls: But as Seminaries of State, for the Propagation of
Holiness, and Improvement of Learning.

That the order was Criminous, and so deserved the Axe; because the
officiaries, were Dronish and Disorderly: does not weigh with some. The Abuse
(in Law) cannot Vitiate the Use; for then Frontiniack and the Friqueezes, must
be Banished the Table; because often Abused through Intemperance.

Reasons why Thrown Down.

But the Excess of Implicit Zeal, heaping mountainous wealth upon them; which
in Time might have absorbed or gulf'd up the whole Laiety; and their own
Dronishness neglecting their Office: with that Reason of State, very just
Dissolved them; is a nemine contradicente, Agreed by all Hands.

Par. 151. The Disanulling justified in State.
IT IS the Doubt of many, especially of Divines; whether the Possessions be
still Teneble in Conscience: I Am clear in the Affirmative.

1. First in Law: the Converting them into a lay-Fee, was no Chimney-Corner
Act; the Offspring of Passion or Infidelity: but the public Judgment, or full
Debate of the whole People, pronounced in Parliament: Adjudging by wearied
Experience, the Droning over notorious; and the Church cloyed with
Superstitious Luxury: which rendered their Office useless and Abominable. Being
too great an Engrosser of the Temporalty, beyond the Cure of Visiting or
Purging: so the Depriving or total Abolishing, no Infeudations of Rapine or
oppression. It being the very same Power, that Created them; that Disanull'd
them. The Law that gave them a Being, without Injury to Church or State, might
likewise Dissolve them. And we are not to Conceive, the least Prejudice
imaginable against their Inactings: being Presumed, no sober Person in his
right Wits, will ever wilfully wrong another: nay wittingly destroy his own
soul. For so had it been, were not the Demolishing, necessary and Civil.

The Dissolving maintained in Conscience.

2. For the Niceness in Divinity: how a Spiritual use (without violence to
Conscience) can be Transmuted, into a Temporal; Contrary to the Will of the
Donor: is a Demurrer that sticks with many, of singular Parts. But thoroughly
understood, there is no just Cause of Scruple. A Surfeit being better spared
then continued: therefore the Taking them off, an Act no way Dolorous, or
Inconvenient.

The Worship of God, consisting not wholly in the Estate Spiritual: the good
Management of the Temporal, does no less glorify him. For if that Faint, the
other will hardly Flourish: so that there is a necessity, to uphold the one, to
support the other: And we may discharge a good Conscience, very liberally, to
the Instructor of the Soul; as much as Heaven does require: without making him
an Idol (like the Dotage of those Times) in Offering All we have; to purchase a
Kiss of St. Jude, or a smile from St. Peter, and be laughed at for our Pains.

3. Were the Church much Impaired, so Beggard; that an able Clergy, could not
be maintained: And all Encouragements taken away, to incite Youth to the Study
thereof: And thereby the Service of God neglected, and like to fall; or even
the Votaries to Virtue, at all Damnified: I should Agree the Negative.

But sufficient being still left (if used soberly) to propagate Religion: And
no just cause of suspecting, any Decay of Learning: the Remains being most fair
and Inviting, Means still enough for the highest Merit: I cannot see, with the
search of both Eyes (as the Church now stands) what Annoyance, the 27 or 31 H.
8. can be, to any intelligent and Loyal Conscience: that is a true Obediencer to
King and Law.

The Abolishing not Contrariant to Civil Justice.

4. If not Continued Spiritually, why not Reverted to the Right Heirs?

This Request seems Plausible; had not so many Centuries passed, that the right
Heirs (without a Divinour) could hardly have been found out: A multitude of
Claims, would soon have put in, and the very true Heir, scarce have ever been
Known: And so the Land given back, to mere Pretenders and false Owners: Then
the Cure worse then the Disease.

The Infadation of Droneries, or Permuting them to a secular Freehold,
warrantable in Divinity.

5. But had the Institution been so Fresh, that the lineal Heir, had been then
Alive: and Certainly Described and Known. However the Transmutation lawful.

The Giving being Intentionally Public, and Consecrated for a general Benefit:
happily a By-bag, or spare Revenue; that the Heir might well part with, and
never sleep the Worse: And so not originally Designed for Him, but Advisedly
always put aside by the Giver; for that Purpose: The Disposing of the Grant, to
another end; then what was Directed by the Grantor: will be neither Forfeiture
nor Frustration of the Grant. Because still enjoyed by the Public, according
to the Intent of the Giver; the Gift only Employed, to a more needful and
better use: then the Continuance of Droneship, and slavering the Adored Toe.

Agreeable with Foreign Laws.

Neither is this any sudden opinion, without Authority; for the Civil Law
allows of the Conversion, as Legal and Honorable:

As by Lysimachu's Decision.

Who desirous to live in Aftertimes, charged some Lands, to maintain public
Shows: which happened to be forbidden, and put down by Law.

Two Questions.
1. How the Rent should be Disposed of. 2. Whether not Accruable or Descendible
to the Heir.
Resolved.

1. The Legacy could not die, though the literal Use, became Unperformable. 2.
Therefore 'twas ordered, that the Magistrate with the Heir; should advise of
another way: How the Intent of the Legator might be gratified.
The Tenure as Durable as other Tenements.

6. These Possessions are Commonly Twitted, by our Well-willers, to the Cast of
Drones, or Sleepy Crammers; to be of a Volatile and fleeting Nature: And so not
to be Enjoyed, or indeed worth Looking after. Being bann'd with an unlucky
Fate, or Mark of Divine Displeasure: Therefore seldom or never, staying long in
one Hand, but very swift in Passing away.

Sometimes proving mere Plague-sores, Infecting the other Estate; bringing All
to Confusion: Therefore some Conceited Heads, otherwise wise enough; are shie
forsooth to Purchase them.

Their Twitlings Blown off.

A very weak and false Aspersion and groundless: on Design by Papish Plotters,
the Underminers of the Church of England; to discourage all honest People, from
Purchasing; or in sooth Holding them.

To resolve these idle Giberings or Popish Bannings; which are as Credible as
the Legend of the Crow, mourning over St. Vincent's Corpse; or the Relics of
Aleppo. We may say of them as justly, as of old Granam's Winter Goblings, or
Gossoping Prophesies: That they are marked when they Hit, but never when they
fail: The same with these Lands, when they happen on Sale; a thousand
God-morrows, and jabering Pritlings; must pass: But they may stay till
Doomsday, before any Boast be made of their Prosperity, and Luckiness of
Continuance.

It Is aptly observed by the smartest Discerners in the Predictive Delusions;
where one falls out Right, Twenty miss: The like of these Lands; they are no
Cancer, or Moate to fret the other Estate: Tenantable under an ill Destiny; for
if true observation were made, Twenty for one Continue. All other Estates are
generally as Transient, as Hasty to be gone, if care be not had to the main
Chance: And as often Actually made away as They.

Prebendaries of Learning and Devoutness necessary.

7. To shut up this Cloistered Dispute; it is the Conceivings of some, that had
there been fewer, and those no gorsey Crommers, or Cloistering Snorers; but
better Disciplined and more Actively Disposed; in Virtue and Piety: The
Continuance might have been Profitable.

I have spoken this, in Vindication of the Liberty of England, the Law: to stop
the mouths of malicious and ignorant Detractors, that run away with a
fantastic Prejudice; without searching into the Reasons and Grounds thereof.

Though I may expect, for writing thus Evenly, without cloaking; or clouding
the Integrity of State: a badder Curse for my Pains, then the Confirmation of
tempestuous Weather, with the Wind Continually in my Face.

SECT. XXII.
Par. 152. Vpbraidings against Church Lands.
THE Ecclesiastical Revenues, are much upbraided by the Anti-Prelate; the
Ruffler against Monarchy: As the lavish Alms of the Blind, in dark Times. No
better then Pious Cheats, worm'd out of the Simple Devout; somewhat to
Alleviate or take off, the Duress, or imaginary Flames of Purgatory: to glide
to Heaven on Dowley Terms. And Testaments framed by Collusion are void.

In Charity we Adjudge them, as the frank Endowments of well-intended Zeal: for
the Maintenance of a pious Use. Though happily Purchased by some Sprinklings of
Fraud; the general End, of the Donation good.

At Common Law, though the Words of the Testator cannot be satisfied; which is
frequent in many Cases: the Intent being Pursued, the Exposition Safe and
Binding.

Now in Law, the Intent of the Legator Justifiable; though the Modus and
Judgment of the Legacy mis-applied: which the Canonists agree may be Rectified,
for the Support of true Worship.

And in Law, Bequests to the Church, must be Determined soly after the Law
Canon: And not after lay Constitutions.

Par. 153. Lamponings against the Person of Prelacy.
ALlowing the Bequest good: yet Adepto fine cessat Motus, the Race being won,
the Quarry once got. Adieu to all Piety and Learning, Epicurism and Pride must
then take Place: Charity and all Prelatical Worthiness thrown out of Doors.

The Lamponers Silenced.

If not Libellous; this is a sore Blur indeed: worthy a through Scanning and
Amendment. But with the Churlish, nothing is Chrystalline but Blood-shot; and
since we cannot estrepe, or muzle Malice, nor Martingale Folly: Aspersive
Mouths (the Spowts of Slander) with the wise, are no Scandal.

Merited Advancement.

1. For their Promotion, it is not per Saltum, at one Jump, or Unadvised Leap:
But Gradually with the uniform Vote, of the Guild of Learning: neither without
the Expense of much Time, and Charge, can they arrive to a very Degree in the
Profession. And afterward through wearisom Study, when Seraphically
Accomplished; it is not their own Seeking, but the Pleasure and Penetration of
Majesty, according to the 25 H. 8. and the 1 E. 6. to distinguish of their
Gifts: whether fit to be Dignified, with the Call, of Custodes Animarum;
Chancelours of Souls and Spiritual Guardians.

2. Before this Providence of Conge de Eslier, does usually salute them:
through long and irksom Studiousness, they are Gone off, their Spirits near
wasted: Being just but moving Skeletons. Preferment comes as late, to render
the Abode Felicious: as a Pardon after the Head is severed. Retirements then
from active motions, are no way wonderful.

SECT. XXIII.
Par. 154. Literature Honorable.
NOtior Virtute, est Potior Honor: Honor is so Riveted and close Entailed on
Virtue; no bartrous Act of Fine or Recovery, can dock or destroy this Right: A
Principle in Favor with the most Barberous. Can Learning be too much
Laureated! those who by wearied Study, are Preferred out of Merit, not of
Grace; to the State of Spiritual Governors: According to the Apostle, Those of
Berea were nobler then those of Thessalonica.

I hear no Divines, Moot the Grandeur of the Law; for some Advocates to bolt,
the Dignity of the Church: Is a great Jeofayle, obnoxious to Piety and
Scholarship. But for their own Coat, to beat so Venomous a Peeke; Renting the
very Bowels of Learning, to rout the Church: is more then Viperous, even the
rudest Silliness.

Par. 155. The Peerage Requisite.
AS there are several Rounds, or Orbs of Dignity in the State; for the Honor
of Magistracy, and the Encouragement of public Spirits: The like Comeliness in
the Church, is most necessary; for the Reverendness of Religion, and semination
of Learning.

Amingle-mangle in the Church will cause an Hotch-potch in the State.

Nothing more unequal then Equality; is an Axiom in State: good Revellings,
that Gentlemen and Scholars, should turn Anticks and Levellers: for Equality
in the Church, will invert the whole Fabric; turn every Interest upside down,
and do the Business. Fraternities merely Lay, as well as Literate, must be
Recoup'd or brought even: Masters and Fellows, Ancients and Punies, All of a
Knot. Neither will the Morrice-Dance of this Zealous Tumbler, rest there; we
must imitate the Church, we cannot follow a safer Light, then the Cassiopaea of
Heaven. And then God b'wy to Monarchy, this levelling Sithe, will mow all down:
the Gentiness of Lacque-boys with bare Heads and Pages: with the Gaudiness of
red Ribbons and long dusty Trains; ushered or Pag'd up: are mere Giggery and
mimical Expense. Nay the Streamers of Sovereignty, and Ensigns of Greatness, of
White Staves and Blew Garters, with the Jesse of Honor: And Swords of State,
with Maces of Majesty, more useless then Bartholomew Babies. In brief, Lord and
Tenant, King and Vassal; All whiff'd off in a Snuff, to bed and board in
Hercules Den.

Par. 156. Why Created Barons.
WE do not mistrust, but in Abraham's Bosom, there will be Fullness of Bliss,
Revealed unto All: However we may Conceive, and that rightly, of Hierarchies,
or Ranges of Beatitude among Angels; and Priorities doubtless we shall find
among Saints. A Series of Glory even among the Stars.

Hence has our Law, created Spiritual Prehiminence; not as a lofty Gayety, to
Lord it above humble State: but as an Honorary and Requital, for Reverend
Parts. To invite and likewise oblige the Laity, to discharge readier obedience;
to Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction: Magistracy being ever more Honored, if Graced
by handsome Quality; but too Commonly slighted, in abject Condition.

Handsome Splendor, no Pagan Pageantry.

Can we Pay too great a Respect, to the Legate of Heaven; that has Curam
Animarum, the Charge and Curacy of Souls! unless the Soul, be a Romance or
Kickshaw, a mere Artifice, or Feat of Wit; feigned only to scare Fools: And the
Legation or Curatorship, as needless as Poppets and Mummeries.

Par. 157. Civil Distances, not Loftiness nor Superstitious Vanity.
BUT such Gaudery is too Drab-like, after the Tearingness of the Tripan of
Babylon: suits not with the Vestal Attire, of the Kirk of Christ.

If the Discipline of the Church, be Queanish; for Retaining any Rite, that is
in usage with Rome: Let Us throw away the Bible, if a Roman Pandar! leave all
holy Ordinances, if Babylonish; and turn Nebuchadnezzars.

Par. 158. The Apostolical Compeerage not Argumentative.
TO enforce an Equality in the Church, from a Parity among the Apostles; is a
Classical Cavil, but no authentic Debating: a President not square with
Divinity, or well-digested Reason; Law.

To unblind the world, of this popular Error; we must consider the Church in
its Infancy, that a familiar Garb was then the likeliest Means; or powerful'st
Charm, to win and Convince the Vulgar: in slighting the Gayness of the world,
to appear not as self-seekers, for their own Interest: But as totally Designed,
for the Conversion of Souls. Which certainly was then Conceived, the strongest
Guard, to subdue Infidelity.

But when the Church, had got sufficient Strength and Repute; that Distinctions
and Precedences were then ordained, is manifest by undeniable Record. For
though Peter and John were Eminent Spreaders of the Truth; yet does St. Paul
claim his Place, Alleging expressly, that he was not Inferior to the Chiefest
Apostles.

If no order were among them, then on necessity, more then Raggedness; even
Confusion: which were foul Profaneness and grosser Folly, to Conceive. Among
the Chosen Ones, Persons specially elected, and Assigned by Heaven; as the
aptest Divulgers, of the precious Mysteries, and fittest Infusers of Grace.

Now if order, that is Gradual and does imply a Disparity, or civil
Subordination: from this we may infer, an orderly Distinction, even with the
Apostleship.

Par. 159. Obedience Natural and Commendable.
THE Custom of England toward Corporal Parents (which some Inveighers against
Order, account even Superstitious) is very Worthy: with good Conformity to the
Fifth Commandment. Why reverential Distance, to Spiritual Fathers, or Tutors
of Souls; entrusted with the Pupillage, of our dearest Concern: should be
Will-Duty, and left unpaid, is a Ridless to me! Those that neglect the
Trustees, or the Supervisors of the Spirit; will render but withered obedience,
to the Framers of the Body.

Neither is the Spiritual Peerage, any fresh Constitution; but Coetaneous with
Christianity: not without even Divine Rooting. And to assart or grub up a Plant
of Gods own Setting: merely out of petish Pride, is ranting Divinity.

Par. 160. With Heralds no Eyesore.
IN Heraldry the Presidency of the Church, no Entailed Dignitary: nor even a
Perpetuary or for life, because Degradable: At best but a Dignation Officiary,
and momentaneous; in Ceremony of State, Expiring with the Person: Thus no Web
in the Eye, if honestly Inspected; affording no Place to the Wife, nor
Advantage to the Issue: in Truth No Eclipse, to cloud Nobility, nor darken the
Commonalty. But a fit Radiancy of State, to approper and brighten both; in
preventing the Owelty, or beastly Parity; which would soon shut up, out of
Prelatical Ashes.

Par. 161. The Office Divine.
FOR the Diviness of the Function: I could never read, before or since the
Gospel, of any settled Ministry; either Profane or Christian: But what was
still governed by a Prelate. Neither need I run much on the score, with Humane
Authority, to pillar this Position. It being evidently Presidented, by all
Church Writers, both Pagan and Christian; principally by the Eloquent Epistles,
of that Renowned Reformist: who taught and plainly Enjoined, the Establishment
of that Jurisdiction, not only Personally, but successively. Which is even
Statute Law to me, that the Office, is not at all, Jure Humano, of Lay
Modelling: but its Nativity Divine, and Primitively from Heaven.

To close up the Diss with this Undeniable Truth.

The Pastors of the Church are Jure Divino. But Prelates (sub Christo) are the
Supreme or Head-Pastours of the Church. Therefore Prelacy, Jure Divino.
Par. 162. The Ingloriousness.
OMost Inglorious, to make the Science of Heaven, the Butt of Reproach, and
Subject of Ignominy! But such is the Indignity of this present Age, that the
Freeze Jerkin with the Red Wastecoat; that are Asinin and even Tongueless, at
any Scene but Calumny: start up mavelous witty (their mouths full tipped with
Satyrism) at such a Prate. And want not a Sting, to club their Clinch; to
sulley and sutt: according to the 8 of Eliz. One of the greatest States of the
Realm.

SECT. XXIV.
Par. 163. Temporal Theft an Hanging matter.
IN Law, in the Paultry old French, Un Denier ou un maile prise de la Robe; a
mite raped from the Person on Travel, invito Domino, by Constraint, is strict
Felony. Many other pety Violences (Animo Furandi) with a Thieving Intent, is no
less Capital. By the Secondary Resolve, of Legal Reason; in Defense of Property.

Neither is Robbery a Sackber'd, (like Cut-Pursing) strictly fixed to the
Person: And therefore if a Surcoat, or any other Goods, are Taken overtly and
Saucily, in ones Presence: Though not on the Person, nolens volens, or as we
say, in spite of ones Teeth. However in Law, the Tractation or Taking is
Felony; the Damage being the same, and the Fear alike.

Par. 164. Ecclesiastical Thievery more Desperate and Heinous.
AT Common Law, the Felonious Taking of an Hawk, from the Peark, or from a man's
Person; was Felony: the 34 E. 3. made the Finding and Concealment, two years
Imprisonment: But the 37 E. 3. though without Vervels made it Felony, unless
the Finder Maintenant or forthwith, brought it to the Sheriff, to proclaim the
same.

Can we think the Law has not as Carefully Provided, against the Spoliation of
the Church? But that she may be Assaulted and Ransacked, her Revenues seized
and transmuted into a Lay Fee; without Deforcement, or the least Shadow of
Sacrilege?

To rob the Diety may be Life; but to put Mortality, into a small Quandary or
Aguish Fit, with Concealing Birds of Prey: Felony. If the one be so Direful, by
the Auncel Weight, or lightest Touch of Reason, the other must be most
Pernicious; the hainou'st Latrociny. Otherwise there will be a Failer of
Justice, a Mischief the Law of England, will by no means Endure.

Par. 165. Thievishness Explicated or Unfolded.
ACcording to the Practice of Law, Theft is the Felonious or Fraudulent Taking
away, of mere Personal Goods; which if Super duodecim Denarios, above the value
of two Testors, it is grand Larceny: if under, it is Petit; usually punished by
Forfeiture of Goods and Corporal Pains. A Minori, according to nature, the
Disseising or Depriving one, of an Hereditament or Lordship; a grander Larceny:
unless with Stoicism, All Offenses are of the same Size; and with Draco, One
Pain a sufficient Executioner. But Circumstance of Fact, with the Overture or
notoriousness of the Intent, whether Treasonous or Felonous, in Law Creates a
Majus and Minus, or Diversity of Pains. And so Penalties are ever Commensurate
to the Quality of the Crime.

By the Civil Law, the Taking up any thing off the Ground, with an Intent to
Convert it to his own use; is Latrociny: whether the owner of the Goods be
known or no, it abates nothing of Pilfering; the Taker is still in Danger of
Felony. But if the thing found, prove a Derelict, that is, quite forsaken or
cast away by the Proprietour: Resolving never to own it more, some say it
excuses. By the Law of the Realm, there is no Forsaking, the owner may claim his
Goods when he will: notwithstanding all Rejectings or verbal Disclaimings; the
Property still Continuing the same.

At Common Law, I conceive the Trover or Casual Discovery, vests no Property in
the Finder; But as a stray it shall rather Escheat to the Lord of the Fee: or
to the King, in case the Franchise be not large enough, to retain it.

The Law is most Curious and Worthy, in this Public Good of Property.

For Example.

If one find another Goods, if afterward they happen to be lost, or even
Damaged, through wilful Default: the Finder is chargeable to the owner.

If lost casually, without wilful negligence; or Committed to another Custody,
who runs away with them; he is said to be unchargeable. But some think the
Committor must answer for the Slipperiness of the Runner: for Reposing Trust in
a Person, of whose Honesty he had not sufficient Proof. His own affected
Supiness, being the Cause of the Damage.

Par. 166. The Ecclesiastical Peace, much Tendered in Law.
THE Famous Statute, so much Admired and talked of by popular Judgments;
Enjoins Primarily and Particularly: that the Church of England, keep her Rights
Inviolable: de Circumspecte Agatis, speaks the same. The one the
Redintegration, or Collect of the Common Law: the other a Concession of
Justice, never Controverted.

Westminster the First, is in very Point; which Commands in the first Place:
that the Peace of Holy Church be kept. A Law framed by the Tutorships of
Angels, and will find obedience over the Gates of Hell.

Thus Pax Ecclesiae observetur, the Peace of the Church must be kept, is a
Theorem in State: And from hence we may infer, that the Spiritualty, is to be
had in Equal Tenderness, with the Temporalty: He that snaps from the one, may
pull Judgment (as a Burgessor) of Life and Member, from the other.

There Is a general Learning at Common Law; that the King is not bound by any
Statute, if not specially named: for his Advantage he may Concern Himself, sans
Express Nosmer. But in Acts that treat spiritually, Majesty is strictly bound,
sans Esteant Nosme, though not named. Religion being the stoutest Pillar and
support of the Crown.

Par. 167. Lands neither Donable nor Deviseable.
BY Ancient Law, Lands by Descent, were not Alienable, without the Consent of
the Heir: But a Gift to God, in Exposition of Law, to a Person devoted to his
service: 'twas undeniable and Binding without the Heirs Assent or Privity: The
like at the Civil Law.

As by a Decision.

Caius mighty wealthy, and wiser then to delay, settling his Fortune; till the
last Groan, devises his Lands in Alexia, to Christ.

Two Questions.
1. Whether the Will not void, for the Uncertainty or Dubiousness of
Limitation. 2. If valid: How to be Interpreted.
Resolved.
1. That the Devise was Good. 2. That the Manor (in Interpretation of Law) was
given, to the Church Parochial; where the Testator did more Eminently Reside,
or usually dwell.
The like Anciently at Common Law, as a Fine levied Deo or Ecclesiae, was Good.

As by a Case.

A. devises green Acre to B. for life, Remainder to C. for Life: Remainder to
the Church of St. Andrew in Holborn.

By the 21 R. 2. I find it Adjudg'd a good Devise: though by the 32. H. 8. I
doubt much, whether it will now hold Good.

Par. 168. Largesses of Devotion are Consecrated Feoffments.
Collatum Clero, Collatum Deo: A Gift to the Church is bestowed on God: the
holy Gifts, the old Legists, call Frank-Almoinge or Free Alms: And not so
sleazily Removable, as some Spangled outsides fain would have it.

Presents of Consecration or Grants to the Church, were in Pearlie Times,
styled Church-Chesset: As the Rearings of Religion, but now Nugatory Endowings;
for that Charity may well be spared, and Heaven Commanded on cheaper Terms.

By the Devout over the Water, for a small Pull; to help the Groners, out of
placeless Purgatory: great wealth is oftentimes Bequested. But with us, not a
(...) afforded, to avoid that Gulf: nor even to be Assured of Heaven.

Par. 169. Sacrilege the deadliest Crime.
BY the Common Law, Sacrilege is defined, Le Larcin des chooses Sacrees, Theft
of Things devoted to a spiritual use: And is deemed, Rettum Gravissimum, the
grievou'st offense; for which no Clergy is Grantable. Therefore by the Canon
Law, Sacrilegious Thieves, were Commonly sentenced to Wild Beasts, sometimes to
the Flames. To enjoy Religion without a Scourge, is to fancy Animation without
the Sun. All Law Books are so full and plain in the Point; to blur Paper, to
Replead, so clear a case: were Sowing the Ocean, or Fishing in the Sky.

SECT. XXV.
Par. 170. If the Church be thrown down: The next Life, will be at the Law.
BUT what if the Church be skinned, and Learning thrown on the Hedge: the
Thriving Trade, will be still kept afoot; and the Effronted Lawyers, grow
Bankers?

This surmise may come short, of an Handful of double Guinies: But how will the
Law be acutely Attained, without being first Grounded with Scholastic
Breeding? so that Property must fall with Religion, both Coffined in the same
Tomb.

Par. 171. Law as Spiritible, or Inspirable as Theology.
AND why may not this Scambling Spright, enlarge the Inspirings? And take on
him, to Spew Law extempore; just as fast as the higher Notion, and more Sacred;
to wit, Divinity: He that is saucy in the Parlour, will scarce be Mannerly in
the Hall. No Difficulty but may be shouldered, by the Ray or Spark of the
Diety; the Spirit.

I Am sure with the late Usurpers, Bracton was Foolish, and Britton an Ass:
Perkins full of Crotchets, and mere waste Paper. Nay the Legis Alpha, and very
Textuary at Common Law, for all the Gorgeous Elegies, the learned Expounder
gives him: was no more Regarded then a Straw. Every Major General, or Common
Agitator, were par my and par Tout, perter Lawyers: Deeper read men, and more
cunning to Cleave an Hair; then the two late Famous Ones, Hobert or Dier.

Par. 172. The Civil Disquisitour.
HOW came some bullish Clog-heads, by that Dexterity? without all Peradventure,
from their Familiar; the Cheating Spirit: for these Pretenders, were just as
Blunt and Bearish as a Cartor: Having never Traded further in Learning, then a
Primer; if so high Bred. For had ever these white Souls, been called to coram
nobis, that is, had Justice ever Demanded an Account of their Actings;
undoubtedly the Neck Verse, would have stuck worse; then the deluding Apple,
did with our Grandsire Adam. And were it worth an Imprimatur, I could versifie
and say much more.

Par. 173. The juridical Advertiser.
A Word in season to the Lawyers (to whom I wish all Plenitude of Prosperity,
or Arms full of wealth and Honor) will be more Preisely: Then Apples of Gold
in Pictures of Silver; and deserve a Coloss Fee. That they dash not against
these Rocks, in Lessening their own Towl. For Calvinism under color of Scandal
(like the Druides in France, which is President enough) will Allay and Engross
many Brangles, and take Grist from the Mill. And what is this but Popery (that is
so hotly railed on) not Incognito or in Disguise: but open Breasted and drawn
in folio. For in order to Dic Ecclesiae or Spiritual Cognition; they Interlope
in Lay matters, and if their whinellings, be not greeted Crouchingly: And meet
more then half way, with a Scraping Courchy; of Hat and Knee: leaden Bolts will
soon be Thundered against them. Plasters which neither Heal nor Abate, but ever
Hurt and Enrage the Anguish. Pure Romish Doctrine, Translated into a Geneva
Mould; Condemned by Parliament, in E. 2. and E. 3. as Treason: That if Majesty
cannot be Clouted by Law, then to be Cobled per Asperitee: Tossing him to the
Cloven Foot, shall do the Feat.

Par. 174. Consinement to the Proper Walks, politic Modesty.
LET Ecclesiastics forbear their Fulminations, or Parchment Pellets; and keep
within their own Purlue, or known Limits: Leaving Civil Misprisions, to the
Sages of the Law. Then shall the Church be quitted of Lordliness, and the State
of Couchancy: in suffering the Crosier to ride too much on the fore Horse.

Let me beg some of the Long Robe, to leave their Reflections; and the Laity
their Mouthings against Prelacy: For without it, the Law will be Defective; all
Causes Ecclesiastical, not Triable without that Office. As Mulierty or Loyalty
of Matrimony, general Bastardy, Excommengement, Profession too Anciently: These
and the like Regularly, ex Institutione legis, by necessity of Law; must be
Tried by the Certificate of the Ordinary. And should this way of Trial be
wholly laid aside, or indeed be but even Disused; the sequel will be strangely
Mischievous. Many will more then Flutter and Flash, with hopes of coming off,
without a nip.

In fine, the late Ruffian Times, when Root and Branch was Threatened against
the Law: are Garnishments enough, to Counsel the Professors; how they part with
le Guardian del Ley, or Protector of the Law: the Government now Established.

SECT. XXVI.
Par. 175. Advice to the Fugitive and Frontless.
TO draw to an End, I could wish some freekish Straglers; would bridle their
Tongues, though their Hearts are Incurable: from Spawling such ugly
Malignities, against the Womb that Produced them; the Font that listed them
under Christ's Banner, to the Blemish of the Diety, and Blacking their own Souls.

Some are clear sighted, and can distinguish between Damask and Callico: And
cannot Stray, without a Check of their Diary; telling them: they must one Day
Audit, for the minutest Thought.

Let me Counsel the Unquiet, or State-Troublers; to leave these Frantic
Rangings, and grase within the Hedge: Stolen Pastures (though Sweet) are Rotting
and Consumptive to the Soul: Truly these outrageous Affray's on the Church,
look frightingly; as Designs to Winless the Buskin, into an Outlandish Nowse.

Bravings against the Law are Destructive.

The loud Crake of Prosperum Scelus, is a Slippery Tread, and may break their
Legs; And well if they Escape with the Top-Member. Let them Take up in Time,
lest they run Mercy quite out of Breath: should the Ducklings of Zeal, boggle
thus Audaciously elsewhere; they would be more then Sentenced to the Gaetulian
Sands, to dabble in Mud, or Pick Daisies: The State would send them a Pair of
Shoes; which if they Refused to wear, the next Token would be a Salamander
Sallet: more then the Pain of the Boot, or that of walling for Fraudulent
Securities.

But for Explaining my self: I will approve of Tenderness of Conscience, and
therefore by no means Allow, of Fagetting the Person: only according to the 1
Eliz. Burning the Purse, or Racking the Pocket: the healing'st Physic for
Peevishness.

Par. 176. To the generous Stray's. The Cockerers of Faction.
LET me entreat the Equestral Order, or Scale of Noble Blood; to Study
themselves? 'twas no less then the Advice of the Oracle. In the whole Compass
of Nature, no Creature so well worth our Acquaintance; as the knowledge of our
selves: They will then quickly learn, without Parling with Feud or Faction; by
the inborn Tutorings of Honor: that the most unthrifty or tragical'st Act,
that a Gentleman can Commit; in, the whole Comedy of his Life, is to resist his
Prince. And Flinging and Fluttering against his Law; is the unhandsom'st
resistance.

Par. 177. The Boyishness of Blundering against Setlements.
HAve we not Compromitted our Consciences, in matters of External Worship, to
Authority? Have they not Given (on grave Debate) their Judgment Final? And must
we now mutter against our own Act, Reneage and turn Runnegadoes; because the
old Truth is Trump, and Falsity gleek'd.

At this Rate there will be no end of Controversy; no obedience to Law. In a
private case, if any oblige themselves to stand to the Award of a Stranger. If
Arbitrated against the Hopes or Interest of either: what childishness from the
Compromittors, to mumble of hard Measure: But non-Complaisance, some Lawyers
adjudge very Boyish, and most Casuists, Barretry.

Par. 178. To the whole Bunch of Dissenters in General.
IN fine, let the Universal cluster of Contrarients, Ponder but the late Chops
and Changes of Government: with the Essay of all ways, and the loss of the best
of Princes; no bottom could be found, neither by the sliness of a Covenant, nor
the Dint of the Sword: But even for a setlement, All were forced to return, to
the forsaken Establishment. Which is a sufficient Conviction, to open Eyes and
Hearts unsear'd; of the Justness and necessity of the Office. And that Digitus
Dei, or the Express Will of Heaven is Visible in the Case: For had God been
offended at Tapers, or at all pleased with Dark Lanthorns: after so long a
suspension, held up by the bloody Hand; undoubtedly it had never been Restored.

Par. 179. A Seasonable Cautel to General Councels.
THE Duty and great Honor, of public Assemblies; is to lay aside
self-Interest, and debate Affairs, Deliberately and Cooly: And when once
matters are seriously Digested, and Resolvedly Agreed on: To Vote and Vnvote,
at the Peekingness of every prick-car'd Creeper; Is more then Fickleness, the
meanest of Pusillanimities: A Disgracing of Authority and most Insecure; in
Exposing Determinations of State to Mockery and Scorn.

1. In Religion.

Liberty of Sheaking, will set the Gate wide open, to all Hellishness: once Bit
with Sedition, they become Frantic. Every one Broaching, what Destructiveness
they please: the most Absurd and Damnable, the purest Spirit.

2. In State.

It Is an Encouragement, to Congeal their Frenzy: when in Busling and Baffling,
they may procure Liberty; when will the Law be observed? it is no better, then
Stealing the Goose, and setting up the Feather:

By the same Petishness, they dream the Spiritual Law hard: They may stand on
Terms, and Camphyle with the Temporal. And by their Trivancy, in Scrupling and
non-obeying the one, the other is Maimed and Resisted.

Diversity of Religion Destructive to Monarchy.

Hardly Peace in the State, without Unity in the Church: is an approved Maxim.
Contrariety of Judgment, in Spiritual Matters (wherein should be the fullest
Assent) Dis-joynts the Affection; makes Parties and several Factions: for
though Teeth outward, they may appear somewhat Courteous and fair; yet
inwardly, there is not that Graciousness of good Will, and Debonaireness of
Love: As when All of one Belief. Therefore a general Liberty not only
inconsistent with the Purity of Religion, but even very Incongruous, and
against the Interest of State.

Thus we contend for no light matter, with the most Prudential, Salus Regis, or
the very Being of Monarchy, lies at Stake: And therefore the Law, not over
whetted, but too Dull and Curt.

It Is Agreed that in Republiques, Consisting of Trucking Nurture; one Size of
State: Studious only to amass, and hoord up Pilth; a Liberty of Ranting,
happily not so Formidable; there being no Pyramids of Envy, to blaze Ambition.
But for Monarchy, the Colony of Honor, and Element of Ambition: it is feared
their Shafts, will be too Busy; and if not Buttoned, too Bold and Dangerous:
Like the Heat of the two Competitours, the one would brook no Peer, the other
no Supreme.

In brief, any little Faculty of Dispensation, will prove Ruinous to Monarchy,

3. In Law.

After the Judgment of several Acts of Parliament; it is against the Safety of
the Kings Soul: And Sedition like Murder, can hardly Conceal long; it must out,
though to the Ruin of the Contriver.

4. In the Isonomy, or even Poise of Justice.

It Is very Hard; that the Obedients, that readily Comply; leading a dutiful and
sober life: should fare worse, then the Surly and Undutiful: the fearless
Darers, that Vapor against Law and Reason; and make all the Bustle.

Such Partiality is enough, to Dis-spirit and cast down the most Valiant'st;
into more then Heaviness, even Despair: and to Entice and Embolden the
Cowardous, and even harden their Haughtiness.

The Sequel is plain enough, to the least Speck of understanding; though bred
at the Plough tail: If Surliness be cocked up with Indulgings, 'twill vaunt
more ragingly in Churlings: And glory to Alarm Church and State, with
Continual Dislikings: which shall always unsetle the one, and Disquiet the
other. So that (through remiss Cockerings) we shall never Enjoy Religion, nor
indeed Peace.

5. In Politic Prudence.

To keep Peace on the Hindge, the surest Contrivance, is to cherish Obedience
to Law: If some few inconsiderable Wretches are Pleased, the Solider and better
Part; will be Disobliged: then their Dissentings, may prove as Fearful, and
more then the former; because forty Times more Worthy: And to slight a Friend,
and not abate an Enemy, is Doting Wisdom.

A Friend will stick to the End, and therefore ought to be put in the Bosom,
and made much of: for his Integrity will avail more, in Time of Need; then a
Crowd of Foes, seemingly Fetched off, with easy yieldings to Ignorance and
Pride: Muffling their Passions, from open Ravings, till opportunity invite
them, to Staring Frantickness.

Thus the Gratifying one Faction, will beget a greater: and so a Stone in the
Foot still. The State sicker for Changing the Law.

But quod inconsulto Diximus, Consulto Revocamus, what we have Indulgently
Voted, we Advisedly Repeal: otherwise the Church (without running to a Seer)
will certainly be Destroyed: and the Monarchy overthrown.

Par. 179. An Advisement to Princes, how they Dandle, the Picqueerers against
Monarchy.
IT IS held a safe Tenent of State, with the Judicious: that nothing does more
Exalt and Amplify Princedoms, then Sticking close to Unity in Religion.

Liberty of Conscience: O sad Juggle! a Sophism of Delusion; and impossible to
be Allowed; unless the Prince be weary of his Crown: for if Connivings, produce
these Scaring Blunders, what will do a full Liberty? that will soon end the
Strife, and throw Monarchy shear out of the Window.

Currat Lex.

For the smallest Indulgence Imaginable, will be the Mother of more Mischief,
then hapily a Session of Wits can Redress: Give but an Inch, and under Color
of Dispensation (such is the Malapertness of Cocker'd Schism) they will take an
Ell: And deem it but scanting measure, though they skip all Bounds, of Piety
and Manners: Liberty of Roving will give them the choice, of Ruffus Shield; to
repudiate Heaven, or Espowse Hell.

Vivat Ecclesia.

Otherwise this Audaciousness will swell, to Confront Sovereignty: and in a
short Time, had they Teeth to their Stomach, Create a martial Disturbance.

Par. 180. Mournings for Moroseness.
I AM struck to the Heart, that so Gallant a Prince, as the Majesty of England;
should be thus Abused: That no Acts of Grace, no softness of Temper; should
prove Disswasives sufficient, to silence the Froward: But rather Condensate and
brazen their Impiety.

-- but it has been Told,
Though rushie Anchors break, iron will Hold.
Forbearings signify no more, then words written in Water.

If the Galaxy or milkey Monishings fail; persevering in Ecclesiastical Unity,
will pick stubborness out of the Breast: And spare legal Buffetings the
Trouble, of Converting the Spirit. Since Mildness cannot Prevail, undoubtedly
Executing the Will of Heaven in suppressing Faction, will Kill the Serpent, and
Keep the Crown on his Head.

Par. 181. Vive le Ley.
ELse Religion must suffer, and in time be overturned: for every Hot-head that
pleads so fiercely, for Liberty of Conscience; without Begging him for an
Anatomy, has apparently a Pope in his Belly. Designing to reduce the Church,
into a despicable Condition; through Tumult and Confusion. And then to slip in
the golden Cross; which in Truth are the Universal Designments, of all the
Whinings and Soothings, for Freedom of Conscience.

Par. 182. The Precation for the Dethroners of Monarchy.
AT the great Advent, of the Sovereign of Souls, and Justiciary of Spirits:
When the Soul must appear in its Albe, or natural Shape; without Frock or
Shift, and Plead peremptorily: Pray God this Sowrness against the State be not
Sentenced to Chains of Darkness.

Par. 183. The Conclusion.
1. TO Conclude: the State having been too much Bruised, through so lame a
Patrociny. No Satyrick Fume, or sporting Vein, through Florridness of Style; to
bait the poor beguiled Ramble: No swelling Thoughts, to Enlarge my Privacy;
through Romantic Pride, to look Big in Print: Sneakingly to Creep, or Curry
Favor with Parmenio: Has occasioned this Emparlance. But merely the Impulse
of Conscience, out of the Allegiance I owe to the Church, to lay the Spirit of
Error, for the safeguard of the Soul, and the Good of Monarchy. In truth, to
Confirm the Regular, and if it Stand with the Divine Pleasure, to reduce the
Pilgrim.

2. Pardon the Frequency, of some French words; used out of necessity, because
Adapted by Law: not foisted in, out of the Common Fondness; that admit of no
Complete Accomplishment: without the Party be Dextrous, in Jabering French. I
detest that Mimicalness. Deeming our own Mother Tongue; just as Good: if not
more Expressive, Elegant, and Grave.

3. If the Ticklish, take snuff at the Jocoseness; feeling himself thereby
Galled, I wish it may prove, a Drench strong enough; to prevent his further
Retchings, against the Church.

I mind not the Telescope of Spite, the Squintings of Gibers, or the
waywardness of some Shuttle-Cocks: nor indeed the Pryings of the severest
Censour; being Conscious of my own Candidness, having made no Breach of Charity
or Civility: conceiving Huffings and Durtings (Billingsgate Arguments) will
never make a Proselyte: And therefore forbore all Tartness of Expression; more
then what the Subject matter did of necessity require; not a syllable hissing,
at any Body in Particular; by Anagram or Circumlocution: no Lampoon of
Wantonness, nor Iambicks of Malice; the frequent Arguings, of the Spawlers
against Prelacy.

4. Making a little Bold, with the Masculine Saintship; perchance with the
Mild, might have been somewhat Pardonable: If Chiming against the Female, had
been forborne: which with the Guilty, seems untunable and Hideous.

I cannot think, striking on this String; will be either Maget or Moat; in any
Civil Eye, not blear'd by Faction: for I handle them, without Levity or Gibery;
with the Julip of Bowels, (without the least Cramb or nick of Reproach) to take
off the fiery Depravedness; against Monarchy: Aiming to Disabuse, the negative
Believers, or wandering side: in Rescuing their souls, from the ridiculous
Cosonage; of this holy Imposture.

5. The Discourse in the Bulk, being purely Controversal; acting no individual
Person: only Checking, by the Modishness of Reason; and likewise by the Laws of
Charity, Counselling the Beguilers. I need not Imparle with the Discreet, to
pardon my Slippings: nor shall I much care, to take off the Spatterer; from his
Mocking and Mewing: By the Enchanting way of the Saints, with Cramping the
Spirit; to flourish my Pen with bumbast Phrases, or Perfuming it with Flattery;
the Cardinal Doctrine of Sedition.

Neither can I surmise, that the sowrest or peevish'st Person alive, that
advises with Civility: will be in the least offended, at these Debates; being
no more, then a Modest Defense, for the King, Church, and Law of the Land:
which the Lowest, are not only obliged, in Thankfulness for their Protection,
and Enjoyment of Peace: But formally bound up by Oath; to honor and yield
Obedience.

6. If proscribed by the Orthodox, I shall lend my Hand, to the ostracism: And
that the Church, might be Indempnified, rest Pleased, and rejoice in the
Proscription.

May the great God of order, reclaim these turbulent Rangers: from being any
longer Gulled, with the flashy Saintings of Delusive Clouds: to our Sorrow, and
their own Ruin.

Lord chase out all Flashiness of opinion, all Growlingness of Humor: And
Restore them to their right senses to render obedience to thy Word, and
submission to the Law: And they must be Happy, even against their Wills.

FINIS.
IT IS desired the slips of the Press might be Corrected, before the Perusal:
that the sense of the Author might not be Mistaken.

Misprintings.

PAge 91, line 11. for from Appearance, read his Appearance, p. 114, l. 16, for
Nicity, r. Nicety, p. 115, l. 8, for Statude, r. Statute, l. 13. for by ome, r.
some, p. 117, l. 23, for or Assign, r. or make an Assignee, p. 126, l. 13, for
by an, r. by any Act or Deed, p. 138, l. 13, for Talleg. r. Tallag. p. 174, l.
12. for Back, r. Bank of Reason, p. 213, l. 12, and Estate, r. and the Estate,
p. 286, l. 14. for overture, r. overtness, p. 300, l. 15, for from r. for.

The Contents of the Sections of this BOOK.
Sect. I. THE Occasion of this Discourse. Page 1 Sect. II. Prelacy a graceful
Prop or Column to Nobless. Page 10 Sect. III. Tidlings over-Fond and Dangerous.
Page 21 Sect. IV. To pride our selves sager than Law: is both vain and
unmannerly. Page 32 Sect. V. Sophistical Cavils or idle Belchings against the
Common Law. Page 46 Sect. VI. Complainings against Equity. Page 55 Sect. VII.
The supposed Deformities and very Freckles of the Common Law: Inspected and
washed off. Page 63 Sect. VIII. The whole Scheme of Law Disquisited and
Assirmed. Page 89 Sect. IX. Groundless Cries against the Pontificial and Civil
Law. Page 95 Sect. X. Murmurs against the Meritorious, Page 100 Sect. X.
Captious Brablings against Courtiers. Page 120 Sect. XI. Kingdoms Resembled to
Families, where the Troublesome are thrown out. Page 140 Sect. XII. Ceremonies
Expostulated and Asserted. Page 144 Sect. XIII. The Pilot of the Soul, for his
careful steerage: is worthy of Double Honor. Page 156 Sect. XIV. To be
Incumbent of Livings is neither Gluttonous nor Greedy, Page 173 Sect. XV. A
Curious Conscience Condemned. Page 177 Sect. XVI. Mis-conceivings and
mis-Teachings, Dissected and Resolved. Page 204 Sect. XVII. Church Disquieters
Prosecuted, not Persecuted. Page 224 Sect. XVIII. Severity no unadvised Precept
or Club-Law. Page 231 Sect. XIX. Vnpractical Actings ill Presidents, and
Dangerous to Resolve. Page 238 Sect. XX. Mistakes Examined, and the Truth
Cleared. Page 247 Sect. XXI. The Minsters of Devotion, by the Minstrels of
Sedition, Tabered down: As the Dormitories of Owls and Gorguts. Page 261 Sect.
XXII. Vpbraidings against Church Lands. Page 272 Sect. XXIII. Literature
Honorable. Page 275 Sect. XXIV. Temporal Theft an Hanging matter. Page 284
Sect. XXV. If the Church be thrown down: The next Lift, will be at the Law.
Page 292 Sect. XXVI. Advice to the Fugitive and Frontless. Page 297
THE END.

