

The Delightful HISTORY OF THE Life and Death OF That Renowned and Famous St.
Patrick, Champion of IRELAND.

Containing His Heroic Actions, and Valorous Atchievments in Europe, Asia, and
Afric.

With other Remarkable Passages, from his Cradle to his Grave.

London, Printed for Dorman Newman at the Kings Arms in the Poultry, 1685.

TO THE READER.
Candid Reader,
IT has been in all Ages accounted necessary to preserve Ancient Monuments
from being contaminated or obliterated; and the more precious the Monuments
were, the more care and industry has been used for their Preservations: The
most Ignorant among the Heathens were not negligent in this matter; but as for
the more Refined Heathens, such was their care, and so great their Charges, in
Adorning some pieces of Antiquity, that it has made them Famous over all the
World, where any thing of History is known, or regarded: Witness their stately
Pillars of Brass, and other Metals; their costly Images, and other Monuments
erected, all to perpetuate, and celebrate the Memory of their Ancestors.

Reader, I crave no more liberty than they arrogated, my subject being of such
a bigness, the Hyperboles may easily be avoided; I may with the more boldness
make my Address to the Ingenious, hoping with him to be Accepted: As for a
carping Momus, as I value not what he can say in my Favors, so I as little
regard what he can say to the Disadvantage of my Self or Book. You have here a
delectable subject, wherein you may have an Idea of One who was the Glory of
his Nation, the Honor of the Christian World, the Terror of his Adversaries,
and the Ornament of all places where he Resorted: His Valor and Success you
may easily perceive; but the sharpest Eye could never fix one Blot or Blemish
upon his Reputation, from his Birth to his Death.

I shall detain thee no longer in the Entry, hoping that what I have said in
these few Lines, be made out with advantage in the Book it self; to which I
refer the Reader.

Farewell.
The Honorable HISTORY Of the Renowned Champion St. Patrick, OF The Kingdom of
Ireland.
CHAP. I. How St. Patrick with other five Champions was wonderfully delivered
out of the Cave of the Sorceress Kalib, by St. George of England.
IT has ever been held in great esteem amongst all Nations, to preserve a due
Veneration of their Heroes, Patriots, and Noble Champions; their Memories have
been so precious to them, that many and great Battles have been fought in
Honor of the particular Tutelars of diverse Kingdoms.

This makes Greece still proud of her great Achilles, Rome of her Pompey and
Caesar's; with no less reason do the English Honor the memory of the Victorious
St. George, Spain of her Jago. France of St. Dennis, Scotland of St. Andrew,
who^e Cross they Annually wear in his Comme^oration; As the Britains Celebrate
their St. David's Day, by wearing a Leek in honor of him: And why the Hibernian
Pa^^on should not receive his just and due Commemoration, I think little can be
objected against it, but rather all must yield to the Iustness and Equality of
so Honorable a Remembrance; especially seeing the fame of his mighty Valor,
and puissant Courage runs in an equal, if not a larger Stream than the rest of
his Fellows.

We shall therefore, to give him his proper Applause, Discourse of his great
Atcheivements, Mighty Prowess, Wonderful Successes, and Strange Adventures, as
they offer themselves unto us separately and apart from the other six; and
herein we shall strictly keep to the best Authors in this case Errant.

Know therefore, that the Seven Champions of Christendom, which we just now
recited, were extant in the World at one and the same time; only the Heroic
St. George of England came last by Birth; but upon that Occasion, he was
fortunately the occasion of all the wonders performed by the other six, as the
following Relation will at large inform you.

In the Year of our Redemption three Hundred Sixty one, One Calphurnius or
Calphurcuus a man Honorable and well Esteemed, begat a Son of Conchessa his
Wife, who when he was Baptized was called Suchar or Socher, afterward called by
St. Germanus, Magonius; but at last Celestine, the first Bishop of Rome, called
him Patrick.

This Patrick was born upon the Coast of Britain, in a place called by the
Ancients Triburnia or Hiburnia. And being yet a Child, was instructed in such
parts of Learning as his tender years were capable of; wherein he profited, to
the Admiration of such as knew him, till that upon a time the Irish having made
an Inroad upon that Country, carried away among the rest of the Spoil, a great
many Children and Young Men, of which Number Young Patrick being but a
Stripling, had the misfortune; or rather the fortune to make one.

The Pirate (for such they were that carried them away) having arrived safe at
their own Country, and divided the Spoil; He to whose share Patrick sell, sold
him to an Irish Man, who presently set him to keep a Herd of Swine, which
grieved the Youth exceedingly: Yet seeing no visible way under Heaven, whereby
he could be delivered, he resolves to bear his burden patiently, and to put all
his Confidence in God, that in due time he would find out a way to enlarge him
from that Slavery under which he was. Six years continued he in this condition;
at the end of which time, Divine providence directed him (as he was in the
Field feeding the Swine) where there was a Treasure hidden in the Earth, which
when he had found; his next care was, to try if by its means he might work out
his deliverance: Therefore he came to his Master, insinuating, that if he
should accept of a little Money, to let him go, he thought he could procure it;
the other readily accepts the Motion; so that having paid him down a round Sum
of his newfound Gold, he freely discharged him.

Patrick being now released from his bondage, did not stand long debating what
to do, but laying hold on the first opportunity, he returned home to his Native
Country, to the great satisfaction of his Friends and former Acquaintance,
being almost hopeless ever to see him again. Yet the Joy which he had to see
his Friends, was not without mixture of Grief and Sorrow; for in his Absence a
grievous and deadly Heresy had crept in into the Country, which with its
venomous plague infected the minds of a great many People. This Heresy was
headed by Pelagius, that Viperous Enemy of the Grace of God.

This consuming flame still growing, means were used by the more Orthodox
Divines of that time for its extinguishing; for which end St. Jermanus Bishop
of Aixen, and St. Lupus Bishop of Trecass came to Britain, who Labored
mightily to inform the People, and to reclaim them from their Errors; Patrick
having occasion to hear St. Jermanus Preach, was exceedingly taken with him:
Therefore having insinuated himself into his Acquaintance, became very familiar
with him, and gave himself, for many Years, to be instructed by him, being as
yet called Magonius; his only Study was supernatural knowledge, having quite
withdrawn himself from the Cares and Vexations of the World, he totally
dedieated himself to Piety and Devotion.

Having thus by long and serious Study accomplished himself with Learning, he
resolved to employ his Talent among the Poor ignorant Irish, whose darkness and
misery he was formerly acquainted with: Wherefore he takes a Iourny to Rome,
and casts himself at Caelestines feet, beseeching him that he would use some
means for instructing that People, who though they were Ignorant, yet were
tractable, and might be informed; Caelestine highly applauded his request,
employing himself as the fittest Instrument to manage the Work. Having likewise
invested him in the Priestly Office, he called his Name Patricius, hoping he
would be a Spiritual Father to many, and so dispatched him for Ireland.

This Holy Man returned about the Year 425. of whose Arrival, when the
Inhabitants were certified, they came in vast Multitudes to see him; for
although some there were among them that endeavored to put him out of the
Country, yet the far greater part of the People did cleave to him, as to a
Father; for there were in him many qualifications sufficient to conciliate
their respects to him, being eloquent without affectation, humble without
dissimulation, and grave without sullenness: Add to these, his great dexterity
in speaking the Irish Language, wherein he was short of none of the Natives;
also his Acquaintance with their Manners, whereby he had a great advantage for
further gaining of them; but that which gave him most success, was the singular
blessing of God upon his labors, by which in a short time he gained a vast
Multitude of Men and Women to the Christian Faith.

Thus Patrick like a faithful Sheepherd watches over his Flock daily,
instructing young Converts in the Knowledge of Christ, strengthening others in
the Faith, and exhorting all to a strict and austere Life. Also, he strenuously
refuted the Errors of Heretics, and confounded the Gainsaying Magitians; he
often visited the Sick upon their Beds, nourishing their minds with
Gospel-Food: sometimes also, when he saw it needful, he with his Prayers Healed
their Bodies of their Diseases.

As Patrick followed this course of Life, many there were who with a perverse
mind opposed his Doctrine, others as it were haulting betwixt two opinions, not
knowing which to follow, greatly desiring of the Holy Man, that he would show
them some Visible Sign of these Joys of Heaven, and Torments of Hell, which he
Preached; he hearing this, did withdraw himself a for little space, and having
applied himself to God, he earnestly besought him that for once he would
condescend to their request. The Almighty was not Deaf to his Prayers, by whose
inspiration, he went toward the South parts of Ireland, there in a desolate
place he found a Cave; into which, if any did enter, there seemed to appear to
them most horrible Apparitions in diverse and fearful shapes; of which, Girald
of Wells who lived about the Year One Thousand One Hundred and Eighty, Writes
thus: There is, says he, a place in the further Parts of Nester, wherein there
is an Island divided into two parts, whereof one part is very Religious, having
a large Church, which is Famous for the concourse of English to it. The other
part being Wild and Uninhabited, is said to be possessed only by Demons, there
they are visibly seen to march up and down in great Troops. This Author adds
further, that it is reported, that if one be enjoined for Penance to sustain
the Torments of this place, he shall feel no infernal torments, except he
afterward commit greater sins than these, for which he did his Penance. This
place is by the Inhabitants of the Country called Patricks Purgatory. Yet
Patrick did by his indefatigable Preaching of the Word, and frequent Reasonings
with those Savages, powertuny convince them of the Reality, and (...) both of
the enjoyments of the Saints in (...) of the Damned in Hell; for which he was
very Famous in his Generation.

(...)ar of our Redemption (...) Fifty and Eight, whose Body was aft^rward
found, together with the Bodies of St. C^lumb, and St. Briged in the City of
Duns in Ulster, about the Year One Thousand One Hundred Seventy Six; as the
same Author does witness; who also Labors to prove, that by the Virtue of this
Patron; It came to pass, that the Irish ground can neither breed nor nourish
any Venomous Creature.

He further Writes, that among their other Wooden Relics, they have one which
they call the Club of Jesus, which is esteemed very famous; for it is thought
that with it St. Patrick banished all venomous Creatures from the Island.
Another of his Relics was a Trumpet, which the same Author says a Peddler
carried about with him, telling the People, wherever he came, that for
Reverence to the Saint, none durst Sound it: But being upon a day in a Village
where a great many People Flocked about him, he according to his custom held
out the Trumpet to them to kiss it: but a Priest called Bernard, standing in
the Crowd, snatched it out of his hand, and set to his Mouth to Sound with it;
but as the Story goes, was presently so struck, that his mouth turned awry even
to his Ear, so as he could hardly speak; yea further, that he fell into such a
Lethargy, that he scarcely remembered he had a Name; though he was formerly a
very Learned Man, yet was he so blasted, that when he recovered somewhat of his
Senses, he was forced (though an Old Man) to begin like a Child to learn the
Letters.

There was in those days a mighty Sorceress named Kalyb, who for the Closer
management of her Enchantments, was retired from Human Society, into a Cave,
remote from all Walks, Roads, or Habitations, and encompassed with thick
Groves, solitary Deserts, mighty Thickets, and unfrequented Solitudes, where
she had fitter opportunity to put her vile Practices in Execution. In this
place she had an Enchanted Castle, wherein she shut up all those her
Fiendly-Power could Seize upon, which she feared or suspected might be
Instrumental of doing any good in the World: Especially Men of great Courage,
and Noble minds, which always go hand in hand; and that is the reason why Men
of Valor seek out brave Enterprises, and Heroic Exploits: Such as the
relieving the Distressed, dissolving the Charms of Witches, and Opposing
whatsoever is hurtful to Mankind. On these Considerations this malicious
Enchantress employed her utmost cunning, (which she arrived to by a constant
Familiarity with Infernal Spirits in these Dark Recesses) to find out the
Nativities of Children, whose Stars promised great things, and whom the Fates
had determined to great and Famous Exploits: and no sooner had she discovered
the happy Birth of any such like Champion, but strait she fell to her Magic,
and Spells; and by her Emisaries or Familiars, would lurch them into her
Clutches, and confine them by her Enchantments from that Chivalry, which
otherwise the World might expect of them. By these Artifices she had already
surprised into her Custody all the Seven, except the Valiant St. George, whom
the good Stars had determined to be the deliverer of all the rest. She Seized
them all in their Minority and Childhood, or rather Infancy; for in the Night
when their Drowsy Nurses were a sleep, this powerful Enchantress would send her
Friends that should Spirit them away to her Magical Cell; leaving their
distressed Parents to tear themselves with Fruitless Lamentations.

In this Brazen Enchanted Castle they spent their time, shut up from the
Comfort and Society of their dear Friends and Parents, and all the Dalliances
attending the Children of Great Princes, (for of no less Stock were these
Mighty Champions descended) and confined to the Society of Batts, the Musical
Harmony of Owls and Ravens, Joined with a Consort of Froggs croaking, Adders
hissing, Wolves howling; and such a dismal noise as might well beget in them an
Opinion, that they were no better than on the Confines of Hell.

When one day walking in the Hall of their Magical Covent, where, amongst many
other Monstrous Figures, was the Picture of the Famous Hydra with the Seven
Heads; Says the Wise Patrick to his Fellow Prisoners, Methinks this silly
Serpent very well represents our Condition, (only she has one head too many)
who like so many heads are joined to a noisome Body, and confined to an ugly
deformed shape; and yet these heads are Crowned as if they were Kings or
Princes at least, and one of them seems as a sleep, which perhaps may signify
another Worthy, not yet arrived to us.

The rest with very great attention hearkened to the Admirable Interpretation
the Sagatious Champion had made of that Dreadful Figure, and with no less
astonishment, gave ear to the strange Explanations he made of diverse other
Monstrous representations, which instead of Ornaments were fixed around the
Walls of the Brazen Castle, which was indeed all the Diversion these Great and
Generous Heroes had to entertain themselves withal* There (instead of Curious
Tapistry, wherein the soft History of the Arcadian Loves were Expressed, and
instead of Battles, Landskips, Prospects and Histories with which the Galleries
of their Palaces were adorned:) they saw the Figures of Ghastly Proserpine, Fell
Rhadamantus, or Fiery Alecto; their Eyes were blasted with the shapes of
Hellish Furies, Horrid Monsters, or cruel Murders: Their Ears, instead of the
Charming Sweetness of well tuned Music, were accosted with yellings of
Spirits, groanings of those that were bound in the Fetters of Kalybs
Enchantments, howlings of terrible Fiery Wolves, Roaring of Devils; and all the
distastful noises imaginable: So that many times you might have seen the French
Champion stop his Ears with Mushrooms to keep out the Horror of the frightful
sound. But the Magnanimous Patrick (who in his Childhood had been used to
Conquer Irish Wolves, and in quest of Beasts of Prey to hunt through the
foulest and most noisome Boggs) little daunted at these hideous Spectacles,
often by his great Courage and Bravery, Buoyd up the Spirits of his dejected
Companions: and would recount to them the Labors of Hercules, the Travels of
Eneas, and set before them the Examples of Great and Courageous Champions, who
by their prowess had Conquered all Difficulties: Wherefore he persuaded them
with an Undaunted stedfastness to contemn the Misfortunes of this Witchy Cave;
not doubting, but their kinder Stars would direct a way out of that dismal
Labyrinth.

One day it happened, that the Sorceress (having sat up in Consult the night
before with her Acquaintance of the other World, and having Drank a dose or two
too much of Lethe, in drinking Healths to Pluto) was laid to sleep away her
potation, and in that Interval the Valiant English Champion, who had been
diverse Years shut up in a Recluse in that Enchanted Castle) took the Freedom to
view the Apartments of that Brazen Tower; he had seen the Garden, which swarmed
with Basilisks, Crocadiles, Aspes, Scorpions, and all sorts of venomous
Serpents; In the midst, a Fountain fed by the River Stix, wherein they bathed
their Flaming poisonous Tongues. On the Trees (instead of Fruit) hung the Sculs
of Dead Men that had been devoured by these Monsters: After having observed
abundance more of these Hideous Spectacles, he came into a Yard, where the Dogs
were that guarded the Castle; some whereof had heads like Bulls, and were
derived of the Centawrs; others had three or four heads, which the Witch had
obtained of the race of Cerberus the Dog of Hell; some had Flaming Tongues,
others Tallons like Eagles; with diverse other forms too tedious here to recite:
but such was the Majesty of this Famous Champion, that all crowched and fawned
whilst he past them by. This Court led him into the great Hall where the other
six Heroes were confined. At his entrance they all stood amazed, supposing some
Diety had been come to visit them, until our brave St. Patrick assuming his
Native Courage, thus addressed himself to them.

Be not abashed, most Noble Partners, at the presence of this Extraordinary
Person whom here you see; for since his coming into this Room, it has been
revealed unto me, that this must be the most Famous, Valiant, and Renowned
Champion of England, whom for our Deliverance, our Angels have sent unto this
place; and this doubtless (continued he) is him that was signified by the
seventh head we saw on yonder Beast, which seemed to us as if asleep. At which,
casting their Eyes toward the Figure of the Hydra, they perceived that that
head seemed to be awake, and was lifted up above the rest; whereupon they all
made their Obeisance to the brave St. George, and were by him comforted with
promises to do his utmost toward their Enlargement from that Barbarous, and
Miserable place. Then turning himself unto our Famous St. Patrick, Sir (said
he) Your Extraordinary Courage, and great skill in Revelations, give me
Occasion particularly to apply my self to you; besides, my good Genius does
assure me you are of the Ancient, hardy Hibernian Race; and that with your
Sword you shall perform such Wonderful Adventures, and Famous Deeds, as shall
enroll you in the Bed of Immortal Honor, and justly Entitle you the Champion
of your Native Country. Something he added to the rest, but that not being to
our purpose, we Omit; only that he told them he would go and put such a design
in Execution, as should speedily accomplish their desired Enlargement.

Then taking his leave of them, he retired to his own Quarter, where he had
remained a very little while, before the Cruel Sorceress Kalib came unto him;
and feeling yet about her the warm effects of her last-Nights Debauch; she
could not forbear expressing her Amors to the Young Knight; and although she
had often, without Success, made use of the same Importunities with the other
Six (especially our Irish Hero) who with manly Bravery withstood her lascivious
Assaults; yet at the sight of the English Spark, she fell to her old pulling,
and found in her self a Violent Inclination to a farther Intimacy, which in
such words she uttered.

Most puissant Knight, You know me to be Lady of this mighty Castle; and that
there is nothing in the Power of Hell but I can accomplish; for not only all
these Fell and Dreadful Monsters residing in this Valley, but even the Fiends
themselves Obey me. Nor there any thing so difficult, but for the sake of your
Love, I will perform: Command then Noble Prince, and you shall soon see how
ready your Kalyb is to obey you; only afford me the sweet Embraces of your
Excellent Person, and all that I am, or have, is at your Princely Feet.

At this the Youthful Champion seemed to be somewhat surprised; until
recollecting with himself, that seemingly to cherish her Affection, would be
the only way to accomplish his designs, for by that means she would be engaged
to a greater Confidence in him, and the more Complaisant to his purpose: He
therefore made her this Reply.

Mighty Princess, Since by your Extraordinary bounty, I have found a Noble
Entertainment in your Palace, beyond the stretch of my slender Memory to
remember; and by your great kindness, have had Information of my Parentage and
Quallity: Besides the Mighty Favor of your High Affection; It would be
Stupendous Ingratitude in me, not to Embrace so Noble a Friendship: Wherefore
be assured, Great Lady, That the services of your Captive shall be always
prostrate to your Command. Then making a very graceful Conge, he Imprinted in
her a strong belief, that her Charm had taken; wherefore taking him by the
hand, she led him round the Battlements of her Palace, giving him a large
prospect of vast Dominions and Territories; then leading him on through many
Galleries, at length she brought him to a Grot or Cave, wherein was a large
Vault in the fashion of a Stately Hall: it was covered with mighty Groves of
decayed Pepplers, and as dark as night: But this darkness was Vanquished by a
number of Goblins, who with Flambeas stood round the Room. Here she gave him an
Entertainment of her Magical Diversions, causing many Fairy Spirits to
Masquerade it to the Music of Beetles and Grass-hoppers: Then came a Troop of
Satyrs, footing it to the Noise of their own Bagpipes, they having learnt that
Instrument of Pan; at last came in a kind of jolly fellow clod in Ivy, and a
sort of Mushromes, having twenty Iacks with Wisps dancing in before him; and
seeming to stagger, or rather stumble into the Hall, he entertained them with
the following Song.

SONG.
FRom Oberon, and Fairy-Land,
The King of Ghosts, and Goblins there
Mad Robin I, at his command
Am come to view your Nights-Sports here;
What Revel Rout
You keep about
In every Corner where I go,
Mad Robin I,
Your Feats will spy,
And fear you home with Ho, ho, ho!
If any Wanderer I do meet
That from his Night-Sports does trudge home,
With Counterfeiting Voice I greet,
And cause them on with me to Roam;
Over Hedge, over Lands,
Through Pools, through Ponds,
Over Hill and Dale, both high and low:
And when I have done
Away I run,
And leave them laughing, Ho, ho, ho!
Sometimes I meet them like a Man,
Sometimes an Ox, sometimes a Hound,
And to a Horse I turn me can,
To trip and dance about them round:
If any dare
My back to stride,
More swift than Wind, away I go,
Over Hedge, over Lands,
Through Pools, through Ponds,
And leave them laughing, Ho, ho, ho!
When Lads and Lasses merry be
With Possets, and with Junkets fine,
Unseen of all the Company,
I eat their Cake, and drink their Wine;
And to make Sport,
I Fart and Snort,
And out the Candles I do blow;
The Maids I kiss,
They Skrick! Who Is this?
I naught reply, but, Ho, ho, ho!
The Song ended, all the Faries, Goblins, and Spirits in the Hall, set up a
Levit with Hunting Horns of all sizes; which they did with so strong a Blast,
that by the Ecchoing of the Vault and Caves, you would have thought all the
Noises in the World had been contracted into that Cell. This being performed,
the Witch dismissed her Familiars, and Conducting the undaunted Knight to her
own Apartment, She gave her Servants Order to lay her Bed in a low Parlour, and
Commanded the Room to be strewed with Pensies, Vervam, Dill, and Yerrow; there
being in these Herbs a Magical Virtue inclining to the Feat; thence taking the
Governor of her heart into her Closset, she took a Bottle of Nepenthe, which
had many years been preserved, and was found out by Juno to incline Paris to
affect her: here taking first a large soop her self, she poured out a Glass
full for St. George; whose Natural Signature had armed him against all
Enchantments whatever; therefore the Knight, without Hesitation, drank it off,
naming it a Health to Kalyb's bests affection, which she took in such kind
part, that sitting down on her Coutch, she drew the Valiant Youth to her side;
and falling into another Amourous Pang, She had much ado to put off the
Violence of her Passion until Bed time: But the fumes of her last Dose working
on the Vapors of her last-nights Potation, at last closed her eyes, which the
subtle Champion soon observing, he laid hold on a Silver wand which lay in the
Closet, whereon was Engraven this Motto, He that has this, may all things Do,
May spoil the Charm, and Charmer too.
Upon which, St. George Immediately concluded this to be the Enchanted Rod, by
which she wrought all her Magical Spells; and heartily glad of such an
oppertunity, was resolved to try the Experiment of it on her self; wherefore
with that Wand stroaking her gently over the Eyelids, he sealed them for ever
opening again, and Charmed her into such a Dead Lethargy, that she never more
awaked.

Now, now indeed, the Noble Hero found the Motto true, and was every Minute
more and more Convinced of it: For he had not time to go out of the Room,
before our St. Patrick, St. George delivering St. Patrick and the other five
champions form the cave of the Sorceress Kalyb and the other five Champions
came to kiss his hand for what he had done: For no sooner were the Eyes of the
Circean Enchantress touched, but they all felt the Chains of their Captivity
to fall off, and a new Courage spread through their Veins.

Diverse Caves also that had Men, and Children, shut up in them many Years, of
themselves flew open, and there was a Universal Jail-delivery, of all such as
the Sorceries of Kalyb had Confined; for at the minute of her Death, her Power
ceased, nor was there any longer force of her Charms.

All the deformed Spirits, Hideous Monsters, dreadful Noises, and Venomous
Serpents Vanished, and a beautiful Serenity diffused it self over the whole
Valley. The Grass assumed its Verdure, the Flowers their Odor, the Birds their
Harmonious Warblings, the Fountains again recovered their Christalline Purity,
and all things returned to their Native Order and Beauty.

Thus was the Mighty Enchantment of the Famous Kalyb dissolved; whilst the
Infernal Spirits hurryed her miserable Carcass into the Dreadful Torments of a
Wretched Eternity.

CHAP. II. The Valiant St. Patrick takes leave of the other six Champions;
what happened to him after his departure.
THe Heroic St. Patrick perceiving himself now at liberty from those Witchy
bonds which had a long time confined him, and hindered the great performances
of his Sword; thought fit to lose no longer time, but to seek out such
Adventures as might Enrole his Name amongst the Chiefest Worthies: Wherefore he
spoke to the English Champion after this manner;

Right Noble and Victorious St. George, since it has pleased our better Stars
to make you the Glorious Instrument of our Redemption from the miserable
Enchantment wherein we were tied; and you seem to be sent from Heaven to us, as
our Guardian-Angel; give me leave (after repeating my Unfeigned thanks for your
so unparalleld favor) to assure you, that I think the Remainder of our Lives
cannot be better Employed, than in the Service of our Renowned Benefactor; and
therefore we will follow your Conduct, and Commands, upon all Occasions, and
Acknowledge it as our greatest happiness to serve so Generous a Master.

To which Speech, the other Five having declared their joint Consent, The most
Courteous St. George having with great Humanity received their Complement, made
this Reply:

Renowned Irish Knight, Whose unmatcht Courtisie (without the Acheivements of
thy Arms) might Entitle thee Conqueror of the World; and you my Fellow
Soldiers, who with so great Affection have offered your kindness to me: You
may be well assured, that it was not for my sake, this great Miracle has been
wrought, but for the general benefit of all Mankind, who need the assistance of
your Valors: Let us then shape diverse Courses, and search out Glorious
Achievements in the furthermost part of the World: Let us divide our selves,
and scatter Monuments to our High Courages in all the Habitable parts of the
Globe; making the most Remote and Barbarous Provinces pay Tribute to the Memory
of the Seven Mighty Champions of Europe. And as for You thrice Noble Patrick,
where ever the Irish Harp shall sound, your Fame shall be recorded by the best
skill of deviceful Bards, and smooth-Tongued Rythmers; our several Native
Countries shall wear Badges of Honor to our Memories, and the greatest Knights
take their Nobility from the Names of our Order.

This Rhetorical Speech of St. Georges being ended; the Active Irish Knight
thought long to have his Spurs on; wherefore calling to him one Mac, a Servant
of his, that had been shut up with others in the Enchanted Rock; he gave him
order to go and provide Horses for himself, and the other six Champions, and to
bring them to the Brazen Tower with all Expedition. Mac readily Obeying his
Lords Commands, was gone in a trice. In the mean time the Worthy Knights
searching the Rooms of the Castle, found all manner of Rich and Costly
Furniture, with Princely Habiliments of War, which the damned Sorceress had
laid up, having belonged to Princes, which she had Devilishly made away in her
Enchanted Cell. There were carved Indian Lances, Turkey Bows, Tartarian Darts,
Toledo Swords, Flemish Pistols, Leather Carbines; and so many sorts of Martial
Engines, so quaintly devised, that it would have pussed all the Virtuoso's in
Athens to have mended their Invention. There were Drums and Trumpets that would
beat and sound of their own accord, to animate the Valiant to Battle.
Musquetoons and Blunderbuss's that would charge and discharge themselves seven
or eight times following: There were Likewise, Breast-plates, Reins, Croupers,
and Furniture of all sorts; some whereon the Pencil had showed its best Art;
others where the Needle has tried its utmost skill: for on some were the Loves
of Pyramus, and Thisbie; on others Dido hanging her self for Eneus, then Venus
tearing her tresses for loss of Adonis; Juno looking through her fingers at the
Rapes of Jupiter; and on one was Prophetically drawn St. George and the Dragon,
with Damosel by: Besides, a number of Impresses, Devices, and curious Stories
of like Nature, enough to fire the Courage of the most mortified Knight alive.

They had scarcely chosen out of the Armory, what was suitable to their several
Phansies and Occasions, before Mac was returned with the Horses; which were
such, that if Barbary were ransacked for Beauty, or Germany for strength, they
could not have been matched; Nor is it strange, that they were brought so
suddenly; for this being an Age of Miracles, St. Patricks Groom met them on
the Road coming to the Castle of their own accord, and ready marked to their
hand; for the Irish Knights was branded with an Harp; the English with a
Garter; the Scots, with a Cross Saltier; the Britains with a Leek; The Italians
with a Tarantula; The Spaniards with a Goat; and Monsiers with the Scratches:
So that it was easy to determine which Jennet belonged to each Champion.

There was not need of much trouble to put on their several furnitures; for
they fitted so exactly, as if they had been made on purpose; they were all very
Sumptuous, Rich, and of admirable Device. I shall only take notice of the
Caparison of our Noble St. Patrick, whose Impress was an Orpheus playing on an
Irish Harp, with a number of Sheep and Bullocks feeding on the Mountains by.
His Motto was, Beware the Wolf. Now being all mounted on their fiery Steeds,
which seemed as so many Pegasus's, or Charitors of the Sun; and having marched
beyond the bounds of the Castle: where having cast Lots which should make the
first Adventure, the Lot fell to our Noble Champion St. Patrick; who in a very
Knightly Oration, Exhorted them to affirm Amity with one another; and that they
should employ their Valiant Swords in Honor of their Native Countries;
promising withal, that if either of their persons required his Service, he
would on the least notice not fail to come to their Aid and Assistance. Thus
having Mutually Embraced, and taken leave of one another, they separated
themselves; each one taking his course, as his particular Genius prompted him:
Our Champion bending the Course of his Travails toward the North, where he had
understood, that a Knight of Extraordinary prowess, had beleagured a very
Beautiful and Excellent Lady in her own Castle, with resolution to force her
thence to Marry him, notwithstanding she had plighted her Faith to another
Lord; who tho much Inferior to him in the Bounties of Fortune, had by far the
pre-eminence of him in Personal Endowments, and especially in the Esteem and
good Affection of the fair Climena, (for so was the Lady called) so that the
most Accomplished Philadon had already secured the main fortress, whilst in vain
his wretched Rival Lymas lay Storming of the Outworks.

Seven times had Radiant Phoebus warmed the Cold surface of the Earthy Globe,
and as often tired with his Quotidian Toil rested his Declining Head on the
Crocean Pillow of his Hostess Thetis, since our Renowned Patrick had left the
Company of the other six Hero's: and now being come within two or three Days
Journey of the besieged Lady, in the Evening he entered into a most delightful
Valley, more like the Workmanship of an Artificial Gardener, than barely the
Product of Nature; so smooth and even was the surface of the Flowery Medows, as
if Flora had thereon spread a Carpetting of Persian Work; the Verdant ground
being Enamled with all the gay varieties of Flowery May, the Walks of Stately
Elmes were Ranked in straight Files, and did not unfitly represent a Regiment
of Soldiers; when by the skill of some Brave Commander drawn up in open Order,
for which way so ever you cast your eye, you might observe they ranked Level on
every side; The Hedges were stored with the most curious Fruit Trees of the
most Choice and Excellent kind that the Climate afforded, where the blushing
Peaches seemed to court the hand of the faint Traveller; and were placed near
the Road, by the Bounty of the Lord of the Soil, for the refreshment of such as
passed that way. He rid by diverse, Ponds of Silver-scaled Fish, where he might
see the gilded Carpe, and shining Tench at strife which should feast most on
the nimble Flies, which in the Evening played on the surface of the Water: This
Prospect was so very Delightful, that our Champion could not forbear stopping
his Chasing Steed to divert himself with the pleasant sight, whilst the Rays of
the declining Sun gave a fresh Luster to the Enammel of their glittering Scales
as they danced above the Water. Not far from this, he came by the Bank of a
stately River, which by the slowness of its Motion, seemed as if unwilling to
forsake the pleasant Fields through which it past; here might you see the
Princely Trout show himself out of his proper Element, whilst he proudly
viewed his Gold and Scarlet in the Mirror of the Flood; The Ravenous Jack
hunting the little Dace, which hid themselves under the Gravel of the bottom to
avoid his Tyranny. Passing a little farther, Our Martial Traveller came by a
well-spread Oak, which standing on the bank of the St. Patrick meeting Lord
Olinder by the bank of the river Stream, seemed as if he had dressed himself by
the reflection of his Shadow on the Christial Channel. Under this Tree sat a
Person of a very Reverend Aspect, having a Fishing-Rod in his hand, with which
on Occasion he used Innocently to disport himself by the Waters side; his face
was not forsaken of its fresh Carnation, although Age had snowed on his Silver
head: his habit was rather Neat than Gay; Spun out of the finest Fleeces of his
own Flock; His whole mien spoke him to be a person that Commanded a respect,
even from Strangers; At the fight of our Noble Adventurer, The Courtious
Olindor arose from his Grassie Cushion, and with a Gentle Aspect saluted him
after this manner:

Sir Knight (said he) for so your Arms and Equipage bespeaks you to be; I well
perceive you are a Stranger in these Parts; and the time of the Evening now
requires a due refreshment after your Travels, wherefore if you please to
accept of such a Treatment as my Country Mansion does afford; I shall
acknowledge it an Honor to my House, and you shall as freely command there, as
if you were in your own Inn: Besides, you must understand, that here is no
Village for your Reception, in diverse Miles of this place.

St. Patrick having with due acknowledgment accepted Olindors Generous Offer,
Alighted off his Horse, and taking the Reins in his hand, he walked together
with his Noble Host toward his Stately Habitation. They had gone but little
more than a Furlong, before the Walks opened them a prospect to the Front of
the Building, which stood on a gentle ascent of ground looking over the
pleasant Fields we but now described. The entrance was raised on Pillars of
Marble, with Pedstals and Capjters of Burnished Brass, which gave a luster like
shining Gold; within the entrance was a Terras supported with Pillars of Iet,
upon a Pavement of diverse Culler'd Marble most Artiffcially laid in Chequer
Work, on each side a green Court set with Mirtles, Oranges, and Pines. The
Building it self was raised with Porphyrie, and Allabaster Curiously set in
Uniform Squares, or Pains. A little before they came to the entrance, at a
small distance on the left hand was the Stable; a structure not unsuitable to
the Grandeur of the rest, but as much as any thing spoke the Magnificence of
the Owner; besides carved stalls for a hundred Horses, there was in one part a
Mew appointed where the Hawks were kept, which in their several Seasons brought
the Duck, the Quail, the Patridge, and Plover to their Masters Table, there
were propper Lodgings for the Gromes, and Falconers, besides Stores for the
Provender, and Rooms wherein the Rich Sadles, Caparisons, Arms, and Furniture
was carefully kept: So many perquisites swelled the Stables almost to the Bulk
of the dwelling House, which was hardly distinguishable from the other in
figure; only that it lifted its Lofty head above it.

Near the same distance from the entrance on the Right hand was a Curious
Fountain, representing the Famous River Nilus; for at seven heads it discharged
as many Crystal Streams into a Vessel of Marble, from whence the Water was
conveyed to an Adjacent Pond for washing, and refreshing the Horses.

Near the Door of the Stables waited several of the Grooms, who at a distance
perceiving their Master, ran to attend him, and received into their Care the
Horse of our Knightly Travellour. Then the most Hospitable Olinder taking the
Noble Patrick by the hand, Conducted him into the most Beautiful, and complete
Palace that ever his eyes had seen; They passed (through a stately Hall whose
gilded Roof dazzled the Eye of the beholder; round about it were curiously
Painted the History of the Trojan War, the Mighty Giants Ascapath and St.
Bevis; and the Famous Combat between Captain Jones, and the King of Bombaza;
Their Postures and Weapons were so lively depainted, you would have thought
their Swords and Spears had clasht together;) thence, going through a Gallery
which had a Floor of Ceder in-laid with Ebony and Silver, and the Wainscot of
Indian Porphirie, curiously gilded with Embossed work of Gold. They Might see
there in several Pieces of admirable Paint, the Honorable and great
Atcheivments of the Ancient Lords of that princely Seat; from whence entering
into a Parlour, whose Beauty exceeded all that had yet been seen; they sat down
on a Couch of Embroidered Damask richly perfumed, which through a large
Casement of Crystal, Entised the Eyes of St. Patrick into the most Beautiful,
and Attractive Garden that ever was contrived, by the most Exquisite Artist:
All that the Fabulous Poets have said in praise of their feigned Elysium falls
much short of describing the Charming Glory, and sweetness of this place.

There were Fountains Contrived with such Admirable Art, that they Saluted your
ears with a Consort of all sorts of Delectable Music, Statues of Copper,
expressing all the Months of the Year, besides diverse Historical Figures; but
in the midst stood Flora, Enthroned as it were in her proper Orb, with all the
Fragrancies of Nature round about her. At one side was a Wilderness for Shady
Walks, where (without the Clew of Ariadne) it was hard for a Stranger to find
the way out again, in one Corner of this was a Grotto where Artificial Birds of
all Sorts Expressed the lively Notes of the Natural, and that so truly, that
Starlings, Black-birds, and Linnets have often resorted to them, and joined in
their Consort.

Whilst at these Excellent Prospects; Our Champion was Contemplating the
Grandeur of the Noble Olindor, a Page with an humble Reverence, brings into the
Room, a Voider of all the Various and Excellent Fruits that stately Garden did
afford; some whereof were Candied with Excellent Art: Of these the Generous
Host presents his Heroic Guest, which were of great refreshment to him after
his weary Travail; They had likewise of the Richest Toscan Wine, besides
Cordials of Admirable Virtue. Then the Page helping off his Armor, St. Patrick
with the Friendly Olindor, took a walk toward the Grot, in the further side of
the Garden, where sitting dow^ together, they began to recount their severa^
Adventures, and to enquire of one another Fortunes, Misfortunes, Successes,
and Accidents.

CHAP. III. What Discourse happened in the Grot between St. Patrick and
Olindor, how St. Patrick undertakes the Release of the Lady Climena; with
several Adventures that befell him.
THe Renowned St. Patrick being affected with all Imaginable Satisfaction, at
the Grandeur, Magnificence, and abounding Courtisie of the Generous Olindor;
and well knowing such sumptuous Palaces, splendid Attendants, with the other
Gallantries wherewith that place abounded, could not be maintained without an
answerable Revenue: He thought himself highly Obliged to pay a suitable respect
to the Lord of the greatest Palace he had ever seen. Therefore casting a
Princely Aspect (yet full of Humility) toward the Reverend Olindor; he gave
him a full Account of all the Direful Accidents already mentioned, in relation
to himself and the other six Champions; all that had happened to them in the
Enchanted Castle of the Magical Kalyb, with the wonderful manner of their
strange deliverance; by the disolving her Charms; at which the Good Olindor
could not forbear to interrupt him in this Sort: Oh Heavens! said he, and is
that Hellish Sorceress at last punished for her Divellish Practices; how much
is the World Obliged to the Fortune and Bravery of those Worthies, that
Accomplished so great a Blessing? I have heard (Continued he) Strange and
Dreadful Relations, of Monstrous Cruelties, and Barbarismes committed by that
Lewd Witch; but had never that particular, and satisfactory Account, which now
even makes my Ears to rejoice at the hearing, and fills my Chilled Veins with a
diffused warmth for Joy of so great a Benefit. What Blessings may not Mankind
hope for from the Glorious Arms of such All-Conquering Heroes, now the
propitious Stars have already made you Triumph over the powers of Darkness, and
Conquerours even of Hell it self.

The Noble Patrick could not here forbear to pay an Honorable Acknowledgment
to his Ga^l^nt Host, for the great Character he had giv n himself and
Fellow-Champions, adding, tha^ whatever Courage or Fortune Heaven had made him
and his Brother-Champions Masters of, must certainly be at the Devotion of such
as the Brave Olindor; and that for his part especially, he knew not how in
Gratitude he could answer the high Obligations conferred on him, without laying
both his Sword, and himself at the Feet of so Excellent a Person. Alas (replied
Olindor) you have laid so weighty a Compliment on a declining Old Man, as makes
me even stoop beneath the weight of it: But Noble Knight (said he) if your
Valor call for Exercise; there is a Neice of mine, by Name, Clymena, that may
need the Aid of your Knightly Prowess: You must know Gallant Stranger, that
this Lady is Heiress to a very Large and fertile Territory, yet of a Family
whose stock of Honor far Exceeds the Bounties of their Large Fortunes. At the
Age of Fourteen both her Parents were summoned to the Elysian Shades, leaving
the Fair Clymena to the Tutelage of her Mothers Brother; This Gentleman had a
Son of his own about sixteen years of age by name Philadon, who is Master of as
much personal Beauty, happy Education, sweet Disposition, and natural Courage
(perhaps) as any Lad of his Age, only his Estate came short of Clymena's; but
that was largely supplied by the other Accomplishments; which made my Young
Neice so fond of him, that she would never entertain a thought of Marrying any
other Person, but still admitted him to all opportunities of Conversation;
spending their time in such Gentile Diversions, as were proper for Persons of
their Quallity: Sometimes his Voice, sometimes his Recorder must make a Conso^t
to her well tuned Lute: Sometimes their wanton Feet would measure out an
Artificial knot upon the plain, whilst one of their Pages proportioned out
their time on a Guittar, or Violin. Sometimes her Fancy would lead her to the
Rivers side; where with his Hook and Line, the Charming Philadon would attend
her, bringing the Inhabitants of the watery Element out of their cold Region, to
dance and play in the Sunshine of her Eyes; and what Excellent strains of
Courtship would the Enamored Philadon use on such occasions; telling her, that
the Sparkling Diamonds of her face bestowed the guilding, and Enamel on their
Silver Seals. Then taking out his Pocket-Whistle, he gave his Page a summons,
who in Obedience to that call, straight attended: Sirrah (said his Master) do
you give this Worthy Knight the Fishing Song my Kinsman Philadon, made on my
Neices going to the Rivers side with him, at which the Page taking a Lute
taught the strings to answer his Voice, whilst he sung.

SONG.
Wee'ce gang Early to the Burks side,
To catch the pretty Fishes as they do Glide,
And every little Fish thy Prisoner shall be,
For I'ce catch them, and Thou'st catch Me.
There were more of the Verses, but because of late they have been made common,
I shall not trouble the Reader with them; but the Page having ended, much to
the Satisfaction of the Traveling Knight, (who much admired his graceful
performance all the while) the good Olindor Assumed his Story after this manner.

But now all those Innocent pastimes are ceased, and their Music changed into
the Noise of Trumpets and Guns, Their Dancing into Sallies, and Attaques,

For suddenly in one Night (one Lymas a great Lord of the Northern Part,
having heard much of the Fortune of Climena, and not thinking it fit that any
one should be Master of so great a Treasure beside himself) came with a mighty
force which he had raised among his Numerous Tennents; and Accompanied with
many young Sparks of his Acquaintance; in an Instant surrounded the Castle,
which is the residence of these two young Lovers; intending to force the
incomparable Clymena to his greedy Embraces; many attempts has he made by
Grenades, Batteries, and other Essays, to enter the House; but by reason of
its advantageous Situation, strong Building; and the great care of my Nephew
and his Servants, they are still repulsed without success: Yesterday I sent my
only Son (who will be glad of the Honor of your Acquaintance) to gather as
many of his Friends and Tennants as he finds willing to engage with him in so
Honorable an Enterprise; either by force to drive Lymas out of our
Territories, or at least to relieve the Castle until a greater Strength can be
raised.

In the Midst of this discourse a Page gave notice that Supper attended for
them, whereupon Olindor taking the Irish Patron by the hand conducted him to a
Spacious Arbor at another corner of the Garden, which was Composed of
Gessamines, Mirtles, and Roses; adjoining to it was an Exquisite Fountain
representing Helicon, where the Nine Muses were Expressed in most propper
Hieroglyphiels cast in Copper; the Conveyance of the Water was contrived with
such Art, that in its passage it made a Musical Harmony, as if Organs,
Harpsicals, and Viols, had been in Consort, and by turning a Cock, they could
make it answer any time they pleased.

The Table was of Allabaster, whereon they had a most Princely Entertainment,
served up in Plate and Porcelane of the China make; There was Kid; Fowl, and
Fish, with the Choicest Fruits of each kind, according to the proper Season:
Wine Richer than ever the Grecians offered in Sacrifice to Bacchus; whilst by
the Command of Olindor on^ of the Pages, setting the Fountain in Accord to his
Voice, in a mournful Accent sang this SONG.
AH! Fading Joy, How quickly art thou past,
Yet we thy Ruin have,
As if the cares of Human life were few,
We seek out New,
And follow Fate which would too fast pursue.
See how on every Bow the Birds Express,
In their sweet Notes, their Happiness;
They all enjoy, and nothing spare;
But on their Mother-Nature lay their Care;
Why then should Man, the Lord of all Below,
Such Troubles choose to know,
As none of all his Subjects undergo?
Hark how the Waters* Fall, fall, fall!
And with a murmuring sound,
Dash, Dash upon the Ground,
To gentle Slumbers call.
Notwithstanding the Princely Patricks Senses were all at one time Importuned,
and feasted with the greatest Delicates Imaginable: His Eyes with the Beautiful
prospect of the Palace and Garden; his Ears with the Charming Music of the
Page and Fountain; his Nostrils with the fragrant sweetness of the Arbor; his
Palate casting the several well-Coockt dishes, and various Fruits, with which
the Table abounded; nor was his sense of feeling un-imployd, for although the
satisfaction he received from so Excellent a Banquet was very great; yet felt
he in himself a more Ardent desire to Encounter Lymas; and Exercise his mighty
Arms for the relief of the Beauteous Clymena, than for ever to enjoy the
wanton Luxury of all the Courtly Entertainments imaginable. Dellicacies and
Dalliances are uneasy to Valiant and Heroic Souls, whose Magnanimity spurs
them on always to feats of Arms, and the puissant Atcheivments of Chivallry.

The thrice Noble Prtrick could not forbear discovering the inward resentments
of his soul unto the Brave Olindor in this sort.

Excellent Lord Olindor, Although the Princely Opulence under which your Table
growns, be such as Emperors Palaces may well envy; and the Entertainment your
Bounty affords me, far transcending all the acknowledgments I can possibly
return; yet give me leave to tell you, that the Opportunity you have put into
my hand, to serve you in relation to your Neice, and to Hazard my Life in the
service of so Worthy a Lord as Olindor, infinitely surpasses all the
satisfaction Arising from the other considerations, so that now I covet nothing
more than to see the Face of Lymas, and to call him to account for the Injuries
offered to your Excellent Neice: Doubtless (said he) he shall soon be sensible
of the loss his own guilt will pull upon him: But (continued he) Know Famous
Olindor, that before I had the good Fortune to meet you by the side of your
River; I had fully determined to Revenge upon the Impious Lymas, the injuries
and abuses done by him to the Lady Clymena; for it was only that Motive that
brought me hither: But I must acknowledge my Resolution much Hightened since I
have had the Relation of her misfortunes from your Lips; and especially since I
understand the aliance between your Families to be such, that you are engaging
your Noble Son in the Conflict.

Whilst he was speaking this, a Servant gave Notice that the young Lord
Olinderus was come, and had brought with him about a servant informing St.
Patrick and Lord Olinder that Olinder's Son has arrived with reinforcements
five Hundred Tennants of the Principal Youth of the Yeomandry, besides about
twenty young Noblemen of his Acquaintance; all ready Horsed and Equipt for the
expedition: At which they Immediately rise from Table, and went to the Entrance
of the fore-gate to meet them; where the Brave Old Father having Embraced his
Son, the young Olinderus and his Companions: He appointed the Spacious Hall for
the Entertainment of the Young Farmers, and an Inner Gallery for the Reception
of the Nobles, they being resolved to rest themselves in his Palace for that
Night, until the next Morning Light should Summon them to attend the call of
the Warlike Trumpet.

Great Observation did all the Strangers take of our Valiant Patrick, whose
Martial Presence, and Heroic Comportment, made them unanimously six upon him
to be their Leader; but this determination they kept secret until the Morning.
In the mean time the Prudent Olindor gave orders to diverse of his principle
Servants to be ready to attend his Son on the next days March, and to bear him
company in the Battle: And to one he gave special direction to bring him word
what was the first success of the Engagement. All the while the brave Olinderus
was entertaining his Friends with the Sumptuous Refreshment his Fathers House
afforded, whilst sederal brisk Glasses went about to Clymena's Health, and the
good success of their Expedition.

Thus passed they away the Evening, with many discourses relating to the
carrying on their Enterprise, until the good Olindor sent one of his Gentlemen
to acquaint the Noble Champion, that if he pleased to repose himself, his
Apartment was ready: So being Conducted by diverse of the principal Servants
with Wax lights in Silver Stands; the Hospitable Old Lord would needs attend
his Guest to his Lodging, as likewise did the Young Olindarus, and diverse of
the Principal Nobles: He was led up by a large Stair Case of Cedar Richly
Carved and Gilded, the Wainscot adorned with many pieces of curious Landscape,
and Sea Prospects of Admirable Art: So that in diverse the Wracks were so Lively
described, you would have thought you had heard the sinking Mariners call for
help: Some Vessels seemed to be just blowing up, where many Bodies appeared
mounted up far in the Air, and their Limbs scattered with the Violence of the
Powder. Within this was a Chamber, where on the Cealing was a Sky most
Artificially wrought, where Silver Cynthia, and her Necturnal Train of glorious
Stars and Plannets gave so great Lustr^ as if they had been come there on
purpose to keep an Alternate watch during the Champions Repose. It was hung
round with the Richest Venetian Tapstery of Silk, Silver and Gold; in which was
admirably expresse^ the Story of Argalus and Perthenia's Love with their many
Adventures; and fatal Tragedy, one would have thought by the splendor o^ this
Chamber, that it had (at least) been the Palace of bright Phoebus, or at least
a Reces^ provided for the Poetical Gods.

Thus having brought our Mighty Hero to this Magnificent Lodging; the Most
Courteous Olindor, and the rest of the Noble Train took their Leaves of him,
recommending him to the Quietude of Downy slumbers; and having bid each other
good night, with the greatest Civillity the most Generous Tongue could Express,
the Valiant Patrick laid him down on an Italian Couch, made of the Richest
green Silk Damask, under a Canopy of Pearl-Couler Satin wrought with Flowers
of Gold; and Revolving in his mind how to manage the Fortune of the following
day: the heavy Morpheus with his Leaden Key Locked up his senses in
soul-refreshing sleep; and about the midst of the Night appeared to him the
Resemblance of the Most Renowned St. George, having on one Arm his Golden
Garter, on the other his Ruby Cross, and on his breast the figure of the fiery
Draggon; his countenance was exceeding Beautiful, such as it had been, when he
Charmed the Enchantress Kalyb: his presence was altogether Amiable and
Attractive; and approaching the silent Bed of the sleeping Champion, he thus
Accosted him: I the Idea of Great George am come,
To tell thee thou must be Base Lymas doom;
Thou Valiant Patrick shall his Power Quel,
And free Clymena from his Magic Spell;
Then shall thy Sword in Thracia raise thy Name,
The Eastern Soultans shall Proclaim thy Fame:
Kings shall in Patricks Honor Bages wear,
And Mighty Kingdoms to thee Statues Rear.
Having said this, the Friendly Spectrum with a slow pace left the Room; whilst
St. Patrick overjoyed with the Vision awaked from his pleasant slumber, and
still Imagining his Brother Champion had been in the Chamber, stepped out of his
Bed to thank him for the extraordinary care he took of his Concerns; but at
last finding no one, he concluded it was St. George's Angel which in such
Courteous manner had administered this comfort to him; so returning again to his
Dormitory, he passed the Night in various Cogitations until the Morning.

But what pen is able to paint out with what Celerity they Addressed themselves
to their March; for no sooner had the gray Ianitor sprinkled his first Attoms
of light on the darkened Air, foreshewing the approach of Apolloes Chariot; but
our Warlike Patrick descended into the Hall, calling for his Armor, where in a
short time the Brave Olindarus, with the rest of the Young Nobles met him. The
Grooms had already fitted all the Equipages of their Horses, and made them
ready for their Masters call, and the furious Beasts stood beating the Ground
with their hardy Hoofs, as if angry they were not on the March; straight as
soon as the Knights had completely Armed themselves, the Trumpets sounded to
Horse; when the mirror of his Age, the Incomparable Olindor, came out of his
Chamber to take his leave of his Son, and his Noble Guests; But first
addressing himself to the Champion of Ireland, acknowledging the kindness of
his Stars that at such a time had brought so extraordinary a Guest under under
his Roof; adding that the fortune of his Neice, and whole Family depended on
his Valor; and that he did not doubt of Victory under the Conduct of so Worthy
a Cheiftain: To which he replied, that he wanted words to express how much he
was Obliged to the goodness of the most generous Olindor; but as long as he had
a hand able to weild a Sword, it should still be employed in the Service of
himself and Noble Family: Then rendering him his Knightly thanks for the large
Bounties of his House, protesting he thought him the most Hospitable Person in
the World; the Heroic Patrick would needs kiss his hand, and so went to his
Horse; Then with a cheerful countenance, embracing his Son, My Olindarus (said
he) thou art now going into the Field of Honor, to Fight the Battle of an
injured Lady, my dear Neice; I know that when I was at thy Age, I wanted not
Martial Blood; and am only grieved my Age denies me now to bear thee company in
so brave an Enterprise: Let these young Sparks, that in most friendly manner
bear thee Company, to the Wars, see proof of the inherent Valor that dwells in
Olindors Blood; nor spoke I this as doubting thy brave Performance; no, my dear
Olindarus, thy forwardness and conduct in this whole Affair, has given me a
large assurance of thy readiness to enter the List, and I doubt not but I shall
see thee return Laden with Triumphs, to the eternal Honor of thy Noble
Ancestors. Then giving him his Paternal Benediction, he commended them all to
the Tutelage of Minerva, advising them to make choice of the thrice Famous
Patrick for their Leader; which with one Voice they immediately did, it having
been their resolution the night before: and with loud Acclamations confirmed
their Choice, taking it as a good Omen, that they had done it by the direction
of Olindor, whose Chariot waited in readiness to accompany them the first two
Miles of their March.

CHAP. IV. Their Equipage at departing from the house of Olindor. St. Patrick
arriveth at the Camp, accepts the Challenge; with what followed thereupon.
THe Famous Patrick being the Mirror of true Chivalry, and Grrant Knighthood,
was accoutred not unsuitable to his high Quality: He had on a Suit of Armor of
Sythian Steel, hardened by the Cyclops in the Forge of Vulcan, folded with
joints of Brass, and set with Studds of Gold; at the bowings of the Arms and
Knees, were Figured the heads of four Monstrous and Terrible Giants, whose Eyes
seemed to spartle with burning Fire: on his Breast Plate, he wore a Harp,
Curiously Composed of Diamonds set in Gold, and strung with Pearl; signifying
his Native Country, and being the Cognizance thereof. As for his Target, it was
of the Skins of scaly Fish, wrought into form by the Indian Magicians, and
hardened by the Sun, till it was impenitrable, even by Darts pointed with the
sharpest Steel; he had a Lance born by his Page, made of Materials so tough, as
no force could brake, and had for its point the Horn of an Africane Unicorn,
that would batter even very Rocks. On his Head was a Murrion of the Finest
Copper, Flowered and Inlaid with Gold, and sparkling with Jems of diverse sorts;
in the Crest whereof, was set a very large Crimson Feather, spangled with Gold,
which waving down his back, seemed like a blushing Cloud, gently moving before
the Wind.

His Sword was supposed to be the Sire of that in Westminster-Abby, in times
past so Terrible to France; it had so great Virtue, that it would dissolve
Enchantments, brake in sunder Magical Rocks, and resist the force of Poison.
This Armor, as you have heard before, was found in the Enchanted Cave of
Kalyb, and placed there by Minerva, to be worn by the most Valiant, and
Undaunted Chevalier in the World; the proof whereof will app^ar in the
following History.

Nor was the Equipage of the young Olindarus, less exquisite; for his Armor,
Trappings and Target, were as Rich as any were ever seen in the Trojan War;
where the Gallantry and Art of the Grecians, were to the Life expressed. All
the other young Noble men his friends, had their several devices; Some in
memory of their Ladies; others pourtrayed the design of their Enterprise, with
other Allusions proper to their several Passions, and Inclinations. They were
all Mounted on Horses of such Admirable Shape and Courage, as if Parthia, or
Germany had been ransacked for their best Horse of Manage.

Their thundering Hoofs did beat the trembling Ground,
Their lusty Neighing, made the Air resound;
In Line most regular, they Marched, to show
That they by Rule, would Vanquish puissant Foe.
Such Courage, Ancient Sparta rarely bred,
Enough to make Great Homer's Heroes dread.
Never did Chieftain with more bravery Grace the Front of his Officers, than
our Mighty Patrick lead his youthful Army to the Trial of their Valors: All
acknowledging him to be the most undoubted Captain that ever gave Law to the
Sword of his Enemy.

The first day, having in most Graceful Order passed the Consines of Olinders
Valley; they ascended a mighty Hill, which brought them into a Plain, within
five Leagues of the perfidious Lymas's Army. Here they resolved to rest
themselves that night, and take such measures as might the better fit them for
an Attack the next morning: Wherefore the Riders dismounting, enclosed a large
piece of Campaign Ground, in the midst of which they turned their Horses to
Grass, that they might be the sitter for the next days Travel. Whilst our
Famous Patrick, the brave Olindarus, and some chief of the young Nobles,
advised which way they might give notice to the Castle of the fair Climena of
their advancement toward her relief; but to their great Astonishment they were
soon answered by the wonder of his Age, St. Patrick, who assured them, that by
the Virtue of his Sword, any one might pass Incognito to the Castle, and bring
them an account before the Morning: Whereupon it was resolved, that the Noble
Olindarus should (by the Messenger) give his Cousin a Letter of their design,
which he immediately writ, in this sort.

To the thrice Fair Climena, Olindarus sends greeting.
WHen these shall kiss your fair hands, you may understand that my self, and
about Eight Hundred of the Principal youth of my Fathers Country, understanding
the unworthy designs of the Traitor Lymas against your Person, are now upon our
March, in fifteen Leagues of your Castle; having for our Captain the most
Renowned St. Patrick of Ireland, whom some good Star brought to my Fathers
House, that very Night that we were mustering our selves for this Expedition:
He is a Person by unerring Fate designed to make all that he opposes Trophies
to his Valor. We only wait an Answer from you by this Messenger, that we may
know in the best manner how to apply our selves to your Service,

Olindarus.


No sooner was this Letter written and sealed, but St. Patrick laying his
Enchanted Sword on the shoulder of the Page, and pronouncing the words, Presto
Remigrare; the Messenger Immediately vanished like a Bird through the Air, and
in few minutes was at the besieged Castle, passing over the Camp of Lymas, as
if he had been the Footboy of Jupiter, whilst his Magical disguise kept him
unobserved by the Soldiers and Watches; and not discovering himself until he
came into the presence of the Beauteous Clymena: where we will leave him to
receive his dispatch, and return a little to St. Patrick and his Noble Brigade,
whom we left on the Plain beforementioned.

The Champaign where these Warlike Horses were grasing was without any water,
so that they had little stomach to fall to their green Salet without drink,
being very Thirsty with their Travail; wherefore like generous Prauncers they
carvetted round their pasture, beating the Soil with indignation that afforded
them nor water to assuage their Martial heat. The Famous Horse of the Irish
Champion pawing on the dry ground with great disdain, suddenly there arose
under his foot a large Fountain, from whence Issued such abundance of Water, as
served not only for the Refreshment of the Horses, but their Riders, to the
great Astonishment of all present: And no Wonder, For if there were such Virtue
in the Beast,
What must He have by whom he was Possessed.
And presently after, to increase their Admiration, there sell amongst the
Horses so great a shower of Oats and Beans, that the Cattle were Knee deep in
Provender, where they wantoned it with great Luxury, until the Trumpets the
next morning sounded to Horse: And tho this Relation may pussle the belief of a
Heretical Reader, yet we may account it but a Puisnie Miracle, if compared with
those more Stupendous Successes that often attended our Champion in his
Heroic Adventures.

Now whilst the Noble Olindarus, and his brave Companions were with much wonder
Contemplating on what had happened; the Page returned from the Castle of the
Lady Clymena, and brought the following Letter.

Clymena to the Noble Olindarus wishes Health.
Right Noble and Dear Cousin,
YOurs by your trusty Page came safe to our hand, with no less Welcome than the
gentle showers to the parched Earth; and we cannot but pay our best thanks to
your Self, and those Honorable Worthies with you, that with so much Gallantry
have engaged in defense of our Innocence against the Barbarous Violence of the
Inhuman Lymas: especially to that Mighty and Renowned Patrick, whom Fame speaks
more than Man, and from whose unconquerable Arm we may justly hope a happy
Deliverance. We must now lay aside all thoughts of beating of the Tyrant by an
Army, for not half an hour before the arrival of your Messenger, a Trumpeter
from the Camp brought us this Challenge.


Philadon,
SInce thy boldness offers to withold Clymena from me; know that to Chastise
thy folly, I have in my Camp a Giant and Champion, who personally is resolved
to defy Thee, or whom thou shall Appoint; if therefore either thy self or any
other shall be so hardy as to meet him Armed to morrow in the Plain, before the
Castle, at the Hour of Two in the Afternoon, thou will there receive a just
reward for thy presumption.

Upon reading this Paper, my dear Philadon resolved himself to Fight the mighty
Giant; but what apprehensions that must needs put me into, you may easily
imagine: I was resolved rather to hazard all by a Sally, then permit it: But
this I durst not reveal to the Noble Philadon, whose great Soul believes all
things superable by the love of his poor Clymena. I leave the conduct of all to
your more Judicious Council, expecting to hear from you in the Morning.

Clymena.


This Letter being read in the presence of the Great and Mighty Champion St.
Patrick, he immediately concluded the Giant to be a Butt proper for him to
shoot the Arrows of his high Courage at; and therefore resolves, before Day to
be upon his March to so brave an Enterprise, by no means brooking any farther
delay; wherefore ordering the Trumpets to give the Summons at that time; they
laid down to take what refreshment they could in the interim.

About three in the Morning, the Trumpets according to Order giving the Signal,
they were soon mounted, their Youthful Rage boiling in hope of a sudden
Encounter; their Furious Horses (though on a very swift March) went Chasing
with Foam, as if their Riders made not have enough to the Fatal Battle. By
break of day they were come in view of Lymas's Camp, which soon took an Alarm
at their unexpected approach, and were quickly in a posture of defense: But the
Giant (having swallowed a Calf and two Sheep for his Supper, and drank a Firkin
of Brandy as a Health to Lymas, and his next days success) was in so profound
a sleep, that all the Cannon in the Dutch Fleet could not have awakned him; but
before his Eyes were unglued, St. Patrick had levelled a forlorn of about Sixty
of their Infantry, and struck such a Terror into the rest, as made them give
him way to enter the Castle with his Troops, which he easily did; for at the
first hearing the Alarm, Clymena concluded her generous Relievers were come,
and was quickly confirmed in that her Opinion; for looking toward the Camp she
soon knew her Cousin Olindarus by his Horse, and a White Feather in his Helmet,
which had been her Brothers; wherefore causing the Castle Eats to be opened,
they found a speedy entrance, none of Lymas's Men dareing to follow them to the
Outworks.

As this unexpected Relief ministered much occasion of joy to the Besieged; who
apprehended the Gods had fought for them, and on so Extraordinary an Attempt
received the greatest Encouragement Imaginable: So was it of as ill Consequence
to the Besiegers; who now perceived they had to do with Persons of such
Incomparable Gallantry and Courage, as dreaded not the dangers, nor Terrors
arising to Cowards on such occasions; but rather with greatest Resolution
courted Honor in the greatest Difficulties. This made the Crafty Lymas (more
then ever) rely on the force of his Monstrous Giant, in whom alone he now
rested his hope of Victory.

Nor may it seem strange, if on the alone Consideration of this Mighty Monster,
Lymas might think himself in Condition to Challenge the whole World: for he was
of so vast a stature, that the Stoutest Man on Horseback could scarcely reach
up to his Navel; and (if Fame be not a Liar) he was Grandsier to the King of
Bombaza named Bahadercam, whose fall so signalized the V^lour of Captain Jones.
This Giant was named Cambagor, born on the Pyrenean Mountains, and was from his
Infancy bred up in the hardships of that Climate, abounding with bitter Frosts,
and Snows; and in the Company of Lions, Bears and Tygres; out of whose Iaws
(when a Boy) he rescued many a Breakfast: He would as ordinaryly fell a Lion
with a Stroke of his Fist on the Pole, as a Warrenner kills Cunnies. He was so
great an Enemy to the Flocks of the Neighbor Villages, that he had destroyed
most of them; and sent their owners into the other World for endeavoring to
protect them from his devouring Chapps. He would take the maddest Bull by the
Horns, and twist his head off.

One day being drawn down to the Sea side, he espied a Mighty Whale not far
from the shore, which he thought might make a proper Booty for his greatness,
wherefore casting a mighty Oak into the Sea, he bestrid it in pursuit of the
Scaly Monster; and the Wind taking hold of the boughs of the Tree, drove him
ashore on that Coast where Lymas had raised his Army against the chaste
Clymena. At his first landing, spying a Company of Men, he designed immediately
to Sacrifice them to the Appeasment of his all-devouring Gorge, which was then
more than ordinary whetted by the sharpness of the Sea-Air: But they (soon
perceiving the purpose of the Fell Monster) left the place, and resigned him
the prospect of a Flock of Sheep, which at that time served him for a Supper.

His Mouth was so large, that it seemed like a Percullis, with five sets of
Teeth, of that strength as would bite in sunder Bars of Iron: The first bitt
he made at Sheep, Staggs, or Bullocks, was at their Horns; which he presently
snapt off, and spit out of his Mouth for fear of choking; the rest of the body
was soon dispatched down his throat, into the unsatiable furnace of his Stomach.

Now the Base-minded Lymas hearing of this Inhuman Monster, bribed him (with
whole Herds of Cattle, and Flocks of Sheep, besides Tunns of Liquors) to put
him in Possession of the Incomparable Clymena.

But no sooner was the ever Famous St. Patrick, with the rest of his Brigade,
got into the Castle; (after having been Complimented by the Fair Clymena, and
her lovely Philadon, for the great Honor they did them in attempting such
hazardous Adventures for their sakes: and having on their parts declared their
resolutions to hazard their lives in pursuit of so glorious an Undertaking:)
but they unanimously agreed to send Lymas this Answer to his Challenge.

To the Vnworthyest of Men, Lymas; Philadon sends Greeting.
THy Challenge by the Trumpet the last even, was received; and in return
thereto, Know thy Champion shall at the Time and Place be met by a Friend of
Mine, who, for all Thy Bravadoes shall send his filthy Soul to the Shades of
Acharon: And as for Thee, if thou dare to be his Second, I will my Self
undertake with equal Weapon to decide thy Pretentions to my Fairest Clymena.

Philadon.


And now hanging on the Castle Walls the Signal of a Message, they dispatched a
Drummer to Lymas with the Answer: Who having perused it, concluded the Lady his
drummer relaying the message to Lymas own, and fancied Cambagor had already eat
his way to Clymena's presence: so seeming highly satisfied with the answer, he
dismissed the Messenger, telling him, his saucy Master should dearly repent his
rash Vnd^rtaking; by receiving due Chastisement from his just indignation.

No sooner was the Messenger returned, but the Gallant Philadon began to set
all things in Order for this Mighty Combat, there were Galleries Erected for
Clymena, and the Ladies with her on the outside of the Castle, against the
plain ground; from whence they might be Spectators of the Bloody Encounter; The
Noble Philadon, with the brave Olindarus, and the rest of the Gallant Horse
that were in the Castle, drew out before the entrance of the Garrison, whilst
the Infantry placed themselves on the Walls: On the other side, Lymas had drawn
his Men in a Line, making as it were a boundary to the other side of the Plain;
so that the middle space between the two Armies, was the Field where the ever
Famous Patrick was to signalize his immortal Prowess by destroying the
dreadfullest Giant that ever was mentioned in Romantic Author: Whilst the
Soldiers on each side were in readiness to have engaged, if any foul play
should be used.

CHAP. V. The Dreadful Combat betwixt St. Patrick and the Monstrous Giant
Cambagor. His Voyage by Sea toward the Coast of Greece, and the strange
Adventures that happened to him in that Voyage.
NOw the appointed hour being come, wherein the Fortunes of the Incomparable
Clymena were to be determined by the matchless Sword of the invincible St.
Patrick, he marched out of the Castle to the Plain before mentioned, attended
by the principal of the Nobility most splendidly Accoutred, with such gayity of
Plumes, Embroideries, Paintings, Guildings; as if they had been going to the
Nuptials of some Magnificent Emperor; the very Air receiving Luster from the
dazeling splendor of their Arms and Trappings; and the Valley resounded with
the Echo of their Silver Trumpets. They found the Monstrous Cambagor already
entered the Lists, (he being the Challenger) his very appearance struck a
terrible apprehension into most of the Spctators, by the dreadful gashfulness
of his grim Countenance; his height was about thirty foot, so that those that
had not lived in an Age of Giants, would have took him for a walking Steeple;
for compared to him the Monsters in the Guild Hall, would have seemed to be but
Pigmie-Pages: His Shield was the Hull of a Ship, his Spear a mighty Mast,
pointed at the Top with half a Tun of Iron; at his back was hung a Club, being
the Body of a mighty Oak; for any thing less ponderous seemed but as a feather
in his hand. Our glorious Champion St. Patrick was mounted on his own trusty
Coursor, and Armed at all points as was before described, with that Enchanted
Armor found in the Magical Cave, which no force of Weapon could penetrate; and
though for Stature of Body he came very short of the Overgrown Giant, yet he
far exceeded him in Courage; and was not much inferior to him for strength of
Body, which joined to the greatness of his Valor, made large amends for the
disproportion of his Stature.

Having viewed his Monstrous Antagonist, the ever-Famous Patrick rid gently to
him, and denouncing a generous and brave Defiance, he alighted from off his
Horse, counting it dishonorable for so great a Champion to Fight even a
Monstrous Giant at such disadvantage: So taking his Target and Spear, he began
the most Tremendous Combat that ever was related, there having never been so
glorious a Victory obtained at so vast a disadvantage.

The Giant with Prodigious force made a blow with his mighty Spear at the Head
of St. Patrick, which he nimbly avoiding, with a sudden thrust of his Lance,
gave the Monster a wound in the right Knee; the horned point of it sticking so
fast in the Joint, that our Champion was fain to jerk with all his strength to
recover it again; at that, the Fell Giant fetching another blow at his Head,
enough to have battered a Rock; St. Patrick with his Target cast it off on his
Shoulder, the weight of it sending him to the ground; but falling only on his
Breech, he rose with such nimble advantage, that his Spear found way through
the keel of the Giants Shield to wound him in the Arm; Cambagor's Spear
breaking with the last stroke he made on St. Patricks Shoulder: And finding his
Shield not Proof against the Irresistible force of his Weapon, he cast it down
with such Violence, that it brake in pieces on the ground; then betaking
himself to his mighty Club, he laid about him with such fury, as must soon have
dashed our Champion to Attoms, had not the Excellence of his Armor, and the
wonderful strength of his Constitution preserved him. This Encounter continued
long, and to the great Astonishment of all the Spectators, who were struck,
with wonder to see a Man of Ordinary Size and Proportion resist, and overcome
the Violence of such a mighty Monster.

Full many a Death-threatning blow had our brave Hero put by with his Glassy
Target, which sometimes would rebound them with such unexpected Violence, that
Cambagor could scarce avoid measuring his length on the Ground, being
overpoised with the force of his own blows; yet could never make any Impression
on the body of our hardy Knight; who now laying by his Lance, suddenly drew
his Fatal Sword, which in little time had chopped off so much of his Club, as
made the weight of it much less Offensive to him: At last the Giant making a
full blow at our Noble Knight with all his might, thinking therewith to have
dashed him into the Earth, our Nimble Hero received it upon the Edge of the
Sword, which split the remainder of the Club in two parts: and weary of the
long Encounter, with great indignation, he slang his Sword at the Face of the
Monster; being fully assured it would not fail of some notable Execution: He
threw it with so mighty force, that the Edge taking against the Giants St.
Patrick, after beheading the Giant Cambagor Neck, it immediately made a
separation between his head and body; so that his Monstrous Head fell like a
Mountain to the Earth, at which the huge Supporters (that were like two great
Trees) failing; the vast bulk of his body fell to the Ground, and resigned his
frightful Soul to Pluto.

Thus fell this Terrible and Formidable Giant Cambagor by the hand of that
wonder of the World, the Mighty Patrick, who (had he lived) would in short time
have devoured the Cattle of a Kingdom: The which Heroic Action filled the Air
with the loud Shouts and Acclamations of all about the Castle, whilst the Camp
of Lymas were in great Consternation for the loss of their (as they thought)
Invincible Champion.

At the sight hereof, the Princely Philadon advanced, to pursue the Noble
Victory by revenging his wrongs upon the Person of the Traiterous Lymas: who
was so far from appearing as Second to his boasted Champion, that on slght of
his Fall, he withdrew into the Rear of his Army, and suddenly rid out of the
Field; whilst the Noble Philadon with great honor demanded him to make good
his Challenge: But he not being to be found by the Officers of his Army; and
they having advice from the Rear, that he had quitted the Field, immediately
broke their Commissions; acknowledging to the Generous Philadon the Injustice
of their Quarrel; and taking an Oath never more to appear in so unworthy a
Cause; they forthwith dismis^ their Soldiers, who were weary of serving so bad
a Master; and dispersed themselves to their respective Habitations. Some of
Lymas's Neighbors taking the Road that lead to his Country, espied him in a
Field about a Mile distant from the Camp; where he had turned Executioner to
himself, and with his own hands had hanged himself to a Tree near the way side:
this Spectacle much Confirmed them in their Opinions of the baseness of his
enterprise, whilst they there saw him tied up to the Destiny usually attending
Cowards in Despair. Where we will leave him exposed to the Eternal Infamy and
Terror of such Barbarous and Inhuman Villains; and return again to the Castle,
which now resounded with nothing but the High praises of the Invincible St.
Patrick.

They divided the Body of the Giant into four Quarters, which were sent to four
Principal Cities of the Realm, to be fixed on the Gates in Memory of so famous
an Exploit; the Head was carried into the Castle, and fastened on a Pole over
the Gate of Entrance: St. Patrick having only taken a Lock of his Beard, which
he ever after wore fastened to his Plume on the Crest of his Helmet, as a
Trophie of his unmatcht Valor, and undoubted Prowess.

Thus by the Courage of this Puissant Hero, was the Fair Clymena delivered from
the Cruel Seige of the most Infamous Lymas, the Noble Philadon rid of his
unworthy Rival, and the whole World freed from the apprehensions of the Salvage
Cambagor.

That Night was spent in all the Solemnities of Rejoicing, the straightness of
the time would afford, by fiering of Guns, making of Bonfiers, and Martial
Consorts of their Drums and Trumpets; whilst the Princely Clymena, with a Noble
Trayn of Beauteous Ladies came to kiss the hand of her great Benefactor: The
Courteous Philadon, the brave Olindarus, with the rest of the Young Lords,
striving which should exceed the other in passing the highest Complements and
Encomiums on so unparalleld an Adventure: The Incomparable St. Patrick with the
greatest Gallantry Imaginable returned their high Caresses with this Generous
Answer:

That all that had been done, and what ever else lay in his Power to perform,
was but too little to show the great Service he had for Persons of their
Extraordinary Figure, and high Perfections. Adding, that what had happened,
must rather be imputed to the influence of Clymena's Stars, that favored the
Justice of her Cause; so that it was Impossible an Action so glorious could
fail of Success, tho attempted by a weaker hand.

In the mean time, whilst these great Heroes were entertertaining the Champion
with these Rhetorical Harangues; the Servants of Clymena had made provision of
a Magnificent supper, not unsuitable to the Extraordinariness of the Occasion.
The Nobles and Ladies sitting down in the Hall, were served with all the Choice
Variety the greatest Palace could Boast of; They testified their hearty
Congratulation of that Days Success by plentiful Glasses of rich Wine, with
which the Table abounded; whilst a Musical Consort of Harps and Viols feasted
their Ears with this

SONG.
NOw, now the Fight's done, and the great God of War,
Lies Sleeping in Shades, and unrifles his Care;
Love Laughs at his Rest,
Whilst the Soldier Alarms;
And with Drums and with Trumpets
They Beat up to Arms;
He rides on his Lance, and the Bushes he bangs,
And his broad Bloody Sword on a Willow Tree hangs.
The Song ended; the Spacious Hall rung with another Consort, which was of
Huzza's, whilst a Health was drank round to the Famous Patrick Champion of
Ireland; which he requited by beginning another to the Hospitable and Noble
Lord Olindor, Father of Olindarus, and Uncle to Clymena; and so in Order, till
a Glass had been pledged to every particular Persons health at that Noble
Table. Nor were the Common Soldiers without a large share of the Bountious
Entertainment of that Night; for many Vessels of Wine, and other Excellent
Liquors were placed in the Court amongst them; with a great plenty of Beef,
Venison, Lamb, and other Extraordinary Provision, answerable to the Grandeur of
the Lady of that Mansion: so that a Universal Joy diffused it self through the
whole Castle, and was Legible in every face; and every Tongue thought it self
not well Employed, that sounded not the High Praises of the most Famous St.
Patrick, whose insuperable Courage, brave Conduct, and stupendous Success, was
now become the Discourse and Wonder of all People.

This was that night (wherein the baseminded Lymas designed to have wantoned in
the Ruin of Clymena's Honor; to have Tryumphed in the Overthrow of Philadon,
and have made himself Lord of that Princely Castle) turned into a Jubilee for
the defeat of the wretched Lymas; the slaughter of the barbarous Cambagor, and
the mighty deliverance of Phyladon, and Clymena.

They spent their time in Unwearied Caresses, and Brisk Entertainments, until
Chanticlere had summoned the Morning to open the Portals of the East: when by
Unanimous Consent, all addressed themselves to make Truce with Morpheus for the
repose of some Hours, to fit them the better for the business of the Following
day. Therefore conducting the renowned St. Patrick to a most Princely Apartment
appointed for him, they left him to reflect on the Transactions of that day,
and to thank his Stars for their happy influence.

So soon as the brave Olindarus awaked the next Morning, he might perceive the
Burnished Chariot of Apollow, had ascended the Olympic Hill, almost Six hours
Journey; when (willing that the Youth, which in courteous manner had attended
him, should no longer be kept from their doubtful Relations; and desirous to
carry home the glad Tidings of this Glorious Victory, to the concerned Olindor)
he gave his Trumpets Order to give the Signal, that his Company should prepare
to Horse; so that by that time they were ready, he with his young Nobles, had
taken their leaves of the Generous Philadon, and the lovely Clymena, and
attended the Apartment of the Worlds Wonder, St. Patrick, where kissing his
hand, and receiving of him many Testimonies of the great Opinion he had of
them, highly applauding them for their Gallantry, in offering themselves on
that Occasion in the service of the excellent Clymena: Embracing the Princely
Youth Olindarus, and by him sending the most grateful acknowledgments
imaginable to his Noble Host Olindor; they parted: St. Patrick accompanying
them to the outer Gate of the Castle, and some of the Principal of the
Gentlemen attending them some Miles on their march.

Never was the Loud Trump of Fame set in Work, on a more Wonderful Occasion,
than this great Overthrow of the Dreadful Cambagor; she had almost burst her
swollen Cheeks with making the sound rattle through the Welkin: So that now all
the Admirers of Great and Heroic Acts, bent their Course to Clymena's Castle
to pay their Homage to the more than Humane St. Patrick; whom they had much ado
to forbear Adoring: Many Statues were Erected in memory of this Famous Exploit,
and the mighty Champions in Foreign Parts, stood Amazed at the report of so
Mavelous an Adventure. But notwithstanding, our Worthy Knight were daily
waited on, and Congratulated by the greatest Lords of the Country, and treated
with a profusion of Dainties, besitting the Grandeur of the greatest Monarch:
yet did none of these Charming Entertainments relish with our Martial Hero,
whose great Courage could not stoop to the soft Pleasures of an Easy and
Effeminate Life; but putting on a resolution to give a taste of his
Extraordinary Valor to remoter parts of the World, and to signalize his
Prowess wherever Fame. had a Register to Record it; he went to the lovely
pair Philadon and Clymena, signifying to them his Determination speedily to
depart in quest of farther Honor, and to add new Trophies to his Mighty
Courage.

The Fair Lovers heard their Mighty Guardian with no small trouble, considering
they were now like to part with the Defendant of their Lives, the Cherisher of
their Loves, and Family, and the undoubted glory of Human Race; but however
submitting to his Resolution, they only requested him as he had been the happy
Champion of their Affections; and had thereby enroled his own Name in the
Temple of Mars; he would please to continue a few Days to see Theirs entered in
the Temple of Hymen: and as by his Stupendous Valor he had preserved the
Beauteous Clymena for her Philadon, he would afford them the farther Honor to
see them Ratify their mutual Vows, by performing the Sacred Rights. The most
Complaisant Hero granted their request, and in the mean time put all things in
readiness for his Voyage; He hired a Ship in an adjoining Port, and furnished
it with Mariners; and all conveniences of Victuals and other Necessaries; he
sent also his Magical Armor on board, and fitted a place for his trusty Steed
Crapearo (for that was his Name, as Authors notify) likewise he sent on board
diverse Chests, and Trunks filled with Extraordinary rarities to an unknown
Value, that had been presented him by the grateful Clymena, and her beloved
Philadon.

Whilst the Renowned Patrick was thus fitting all things for his Voyage, the
two Lovers had prepared themselves for the long-wisht for Nuptials; the glad
Morning was come; the fair Bride was awaked with an Excellent noise of
Wind-Musick, the Hymeneal Lamps were Kindled, the Virgins were ready, the
Priest attended, whilst the Altar of the lofty Temple perfumed its stately Roof
with Clouds of Sacred Incence. All things being ready, they proceeded in this
Order.

First went twenty four Damsels in white Satin playing on Pipes, and Timbrils
after the Ancient manner, then twelve beautiful Boys about twelve years of
age, carrying large Candles burning of purest Virgin War, they were habited in
Cloth of Silver, with Starves of Pink-Colour Silk; after them the Priest in
his Miter, and Pontificallibus for that Occasion; then was the Bride Conducted
by the Noble young Olindarus, and another Noble Man of Principal Quality; her
Gown was of Pearl-Coloured Satin, wrought with True-loves-knots, and Flowers
of Silver; over all, a large Veil of the finest Tiffany: The young Lords were
in Vests of Green Silk, richly said with Gold lace, having white Beavors, with
Curious plumes of Snow-white Feathers, tipped with Pink-colour. After her,
followed a fair train of Young Ladies of Principal Quality, in dresses
Extraordinary rich, wherein the skill of the best-famed Taylers had been
Employed, being attended with many little Pages in very proper Liveries, each
wearing according to the Device and Fancy of his Mistress. After these, came
the Princely Bridegroom in a vest of Sky-colored Satin curiously Embroidered
with Silver and Pearl; having on his Breast a Golden Harp set with Diamonds,
after the Order of St. Patrick, who had bestowed that on him as a Badge in
Memory of the Irish Champion that slew the Giant; on one shoulder he had cast a
Pearl-coloured Mantle wrought with hearts, and Roses of Gold: he was supported
by two Beautiful Maidens of Noble descent, in Vestures of Lemon-colour, and
Carnation Silk, made somewhat short, that their Satin Buskens might appear,
which were of Carnation Satin Embroidered, and set with Silver Bells: On their
Heads they had Tyara's of Feathers, of Sky, White, and Pink-colour: after them
came the Noble Old Lord Olindor, Uncle to the Bride, and on his Right hand the
Most Renowned Champion St. Patrick, being followed by a very Honorable Company
of Young Lords and Gentlemen of principal Quality: Diverse Chariots and Coaches
attended, wherein after the Ceremony was performed, this Princely Company
placed themselves; and in great Pomp and Admirable Order returned to the
Castle, which from this time we must call Philadons.

Nothing imaginable was Omitted, that might express the Bounty of the
Bridegroom, and his Bride, or the high Welcome of the Noble Guests. The Bells
rung at the Temple, the Trumpets Ecchoed on the Castle walls, the Hall
resounded with Musical Instruments; and after the Second Course had been served
at Table, this Song was Sung to a well-tuned Consort of Lutes, in praise of the
Fair Bride.

SONG.
HAil to the Myrtle Shades,
All Hail to the Nimphs of the Field,
Kings cannot here invade,
Nor Virtue her Freedom yield;
Beauty now opens her Arms,
To soften her Languishing mind,
And Phillis unlocks her Charms,
Ah! Phillis, Ah! why so kind?
Phillis the Soul of Love,
The Joy of the Neighboring Swains,
Phillis that Crowns the Grove,
And Phillis that guilds the Plains;
Phillis that never had the Skill
To Paint, or to Patch, or be Fine,
Yet Phillis whose Eyes can kill,
Whom Nature had made Divine.
Phillis whose Charming Tongue
Makes Labor, and Pain a delight;
Phillis that makes the day Young,
And shortens the Live-long Night;
Phillis whose Lips like May
Still laugh at the sweets that they bring,
Where Beauty knows no decay,
But Sits with Eternal Spring.
Whilst their Ears were thus delighted with diverse sorts of Excellent Music,
plentiful Healths of Noble Wine went round the Table, after that of the
new-made Husband and Wife; a large Brimmer was Consecrated to the Health of
their ever Famous Patron and Champion the Heroic St. Patrick, accompanied with
loud Acclamations in acknowledgment of his Memorable Adventure in the
Destruction of the Monster Cambagor. Thus with Dances and other Diversions
suitable to the Occasion, they spent the Night; whilst the Noble Philadon, and
beauteous Clymena withdrew to their Bridal Chamber, there to taste those more
refined delights that were to Crown that Festival. The rest of the Company, as
they saw occasion, retiring to their respective Dormitories.

No sooner had the Glorious Charioter of the Spheres the next Morning with his
refulgent beams gilded the tops of the Mountains, and opened a most pleasant
prospect over the Fertile Plains; but our St. Patrick, the true Mirror of brave
Chivalry left the soft repose of his downy Pillow; and tired with the
un-souldierly delights of an Idle Luxury; his Martial Soul set forward in
pursuit of those Noble Glories, that must give a farther Honor to his Renowned
Shield, and set the Pupils of Pernassus on work, to erect Collums to his high
Praises. So that he presently gave order to his Page to fit his Horse with a
suit of Extraordinary rich Furniture that had been presented him (amongst many
other Rarities) by Clymena; he had on a stately Coat of Male, a Cosset and
Beavor of Gold, with a large Milk-white Plume, having tied to it the lock of
Cambagors Beard, a Scarf of Carnation Sassnet; whereon, by the Art of a curious
Needle, were lively Expressed Giants heads Embellished with Gold: This was
likewise presented by the Noble Bride; for as we told you before, St. Patrick
had sent his Enchanted Armor, with other Curiosities on board his Ship. Being
thus Equipped, he came to bid farewell to the Gallant Bridegroom; and Beauteous
Bride, who had dressed themselves sooner than ordinary that Morning to take
their Leave of our Famous Champion; the Old Lord Olindor, and his Son the brave
Olindarus were likewise ready to pay their parting respects to him: So that
coming all together into the Hall, they there passed such mutual Compliments,
as were agreeable to such a Season: Then the Princely Hero departed in order to
take his Horse, but that was prevented by the ever Courteous Olindor who had
ordered his Chariot to be ready that he might accompany the Admired Patrick on
his was to the Port, all the Gallants waited on him to the Gate, and Philadon
and Clymena had likewise their Chariot ready to have born him Company, but he
would by no means permit it; so that compelling them to tarry behind, they
there took their last leave of him; only the Young Olindarus accompanied his
Aged Father, who having placed our Champion at his right hand, made his Man
drive until he had brought St. Patrick over a Bridge five Miles on his way;
where alighting they embraced, and gave each other the most hearty Testimonies
of an Inviolable Friendship; Here our Matchless Knight Mounting his own Horse
(which had been led by his Page) took his direct way to the Port, whilst the
Noble Olindor and his Son returned to the Castle of Philadon.

Early in the Evening they arrived at the Port, and presently went on Board;
and finding the wind favorable, forthwith hoisted Sail for the Coast of
Greece, where we must now trace our Famous Patrick doing such wonders as would
pusle any but a Romantic Faith. Neptune had now with his Trident smoothed the
tangled Curles of Thetis Billows, the surface of the Deep had put on such an
even level, as might invite the Halcion to build; her Mountainous Waves were so
depressed, as if the Watery God had paved a way over her Rugged Channel for the
Vessel of so great a Champion to pass smoothly on; the Sturgeons, Dolphins,
with other the Scally Inhabitants, danced and played about the Ship; as being
glad a Knight, the wonder of the Land, should Honor their Element with his
Renowned burden: The surly Emperor of the Eolean Cave had likewise musled his
Roaring Blusters, so that there seemed to be an Amicable trute between the Airy
and the Watery Regions: Never was obtained such a sereninity since the enraged
Neptune hust the Loud-Tongued Troops from his Briny Dominions, when they
assaulted the Trojan Cheiftain.

But as usually, the greatest Successes are attended with some Cross and
disasterous Accidents; and the Shining Planet Phoebus having performed his daily
task, his resplendent Rays, give place to the shades of Gloomy Darkness, and
the sad solitudes of the succeeding Night: So this Glorious Tranquillity met
with a Misfortune, not unusually attending those that Travel on the Vast Watery
Desert. For having now passed several days in an undisturbed Quietude, they at
last met with a very strange Adventure, which happened in this sort.

Passing by an Island remote from any Continent, a mighty Whale, the Giant of
the Ocean, met their Vessel, which being of no great Bulk, and the Night such,
as they discerned not the approach of so Potent a Foe, suddenly putting her
self under one side of the Ship, Violently Overthrew it in the Sea; so that,
but few of the men were saved beside the Famous Patrick, his Page Mac, and five
others, who being not far from the shore, made a shift to get to the Island,
where with much bitterness they endured the Wet and Cold of the Night, until
the next Morning; when casting their Eyes to the place of the miserable Wreck,
they espied the Overthrown Vessel floating on the Water, and the huge Whale
still plying her self about it; whereat, the Enraged Champion taking up a keen
stone from the Sea side, Flang it with such force at the Whale, that it cut a
large wound through his side, whereat issued such abundance of Blood as stained
the Water a great ways round the Place; the Beast finding her self sorely
wounded (as the Nature of the Whale is) made to the Shore, and cast her self on
the Sands not far from the place where St. Patrick was; where wanting Water to
carry her off, she in little time dyed for want of her own Element: Our
Champion and his Men dividing the Vast Body into diverse parts, got it so far on
Land, as was beyond the power of the Sea to fetch her off again. Amidst the
Horror of their present Disaster, it was a little relief to consider that the
Fatal work of their overthrow should so soon, and by so strange means receive
Punishment for the Irreparable injury. But what can resist the hand of St.
Patrick, when the Monsters of the Land and Sea, fall before his Mighty
Puissance?

CHAP. VI. How St. Patrick recovered his Vessel, the Miracle of his Horse
Crapearo, and what happened in the farther prosecution of his Voyage to Greece.
Whilst our Ship-wrackt Passengers were in great thoughtfulness how they
should get off the Island, and prosecute the designed Voyage; there being on
the place, no Inhabitant, nor any Convenience that could give them any hope of
a suppply for their Necessities; whilst some of them even wished they had been
drowned with their Fellows, for fear of the miseries they were like farther to
suffer: Our matchless Hero, both by the example of his admirable Patience, and
the great bravery of his Courageous speeches, so heartned them, that it seemed,
as if he had conveyed a new Soul into their Bodies; such Virtues does the very
presence of a Valiant man infuse, even into very Cow-heads; but he that never
knew what it was to fear, thought it could be of no use to him now; besides, it
would argue a great Pusilanimity of Soul, which would ill become a Person cut
out to be famous to all Posterity. Whilst therefore he was sweetning his fellow
sufferers with the most Sugared Exhortations he could on the sudden invent,
and in which (too) he was very dexterous; so the kind waves (relenting the loss
of so Famous a Champion had on their Element) threw the Wreck so near to the
shore, that they could lay hold on some of the Tackling; when our
nev^r-enough-Admired Patrick, setting both hands with all his might to the
Stern, turned the Vessel clear upon her Keel: But you must imagine, the falling
back of the Water, helped much toward the effecting thereof: But Alas! if
there had been no water at all, it could not have been impossible for him to
perform; with whom Miracles were as common, as for us to put on and off our
Clothes. The Seamen seeing this Wonder of his Sex, had again put them in a
possibility of Saving themselves, soon got upon the Deck, and looking into the
Hold, they might there discern the Nonesuch Crapearo still alive: For you must
know, that the Whale had cast the Vessel into such a posture, that the water
could not get in, because all the Hatches and Port-holes where the Air might
get out, were stopped; and so the Ship remained like a wooden Bowl, reversed
on a Tub of Water, which because the Air is pent in, keeps out the other
Element; some of the Seamen too, which they thought had perished, were found
alive under the Hatches, to the exceeding Comfort of St. Patrick, and the rest
of their Ships Company: But our poor Crapearo was somewhat battered on his
Cheek, Side, and Thigh, by the turning of the Vessel; when St. Patrick, only
smoothing his hand over it, it presently grew whole, and Skin and Hair came on
it in the same instant; so that there was no sign of any hurt had been there.

Then viewing the Trunks and Chests wherein the Noble Champions Rich
Habiliments were packed, they found they had received no damage at all; and
though the Magical Sword had lain in the Water, yet such was the Virtue of it,
that it preserved from Rust, and had no apparent injury: But yet one Principal
Thing was missing; for the Victuals being stowed in one of the upper Decks,
where the Hatches were open, they were all fallen out, and carried away by
violence of the water, so that there was not so much as a Cheese, a dish of
Pease, a piece of Beef or Pork left, only a Barrel of Biskets remained, that
had been stowed in the Pursers Cabin.

This now began to be a new Extremity, for the day was pretty far spent, in
Toyling about the Ship, to set her again at Rights, and with the extreme Cold,
and Mischance of the Foregoing Night, they were in a very Faint Condition; and
now again began to conclude all Lost; when St. Patrick Luckily casting his Eye
to the Land, might perceive a Beast at a distance, resembling a Woolf, and as
he thought, carrying a Sheep in his a wolf offering a newly slain sheep to St.
Patrick mouth; whereat he forthwith got to Shore, taking with him his Trusty
Sword, and resolving to make the Beast part with her Prey to him: But O
Wonderful! no sooner was this Gallant Knight come on Land, but the Woolf made
toward him, moving her Tail in seeming Kindness, and fawning upon him, laid
the Sheep at his feet, without offering any the least Violence to our mighty
Champion; then inclining her head to the ground, she cast out of her mouth the
Quarters of a Lamb, which she had newly killed, and it seems brought there for
the Entertainment of these Travelers: So having done her Errand, the Woolf
departed to her Den. This Relation may perhaps pusle some Incredulous People,
but those who were acquainted with the Irish Patron, know, that when he was a
Boy, and kept his Aunts Flock, he would ordinarily make the VVoolves restore
the Lambs they had taken from her Fold.

Thus by the Assistance of this Famous Man, were the poor fainting Seamen,
once more in a prospect of somewhat to assuage their Hunger; but now (as if
Nature had made defects on purpose, that the Famous Patrick might supply them,)
there was not one stick of Wood to be found on the whole Island; so that unless
they should make a Fire of their Ships-Tackling, they could have nothing to
Broil their Meat: Wherefore the Vigilant Champion searching about, came at last
to a Pond of Water, which was Frozen over by the extreme Cold of the Season:
therefore ordering his Men to brake up the Ice, they fell to Work upon it; and
as it broke, it splitted into gads and pieces, like Billets of Wood; whereat,
the Hero laying some of them together, and rubbing them with the point of his
Sword, they immediately took Fire, and burnt like states of Deal, or
Scotch-Coal; by which they soon Roasted their Mutton, and Lamb, and Boiled
several pieces of the Fish, out of which came such abundance of Oil, as served
them for Dripping and Sauce for their other Meat.

The Servants of St. Patrick being Fed, and Replenished, began now to conclude,
that it was impossible for them to want any thing whilst they were with such a
Master, that could make the Sea cast him up Fish, the Wolves provide him Flesh,
and the Water to yield him Fire; so that now being revived with Victuals, and
such Considerations, they lustily apply themselves to fit their Vessel for her
farther Voyage, resolving not to desert so notable a Master, even in the most
hazardous Adventures.

In few days, by their great Industry, the Ship was again fitted for her
Voyage; but then, not knowing, how long it might be before they might come at a
place to Victual, and having as yet no farther supply, but what the Care, and
Wondrous Fortune of St. Patrick daily provided for them, they therefore
besought him not to Adventure on an unknown Sea, until there were some
probability for their subsistence; adding, they might with less appearance of
Danger, continue on the Island, where they had found Food, than trust the
merciless Ocean, where it would be impossible for them to live, without a store
of Provision. But the Mirror of Rnighthood, St. patrick, made them this Reply:
That it would ill become the Gods, whose Champion he was, not to make provision
for him, whilst he was in pursuit of such Glorious Achievements as should make
Altars be reared to them; and their Temples resound with the loud Praises of
his mighty Chivalry: That they did very ill to distrust the benignity of his
Stars, having had so late proof of the great Success which always attends
Heroic minds, since even all the Elements Conspire to serve them. That he had
met with no opposition from productions purely vulgar, or in the common course
of Nature; for they saw that even the most Salvage and Ravening Woolves
(contrary to their Natural disposition) Ministered to him: but the danger he had
me withal, was only from Monsters, and those the Mightiest Products of the
Land, and Water; Both which notwithstanding had paid their Lives a Tribute to
his Knightly Valor. Then looking on them with a cheerful Countenance, and
somewhat raising his Voice. Courage (said he) my Mates; you shall see the never
failing Fortune that attend Gallant Minds.

So carrying on board that small Portion of Food they had left, they with great
resolution Embarked, and put again to Sea; being Encouraged by the brave
Expressions and high Courage of their Valiant Leader.

But now the Cross Fates had their Game to play, which they did to their
utmost, all the Evil and Malignant Aspects assisting; to break (if possible)
the Vistorious success of this Invincible Champion: For you must understand the
Island they were under was Situate in a Climate under the Dominion of Evil
Spirits, by which only it was Inhabited: all the Familiars of the Famous
Magicians, Wizzards, Conjurers, and Witches had Resort hither; here they kept
their Rendezuous and general Councils; to which many times they invited those
of Lappland, and Finnland as Assistants: But none of these Furies durst show
themselves, or give the least signification of their being there* whilst our
great Hero was on the shore; knowing that by the Mighty Virtue of his Sword,
they must all have been dispersed, their Charms dissolved; and their Kingdom
destroyed; therefore they entertained him with a great Serenity whilst on the
Land: But now having got him on the Watery Stage, they resolve to show all their
Malice, to join all their Force, and employ all their Hellish Arts toward
his overthrow.

Scarce were they got three Leagues from the shore, before the Little primate
was surrounded with Shoales of Witchy Sirens, dancing on the top of the Water,
combing their blew Locks, and Singing their Ominous Notes; which were Intended
for the Funeral dirges and Exequies of the great Patrick, and his Ships-Company.

Many of which seemed strangely pleased at the Novelty of the sight; till the
Sea Rising, the Waves clashing, the Billows Roaring, the Sky Darkened, and
Flashing with Tremendeous Fireballs, convinced them, that these Watery Nimphs
were the unlucky forerunners of most destructive Tempests. Now indeed was the
face of things altered to the greatest disadvantage; the Air was so
pitchy-black with the horrid vizour drawn over the Horizon that they could
scarce discern one the other, unless sometime by the Flashes of Lightening;
which made the sturdy Axel-tree to crack again with its loud roaring Thunder,
The trembling Vessel was kicked about on the Surges like a Football in
Tuttle-Fields; sometimes mounted to the Clouds, by and by sink down between
watery Mountains, that seemed on every side to be tumbling in upon her; the
Keell cracked, the Mainmast was broken, and the Seamen now reduced to
desperation; that they could have been content to drown for fear of farther
Danger; Only the undaunted Champion amidst all this disorder stood with his
unconquerable Sword drawn, as if he would Challenge Neptune, and all the Gods
of the Ocean; no more was he dismayed at the rolling of the Sea, then if he had
been at Olindors Table; but like a Son of true Valor had his Courage most
Elevated in the lowest Ebb of Adversity, and casting a Magnanimous Aspect on
the insulting Billows; Proud Waves (said he) think not by your loud clamor,
and impetuous noise to daunt him that values not all the Violence of
Misfortune; for were I astride on one your curled backs, my great Soul should
so buoy me up, that I would despise a Squardron of Tritons, or a Troop of your
Gygantick Leviathans. Still the noise of the Tumultuous Air grew Louder, and
was augmented by the schrieks and cries of diverse friendly Spirits which
surrounded the Ship; and casting his Eye toward the miss^n Mast, our Patrick
espied the Spirit of the great Sorceress Kalyb, his old Adversary; she indeed
was the main raiser of all this horrid Tempest; for no sooner had she perceived
the dissolver of her Magical Charms set foot on that unlucky Island; but
straight she whispers among all the Demons, what extraordinary Person our
Famous Hero was; How beloved by the Gods, and brought into the World under such
an Aspect, as would certainly make him Victorious over all that oppose him: He
has already (continued she) ruined me, and destroyed my Magical Empire: But
let us try what our united Forces can do toward his Overthrow, that our
Infernal Kingdom may no more be over-mastred by his proud Successes.

Thus having said, they all consented to endeavor the drowning of our Mighty
Champion on the Ocean: But no sooner had he espied the shade of the Hellish
Kalyb; but fixing his piercing Eye upon her Airy form: Base Hagg (quoth he) and
have thou yet such interest in the lower World, that thou can suborn and
raise such Violence against Humane race; Know, that I Patrick have determined
thy final overthrow, and by the power of this Sword (whose force thou have
already felt) I conjure thee not to stir from that place, until my virtuous
Hand send thy Fantastic form into the Empty Air. Thus said he, ordered his
Men to hoist him up to the Mast, where being drawn up by the Tackling, and
Elevated just of a height even with the Spectre of the Witch, he let drive a
blow with his Enchanted Sword, that you might have seen the Spirit split in two
parts, which immediately vanished into the Air, and dissolved it self in a
Pillar of Smoaky Attoms: All the other Demons with hideous yells and infernal
noises, leaving the Vessel to pursue her Voyage.

CHAP. VII. St. Patricks Adventures in the Grecian and Eastern Countries.
NO sooner were these Goblins dispersed, but the Sky was so clear, you could
not discern the sign of a Cloud; the Ocean was as smooth as a Billiard Table,
and all things appeared as if there had been no Storm at all; the very Masts
and Shrouds which seemed to have been broken, were on search found sound, and
without defect: Only the Seamen passing through so many Scenes of Miracles were
almost Petrifyed with wonder. Now might you see the proud Frigate sliding over
the smiling Main, before the easy blast of a gentle gale, viewing her stately
Masts, and glittering Stern in the Crystal Flood, whilst Silver-Whitings,
Enammell'd Salmons, and broad Turbants, of their own accord presented
themselves on the deck to feast the Princely Champion, to whom Neptune seemed
to have resigned the Dominion of the Sea. Nor was the Lord of the Airy Region
behind hand with his presents to our Valiant Hero, for Duck, Teal, and Widgeon,
with all other sorts of Water Foul came to the Ship in such abundance, that
they were forced to cast many of them over into the Sea.

Now entering the Mediteranian Sea, they passed by the Rich Countries of Spain,
Italy, and the Coast of Barbary; and putting into one of the Ports belonging to
the Kingdom of Naples, they furnished their Ship with such Necessaries as they
stood in need of; and then continued their Voyage toward the Archipellago:
where meeting with two great Ga^lies belonging to the Turkish Port, they were
saluted with a Thundering Broadside from the first, which laid the Mainmast
flat upon Deck; so that it was in vain to hope by flight to Escape their fury:
But had the Vessel had all her Whings, the great Patrick who never knew what
'twas to turn his back upon danger; bravely animated his men to a Noble
defense, assuring them, if once the Turks came to Grapple with him, they should
dearly pay for. the damage they had sustained by them; then the other Gally
coming up, Gaulled the other side of our Champions Ship with showers of small
shot; but they found not the brave Irish Knight ungrateful to any of their
Attacques; for he so well played his Port-holes, that he might perceive diverse
breaches his shot had made in the huge sides of their large Galleys; besides,
many of their men that had been laid upon Deck by his Muskets: The brave
resistance that our Noble Chevalier made, striking no small Terror into the
Turkish Commanders; who being much incensed to see two great Galleys so
defeated by a small Friggot; one of them with furious resolution clapping on
his grapling Irons, endeavored to board the ship of our Noble Patrick, but was
prevented by his Courage: for no sooner perceived he that the vessels were
linked together, but forthwith with a Courage Exceeding all but himself, he
leapt on Board the Turk, and in little time had covered the Deck, with Bodies
that were mowed down like stubble by his Victorious Sword; then seeing the way
clear to the Captain, he made up to him with such bravery, that the Infidel,
was going to deliver him his Cimeter; Know base Dog (said the mighty Patrick)
That thy Fawning shall not so Reconcile me to thy Bestial Submission, but I
will send thy black Soul, to tell those that are sent before thee, that thy
Brutish Cruelties, have received their just Recompense at my Unconquerable
Hand. And at that word giving him a downright blow upon the Head, he broke his
Cimeter, with which he endeavored to defend himself, and parted his Head in
two parts just in the midst; so that one half falling on the right shoulder,
and the other on the left; and in this Posture carried them into the other
World, as a double Trophy to the Valor of St. Patrick. The remaining few in
that Gally seeing the Fate of their Leader, and fellow Soldiers, fell at his
feet, beseeching him to spare their Contemptible Lives, that they might make
known among their Country men, the High Praises due to his Inimitable Valor.
His generous Heat being pacified with their humble Submissions, easily was
prevailed upon to give them their worthless Lives: Then securing them under one
of their own Hatches; he turned to see what was become of the other Gally; but
her Commander seeing the Fate of his Brother Pyrate, had wisely Conveyed his
Vessel so far out of the Storm, that it being near Night, and St. Patricks
Vessel much disabled, he thought not fit at that time to make after Her: but
ordering his men to take notice of what loss had happened amongst the Turks, they
found that two Hundred and Eighty had fallen by the alone hand of St. Patrick,
besides the Captain: which Bodies having been thrown over Board, they returned
to Examine the Value of their Prize, which could not well be Computed, she
being most Richly Laden with abundance of Silks; besides great store of Gold,
Pearl, and Spices. The greatest part whereof, he like a Generous Captain
distributed amongst his Soldiers, the better to Encourage them in another
Difficulty; and counting his own Loss, he found but one of his men Killed, and
three Wounded; so that reckoning the many Slain and Wounded in that other Gally
that went off, this will appear to be as strange a Victory as perhaps any Story
makes mention of.

The greatest part of that Night was spent in unloading the Gally, by taking
out the Choicest Goods, and Stowing them in their own Frigate; so that by the
next morning they had little to do but to fit their Vessel the best they could
for the remainder of their Voyage; which began now to shorten. They had a
reserve on Board for such Accidents, and in little time had fitted on new
Shrouds, mended their Sails, and repaired the Mast: So leaving the Gally to the
conduct of the few Slaves that remained in her, They made with all the Sail
they could to the Country of Greece, and in few weeks came in sight of the Isle
of Chios; and making to the Harbor, they spent some days there; in
disposeing of such Commodities as they thought good to part with; and
furnishing them with such Necessaries as they stood in need of. Here likewise
they met with some English Merchant, by whom they sent home word of their safe
Arrival on that Coast, and of the strange Adventures performed by the famous
St. Patrick by the way. Departing from Chios, the Heroic Champion continued
his Resolution for the Continent of Grecia; intending by Land to Travel to the
Mighty City build by the Great Constantine of England, of the which place, that
Age talked Wonders; so in few days Arriving at -- a Port of Dalmatia; he took a
Lodging for himself and his Page Mac, providing a convenient stable for
Crapiero, of whom you have heard nothing a long time, the wooden Horse having
been in his stead: but now we have brought our Knight on shore, we shall have
occasion to mention him in our Travels. St. Patrick having Landed such
principal things as he most esteemed; freely gave the Vessel, with the rest of
the Cargo, to the Seamen; who, notwithstanding they met with so great a Booty
at leaving their great Master; (whose bounty was as his Valor, above the rest
of Mankind) yet could they not part with him without many Tears; protesting
that their Captains presence was more valued by them than the Riches of the
Indies, nay, dearer than their own Lives: So great impression had his high
Courage made, even in men of so low a make; notwithstanding, in Obedience to
his Command, here they parted.

The ever-Famous Patrick having stayed some time in this Harbor, one Morning
very early departed, as soon as the light gave l^ave; this he did, that the
Rabble might not pass their Censures on the goodness of his Horse, the richness
of his Armor; or the Gallantry of his Equipage. They Iournied several days
through the pleasantest parts of that once happy Country, beside stately
Vineyards, Groves of Olives, and Oranges, Fragrant Mirtles: Silver Streams, and
Fountains, once Consecrated to the Muses; at last passing through the pleasant
Fields of Tempe in Thessalia, of which the Ancient Greeks Sung so sweetly: The
Native Beauty and Freshness of the place invited him to fit down under the
shade of a Spicy Myrtle, whilst Mac fed the Horses at a distance; suddenly he
heard a lamentable cry in the adjacent Wood, which seemed to pierce the very
Air; upon which calling for his Horse, he rid into the thicket with the
greatest speed he could, till the noise brought him to a green plain St.
Patrick rescueing a young woman who was being assaulted by a Satyr by a River,
where a Monstrous Satyr with two heads was attempting the Chastity of a
Beauteous Young Lady; who having no company but her maid, was diverting her
self in the pleasant solitariness of that place: Our Knight presently made up
to the Monster; who with his hideous Roaring seemed as if he called more of
like sort to his Succor; but St. Patrick pressing upon him, the Satyr gave him
a wound with his sharp Horns, betwixt the Armor and the saddle bow; whereat
out Knight giving him a mighty blow on the neck betwixt his two Heads, that
parted his body into two equal halves; the Heads roared, and made a noise for
some time after, but could not avoid falling before the Invincible Sword of St.
Patrick. This being Finished, he returned to the Damsel, enquiring wherein he
might further serve her: She told him he could do her no greater Honor, than
that night to lodge at her Fathers House, that she might show him her Heroic
Benefactor: so passing out of the Thicket, they came to a small Lodge, where a
Chariot waited for the Lady, on whom our Champion waited to the Basha's Palace;
who was her Father, and about two Miles from that place. The Bashaw welcomed
the Princly Stranger with all the Gallantry of the Turkish Court, and having
heard from his Daughter of the Wonderful manner; and with what more than Human
Courage, he had saved her from the Cruel Satyr; The Bashaw being sent for to be
at Constantinople in three days; besought our Hero to go with him; that he
might show unto the Sultan the most undoubted Chevalier in the World. This
request of the Bashaw's was so agreeable to St. Patricks resolution, that
without any previous Complement he accepted of it; and the next Morning they
departed to that Imperial City; and in (...) days arrived at the Seraglio,
where the (...) ^^^^ented our Famous Champion to the Grand Seignior; who was
much in Love with his Knightly Person, a great admirer of his Armor; and
especially of his Horse Crapiero, who by the Conduct of his Master won many
Races, and Tournaments from the most Famous Chevaliers in the Ottoman Court.

CHAP. VIII. How St. Patrick fought with the huge Tartarian Bembo, and overcame
him.
OUR Champion had not rested long at the Grand Seigniors Court, when (the Fame
of his former Atchievments being spread over the World) A Monstrous Tartar
arrived also at Constantionople, where he tarried certain days, bidding
defiance to all the Knights about the Court, but none durst adventure to accept
of his Challenge; wherefore hearing of a Stranger lately arrived, who was
Famous for Chivalry, he sends his Lacquey early in the Morning to St. Patricks
Lodging with a Challenge; who when he knocked at the door, Mack lets him in,
and asks his business; he answered, that his business was with his Master, that
he had a Letter for him, from the Great and Famous Bembo, which required a
present answer. Well says Mack, if you please to let me have the letter, and
you shall have the answer anon; which he did. Mack carries the Letter to his
Master being in bed, who when he had opened it, he found the Extent of it to
Thus: Renowned Knight,
HEaring of the great Fame, which by thy Gallantry thou have acquired in all
places where thou have been in this part of the World; I desire to be further
informed, as to the Truth of it; and knowing nothing so Satisfying in this
Point, as Experience; I have sent you this Challenge, that to Morrow Morning
you may meet me well Armed in the List, before the Seraglio; where your Valor
shall be fully tried by

Bembo.




St. Patrick no sooner had read the Challenge, but he called for Pen, and Ink,
and returned this Answer.

Unknown Knight,
FOR so I must call you, being altogether a Stranger to you; since you are
pleased to pass so many worthy Knights in Greece, and to express your desire of
putting your Valor to trial with me, to Morrow in the List before the
Seraglio; I heartily accept, both of the Time and Place, with this proviso,
that the Grand Segniors leave be obtained to it; which I my self shall
endeavor to procure: Whereas you say that my Valor shall be fully tried, it
must be Deeds, and not Words that shall do it; however expect to be there
looked for by

Patrick.


Our Champion no sooner dispatched the Messenger, but presently he makes his
Application to the Grand Segnior (whom he found walking in his Garden with a
great train of Courtiers) in these words; Most Renowned Monarch, The Report
that Fame has made of thy Greatness, and the magnificence of thy Court over
all the World, has invited me hither, and now I lie under a Challenge from a
Stranger, who was so bold as to appoint the Lists before your Majesty's
Seraglio, the place of our Rancounter (without so much as asking your Majesty's
leave); but for my part, I have been more Civilly Educated; therefore (am I
come now to prostrate my self at your Imperial Feet, hoping that for the Love
you have to Chivalry, and your Royal Favors showed to Strangers, and
particularly to my self, we may be permitted to morrow morning to try our
Fortune in the foresaid Lists. The Emperor asked him what the Knight was that
thought himself able to Enter the Lists: Why may it please your Majesty, says
he, I know no more of him as yet, but only that he subscribeth himself Bembo,
which I suppose is his Name; whereupon, the grand Segnior seemed extremely
concerned, telling him, that he greatly feared the Event: For says he, the
Bembo is rather a Giant than an ordinary man, and has been a long time in
Greece, and Challenged many, but none of all our Knights durst answer him,
except two; And what then, he played as a Cat would do with a Mouse, so great
was the disparity in the strength: I am not in any respect afraid of him,
answered he: If he should borrow the strength of a Rock, and the Courage of a
Lion, i will venture all, so that I may have your Majesty's Consent as to the
place appointed. With all my heart (answered the Emperor) and taking the
Champion by the hand, I know says he, thou art one whose Sword has brought
thy Fame from the ends of the Earth, and now when the Perecious Jewel (your
Honor) should in the least be stained in our Court, I would choose to forgo
infinite Treasures; yet I am not out of hopes, but will make the Knight feel
the weight of thine. I doubt it not in the least (replied the other) for I
think every hour a day till I see him.

St. Patrick having obtained the Emperors License, with so great Expressions
of Kindness besides; he presently Retired to his Lodging, gave orders to Mac to
have a special care that Capriero should be well fed that night, for that he
was to be put to Task next morning: Trusty Mac neglected nothing that could be
for his Masters Interest and Advantage, roused up Capriero with such things as
he had provided for him, so that by his Prauncing and Bouncing, he had almost
broke down the Stable, none being able to Command him, but his Master alone.

No sooner began the Chirping Birds to Celebrate the approaching shining of
bright Aurora, but our Champion began to make ready for the work of the day;
and about eight a Clock, he presented himself in the Lists, clad in his Rich
Glittering Armor upon his stately Prauncing Steed, expecting the Emperors
coming, who about an hour after appeared from his Royal Palace, with a
Magnificent Train of Knights and Ladies in great Splendour: the Emperor having
sat upon a Throne erected for the purpose, and all the Princes and Ladies
being placed according to their Rank; They began with wonder to view the
Stately Champion who was upon Horseback within the Lists; greatly admiring his
Stately Body, his Amiable Features, and Graceful Mien, wishing heartily that
he might be Victor. As they were thus taken up with him, behold the fierce
Tartar entered the List, with Innumerable Tokens of Incomparable Valor, which
made many sear how it would go with the Comely Knight, (for so they called St.
Patrick.) But the Pagan coming up close to him, said,

Now Knight, seeing the time for trying thy Valor with Deeds, is come, there
is no reason to delay it, but in the nameing of the Judge; since one of us must
of necessity remain for ever Breathless in the Field, therefore I would know
whom you would nominate for Judge. That question is needless in many respects
(replied the other) nevertheless I appoint the Emperor himself, who sits there
for Judge. I had not thought thy Pride so great (said the Pagan) but since it
is so, I am content that the Emperor be judge to them I intend to present thy
Head before I leave the Lists.

The furious Champion thought it no time to trifle any longer with the
Barbarous Savage, therefore they turned their Horses, swifter than two light
Galleys carried with the force of their full wind blown Sails, met in the end
of their Courses, breaking their Lances to Shivers without moving in their
Saddles. So drawing their glittering Swords, they ran like Lions one upon
another, laying on such blows as that every one that looked on, thought they
were the last. Great abundance of Blood issued from both their Armor, but most
from the Pagans; for though the strength of his Armor defended his Body in
some parts of it from Wounding, yet the Combat had not lasted an hour, when he
found himself so bruised and tired, that he could hardly keep his Saddle, which
made him in a raging Fury Assault St. Patrick, thrusting at him with a Point
with such Force, that he laid him along upon his Saddle; this he seconded with
a terrible blow upon his Breast, before he could recover himself, which made
him almost quite senseless. With more ravening Fury turned n^ the raging Tygre
upon his Foe, than no^ did our Champion; for casting his own Shield (...) his
back, he discharged such a blow on his Adversaries, that he clave it quite
assunder; then with renewed Force, did they close one with another, with such
Rage, that both Horses and Riders tumbled to the ground; yet had they scarcely
touched the ground when both were on their feet again. The Pagan having
recovered some Breath, with fresh strength he assaulted his Adversary,
thrusting at him with such Force, that made him yield a little ground; yet not
so much but that he could reach him with such a blow upon the Thigh, as made
him tremble: Abundance of blood streaming from it; whereupon the Pagan
abandoning all Fear, Reclosed with him, and with one stroke, cut away his
Male-sleeve, drawing much blood after it: This grievous blow he thought to have
seconded with such another as would end the Controversy with our Champions
Life, but he found himself much mistaken; for the other being sensible that his
Armor was much weakened, resolved to make strength and courage his Armor;
therefore with his Sword he gave the Pagan such a blow upon the Shoulder, that
he made the blood gush out in great measure. The fight is now as it were begun
afresh, such Strength and Valor appeared on both sides, that the beholders were
so possessed with admiration, that they almost thought it a Dream; for the Combat
continued four hours without any rest; therefore with mutual consent, they
parted a little to breath: St. Patrick having sat down in a Chair that was set
for him of the purpose, he began to recount with himself, with how little
success he had fought all that while, his Enemy having as yet as good a
prospect of the Victory as himself; therefore he presently starts up upon his
Feet, assaulting his Enemy, who was ready for him, with such terrible fury,
that both almost came to the Ground together; then they clasped one another
about the middle, and began to wrestle like two Giants; but their strength was
so equal, that none of them could get his Adversary thrown down, which made
them again betake them to their Swords; then the Spectators observing St.
Patrick to have the better, began to shout for Joy. But the Impatient Pagan
Cursing and Blaspheming against his Gods, as thinking that this disgrace
proceeded from them, run upon his Enemy, and with both hands let sly at him
such a blow, that lighting on the side of his Helm, he cut away all the
Bucklers on the right side.

Now our Champion finding that all the parts of his Armor were thus rendered
useless to him, thought it was no time to linger; therefore with his Sword in
both hands, he assaulted his Enemy; who in the same manner received him, and
with more horror then the furious Waves bent upon the Flinty Rock, they
discharged their blows upon their Helmets, so that they both fell senseless to
the ground, St. Patrick without his Helm, but the other with his Head, Skull
and Brains broken, and scattered within his Helm. Some would have gone to them,
but were not permitted by the Guard, till it were seen, what the effects of
their Trance must be; but straight was the Victory proclaimed, for the Valiant
St. Patrick recovering himself looked for his Enemy; but finding to lie, went
to him and unlacing his Helm, saw that he was quite dead: Then addressing
himself to the Emperor, and to the rest of the Judges, demanded whether he had
performed the Action to his Honor. One in the Emperors name, replied thus,
Valiant Knight, The great Souldan, with all the rest of the Judges and
Spectators, commanded me to tell you, That your Atchievments this day, have
been such, as shall be enough to perpetuate your memory in this place for ever.
Nay, this was not all, for the Emperor himself, with all his Train came to the
place to receive the Viccorious Knight; to him he spoke thus: Valiant Knight,
The force of your Arms has this day purged our Court from the Aspersions,
which otherwise it should undoubtedly lie under, by the daily Bravadoes of that
insolent Knight; ask what thou please in compensation of thy Valor, and it
shall forthwith be granted. To whom our Campion replied, Renowned Monarch, I
reckon my self highly honored, in that your Greatness condescends to look upon
this Service as done for the honor of Thy Court, to which I heartily dedicate
it; wishing for no other reward, but that I may continue in thy Majesty's
Favor. Whereupon the Emperor giving him his hand to kiss, raised him from the
ground, and demanded who he was; to them, he answered, that he was born in the
Western parts of the World, but for some time Traveled in Greece; and that
hearing of the splendour of the Emperial Court at Constantinople, he would needs
Satisfy himself to see it; neither did he then repent his coming thither, for
every thing did exactly answer his expectations. The Emperor would not suffer
him to go back to his lodging, but would deeds have him go along with himself
to Court, where his wounds might be healed by his own Physicians, which was
very Carefully and Dexterously performed, so that in few days he was perfectly
recovered: Capriero also having been hurt in two places, was entrusted to the
care of the Emperors Grooms, who so performed their part, that he was well
before his Master.

CHAP. IX. How Alphebo, Bemboes Brother being to revenge his Brothers Death,
was vanquished by St. Patrick.
Our Champion had not rested himself long after the Conflict with Bembo, when
news being gone to Tartary, that their Champion was killed at Constantinople,
his Brother whose Name was Alphebo, being for Valor and Courage every way
equal to Bembo himself, hastens with all speed to Constantinople, resolving
either to revenge his Brothers death, or else never to see his Country again.
Being arrived, the first thing he did, was to enquire for his Name, whose
Fortune it was to overcome the Mighty Bembo; which he no sooner learnt, but he
presently sends him a most provoking Challenge in these Terms.

Presumptuous Knight,
WHose misfortune it was to kill the bravest Champion in the World; I his only
Brother knowing assuredly, that thou could never have done such an Act, but
through Treachery, am here arrived to demand satisfaction, which I am resolved
to have upon any terms; and that in the very place where thou most cowardly
murdered my Valiant Brother; I am resolved to offer up thy carcass, as a
Sacrifice to my Gods, and and to carry thy Head in triumph to my Country, to
make satisfaction for thy wrong. If thou do not presently answer my Challenge
(as it is probable thou dare not) think not that the Emperors Palace shall
protect you, for my resolution is to have thy life, if I should break through
Walls of Brass for it; therefore your answer in have,

Alphebo.


This Challenge came to our Champion, as he was walking with the Emperor in the
Garden; which he no sooner rec^ived and read, but he let the Emperor see it:
he having read it over, and observing the Man's rash and inconsiderate way of
Writing; turning about to St. Patrick, I perceive (says he) that these two
Knights are much of a temper, and I doubt the success shall prove the same to
this, as it did to the last: I need not advise thee what to do, I leave it to
thy self; and I question not, but thy Sword is sharp enough to vindicate thine
Honor: What ever time and place thou shall affix, care shall be taken that all
things may be put in due order; and so adue.

The Emperor being gone to the Palace, St. Patrick asked the Bearer of the
Letter to tarry there a little, and he should have his answer presently, and so
retired to a Summer House, there writ his answer thus,

Sir Knight,
IT might be expected from a Man of Arms that he would not undervalue himself
to invade the Province, not of a silly Woman, as you by your Scolding Language
in your Letter; proves you self to have done. I think it below my self to take
particular notice of any passage in it, so much as to mention it; only know,
that your Brother, who has gone before you, talked almost as broadly as you
do; but the event proved, that his Tongue had the advantage of his hands: And
for your part, since you have not by his fate received instruction; make your
self ready, and appear in the same place, to morrow morning at eight a Clock;
where if you want to know how your unhappy Brother dyed, you shall upon your
own charges be acquainted with it, by

Patrick.


Our Champion having dispatched the Messenger, he went to the Palace, where he
found the Emperor, giving the necessary orders for the next day; who desired
that St. Patrick would be so free with him as to acquaint him of any thing that
he might want that were necessary for the Action: He replied, that he wanted
nothing at present, only his Armor was much cut in the last Engagement;
whereupon the Emperor went presently to his Armory, and brought in his own
hand, a stand of most excellent Armor, with which he presented St. Patrick,
desiring him to try how it would fit him; which presently he did, and found it
lay as well to his Body, as if it had been made for him; after that the
Emperor had discoursed a while with him upon the next days adventure, he
retired to his Chamber; where calling for Mac, he gave him strict orders, that
he should look well to Crapriero, and should have his Saddle, and other things
in good order before he went to rest, which Mac accordingly did. Thus our
Champion passed over this wearisom night, long looking for the morning, which
no sooner began to appear, but he presently arose from his Bed, and began to
put every thing in its own place; having with all speed buckled on his Armor,
when he found the appointed time approach, he came from his Chamber, where in
the great Hall the Emperor met him, and complemented him at a high rate; and
accompanying him to the Gate, he heartily wished him good success; and so left
him to call the Princes and Ladies of the Court together, that they might
follow.

Our Champion entered the Lists by the way from the Palace; where he no sooner
appeared, but all the beholders began to wonder, who it should be, his Change
of Armor making them no wise suspect, that he was the Champion that had made
himself so famous in that place not long before. The Armor which he wore that
day, was of a bright yellow color, full of half Moons, overcast with a russet
Coat. The Emperor and the Court had scarce taken their Seats when at the other
end of the Lists entered the Tartarian, mounted upon a strong and mighty
Courser: his Warlike Habit was of a sad Red Color, with green Bars and golden
Gravings; at his Saddle Pummel hung a mighty Mace of Steel; with all which he
appeared mighty Terrible to all, except him with whom he had to do.

Without any other Ceremony, these two Warlike Champions, like two Flashes of
Lightning, ran at one another; at the first Rancounter they peirced their
Sheilds, the Breast Plate of each staying his Adversaries Fury, from whence the
shivers of the broken Lances mounted into the middle Region of the Air; then
with the raging Wrath which possessed both of them alike, they returned upon
each other, and with the strength of mighty Arms discharging such furious
Blows one upon the other, that all the Beholders expected the Conflict would
not last long; but they were much mistaken; the furious Pagan laid on so
fiercely with his Mace, that St. Patrick lost his Crest, and had his Head sore
bruised; but feeling the smart of the blows, and seeing his own blood, he with
redoubled strength let such sly at the Pagan, that he had almost tumbled him
from his Saddle; yet it so fell out, that he only fell forward upon his Horses
neck, shedding a great deal of blood through his nose and eyes.

Thus they continued for the space of five hours in such a bloody conflict as
perhaps the World did never see the like: At last both of them beginning to be
weary, and vexed that his adversary should stand so long before him, with the
utmost of their force, they discharged their fury in such sort, that they
struck each other from their Horses, to the astonishment of all the beholders.
The Pagan loosed his Mace in the fall, which was a great loss to him, they
scarcely touched the ground, when quicker than could be Imagined they were both
upon their Feet again; but before the Pagan could well recover his feet, our
Champion gave such a stroke with his Sword upon the top of his Shield, that he
cut away a piece of it, with all the top of his Helm; an that side, this
terrible blow made him stagger, and look as if he were ready to sink down upon
the place; St. Patrick finding now that his Adversary was in such a maze, he
seconded this blow with another upon his Thigh, cutting it to the bone. This
awakned the Pagan, as it were out of a Dream, and seeing his own blood
coloring the Grass all-about him, it put him into such a Lyon-like fury, that
like a devouring Bear he ran upon his Enemy, who in the same manner received
him. Thus, as it were, the Battle is began afresh, with force and fury upon
both sides; the noise of their Swords, was heard all over the Emperors
Palaces, though Two hundred and fifty Paces distant from it. The Pagan finding
that his adversary could handle his Sword with more dexterity than himself
could do; and being now abundantly sensible of the want of his trusty Mace,
resolved upon the first opportunity to get within him; which the other
perceiving, he asked him if he thought it might be any advantage to him to try
his strength in Wrestling; if it were, he told him that he was content to throw
away his Sword, and to try him in any manner, or upon any terms he pleased;
whereupon they both agreed; but withal, they were first to take a little breath.

Having both of them sat down at a little distance one from the other, they
began each of them to be more sensible of his Wounds; the Pagan had received
nine very deep wounds, one of which was upon his thigh, which did extremely
trouble him, for it bled all the while he sat: St. Patrick has four all about
the Buckling of his Armor, two of which were very deep; his body also was very
ill bruised with the Pagans Mace, which did him much hurt.

However, bethinking with himself that for all that was done, the victory was
yet uncertain, he starts up upon his Feet with as much nimbleness, as if he had
not fought a stroke that day: He addresseth himself to the Pagan thus, Sir
Knight (says he) We have kept the Emperor and his, all this day looking to no
purpose, so little is done by us on either side; that they have no reason to be
satisfied; come therefore, since thou have thrown away thy Sword, and made it
thy choice to determine the quarrel by your Strength, let us trifle away our
time no longer. The Pagan seemed very ready, and with great Courage advanced
toward him; and cast his mighty Arms about him: Here began a terrible
Conflict, the Pagan raised our Champion from the Ground, and had almost thrown
him upon his Back. He with all his Power held him fast, and in the mean time,
with a Trip, got hold of him fast by the mindle, by which he was in equal
terms with him: Thus they tossed one another about like two Lions, for a long
space, till at last, St. Patrick, in a Rage, swinging the Pagan about, threw
him well nigh six paces from him; with the force of which, he himself fell to
the ground; but both were up again with such Nimbleness, that all the beholders
were Astonished; then with renewed force they clapsed each other about the
middle, which was the beginning of the last Scene of this Tragedy, and was as
Courageously managed as any of the former; both of them knowing that it could
not hold out much longer. The Pagan taking his advantage, attempted to throw
his Adversary backward: But the other, being as nimble as he was strong, not
only kept his feet, but also with Admirable Force lifted up the Pagan from the
ground, and threw him down again with such a noise, as made the ground shake;
yet after much striving, he got up again. Now the light of Phoebus being by
this time drencht within the caverns of the Western Ocean, and night having
covered them with her dark vail; the two Champions cried out for lights:
Whereupon the Emperor caused above a thousand bright Torches to be lighted; but
the Warriers were both of them so overcome with this long and tedious Conflict,
that if Honor had not been so much concerned, which made both of them act
above their strength, they could not have subsisted so long, especially the
Pagan, who was wearyed with the Combat, and so weakened with the loss of his
Blood, that for every step he made, with his Blood he left it printed on the
Grass: However, finding that by his Sword he was not like to overcome his
Adversary, and being still resolved either to conquer him, or dye in the place,
he to his fatal loss, joined with him again, and observing a Dagger by St.
Patricks side, he snatched it from him, and thought to have run him through the
left shoulder with it, but the Valiant St. Patrick disdaining thus to be
wounded with his own Weapon, takes hold of the Pagan by the wrist, forcing the
Dagger out of his hand, and gives him such a stab with it, in the Breast, that
he fell upon his back. Whereupon our Champion presently gets above him, and
with the Dagger in his hand, bespoke him thus: Now Knight, know assuredly, that
your Life is in my hand; you may remember your Challenge, and that the contents
of it were, that in the same place, where I killed your Brother, you should in
the same manner kill me; yet now you may see your folly, in venting your self
at such a rate against a man whose strength you knew not; till your own sad
experience gave you a Proof of it: But for my part, I have learned moderately
to manage my Conquest; therefore, here I put it in thy Choice, either to dye,
or live; if thou wilt accept of thy Life, as a complement from my hand, thou
shall have it, provided only, that thou acknowledge thy self Overcome. At this
motion, the Pagan began to Curse, and Blaspheme; Cursing his Gods that had thus
left him in his Extremity. St. Patrick, asked him the second time, if he would
accept of his Terms, which he disdainfully refused: Whereupon, with the Dagger
which was ready in his hand, he cut off his head, and held it out to the
people. No sooner they espied it, but they gave such a shout, as made all the
Rocks resound: The Emperor immediately gave orders to his Physicians to
accompany our Champion to the Palace: thither he was carried in great Triumph,
with sound of Trumpet, and other Warlike Instruments; persons of all Ranks and
Qualities, expressing their kindness to him by all possible tokens of Love and
Affection.

CHAP. X. St. Patrick sets out from Constantinople, toward his one Country; he
comes to the King of Sicilies Court, and of his Gallant behavior there.
OUR renowned Champion, having purchased immortal Trophies of Fame all the
World over; considering with himself, how long he had been absent from his
Native Country, and from enjoying the comfortable Society, and Fellowship of
his dearest Friends and Relations, (who by length of time, as also considering
the great hazards to which he was daily exposed; began to despair, of ever
seeing him again, resolves now to return home, and pass the rest of his days
more obscurely. Therefore when he was perfectly cured of the wounds which he
had received in the last Rancounter with the Tartar He resolved to take hold of
the first opportunity for communicating his purpose to the Emperor: Occasion
soon after offers it self; for the Emperor being at his mornings walk in his
Arbor, St. Patrick addresseth himself to him thus.

Illustrious Monarch, I make bold to interrupt your Majesty from your greater
thoughts, by presenting my mean request to you: Sir, I am a Man, a great part
of whose days have been spent in deeds of Arms, and now I am resolved by your
Imperial leave, to return home to my Native Country, there to give my self to
the Contemplation of Supernatural things; This therefore is my request, that it
may please your Majesty to give me leave to depart your Court with those Marks
of Honor, that usually are conferred upon such as have brought themselves
under no Stigma of reproach under your service; higher I pretend not, and lower
I presume, your Majesty will not place me. The Emperor not dreaming that St.
Patrick would ever leave his Court, was hugely surprised, when he heard him
thus talk of his speedy resolution; and after having for half an hour stood
amazed as if he knew not what to say, at length he breaks out in a passionate
manner. What, says he, You whom of all the Knights in the world I most esteem,
and by whom of all the Knights that ever appeared at my Court, I thought my
self most Honored, Will thou now after your having purchased such a vast Stock
of Fame; nay which is more, gained my Affections in such a measure? Will thou I
say, after all this, leave us thus obscurely? I hope you will not, therefore I
desire you may consider better before you resolve. If you want any thing that
can give you satisfaction which my Dominions can afford, let me know it, and
doubt not but it shall be granted. St. Patrick replied, that nothing moved him
to leave his Majesty's Court, but his longing to see his Native Country; and
that if he were to pass his time as he had formerly done, no Monarch should
command him more than he.

The Emperor finding that no entreaties could prevail with our Champion to
tarry any longer with him, did at length (though much against his heart)
Condescend to let him go, causing also rich Presents to be provided for him:
but St. Patrick humbly refused them all; telling the Emperor, that those costly
things were sitter for Ladies, than for such as he was.

Thus after a great many Ceremonies and Complements past on both sides, he
departed from Constantinople, with no other retinue but trusty Mack, and
Capriero, directing his course toward Sicily; being come to the Mauritaman
Coast, he hired a small Vessel to transport him to Sicily, which no sooner was
under Sail, but the Wind and the Element began a strife, as it were which of
them should be most serviceable to him; so that in a shorter time than one can
imagine, he came to a Harbor in a remote part of the Country. Having landed,
and walked a while by the Sea side, there came to him an Old Reverend Lady all
disordered with grief, having her Vail in her hand, and Hair hanging about her
shoulders, our Champion upon her approach stood still, expecting that she would
speak to him, which she her self intended; but when she went about it, such
floods of tears rose in her Eyes, that she could not utter one word: whereupon
he breaks off to her thus: I perceive Lady, that you are one whose Troubles are
great, so much is expressed by your looks; but if they be not past remedy, be
pleased to acquaint me with it, and I shall endeavor to see you set to rights.
The Old Gentlewoman, when she heard such words from so Gallant-like a Person,
began to revive, and to gather some hopes, that he might be the man that should
ease not only her, but all Sicilie of their grief; whereupon she abruptly break
her silence thus. Valiant Knight, who knows but that by the Gods, thou art
ordained to make Sicilie happy; and sent hither at this time for that end;
therefore I beseech you make haste to the place appointed, or I fear you may
come too late. Our Knight began to be a little astonished at the Ladies
relation, and therefore desired her in short to be more plain in it. That I
will do (quoth she) in as plain and short terms as I can. Know then Heroic
Champion, that the fair Honoria, the King of Sicilies only Daughter, is this
day (in all probability) to fall into the hands of a Monster: The manner thus;
There lives in a Forest not far from the Kings Palace, a huge creature
shaped like a man; but no doubt the product of some monsterous copulation; for
though he seems to have something of the actions of a man, yet his terrible
bigness, and most fierce actions makes many doubt what he is. This Giant or
Monster having upon a day, unfortunately seen the Beautiful Honoria as she
passed in her Chariot through the wood, came within a few days, and very
imperiously demanded her of her father: The King viewing his features, and
considering his deformity, disdainfully refused him; whereupon immediately he
departed, threatening to make her a dear Honoria to Sicily; and accordingly ever
since he has made it his work to burn and destroy the Country where ever he
comes, not sparing either Age or Sex; none dares oppose, for his strength is so
terrible that men seems but like Rats in his Clutches. The King finding the
great loss the Country sustained by his cruelty, sent him an Herald,
acquainting him, that if he did not (against this day) find one who should
fight him* and overcome him, he should have his daughter. Now the day is come,
and none has as yet appeared at Court that offers battle to the Monster;
therefore, now Knight, think, what you have to do; If you will venture for
Honor, do; if not, forbear.

This full and perfect account so filled our Champion with an itching to be at
it, that he could scarce contain himself; so he asked the Lady which way he
should steer his course to find out the place of the Battle; she told him,
that if he should ride to the right hand until he came to a little Brook, that
Brook would lead him to the very place, where he should see the Giants Tent
ready pitched; but that she was afraid there should be none else there but
himself. Without any more, S. Patrick sets his Spurs to his Horse, commanding
Mack to observe the Ladies direction, and follow him; and in the space of an
hour he came within sight of the Tent, which was of a prodigious bigness: he
alighted without the field, and tied Capriero to a Bush; then he began to
advance toward the Tent. But as he was tying his horse to the Bush, one of the
Kings servants who had been sent out as a private spy, sees him at a distance;
who taking notice of his extraordinary appearance, ran back in all have, and
told the King of it; whereupon the King immediately Summons the whole Court
together, and went out all in their Chariots toward the place.

St. Patrick having made no great have toward the Tent, the King was within
sight of the Field before the Giant appeared; for St. Patrick as soon as he
came near the Tent, made a sign upon the roof of it with his Lance for the
Giant to come out; but the Giant pretending he was not ready, gave the King
time to enter the field before he appeared: also people of all sorts having
heard that a strange Champion was arrived, came to see the Event. The Giant at
length comes out of his Tent, with eyes full of Terror, having in his hand an
Iron Mace of such bigness, that no ordinary man could carry a piece of Wood of
such a size: He no sooner saw his Antagonist, but he struck at him with such a
Force, that (he having nimbly leapt aside) it made the whole Field to shake:
St. Patrick, before the Giant could recover his Mace, runs his Lance through
his shoulder Bone; the Monster seeing his own Blood, became as mad as any Devil
in Hell; Whereupon lifting up his fearful Instrument, let such a Blow at the
other, as might be enough to cleave a Rock; but St. Patrick avoided it
likewise; which made the Giant in a rage, throw away his Mace, and draw his
Terrible Sword; which when it appeared out of the Sheath, looked a great deal
bigger than the Oar of a Schuller; with it he runs upon his Enemy with all his
Force, who received him in the like manner: Thus the Conflist begins a fresh;
the Giant had strength, but not art to manage his Sword. St. Patrick, though he
was short of the Giant in Strength, yet his singular dexterity in handling the
Sword, made him have the Advantage of his Adversary in that point, which he did
not fail to improve to the Life; for they had not Fought above half an hour,
when the Giant had five deep Wounds in his Body; which did very much abate his
Strength; and put him in such Fury, that his Sword proving as unserviceable to
him, as his Mace did; threw it away also, and runs in upon his Antagonist,
hoping to make his clutches do that which his Weapons could not do: But St.
Patrick not willing to commit himself into his hands, whom he believed to
exceed him so much in strength, holds the point of his Sword to him, to keep
him off him; but he rushing forward with all his force, not regarding any
hazard, run himself directly upon the Sword, and made it go directly through
his Body. When he had thus received his Fatal Wound, he scrieched out in so
terrible a manner, that he made both Heaven and Earth resound; tumbling down
upon the ground like a Rock. The Spectators they shout aloud for joy,
especially the King; for the joy he conceived in having his Country freed from
such a terrible Enemy, and Honoria for being quit of so unpleasant a Lover. The
Victory being absolutely obtained, the King himself came toward St. Patrick,
where he was resting his wearied Body, by the Carcass of the Giant, and invites
him home with him, which the other willingly consented to.

Being conveyed by some Knights to a most sumptuous Apartment in the Palace, he
disburdened himself of his Armor, which the Grand Seignior presented to him,
which by this last Engagement, was so shattered to pieces, that it was now
quite useless for any further service: His Headpiece was beat together like an
old Pewter-Platter, by the Giants terrible Mace; so that if the Head it self,
had not been of more than ordinary hardness, it had gone ill with him; as for
his Body-Armour, though it was one of the Best, that the eyes of man ever did
behold, the morning before the Conflict; yet, so miserably was it cut, that one
could scarce see an inch of it whole from head to foot; which made the Rnights
who stood by, exceedingly please themselves, in passing their Judgment upon it
in merriment. Some asking our Champion, What he would sell his bundle of old
Rags for? Another alleged, that he doubted, whether any Knight in Sicily (for
as well as they were acquainted with Armor) if this bundle were presented to
them, as it lay, could tell what it was. A third said, Our Champion would do
well to take especial notice of every piece, as he laid it by, that he might
know how to put it in its own place, when he had use for his Armor: for I will
assure you (says he) Sir Knight, you will need timely Advertisement to make
ready; for if the Enemy should assault us, your Tackling is a little out of
Order. Well, well, Gentlemen, answered he, I see you are resolved to be merry,
and rather than you should want a fit Subject, my distressed Armor must be
laid hold on, which I very well allow of; but I must tell you, the cutting of
it was no matter of Laughter to me, for I must confess, I was never in my Life
so hardly Engaged, as I was with this Giant: I knew his strength did by many
Degrees exceed; mine; and besides, I was much out of order, with my long and
tedious Journey from Constantinople, which did not a little impair both my
strength and nimbleness; and I must further confess, that if he had had the way
of managing his strength with such Knightly Dexterity as was becoming, I did
look upon him to have been too hard for any Knight that bears Armor, under
the Sun; however, when I found where his Strength lay, I began to know how to
deal with him, and accordingly I managed my business, so as all things happened
according to my expectation; Nay, replied one of the Knights, whether things
fell out according to your expectation or not, I know not; but this I must say,
(though I love not to Flatter any one to his face) that I did never in my Life
see so seemingly unequal a match, have such an unexpected Issue: For when you
both appeared in the Field together, me thought I could make no sitter
Comparison betwixt, than of a Man and a Mountain, so disproportioned were
Statures one to the other; I looked upon your Adversary fitter to overturn
Rocks, than to fight with Men; neither do I believe that I was mistaken of his
Strength, for he seemed to make no more of the huge Mace he had in his Paw,
than if it were no heavier than a rush: yet, says he, (casting his Eye upon
the Fineness of St. Patricks Armor, which lay upon the Table) I think truly
the loss you have sustained in your Armor, might be a sufficient ground, of a
new Challenge, if the Monster had survived. Come, come, answered he, that loss
is no loss at all, if rightly considered; for I am certain his loss is greater
that did it; nor do I in the least doubt but he was sufficiently sensible of it
before his soul and his body parted; for one might read in his very looks, that
he repented his interprise, and that if it were to do again, he would advise
before he ventured. It is true, replied another of the Knights, he was a
prodigeous Fellow to look on; but I doubt, that if we be asked by Strangers,
(as undoubtedly we shall) concerning his exact dimentions, both as to his
length and breadth, whether any of us can satisfy them. Indeed answered
another, I cannot; Nor I, says the third. Come, says the fourth, that is a
thing easy; for this Valiant Champion has laid him at his full length in
yonder Field, (pointing out at the window to the Field where he lay); so that
now one may safely measure him by inches from top to toe: Let any too of us go
then, and for our own and others satisfaction, bring his exact dimentions: To
which they all agreed, and so two of them went; but as they were going out at
the door, one of the rest calls merrily after them. Gentlemen, says he, I hope
you know your business, and what you are going about. One of the Knights going
out at door, turned about, and asked him, What made him question that? why,
says he, I would have you forget none of your Necessaries for your work; for
you know Mathematicians, when they who take the Dimensions of a Hill or
Mountain, they make use of the Quadrant, without which they cannot assure
themselves whether they have done their business as they ought, or not. St.
Patrick smiling at the Jest, said: Pray Gentlemen go about your work, for we
have sport enough already, from the fellows Carrion, and my Armor; so that you
see, how one man's rashness may be a Subject of Divertisement to many: The two
Knights went accordingly about their Business, with a measuring Linet; but
their Line proving too short upon Trial, they were forced* to send for more,
and themselves to wait by the Carcass, until it was brought them; then they
went a second time to Work, and in the first place they measured his full
length, which they found to have been Seven yards, three quarters, and Seven
inches; then they measured the circumference of his Body about the middle; but
this they found very difficult, because of the weight of his Trunk; yet by the
help of some that looked on, they raised the Body so far from the ground, as to
get the Line put under him, and bringing it about, they found his Circumference
to be five yards and an half; last of all, they measured the Length betwixt his
Eyes, which appeared to have been Twenty Inches full: Thus having satisfied
their own Curiosity in viewing, and measuring of him, they returned to the
Palace.

They were no sooner gone from the Carcass, but Six men in Armor, came from
the adjacent Wood, and putting the Body upon a Huge Engine, somewhat resembling
a Hearse, drawn by Six Horses, and as it seemed, made of purpose for that end;
they with a great deal of seeming grief, conveyed it to the wood; where, as
soon as it entered, there begun such a fearful crying and bellowing of men and
women together, that St. Patrick, who all the while looked out at his
Chamber-window, said, Merrily. I wish he has not been my Country man, for these
lamentable Obsequies, resembling our Irish Women, makes me deeply suspect it.

The two Knights, being come back again, as they were giving an account of the
matter, the King enters the room, who seeing two of the Knights standing, one
at one end of the room, the other, at the other, having a Line extended betwixt
them, each of them holding it by the end; asked them what it meant to them?
they replied: May it please your Majesty, this is the exact Length of the
Giant, which fell by the hands of this Valiant Knight (pointing to St.
Patrick): The King, though he did see the Giant fall, yet was he Astonished
when he saw his Length, by the Line; nor could he hardly be persuaded to
believe it, until they showed him his Thickness also; whence he concluded,
that the Prodigious Bulk of his Body, had made him mistake, as to his Length;
but when he saw the space betwixt his Eyes, he could by no means be persuaded
to believe it, till with many Asseverations the two Knights who measured him,
averred it: The King hav^ng heard and seen all that passed, walked five or six
times about the room, in a profound silence, with his eyes fixed upon the
ground: At last he breaks out with great Passion, and said, (directing his
words to St. Patrick) O Knight, without reproach, thou Mirror of Chivalry, had
the Fates Honored Sicily with thy Birth, I would look upon thee, as one of the
Preciousest Jewels in my Regal Diadem; but however, it was otherwise ordered by
the uncontrollable Powers, yet I purpose, that if Honor or Preferment, the
Riches and Glory of Sicily, may be of any weight with you, that henceforth thou
shall live with me, and partake of my Fortune: I doubt not, but that you had
Offers of this Nature from other Princes, before you came hither, yet, this
does no ways discourage me from inviting you, nor put me out of hopes, but that
you will comply with my desire; if there were nothing else to move you to it,
but the examples of the many Valiant Champions, Famous over all the World, who
after they had visited the most Famous Courts in the World, yet were content at
last, to take up their residence with my predecessors at this Court. And for
you Knight, if you will stay, here I pass my Royal Promise before these
Gentlemen, that you shall have as much Honor and Respect, as any Knight that
ever was in Sicily.

St. Patrick was mightily surprised at this, fearing that if he should persist
in his former resolution of coming home to his own Country, as he intended to
do, at any rate, he should lose the Kings Favor, which he had so lately
procured; therefore he resolved to express his mind, as Courteously as was
possible, so as not to give the King any ground to hope that he should tarry;
so observing that the King by his steadfast looking in his Face, expected a
present answer, he addressed himself to him in these terms.

Most Mighty King, I must acknowledge that there is more than words required in
a man of my Character, to retaliate so great and signal Honors, as your
Majesty has tendered to me, ever since I had the happiness to see your face;
so that now I am forced to acknowledge my self unhappy in that I want
opportunity to express the same. As to what your Majesty requires of me; I
heartily wish it were in my Power to comply with your Demand, but it is now
past help; for I have put my self under an inevitable necessity, of begging
your Majesty's Pardon in that Point. I have been for many years absent from my
Native Country, and have put on a resolution, and put my self under a promise
to return with the first occasion; so that now my hands are tied up, that I
cannot obey your Majesty's Demand in this point, for which I am heartily sorry.

The King finding him thus peremptory, resolved to express a great deal of
Grief, but no displeasure at him; he told him, since it was so, he expected
that he would not be sudden in his departure: to which the other consented, and
tarryed several days; but at last took leave of the King, and all his Court,
and was dismissed with all the expressions of Honor imaginable. But these
Knights, who upon the Death of the Giant, had made acquaintance with him,
resolved to convey him a part of his way, which accordingly they did. Their way
from the Royal City, lay through the Wood, where the Giant resided; and from
thence he advanced to the Fatal Conflict with our Champion. The Wood, although
frequently passed through in former times, yet for a great while before this,
it became a perfect Wilderness, by reason of the Savage Creatures possessing
it, which made people afraid to come nigh it; the common Road also was so
overgrown with Bushes and Shrubs, that there was hardly any appearance of it to
be seen: yet notwithstanding, St. Patrick being desirous to see his late
Antagonist's Habitation, and to know them, he left to succeed him, if they were
disposed to revenge his Quarrel; the other Knights also willing to satisfy
their Curiosity, and that they might brag afterward that they were among the
first that entered the desolate Forest, after the Death of the Monster; all
conclude Unanimously to take their way through the Wood, resolving they should
make some search, as they passed along the Monsters Manor.

Thus they entered the Wood, about Ten of the Clock in the Forenoon, having
left all the Servants without the Wood, commanding them to return home; only
St. Patrick, because he was not to return again that way, took Mack along with
him. They were not half an hour in the Wood, when they began to question where
they were; the Knights protested, that though they have many times passed
through, yet now they knew not where they were; and that which bewilders me
most (says one of them) is, that I see a Mountain yonder, over against me,
which so far as I can remember, was not to be seen here in former times; to
which all the rest of the Sicilian Knights agreed, saying, That unquestionably,
this must be some extraordinary Thing: Whereupon, they all Rode toward it, to
see it; But when they drew near it, they could discern it was an House built
with (...), Stone, and Wood, and such Materials as the Place could afford, to a
prodigious Bigness: when they came to the door, they began to advise, whether
it was safe to go in: But St. Patrick was so bent for it, that he made them
pres^ntly co^^^nt: So they entered, every man having his Sword drawn, expecting
to meet with some rugged fellows; but they were much mistaken, for they found
none there, except an Old Man of about an Hundred years of Age, who sat by the
Fire very Pensive; to him St. Patrick Addressed himself, in these terms. How
now Old Man, What is become of the rest of your Company? to him the Old man
answers very surly, You may go look; Nay, says the other, I am not come hither
to offend you; yet I think, I may safely ask you this question, which is
commonly the first that is asked of a Solitary man, by such as Visit him: Then
the Old man became a little more calm, and told them how that his Son was
Killed some days ago in a Duel, hard by the King of Sicilies House, and now his
other Sons, and the rest of his Friends were gone to bury him; but he would not
tell them where, nor were they very curious to enquire: so having viewed the
House, both within and without, the Old man directed them out of the Wood,
where they heartily, and sorrowfully did bid adieu to each other.

Our Champion having for many years raised Piramids to his memory, both here,
and in all the parts of Greece: Where he fought such Battles, and did such
Wonderful Exploits; that his Name began to out-sound that of his own Trojan
Hector. At length he embraced a firm resolution to retire into his own Native
Country; which he did, and having long confined himself to a retired Life, at
length gave up his great Soul to the Conqueror of all Champions, Death.

Thus Patrick, the Worlds-wonder, when his Sword
Over Witches, Giants, had proclaimed him Lord;
When by his hand, the Mightiest Monsters fell:
And Seas, and Shoars, his unmatcht Wonders tell:
After Proud Greece, raised Temples to his Name,
And the whole Universe Proclaimed his Fame;
The Universe, a Theater too scant,
His Numberless Heroic Arts to Paint!
Calmly unto his Native Soil retires,
And there does Expiate his Martial Fires.
Ireland, to Thee Patrick, this Honor gave,
To be thy Patron, who gav'st him a Grave:
Whilst Mighty Monarchs to his Tomb do bring,
Their great Encomiums, and Wise Bards do Sing
His Valors Praise, of which the world does ring.
FINIS.

