THE ANATOMY OF PLAY, Written by a worthy and Learned Gent.

Dedicated to his Father, to show his detestation of it.

London, Printed by G. P. for Nicholas Bourne and are to be sold at the South
entrance of the Royal Exchange. 1651.

To the Ingenious Reader.
THis brief but pithy discourse concerning Gaming, as it had a speedy birth,
so was it by the Author of it, doomed to perpetual oblivion. But it by
accident coming to my hands, and persuading my self the die vulging of it
might be beneficial to others: I have made bold to bring it out of the grave
of obscurity: wherein it has long been, into the view of the Sun that by its
community, it may work the greater effect in the minds and hearts of such, as
shall peruse it, and have been addicted to that vice of vices.

The Author, if he take notice of the publishing of it without his leave or
knowledge, cannot deservedly blame me, intending it not any way to his hurt,
but the common good, which if it reclaim any, as I hope it may, I have my ends,
he the honor, and they the benefit.

Farewell,
To my Father.
Sir,
I Am emboldened to present this small treatise to you, as being due to you by
diverse obligations, first by that natural bond whereby I owe unto you my
self, my actions, my endeavors.

Secondly because I owe to your advice and persuasions, (but especially as I
make no question) to your prayers, that present detestation which I have of
gaming, whereof this is a consequent effect. Disdain not then to accept this
small work, and to acknowledge it as the issue and offspring of your prayers
and counsels, as the Author thereof is of your natural body: who offers it to
your hands with that reverence and humility which becomes,

Your most dutiful Son.

The Anatomy of Play.
The Preface.
I Discourse not of Play as some gownemen have done of foreign Wars, or
discoveries, who, never traveled out of their studies to see either, but
speak upon other men's knowledge and fidelity, which must needs weaken their
credit, but what I write comes all within the sphere, and compass of my own
knowledge and observations; I write nothing but as the Poet, says quaeque ipse
miscrrima vidi et quorum pars magna fui

And therefore justly challenge the better acceptations and belief. But here
may be objected that my own particular losses may make me more bitter, and
satyricall then the case requires.

To this I answer, that I have not lost any so great sums either of money,
credit, or times, as to sharpen my pen, either to passion or invection, neither
does the vexation of any late received losses, strive to vent, and evaporate it
self into a Satyr, but I write upon an even and indifferent temper void both
of prejudice and passion; one only caution I will add, that you must not
expect any flourishes of wit or eloquence, for those are proper to works of
fancy, and imaginations, but this is a work only of observations and
experience, and therefore I can promise nothing but truth. Play was first
invented, for the recreation of man's mind, and the refreshing of his spirits,
having bin tired and spent with any serious affairs, that so being as it were
a bow unbent, they might recover their former strength and vigor; certainly in
this respect, moderate recreation is not only allowable, but commendable;
being of the same use (though in an inferior degree) as rest, sleep, or meat.
But your sensuallity easily suffers it self to be overcome by vice, and that is
turned to an ill habit, which was first intended for a lawful exercise, so
that Play when it breaks this rule and passes beyond its due bounds, being no
longer (...), but (...) not recreation but a profession, it is infancy,
wickedness, theft; being seldom unattended by these attributes. I speak then
of professed gamesters who spend their whole time and faculties therein, as in
a trade or office; for when Play grows to this excess, it is so far from
good, that it loses all similitude or resemblance of good, for most vices want
not a color and likeness of some good to shadow and palliate themselves.

Saepelatet vitium proximitate boni.

As covetousness has a resemblance of thrift, prodigality of bounty,
drunkenness of mirth, and gaming of recreation, that nothing can cause greater
anxiety or vexation: what broken sleeps, what raving passions, both of body
and mind, what secret gnawing, and fretting discontents does it procure: so
that (as I said before) losing this name of recreation, it loses all
likelihood and similitude of good. To define then what play is (not in the
concrete, for so it is a mixture of almost all vices but in the abstract)
Gaming is an evil from which arises a most certain loss, and this loss is
threefold, of time, of credit, of money; the first and second unavoidable, the
last only casual but rashly avoided: these three losses have a respective
relation to the three parts of man his soul, his person, his Estate.

To begin with the first, and most unavoidable loss, which is of time; being
the greatest loss, both in respect of it self, as (being rightly considered)
the most precious, of all other things, and in respect of what it has relation
unto, the soul being the most precious part of man. It cannot but seem a
paradox to set this loss of time in the first place, as the greatest and most
important, because it is so far from being accounted so by the lovers of Play,
that the mere purpose and resolution of losing time is often the cause of all
their other losses, is it not their ordinary question, how shall we spend the
time? it being thought a matter of that little worth and value, that it seems
rather a thing troublesome, and tedious, so that men do even study how to cast
it away.

At so low a rate is this inestimable jewel prized. But how happens it, that
time if it be so precious, comes to be so neglected and undervalued. Certainly
it proceeds only from ignorance: for the use of time is only to attain to
knowledge, now there being that antipathie between knowledge and ignorance,
knowledge is not only despised, but the means also of attaining it, which is
time: so that time to the ignorant, is as pearl to swine; they know not the
value of it, and therefore trample it under foot; but that it is otherwise
esteemed by those who know the use of it, the practice and testimony of all
learned men will easily evince. It is the saying of a heathen, and spoken to
the shame and scandal of most Christians; Conteritur vita inter errores
brevis, etia^fi dies noctesque bonae menti laboremus.

Our life is consumed in errors, even too short, though we should labor day
and night in the ornament of our minds; it was the complaint of another, Ars
longa, vita brevis, that our life is too short, for the attaining to the
perfection of any of the liberal Arts. Had those heathens but known the great
Art which our great Schoolmen daily teach us, the Art of living and dying well,
an Art that can never be too through learned, nor sufficiently practiced, how
carefully would they have husbanded every minute of their lives. But so far
are our Gamesters from learning or practicing this Art, that if happily before
their falling into this vice, they had learned any part part thereof, they now
learn and practice to forget it, so that they bring upon themselves that curse
which our Savior denounces in another case, from them, that have not shall be
taken away even what they have. Of the little time that is lent us, half or
more is spent in the necessary service of the body, for the other moytie, few
there are who do therein what they should do: many who do nothing at all, and
most who do what they should not do, and of this sort are gamsters: and I dare
say there is no man who has wit enough to play, but has wit enough to know he
should not play, being forced in his conscience to say with the Poet: Video
meliora proboque, deteriora sequor.

Certainly for this talent of time that God has lent us, he will call us, he
will call us to an account, and if the servant that brought his talent in a
napkin, without any improvement were cast into utter darkness: what shall
become of him who not only improves not his talent, but brings not to his Lord
so much as his own again, having wasted it upon his lusts and pleasures? And
this certainly is the only account that most of our Gamsters can give either of
their talent of time, or money; I am unwilling to lose time, in lamenting the
loss of time, but the loss is so inestimable, and yet so little esteemed off,
that it cannot be too much lamented.

To pass then to the second loss, arising from Play, which is credit, and
principally respects the second part of man his person. The word credit, as we
use it, is of some latitude and admits a threefold Construction, first the
report, sufferage, or opinion which the world conceives of any man, more
properly and strictly called good name or reputation, secondly that trust or
confidence which one man has in an others honest dealing and good courage;
thirdly a mixed credit, having a relation both to a man's person and estate, as
for what sums a man's word or bonds may be taken. Take then credit severally
or jointly, in all these senses, and a Gamester forfeites it in them all:
first, for reputation or good name, does not the very name of Gamester stinck
in the nostrils of all honest men: although unaccompanied by any of its
ordinary attributes, as cheating, lying, blaspheming, and the like. Tully when
he declamed against Catiline, objecteth as one of his greatest crimes that he
did alea pernoctari: and the Synod of A^sburgh does expressly forbid from the
blessed Sacrament, amongst whores and Panders: Omnes qui alearum usui perpetuo
vacant.

And the sixth council of Constantinople peremptorily decrees, that none
whatsoever should play at dice, threatening degradation to all Clergy men, and
excommunication to all laymen, that should thence-forth attempt it; The words
of that Council are Can 50. Nullum omnium sive Clericum sive laieum ab hoc
deinceps tempore alea ludere decreuimus, siquis autem hoc deinceps facere ab
hoc tempore aggressus fuerit, si sit quidem clericus, deponatur, si laicus
segregatur.

Many are the Councels Cannons: and Statutes of this and other Realms to
forbid it, yea even Mahomet himself, in his Alcaron, who otherwise allowed all
sensuallity.

Judge then whether the bare name of a Gamester be not of it self sufficient
to blast any man's reputation.

Take then credit in the second sense, for trust or confidence reposed by one
man in another, which also is of three sorts: either of a Prince to his
subject, of a father to his son or a Master to his servant.

For the first, how unfit Gamsters are for the managing any affairs of Estate,
I cannot omit two notable examples of the ancients.

Chilon being sent from Lacedemon to Corinth to Treat of a league between these
two Commonwealthes, and finding the Rulers Playing at Dice, returned without
speaking of his Commission, saying, that he would not stain the glory of the
Spartans, with so great Ignominy, as to join them in society with Gamsters.
The second was a law amongst the Thebans, that Merchants should not have to do
in the Government of the Commonwealth.

And if Merchants were forbidden, consequently Gamesters who are the meanest
sort of Merchant adventurers, and I am sure the reasons my Author gives serve
better against Gamsters then any other Merchants. Primam quia Consuetudine, and
inclinatione avari ideo que facile, publicam rem in suam vertune.

2. Quia parum magnanimi and splendidi, and ut ait Aristoteles parum generosa
hac ratio vitae, and virtnti adversa Tertio quia in publica persona
authoritatem inminuit. First because, by custom and inclination they are
covetous, and therefore apt to convert the public wealth to their own private
secondly, because they are seldom nobly minded, and as Aristotle says, this
course of life is nothing generous, and is repugnant to virtue thirdly, because
in a public person it diminishes authority: for the second sort of trust,
which is from a father to his son: what wise Parent will trust a son either
with the fruition of a present or the possibility of a future estate, whom he
sees addicted to Gaming, unless he be willing to behold the utter subversion
and ruin of his family and estate, and the fruit of all his labors and cares
vanish into nothing.

This I need not seek to prove, so many woeful examples make it to manifest
and nourious.

For the third sort of trust which is of a Master to his servant, what Master
would give bread to a servant that is a Gamester, for if he manage his Masters
affairs and have either money of his in his hands, or other his goods committed
to his charge, and that he chance to lose his own, he will play upon his
Masters purse hoping to recover himself, and if peradventure he continue still
on the losing hand, and has not where withal to pay, he runs himself into
greater danger then before, hoping that luck will turn and so come to relieve
his losses: But say he is not trusted with any thing of his Masters, nor has
ought of his to lose, yet it is not possible that he should assist at these
hours when he ought to give attendance, nor will he be in the way to be found,
when need requires.

Thus much for the second sort of credit, which is a trust or confidence
reposed by one man in another, and is threefold; either from a Sovereign, to a
subject, a Father to a son, or a Master, to a servant, of all which a Gamester
makes himself incapable.

The third sort of credit, which is for what sums a man may be trusted either
upon word or bond comes now to be spoken of: A gamester certainly of all men is
most unfit to be trusted, because his estate is so uncertain, for though it be
never so great this day, it may be nothing to morrow; as the Poet said well.

Quem dies vidit veniens superbum, hunc dies vidit fugiens jacentem.

A gamester is homo fluxae fidei a man of a fleeting credit, and as Jacob said
of his first born Reuben, is like the waves of the sea, which as they are
either raised into mountains or sunk into vallyes by every gust of wind: so
is a Gamesters Estate, and credit by every gust of fortune.

Again, a Gamester resembles the waves of the sea in another property, for
naturally they are always either ebbing or flowing, so is a Gamesters Estate
and credit, though with this difference, that in the sea after a ebb,
constantly follows a flood, but a Gamesters Estate commonly ebs many times
before it flows once.

Again, no man will take the word of a Ward or I^eot, though their Estates be
responsible, because they are under their Guardians; thus fares it with
Gamesters, who make themselves wards to fortune, giving over the managing and
disposing of their whole Estates to this their goddess guardian, who commonly
deals as ill with them as any guardian the King or Law imposes. Thus have I
run over the second general and unavoydable loss arising from Play which is
of credit, and principally has relation to the second part of man: his person.

To pass then to the third loss springing from Play, which is of money, and
principally respects a man's Estate, though I have before noted it, as only
casual, yet so great an ods there is that where one man has raised or
augmented their estates by Play, more then an hundred have utterly ruined
themselves: I speak here of Gentlemen who either have present, or are heirs to
future Estates, not of those professed cheaters who like robbers upon the
spoils and ruin of the Commonwealth, this affection of mine though it may
seem strange, yet is it confirmed by daily examples, and if rightly considered
stands not without good reason. The first and chiefest reason of which I shall
have more occasion to speak of hereafter, is the want of Gods blessing upon
money so ill gotten.

2. Because great store of money is as a lure to draw together all the birds of
prey, so that if a man of Estate be addicted to Play though he understand the
ways thereof never so well, yet so many Stratagems, plots and traps, will be
laid to ensnare him, that it is impossible to escape them.

Thirdly because men that are either of good parts or Estates and have any
nobler thing then Play to busy their wits, or set their minds on work, Play
upon great disadvantage with those whose wits studies, and faculties, are only
bent that way.

Fourthly, Because men of quality have always some respect to their
reputation, and having lost any reasonable sum will rather let it go, then
seek any indirect means for the regaining it, whereas needy Gamesters having
little or no credit, upon loss, will not forbear any shift though never so
base, or unworthy for the recovery of their losses.

5. And lastly winning commonly brings a man into a vein of great expense, and
draws together many needy persons to attend on him, for money that comes so
lightly, goes as lightly; but upon loss no body will either help him or pity
him, for losses that come by a man's own neglect or folly (as loss by play does)
are less compassionated, then those that come by casualty; and here I cannot
but relate a story of mine observation, which I think will not be impertinent. I
was wont to accompany a Gent. to the house of a great Lady, where commonly
meeting other company they fell to play, the Gentleman upon winning was very
free and open handed to the servants, so that if they sat up all night, not a
servant would go to bed, but when they broke up Play, the Butlers would be
ready to present him with wine or beer, the Pages and Lackies one would hold
up the hanging, another hold open the door, another light him down the stairs,
and be ready to do all offices expecting their reward.

But if the Gentleman were a looser, and like to continue so, they all get them
to bed, and he might stumble and break his neck down the stairs, for any help
he should have of them, not one of them being to be seen, making good that of
the Poet.

Nullus ad amissas ibit amicus opes, so that a man's winnings are as it were in
jest, but his losses always prove in earnest.

The examples of families and Estates ruined by Play so far confirm this that
(I verily believe) that all others of expense laid together have not bin the
overthrow of so many Houses as Play alone. I have observed these five ordinary
ways of wasting men's Estates: drink, Women, Carlesnesse, great expense,
Gaming, not mentioning those Casualties which are unavoidable and proceed not
through a man's own neglect, as loss by fire, loss by Sea, Law Suites, and the
like, but to speak of these five which proceed from a man's own folly.

First, as for drink no great Estate was ever spent therein, without the
concurrence of some other vice, it being rather prejudicial to the body then
the Estate.

For Women it is certain they have been the ruin of many houses, but seldom
unless accompanied by other vanities, as b^ave apparel, rich presents,
sumptuous banquets, and the like. By carelessness it is true many Est^tes are
sunk which commonly happens by the neglect or dishonesty of servants and
Officers, but this comes but by little and little; and if in time perceived, is
easily redressed.

For great expense it is commonly the error of youth, coming suddenly to
great Estates (as hungry stomachs coming to plenty of meat) to surfeit and
over shoot themselves ere they are aware, and though some Estates have fallen
by it, yet time and experience many times make up the breach.

Last of all comes Play, which being laid in the scale, will outweigh all the
rest. All this above named are like consumptions and lingering diseases, that
weaken and waste a man's body by degrees, and if taken in season may be
prevented, but play like an Apoplexy, or Pestilent infection strikes a man dead
at a blow, and is not unfitly compared to Gunpowder at one blast, blowing up
whole families and Estates: Other ways of spending have some correspondence
with the ways of getting, for as money comes in by little and little, so it
goes out and may be as long in spending, as it was in getting, But by Play, the
labors and fruits of many years, may in one night be dissolved and come to
nothing; for play brings to a man, as Aristotle says, sudden destruction;
Lastly as other ways of expense cannot without a kind of Harmony and agreement
amongst themselves ruin a man, this of Play, (be he otherwise never so
temperate, never so chaste, so wise, so thrifty) of it self is able
irrecoverably to undo him.

Thus I have gone over the three most notorious and general effects and
consequents of play, loss of time, loss of credit, loss of money.

There remains some other inconveniences, which come not under any of these
three general heads, yet are they not so great and intrinsic, but that they
fall under popular observation.

The first of these, is the great disadvantage which arises from the very end
of Play.

The end of Play is either to win or lose, but if there be more unhappiness in
losing then happiness in winning, this makes the disadvantage: but that it is
so is most apparent: consider if a man have a competent Estate wherewith to
live plentifully and contentedly, suppose he double this Estate by Play, it
adds but little, nay it rather diminishes his former Estate; but if he lose
half of what he had before, what daily occasions of discontent arise, when he
sees himself abridged of his wonted plenty.

But to make this more apparent, by an example; suppose a man have a 1000. li.
whether if he make this one an 100000. li. is his happiness greater, then his
misery would be, if he lost all and should make it nothing? no questionless,
nay the misery is as much greater, then the happiness would be, as the 100000.
li. is greater, then the 1000. li. for happiness and misery being only
comparative, all men that have more, nay many men that have not so much, may be
more happy then he, but no man can be more miserable, therefore is the misery
greater then the happiness. This rule holds good also in Philosophy: For it is
a maxim that there is a nearer proportion between something and something,
then between something and nothing; so that the proportion is nearer between a
1000. li. and a penny, then between a penny and nothing; therefore to be
brought from a small estate to none is more bad, then to come from a small one
to a very great one is good, then is the disadvantage, in the very end of Play,
more then 100. to one.

Secondly, Another inconvenience is, that the continual use of Play, robs a
man of all pity, charity, and natural affection, being hardened by daily
seeing one another undone, and ruined, as soldiers being continually used to
blood, grow thereby merciless.

No man comes amiss to a Gamster, whether, Brother, kinsman, or friend, of
whom he may make any advantage, being so remote from all pity, that when they
see one falling, they will rather precipitate, and throw him headlong, then
offer to help, or hold him up.

Thirdly, Another inconvenience, is that he that wins is bound to give the
loser leave to speak; to endure many bold and intemperate Actions, to bear
with many indiscreet words, and uncivil behavior; which he is tied to suffer,
only as a Winner, not as a man of honor, who in things of another nature would
resent the least wrong that is done to him; besides many suspicions and
traducements of his Play be it never so fair.

Fourthly, Another inconvenience is, that when a man has lost he is liable to
be insulted over, laughed at, and scorned by them who have won, which is worse
to be endured, then the loss of the money it self, verifying that of the
Poet, Nil habet infaelix paupertas durius in se quam quod ridiculos homines
facit.

And with this will I close the first part of my discourse, wherein I have
only spoken of Gaming as it trenches upon morality, and civility; Now will I
speak in a word, how hainously it is offensive to God.

The profession of Gaming is little less then professed Atheism, for it is
not only a manifest distrust, but an open contempt of Gods threats, his
promises, and his providence: If God speak nothing vainly, then much less
falsely; and if all his promises are yea and Amen, is it not a strange
presumption to slight and despise them; has not God pronounced that goods ill
gotten shall not prosper? yet the Gamester laughes in Gods face, and says
secretly to himself, I will try whether they will prosper or not, say God what
he will: has not God pronounced a woe to them who eat, drink, sleep and rise
up to play? yet is this the whole life of a Gamester? has he not promised to
all that rely upon him, that they shall want nothing that is good? yet the
Gamester makes flesh his arm, and relies upon his own Art and Fortune, neither
imploring the Divine blessing, nor acknowledging any thing they obtain from
thence, but that comes to pass with them, which the Prophet speaks;
Laetantur exultant, immolant plagis suis, and sacrificant reti suo. Certainly
there is no one vice that so desperately affronts God in the breach of almost
all his Commandments. As for the first and second, Is not God pulled out of
his Throne, and the Idol of fortune deisied, and set up in his stead?

But for the third, oh how is that most precious name rent, and torn in curses,
blasphemies, execrations, yea even to perjury it self? for the fourth, I never
knew any Gamester a Sabbatarian; and although public Authority forbids the
public exercise of Gaming, yet is it as frequently used in private on that day
as any other; for the fifth, I know none that have any either Religious or
honest Parents, but they dissuade and command them from Play; then consequently
it is a disobedience to them: for the sixth, It is often the occasion of
mental murder, yea sometimes of actual, and once (that I remember) of self
murder.

To pass to the eighth, Gaming is a kind of professed theft and little
differing from that on the high way; only one is by force, the other by fraud.

But for the tenth, it is so directly repugnant to that, that the most innocent
play can scarce avoid the breach of it, for though a man play with his Child
or servant to whom he must restore more then he wins, yet is there a strange
instinct of coveting and desire of winning.

Thus have I briefly showed how play does either directly or indirectly oppose
eight of Gods ten Commandments: and if any other sin can be produced of so
great a latitude to the making up whereof there is such a confluence and
concurrence of so many other sins, I will be willing hereafter to think play no
sin: I will only here add a quaere or two and so conclude.

First, Why should play be more used in the night time then in the day,
considering the night is a time of rest both to the body and mind.

Play certainly is a work of darkness, and herein Gamesters are like beasts of
prey, which rest all day and go abroad in the evening; as the psalmist says.

Thou made darkness, that it might be night, wherein all the beasts of the
forest do move. The Lions roaring after their prey etc: the sun arises and
they get them away together, and lay them down in their dens.

Man goes forth to his work and his labor until the evening.

Thus fares it with Gamesters who turn day into night, and night into day:
inverting the course of nature: herein rather imitating Lions and beasts of the
forest then men who follow their honest labors.

My second quaere is, why in this as in most other dangers one man should not
beware by another example, nay not by their own, the fish will scarce come
twice to the hook, nor the bird to the net; having once escaped.

But men having been often taken in this snare have not the wit of fishes, or
birds to avoid it: certainly this is a great master piece of the Devil, first
to work upon the weakness of men's inclinations, being of themselves too prone
to evil, having thus far prevailed to win a man to play, he then musters up all
his Arts and Tentations fearing to lose so fast an hold, and so great an
advantage, as when he has made one a Gamester.

So that a man having entered into this course cannot without Divine assistance
retire; the way being like (if not the same way) that leads to hell, as Virgil
well describes it.

Facilis descensus Averni,

Sed revocare gradus, superasque evadere ad auras.

Hic labor hoc opus est.

Thus have I performed this short exercise of my pen, having only deciphered
this enchanting Circe, but in a small table, and in a draught, leaving it to
some more curious hand, to draw her in a larger proportion, and in more lively
colors, that so being the more discovered, she may be the more abhorred.

FINIS.
April 21. 1651.
Imprimatur.

John Downame.


