The Spanish LADY's Love.
To a pleasant new Tune, etc.
Licensed and Entered according to Order.



WIll you hear a Spanish Lady, how she wooed an English Man,
Garments gay as rich as may be, bedekt with jewels had she on;
Of a comely countenance and grace was she;
Both by birth and parentage of high degree.
As his prisoner there he kept her, in his hands her life did lie;
Cupid's hands did tie them faster by the liking of an eye:
In his courteous company was all her joy;
To savor him in any thing she was not coy.
But at last there came commandment for to set all Ladies free,
With their jewels still adorned, none to do them injury.
O then said this Lady gay, Full woe is me;
O let me still sustain this kind captivity.
Gallant Captain, take some pity on a woman in distress;
Leave me not within this city, for to dye in heaviness;
Thou have set this present day my body free,
But my heart in prison still remains with thee.
How should thou, fair Lady, love whom thou know thy Country?
Thy fair words make me suspect thee, serpents lie where flowers grow.
All the harm I think on thee, most courteous Knight,
God grant upon my head the same may fully light.
Blessed be the time and season that thou came on Spanish ground;
If you may our foes be termed, gentle foes we have you found:
With our City you have won our hearts each one,
Then to your Country bear away that is your own.
Rest you still, most gallant Lady, rest you still and weep no more,
Of fair flowers you have plenty, Spain does yield you wondrous store.
Spaniards fraught with jealousy we often do find,
But English Men throughout the world are counted kind.
Leave me not unto a Spaniard, thou alone enjoy'st my heart,
I am lovely, young and tender, love is likewise my desert:
S^ill to save thee day and night, my mind is pressed;
The wife of every English Man is counted blessed.
It would be a shame fair Lady, for to bear a woman hence,
English soldiers never carry any such without offense.
I will quickly change myself, if it be so,
And like a page will follow thee where ever thou go.
I have neither gold nor silver to maintain thee in this case,
And to travel is great charges, as you know in every place.
My chains and jewels every one shall be thy own,
And eke an hundred pound in gold, that lies unknown.
On the seas are many dangers, many storms do there arise,
Which will be to Ladies dreadful, and force tears from watery eyes.
Well in worth I shall endure extremely,
For I could find in heart to lose my life for thee.
Courteous Lady, leave this folly, here comes all that breeds the strife,
I in England have already a sweet woman to my wife;
I will not falsify my vow for gold nor gain.
Nor yet for all the fairest Dames that live in Spain.
O how happy is that woman that enjoys so true a friend,
Many happy days God send her, and of my suit i will make an end*
On my knees I pardon crave for my offense,
Which love and true affection did first commence:
Commend me to that gallant Lady, bear to her this chain of gold,
With these bracelets for a token, grieving that I was so bold;
All my jewels in like sort take thou with thee,
For they are fitting for thy wife, but not for me.
I will spend my days in prayer, love and all her laws defy,
In a Nunnery I will shrewd me, far from any company:
But ever my prayer have an end, be sure of this,
To pray for thee and for thy love, I will not miss.
Thus farewell most gallant Captain, farewell to my heart's ^ontent;
Count not Spanish Ladi^s w^nton* though to thee my (...)
Joy and true prosperity remain with th^e*
The like fall unto thy sh^re, most fair Lady.
Printed by and for W. O. for A. M. and sold by I. Conyers in Leicester-field.


