The Lamentation of Mr. Pages Wife of Plymouth. Who being forced to wed against
her will, did consent to his Murder, for the love of George Strangwidge, for
which fact they suffered death at Barnstable in Devonshire.
The Tune is, Fortune my Foe.
UNhappy she, whom Fortune has forlorn,
Despised of grace, that proffered grace did scorn,
My lawless love, has luckless wrought my woe,
My discontent, content did overthrow.
My loathed life too late I do lament,
My woeful deeds in heart I do repent:
A Wife I was that wilful went awry,
And for that fault am here prepared to dye.
In bloomy years my Fathers greedy mind,
Against my will a match for me did find:
Great wealth there was, yea, gold and silver store,
But yet my heart had chosen one before.
Mine eyes, dislikt my Fathers liking quite,
My heart did loath my Parents fond delight:
My greedy mind, and fancy told to me,
That with his age my Youth could not agree.
On knees I craved they would not me constrain,
With tears I cried their purpose to restrain,
With fighs and sobs I did them often move,
I might not wed whereas I could not love.
But all in vain my speeches still I spent,
My Mothers will my wishes did prevent,
Though wealthy Page possessed my outward part,
George Strangwidge still was lodged in my heart.
I wedded was and wrapped all in woe,
Great discontent within my heart did grow:
I loathed to live, yet lived in deadly strife,
Because perforce I was made Pages Wife.
My chosen eyes could not his sight abide,
My tender Youth did loath his aged side,
Scant could I taste the meat whereon I fed,
My legs did loath to lodge within his bed.
Cause knew I none, I should despise him so,
That such disdain within my heart did grow,
Save only this, that fancy did me move,
And told me still George Strangwide was my love.
But here began my downfall and decay,
In mind I mused to make him strait away,
I that became his discontented wife,
Contented was he should be rid of life.
Methinks the heavens cries vengeance for my fact,
Methinks the world condemns my Monstrous act:
Methinks within, my Conscience tells me true,
That for that deed, hell fire is my due.
My pensive soul does sorrow for my sin,
For which offense my soul does bleed within:
But mercy Lord, for mercy still I cry,
Save thou my soul, and let my body dye.
Well could I wish that Page enjoyed his life,
So that he had some other to his wife:
But never could I wish of low or high,
A longer life then see sweet Strangwidge die,
O woe is me that had no greater grace,
To stay till he had run out Natures race;
My deed I rue, but more I do repent,
That to the same my Stranwidge gave consent.
You Parents fond, that greedy minded be,
And seek to graft upon the golden tree,
Consider well, and rightful judges be,
And give your doom, 'twixt Parents, love, and me,
I was their child, and bound for to obey,
Yet not to love where I no love could lay:
I married was in muck and endless strife,
But faith before had made me Strangwidge wife.
O wretched world whom cankered rust does blind,
And cursed men who bear a greedy mind:
And hapless I, whom Parents did force so,
To end my days in sorrow, shame, and woe.
You Devonshire Dames, and courteous Cornwall Kts.
That are here come to visit woeful wights,
Regard my grief, and mark my woeful end,
But to your Children be a better friend.
And thou my dear, which for my fault must die,
Be not afraid the sting of death to try:
Like as we lived and loved together true,
So both at once let us bid the world adieu.
Ulalia thy friend does take her last farewell,
Whose soul with thine in heaven does ever dwell:
Sweet Savior Christ do thou my soul receive,
The world I do with all my heart forgive.
And Parents now whose greedy minds do show,
Your hearts desire and inward heavy woe,
Mourn you no more, for now my heart does tell,
E're day be done my soul shall be full well.
And Plymouth proud I bid thee now farewell,
Take heed you Wives, let not your hands rebel,
And farewell life wherein such sorrow shows,
And welcome death that does my corpse enclose.
And now sweet Lord forgive me my misdeeds,
Repentance cries for soul that inward bleeds,
My soul and body I commend to thee,
That with thy blood from death redeemed me.
Lord bless our King with long and happy life,
And send true peace betwixt each man and wife,
And give all Parents Wisdom to foresee,
The match is marred where minds do not agree.
The Lamentation of George Strangwidge, who for the consenting to the death of
Mr. Page of Plymouth, suffered death at Barnstable.
THe man that sighs and sorrows for his sin,
The corpse which care and woe has wrapped in,
In doleful sort records her swanlike Song,
That waits for death and loathes to live so long.
O Glansfield cause of my committed crime,
So wed in wealth, as birds in bush of lime:
What cause had thou to bear such wicked spite,
Against my love and eke my hearts delight?
I would to God thy wisdom had been more,
Or that I had not entered in thy door,
Or that thou had a kinder father been
Unto thy Child, whose Year are but green.
The match unmeet which thou for me did make,
When aged Page thy daughter home did take,
Well may thou rue with tears that cannot dry,
Which is the cause that four of us must die.
Ulalia more brighter then the Summers Sun,
Whose beauty has for ever my love won,
My soul more sobs to think of thy disgrace,
Then to behold my own untimely race.
The deed late done in heart I do repent,
But that I loved I cannot yet relent:
Thy seemly sight was ever sweet to me,
Would God my death could thy excuser be.
It was for me alas, thou did the same,
On me by right they ought to lay the blame:
My worthless love has brought thy life in scorn,
And woe is me that ever I was born.
Farewell my love, whose Royal heart was seen,
I would thou had not half so constant been:
Farewell my love, the pride of Plymouth town,
Farewell the Flower, whose beauty is cut down.
For twenty Years great was the cost I know,
Thy unkind father did on thee bestow:
Yet afterward so sower did fortune lower,
He lost his joy and child within an hour.
My wrong and woe to God I do commit,
Who was the cause of matching them unfit,
And yet my guilt I cannot so excuse
We gave consent his life for to abuse.
Wretch that I am, that my consent did give,
Had I denied Ulalia still should live:
Blind fancy said, do not this suit deny,
Live thou in bliss, or else in sorrow die.
O Lord forgive this cruel deed of mine,
Upon my soul let beams of mercy shine:
In justice Lord do thou no vengeance take,
Forgive us both, For Jesus Christ his sake.
The Complaint of Mis. Page for causing her Husband to be murdered, for the
love of Strangwidge, who were executed together.
IF ever woe did touch a woman's heart,
Or grief did gall for sin the outward part,
My conscience then, and heavy heart within,
Can witness well the sorrow for my sin.
When Years were young my father forced me wed,
Against my will where fancy was not fed:
I was content their pleasure to obey,
Although my heart was linkt another way.
Great were the gifts they proffered in my sight,
With wealth they thought to win me to delight,
But gold and gifts could not my mind remove,
For I was linked whereas I could not love.
Methought his sight was loathsome to my eye,
My heart did grudge against him inwardly:
This discontent did cause my deadly strife,
And with this wealth did cause a grievous life.
My constant love was on Young Strangwidge set,
And woe to him that did our welfare let:
His love so deep a root in me did make,
I would have gone a begging for his sake.
VVronged he was through fond desire of gain,
VVronged he was, even through my Parents plain,
If faith and troth a perfect pledge might be,
I had been wife unto no man but he.
Eternal God forgive my fathers deed,
And Grant all Maidens may take better heed,
If I had been but constant to my friend,
I had not matched to make so bad an end.
But wanting Grace I sought mine own decay,
And was the cause to make my friend away:
And he on whom my earthly joys did lie,
Through my amiss a shameful death must die.
Farewell sweet George, always my loving friend,
Needs must I laud and love thee to the end.
And albeit that Page possess thy due,
In sight of God thou wast my Husband true.
My watery eyes unto the Heavens I bend,
Craving of Christ his mercy to extend:
My bloody deed do me O Lord forgive,
And let my soul within thy Kingdom live.
Farewell false World, and friends that fickle be,
All wives farewell, example take by me,
Let not the Devil to murder you entice,
Seek to escape such foul and sinful vice.
And now O Christ to thee I yield my b(...)
Strengthen my faith in bitter pangs of (...)
Forgive my faults and folly I thee pr(...)
And with thy blood wash thou my sin(...) (...)
Printed for F. Coals* T. Vere, and I. Wright*


