The Gentle Craft's Renown, with all their Heroic Deeds, and Noble
Achievements.



How Anthony now now played before the merry green King of Saint Martins.


THE HONOR OF THE Gentle Craft, A Discourse of Mirth and Wit, to the Renown
of those two Princes, Crispine and Crispianus and all the true Lovers thereof.
The Last and best Part. Being a most Merry and Pleasant History, not altogether
unprofitable, nor any way hurtful. And for the glory of the gentle Craft; Let
all men say that a Shoomakers Son is a Prince born.

By T. D.

Newly Corrected, with several pieces added for the benefit of the Reader,
which was never heretofore published or Printed. With a new merry Song in the
praise of the Gentle Craft, and to be sung by them every morning on the 25th
day of October.

Haud curo invidiam.

London, Printed by G. P. for I. Andrews at the White Lion in Pye-Corner. 1660.

To the MASTER and WARDENS of the worshipful company of Cordwaynors in London,
all cotinuance of health and perfect brotherly affection:
ONce more has good will emboldened me to present unto your Worships my
worthless labor, to manifest the good affection I bear to this Fraternity:,
and finding you lent a gentle look on the first part of this History, I have
been the more bold to proffer you the second; For having bound my self by
promise to perform it; and you perhaps claiming promise as a debt, expecting
payment, I bent all my study to keep touch; whereupon I tender this small
trifle unto you, only craving at your Worships hands, a good opinion of my
poor endeavors. And albeit this Phamphlet does not minister matter worthy
your grave view: yet in regard of the subject, I trust you will deigne to
esteem it since so well as I could, though not so well as I would, I have sought
herein to procure you delight: and although you find not all the men spoken of,
which is promised in the first part, yet think it no faintness in me, but
fault in good instruction: and again, for as much as these men here mentioned,
were all of this City, (whose story grew longer then I supposed) and the other
of the Country: I thought good so to break off, and to defer their story to
another time, when I may more perfectly speak thereof. In the mean space I
commend your Worships to the protection of the most Highest.

Your Worships in all he may. T. D.

To the Courteous Readers health.
GEntle Reader, you that vouchsafe to cast courteuos looks into this Pamphlet:
expect not here to find any matter of sound value, curiously pend with picked
words, or choice phrases, but a flowing and plain discourse best fitting
matters of merriment, seeing we have herein no cause to talk of Countries, or
Scholars. Notwithstanding, if you find your self overcharged with
melancholy, you perhaps have her a fit medicine to purge that humor by
conferring in this place with Doctor Burket: or if you meet with round Robin,
he may chance ryme it away: I tell you, among Shoomakers is some solace, as you
shall see by Tom Drums entertainment, and other mad merry pranks played by the
Green King of St. Martins. If that will not suffice, you may in meeting with
Anthony now, now, have such a fit of mirth with his firking Fiddle, that it
shall be a great cause to expel choler. And so I leave you to your own liking,
whether you will enter to see this sport or no: stand back I pray, room for a
Gentleman, for you cannot come in under a groat.

The Shoomakers Glory: OR, A new merry Song in the praise of Shoomakers, to be
sung by them every year on the 25th. of October.
To the Tune of the Tyrant.
IN the praise of the
Shoomakers trade we will right
A merry song is to be sung
on October twenty fifth night,
For without the Shoemaker
we shall go cold of our feet
To preserve the Gentle Cr^ss
therefore it is meet
Then sing boys and drink boys
and cast care away,
For the honor of Shoomakers
we will keep holy day:
To add the more luster
unto due merriment,
Our Ancestors came of
a Royal descent:
Crispiana Cryspinus
and noble Saint Hugh,
Were all sons of Kings,
This is known to be true:
Then sing boys and drink boys,
and cast care away,
For the honer of Crispine,
we will keep holy day.
Moreover ^de have you
thus much understand,
That the chiefest gay Ladies
and Lords of our land,
To the bonny shoomakers
beholding must be:
Take them from the highest
to the lowest degree:
Then sing boys and drink boys
and cast care away,
For the honor of crispine
we will keep holy day.
And now for Saint Hugh
and fair Win^frights sake,
Ajoviall bout of it,
we purpose to make:
In the gulf of oblivion
let sorrows be drown^d
Whilst we in good fellowship
merrily drink round:
Then drink boys and (...) boys
and cast care away,
For the honor of crispine
we will keep holy day.
Here Is a health to the Muses
which furthers delights,
And helps us to pass away
long winter nights.
With songs and with pastimes,
as the season does require:
Whilst we steel our noses
and sit by the fire:
Then sing boys and drink boys
and cast away care
For the honor of Crispine
Weel keep holy day.
The next cordial health
to speak as I think,
Shall be to the Brewer
that makes us good drink:
And to the brave Butchers
that kills us good meat,
That Is tooth some and whole some
for Christians to eat
Then sing boys and drink boys
and cast care away,
For the honor of Crispine
weel keep holy day.
Here Is to the bonny Weavers
and Glovers also,
For they are our own neighbors
and men that we know:
And to Vulcan the Black, smith
that blows the bellews,
For he is accounted
the King of good fellows:
Then sing boys and drink boys
and cast care away,
For the honor of Crispine
weel keep holy day.
Here Is to the Tailor,
that never meant h^rm,
For he makes us cl^athing
to keep our bones warm,
And a health to the ^anner
that dresses our Lea her,
For they (...) the (...) that
must hold (...) together.
Then sing boys and drink boys
and cast care away.
For the honor of Crispine
weel keep holy day.
And now to conclude all
and finish my song,
Lets drink up our drink
and do no body wrong:
It Is late in the night sits
therefore let us pay
Our reckonng, and then weel
be jogging away:
Another time when we do
meet here again,
Weel make a merry bo^t
for an hour or twain.
L. P.

CHAP. I. Containing the History of RICHARD CASTELER: and the first of his love.
THE lovely Maidens of the City of Westminster, noting what a good husband
Richard Casteler was, and seeing how diligently he followed his business,
judged in the end he would prove a rich man: for which many did bear unto him
very good affection, and few there were that wished not themselves to be his
Wife: insomuch that he having the custom of all the pretty Wenches in the
City, by that means knew the length of every maids foot so well, that he above
all other best pleased them: on Sundays when he came into the Church, the Maids
eyes were so firmly fixed on him, that he could neither look forward, backward,
nor on any side, but that he should be sure to have a wink of one, a smile of
another, the third would give him a nod: and to be brief, they would all cast
on him such gracious looks, that it was easy to guess by their outward
countenance, their inward affections.

As he stood a (...) at his cutting-boord, he should be sure to have twenty
cursies made him in an hour, by Maidens that past up and down: some would
bestow on him dainty sweet nosegaies of the fairest flowers they could find,
and othersome would bring handkerchers of Cambrick, and diverse such like
favors; well bewailing their friendship toward him.

But among many that secretly affected him, I will only tell of twain, because
above all the rest, their merriments do only remain in memory, the one of them
was called Margaret of the spread Eagle, but more commonly known by the name of
long Meg of Westminster: The other was a proper neat wench named Gillian of the
George, both of them as wily as they were witty, and among all the Maids in
Westminster were reputed to be the best servants: having therefore good wages,
they maintained themselves gallantly, and therewithal so honestly, that no man
could quip them with had living, though afterward it fell out otherwise, as in
this History you shall hear.

Margaret was a Maiden born in Lancashire, in height and proportion of body,
passing the ordinary state of Women, but there-withall very comely, and of
amiable countenance, her strength was agreeable to her stature, and her courage
as great as them both: she was of quick capacity, and pleasant disposition, of
a liberal heart, and such a one as would be suddenly angry, and soon pleased,
being ready to revenge her wrongs by weapons then by words: and therein did she
differ from the nature of women, because she could not abide much babbling. And
albeit she manifested her good will by diverse means, yet did Richard little
regard it, having his mind nothing bent unto marriage, by means whereof
Margaret grew into such sad conceits as changed her cherry cheeks into a green
wan countenance, insomuch that every one wondered to see her pensiveness.

Nay said Gillian, if that be all, I am at a good point, for though my maiden
head be somewhat burthensom to bear, yet I had rather keep it, then bestow it on
a bad Husband, but though I say it, although I be but a poor wench, I have
choice of husbands, enough and such as I am assured in my conscience, would
both love me well, and keep me gallantly. Wherefore then do you not marry quoth.
Margaret? in my opinion it is the most pleasing'st life that may be: when a
woman shall have her Husband come and say to her in this sort: How now Wife?
how do Sweetheart? what will thou have? Will thou have a cup of White Wind,
or Sack, and if there be one good bit better then another, she shall be sure to
have it. At last having well refresht themselves, she puts her silver whistle
to her mouth, and calls her maid to clear the board: then going to the fire he
sets her on his knee, stroaking her cheek, checks her under the chin, fetching
many kisses at her rubie lips, and so soon as he hears the bell ring eight a
clock he calls her to go to bed with him. But when they are once close between
a pair of sheets, O Gillian then, then: why what of that quoth. she? Nay nothing
says Margaret, but they sleep soundly all night. Truly quoth. Gillian there be
many wives, but few that meet with such kind Husbands: But seeing you ask me
why I marry not, in troth Meg I would tell thee, if I had time to stay, and
therefore farewell good Meg, when I see thee again, thou shall know more of my
mind.

Nay Gillian hear you quoth. she, go but a little way with me, and I will go home
with you, for I have nothing to buy but a a score of Quinces, and a couple of
Pomegranets: Gillian was contented to stay a while, and as soon as Margaret had
made her market, they went homeward, where by the way Gillian entered into this
communication.

You did even now demand a question of me, and very desirous you were to know
why I did not marry when I was so well preferred; Trust me Margaret I take you
to be my friend, which makes me the more willing to unfold my fancy; And truth
it is that I have forsaken good matches, for I might have had Master Cornelius
of the Guard if I would, who as you know is wealthy, yet there was one thing
made me to refuse his kind proffer: what was that quoth. Margaret, I pray thee
tell? Quoth she, he loved me not so well, but I loved another ten times better
and therefore it is not good for hands to join where hearts agree not. No Meg
no, there is a youth in our street that nearer touches my heart, and better
pleases my mind: for it is an old Proverb, two may keep counsel if one be away,
Nay then quoth Meg. if you dare not trust me, tell me no further
notwithstanding I have had credit in as great a matter as yeurs, for many a man
has (...) his life in my hands, and found no hurt thereby, and as many (...)
have committed their secrets to me, as men have ventured their bodies with me.
Go too Margaret, you are disposed to j^st said Gillian, but swear by thy
Maidenhead that thou will never bewrey, nor prevent me in my love, and I will
show thee all: nay fie do not so quoth. Margaret, show not all for shame, left
more see it then my self, for so may they blush at thy boldness: no trust me
quoth. Gillian, for such a one as cannot keep her Maidenhead, will never keep a
secret, and that made Katherine of the Crane to be such a blab: but now Meg I
will proceed to the matter. What do you think by Richard of the Rose, who is up
so early every morning, that he is called the wakefull cock of Wesminster.

Oh ho quoth. Meg is that the man? there is no reason I should think amiss of him
that every man commends: nevertheless, he is no body in respect of riches,
nothing comparable to Cornelius. I will tell thee what quoth. Gillian, that man
which needs neither to flatter with friends, nor borrow of his neighbors,
has riches sufficient: and he is most poor that has least wit, by which
arguments I am able to prove, that this Tock is as wealthy as wary, for he will
sure be beholding to no body, or to as few as may be, and it is always to be
noted, that men of such minds do never prove beggars.

Margaret hearing Gillian so stoutly to to take Richards part, perceived by her
vehement speeches, the great affection she bore to him, and finding that she
was sick of her own disease, Margaret sought means to remove the cause of her
grief: And the policy she used most herein, was to speak altogether in
Richards dispraise, and the more firmly to plant her own affectio^n, whereupon
she uttered her mind in this sort.

Well Gillian, seeing you hear so good an opinion of Richard of the Rose, I
would not for a bushel of Angels seek to diswade you: but because you request
my opinion how I like the man, in rotth I will tell thee my mind without
flattery: I confess that Richard is a gentle young man, courteous and kind,
diligent about his business, and wary in his dealings, which argues good
husbandry. Notwithstanding, I like not these over covetous fellows, of such
greedy minds; Tell me I pray thee what joy should a woman have with such a
churl, that would grudge at every halfe-penny that is laid out: That in a
whole year would not leave a farthing worth of mustard unwritten in his book.
And such a one I fear will this Cock prove, for me thinks he looks with a
hungry nose, and howsoever you think of him. I know not, but I verily fear,
though he be a Cock by name, he will never prove a Cock of the game. Again, he
is but a dwarf in respect of a man, a shrimp, a wren, a hop of my thumb, such
a one as a body may hide in a wrinkle of their buttocks.

Well Meg quoth she, you are privileged to speak your pleasure, but should
another thus mi^^earme him, I would tear her face: I tell thee true, I had
rather have a winner then waster, a sparer then a prodigal spender: for when a
man in his youth has gotten something with pain, he may better spend it in his
age with pleasure, and far better he should be thought covetous, then
careless: his stature and proportion of body pleases me well enough, for it is
no matter how great he is, but how good he is.

But Margaret seeing our talk has endured so long, that it has brought us
home, let us at our parting be mindful of our promises, to keep secret
whatsoever has been said, for little knows the young man the depth of my mind,
and therefore would I keep it close, till I saw some sign of good will
proceeding from him, for it becomes not maidens to be woers, though willingly
they could wish to wed where they best fancy, and so farewell sweet Margaret.
Adue gentle Gillian quoth Margaret until our next meeting, when I hope I shall
further understand of proceedings in your love.

When Meg had thus understood her mind, and saw how the matter went she sought
all means possible to prevent her, as hereafter shall be shown.

CHAP. II. How Margaret requested Richard to the eating of a posset at night,
and how her Masters buttocks was scalded therewith.
IT chanced that against Whitsentide, Margaret stood in need of a new pair of
shoes: therefore in a morning betimes she came to Richard of the Rose to
bespeak them aforehand, and the more to declare her kindness, and to win his
good will, she carried with her a bottle of excellent good Muskadine, which a
Yeoman of the Kings wine-sellor bestowed upon her, she carried with her a
dainty piece of powdered beef, and the carcass of a cold Capon, and thus began
to greet him. All health to the kind cock of Westminster, that with the Lark
greetes the Sun rising with a cheerful note: Tell me quoth she thou bonny Lad,
will thou take the length of my foot, and make me a good pair of shoes
against Sunday? that I will Margaret quoth he, therefore let me see thy foot:
there is both my foot and leg said Meg, I am not ashamed to show either of them
for I am not legged like a Crave, nor footed like a Fly, and therewith she did
lift up her clothes to her knee, whereat Richard smiling said, a little higher
Meg and show all: whereupon she suddenly replied in this sort: soft Richard
not so, for I will tell thee one thing, Every Carter may reach to the garter,
A Shoemaker may reach to the knee,
But he that creeps higher shall ask leave of me.


Good reason quoth. Richard, leave is light, which being obtained a man may be
bold without offense, but this only is my grief. I have never a last long
enough for thy foot: then I would they were all fired quoth. Meg. He that would be
counted a good workman will have tools to fit all persons: Fie Richard fie,
thou should never be unprovided, especially for women.

Well Meg quoth. he, be contented, consider you are a Woman of no ordinary making,
but as in height thou overlookest all, so in the length of thy foot thou
surpassest all: therefore I must have a pair of Lasts made for the nonce, and
that shall be done out of hand: I tell thee Dick quoth. she, as high as I am, I am
no so high as Paul's, nor is my foot so long as Graves-end Farge.
Notwithstanding quoth. Richard, a pair of Lasts to fit thy foot will cost as much
as a hundred of wooden faggots, which will not be bought for ten groats: if
they cost a crown quoth. Meg, let me have them; I love not to pinch for a penny,
if I find my shoes good, I will not shrink for a shilling: In troth quoth.
Richard, frank customers are worthy of good ware, and therefore Meg doubt not,
for thou shall have as good a shoe as ever was drawn upon a woman's foot:
Godamercy for that sweet Dicke quoth. she, and seeing thou say so, I will bestow
this bottle of wine on thee to breakfast, and therewithal she plucked out her
powdered beef and her cold Capon; Richard seeing this, with thanks to Margaret
for meat, reached out a couple of joint stools, and after that they had laid a
cloth therern, they down did fit, at which time many merry speeches did pass
between them. And at that very time there was in the same shop, amongst a great
many other men, a pleasant Iourney-man called round Robbin, being a well trust
fellow, short and thick, yet very active and pleasantly conceited: for singing
he was held in high reputation among all the shoomakers in Westminster. This
jolly companion seeing them both so well at their breakfast, and nothing at all
to respect him in the place where he sat, cast out these merry speeches unto
them.

Much good do it you Masters, and well may you fair,
Beshroe both your hearts and if you do spare,
The wine should be naught as I judge by the smell,
And by the color too I know it full well.
Nay faith quoth Meg that is but a jest,
I Will swear quoth Robin it is none none of the best.
Taste it quoth Meg, then tell me thy mind,
Yea marry quoth Robin now you are kind.
With that Margaret filling a cup brim full, gave it into his hands, saying,
now taste it Robin and take there the cup: Nay hang me quoth Robin if I drink it
not up.

By my Maidenhead quoth Margaret, I see that thou art a good fellow: and to
have thee drink it up is the thing that I crave.

Then swear quoth Robin by the thing you have,
For this to swear I dare be bold,
You were a maid at three years old.
From three to four, five, six, and seven,
But when you grew to be eleven,
Then you began to breed desire,
By twelve your fancy was on fire:
At thirteen years desire grew quick,
And then your maidenhead tell sick:
But when you came unto fourteen,
All sec^et kisses was not seen:
But that time fifteen years was past,
I guess your maidenhead was lost:
And I pray God forgive me this,
In thinking so I think amiss.
Now by my honesty quoth. Meg you do me mighty wrong to think so ill of me, though
I cannot excuse my self, for women are not Angels, though they have Angels
faces: for to speak the truth might I have had mine own hearts desire when time
was, I would rather have chosen to lie with a man than a maid but such merry
motions were out of my mind, and now I you that a maiden I will dye.

By this wine quoth Robin I dare swear you lie,
For were I as my Master by this good light,
You should leese your maidenhead ere twelve a clock at night,
With hey derry derry, If it be not gone already.
Nay quoth. Maragret, your Master scorns me, he keeps all his Gowns for Gillian
of the George, a pretty wench I confess, having a proper body, but a bad leg,
she has a very good countenance, but a bad color: why Margaret quoth. Richard,
has she told you so much of her mind, that you know her disease so well? It
may be she has quoth. Margaret but whether she did or no it is sufficient that I
know so much: But I think quoth. Margaret you are not so besotted to make any
account of a Tallow-cake.

No faith quoth Robin, a nut-brown girl,
Is in mine eye a Diamond and a Pearl,
And she that has her cheeks cherry red,
Is ever best welcome to a young man's bed.
Certainly quoth. Richard, which is the best or worst I know not yet, nor do I
mean hastily to prove: and as Cillian of the George, as she has no reason to
hate me, so she has no cause to love me: well said Master, quoth Robin, In
this sort grind you still,
So shall we have more sacks to the mill.


Trust me quoth. Margaret, I speak not this so much to disgrace Gillian, as for
the regard I have to your credit: but to make an end of Gillian and this jest
altogether: let me entreat you soon at night to come to our house: and though
your cheer be small your welcome shall be great: I will have as good a Posset
for you as ever you did taste in your life. My Master is an old man, and he
commonly goes to bed at nine, and for my Mistress, I know where she will be safe
till midnight mass be ended, so that for an hour we may be as merry as Pope
Ione: what say you Richard quoth she, will you come? In troth Margaret quoth. he,
I heartily thank you for your good will, I would willingly come, but I love not
to be from home so late, I think so quoth Robin lest you should miss Kate.
But take my counsel, when you are with Meg,
Suppose you have got fine Kate by the leg.


Robin said he, thou art so full of thy rhyme, that often thou art without
reason: thru see that Margaret has been at cost with us to day, and it is
more then good manners to charge her further: quoth Margaret, it is not such a
matter, therefore sweet Richard you shall come, and forget not to bring round
Robin with you, and so farewell.

No says quoth Robin, it shall not need,
I am bidden already, and so God speed.
Who had thee quoth Margaret?
What are thy wits so unsteady?
You did bid me quoth Robin, have you forgot already?
Why then I prithee good Robin, said Meg, do not forget in any case: for I
faith Robin, if thou bring thy Master along with thee, I will think the better
of thee while I live: why then quoth he, And as I am no Knight,
We will come to eat the posset soon at night.


Now Margaret was no sooner gone, and Richard at his cutting board, and Robin
set on his stool, but in comes Gillian of the George, bringing in her Apron
the corner of a Venison Pasty, and some Lamb Pie, bidding Richard good morrow,
and asked him if he had broke his fast? yes verrily quoth Richard I thank long
Meg, we have been at it this morning, and had you come a little sooner, you had
found her here, for she went away but even now.

It Is a lusty wench quoth Robin, gentle, and kind,
And in truth she bears a beautiful mind.
Gillian hearing Robin to enter into Megs commendations, began to grow jealous
of the matter: out upon her foul stammell quoth she, he that takes her to his
wife, shall be sure of flesh enough, let him get bread were he can.
Notwithstanding this, I will tell you Richard, the less she come into your
company, the more it will be for your credit. And howsoever she deserves it,
God knows, I cannot accuse her, but I promise you, she has but a hard report
amongst many. But let her rest as she is: see here what I have brought you, and
with that she gave him the Venison and the rest, and drawing her purse, she
would needs sond for a quart of wine, Richard sought to persuade her to the
contrary, but she would not: what man quoth. she, I am able to give you a quart of
wine: That Is spoke like an Angel quoth Robin; And this I do think,
If you be able to give it, we be able to drink.


Hereupon the Wine was fetched, and so they sat them down and fed heartily on
the Venison Pasty, and Gillians eye fed as greedily on Richards favor: and as
soon as the wine was come, she plucked out of her pocket a good piece of Sugar,
and filling a glass of wine tempered well therewith, she drank to him, saying,
here Richard, to all that love you and me, but especially to him whom I love
best: quoth. Richard, I will pledge him whosoever it be.

So will I quoth Robin without any fail,
Were it the best Hipocras, I would turn it over my nail.
Then Gillian looking round about, spoke to this effect: verily Richard here is
a pretty house, and every thing hansome by Saint Anne, I see nothing wanting
but a good Wife to keep all things in his due kind: whereunto Kobin made this
answer.

Now speak thy conscience, and tell me good Gill,
Would not thou be that good wife, with a good will?
Who I? alas quoth she, your Master scorns me, he looks for a girl with gold,
one that might bring him the red ruddocks chinking in a bag: and yet he were
better to have one with less money and more huswifery: for my one part, I
would not come to learn of never a Woman in Westminster, how to deal in such
affairs: I think no less quoth Richard, and therefore I pray God send you a
good Husband, and one well deserving so good a wife: with that Gillian fetched a
great sigh, saying, Amen I pray God. Why then marry me quoth. Robin, and thereby
prevent the perish of bad thoughts, hark in thy ear Robin quoth she, I would
thy Master would say so much and then he should soon know my mind.

Ha, ha, quoth Robin, I faith you drab,
And would you have him to stamp the crab.
Why what is the matter quoth Richard? nay nothing (quoth Gillian) but that I
was bold to jest with your man, and I hope you will not be offended if he and I
talk a word or two. There is no reason I should, quoth Richard, and therefore
confer at your pleasure, and the whilst I will be busy with the Lamb-pye, then
Gillian whispering Robin in the ear, spoke in this sort unto him. I perceive
you can spy day at a little hole. Robin I am of opinion that affection grows
as strong in a woman as a man, they to have equal privilege, as well as men
to speak their minds: In truth Robin to be plain, I love thy Master with all my
heart, and if thou would be so much my friend to break the matter unto him,
and therewithal to procure his good likeing unto me, I would bestow on thee as
good a suit of apparel, as ever thou wast Master of in thy life, whereunto
Robin answered, saying.

Here Is my hand Gillian, at thy request,
I Will make a vow I Will do my best,
But for my apparel grant me this,
In earnest first to give me a kiss.
There it is, quoth. Gillian and I do protest, that upon that blessed day, when he
gives his happy consent to be my husband, at the delivery of thy apparel, I
will make that one kiss twenty, and they came to the table, and set them down
again. Richard marking all, said nothing, but at her approach to the board,
took the glass and drunk to her, giving her thanks for her cost and
kindness: she gladly accepting the same, bending her body instead of cursie,
took it at his hands, and drunk unto Robin, and so taking her leave of them
both shh^ ran speedily home.

So soon as she was gone, Robin told his Master it was the pleasentest life in
the world to live a Bachelor, for he would never want good cheer and company:
I marry quoth Richard, but what I get one way I spend another: you see quoth he
here is a foreneoon spent to no purpose. I tell thee Robin, I account their
inticoments dangerous, therefore a man must not be won with fair words as a
fish with a bait.

Well quoth Robin, all is one to me, whether you love or loath them, but let
not the posset be forgot soon at night.

Quoth Richard, if I rest in the mind I am in now, I mean not to be there at
all: then you will lose her love quoth Robin, that, said his Master is that I
desire, for the love of a Shroe is like the shadow of a cloud that soon
consumes, and such love is better lost then found. Quoth Robin, this once
follow my mind, Though by her love you set but light,
Let us eat the posser soon at night,
And afterward I will so deal,
If you will not my ^ricks reveal:
That they shall trouble you no more,
Though by your love they set great store,
For one another they shall beguile,
Yet think themselves well pleased the while.


Verily quoth his Master, if thou will do so. I will be Megs guest this once,
and think my self happy to be so rid of them: Hereupon Richard having his Shop
windows shut in and his doors made fast: He with his man Robin, took their
direct way to the Spread Eagle, where they no sooner knocked at the door, but
Margaret came down and let them in, and bid them heartily welcome. Now Richard
quoth she, you are a man of your word, I pray you come near for to have you in
my Office is my desire: quoth Robin was your Office never a fire? you see the
Kitchen is large and the chimney wide: quoth Robin, how many Rooks has your
Kitchen tried? I know not quoth Meg, quoth Robin, I think even so. Go to quoth
Meg, but I Will let it pass; Then taking Richard by the hand, she bad him sit
down, saying, good Richard you are welcome. I have never a friend in the World
that can be better welcome: I thank you good Margaret quoth he. I, thank her
still. quoth. Robin in every degree,
For you that have all the welcome, shall give thanks for me.


Why Robin quoth. Meg, be not offended, thou art welcome to me.

I faith quoth he, you bid me welcome when you have nothing else to do.

Herewithall Margaret very neatly laid the cloth, set a dainty minst Pie on the
board, and other good cheer and sent the other maid of the house for a pottle
of wine, and so fell to their meat merrily, when they had eaten and drunk,
Margaret stepped to reach the posset, but while she had it in her hand, she heard
one coming down the stairs: Gods precious quoth she my Master comes, where
shall we hide the posset, if he see it, we shall have more anger then ten
possets are worth, with that she whipped it into the seat of the p^ivy house,
thinking it there safest out of sight, her Master being an old crabbed fellow,
would often steal down to see what his Maids were a deing, the old man being
raised by a looseness of his body, came to pay tribute to Ajax, where he clapped
his buttocks into the posset, wherewith being scalded, he cried out, saying,
help maids, or I am spoiled for ever: for some Devil has thrown scalding lead
upon my buttocks, and in this case he stamped up and down the yard holding his
hips in his hands: Meg. that knew better what the matter was then her Master,
ran into the house of Office with a spit, as if she purposed to broach the
Devil, casting the posset into the puddle, said, how now Master what is the
matter, are you hurt, hurt quoth her Master, I tell thee Meg, never was man
thus hurt, and yet I am ashamed to show my hurt: bring me a candle quoth Meg, I
tell you Master, it is better all should be shown, then all spoiled: and
casting up his shirt, spied both his great cheeks full of blisters, whereupon
she was feign to make a medicine with sallet oil and houseleek to assuage this
unseen fire: and by this means, Richard with his man was fain to slip away,
which was to Robin no small grief, and yet laughing to think how odly this jest
fell out.

I am quoth Robin, forty years old and more,
Yet did I never know posset so tasted before:
I think his eyes in his elbowes he had,
To thrust his a^se in the posset, or else he was mad.
His Master answering, said, Robin I will never go there to eat posset more.
Margaret coming thither told them she was sorry they were so suddenly broke
from their banquet; but Y faith Richard (quoth she) another time shall make
amends for all.

CHAP. 3. How Richard the Cock of Westminster was married to a Dutch Maiden,
for which cause long Meg, and Gillian of the George wore willow Garlands.
RIchard Castler living a long time a Bachelor in Westminster: at last linked
his love to a Dutch Maiden dwelling in London. To this pretty soul went
Richard secretly a wooing, who for half a year set as light by him, as he did
by the Maidens of Westminster, and the more he was denied, the more he sought
her good will; But while he was thus busied to make himself blessed by matching
with a Maiden in London: round Robin cast his wits to set the Maidens of
Westminster against him, which he effected in this sort.

Margaret and Gillian coming often by the Shop, cast many a Sheeps eye to spy
out their beloved friend, and finding him not at his Shop, they judged that it
was not Idleness that drew him away, but rather that he was gone a wooing to
some pretty Wench, whereupon Margaret entered into these speeches with round
Robin.

I wonder quoth Meg, where your Master lays his knife aboard now a days; tell
me Robin said she, where the Cock does crow now? Not so quoth Robin, my Master
does not that allow, I must not show his secrets to one or other,
Therefore you shall not know it though you were my mother
Yet thus much by thy speech I plainly do see,
Thou think not so well of him as he thinks on thee.


Margaret hearing round Robin rhyme to so good a purpose; asked if he knew his
Masters mind so much? therefore sweet Robin let me know whereupon thou
speak. Hereupon Robin said, that his Master was very well affected toward
her, and that if it were not for Gillian of the George, he would long ere this
have uttered his mind to you: but quoth Robin, he is se haunted by that female
spirit, that he can rest in no place for her.

These Words uttered by Robin, made Margarets heart leap in her belly:
wherefore taking gentlely her leave of him, she thus began to meditate on the
matter: Now do I well see that the tongue of a wise man is in his heart, but
the heart of a fool is in his tongue: and Richard quoth she have thou born me
such secret good will and would never let me know it.

Thus in a jolly humor Margaret jotted home, flatterring her self in her happy
fortune, in which delight we will leave her and make some rehearseall of
Gillians joy: who coming in the like manner to Robin, asking for his Master,
was certified by him, that for her sake only he lived in such sorrow, that he
could not stay in his shop, and therefore was feign to drive away melancholy
by marching abroad. O Gillian quoth he, had it not been for two causes, he
would long ere this have uttered his mind to thee: quoth Gillian, is it true
Robin that thou do tell me? doubt not of that, do you think I will tell you a
lie? Nay good Robin be not angry, blame me not to ask a question: ask what you
will quoth Robin, and I may choose whether I will answer you or no: now I have
opened my Master secret, you were best to blab it through all the town. Nay
good Robin that is not my mind quoth Gillian, but I beseech thee let me know
those two causes that keeps thy Master from uttering his mind. Nay soft, there
lay a staw for fear of stumbling quoth Robin, let it suffice you that you know
what you know. Nay good sweet Robin I pray thee make it not dainty now to tell
me all, seeing you have begun; the day may come that I may requite thy
courtesy: say you so Gillian? now by good Crispianus, were it not that I am in
hope you would prove kind to my Master, and be a good Mistress to us, I would
not utter one word more. Well Robin, if ever I come to command thy Masters
house, and keep the keys, thou shall see I will keep no ^iggards table, but you
shall have meat and drink in a plentiful manner.

Robin hearing this, told her this tale, that his Master loved her entirely,
and would long since have uttered his mind, but for two reasons: the first was
that he could never find a fit opportunity, because of long Meg, whose love to
him was more then he could wish: for if he do but speak, and look upon any, she
presently pouts and lowers, which is such a grief to my Master, that he is
feign to keep silent. The second reason is, that he is not wealthy as he could
wish himself, you would disdain his suit: Who I quoth Gillian? I tell thee
Robin I do more respect his kindness then his goods. Why then good Gillian
quoth Robin, hearken hither three days hence, and you shall hear more. I
warrant thee Robin quoth she, and so away she went, being as glad of this
tidings as her Master was of a good Term. Now when his Master came home, Robin
asked him how he sped in his suit, even as Cooks do in baking their Pyes,
sometimes well, sometimes ill. London Wenches are wily Lasses; Now she is in one
mind, by and by in another, and to be brief never steadfast in any thing.

Tush Master quoth Robin, stoop not to a Thistle, take this comfort, what one
will not, another will: I tell you Master, these nice Minions are so full of
curiosit, that they are clean without courtesy: Yet well fare the gallant
girls of Westminster, that will do more for a man then he will do for himself.
What is that said his Master? mary quoth he to give two kisses before he calls
for one. That indeed is extraordinary kindness quoth Richard, but their loves
is like braided Wares, that is often seen, but hardly sold.

Well Master quoth Robin, you know your two old friends Meg and Gillian: I,
what of them quoth Richard? I have made them both believe that you love them
out of all cry. And I beshrow thy heart for that quoth. Richard, for therein thou
do both deceive them, and discredit me: I assure thee I like not such jesting.

Now gip quoth Robin, are you grieved at my talk?
And if you be angry, I pray go walk:
Thus do you never esteem of a man,
Let him do for you the best that he can.
Richard hearing his man so hot, pacified him with many cold and gentle
speeches, wishing if he had begun any jest, that he should finish it with such
discretion, that no reproach might grow upon him, whereupon Robin proceeded in
this sort.

Upon a time Margaret according to her wonted manner came thither, whom Robin
peswaded that his Master was go^e into Tutle fields, and he desired you that
you would meet him there: but take heed that Gillian of the George spy you,
and so follow you to the place where my Master attends your coming. Tush quoth
Margaret, let me alone for that, if she follow me she were better no, for I
will lead her a dance shall maker her weary before she has done, and so
farewell Robin: for into Tutle fields I will trudge as fast as I may. But take
heed you loose not your maidenhead by the way.

Robin presently runs unto Gillian, saying what cheer Gillian, how does all
the pretty Wenches here? I faith Robin quoth. they, we rub out with the rest: but
what is the news with thee? Small news quoth Robin, yet somewhat I have to say,
But hear you Gillian a word by the way.


And with that (rounding her in the ear) he told her that incontinent it was
his Masters will she should meet him in Tutle filds: charging her if she met
Margaret she should in no case go forward, for my Master cannot abide that
great rounsefull should come in his company.

For that let me alone quoth Gillian, but trust me Robin, it could not have
come in a worse time this twelve month: why then let it rest till another time
quoth Robin: nay quoth she, I will go to him, since so kindly he sent for me;
into Tutle fields she goes, where at last she spied Margaret with a hand-basket
in her hand, who suddenly had got a sight of her, she made a show as if she
gathered herbs in the field: quoth Gillian I will gather herbs as fast as
you, though I have as little need of them as your self.

In the mean time Robin got him home, and heartily laughing at them, saying O
what a World is this, when maids runs a madding for husbands? now may I swear
what I have seen.

Two maids run as fast as they can,
A mile in the field to meet with a man.
How can men say maids are proud, or coy, when we find them so gentle, that
they will run like a Falcon to the Lure: but alas they are deceived in finding
Richard in Turtle fields: but hereby I know their minds against another time.

Thus did Robin deride them when he found their fondness to be such: but to
leave him to his humor, and return to the maids that were picking herbs in the
fields: when Meg saw that Gillian would not away, she came to her, and asked her
what she did there? nay what do you here quoth she? quoth Meg I come to gather
thrift, but I can find nothing but thistles: quoth Gillian but I mean to get
hearts-ease ere I go: Nay quoth Meg I shall find thrift, as soon as you shall
find heart-ease, but I think I shall find none to day, then get you home quoth
Gillian, would you be rid of my company quoth. Meg? for that word I mean not to be
gone yet: I faith Gillian I smell a Rat. Then quoth she you have as good a nose
as our gray Cat: but what Rat do you smell tell me? I doubt, if there be any
Rat in the field, you would fain catch him in your trap, but I faith Meg you
shall be deceived: then quoth. Meg you would have the Rat taste no cheese but your
own; then said Gillian, wheresoever he run, I would have him creep into no
corner of yours: you speak mystical quoth Meg: if thou art a good Wench let us
go home together: quoth Gillian, as I came not with you, so I mean not to go
with you.

Quoth Meg before God I will stay as long as thee for thy life: quoth Gillian
thou shall stay while midnight then: and in this humor sometimes they sat
down, sometimes they stalkt round the fields, till it was night, and at last
the Watch met with them, who contrary to Gillians mind, brought them home
together. But their Mistresses that had so long mist them, were very angry with
their long absence, yet were glad they were come again; and asking where they
had been so long, the Watchmen answered, that the one had been to seek
hearts-ease, and the other to gather thrif. Nay quoth their Mistrisses if that
be the reason, we cannot much blame them, seeing we have sought it this seven
years and could not find it: and in this sort the jest ended.

Within a while after, Richard through his long ^^oing, had ^otten the good
will of his sweetheart, and making all things ready for his marriage,
presently Magaret and Gillian had notice or it, who coming unto Richard, saying
he was the most false and unconstant man in the World. Have I quoth. Meg, set my
whole mind on thee to be thus served? Nay quoth Gillian, have I endured such
sorrow for thy sake, and be thus unkindly cast off? Now I wish from my heart
quoth Meg, that if ever thou marriest any out me, that she may make thee as
errant a Cuckold as Jack Coomes. So, you are very charitable quoth Richard, to
with me no worse then you mean to make your Husband: but when did I request
thee to come into Tuttle fields? What have you so weak a memory quoth she? ask
your man Robin whether it were so or no: Well quoth Robin what then? wherefore
did you not speak with him at that present?

You know it comes in an hour, comes not in seven year,
Had you met him at that ^^ant you had married him clear.
A vengeance take her quoth Meg, I could not meet him for Gillian. I could not
meet him for Meg, a morin take her quoth Gillian. Richard hearing them at
words, made this reply. It is a strange thing that you will blame me of
discourtesie: had you come at the appointed time, it is likely I had married
one of you, seeing my mind was adieted to one as well as the other:: Why may it
not be yet quoth they? No said he, you speak too late: hearing this answer they
were struck with grief, and so with watery eyes went home, to whom Robin carried
two Willow Garlands, saying; You pretty souls that forsaken be, Take here the
branhces of the willow tree.
And sing loves farewell jointly with me.


Meg being merrily inclined, shook off sorrow in this sort, and taking the
Willow Garland, said, Wherefore is grief good? can it recall folly past? no^
and therefore a fig for the Cock of Westminster; Now God bless me, I swear by
Venus, that in the mind I am in, I would not have him, if he had as much money
as would lie in Westminster Hall. And therefore Robin this Willow Garland is to
me right welcome: and now I will go with thee to Gillian, but when they came
to Gillian, Robin staid for her at the stair foot: they found her sick in her
bed, to whom Margaret spoke in this manner. What how now Gillian sick a bed?
now fie for shame, let not a man thiumph so much over thee, as to say thou
gav'st the Crow a pudding. Ah no quoth Gillian, death is sweet to them that
live in sorrow, but to none should be better welcome then to me. What now quoth
Margaret, whose Mare is dead? Art thou a young Wench, fair and comely, and does
thou despair of life: and all for love? O quoth Gillian, what are all the men
in the world to me now I have lost my Richard. Rise quoth Meg, come lets go
drink a quart of Sack to wash down sorrow. O quoth G^lli^n I cannot rise if I
might have all the World. What if your Father or Mother, or some of the Kings
Gentlemen entreat you, would you not rise, never prate, I would not rise to the
best Lord in the Land, nor to no man else: nay quoth. Meg I am sure you would: If
I do, say I am an errant queen. Nay quoth. Meg, seeing you say so, I have done,
and therefore I Will keep my breath to cool my pottage.

A matter said Gillian? what matter is it sweet Meg, tell me? no quoth she, it is
but but a trifle, your sweet heart Richard has sent his man Robin for you, and
he tells me he has a token to deliver to you: quoth Gill, where is he, why
comes he not up? quoth Meg, he counts it more then manners to press into a
maidens chamber. O stay a little good Meg and I will go along with you, and
with that, on she slipped her Petticote, and would not stay the puptting on her
stockings or her shoes: why how now Gillian quoth Meg, have you fogot your
self? remember you are sick a bed: tush it is no matter for that said Gillian,
grief has too tongues, to say, and unsay: and so she ran down the stairs after
Margaret, who got Robin to go before to the three Tuns, who when Gillian came,
she asked him how his Master did, and what his errand was to her.

Soft, first let us drink quoth Robin, and then let us talk,
That we cannot pay for, shall be set up in chalk.
You speak merrily quoth Margaret, but I wish I could see the Wine come once,
that I may drink a hearty draught: for sorrow they say is dry, and I find it to
be true, Then drink hard quoth Robin and bid sorrow adue.

Thus when they had whipped off two or three quarts, Gillian began to grow as
pleasant as the best, and would know of Robin what he had to say to her:
nothing quoth. he but to do my Masters commendation, and to deliver you his token.
This token quoth. she, what a Willow Gar land? is this the best reward he can give
me for my good will: had he no body to flout but me. O intolerable injury
quoth Gillian, did I take pains to rise out of my warm bed for this? Well
Margaret if you will agree, we will wear these disdainful branches on his
marriage day to his great disgrace: content quoth Meg, look what thou will
allow, I will not dislike, so paying the shot, away they went.

At length when the marriage day was come, and that the bride in the midst of
her friends was set down to dinner, Margaret and Gillian attired in red
petticotes, with white linen sleedes, and fine Holland Aprons* having their
Willow Garlands on their heads, entered the Hall singing this song:

WHen fancy first framed our liking in love,
sing all of green willow,
And faithful affection such motion did move,
for willow, willow, willow.
Where pleasure was plenty we chanced to be, sing all of, etc.
There were we enthralled of our liberty,
and forced to carry the willow Garlard.
This young man we liked and loved full dear, sing all of, etc.
And in our hearts-closet we kept him full near, sing willow, etc,
He was our hearts pleasure and all our delight, sing all of, etc.
We judged him the sweetest of all men in sight,
who gives us unkindly the willow Garland.
No cost we accounted too much for his sake, sing all of, etc.
Fine bands and fine handkerchers for him we did make, sing, etc.
And yet for our good will, our travel and pain, sing all of, etc.
We have gotten nothing but scorn and disdain:
as plainly is proved by this willow garland.
Then pardon our boldness, thou gentle fair bride, sing all of etc
We speak by experience of that we have tried, sing willow, etc.
Our overmuch courtesy bread all our woe, sing all of green, etc.
But never hereafter we mean so to do,
for this only brought us the willow Garland.
Their song being thus ended, the Bride said she was heartily sorry for their
hard fortunes, and blaming the Bridegroom for his unkindnesse: Nay do not so
quoth Meg, for you shall find him kind enough at night: but seeing he has
disappointed me in this sort, if shall go hard but I will loose my maidenhead
as soon as you shall, and you shall make good have then. Well Gillian quoth
she, let us go, never will I be tide in affection to one man again while I do
live? Well, I say little, but hencefor: ward, hang me if I refuse reason when I
am reasonably entreated. Thus Margaret in a melancholy humor went her ways,
and in short time after she forsook Westminster, and attended on the Kings
army at Bullen, and while the siege lasted, became a Landresse to the Camp and
in the end she left her life in Islington, being very penitent for all her
former offenses. Gillian in the end was married, and became a very good
housekeeper, living in honest name and fame till her dying day.

CHAP. 4. How round Robin and his fellows sung before the King.


THe Kings Majesty having won the strong town of Bullen, victoriously he
returned into England, and according to his accustomed manner lying at hi^
Palace of White Hall: diverse of his Nobility passing up and down Westminster,
did many times hear the Journey men Shoomakers singing: whose pleasant songs
was so pleasing in the ears of the hearers, that it caused them to stay about
the door to hearken thereunto: Robin above the rest, declared such cunning in
his song, that he ever obtained the chiefest praise; Now you shall understand,
that by their often singing in the Shop, the Iourneymen of that house were
noted above all men in Westminster, insomuch that at the last, the King had
knowledge thereof, who caused them to be sent for to the Court. Whereupon round
Robin and his four fellows made themselves ready, and their Master being of a
good mind, against the day they should go before the King, he suited them all at
his own cost, in doublets and hose of crimson Taffety, black velvet Caps on
their heads, and white Feathers, on their legs they had fine yellow stockings.
Pumps and Pantofles on their feet: by their sides each of them wors a fair
Sword: and in this sort being brought before his Majesty, upon their knees they
craved pardon for presuming to come into his royal presence: The King seeing
them to be such proper men, and attyred in Gentlemen-like manner, had them
stand up: Why my Lords quoth he, be these the merry minded Shoomakers you spoke
of? they are dread Sovereign, said they: certainly, said the King, you are
welcome every one, but who among you is round Robin?

My Liege quoth Robin, that man am I,
Which in your Graces service will live and dye:
And these be my fellows every one,
Ready to wait your royal Grace upon.
How now Robin (said the King) what, can thou rhyme?
A little my Liege quoth he, as I see place and time.
His Grace laughing heartily, told him that he heard say he could sing well.

Trust me quoth Robin, at your Graces request,
You shall well perceive we will do one best.
Hereupon the King sat him down where many great Lords and Ladies attended his
Highness. And being in the Christmas time, Robin, with his fellows had liberty
to declare their cunning before our King, but his Princely presence did so
amate them, that they were quite dashed out of countenance, which his Grace
perceiving, gave them many gracious words, of encouragement, whereupon they
began in this sort, singing a song of the winning of Bullen.

The Song of the winning of Bullen sung before the King by round Robin and his
fellows.
IN the month of October, our King would go to Dover,
By leave of Father and the Son,
A great army of men, well appointed there was then,
before our Noble King to come.
The valiant Lord Admiral, he was Captain General
Of all the royal Navy sent by Sea:
The sight was wothy to behold, to see the ships of shining gold,
and flags and streamers sailing all the way.
At Bullen then arriving, with wisdom well contriving:
the armed men were set in battle ray,
And Bullen was besieged round, our men with drum and trumpets sound,
before it marched courageous that day.
Then mark how all things chanced, before them was advanced,
the royal Standard in the bloody field:
The Frenchmen standing on the walls, to them our English Heralds calls,
wishing in time their City for to yield.
Our King has sent to prove you, because that he does love you
he profferd mercy if you will embrace:
If you deny his kind request, and in your obstinacy rest,
behold you bring your selves in woeful case.
Quoth they we do deny you, and flatly we defy you,
fair Bullen is a famous Maiden Town,
For all the deeds that has been done by conquest never was she won,
she is a Lady of most high renown.
When they so unadvised, his proffer had despised,
our Ordinance began to shoot amain:
Continuing eight hours and more, for why our King most deeply swore,
her Maidenhead that he would obtain.
When thus his Grace had spoken, he sent her many a token,
fiery balls, and burning brazen rings,
Fair broad arrows sharp and swift,
Which came among them with a drift,
Well garnisht with the gray goose wings.
This maiden town that lately, did show her self so stately,
In seeking favor many tears she shed:
Upon her knees then fell she down, saying O King of high renown
Save now my life, and take my maidenhead.
Zo, thus her self she ventred, and straight her streets were entered,
And to the market place she marched free:
Never a Frenchman durst withstand to hold a weapon in his hand
For all the gold that ever he did see.
Their Song being ended, our King cast them a purse with fifty fair Angels for
a reward, and so they had liberty to depart: and when they came home, they told
their Master all their merriment before the King, and what his Grace had
bestowed on them, and pouring the Gold upon the table, and their Master told it
for them and every man's share was five pound a piece. Which when Robin saw he
swore he would bestow a supper upon his Master and Mistress, though it cost him
two angels: his fellows hearing him so free, said they would join with him and
invite all the Shoomakers in Westminster to bear them company.

Content quoth Robin with all my heart,
And twenty shillings will I spend for my part.
And as I am a true man, and sung before our King
As much shall each of you spend before our parting.
So shall we have music and gallant cheer.
Sack and sugar, Claret wine strong Ale and Beer.
This being concluded, they met at the sign of the Bell, and they were very
merry, and Robin began to blame his Master that in three years time had not got
his Mistress with child: hold quoth he, I have but jested all this while, but
when I fall on in earnest, I will make her belly rise like a Tun of new Ale,
thou know I am the Cock of Westminster. I quoth Robin you had that name,

More for your rising, than your goodness in Venus game. But suddenly after
this his Master dyed, being a good friend to decayed house keepers, a worthy
example for all men to follow.

CHAP. 5. The pleasant Story of Peachy the famous Shoemaker of Fleetstreet in
London.


MVch about this time, there lived in London a rich Shoemaker, and a gallant
housekeeper, who being a brave person, was therefore of most men called lustey
Peachy: he kept all the year long forty sad men and Prentices at work, and
every one be clothed in tawny Coats, which he gave as his Livery, with black
Caps and yellow Feathers: and every Sunday and holy day, when this
Gentlemanlike Citizen want to Church in his black Gown guarded with Velvet, it
was his order to have all his men in their Liveries to wait upon him, with
every man his Sword and Buckler, ready at any time, it need required.

It came to pass upon St. Georges day, that this Eolly Shoemaker (being
servant to the Duke of Suffolk) went to the Court with all his men after him to
give attendance upon his noble Master: which some young Gentlemen more wanthen
wise, pick a quarrel, thereby to try his Manhood: quoth. they did you ever see a
Shoemaker, a Cobling Companion brave it so as this fellow does? see what a
train of hardy Squires and squaring lads they be, they look as if they would
fight with Gargantus, and yet I durst lay my life they dare scant kill a
Hedgehog: I warrant you there is never a Knight that goes with such a train:
it were good sport to try what they could do? My mastes I tell you this fellow
is a hardy Coin, he is current mettle y-faith and whenever you try him, you will
find him not fly a soot: With that, comes by lusty Tom Stuteley and
Strangwidge two gallant Sea Captains who were attired in Crimson Velvet, in
watched silk, thrump hats, and white frathers, having Pages attending with
their weapons, asked what was the matter? marry Captain quoth they, we are all
beholding to ponder lusty Gallant with so many waiting on him with Tawny Coats:
S'blood what to be quoth Stuteley? be seems to be a gallant man said Stangwide
and were it not I see him in the Duke of Suffolks livery* I should take him to
be some Lord: Nay quoth Stuteley he is some Knight of good living. Gentlemen
quoth they, you are deceived in your judgments, for he is a good Shoemaker
living in Fleetstreet. What? but a Shoemaker quoth Stuteley? O that word makes
me scratch my elbow: Can a Shoemaker come with more serving men at his heels
then Captain Stuteley; see how it makes my blood rise: see how he squares it
out? see, what a company of handsome fellows follow him, ^is twenty pound to a
penny but they are better men their Master: not so quoth the Gentlemen for
their birth and bringing up are much at one for they are all Shoomakers: now by
this iron age quoth Stuteley, were it not that he is attendant on the Duke, I
would have him by the ears presently. I wi^ say a hundred pound that Captain
Strangwidge and I beat him and his Courty men. The Gentlemen being ready to set
this match forward, commended the Captains high courage: Well Gentlemen said
they you say he dwells in Fleetstreet, and that he is a Shoemaker, never swear
we with become his Customers: Nay quoth Stuteley we will bespeak Boots on him
and so we will raise our quarrel* for if they come not on east, and sit on our
legs neatly, we'll beat them about their ears, and if they take it in dudgin
and follow us for revenge, if we make not them leap before us like Monkies, and
run like sheep-biters, we will lase our credits for ever.

But what if you chance to kill one of them? what care we? we are bound to Sea
on a gallant voyage, where they cannot go forward without us, and when they are
seeking of us in Fleetstreet, we shall be seeking out the Coast of Florida.

Within a while after Stuteley and Strangwidge having thus determined, came
into Fleestreet and inquired for P^^chies shop, and when they came to the house
they inquired for the good man, the foreman of the shop demanded what their
wills was, why knabs quoth they let us speak with your Master; Gentlemen quoth
he, if you lack any commodity in our shop, I can fit you: why Jack sauce quoth
Stuteley, know you to whom you speak?

The fellow being displeased at his words, roundly answers, ask you to whom I
speak, quoth he? yes goodman flateap said Strangwidge, we ask to whom you
speak* she quoth he, I speak to a velvet slave, a stiken slave, with that
Stuteley pulled out his Dagger and began to strike at the fellow, which one of
his fellows seeing, slung a Last at his head and feld him to the ground:
Strangwidge thereupon drew his sword, but by that time the fellow had took down
his Sword and Buckler, and so well defended himself, that Strangwidge could do
him no hurt.

But Peachie hearing a noise in the step, asked the cause of the quarrel his
servants told him they gave the Iournemen til language, whereupon Peache went
unto them, saying, how now Captains, how grew this quarrel between you and my
men?

Thy men quoth Stuteley, Thy Rogues, and thy self is no better: sir you wrong
me says Peachie, and get you gone from my door, for I tell you Stuteley and
Strangwidge both, that I keep forty good fellows in my house, that in respect
of their manhood may be your equals. I Will tell thee what Peacie, if we two beat
not thee and thy forty men, I durst be hanged up at thy door. Fie, fie quoth
Peachie, dare you two take five? take that and try quoth Strangwidge, and
therewithal gave him a sound blow upon the ear: nay this is too much quoth
Peachie, put up this and put up all: Stuteley and Strangwidge if you be men
meet me in Lincolns Inn fields presently: Content said they* and so they went
their ways. Peachie fetching straight his Sword and Buckler, and called his
man John Abridges, and so into the fields they went, where they met which these
lusty Cavaleers. The two Captains seeing him come only with one man, asked if
there were all the help he had? I will request no more quoth Peachy to beat you
does out of the fields.

Brag is a good dog quoth Stuteley, but tell us, have thou made thy will? what
if I have not quoth Peachie? why then quoth Strangwidge, for thy wife and
childrens sake go home and do it, or get more help to preserve thy life.

What how now Master quoth John Abridges come you into the field to fight with
women, for these be two disguised Butter-whore^, that have more skill in
scolding then sighting: shall we be thus outbrav'd quoth Stuteley, and
therewith drawing their Weapons they fell to it lustily, where Peachy and his
man so bravely laid about them that they beat both the Captains out of breath,
in which tray Stuteley was wounded in the head, and Strangwidge in the Sword
arm, but at last they were parted so prevent further mischief.

The Captains got them to the Surgeon, but Peachy and his man went directly
home: and while they were dressing, Peachie sent to Stuteley a Handkerchief by
one of his men, and by another a scarf to Strangwidge, by the third he sent a
b^t^le of Aqua vi^ae, wishing them to be of good cheer: The Captains finding
these favour's to be but stouts, were more gr^eved thereat then their hurt, and
therefore with many disdainful speeches they refused his courtesy.

And you shall understand that afterward Peachies men by two and two at a time,
did often meet and fight with them, and so narrowly would they watch them that
they could be in no place at quiet for them, insomuch that the Captains sound
fighting work enough and more then they willingly would so that they were
seldom out of the Surgions hands.

Upon a time it chanced that being upon a point of their voyage to sea,
Stuteley and Strangwidge having been at Court, and newly come from my
Lord-Admirals lodging, before they came to Chairing Cross they were encountered
by two of lusty Peachies men who presently drew upon them, and laid so about
them, that the two Captains were glad at length to house themselves for refuge:
Now a plague on them quoth Stuteley we shall never be quiet for these
Queistrels? Captain Strangwidge there is no other shift but to seek their
frindship, therefore to keep our limbs sound against we go to Sea, it is best
to use a means to quiet this grudge.

Then said Strangwidge it were good to do so if a man knew how: but you may be
sure they will not easily be entreated, seeing we have abused them in speech:
and albeit they sent diverse of their friends unto Master Peachy, and by his
men, yet they would not yield, nor give consent to be appeased: so that the
Captains were at length constrained to make suit to the Duke of Suffolk to take
up the matter, who most honorably performed their request, and so the grudge
ended betwixt them, to the great credit of Master Peachie, and all his men.

CHAP. 6. How Henry Nevel and Tom Drum came to serve Peachie of Fleet Street.
PEachies same running through England by means of the f^ays which he and his
men had with Stuteley and Strangwidge, it made many of that occupation destrous
to come to work with him. Among many other that were desirous of his service,
the^e was one called Tom Drum that had a great desire to be his man, a very od
fellow, and one that was sore infected with the sin of ^^^oing: this boasting
companion sitting in his Masters shop at Petworth, and seeing the Sun shine
very fa^^, made no more ado but suddenly shrouded up St. Huges bones and took
down his pick-staffe, clapped his pack at his back and called for his Master, who
coming into the shop and seeing his man prepared to be packing abroad, demanded
the matter was that he followed not his business.

O Master quoth he, see you not how sweetly the sun shines! well, and what then
quoth his Master? Marry quoth. (...) great mind to (...) the small birds sing, I
called (...) forth so take my leave, and so bid you farewell, I hope (...)
(...) in your hand.

Why no quoth his Master, thou will be suit to take an order for that, and
therefore adue. God be with you good Master, and farewell all good fellows of
the Gentle Craft, and therewith be departed.

The Iourneymen of the Town hearing that Tom Drum went away, they gathered
themselves together to drink with him, and to bring him out of Town: and to
this intent, up they go to the sign of the Crown, where they parted not till
they had drunk a stand of Bear and Ale.

Which being done, they bring him a mile on his way, and then once again they
drink to his good health, and to Chrispianus soul, and to all the good fellows
of Kerbfoord, which being done, Tom Drum being in a merry vain, and destrous to
drive out the weary way, as he walks he begins thus pleasantly to sing.

The Primrose in the green Forest,
the Violets they be gay:
The double Dazies and the rest
that trimly decks the way.
Does move the spirits with brave delights
whose beauties darlings be:
With hey trickfie, trim go trickfie,
under the green wood tree.
The singing of this song awaked a young Gentleman whom sorrow had laid asleep
on a green bank by the high ways side. Now when he heard Tom Drum so trimly
tune it on the way, raising himself from the sad ground, he awaited his coming,
at whose sudden sight Tom Drum like one that had spied an Adder, and seeing him
provided with a good sword and buckler, supposed he had been one that waited
for a purse: Good fellow quoth he, good morrow, but ill speed: why say thou
so quoth Harry? because said Tom by the light of the day thou may see to
pass beside me, and that by thy speeding ill, I may speed the better: what
have thou so much store of money said Harry that thou art loath to lose it?

No by my faith said Tom, I assure thee all my stock is but one poor penny. Why
then quoth Harry if I were minded to assault thee, it should be more to rob
thee of thy manhood then thy money: but tell me, what is that pack at thy back?
said Tom they are St. Hughs bones: quoth Harry what is that? a commodity said
Tom that I cannot miss, for they be my working-tooles.

Quoh Harry what occupation art thou of? sir quoth Tom, I am a Goldsmith that
makes rings for women's heels: what meanest thou by that quoth Harry? I am said
Tom of the the gentle Craft, vulgerly called a Shoemaker.

Happy thou art quoth Harry that thou have a Trade to live by, for by that
means thou carriest credit with thee in every place: but what is thy name quoth
Harry: as for my name I am not a ashamed to tell it, for my name is a Noune
substantive that may be felt, heard, or understood, and to speak and tell the
truth, my name is Thomas Drum, or Tom Drum choose you whether: Well Thomas quoth
Harry I perceive thou art a good fellow, therefore I will open need unto thee.

I have quoth Harry been unto my Parents untoward, not knowing when I was well,
I wilfully came from them, and I have spent all my money, I have utterly undone
my self, for I am not worth a great. Why then quoth Tom thou art not worth so
much as goodman Luters lame Nag, for my Lord of Northumberlands Huntsman would
have given ten groats for him to seed his Dogs: notwithstanding be of good
cheer, if thou will go to London with me I will bear thy charges, and I faith
we will be merry at the next Town.

Alas quoth Harry how can that be, seeing you have but one penny? I tell thee
quoth Tom, were thou a Shoemaker as I am, thou might go with a single penny
all England over, and at every good Town have meat, drink, and lodging of the
best, and yet keep thy penny in store. Believe me quoth Harry that is more then
any Tradesman else can do.

Tush quoth Tom Shoomakers will not see one another lack for it is their
custom, if a good fellow comes to Town, if he wants either meat or money,
making but his case known to them, they Iourneymen of that place will not only
bid him welcome, but provide him all things necessary of free cost. Verily quoth.
Harry I would spend half of my blood to be of the gentle Craft; Will thou say
and hold sad Tom: or else said Harry hang me: then said he anoint me a
Gentleman, and I will shape thee for a Shoemaker presently. Thereupon Harry
took his knife, and cutting his finger, he all to be smeared Tom Drums face
with his blood, that he made him look like the image of Breadstreet corner.

Tom Drum seeing him do so, said he might as well anoint him a Ioyner as a
Gentleman: Nay said Harry I do not deceive thee, if thou will not believe it,
ask all the men in Malin and they will say the like.

Well I Will take thy word quoth. Tom; and therefore look that presently you strip
your self* for I will cast thee ino a Shoomakers mould and that by and by.
Harry perceiving his intention, did what he willed so he was suited in Toms
attire, and Tom in his: so Harry took up St. Hughes bones, and so they came to
Gilford where they were both taken for Shoomakers and they was made very
welcome by the Iourneymen of the Town, and they asked Harry if he could st^g,
or play on the Flute or sound the Trumpet; believe me quoth Harry I can neither
so and a Trumpet, nor play on the Flute, and beshrow his nose that made me a
Shoemaker, for he never told me how to reckon up my Tools in rhyme or prose.

Tom hearing him say so, told them that he made him of an old Servingman a new
Shoemaker: why then quoth they* we account this young man's wife that he can be
take himself to a Mystery, but it will be hard for one not used to labor, to
frame his fingers to a course faculty.

Not a w^it quoth Harry, for labor by custom becomes easy. It Is trus said
Tom, for I durst lay a wager that I have made more shoos in a day then all
th^se Iourneymen have done in a month; and I have traveled in all parts of
the world: but tell me where thee have been, and in what Countries th^s h^st
traveller.

Far enough quoth he, to prove as good a workman as thou art: I deny that quoth
Tom for I have been where I have seen men headed like Dogs, and others, I have
seen that one of their legs has been as good as a Penthouse to cover their
bodies, and yet I have made them shoes to serve their feet: nay if thou will
go with me, thou shall see me make an hundred pair of shoes from sun rising to
sun setting, or else count me worse then a stinking Mackrell. Now verily thy
talk sti^^s too much said they, if thou can do so much as thou say, try
the matter here.

No said Tom I cannot try it in England, nor in France, nor Spain, or Italy nor
in Germany, Swedland or Polonia: we think no less said they, nor in no part
beside. Yes said Tom I can do it as we travel to Russia, for there every day is
five and fifty of our days in length: nay quoth Tom in some parts of the world
where I have been, it is day for half a year together, and other part all night.

Now my Masters tell me, were you not born in Arcadia? no said they; but why
ask ye? because said Tom that Country abounds with Asses, where they swarm
like Bees: we have cause said they to give yo thanks for calling us Asses so
kindly: not so said Tom; I did but ask a question: but tell me said Tom, what
Country breeds the best hides, and whence have we the best Cork? the best Cork
said they comes from Portugal, and the best Leather is in England. Not so, for
the best Cork is in Sparta, and for Leather there is none like that of Siciona,
where I have made a pair of shoes that has lasted a twelve month and toil
in them every day: For I tell you there was never a Shoemaker in all England
that kept so many men as I did at that time.

Then said the rest he speaks he knows not what: for Master Peacy of
Fleetstreet keeps continually forty men at work, and the green King in S.
Martins has no less then threescore Iourneymen.

Tush said Tom, what say you to him who kept a hundred men half a year together
and never did a stitch of work, he was a Shoemaker of some account? but who was
that said they? it was my self quoth Tom, and yet I never made brags of it: nay
pray you tell us said they what men they were? quoth Tom they were vermin: in
troth said they we thought as much: But tell us Tom, art thou minded to be
Master Peachies man? I am quoth he except he will make me his fellow. By the
Mass said they, then were thou best to have thy wards ready, and thy hi^ts
sure for he receives no servants before he tries their manhood, so much the
better quoth Tom: And for that purpose I post up to London; thus having had at
Gilford very good cheer, but the Iourneymen of the Town paid for all, and gave
them money, so toward London they went with all speed.

CHAP. 7. How the wild Knight Sir John Rainsford for burying a Massing Priest
alive, was fain to leave his Lady, and forsake his house till he had obtained
pardon of the King: who meeting with Henry Nevel, and Tom Drum, went with him
to serve Peachy of Fleetstreet, where for a while he became a Shoemaker.
YOu shall understand that at this time there lived a gallant Knight called Sir
John Ransford, who was for his courage inferior to few, and had a brave
company of tall men to wait upon him. He was very charitable to the poor,
relieving them daily: he was a famous Courtier, and in very great favor with
the King; and the only thing that disgraced his virtues was this, that he was
something wild in his carriage, and wilful in his attempts; often repenting
sadly what he committed rashly.

It came to pass upon a time as he was riding to his house, there was at a
certain Village a Corpse carried to be buried, the deceased Father of five small
Children, and the Husband of a woeful widow, whose poverty was such, that she
had not money to pay for her burial; Sir John the Parish Priest doubting would
not do his duty except he might first have his money.

The widow with many tears entreated him to do his Office, but he would not,
saying,

What you beggars, would you have me to open my sacred lips to call upon the
King of heaven to receive or take thy husbands soul, and to persuade our
Grandmother the Earth to wrap his cold body in her warm bosom for nothing? I
tell thee no: The poor widow falling on her knees* plucked him by the gown
saying, good Sir John for sweet St. Charity say one Ave Mary, or one
Paternoster, and let my poor husband Corpse be covered, though it be but with
one handful of holy ground.

Nay Dame quoth Jack do you remember how you served me at the last shift; you
would not, no forsooth you would not: and now good Mistress I will not, no
penny, no Pater noster* that is flat; I thought a time would come at length to
cry quittance for your coyness, so away he went.

The poor Widow seeing his obstinacy, with a heavy heart turned into the
highway side adjoining to the Churchyard, and there she and her Children
begg^d of the passers by some money to bury their Fathers dead Corpse.

At last Sir John came riding with all his men, of whom the poor Widow in this
manner began to ask his Arms: good Sir John, if ever woman's misery moved your
heart to pifty, give me one penny for Gods sake, toward the burying of my poor
husband: Sir John hearing their lamentable cry, and seeing the dead Corpse lying
there, asked why the Priest did not bury it?

O Sir quoth she* I have no money to pay for the burial, and therefore he will
not do it, no quoth Sir John? I Will make him ^ury the dead, or I Will bury him
alive: whereupon be willed one of his men to go and fetch the Priest and bring
him immediately, his men did so, and forth came the Priest in his Gown and
corner Cap, roughly demanding who would speak with him?

That would I, quoth Sir John Rainsford, and therefore tell me how it comes to
pass that you put not this Corpse into the Pit? Sir quoth he, because they will
not pay me for my pains.

Above all men, said Sir John. Priests should respect the poor and needy; and
let the dead possess their due; I so they shall, said the Priest, so I may not
lose my due: will thou not bury him said the Knight: no, not without money said
the Priest: I pray thee said the Knight let me entreat thee to bury him: then
do you pay me quoth the Priest? Sir John Rainsford seeing him so peremptory,
swore a great oath, that if he did not bury the dead Corpe, he would bury him
alive: a fig for you go bury blind Byard when he is dead. The Knight when he
heard these words, was mavelous angry, he commanded his men to take him up
and put him into the grave and they took up the Priest and wrapped him to his
Gown and put him quick into the grave, and cast the earth upon him: the Priest
cried out hold for Christ's ^ake, and let me rise and I will bury the head for
naught? no said the Knight, no rising till the general resurrection: the Knigh
sent for a another Priest to bury the corpse which he did for nothing: which
being done, he gave the poor woman ten shillings, and so returned homewards.

When Sir John came home, he told his Lady what he had done, his Lady being
grieved thereat, wished he had paid for twenty burials, then made that one
burial: it is done now said the Knight, and it cannot be undone again, though I
kill my self with grief.

The Dean of the Diocese bearing of it rode presently up to London and
complained to the King, which when his grace heard, he was very wroth and sent
down Pursedants to apprehead the Knight, but he before had forsaken his house,
and wandered disguised up and down the Country, where he chanced betwixt
Gilford and London, to ^^ght into the company of Harry Nevel and Tom Drum: but
Harry viewing him well in the face, descryed what he was, and marvelling much
to see him in such distress, made himself not known, but sounded him in this
sort.

Sir quoth he whether do you wander or to what place do (...) travel: Gentle
youth said he you may rather ask wh^refore I travel, and then I might answer
your question? (...) quoth Tom I (...) lay a (...) to of Ale the Peasant is in
love. Nay quoth Sir John, if thou had said I traveled with (...), thou ha^st
said ^ight. Tush said Tom, bridle these foolish p^ssions: The Knight too^ great
comfort at his words, and having store of Gold about him, made them great cheer
at Kingstone, and in the end was content to take their counsel, and coming into
Fleet Street, Tom Drum brought them to Peachies house, where such means was
used, that at last upon the trial of their manhood, they were all entertained;
and so well Peachy liked of Sir John, that he vowed he should not be his man
but his fellow.

Within short time after the Frenchmen had landed in the Isle of Wight with
about too thousand men of War, who in several places of that Country burned
and spoiled many Towns and Villages to the great loss and ruin of that
Isleland.

Our King hearing of the sad dealings of the Frenchmen in that Island,
presently raised an Army together. Peachy that famous and renowned Shoemaker,
at his own proper cost and charhes set forth thirty of his servants, gallantly
mounted, and well armed and furnished for all assayes, and Peachie himself like
a most noble and valiant Captain over them, mustred them before the King, who
liked of them so well, that he chose seven out of that Company for to be of his
own Lifeguard; at which time Sir John in disguised manner behaved himself so
gallantly and Souldier-like showed there such good service for the King and his
Countries good, that thereby he gained his Majesty's Royal favor, and was
afterward by him most graciously pardoned for his former faults.

Peachie of Fleet-greet for his Loyaly to his King was afterward made his
Majesty's Shoemaker* who lived long after that in great favor, and in high
estimation with his Sacred Majesty, and in great favor with all the honorable
Lords, of the Court.

CHAP. 8. Of Tom Drums vants, and of his rare entertainment a^ Mistress Farmers
house the fair widow of Fleetstreet.


THere lived in Fleet Street at this time a fair widow, who was famous for her
beauty, as she was esteemed for her wealth; she was beloved of many Gentlemen,
and sued unto by diverse Citizens, but so deep was the memory of her late
husband ingraver in her heart, that she utterly refused marriage.

Harry Nevell having his heart fired with the bright beams of this blazing
Comet, sought all means possible to quench the heat thereof: Tom Drum
perceiving, demanded the cause of his late conceived grief, saying how now
Hall, what wind blows so bleak on your cheeks now? has Cupid the blind slave
given thee a bloody nose, or a broken head? Oh, no Tom said he, that little
Tyrant ayms at no other part but the heart, therefore it is not my head but my
heart that bleeds. With whom Hall, with whom art thou in love, tell me man? if
I bewray your secrets, call me dogs nose, and spit in my face like a young
Kitling.

I tell thee Harry, I am holden in greater account among women then you are
awa^e, and they will more willingly show their secrets to me, then to their
Ghostly Father: But art thou so in favor with pretty w^nches quoth Harry?

Yes Sir, quoth Tom, and I tro I have not lived thus long but I know how to
make a woman love me, by a cunning trick that I have: I durst lay my life I
will make a dozen maids run after me twenty miles for one nights lodging,
striding who should first bestow her maidenhead on me.

That trick surpasses all that ever I heard, said Harry.

Nay quoth Tom, I Will tell thee what a merry prank I played once, God forgive me
for it: upon a time, on a Saturday in the morning I went into East cheap on
purpose to spy what pre^ty wenches came to Market were I spied a great many as
fresh as flowers in May, tr^pping up and down the streets with hand-baskets on
their arms, with stamme^ Petticoats, and Lilly white Aprons: I did but carry
the right leg of a Turtle under my left arm, and immediately the wenches were
so inamored with my sight, that they forsook the Butchers shops and enticed me
into the tavern, and spent all their money in merriment, that they should have
laid out at the Market; and I had much ado to be rid of them, for they were
ready to go together by the ears for the kisses they would best^w upon me.

But quoth. Harry, your Art may fail now to help me at a dead list: Not so said
Tom, therefore if there be any in this street that thou have a mind to, thou
shall carry but the head of a dead Crow about thee, thou shall bring her to thy
bed, were it f^ne Mistress Farmer her self. But art thou acquaint^d with her
quoth Harry, or do thou think thou could prefer a friend to her speech? I
said Tom, why I tell thee, I am more familiar with her, then with Doll our
Kitchen-drudge, for she will do any thing at my request, nay, in some sort I
can command her: I assure thee quoth Harry th^se are high (...); and I much
wonder you being a young man will not seek a wife that is so wealthy, and so
make thy self famous by marrying Mistress Farmer, for it is likely she could
well away to make him her husband, to whom she so much opens her hearts secrets.

It Is true quoth Tom, and I know that if I spoke but half a word she could never
deny me: Nay, she would spend ten of her twelve silver Apostles on condition I
would vouchsafe to be her husband. But wot you what Harry, it is well known
though Lillies be fair in show, they be foul in smell, and women as they are
beautiful, so they are deceitful: besides, Mistress Farmer is too old for me.

Too old quoth Harry? why man, she is not so old as Chairing Cross: for in my
conscience I think, that since her fair eyes beheld the bright sun, she never
tasted of the fruits of twenty flourishing Summers, therefore her age need be
no hurt to her marriage.

I will tell thee my mind quoth Tom, after that a woman is past sixteen or
seventeen years old, I would not give fifteen blew buttons for her. But tell me
Harry, and that truly, do thy like her? and if thou do, say so, and I will
warrant her thine own.

Gentle Tom Drum quoth Harry, be but as good as thy word and do but prefer me
to her acquaintance, and I will request no greater a courtesy. Here is my hand
quoth Tom Drum, it shall be done: The day being set down, Harry had prepared
himself a faier suit of apparel against the time, and Tom Drum in like sort had
dressed himself in the best manner; still bearing Harry in hand, telling him that
none should be more welcomer to her then himself. The day being come Tom takes
Harry by the hand, and coming to the widows door, Tom falls a ringing of the
Bell as if he had been mad, the Printice came to the door and asked who was
there: it is I said Tom, open the door, for I must speak with your Mistress,
stay then and will tell her said the boy, and leaving him at the door, where he
sat till he was almost starved. Quoth Harry, whatsoever your credit is with
the Mistress I know not, but with the man it is very small. Tush quoth Tom, I
will once again use the help of a Bell-rope.

At his second ringing, out comes one of his maids, saying, who the Devil is at
the door which keeps such a ringing? why it is, I you queen said he, who Tom
Drum quoth she what would you have? I would speak with your Mistress said he;
trust me you cannot said she, for she is at supper with two or three that be
Suitors: the one is Doctor Burket, and Alderman Jarvice the other.

Tush quoth Tom, tell me not of Suitors, but tell her that I am hear and then
it is well enough: well I will quoth she, so claps to the door again and keeps
them both out of doors. Now said Harry, this gear work but illfaverdly, for you
are little beholding to the maids for ought I see: it is no matter Harry said
he, but if their Mistress should know this she would swinge their coats soundly
for it; and with that one of the boys opening the door, told Tom his Mistress
would have him send up his errand, what is she so stately that she cannot come
down? I knew the time when she would have been glad to have spoken with me; I
quoth the fellow it may be so, when that you have brought her shoes that have
pinched her toes. Come Harry said Tom I will go up and speak with her: quoth
the fellow but you shall not, therefore keep back and come you not here.

Tom Drum seeing himself thus disgraced before his fellow Harry (being very
angry) asked if this were the best enterteinment which they could afford their
friends? and then began to strugle with them, which their Mistress hearing, ro^e
from the Table to know what the matter was, who being certified of Tom Drums
sauciness, she began to check him, why fellow quoth she, what art thou mad?
what have thou to say to me, that thou art thus importunate? no hurt said he,
but that this Gentleman and I would bestow a pot^ls of Wine to have two or
three hours talk with you.

I tell thee said she, I am not now at leisure therefore honest fellow trouble
me no more. What quoth he are you grown so coy? if you and I were alone I
should find you a little milder, must no man but Doctor Bu^ket cast your water?
is his P^^sick in most request? well I will be better en^ertained ere I go, for
there is never a Flemming of them all shall outface me: Mistress Farmer seeing
him so furious, answered he should have present entertainment according to his
desert: whereupon she made no more ado but bid her servant thrusts him out by
the head and shoulders, which they presently performed: but Harry was by her
very modestly answered, that if he had any speech with her, the nex day he
should be patiently h^ard, and genly answered: with which words he departed,
and going home he told Tom Drum he was beholding to him for preferring his suit
to Mistress Farmer: surely you are in high favor with fair women, as it seemed
by your entertainment.

Well quoth Tom, stout on, but I Will lay my life had I not brought thee with me,
no man should have had more welcome then I: and now I remember my self that she
was displeased that I should make another copartners of her presence: and I
remember an old proverb that love and Lordship brooks no fellowship: when the
Iourneymen heard of this Tom Drums entertainment was spoke of every where, and
so it becomes a proverb, that were it is supposed a man shall not be welcome,
they will say he is like to have Tom Drums entertainment.

Now to avoid their flouts Tom Drum forsook Fleetstreet, and went into
Scotland, being pressed for a Drummer at Muskelbrough field, where the noble Duke
of Sum^erset, and the Earl of Warwick were sent with a noble Army, where
English and Scots meet, there was fought a cruel battle, the victory fell to
thee English, at which time there was slain of the Scots fourteen thousand,
fifteen hundred taken prisoners, where we shall leave Tom Drum till his return:
making mention how Harry Nevel bevaved himself in the mean time in London.

CHAP. 9. How Harry Nevel wooed Mistress Farmer, and deceived Doctor Burket, and
how they were both beguil^d by an Apprentice that dwelt in the house, who in
the end married her.


Mistress Farmer for her rare beauty was wondrously wooed by Doctor Burket, who
did give to her many rich and costly gifts, yet Mistress Farmer would hardly
accept them, least by his cunning he should insert therein more matter then
ordinary that might move any motion of love contrary to her natural inclination.

Upon a time Harry Nevel coming thither, and finding the Doctor very diligent
to breed the Widows content, plotted how he might cast out the Doctor and so
prefer his own suite, at last lighting on a device fit for the purpose: there
was an G^iptian woman at Black^Wall who was in travel with child, and could not
be delivered by the Midwives thereabout, Harry Nevel hearing of it, thought it
fit to employ Doctor Burbet about it, who in the mean time might the better
prefer his own suite to the Widow.

Whereupon he sent one to him attired like a servingman, booted and spurred,
who coming to the Widows house he asked for Doctor Burket, what would you have
with him said the Maids? quoth he my Lady Sunborne has sent for him in post
have, and therefore I must needs speak with him: the Maid presently went and
to^d him, when Doctor Burket heard, he took his leave of the Widow, and came to
the messenger, saying, how now fellow, what wou^d your Lady have with me? Sir
said he, she desires you to come with all speed, for she is wondrous sick: the
Doctor presently took horse, and away he goes with the Servingman. Harry
hearing of his departure, came to the Widow with a smiling countenance, and
merrily began to woo her.

Fair Mistress quoth Harry, I know said he it is the custom of women at first to
make their denial to their lovers, because they would not be accounted easily
won or soon entreated: ut dear Lady, nature has not adorned your face with
such incomparable beauty, and framed every part so excellently, to wound men
with woe, but to work their content. Wherefore now sweet Mistress, in the April
of your years, and the sweet summer of your days, banish not the pleasure
incident to bright beauty, but honor me with the fair fruit of your womb, and
make me blessed by being Father to the issue of your delicate body.

Nay then Sir said she I perceive yon will grow troublesome and show your self
no such men as you profess your self, and I may say your friendship is more in
words then in deeds, and I perceive I must call my maid for a cup of yolding
beer before you will depart.

Nay Lady said he I will save you that labor, seeing your love commands me,
and I pray God grant you in a favorable mind at our next meeting, and so he
departed.

Now you shall understand that this gallant widow had in her house a proper
young man which was her Prentice, who long had born his Mistress good will; at
last he declares his mind to a secret friends, who comforts him in this sort:
Tush said she, what if she be thy Mistress? be not ashamed to show thy affection
to her, but try her, thou know not how fortune may savor thy suit. O quoth
he, if I were out of my time I could have some heart to woe her.

P^sh stand not on those terms said his friend Francis, for she will never
requite kindnesses with discourtesies, and therefore William be not too fearful.

The time at last being come that Mistress Farmer had appointed to have her
books cast up and she gets her to her closet, and whistles to her maid to bid
William bring her up the books which very willingly he came to her, and said,
Mistress quoth he, doubt not but that your estate is good, for I have been as
careful and as just to keep it as if it had been mine own. I am said she the
more beholding to thee, neither shall thy true service go unrewarded if I live,
or if I dye thou shall not be altogether forgotten.

These kind speeches comforted Williams heart, whereupon be ^ell to his
reckonings roundly, till his mind running on his Mistrisses beauty, would miss
and count threescore and four-score, nine score, there you misreckon forty
said she. O my dear Mistress blame me not if I do so, seeing your sweet presence
has made wiser then my self to dote: but pardon dear Mistress my presumption in
being thus bold to unburthen my hearts affection to you* and therefore sweet
Mistress despise not him who has been your faithful fervant, but yield unto him
your savor which may prolong his days with blessed years.

His Mistress with lowering looks made him this answer, how now sir, has my
too much mildness made you so sa^cy, can you set your love on no lower pitch,
but you must seek to be Master of your Mistress.

Hereupon she commanded her man Richard to take his place, and to be foreman
of the shop, and gracing him with the keys of her Closet: and commanding her
man William to fetch her some Oysters and a pint of Claret Wine, and bring them
to her Chamber, Will overjoyed at these words, ran with all speed and brought
them to her, and when she saw him, she with a smiling countenauce said, what
Wilkin art thou come, that is well done bring them hither, said she, and the
Manchet and Whitewine, yes forsooth, I will, and if you please I will open the
Oysters for you, which he did, and opened faster then she could eat.

William said she, you are quick in opening of Oysters, yet (...) in costing up
your Accounts: these words put William in mind of former passages, and made him
more eager to renew his suit to his dear Mistress, and said O my dear Mistress
said William, (...) not a pleasant youth, and in the glory of his age to dye,
which I shall, if you deny to grant to me your favor and to make me your
husband.

She thereat seemed very coy, and took it in disgrace (yet to herself had
granted his request) that he profer^d such love and liking to her (...) to him,
what has my familiarity made you so saucy? at which words William seemed to be
angry, and said, nay Mistress said he, if you had been as willing to grant my
request, as I have been forward to follow your precepts, I might long ere this
enjoyed what I now have desired and therewithal he departed.

These words the seriously took into consideration and told her friends what
had past between her man William and she, her friends being very willing and
told her that he was a proper young man, and that ^he might live more happily
with him, then with Doctor Burket, or Harry Nevel: at which words the utterly
renounces them too and resolves to live and dye with William.

William hearing her resolute answer spoke thus to her; I see you have so
freely granted my request, worthy I were to dye a beggar, if I should refuse so
(...) a treasure, and thereupon joined their hearts and hands, and being
married; they lived many happy days together.

CHAP. 10. Of the green King of Saint Martins and his merry feats.
TH^re dwelt in Saint Martins a jolly Shoemaker, he was commonly called the
Green King* for that upon a time he showed himself before King Henry, with all
his men att^nding on him clothed all in green Sa^ten.

Th^s green King as they called him, he was a man very humourous, and of a
small statute, but most valiant and couraious, and he continually used the
Fencing-school; and when he went abroad he always carried a two-handed sword
on his shoulder, or under his Arm: he kept continually thirty or forty
servants, and kept always a gallant and a bountiful house as most men did in
his time.

You may understand that in his young years his Father dying left him a good
portion, so that he was in great credit and estimation among his neighbors,
add that which made him more happy was this, that God blessed him with the gift
of a good wife, who was a very comely young woman, and therewithal very
careful for his commodity: but he who had his mind always bent upon
merriment, little respected his profit in regard of his pleasure; insomuch that
through his wastfull expense, he brought po^erty upon himself before he was
aware, so that he could not do as he was accustomed: which when his daily
companions perceived, they by little and little would shun his company and if
at any time he cha^sed for to pass by them, perhaps they would lend him a nod
or too or it may be give him a good morrow, and make no more add.

Is it so quoth the Green King, does want of money part good company, or to my
countenance so changed that they do (...): know me? I have seen the day when
never a kna^e of them all but would have made much of my dog for my sake, and
would have given me twenty salutations on a Sunday morning if I would bestow
but one pint of Muskadine upon them? and what, has a thread bar^ cloak scared
from me all good fellows? why, though I have not my wonted habit, I have still
the same heart: and though my money be gone, my mind is not altered; why then,
what Iacks are they to reject me.

I, I, now I find my wifes tale true, for she was wont to say, husband, husband
refrain these trencher flies, these smooth faced flatterers, that like Drones
live upon the honey of your labor, and suck away the sweetness of your
substance. I wi^, I wi^, if once you should come in want, there is not the best
of them all that would trust you for ten greats: by which saying, I will lay my
life she is a witch, for it is come as just to pass as Marlins Prophecy, for I
would the other day but have borrowed twelve pence, and I tried thirteen
friends and went without it: It being so, let them go hang th^mselves for I
will into Flanders, that is flat, and leave these slaves to their servill
conditions, where I will try whether a firkin barrel of butter be worth a pot
of strong beer, and a load of Holland these better then a gallon of Charnico:
and if it be by the cross of this sword I will never stain my credit with such
a base commodity again.

With that he went to his wife, saying, woman do thou hear? I pray thee look
well to thy business till I come again: for why? for to drive away melancholy,
I am minded to walk a mile or two: but husband quoth she, were you there where
you laid your plate to pawn? I pray you is it not misused? and is it safe?
woman said he I was there, and it is safe I Will warrant thee for ever coming into
thy hands again, thou know I borrowed but twenty mark upon it, and they have
sold it for twenty pound: it is gone wife, it is gone.

O husband said she, what ill fortune h^ve we to be thus ill dealt with all?
and therewithal she wept: fie quoth he leave thy weeping, bang it up, let it
go, the best is, it ^ever cost us a great; it is in vain therefore to mourn
for the matter; he thereupon took his leave of his wife, bidding her look to
the house, and see that the boys ploy their wor^.

The Green King having thus taken his leave, went toward Billingsgate on
purpose to take Barge, where by the way he met with Anthony now now: what,
Master said he well met? I pray where are you walking? will you not have a
crash ere you go?

Y faith Anthony quoth he, thou know that I was ever a good fellow, and one
that never had been a niggard to thee at any time, therefore now it thou will
bestow any music on me before I go, do, and if it please God that I return
safely from Flanders again, I will requite thee well for thy pains. but at
present I have no money for music: Gods nigs said Anthony, whether you have
money or no, you shall have Music, I do not always request coin of my friends
for my cunning: what, you are not every bo^y, and seeing that you are going
beyond sea, I will bestow a pint of wine on you at the Salutation: say thou
so Ahthony quoth he, in in good sees I will not refuse thy courtesy, and with
that they slept into the Tavern where Anthony called for wine, and drawing for^h
his Fiddle began to play, and after he had scrapt half a score lessons, he
began to sing this merry song as follows, When should a man show himself
gentle and kind,
When should a man comfort the sorrowful mind?
O Anthony now now now.
O Anthony now now now.
When is the best time to drink with a friend?
When is it meetest my money to spend?
O Anthony now now now.
O Anthony now now now.
When goes the King of good fellows away?
That so much delighted in dancing and play?
O Anthony now now now.
O Anthony now now now.
And when shall I bid my Master farewell?
Whose bounty and courtesy so did excel?
O Anthony now now now,
O Anthony now now now.


Lo ye now Master quoth he, this song have I made for your sake, and (...) the
grace of God when you are gone I will sing it every Sunday morning under your
wives window, that she may know that we drank together ere we parted: I pray
thee then do so said the green King, and I pray thee do my commendations to
her, and tell her at my return I hope to make merry.

Thus after that they had made an end of their Wine, and paid their reckoning,
Anthony putting up his Fiddle departed, see king to change music for money;
whilst the green King of St. Martins sailed in Gravesend Bargs. But Anthony in
his absence sung this song so often in St. Martins, that ever after that he
purchased a name which he never lost till his dying day, for ever after that
men called him nothing but Anthony now now.

But it is to be remembered that the green Kings wife became so careful in her
business, and goverded her self with such wisdom in all her affairs, that
during her husbands absence she did not only pay many of his debts, but also
got into her house every thing that was necessary to be had; the which her
diligence won such commendations in so much that her credit in all places was
very good, and her gains (through Gods blessing) came so flowing in, that
before her husband came home, she was had in good reputation with her
neighbors, and having no need of any of their Favors, every one was ready to
p^offer her courtesy, saying, good neighbor if you want any thing tell us, and
look what friendship we may do you, be sure you shall find it.

I neighbor quoth she. I know your kind^esse, and may speak thereof by
experience, wrll may I compare you to him that would never bid any man to
dinner, but at two of the cl^ck in the afternoon when he was ^ssured they had
fi^d their bellies before, and that they would not touch his meat, except for
manne^s sake: wherefore for my part I will give you many thanks for your
kindnesses when I take benefit of your p^offer,

Why neighbor we speak for your good quoth they: It Is true quoth she* and so
say they that call for wi^e to bestow on a drunken man when they know it will
do him as much good in his boots as his belly.

Well neighbor said they, God be thanked that you have no cause to make use of
any of your friends: Marry Amen quoth she, for if I had, I think I should find
few there; these and the like greetings were often betwixt her and her
neghbours.

At last her husband came home, and to his great comfort found his Estate so
good, that he had great cause to bless God for the same, for a warm purse is
the best medicine for a cold (...) that may be.

The green King therefore boasting himself as brave as ever he did, ha^ing
sworn himself a faithful companion to his two-handed sword, would never go
without it.

Now when his ancient acquaintance saw him again so gallant, every one was
ready to curry ^avour with him, and many would proffer him Wine. And where
before they were wont to thrust him to the kennell; and nothing respecting his
poverty, they give him now the upper hand in every place, saluting him with cap
and knee: But he remembering how slightly they set by him in his need, did now
as slightly esteems* heir ^l^ttery, saying,

I cry you mercy, me th^nks I take seen your face, but I never knew you for my
friend. No quoth one, I dwell at Aldersgate, and am your near neighbor* and so
much the worse said the Green King: wherefore quoth the other? because said he,
I think the place is meet for an honester man, I trust sir you know no hurt by
me.

Nor any goodness quoth the green King but I remember you are be, or one of
them of whom once I would have borrowed forty pence, yet could not get it if
thereby I might have saved forty lives: therefore goodman ^og, or good man cog,
or good man dog, choose you whether, scrape no acquaintance of me, nor come any
more in my company, I would advise you least with my long sword I chop off your
coward legs* and make you stand like Saint Martins beggar upon two stilts. The
fellow bearing him say so, went his ways, and never durst speak to him
afterward.

CHAP. 11. How the Green King went a walking with his wife, and got Anthony now
now to play before them in which sort he went with her to Bristol.


THe Green King being a man much given to go abroad, his Wife upon a time thus
made her moan to him; husband quoth she, I think you are the unkindest man
alive, for as often as yon walk abroad, you were never the man that did once
take me in your company: it is no small grief unto me, while I sit doting at
home every sunday and holy day, and to see how other men walk with their wifes,
and lovingly hear them company into the fields, that thereby they may have some
recreation after their weeks weary foil; this pleasure have they for their
pains, but I poor soul could never get such a courtesy at your hands: either
it must needs be that you love me but little, or else you are ashamed of my
company, and I tell you true you have no reason for the one or the other.

Well quoth he my dear, seeing you are so desirous to walk a broad with me,
Thursday next is Saint James's day against which time prepare your self to go
with me to the Fair, where by the grace of God I will bestow a fat Pig upon
you, and there I mean to be merry, and doubt not but that I will walk with you
till you are weary of walking. Nay quoth the I should never be weary of your
company though I went with you to the worlds end: God a mercy for that wife
said he, but so doing, I doubt I should try you a very good footwoman or a bad
flatterer.

Thus it past till Thursday was come, and in the mean season meeting with two
or three other Shoomakers, he asked them if they would walk with him and his
wife to Saint James's Fair, that we will with all our hearts said his fellow
Shoomakers: but will you not like flinchers go back from your words quoth the
green King? To that (they said) which if they did they would forfeit unto him a
gallon of wine.

Tush said the green King, talk not to me of a gallon of wine, but will you be
bound in a bond of twenty pound a piece to perform it?

Why quoth the Shoomakers, what needs bands for such a matter as this, we hope
that you will take our words for a great deal more then this?

My Masters said the green King, the world is grown to that pass, that word^
are become wind, and I will trust you as little on your word, as long Meg on
her honesty, therefore if you will be bound in a bond so, if not, I will make
no account of your company.

The Shoomakers hearing these words, and they knowing him to be a man of a
merry mind, after that they had washed their wits well with Wine to the
Scriveners they went, and there they bound themselves in twenty pound bond
according to his request.

They had no sooner made amend of this merry match, but presently into another
Tavern they get, and who should they meet but that merry companion Anthony now
now, who as soon as he spied the green King, he smiled with a wry (...), but
joyfully embraced him with both his hands, saying, what my dear Master, well
are you met said Anthony, and pray you Sir when came you from the other side of
the water, by my troth you are welcome, and I am glad to see you with all my
heart.

God a mercy good Anthony said the green King, but how comes it to pass that
you go not so often into Saint Martins as you were wont to do?

O Master said Anthony, you may remember what song I made at your parting when
you went to Graves end.

Yes marry said the green King, and what of that? quoth he, by singing that
under your window, all the merry Shoomakers in Saint Martins have got it by the
end, and now with their so often singing it up and down amongst their jovial
crew, that they have made it as common as a Printed Ballad, and by their so
doing I have gotten such a name by it, that into what place soever I go, I am
called nothing but Anthony now now.

And now Master I Will tell you, that by these merry Shoomakers meanss it has
made me as well acquainted in all Cheapside and other places about the City as
the Cat in the Cream-pan; for as soon as ever the Goldsmiths Wives spy me they
will hold up their fingers and cry O yonder goes Anthony now now that merry
companion, and this is their prating as I go along.

And when I come amongst the Merchants Daughters, those merry prettey wanton
wags will laugh at me whilst they are ready to bespiss themselves, and call me
to them saying come Anthony now now play us a fit of music says one; come
Anthony sing us a merry song says another, so that I cannot pass up and down
the streets by the means of these merry wag-tails, insomuch that now the little
boys in the street will have a fling at my tail, and take my name in vain,
and say O yonder goes Anthony, O yonder goes Anthony now now, and so they run
up and down after me like a sort of Pismires: good Lord, good Lord, you never
knew the like: hear ye me now my good Master? and I will tell you, that since
you departed from me and took your journey beyond Sea, that by singing of that
song so often (...) Wifes window, that I have gotten more pence then your wife
has pins, So that with taking small pains and little sweat,
My name is as famous as Alexander the great.
And now my Master seeing you are come again and safely arrived from your
dangerous voyage from Sea, I will ere long make the second part.

But now the green King is no sooner returned from his voyage beyond Sea, but
his wife solicites him to take a journey into the Country and to take her
along with him, for since he had her to Saint James's Fair, she was so well
pleased with him, that she could go with him to the worlds end.

The Green King therefore being willing to give his wife content, he is
resolved to take her with him to Bristol, and connsidering what company he
shoud get to go with him to pass away the tedious journey, at last he meeting
with Anthony now now, who no sooner did his Master ask him the question, but
presently he gives his consent, and immediately Anthony get his Fiddle and away
they take their Journey, and merrily they march and at every Town they come at
Anthony pulls out his Fiddle and plays as he goes, which the Country people
much admiring at his mirth and merry conceits, they were very desirous to have
him stay with them, but Anthony not willing to leave his Master and Mistress,
desired them to excuse him; so he continued this mirth and merriment until
they came to Bristol: where playing up and down at several (...) in the Town,
he gave the people a great deal of content, and got as great a name there as he
did in the City of London, so that he could not pass upon down the streets;
they would cry, O yonder goes Anthony now now. And so having got the praise of
the Country, he returns back with the green King and his wife unto the City of
London who in a short time after fell dangerously sick, and how he escaped that
s^ickness, and other merry exploits he played afterward, we shall mention when
we come to write the third part,

FINIS.

