Anno Regni GULIELMI ET MARIAE, REGIS and REGINAE Angliae, Scotiae, Franciae
and Hiberniae, SECUNDO.

On the Fourteenth Day of April, Anno Dom. 1690. In the Second Year of Their
Majesty's Reign, this ACT Passed the Royal Assent.

DIEV ET MON DROIT HONI ^^IT QVI MAL Y PENSE royal blazon or coat of arms

LONDON, Printed by Charles Bill and Thomas Newcomb, Printers to the King and
Queens most Excellent Majesty's. MDCXC.

Anno Secundo GULIELMI and MARIAE.
An ACT for Recognizing King WILLIAM and Queen MARY, and for Avoiding all
Questions touching the Acts made in the Parliament Assembled at Westminster the
Thirteenth Day of February, One thousand six hundred eighty eight.
WE Your Majesty's most Humble and Loyal Subjects, the Lords Spiritual and
Temporal, and Commons in this present Parliament Assembled, do beseech Your
most Excellent Majesty's, That it may be Published and Declared in this High
Court of Parliament, and Enacted by Authority of the same, That we do Recognize
and Acknowledge Your Majesty's were, are, and of Right ought to be by the Laws
of this Realm, our Sovereign Liege Lord and Lady King and Queen of England,
France, and Ireland, and the Dominions thereunto belonging, in and to whose
Princely Persons the Royal State, Crown and Dignity of the said Realms, with
all honors, Styles, Titles, Regalities, Prerogatives, Powers, Jurisdictions,
and Authorities to the same belonging and appertaining, are most fully,
rightfully, and entirely Invested and Incorporated, United, and Annexed.

And for the Avoiding of all Disputes and Questions concerning the Being and
Authority of the late Parliament Assembled at Westminster the Thirteenth day of
February One thousand six hundred eighty eight, We do most humbly beseech Your
Majesty's that it may be Enacted; And be it Enacted by the King and Queens most
Excellent Majesty's, by and with the Advice and Consent of the Lords Spiritual
and Temporal, and Commons in this present Parliament Assembled, and by
Authority of the same, That all and singular the Acts made and Enacted in the
said Parliament, were and are Laws and Statutes of this Kingdom, and as such
ought to be Reputed, Taken and Obeyed by all the People of this Kingdom.

FINIS.

