A Demonstration that Farthings are as necessary as Bread, for most of the
people: And that Farthings of an intrinsic value, are useless, and deceitful.
THe number of those whose bowels yearn for their daily bread, before they can
earn a penny to buy it, do eminently exceed all the rest of the people in any
Nation; and their extreme poverty makes them incapable of paying, if trusted;
So that to keep them from Farthings, and such small exchanges, were to starve
three quarters of the people, and withal to break, and so in fine, to starve
all these multitude of petty Retailers, who sells only these poor all
necessaries for life.

This necessity enforces those Retailors, for want of a public allowed
Token, to make Tokens of Pence, Halfpence, and Farthings, and therein, as in
all else, to grind the faces of the poor, by wholly refusing, or at best,
giving but what they please, for their own late vented Tokens.

This unresistable want of small exchanges, is yet cleerer by the general
acceptance of the Rump two pences, Dutch Stivers, and French Souces.

These experiences, together with the observed waste of Bulloin by loss of
small Coin, has ever produced Copper or Brass Tokens in all Nations for the
necessary traffic and subsistence of the needy, choosing rather to endure the
mischief of counterfeits, then the dying groans of their starved poor.

Tokens therefore being as necessary as Bread, it is the same charity to
provide that silver be repayed for all Tokens, as that a penny loaf shall weigh
so many Ounces, without which care the poor would quickly be forced to give a
penny for one ounce of bread, as now they do ten pence to some chandlers of
their own Farthings for a two-penny loaf.

Master Slingsby of the Mint, to accomodate the poor, and prevent counterfeits,
proposes a Farthing of an intrinsic worth; but considers not that if he
justly perform it, their burden will be so intolerable, that the Chandlor
will not sell his ware for them, because in one week he will have a Cart load
of them, and withal, will not know how to get silver for them, without which he
breaks, because though he sells by Farthing parcells, yet be buyeth by pounds
and shillings.

Next, though Mr. Slingsby be still of so public a Spirit, to give his pains
for no gains, yet the people, who have so lately been so cheated by pretenders
to this public spirit, may reasonably desire sure security, that he, and all
under, and after him, shall never lessen his weight, embase his Metal, or
refuse to return silver for his Tokens, without loss of time or money to the
people, and that he will also take all Counterfeits that shall deceive them,
under color of his.

Yet if he would undertake to secure all this, which no security can, until he
can afford Copper and labor as cheap as the Sweads, and withal bind both
Sweads and Dutch from sending us in lighter and courser Copper Farthings, which
cannot be discerned, without a Touchstone, and Gold weights in every Family,
if these impossibilities could be secured, yet the King loses the Noble in the
pound which Sir Edward Ford offers, with certain security and clear evidence
that he can perform all. And yet desires no Monopoly of Tokens, but that all,
who will so secure the people from all damage, and pay the Noble, as he
offers, may also make Tokens, so they use not his Invention, which the Law
gives him for fourteen years, and the King he doubts not, will allow him.

FINIS.

