THE CASE OF THE Governor and Company OF MERCHANTS of LONDON, Trading to the
East Indies, Humbly Represented To the LORDS Spiritual and Temporal, In
Parliament Assembled.
May it Please Your Lordships,
THE Present East India Company are Entitled to the Trade to India, by several
Charters Granted by the Kings, The East India Company first Incorporated in the
43 Q. Eliz.
and Queens, of this Realm. They were first Incorporated near One Hundred Years
ago, viz. 43 Eliz. which Charter gave them Power to Trade to the East Indies,
Exclusive of all others, by a Joint Stock, for Fifteen Years: For 15 Years.
And that Noble Princess gives, as a Reason, for Her Settling this Part of our
Traffic under such an Establishment, That it is for the Honor of England, Her
reason for so doing.
for the Increase of Navigation, and the Advance of Trade. Which Words are
repeated in all subsequent Charters.

In the next Reign, viz. 7 Jac. 1. there was a Charter Granted to them,
reciting that of Queen Elizabeth, and setting forth the great Success of the
Company, and the Honor and Profit, this Traffic brought to the Kingdom. This
Charter confirms the former: And in the 7 Jac. 1 forever.
But whereas before they were Incorporated only for Fifteen Years, King James
the First, by this Patent, upon Experience of the Benefit this Trade produced
in the Nation, Erects the Company into a perpetual Body Politic.

13 Car. 2 1661 their former privileges confirmed.
Afterward, viz. 13 Car. 2. 1661, there was a Charter Granted to them, with the
like Recital, of the great Benefit accruing to England, by the Trade to those
Parts; and which Confirms their former Privileges, with these Clauses among
others, That they from henceforth forth for ever be, and shall be, one Body
Corporate and Politic, in Deed and in Name, by the Name of the Governor and
Company of Merchants of London, Trading into the East Indies: And them by the
Name of the Governor and Company of Merchants of London, Trading into the
East Indies, one Body Corporate and Politic, in Deed and in Name, really and
fully, for ever, for Us, Our Heirs and Successors, We do Make, Ordain,
Constitute, Establish, Confirm and Declare, by these Presents: And We have
Condescended and Granted, and by these Presents, for Us, Our Heirs and
Successors, We do Condescend and Grant unto the said Governor and Company of
Merchants of London, Trading into the East Indies, and their Successors, That
We, Our Heirs and Successors, With a Clause that no others should have the
Liberty of Trading to India besides the Company.
( during all the Time that these Our Letters Patents shall be, and remain, in
Force, as aforesaid) will not grant Liberty, License or Power, to any Person or
Persons whatsoever, contrary to the Tenor of these Our Letters Patents, to
Sail, Pass, Trade or Traffic, to the said East Indies, or into, or from, any
the Islands, Ports, Havens, Cities, Towns, or Places aforesaid, or any of them,
contrary to the true Meaning of these Presents, without the Consent of the said
Governor and Company of Merchants of London, Trading into the East Indies, or
the most part of them.

Subsequent to this, viz. 20 Car. 2. they had another Charter; whereby the
Inheritance of the Island of Bombay, is Granted to the Company, The Company
made Lords Proprietors of Bombay, 20 Car. 2.
and they are thereby, for ever, Made and Constituted the true Lords and
Proprietors of it. And this Grant has encouraged the Company to Expend, out of
their Quick Stock, very great Sums of Money, Whereupon great Sums have been
expended by them to strengthen it.
from time to time, to Fortify the said Island, which is one of the principal
Securities of their Effects, and of the English Ships Trading thither.

St. Helena granted as their perpetual propriety 25 Car. 2.
The Company have since had other Charters. That of 25 Car. 2. takes Notice,
That Sancta Helena, which had been Granted to them, was Taken during the then
War; which, by being Retaken by the King's Forces, became Vested in the Crown.
This Charter therefore Regrants the perpetual Propriety of Sancta Helena to the
Company: And in Fortifying this Island, for the future Benefit and Security of
English Traders, they have likewise Expended considerable Sums.

All their former Privileges confirmed by Charter 2 Jac. 2.
They had another Charter, 2 Jac. 2. which Recites the other Charters, and the
Benefits arising to the Nation, from the Trade; and Confirms to them their
former Privileges and Immunities.

The Grants here Recited, did induce the Adventurers to think, That they had a
Right, in Law, to the Trade; at least, that they should have an Uncontroverted
Title to the Land of Inheritance, the Towns, Forts and Castles, Rents and Dues,
purchased in India with their own Money: Upon which Presumption, and Relying
upon the Public Faith, and Credit of the Great Seal of England, for the
Preservation of their Property, The Company have expended above a Million on
the Credit of these Charters in Fortifications etc.
They have since the Year 1661, Expended upwards of a Million, as they are
ready to make appear, in Extending their Territory, and in Fortifying several
Places, for the greater Ease and Safety of their Factors. All which they did,
in order to preserve their Factors and Servants from the Insults of the
Natives, and the Encroachments of European Traders, for the benefit of their
Trade.
and to render the Trade more Lasting to this Kingdom. And in Prospect of this
Right, which they humbly hoped would never have been Disturbed, They have
acquired, at such their Expense, Revenues at Fort St. George, they have a
Revenue of 44000 l. a Year.
Bombay, and at Fort St. David's, in Persia, and elsewhere, of above 44000 l.
per Annum, which are Daily increasing, and a large Extent of Lands in the
respective Places. Also several Forts,
They have also Erected diverse Forts and Settlements, and procured Territories
in the Island of Sumatra, and in the Queen of Attinga's Country, and elsewhere,
on the Coast of Malabar; without which, the Pepper Trade must have been
entirely Lost to England. And they have Erected a strong Fortification in
Bengale, with several Factories, some of them Fortified, and Settlements.
and many Buildings and Settlements, in diverse other Parts, within the Limits
of their Traffic: And they have Purchased of the Indian Princes, and others,
at a great Rate, And Privileges in India.
many Privileges and Immunities. All which they were Encouraged to do, out of
a firm Belief that their said Rights and Inheritances, upon all Occasions,
would be Objects of the Public Care.

Since His Majesty's happy Accession to the Throne, in several Committes of the
Honorable the House of Commons, appointed to consider of the East India Trade;
and in Committees of the whole House, and by the House, as also by your
Lordships, it has been declared, Both Lords and Commons have Voted, the Trade
to India, should be in a Joynt-Stock exclusive.
That the East India Trade should be carried on in a Joynt-Stock exclusive to
all Others. During the Transaction of this Matter in Parliament, His Majesty
was pleased to signify, in a Message to the House of Commons, of the 14th of
November 1692, That upon Examination of the Charters, and consulting with His
Judges, and Learned Council, His Majesty's Message to the House of Commons,
with the Judges Opinion touching the Companies Charter.
His Majesty found that He could not legally dissolve the Company, but upon
Three Years Warning; and that during the Three Years, after warning, the
Company must subsist, and might continue to Trade: And that though the King
might constitute a new Company, yet he could not empower such new Company to
Trade, till after Three Years: The Crown having expressly covenanted, not to
Grant any such Liberty.

Hereupon His Majesty was very apprehensive of the ill Consequence of giving
Warning to the Company, because they would then be less Solicitous of promoting
the true Interest, and Advantage, of a Trade, whereof they would not long reap
the Fruits: And that no new Company could be immediately admitted to it. So
that this very Beneficial Trade, which is already so much impaired, might be in
danger of being entirely lost to the Nation.

And in the Close of his Message, upon that occasion, His Majesty was
graciously pleased, to recommend to the House of Commons, The Preparing such a
Bill, in Order to pass into an Act of Parliament, as might establish this
Trade, on such Foundations, as were most likely to preserve and advance it.

After this, the Interlopers started a Suggestion, That the Companies Charter
was forfeited, The Company not paying their Tax the 25th. March, 1693 their
Charter was questioned.
upon the Non-payment of the first Quarterly Assessment, of 5 per Cent. Charged
upon their whole Stock, though the Companies Agent, upon the day limited by the
Act, viz. the 25th of March 1693, went up to the Exchequer, in order to pay it
in; but found the Exchequer not open, the same being an Holyday, and the
Printed Act not being public till that Morning.

(...) Enemies of the Company, designing to take this Advantage over them, They
did, with all Humility, apply themselves to the King; and His Majesty, weighing
in his Princely Wisdom, That the Uncertainty of the Companies Affairs, might
occasion the total Loss of this Rich Trade; Whereupon his Majesty the 12th of
May, ordered a new Charter to granted.
and in his Goodness, Commiserating the Losses, about that time, sustained by
them, he was graciously pleased to give them Assurance, on the 12th of May
following, That no Advantage should be taken of their Forfeiture, the Attorney
General having then Orders, to draw up a new Charter.

And it appearing, that His Majesty was graciously disposed, to grant the
Company a Charter, there were Petitions exhibited against it, Which the
Interlopers opposing before the Queen and Council it was not Sealed till the 7
th. of October, 1693.
by the Interlopers; and the Matter was contested many days, before the Queen
and Council, and every Article of the intended Regulations was weighed, and
considered, with great Deliberation. This Business being in Debate, from March
1693, to the 7th of October following; at which time the Charter had the Seal,
with a Proviso, That if the said Company did not submit, and conform, to such
Alterations, Restrictions, and Qualifications, as the King should make, before
the 29th of September following; It should be lawful for His Majesty, to Revoke
the said Charter.

A Charter of Regulations granted the 11 th. of November following.
On the 7th of November, the Parliament met, and on the 11th following, the
Company had a new Charter of Regulations; which in most material Points, was
framed pursuant to the Regulations formerly proposed in Parliament.

And thereupon 744000 l Subscribed and paid in during the sitting of the
Parliament.
Upon the Security of this Charter, the Company consented to a new Subscription,
and there was Subscribed anew, into the said Stock, about 1200,000 l. and
reduced accordingly to 744,000 l. which new Subscriptions were made, and the
Money thereupon brought in, Sitting the Parliament.

And, during that part of the Sessions, in which the 744,000 l. were
subscribed, No Objections being against that Charter.
and paid in, as an Addition to the former Joynt-Stock, for enlarging, and
making the Trade more National; nothing was done, said, or offered, against the
Charter of Regulations; on the Strength, and Credit of which, the new
Subscriptions were made: So that upon the Public Faith, 781 New Adventurers
came in on the Credit thereof, many of them Widows and Orphans.
(at least tacitly given) 781 new Adventurers, of which many are Widows, and
Orphans, did subscribe a large part of their Substance, to support this Trade,
during a hazardous War, for the Profit and Honor of England.

And it having been so frequently Resolved, That this Trade was Beneficial,
That it was best to be carried on in a Joynt-Stock: And the principal
Regulations having been pursued, which had been proposed in Parliament; the new
Adventurers thought they might, without any Hazard, subscribe on the Security
of a Charter, which was so plainly designed by His Majesty, to preserve the
East India Traffic, In six Months time the Company sent out 11 rich Ships.
then in danger of being lost. And in less than six Months, from the Date of
the said Charter, the Company did set out eleven Ships, richly Frighted. And in
Obedience to an Order of His Majesty in Council, And 150000 l. worth Woollen
Goods etc.
did thereon lade above the Value of 150,000 l. in Woollen, and other Goods, of
the Product, and Manufacture, of this Kingdom.

Another Charter of Regulations granted the 28 th. of September 1694
During the then Prorogation of the Parliament, It was the Pleasure of their
Majesty's, to order a second Charter of Regulations, dated the 28th of
September 1694, to obviate some Objections that had been made.

In these Charters of Regulations, there are many Provisions made, for the
General Benefit of Trade, and for the Public Weal of this Kingdom:
Particularly, the Company is thereby obliged, to Export to the East Indies, to
the Yearly Value of 100,000 l. at the least, Company by these Charters bound to
export yearly 100000 l value in Cloth etc. to the great benefit of the Nation.
in Goods of the Growth, Product, or Manufacture, of England; and to furnish
the Crown Yearly with 500 Tun of Saltpeter, at the (...) of 38 l. 10 s. per
Tun, in time of Peace; and 45 l. per Tun, in time of War: The Company are ready
to make appear, of what Advantage their Yearly Exportation of Woollen
Manufacture, And to furnish the Crown with 5^0 Tons of Petre at ^5 l. a Ton, in
Time of War.
has been to this Nation; and that they have carried out Draperies to a great
Value; which would not have been exported by any other Trade. And it must be
owned, That the Companies Obligation, to serve the Crown with Saltpeter at
such a Price, has saved the King a great Sum, during the last War; Though then
worth above 70 l.
the Market-price being generally 70 l. per Tun, and upwards.

Since this time, the Company have lost several Rich Ships, The Company
suffering by the War and yet supporting the Trade, hope to enjoy the Profit
thereof in Peace.
outward, and homeward, bound; and having born the Brunt of the War, and
supported the Trade, in times of Hazard, they well hoped to receive some
Returns of Profit, in time of Peace.

Upon which account, an Intimation having been given, in December last, to some
of the Court of Committees, Upon Intimation given.
by persons of considerable Rank in the Government, That a Proposal from the
East India Company, to make a Loan, might be acceptable, They sounded several
Members of their Body, how they stood disposed, to advance a Sum of Money, in
Consideration of a Settlement, by Authority of Parliament; and finding many
inclined to it, They resolved to take the first seasonable Opportunity, to lay
this Matter before a General Court; and accordingly, It was proposed, and
agreed, in a General Court of Adventurers, for the General Joynt-Stock to the
East Indies, held the 14th of April School, They offered a Loan to the Government
of 700000 l. in April, School.
That by settling the East India Company, a Loan of 700,000 l. may be made;
which Proposal is ready to be exhibited to your Lordships: And the Court
pitched upon this Sum, because it did formerly seem the public Sense, that an
Establishment might be reasonably granted (their Sufferings by the War
considered) for the Loan of 600,000 l.

They were not without some Encouragement, to offer this Proposal; But as it
has since appeared, there was privately carried on, by the Interlopers, a
Design, of proposing a far larger Sum: For some few days after the Companies
Offer of 700,000 l. was made, Upon this, in May, came the Proposal of 2
Millions.
Mr. Sheppard's Proposal of Two Millions was mentioned; and on the 20th of May,
tendered to the House of Commons.

And (whereas formerly it has been the constant Custom, in Farms, Bargains, and
Offers of the like Nature, not to close with a new Proposal, till the first
Bidder be asked, whether he is able to advance farther) in this Case, the
Company, notwithstanding their Charter, and the Right they have to the Trade,
were early told, without doors, That their Proposal should be opposed, though
they would lay down the two Millions in question.

However, the Company thought it their Duty, to do their Utmost for the Service
of the Government: And being informed of Resolutions made by the Honorable
House of Commons, whereupon the 10 th. of June,
for the raising Two Millions, on a Fund of 8 per Cent. with the Additional
Advantage of the Trade to the East Indies; They (for the Preservation of above
a Thousand Families, interested in their Joynt-Stock) in a General Court held
the 10th of June Instant, did agree to submit their present Stock, to a
Valuation of 50 per Cent. viz. 20 per Cent. for their dead Stock, The Company
offered to raise 2 Millions.
and 30 per Cent. for their quick Stock (which they were contented to warrant
at the said Sum) and upon these Terms they offered to open their Books for new
Subscriptions, in order to raise the said two Millions: And afterward, to
ascertain the Payment of the said two Millions, they held a General Court on
the 20th instant, And by Persons of known Abilitys to pay down 200000 l. to
secure the rest as by their subscriptions
in which they agreed to an immediate Subscription by private Adventurers, of
200,000 l. to be paid as the first Payment, subject to make good the subsequent
Payments; which Subscription was accordingly made, by persons of known
Abilities and Substance. And these two Proposals, the Company is likewise ready
to exhibit to your Lordships.

And the Company will presume, Humbly to affirm before your Lordships, the
Company well assured they could comply.
that, from the Resolution and Cheerfulness, which was observed among the
Adventurers, they have Grounds of Assurance, that the Government might have
firmly depended upon the Performance of such their Proposal.

But, May it please your Lordships; the Company is informed, that there is a
Bill passed the Honorable House of Commons, and now depending before your
Lordships, But a Bill is now passed the Commons, tending to deprive the Company
of their 44000 l. per Annum Revenue.
which highly tends to the Prejudice of the Companies Charters, and Rights
thereby granted; and also to deprive them of the Property which they have in
Lands of Inheritance, and other Estates and Interests in Foreign Parts, to the
Value of 44000 l. per Annum: also of their several Forts etc.
which Bill likewise, by undeniable Consequence, deprives them of their
Possession and Right, in several Forts and Fortifications; the Purchase and
Improvement of which, have, at several times, cost them above a Million of
Pounds Sterling.

And they crave leave, humbly to lay before your Lordships, that this Bill
grants to a General Society to be established, That from the 29 th day of
September School, Granting to others the Sole Trade to India.
they shall have, use and enjoy, the whole and sole Trade and Traffic, to and
from the East Indies; and the only Liberty, Use and Privilege, of Trading and
Trafficking thither. Which Grant, the Company humbly conceives, to be directly
contrary to the Tenor of their several Charters, contrary to the Tenor of
their Charters, viz.
viz. Of that from King Charles the Second, dated April the 3d 1661, whereby
there is granted to the Company, for the King, his Heirs and Successors, That
they shall for ever hereafter, have, use and enjoy, the whole, entire, and only
Trade and Traffic, to and from the said East Indies; subject to the Conditions
therein mentioned. And directly contrary to one other Charter from His present
Majesty, bearing date the 7th of October 1693, whereby the King, for Himself,
His Heirs and Successors, grants to the Company, to have, hold, use, exercise
and enjoy, the Ports, Islands, Plantations, Territories, Castles, Powers and
Privileges, in such and the same Manner, as they might or ought lawfully to
have held the same by their former Charters, subject to the Conditions therein
mentioned. And contrary to one other Charter of His said Majesty, bearing date
the 11th of November 1693, whereby the King, for Himself, His Heirs and
Successors, does Order, Direct, Limit and Appoint, That the Joynt-Stock of the
said Governor and Company, shall continue One and Twenty Years, to be computed
from the Date of the said Letters Patents, subject to the Conditions therein
mentioned.

The Company humbly submit to the Consideration of your Lordships, Whereof no
forfeiture is charged upon them.
That since the said Charters were granted, no Breach or Forfeiture of their
Rights, has been committed by, or pretended to be charged upon them.

It Is true, that in a Charter from His Present Majesty, The Proviso in
September 1694, no way affects the Company on pretense of unprofitableness.
bearing Date the 28th of September, 1694, there is a Provisoe, That if it
shall appear to the King, His Heirs or Successors, that the said two Charters,
or any other Charters, heretofore Granted, shall not be Profitable to the King,
his Heirs or Successors, or to this Realm, that then, and from thenceforth,
upon and after Three Years Warning, to be given to the said Company, by the
King, His Heirs and Successors, under His or Their Privy Seal, or Sign Manual,
the said several Letters Patents, etc. shall cease, be void, and be determined.
But the Bill now depending, does in no part suggest, That the said Charters, or
the Trade from thence arising, have been Unprofitable to the King or Kingdom.
The present Bill and the Companys offer proving the Contrary.
On the contrary, the Trade depending upon the said Charters, is rather
declared Profitable by the Scope of the said Bill, being thereby made the
Recompense and Encouragement for raising of Two Millions. But if the said
Charters, upon the present Exigency, should be pretended Unprofitable to the
King, and His Realm, by being a Bar to the raising of this Supply, yet the
Companies Offer, and Proposal aforesaid, removes, as it is hoped, that Pretense.
And the Company submit it to the Wisdom and Justice of Your Lordships, The
Companies Grant as is conceived remaining Good till it proves unprofitable by
the forms of Law.
Whether their Charters shall be thus prejudged Unprofitable; and whether the
Rights thereby Granted, ought not to remain, till the said Charters are found
Unprofitable to the King, and His Realm, by the usual Forms of Law?

The Bill now depending Enacts, The Bill now depending, forbids all Trade to
the East Indies, except the subscribers,
That after the 29 th of September the East Indies shall not be visited,
frequented, or haunted, by any other of the Subjects of His Majesty, etc.
during such time, as the Benefit of Trade thereby given, or intended to be
given to the Subscribers, ought to continue, And the said Bill lays great
Penalties, under great penalties,
upon such as shall do any thing, contrary to the Intent and Purport of the
said Act. It Is true, in a subsequent Clause, Provision is made, and after the
Companies 3 years,
That the Company may continue Trading to the East Indies for Three Years; viz.
to the 29 th of September, 1701: But after that Time, (being prohibited
resorting thither) the Forts and Castles, which have cost a Million, makes no
provision for their Revenue and dead stock.
Erected in those Parts, will be a dead Loss upon them, and they can reap no
manner of Advantage, from their Plantations, Edifices, Dues, and Rights, in
India and Persia, which now yield them 44000 l. per Annum. And it is humbly
hoped that Your Lordships will not think it consistent with Your Justice, to
give Property so large a Wound.

Not only the Company must suffer an Immense Loss, by this intended Dissolution
of their Charter, without any Provision for the Reimbursement of their
Expenses, and without any Satisfaction for their Lands, and Rights of
Inheritance, in those Parts, (which they hope will have its due Weight with
Your Lordships); but they presume, they shall be able to show, That the Kingdom
in General, By the Companies dissolution, the Kingdom will be greatly
prejudiced.
and the Trade it self, must receive great Prejudice, by this sudden
Dissolution of the Charter, and shifting of Hands, without Previous Agreements,
and Stipulations with the Indian Princes and Governors.

It would be less Prejudicial, to the Body of this Kingdom, if what were Lost
to the Company, in their Revenue arising in India, The Companies Revenue likely
to cease with them.
were like to accrue to their Successors: But their Rents at Fort St. George,
Fort St. David's, and at Bombay, being produced from the Particulars following;
viz. From 5 l. per Cent. Custom on all private Persons Goods Imported, or
Exported, by Sea: From Licenses for selling Company, yet that New Company ought
not to Trade, during the Three Years, by Reason His Majesty has Covenanted to
the contrary. This Bill entitles Subscribers to Trade during the three Years.
The Bill impowers any New Corporation, or Subscribers, to Trade, even during
the said Three Years, concurrent with the Company; Several hardships the
Company lie under thereby more than the others.
but with this disadvantageous difference, That the Company must send out every
Year a Hundred Thousand Pounds in Woollen Manufacture, and the New Subscribers
none: The Company must deliver to the King 500 Tuns of Salt petre, at an
under-value, the New Subscribers none: They are charged with Taxes for their
Capital Stock, the New Subscribers are exempted by the Act from Payment of
Taxes: The Company must maintain their Forts and Castles, and the New
Subscribers will have an equal Benefit in the Trade. So that this unequal
Burden, is in effect immediately depriving them of the Trade. And it is plain,
from this inequality, although they are allowed Three Years, they can thereby
reap no Benefit.

And it is likewise humbly laid before your Lordships, that though the present
Company, consists of many persons of Figure in the Nation, and of Substance, as
is evident from the Proposal they made, of raising the two Millions, and from
the Subscription of 200,000 l. to ascertain the said Proposal, completed in
two Hours; yet so large a Body as theirs is (consisting of 420 old, and 781 new
Adventurers) besides those which hold Stocks in other Men's Names, which make
near double the number, Many hundred family's will be ruined by this Bill.
Does also contain very many People, who are by no means able to bear so great
a Loss, as the Consequences of this Act must unavoidably bring upon them. The
Company therefore humbly craves leave to offer, that there are among them some
Hundreds of Families (many of which are Widows and Orphans) who have no other
Subsistence, but their Interest in this Stock, whose utter Ruin, this Bill (if
it take effect) must certainly occasion. But it is more especially hoped, that
the Noble Minds of your Lordships, will be struck with Compassion, when, in
your Wisdoms, you consider the Deplorable Condition of some Hundreds of the New
Adventurers, who, who came in upon the Credit of the Kings Charter.
in 1693, did Imbark their whole Fortunes in the said Stock, Subscribing
thereunto large Sums, upon the Credit of the King's Charter; in which
Subscription they met with no Opposition, Check, nor Discountenance, from the
Parliament then sitting. And have farther Embarked in the said Trade, and have
advanced more Money for the support of the Trade.
for support thereof, by advancing very great Sums of Money, the loss of which
will be hazarded by this Bill, which will yet more contribute to their Undoing.

Since the new Subscription, the Company have lost twelve great Ships, after
the loss of the 12 Ships which happened since that Charter.
which in England would have sold for near Fifteen Hundred Thousand Pounds, not
through any Fault of theirs, but by the Accidents and Calamities of the War;
Notwithstanding which great Losses, their Charters, and the Trade from thence
arising, have been so far Profitable to the Public, that they have still
carried on the Trade, they have also paid 295000 l. Customs. above 85000 Taxes.
Provided for the King 6000 Barrels of powder in Holland, advanced 80000 l. to
circulate Exchequer Bills.
during a long War; and since the new Subscription, have paid in Customs
295,000 l. and in Taxes (besides Taxes for the Current Year) 85,000 l. They did
likewise supply His Majesty, in Holland, with 6000 Barrels of Gunpowder, upon
a very pressing occasion. And they subscribed at a time of great Extremity
80,000 l. to the Circulating of Exchequer Bills, at the Instance of the Lords
of the Treasury, the Principal Persons of the Company, promoting the said
Subscription very much among the other Adventurers, which was then judged an
Important Service.

May it please Your Lordships: It appearing manifestly,

1 st, That the Company have a Right to the Trade to India, by several
Charters; of which no Breach has been assigned.

2 ly, That their last Charters are made, pursuant to several Regulations,
Proposed and Resolved, in the Honorable the House of Commons.

3 ly, That the said Regulations contain Provisions Advantageous to the Crown,
and Beneficial to Trade in General; and particularly to the Woollen
Manufactures; of which there is no care taken in the Bill depending.

4 ly, That the Company have made a Proposal, to advance the two Millions,
intended to be raised by the said Bill, which Proposal they afterward
ascertained, by a Subscription of 200,000 l. subject to Forfeiture in case of
Failure.

5 ly, That the Kingdom may lose very considerably, (besides their Footing and
Settlements in those Parts; which will be an irrecoverable Loss,) by this
sudden Dissolution of the Charter, with many Rights and Privileges, which the
present Company now has in India, Persia, and other Places.

6 ly, That the Bill makes no Provision for Settlement of a Stock, to carry on
the Trade; for want of which, in process of time, it may be lost to England.

7 ly, That it admits Foreigners into the Benefit and Mystery of the Trade,
which may produce bad Effects.

8 ly, That the Bill does not seem framed with Encouragements, sufficient to
bring in the intended Subscriptions.

9 ly, That during the three Years, in which the Company are allowed to
Traffic, the Trade is put upon such an unequal Foot, between them, and the
General Society erected by the Bill, that during the said Term, the Company can
reap no Advantage from the Trade.

10 ly, That many Hundred Families, have their whole Fortunes depending in the
Stock of the present Company, who must be entirely ruined, if this Bill take
Effect.

All which Matters being duly weighed and considered, it is humbly hoped, Your
Lordships will find it reasonable to reject the said Bill. Signed by Order of
the said Governor and Company. Robert Blackborne, Secretary.


