THE EAST INDIA TRADE.
A true Narration of diverse Ports in EAST INDIA; of the Commodities, and Trade
one Kingdom holds with another; whereby it appears, how much profit this
Nation is deprived by restraint of Trade to those parts, which is far greater
then all the trade of EUROPE.
East India Trade.
THe East India Trade of old was managed by the Chinese which appears by
diverse Monuments which yet remain in India; as the Plantation of the Cinnamon
Island of Ceylon, inhabited by the Chiugala's, an offspring of Chinese, with
several other Plantations on the West coast of Sumatra; and the very name of
Cinnamon, which to this day is called by the Persians Darcin, or China-wood.
After them succeeded the Guzara^es, or Moors of Cambaya, until the year 1497
that Vasco de Gamas with his Portugals discovered beyond the Cape of good hope
and during 100 years purchased and enjoyed that Trade: And at last from Anno
1595 the Hollanders first, then the English, and afterward some few French and
Danes came for a share of that rich Trade of the East.

Spices, and other East India commodities in the Chinese and Moors times were
brought into Europe, and other Western parts, by the way of Ormus, and thence
over Babylon to Trapizond, Caffa and other places on and about the Euxine and
Mid-land Sea, and by the Genueses further Westward: And sometimes over the Red
sea to Memphis or Cairo in Egypt, and so to Alexandria and Damiata: thence by
the Venetians to the more western parts, whereby those States of Genua and
Venice flourished for many ages. The East India trade is so vast that all the
shipping of our Western Europe would therein find sufficient employment, if once
undertaken and prosecuted with industry and courage, which may appear by the
following general descrip^ions, (for the particulars would be too tedious)
beginning at Cape bon Esperance, and so along the coasts of the Contin^nt unto
the furthest parts of China; and afterward a little of the Islands, and the
unknown Southern world, with a brief description of the commodities, and so
to a conclusion.

Cabo bon Esperanca.
The Cape, besides Beef, Sheep and other provisions, which used to be
purchased there for pieces o^ old Iron hoops and for some late years ceased by
the ill mannaging thereof by Hollanders, affords Train oil sufficient to ^ade
six or eight ships a year; the Hollanders and French made often times Voyages
thither on purpose for Oil, and full fraughted their ships although the
Hollanders of late, since the erecting of their West India company, never came
there for that fishing because that all others besides tha^ Company are
restrained the navigating beyond the Tropic of Cancer: the French were there
few years past and had their desires. At several times motion was made by
Green land Commanders out of Zealand which had used both Green-land and
East India Voyages to send to the Cape aforesaid out of England and they made
it appear as cheap and easier then Green-land, and the hazard and dangers
less, for that although the voyage to the Cape cannot be performed under eight
months, and that of Greene-land in six months, yet wages and victualing will
cost no more for eight months to the Southwards then for six months to the
Norward: besides, Green land is not past three or four months a year free
from ice, whereas the cape may be applied unto all the year long. The vent for
this trayne-oyle, when Europe affords no considerable price, must be found out
in Brazil, in the East Indies, and at the cape it self and neighboring
places; for that people uses store of grease to anoint th^mselves, and would in
liew thereof afford us better commodities.

Agoade San Bras.
Here the Hollanders trucked Beeves and other provisions for pieces of old
Iron-hoopes and Hatchets; and found all the Country full of Sempervivum or
Aloes herb; and most of the Country People we^res golden Rings which argues
Gold along their coast: For 250 League furth^r Eastward, the Portingalls found
the Country people likewise adorned with Gold.

Cabo Correntes.
The Portingalls of Mosambique trade yearly to this place with diverse Ships
where in truck of blue Cal^^co painted and checquered, Stuffes and Beads from
Cambaya they return Gold, Ivory, Negros, Tobacco leaves, Rinoceros horns, and
several sorts of Provisions. The people much inclined to trade with strangers,
and an Island very convenient for many more Shipping then usually comes.

Soffala.
Here the Portingalls have a Castle to preserve their golden trade of Ophir:
for this is the true Ophir whence Salomo fe^c^ed Gold and other riches, as by
tradition and ancient monuments there to this day appears. The trade is not so
barred but we might obtain a share; many Navigable Rivers there are besides
the Portingall Castle of Soffala, where we may navigate and trade with the
Natives for Gold and Elephants teeth.

Sena.
Up the River Quama* the Portingalls have a Fort to secure the possession of
other gold Mines, but this great River has many branches and the Country
abounds with store of Minerals more then few Portingalls are able to manage.
The Country people are not expert in the handling of Guns, so that two
Portingalls under the protection of their Fouling pieces, may travel and trade
six weeks up in the Country without let or resistance.

Mo^ambique.
This Portingall Castle and town, here are upon a small Island (which wants
both provisions and water close to the maine: and from thence they trade
Southwards to Sena, Soffala, Cabo Correntes, to the Northwards to Querinba,
Mombafa, Melinde, Magadoxo, and other places: to the Eastwards, to Musalady
Asaday, and other ports of Madagascar, for Negros and Provisions, to the red
Sea, Persia, the coast of India and Mallabar but cheiflier to Goa, the center
of all East India Portugal Trade.

Querinba, Quiloa, Momba^a, Melinde, Pate, Brava, Magadoxo.
These places Trade with Mofambique, the red Sea, Arabia, India, Persia and
Madagascar, and store of Ships continually employed by the Country people to
and again* so that twenty or our Shipping may find sufficient employment upon
this Coast. The Commodities best known, are Gold, Ivory, Ebony-wood,
Turtell-shels Negros, Ambergreece, Estrich feathers Manna, Seahorse teeth,
Hydes, Butter, Tobacco, Rice and all sorts of grains Rhinoceros horns, and
many other good Commodities yet unknown.

Red Sea, Moha, Aden, and the Coast of Arabia.
To the Red sea comes every monsone, above a hundred sail of Ships from all
places of the East, with Commodities for the inland parts of Arabia, Ethiopia,
Egypt Palestina, and adjoining Countries; and with Passengers that go in
Pilgrimage* to visit Mahomets Tomb of Mecca: Not only from the places before
mentioned, but also from Madagascar, Masca^e Gombrour, Jasques in Persia,
Sindu, Diu, Cambaya, Surratte, Dabull Ragiapore, Goa, Mangalore, Cannanore
Callicut, Cochin, Seylon, Masulipatan, Bengala, Pegu, Tannassery, Achen,
Bantam, and other several places. Which Ships being of no great defensive
forc^, are Subjects to Mallabar Pirates, Portingall, and insulting Hollanders,
and to all manner of men of War, which often resorts to the Red sea* to make
purchase of rich Indians; so that our Shipping may find employment not only in
Trade, but chieflier in carrying and re-carrying those Indians, their persons,
slaves and goods to the Red sea, and back to their own home.

Mascate, Ormus Gombrone, Bander, Jasques, Guadel, Persia.
Thither comes Shipping from most of the ports before mention^d, with diver
Commodities, and from all the rest of the East Indies, as from Sindu, Diu,
Cambaya, Surratte, Dabul, Ragiapore, Carwar, Baticala, Mangalor, Cannanore,
Calicut, Cochin Ceylon, Negapatam, St Thome, Masulipatam, Bangala, Tannassory,
Pegu, Achin, and other places from the South sea; with pepper, cloves, nutmegs,
mace, cinnamon, indico, turmericke, gumlack, ginger, cohoseed; cardemons,
rampontri, saunders, lignum aloes, musk, ambergreece, turtellshels Elephants,
timber, negros, sugar powder and candy, callico, and cotton cloth of all sorts,
dyed, painted and white, with all kind of China stuffes, and China wares: and
return larees or money, horses, silk carpets, bezars* turkeys pearls, tutia,
brimstone myrrha olibanum wormseed, rubarbe, manna, roanay, rosewater and
cakes, asa fetida, raisons, dates, almonds, wine, horse tails and maines with
other commodities. Persia it self, will vent above 3000. English cloths a year,
and in progress of time more, the country to the northward of that great
Kingdom, and toward the Caspian Sea, being extreme cold; which vent of cloth
was all this while disorderly neglected by the Merchants Trading into those
parts; although by their agents duly informed. And its believ^d that Persia may
find employment, not only for the best part of the Ships of this Kingdom,
but also for the greatest part of the stock, if providently adventured on its
vast Trade; and the marct of Persia silk* thus brought to London; whereas its
now diverted by Armenians and Hollanders, to Turkey and Batavia.

Mogull, Sindu, Diu, Goga, Cambaya, Surratte, Damon* Ba^a^m, ^haul.
The Trade of the great Mogulls dominion, is answerable to the vastness of
that great Empire, and affords sufficient matter for a far larger trade, then
hitherto used by the Merchants of London, trading into those parts, and only
at the port of Surratte and up into the Country to Baroche* Brodera, Amadanab
and Agra for Calicoes, Indigo and few drugs to lade two or three ships a year:
Whereas Surratte and the Countries adjacent may very well afford trade for the
investment of all the stock of England; not only for Europe but chiefly for
all ports before named, as the coast of Abissine, Red sea, Arabia, Persia,
India, Cormandell, Bengala, Pegu, Aracan, Siam, Achen, Bantam Banda, Meluccos,
Ceylon, and other Coasts and Islands; wherein great number of Ships continually
employed. Cambaya alone is a place of far greater Trade, then by all our
Shipping could be managed; and has sometimes a hundred Frigates in a Caffila or
Fleet, from Goa and other places upon the coast of India, bound to that Port.
Sindu Diu Goga, Damon. Bacaim and Chaul are Ports of great Trade to all ports
of India: so that it may confidently be believed that the Moguls Country may
afford sufficient employment for all the Shipping of ENGLAND.

Coast of India Dandragepore, Dabull, Ragiapore, Goa, Carwar, Onor, Baticala,
Bar^alor.
These ports Trade not only for Europe, but also for the Red Sea, Melinde,
Madagascar, Persia Guzaratte, Mallabar, Ceylon, Cormandell, Bengala, Aracan,
Pegu, Tennassery, Mallacca, Achin, Bantam, Macassar, M^luccos Banda, Timor,
China, Japon, and other places; and afford Navigation for a great number of
Ships.

Mallabar, Mangalor, Mount-delli, Cannanor, Callicut, Cranganor, Coula^^,
Tuiucuri.
This coast is much intested with Mallabar Pirates, but affoords profitable
Navigation for many good Ships trading to all places before mentioned and
besides to the Maldivas, Ceylon, Cormandell, Bengala, Pegu, Achin, Bantam,
Maccassar, Timor, China, Japan, and to a number of ports resorting under the
said general Names.

Cormandell, Trinconbar, Negapatam, St. Thome, Paliacatte, Armagon, Pettipoli,
Masulapa^am.
The Trade of this Coast is very rich for the great store of Cotton cloth made
here of all kinds white, dyed and painted whereof all the world is furnished
and chiefly the coast of Melinde* Persia, Red sea South sea, Pegu, Malacca
Achen; the west coast of Sumatra, Jambre Bantam, and many other places: hence
come the best Diamonds, and diversity of other commodities. Great store of
Ships trade continually upon this coast to and again, and to all places before
mentioned and our Shipping could want no employment there, every port being
open and most willing to entertain strangers and their trade; and passengers
ready to commit both themselves and goods in our ships, which are securer and
of better accommodation and defense, then the Country junckes.

Bengala, Narsapore, Pipili, Vgalce, Chatigam, Arachan.
Here abounds all kind of Cotton cloth, and Stuffes, Silk, and provisions of
Rice Butter, Oil, Wax, with all sorts of Mineralls, sufficient to provide a
great part of India, and the Islands where such are wanting and Navigation used
with great number of Ships to Persia, the coast of India, Maldivas, Achen and
other places.

Pegu, Martavan, Tavay, Tenn^ss^ry, Queda, Pera, Mallaca, Johor, Pahaun.
The Trade of these Countries produces Gold, Copper, Tin, Lead, Rubies,
Elephants, Gomlacca, plenty of provisions and other Commodities vendible in
India, Persia, and Red seas and to the Eastward as far as China and Japon;
wherein great many Ships continually employed in carrying goods and commodities
to and again.

Siam, Patane, Lugor, Cambogia, Champa, Cauchin, China.
Here is to be had in abundance, Gold, Tin, Lead, Tatimaga* Copper, Dureshinus,
Sabonwood and Pepper, with variety of other commodities native, and brought out
of the adjoining vast Countries bordering with China, and thence is great
navigation and trade maintained with the more adjoining Countries of China*
Japan and Philippinas; and full employment for our Shipping, for these ports
affoords store of Rice and provisions needful in the Moluccos and other places
of the South sea, where the like are wanting.

China.
The China Trade is esteemed and admired all the world over, and of such
vastness that all the wealth of Europe, is not able to compass; the Ships
employed in the Rivers and upon the coast of China are innumerable; sometimes a
particular man has there been seen with a Fleet of five hundred Sails of his
own. Their Trade to remote Countries is much declined and are by the
Hollanders forced to forbear trade in the Meluccos, Banda, Malacca, and other
adjoining places. China affoords great treasures in Gold by so much as the King
of Spain has been wished to exchange the half of his West India Plate for
China Gold, upon the exchange whereof he might gain 75 or 80 per centum.
Commodities best known to us here, are raw Silk, silk Stuffes of all sorts;
Sugar powder and Candy, Green ginger, Radix China Rubarbe Musk, Pearls China
dishes Cinnamon, Aliume, Copper, Tatenag, with several other commodities; and
abundance of all kind of provisions for the sustenance of all living creatures
very cheap, commodities vendible from other places is Silver cloth Corrall,
Amber, Pepper and Spices, of the Mesuccos and Banda, Ivory, Rinoceros horns
Benjamin, Mirrhe, Puchock, Olibanum and many others. The difficulty of trading
with the Chinese in their own Country, is not so difficult as the Portingalls
and Hollanders would persuade the World for their own advantage. English
Merchants have traded even in the great City Cantan, for three months
together; and notwithstanding all the treacheries and hindrances procured by
the Portingalls, I have brought from thence, near the full lading of three
Ships of 500. 400. and 300. Tons. This coast with some labor, courage and
industry may afford employment for all our Shipping to export the Country
commodities, and provide Spices, East India goods, Japan and West India Plate:
and whereas this coast consum^s the most part of the plate which out of Europe
is exported to the East Indias, either by Sea or over land, with all the Japan
Plate; and all the Plate which out of Peru and new Spain, comes to the
Mavillas for China commodities; doubtless, when our Ships shall be possessed
of that trade great store of that plate and China Gold will remain to our
share in exchange of our commodities and industry; besides what China goods we
may have brought home to supply Europe and the West Indias. Here ends the firm
coast which for the space of 15000 miles and upwards, contains more trade then
ten times our Shipping is able to supply; now for the Islands and their Trades
among themselves, and with the Ports of the maine continent, and begin with

Madagascar, Comoro, M^hilla, Joanna, Mayottes.
The Ports known to us upon Madagascar Island, are St. Augustine, Sta. Lucia,
Sta. Maria, Autongil Asada* Masclage^ the commodities besides Beeves Sheep,
Goats, Hogs, Rice, Gravances, and other victual kind best known are
Ambergreece Negros, Iron, Copper, Tin, Turtel shells Sugar Ginger, Aloes,
Tamarinds, Sanguis draconis, Turmerick, Ebony-wood, Saundel-wood, and several
dying and painting Stuffes, Cotton, and Cotton Stuffes. The Northern parts are
Traded unto by several Ships from Mosambique, and above twenty Ships in one
port from Mombasa, Magadoxo, Joanna, Mohillia, Comore, Mayottes, and the coast
of Arabia. These Islands are wonderful well seated for a great Plantation;
which in progress of trade and time may engrosse all the Navigation of the
coast of Melinde, Red sea Persia, Cambaya, India, Cormandell, Bengala, and the
South sea.

Mauritius, Mascarenhas, Diego Roiz.
These three Islands to the Eastward of Madagascar, abound with Provisions and
Ebony-wood. The Hollanders have upon Mauritius a Fort with sixteen pieces of
Ordnance, and above 100. men upon the Island to cut Ebony-wood, and to look
for Ambergreece, whereof oftentimes good store comes a shore. These Islands are
no ways inferior to the Caribes, and may with small trouble be planted by our
people, and further trade from thence to all parts of India may be settled.

Socotora, Abdelcuria.
Upon these Islands store of Dates, Aloes, Socotrivo and mirrha to be had, and
may very well yield employment for three or four of our lesser Ships; for the
Islands being barren, want rice ann other provisions, which from Madagascar and
other places may plenteously be supplied in barter of their Aloes, Mirrha, and
other Socotrive commodities.

Maldivas, Malmallas.
Great trade is driven to these Islands from Cananor, Bengala and other places
with rice and other provisions, for barter where of returns Cocos Nuts Cayro
ropes, for the most part of the Shipping of India, Ambergreece, Cocomaldina,
Bugios and dried Salmons.

Ceylon, Manaren.
Diverse parts of trade there are upon the Island of Ceylon; the chief
Columbo, Punto galls, Maticalo and Trinquemala: the trade is plentiful chiefly
in exporting of Cinnamon and Elephants, here also are store of Rubies,
Carbuncles, Drugs, and other Spices to be found; and in the small Island of
Manaren, a precious Pearl fishing, whence yearly great store transported to
all parts of the East.

Nicubar.
These Islands yield store of Ambergreece, and wants Rice for sustenance of the
Inhabitants which causes a reasonable Navigation from Bengala, Araccan, and
other places which abounds with provisions.

Sumatra.
The Ports of Achen, Pedit, Barros, Tico, Priaman, Cellibar, and the Rivers of
Palimbam Jambre, and Andrahiri, are upon this Island which yield altogether as
much ^epper as the rest of the East Indias, besides Benjamin, Elephants,
Campher Lignum, Aloes, Cubebes, and other commodities and chiefly Gold which is
so plentiful in this Island that the Inhabitants report by Tradition* that
Solomon fetched his Gold from this Ophir. To the Port of Achen resorts Shipping
from Cambaya, India, Cormandell, Bengala, Araccan, Macassar, and almost from
all places of trade, every one with his Country commodities; whereof for the
most part, one stranger exports what merchandises another imports, ^esides the
native commodities of the ^sland, as Gold, Pepper, Elephants, Benjamin and
others. Our trade being closly followed to all parts of Sumatra, no doubt but
we might bring home a yearly Treasure in Gold, besides other commodities to
supply the markets of Europe; for the Island wants Provisions and clothing
which we may bring cheap from other places, the people being addicted to their
pleasures, lasinesse and Prodigality.

Java, Madura, Lombock, Baly, Cambava.
The ports of Bantam, Batavia or Jacatra, Japara, Jortan and Gressi, besides
others belong to Jaua, which yields of their own Pepper, Sugar, Cubebes, Gold,
Cassumba and other commodities. The Navigation to Bantam and Batavia, are best
known to English and Hollanders, these being here seated to secure their Spice
trade upon Sumatra, Borneo, Java, Molucco and Banda besides their China and
Japan trade; the former to receive their, Pepper, which with smaller vessels
come from Jambre, Bengermassin and few more ports: These ports are not so full
of Shippi^g, but might add many sail to the number, and find profitable
employment to industrious merchants.

Borneo.
This great Island contains many good Ports which yield quantities of Pepper,
Campher, Diamonds and other commodities. The Navigation here known to us is at
Samba, Succodana and Benger Massin: besides other ports which trade with the
Spaniards of the Mavillas, and the Hollanders of Bataia with store of Shipping;
and great many more may be added by industry of painful Merchants, to no
small benefit of the undertakers.

Celebes, Bouton, Pangesane, Cambena, Salayer, Calauro.
Macassar upon Celebes trades with many places, as the coast of India,
Mallabar, Achen, and all Ports of the South sea, chiefly with the Molucco and
Banda Islands, for Cloves, Nutmegs and Mace; here being a continual marct for
those Spic^s which for most part are brought hither by stealth, for fear of
the Dutch, who by an everlasting contract claim all the Cloves Nutmegs and
ware which grow on the Molucco and Banda Islands; and suffers none to be sold
from themselves.

Moluccos, Gilolo, Morotay, Ceram, Amboyna, Boero, and Ternate, Tidore, Motyr,
Machian, Bachian.
The five Islands of Ternate, Tidore, Motyr, Machian and Bachian yield all the
cloves except some small quantity growing upon Gilolo, Amboyn^ and Ceram, and
are now under the government or rather tyranny of the Spaniards and Hollanders,
so that the whole Navigation and sole trade thereof is in their hands, except
some portion which by stealth and by night is thence brought in small vessels
to Maccassar, and other neighboring places. Doubtless as soon as store of our
shipping shall trade into those parts, the cloves will be brought unto us let
the Hollanders and Spaniards be never so watchful, for hopes of gain will
induce the country people to attempt any thing, let it never be so dangerous.

Banda-Ilands, Nera, Bonda, Gonapy, Puloway, Puloron, R^ssengyn.
These six Islands contain all the known nutmeg trees of the World, and are
wholly possessed by the Hollanders: the Island Puloron of about eight or nine
miles circumference belongs to the English, but lies wast, and all the nutmeg
trees are cut down: so that the Hollanders remain quiet owners of all the Mace
and Nutmeg until that by increase of our navigation in the South Sea Puloron
may be replanted again, and some share procured of the other Islands, and
their fruits, in manner expressed about the cloves. A report goes that some of
the old Bandaneses to shun their new usurping Masters the Hollanders are
retired to the Southward, and begun to plant nutmeg trees there: which ought to
move us to try whether cloves and nutmeg trees may not grow in other places
besides the Molucco and Banda Islands.

Timor, Flores, Sava, Solor, Banbale, Malua.
Upon Timor and neighboring Islands grows store of Sandelwood which is
fetched from all parts of India, South sea and china, causing a reasonable
navigation and rich trade into these Southern parts.

Japan.
Japan is an Empire of a great Island, with many lesser round about the same,
which reaches from 30. degrees to 50. degrees North-latitude, and from West to
East for above 300. leagues, which great Empire is now wholly under the command
of a Monarch, known by the name of the Emperor of Japan. The Trade of these
parts is chieflier with China, Siam and Philippinas, the northern trade as yet
unknown. This Country vents very great store of China raw silk, silk
stuffes, cloth of gold, and many other China commodities, and from Siam
abundance of Sabon-wood and deerskinnes, from the South Sea spice, especially
Cloves, from hence cloth, Tin, Lead, Camerick and Launes, mather, bays,
perpetuanes* wax* verdigreece and other stuffes: Iron and steel, Amber, glass
of all sorts and colors, Castle Soape, Velvet, Satin, and Taffeties, with
other commodities. Our cloth there is in very great esteem, and sold at
excessive dear rates, and believed that this Empire of Japan would spend all
the cloth which could be made in England. For which commodities it returns
Silver or Plate which is there in great abundance, and of no less quantity
then all the King of Spaines Fleet brings out of the West Indies into Spain:
the most part of that Plate goes to China for silks and silk stuffes, cloth
of gold and other fancies, the greatest part whereof may come to us when we
furnish them with good cloth and other commodities which may satisfy their
minds: other commodities, as hemp Wheat, Barley, rice, all kind of lackwork,
a blew color whereof great store and cheap to be had may likewise be returned
from Japan. Great store of shipping is continually employed, about the Japan
trade which ours may supply* and now the best time to begin, the Hollanders
in a manner being expelled from thence.

Philipinas, Luzon, Mindanao, Mindoro, Tandaya, Panay-Paragoa.
The trade of these Islands with China Japan, Moluccos, and the West Indies is
of great value; for sometimes three or four millions of Rialls of 8. are
brought yearly from the West Indies, to be invested in China silk stuffes, and
other commodities for the use of Mexico, Peru and other parts of America. The
Spaniards are chief Rulers of these Islands, and willing to admit us partners
in their Navigations.

Aynan, Fermoso, Lequeos, and other Islands upon the Coast of China.
There be three famous Pearle-fishings in the East Indies, whence the best
Oriental Pearls comes to our Europe; Baharen in the gulf of Persia, Manaren
betwixt Ceylon and Cape Comorin, and this Island of Aynan the Southermost part
of China. Upon Fermoso the Hollanders have a Fort called Tayoan, whether
Chinese bring these costly commodities to the Hollanders, which commodities
are thence transported to Japan, Batavia and other parts of theirs: this Tayoan
being as a market for the Chinese to sell the goods. There is great Navigation
^n all these Islands, and very easy for our shipping to become owners of the
best trade there, if courage and industry be not wanting. And here ends the
Island trade, the circumference of which Islands summed up together does not
amount to less than 14500. English miles: and now proceed to the unknown
Southern World.

The unknown Southern WORLD fit to be discovered.

The extent of this unknown World must needs be very great, for beginning from
the Straits of Le Mart in 57. degrees Southlatitude, and thence Eastwards to
the last Holland discovery about Houtmans Abrelhos in 35. degrees and so to the
trials in 20. degrees, thence to the Westermost discovery of Nova Guinea under
the equinoctial, thence along that Nova Guinea and Papuas Eastward along the
Terra Australia de spiritis Sancto and all the Islands discovered by Fernand
Magelanes, Villaloboz, Fernando Dequiros, and Jacob le Mayre until the
Southermost part of the straites le Mayre, no less then 20000. English miles
can be reckoned of coast, including the Southern unknown World of larger
extent then Asia, Africa and Europe joined together. From the straites le Mayre
in ^7. degrees Southlatitude, to the coast of Chili and along Peru, and all the
backside of America to Californias, thence to the Northern par^s of Japan,
China, Tartaria and Waygatts, may be coasted for the space of above 12000.
English miles. The trade of the Southern unknown World is as yet to discover
and not improbable to prove to benefit whenever attempted; the few
discoveries made in several parts thereof proves sufficiently the same to be
inhabited, and abounds with provisions for the sustenance of men, with many
commodities, with great likelihood of gold and Pearls. The trade on the
backside of America will turn to the advantage of the undertakers, when
thereby the gold of Chili and Plate of Peru shall thereby come into their
possession. Hence shall proceed to the East India commodities.

East India Commodities.
The commodities which usually are brought home into Europe, or may be brought
from the East Indies are these:

Mettalls, gold, Silver, Copper, Tin, Lead, Iron, Steel.

Mineralls and salts, brimstone, salpeter, allume, sal-armoniac, tincall,
salgemur, vitriol. Gemmes, Diamonds, Rubies, Pearls, Spinells, Emeralds,
Saphirs, Turkeys, granats, hyachuts, amethists, catteyes, cornesians, Lapis
lazuli, Elitropian, Jaspis, agats Christalls.

Spices, Pepper, Cloves, Nutmegs, Mace, Ginger, Cinnamon Sugar, powder Candy.

Perfumes Musk, Civet, Ambergreece, Lignum aloes, sandelwood, Mirrha Olibanum,
Benjamin, Campher, Calamus aromaticus.

Druggs, aloe socotrino, amacardium, amomo afiom, asa fetida, ammoniacum, bolus
armenius, bezar, balsamum bdellium, balaustium, Cassialignea, cassia fistula,
cardamoms, costus, cubebes, China-rootes, coculus Indi, coriander, cambogium,
coloquintida, galbaum, gallangall, gum dragam, gum arabic, manna mirabolans
nux vomica, long pepper, cocus maldina, spikenard rubarber, sanguis draconis,
squinantia, sarcacolla, lapis tutia, turbich, turmerick tamerinds tacamahaca
wormseed, seed pearls, anisseed, cotton, cotton yarne, and all sorts of
clothes made of cotton, white, dyed and painted.

Silk raw and silk wrought in silk stuffes of all sorts.

Indigo, gumlack ^abon-wood, safflower.

Buffiles hides, deereskinnes, Persian sheepskins.

Wax, honey, ebbony-wood, Box-wood, Elephants teeth, Turtle shells, bugios.

China dishes of all sorts, Japan scritories.

Besides these commodities which are or may be brought to us with advantage,
and are likewise transported in trade from Port to Port in the East Indies, the
Country people uses to trade and transport many other goods, provisions and
merchandises from one place into another, as

Elephants, horses, beeves, sheep, Tobacco, Rinoceros horns, Elephants and
Seahorse teeth, Negros and slaves, rohanaz, cocos nuts, cayro-roapes, dried
Salmon, hemp, rice, butter, oil, jaggara, rack, betell nuts, Salt, wheat,
wine, Dates, Raisins, Almonds, galls-onions, chests, cots, cabinets, and all
manner of their housholdstuffe, Persian carpets tombelo, rampontri tatinaga,
noshader, cohoseede, quicksilver, vermillion, red lead, martaban jarres,
dammer, cassumba, beads, horse tails and manes, and many other sorts and
kinds of commodities, the names unknown to us. Now to a conclusion.

CONCLUSION.
The Premises considered, what quantity of Ships and Seamen may be employed,
and to how great advantage, is left to every judicious Reader, if trade to
those parts were either left free, or else so r^gulated as not to limit it to a
joint stock, and to be d^sposed under such a government as is destructive to
trade, which this Nation has experience in these last 20. years.

FINIS.

