THE DEMANDS Of his EXCELLENCY THO. Lord FAIRFAX. And the General Council OF
THE ARMY, In prosecution of the late REMONSTRANCE To the two Houses of
PARLIAMENT.

As also against those persons who were the inviters of the late Invasion from
SCOTLAND, the instigators and encouragers of the late Insurrections in this
KINGDOM.

With Lieutenant General CROMWELS LETTER To his Excellency concerning the
executing of Justice upon all Offenders, and the settling of the Kingdom upon a
due, safe, and hopeful succession of PARLIAMENTS.

BY the appointment of his Excellency the Lord Fairfax Lord General, and his
General Council of the Army.

Signed JOHN RUSHVVORTH.

London, Printed for R. M. 1648.

The Demands of his Excellency the Lord Fairfax, and the General Council of
the Army, in prosecution of the late Remonstrance to the two Houses of
Parliament.
THe incompetency of this Parliament, in its present constitution, to give an
absolute and conclusive Judgment for the whole (especially to be the sole
Judges of their own performance, or breach of Trust) does make the juster way
for such an Appeal, so indeed we see no other way left for remedy, in regard
the present unlimited continuance of this Parliament does exclude the orderly
succession of any other more equal formal Judicature of men, to which we might
hope in due time other ways to appeal.

Thus then we apprehend our selves in the present case, both necessitated to,
and justified in an Appeal from this Parliament, in the present constitution as
it stands, unto the extraordinary Judgment of God and good people; and yet in
the prosecution of this Appeal, as we shall drive it on, but to the speedy
obtaining of a more orderly and equal Judicature of men, in a just
Representative, according to our Remonstrance (wherein to acquiesce) so in the
present procuring of Justice with the peoples ease and quiet, and in the
settling of the Kingdom upon a due, safe and hopeful succession of Parliaments:
It is our hearts desire, and shall be our endeavor, that so much, both of the
matter and form of the present Parliamentary authority may be preserved, as can
be safe, or will be useful to these ends, until a just and full Constitution
thereof, both for matter and form (suitable to the public ends it serves for)
can be introduced.

And therefore first, It should be our great rejoicing (if God saw it good)
that the majority of the present House of Commons were become sensible of the
evil and destructiveness of their late way, and would resolvedly and vigorously
apply themselves to the speedy execution of Justice, with the righting and
easing of the oppressed people, and to a just and safe settlement of the
Kingdom upon such foundations as have been propounded by us and others for that
purpose, and would for the speedier and surer prosecution of these things,
exclude from Communication in their Councels, all such corrupt and apostatized
Members as have appeared hitherto, but to obstruct and hinder such matter of
Justice, Safety and public Interest, and to pervert their Councels a contrary
way, and have therein so shamefully both falsified and forfeited their Trust.

But however, we shall, secondly, desire, That so many of them as God has kept
upright, and shall touch with a just sense of those things, would by
Protestation, or otherwise acquit themselves from such breach of Trust, and
approve their faithfulness, by withdrawing from those that persist in the guilt
thereof, and would apply themselves to such a posture, whereby they may
speedily and effectually prosecute those necessary and public ends, without
such Interruptions, Diversions, or Depravations of their Councels from the
rest, to their endless trouble, oppression, and hazard of the Kingdom as
formerly, and for so many of them, whose hearts God shall stir up thus to do;
we shall therein, in this case of extremity, look upon them as persons having
materially the chief Trust of the Kingdom remaining in them, and though not a
formal standing power to be continued in them, or drawn into ordinary
Presidents; yet the best and most rightful that can be had, as the present
state and exigence of Affairs now stand; And we shall accordingly own them,
adhere to them, and be guided by them in their faithful prosecution of that
Trust, in order unto, and until the introducing of a more full and formal
power in a just Representative to be speedily endeavored.

Now yet further to take away all jealousies in relation to our selves, which
might withhold or discourse any honest Members from this courage, as we have
the witness of God in our hearts, that in these proceedings we do not seek, but
even resolve we will not take advantages to our selves, either in point of
Profit or Power; and that if God did open unto us a way, wherein with honesty
and faithfulness to the public Interest, and good people engaged for us, we
might presently discharged, so as we might not in be our present Employments
look on, and be accessory to, yea supporters of the Parliament, in the present
corrupt, oppressive and destructive proceedings, we should with rejoicing, and
without more ado, embrace such a discharge rather then interpose in these
things to our own vast trouble and hazard; so if we could but obtain a
rational assurance for the effectual prosecution of these things, we shall
give any proportionable assurance on our parts, concerning our laying down of
Arms, when, and as we should be required: But for the present, as the case
stands, we apprehend our selves obliged in duty to God, this Kingdom, and good
men therein, to improve our utmost abilities in all honest ways, for the
avoiding of these great evils we have Remonstrated, and for profecution of the
good things we have propounded; and also that such persons who were the
inviters of the late Invasion from Scotland, the instigaters and incouragers of
the late Insurrections within this Kingdom, and (those forcible ways failing)
have still pursued the same wicked Designs by treacherous and corrupt Councels,
may be brought to public Justice, according to their several demerits. For
all these ends we are now drawing up with the Army to London, there to follow
Providence as God shall clear our way.

By the appointment of his Excellency, the Lord Fairfax, Lord General, and his
General Council. Signed JOHN RUSHVVORTH, Secr'.

For his Excellency the Lord General FAIRFAX.
My Lord,
I Find a very great sense in the affairs of the Regiments of the sufferings
and the ruin of this poor Kingdom, and in them all a very great zeal to have
impartial Justice done upon Offenders; and I must confess, I do in all, from
my heart, concur in them; and I verily think; and am persuaded, they are things
which God put into our hearts: I shall not need to offer any thing to your
Excellency, I know God teaches you, and that he has manifested his presence so
to you, as that you will give glory to him in the eyes of all the world. I held
it my duty, having received these Petitions and Letters, and being desired by
the Framers thereof, to present them to you; the good Lord work his will upon
your heart, enabling you to do it; and the presence of Almighty God go along
with you. Thus prays

My Lord, Your most humble and faithful Servant O. CROMWELL.

FINIS.

