AN ACT For Turning the BOOKS of the LAW, And all Process and Proceedings in
Courts of Justice, INTO ENGLISH.
The Parliament have thought fit to Declare and Enact, and be it Declared and
Enacted by this present Parliament, and by the Authority of the same, That all
the Report-Books of the Resolutions of Judges, and other Books of the Law of
England, shall be Translated into the English Tongue: And that from and after
the first day of January, One thousand six hundred and fifty, All Report-Books
of the Resolutions of Judges, and all other Books of the Law of England, which
shall be Printed, shall be in the English Tongue only. And be it further
Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That from and after the First Return of
Easter Term, which shall be in the year One thousand six hundred fifty and one,
All Writs, Process and Returns thereof, and all Pleadings, Rules, Orders,
Indictments, Inquisitions, Certificates; and all Patents, Commissions, Records,
Judgments, Statutes, Recognizances, Rolls, Entries, and Proceedings of Courts
Leet, Courts Baron, and Customary Courts, and all Proceedings whatsoever in any
Courts of Justice within this Commonwealth, and which concerns the Law, and
Administration of Justice, shall be in the English Tongue only, and not in
Latin or French, or any other Language then English, Any Law, Custom or Usage
heretofore to the contrary notwithstanding. And that the same, and every of
them, shall be written in an ordinary, usual and legible Hand and Character,
and not in any Hand commonly called Court-hand. And be it lastly Enacted and
Ordained, That all and every person and persons offending against this Law,
shall for every such Offense lose and forfeit the full Sum of Twenty pounds of
lawful English Money; The one Moiety thereof to the Use of the Commonwealth,
and the other Moiety to such person and persons as will sue for the same in any
Court of Record, by Action of Debt, Suit, Bill, Plaint or Information; in which
no Wager of Law, Essoign, or other Delay shall be admitted or allowed.

Die Veneris, 22 November. 1649.
ORdered by the Parliament, That this Act be forthwith printed and published.

Hen: Scobell, Cleric. Parliamenti.

London, Printed by Edward Husband and John Field, Printers to the Parliament
of England, 1650.


