THE LAND OF PROMISE, AND The Covenant thereof: Explained by certain questions
and propositions propounded, To those that teach a deliverance of the Jews out
of all Countries to the Land of Canaan; and from their long continued
blindness to the faith of Christ; and a glorious estate in the land, for a
thousand yereas.

And also, to those that teach a personal coming of Christ, and a
resurrection of the just, to live and reign with Christ a thousand years
before the resurrection of the unjust and end of the world. Of which there be
several sorts, who are commonly called Millinaries.

By which doctrine of each of these, the true intent of sundry places of
Scripture of great importance to the Church and people of Godm is uch obscured,
which being rightly understood and taught, acording to their true and plain
meaning, would be greatly to the edification and comfort of Gods chosen,
especially, now in these last days, wherein the accomplishment of all things,
which God has spoken, draws so nigh.

And to the end it may be so, I thought good to publish that, which hereafter
follows.

LONDON Printed by F. L. For I. W. the younger and are to be sold at his shop
at the upper end of the old Baylie 1641.

The Promise of the land of Canaan, To the holy Fathers and their seed.
First to Abram, Genesis 13.14.15.
And the Lord said unto Abram, lift up thine eyes and look from the place
where thou art; Northward and Southward, and Eastward, and Westward, for all
the land which thou see, to thee will I give it, and to thy seed.

Again to Abram Genesis 13.17.
Arise, walk through the l^nd in the length of it, and in the breadth of it,
for I will give it unto thee.

Again to Abram. Genesis 15.7.8.
And he said unto him, I am the Lord that brought thee out of the land of Vr of
the Caldees to give thee this land to inherit it. And he said, Lord God whereby
shall I know that I shall inherit it? And he said unto him, take me an heifer
of three years old etc.

To Abraham Genesis 17.7.8.
And I will establish my covenant between me and thee and thy Seed after thee
in their generations, for an everlasting covenant to be a God unto thee, and to
thy seed after thee. And I will give unto thee and to thy seed after thee, the
land wherein thou art a stranger, all the land of Canaan for an everlasting
possession, and I will be their God.

To Isaak Genesis 26.1.2.3.
And the Lord appeared unto him, and said go not down into Egypt, dwell in
the land that I will tell thee of: so journe in this land, and I will be with
thee for unto thee: and unto thy seed, will I give all these Countries.

To Jacob. Genesis 28.10.11.12.13.
And Jacob went out from Beersheba and went t^ward Haron, and he lighted upon a
certain place, and tarried there all night, because the ^^nne was set, and he
took off the stones of that place, and put them for his pillow, and lay down
in that place to sleep, and he dreamed. And behold a ladder set upon the
earth, and the top of it reached to heaven; And behold the Angels of God
ascending and descending on it. And behold the Lord stood above it and said, I
am the Lord God of Abraham thy father, and the God of Isaak, the land whereon
thou lie, To thee will I give it, and to thy seed.

The Land of Promise, AND The Covenant thereof. Explayned by certain questions
and propositions propounded. To those that teach a restoring of the Jews, to
the Land of Canaan and faith of Christ, for a thousand years yet to come.
And also to the several sorts of Millinaries, that are in these times, who
teach a pers^nall coming of Christ, and resurrection of the just to live and
raig^e with him a thousand years before the resurrection of the unjust, and
the end of the World.
The first Question or Proposition.
FIrst I ask^, if the Promise of the land of Canaan to be given for an
inheritance, as in the places of Genesis before mentio^ed, be not as plainly
made unto Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, their own persons, as it is unto their
seed.

The second Question.
Secondly I ask, if the promise be not to all the Seed, as well as to a part
or any one of them.

The third question.
Thirdly, I ask, if the Gentiles which have the faith of Abram, be not of the
same seed, and included also in the promise as well as the Jews having the same
fait^, concerning what God said to Abram, when he was making this covenant with
him. Genesis 17. Saying. As for me, behold my Covenant wit^ thee; And ^hou shall
be a Father of many Nations. Neither shall thy name any more be called Abram,
but thy name shall be Abraham, for a Father of many Nations have I made thee.
verse 5.6.

And considering also what Saint Paul says Romans 4. Speaking of Abraham, and of
this same covenant that God made with him, at the same time, when he also
appointed him circumcision for a token thereof, as in Genesis 17.

The words of Saint Paul are these: And he received the sign of Circumcision,
a scale of the righteousness of the faith, which he had, being yet
uncircumcised: that he might be the father of them that believe; though they
be not circumcised, that right^ousnesse (...) be impu^ed ^^to them also. And
the father of circumcision to them; who are not of the circumcision only, but
also walk i^ ^^e steps of the faith of our Father Abraham^ ^h^ch ^^e had;
being yet ^ncircumcised. For the pro^ise that (...) should ^^e the heir of the
world, was not to Abraham, or ^o (...) through the Law, but through the
righteo^snesse of Faith; for if they which are of the law be heirs, faith is
made void, and the promise made ^f none effect; because the law works wrath.
^^r where n^ law i^, there is no tra^sgression. Therefore it is ^f faith, that
it might be by grace to the end; the promise might be sure to all the seed^,
not ^o that only which is of the ^aw, (...) to that also, which ^^ ^f the
faith of Ab^aham, wh^ is t^^ (...) of ^s (...) written^ I have made thee a
Father of many Nations. Before him, who^ be believed, even God, who quickneth
the dead, and calle^h those things, which be not, a^ though they were, who
against hope, believ^d in hope; that h^ might become the Father of many
Nations, according to that, which was sp^ken: So shall thy se^de be. Romans 4.11,
12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18.

And as he testif^eth again saying, there is neither I^w, nor Gr^^k^; there is
neither b^nd n^r free, ^here is n^ith^r male (...) female, for ye are all one
in Christ Jesus: And if ye be Christ^s, then are ye Abraham's s^ede and
heirs, according to the promise, Gal. 3.28.

Now if these things be so, that the promise of the land of Canaan, which
Saint Paul expresses by the name of the world, be as plainly made to Abraham,
Isaac, and Iacob^ their own persons, as it is unto their seed, and to all the
seed, as well as to a part, or any one of them, and that they of the many
nations, the faithful Gent^les are of the same seed, as well as the faithful
Jews, and heirs of the promise together with them, according as all the
forementioned Scriptures do plainly declare, so plain^ly as I suppose no man
will deny: Then I ask, wh^refore or for what cause they should not all
receive the same, and not any one or part be excluded, seeing God is faithful
that promises.

God did covenant also with Abraham to be his God, and the God of his seed; and
this he established in no plaine^ or su^er man^er, then he did, to give them
the land for an everlasting possession, as in the same place. Genesis 17.7, 8.
appears: but if God should fail either Abraham, o^ any of his seed in this
respect, how did he then keep his covenant even so of the other. Therefore as
God will not fail either Abraham or any of his seed to be their God; neither
will he fail to give them the land of Canaan, and all the world besides, for
an everlasting possession.

The fourth question.
Fourthly I ask, if the true intent of the promise in the forementioned
places, be not of an eternal estate in the world to come after the
resurrection of the body, and end of this world. That Abraham, Isaak, and
Jacob, and all their seed, shall then inherit, (I say) not the land of Canaan
only, although principally as the Throne and City of the great King, but all
the earth even to the utmost ends and bounds thereof: according to Psalm. 37.
and Mat. 5. Where it is promised that the meek shall inherit the earth: And as
the twenty four Elders, sing in their new song unto the Lamb Christ Jesus
saying, Thou art worthy to take the book and to open the Seals thereof, for
thou wast slain and have redeemed us to God by thy blood, out of every
kindred, and tongue, and people, and nation, and have made us unto our God,
Kings and Priests, and we shall reign on the earth, Revel. 3.10.11.

And who may these redeemed ones out of every kindred, tongue, people, and
nation, (that shall reign on the earth) be, but those of the many nations: the
faithful Jews, and the faithful Gentiles, which God made Abraham a Father
of; and Saint Paul says, are heirs with Abraham of the world? And the promise
that the meek shall inherit the earth does belong to every meek man, as well
as to any one of them, and so to be fulfilled, but it was never so yet in this
world. Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, the Fathers of those meek, unto whom the
Land of Canaan, was promised for an inheritance; dyed and inherited not a
foot. Therefore, that God may be found ^^ue of his word, they must all of them
inherit it in the (...) the resurrection, because here it is otherwise: neither
is it said they do inherit, or reign, but they shall; neither when God
promised the land of Canaan unto Abraham, and to his seed, the earth, the world
to inherit, (as in the forementioned places) did he mean this present; as it
is now polluted: neither were they so to look for it, as the Prophet Micha
says to them of his time. Arise ye and depart, ^or this is not your rest,
because it is polluted. It shall destroy you even with a sore destruction Mich.
2.10. But God spoke, and intended it of the world to come, when all things
should be new, holy, and heavenly, and so did the Fathers understand and expect
it.

And this does the Apostle Paul prove from their own words, when they
confessed that they were strangers, and pilgrims on earth; saying, And they
that say such things, declare plainly that they seek a Country. And truly
(says he) if they had been mindful of the Country, from whence they came
out, they might have had oppertunitie to have returned, but now they desire a
better Country, that is, an heavenly. Wherefore God is not ashamed to be called
their God, for he has prepared for them a City Heb. 1^.13.14.15.16.

In which words, the Apostle (doubtless) has respe^t to the promise in Genesis
17.7.8. Where God did establish his covenant with Abrah^m, to be his God, and
the God of his seed; and to give them the land, and so understood both to be of
like certainty, and continuance, and such as are heavenly, and eternal, And
that there was also a City having foundations, whose builder and maker is God:
which they looked for upon the promise, and that therefore, God was not ashamed
to be called their God.

For Abraham well understood, it was not for a corruptable country, or a
mooveable City in a transitory world, as now this is, that God called him out
of the land of Vr, to give him and his seed to inherit, but for an
uncorruptable, unmooveable, eternal, in a better world, and so much do the
very words of the promise express in that, it says, for an everlasting
covenant, for an everlasting possession, for no corruptable things are
everlasting, neither are these promises such, as shall either vanish or fail.

And upon the ground of this covenant did Christ himself prove the
resurrection from the dead, against the Saduces, knowing it to be most
sufficient for the purpose, saying, Now that the dead are raised, even Moses
shows at the Bush, where he calls ^he Lord the God of Abraham, and the God
of Isaac, and the God of Jacob, ( they being now dead, when Moses thus spoke
which the Sadduces knew) and therefore Christ says unto them, God is not the
God of the dead, but of the living. Luke 20.37.38. Prooving hereby that
Abraham, Isaak and Jacob, must rise again from the dead and live to inherit
the country and City promised, that God may be found true of his word, and
declare himself to be their God for everlasting, according to his covenant
Genesis 17. Ezod. 3.6.

And that it shall be a heavenly and eternal estate in the world to come, the
Lord also manifests in his answe^e to the Carnal objection of those Saduces
a little before, where he says ( The children of this world marry, and are
given in marri^ge but they, that shall be counted worthy of that world and the
resurrection from the dead, neith^r marry nor are given in marriage, neither
can they dye any more, for they are equal unto the Angels and are the children
of God being the Children of the resurrection. Luk, 20.35.36.

Where the Lord shows plainly, that the world to come; which the holy Fathers
and their seed shall inherit at the resurrection, will be such a world, as none
of the ungodly shall be counted worthy to inherit any part thereof, as they do
most parts of this world.

And to this covenant also had David respect in his Psalm where he exhorts the
people of Israel saying, Seek the Lord and his strength, seek his face
continually, rem^mber his marvelous works that he has done, his wonders and
the judgments of his mouth, ye seed of Israel his servant, ye Children of
Jacob his chosen ones, he is the Lord our God, his judg^ments are in all the
Earth, Be ye mindful always of his covenant; the word which he commanded to a
thousand generations: Even of the covenant which he made with Abraham, and of
his oath unto Isaac, and has confirmed the same unto Jacob for a law, and to
Israel, for an ^verlasting covenant, saying unto thee will I give the land of
Canaan the lot of your inheritance, when ye were but few, even a few and
strangers in it etc. 1 Chro. 16.

But small reason had David, and as little reason had they, either the Fathers
or the children, to be always mindful of this covenant, if God had not
confirmed it fure unto them all, even to the thousand generations, for an
everlasting Covenant ever to endure; and that it had not been heavenly without
corruption.

The covenant was made, when they were strangers on earth, but when they shall
inherit the same, they shall be no more strangers but true owners.

Then shall they worship the Lord in the beawtie of holiness, and fear before
him all the earth, the world also shall be stabl^^ that it be not moved, Then
shall the heavens b^ glad and the earth shall rejoice, and men shall say among
the Nations: The Lord reigns. According as David declares in the same Psalm.

And that David did well understand this covenant, of the inheritance of the
land of Canaan, to be an eternal inheritance in the world to come, he
declares himself further unto the People in another Psalm, where he
exhorts them also, saying, O come let us worship and bow down, let us kneel
before the Lord our maker, for he is the Lord our God and we are the people of
his pasture and the sheep of his hands. To day if ye will hear his voice,
harden not your hearts, as in the provocation, and as in the day of temptation
in the wilderness when your fathers tempted me, proved me, and saw my works,
forty years long was I greived with this generation, and said, it is a people
that do err in their hearts, for they have not known my ways, unto whom I
swear in my wrath, that they should not enter into my rest. Psalm. 95.

Where the King and Prophet David does plainly show, that when God did swear
in his wrath, they of Israel, that sinned in the wilderness, erring in their
hearts, should not enter into that good Land, which God swear he would give to
their Fathers, (as it is in Deuteronomy. 1.34.35.

God meant most especially, and chiefly, the heavenly estate of inheritance in
the world to come, wherein holiness and righteousness, rest, and peace should
habit and abide, and God himself would dwell with all the holy Fathers and
their Seed, as in his Tabernacle for evermore, for which cause he calls it
his rest, and shows that they, that will enter into it, must vnharden their
hearts, and hear his voice, that is to say, repent and believe the promise,
otherwise, there is no entering into it.

And this does the Apostle plainly prove mentioning this very same thing to the
Hebrews saying, And to whom swear he, that they should not enter into his
rest, but to them that b^leived not, So we see (says he) that they could not
enter in, because of unbeleife: let us fear therefore, least a promise being
left of entering into his Rest, any of you should seem to come short of it,
for unto us was the Gospel preached, as well as unto them etc. Heb.
^.7.8.9.10.4.1.2.3. etc.

Where he also declares that every one that has the faith of Abraham, that so
beleiveth as He did, not only has an entrance here, in the Spirit,
Spiritually^ (as he says, we which have believed do^ enter) and as all the
holy Fathers had, but also, shall hereafter, their own persons, soul, and
body, inherit the same really and truly, with all the holy Fathers, and
shows that the same rest and entrance into it, is preached unto us by the
Gospel, as it was also unto them by the promise, it containing the sum of
the Gospel. And that it remains yet, to be expected of all the people of
God, who are here so entered by faith. Their calling, and election being made
sure, as the Apostle Peter says, For so an entrance is abundantly ministered
unto us, 2 Timothy 4.1.
into the everlasting Kingdom of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ. 2 Pet.
1.10.11.

For Gods rest eternal, is Christ's everlasting Kingdom, which is to be
manifested at his appearing, when he shall also judge the quick and the dead,
as Saint Paul says to Timothy. For Iosh^a did not give the people of Israel
that rest, but Jesus Christ is to do it, in whom they believed.

And of this salvation of Israel, inheritance of the Earth, and stability of
the world, does the Prophet Esaias also speak, where (he having forshewed the
shame and confusion of the ungodly, and Idolatours of the world, which is to
come upon them) says. But Israel shall be saved in the Lord, with an
everlasting salvation, ye shall no^ be ashamed, nor confounded world without
end, for thus faith the Lord, that created the heavens, God himself that
formed the Earth, and made it, he has established it, he created it not in
vain, he formed it to be inhabited, I am the Lord and there is none else: I
have not spoken in secret, in a dark place of the Earth; I said not unto the
seed of Jacob; Seek ye me^ in vain, I the Lord speak righteousness, I
declare things that are right, Esaias. 45.14.15.16.

So that if Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, and their seed should not live and
inherit the earth, If God that made it had not established it so, as they
should inhabit the same, and well therein for ever, according to his word; Then
had he created it in vain, then had he said unto the seed of Jacob, (all this
while) seek ye me in vain. But the Lord speaks righteousness, he
declares things that are right, and such as shall surely come to pass in
their due time, and season.

Neither has he spoken in obscurity, in dark places, or corners of the Earth,
as if he would not have his mind known; nay, he speaks plainly, and openly,
to the ears of the people: and inhabitants of the world. So as the simplest
soul; through his grace may understand his meaning.

And for further confirmation, that God did not create this excellent work,
and Fabrike of the world, to destroy it, but that he has established the same,
and will, that it be not moved. Consider these scriptures. 1 Chro. 16.30. ^sal.
78.69. Psalm. 93.1. Psalm. 96.10. Psalm. 14.5.

The fifth Question or Proposition.
Fifthly, I ask, i^ the deliverance by Moses, and the possession and estate,
Joshua gave the natural Israelites, in the land of Cana^n, which God
fore-shewed unto Abraham in Genesis 15.16.18. Were not a Typical signe^ or token
of that to come before spoken of; by which Abraham, as well as his seed after
him, was given to know of a certain, that he himself should inherit it; in
the perfection^ according to his motion and request, that he m^de unto God,
immedi^tely upon the promise, that God made unto him of the land, in G^n. 15.7.
saying, ( lord God whereby shall I know that I shall inhe^i^ i^. ver. 8. And
the Lord said unto him, take me an Heifer of three years old etc.)

Although it were then 400. years to come before his natural Children (who
were to go into a strange country and be afflicted there) should be brought to
the land to possess it, so Typically, and that he must dye before that day, as
the Lord had showed him.

For Abraham now ^nderstood, that God had so appointed, that neither he, nor
any of the Patriarchs, Prophets, Apostles, or Saints whatsoever, should be
made perfect in the promises, before, or without other, nor till all the seed
were accomplished, and brought in according as the Apostle declared in Romans 4.
Before mentioned, and as he testifies again in Heb. 11. Where he says, of
the Fathers then past, These all dyed in faith, not having received the
promises. Heb. 11.13
But having seen them a far off, and were persuaded of them, and confessed,
that they were Strangers and Pilgrims on Earth. ver. 13.

And also he having mentioned the rest of the Holy Fathers, and Prophets, and
other of the faithful, their faith also, their distresses, and sufferings,
faith ( These all having obtained a good report, through faith, received not
the Promises, God having provided some better thing for us, that they without
us, sh^^ld not be made perfect, Ver. 39.40.

They might not be made perfect, without the children, which is far better
for us, then if they had, neither may the C^ildren without them, which is no
harm to us, but a better thing for them also, then if we should. Gods dealing
and ordering all things is right and just, without all exception. They are all
of them to receive the perfection of the promises together.

And unto this do the words of Christ agree, where he says, Many shall come
from the East, and from the West, and from the North, and from the South^ and
shall sit down with Abraham, Isaack^ and Jacob, and all the Prophets, in the
Kingdom of God, and the children of the Kingdom shall be cast out into utter
darkness, there shall be weeping, and gnashing of teeth. Mat. 8.11.12. Luke
13.28.29.

And again, and other sheep I have which are not of this fold, them also must
I bring, and they shall hear my voice, and there shall be one fold, and one
Shepherd. Ioh. 10.

In which places, Christ plainly shows, that all the elect Gentiles, (whom
Christ calls other sheep that he had, (besides them of the Jews fold) These
he must bring (they having heard his voice from all the four quarters of the
Earth, and sit down together with all the holy Fathers, and Prophets, and all
the rest of the elect Jews, in the Kingdom of God. Where there shall be one
fold, and one Sheapheard, one King, and one people: and the Children of the
Kingdom; all those unbeleiving Jews, which have still erred in their hearts,
shall be cast out etc.

So then, If all these things be so; how are we to understand the Prophets,
that have foretold of a deliverance of the children, and seed of Israel, from
all countries wheresoever they are scattered, to their own land, the land
which God gave to their Fathers, wherein their Fathers had dwelt etc. as in
Ier. 16.14.15. Ier. 23.8. Ezekiel. 37.11.12.13.14. Ezekiel. 39.26.27.28. And other
places.

What deliverance and possession of the Land of promise, may this be, but the
same that was promised the Fathers, and they looked for, agreeing with all the
promises, and Scriptures before mentioned, and must needs be the substance, and
perfection of that, which was performed by Moses, and Ioshuah; being the Tipe
of this, which is to be performed, be Jesus Christ, the true deliverer, and the
Children, and seed of Israel; there spoken of, are all Gods elect, both of
Jews, and Gentiles, as the Prophet Ezekial does plainly declare, they with all
the holy Fathers, Ezekiel. 37.24.25.26. etc.

And this does Zacharias the father of John the Baptist, declare in his
prophetical song, saying, Blessed be the Lord God of Israel, for he has
visited, and redeemed his people, and has raised up an horn of salvation for
us in the house of his Servant David, as he spoke by the mouth of his holy
Prophets since the world began, that we should be saved from our enemies, and
from the hand of all that hate us, to perform the mercy promised our Fathers,
to remember his holy Covenant. The oath which he swear to our father Abraham,
that he would grant unto us, that we being delivered from the hand of our
enemies, might serve him without fear, in holiness, and righteousness before
him, all the days of our life. etc. Luke 1.68.69.

Where this holy Servant of God, shows plainly that all whatsoever the Holy
Fathers looked for, which God swear he would grant and give unto them, and
their seed; to save and deliver them from their enemies, and from the hand of
all that hated them, to serve him without fear in holiness etc. Was to be
brought to pass by Christ (whom he knew) was now soon after the birth of John
to be borne according to all that the Prophets had spoken since the world
began, which great deliverance from their enemies and from all the haters of
them, is not yet fulfilled, as they have all hitherto known, and do yet know
still by experience; But that it shall be, they duly expect, according to all
that the Prophets have spoken.

And according to that of Zecharias and all the rest before, does the Apostle
Peter give testimony, speaking to the Jews of Christ also the true deliverer:
whom they had crucified, and was now ascended into Heaven, saying unto them,
Repent ye therefore and be converted, that your sins may be blotted out,
when the times of refreshing shall come from the presence of the Lord: And he
shall send Jesus Christ, which before was Preached unto you, whom the Heavens
must receive, until the times of restitution of all things, which God has
spoken by the mouth of all his holy Prophets since the world began. Acts 3.20,
21.

So that this great redemption and restitution of all things, whereof all the
holy Prophets have spoken as with one mouth, agreeing with the Fathers, and all
the rest of the holy Servants of God, is not to be, till Christ shall come in
his glory. Which Christ himself does most fully confirm, where he having
foreshewed the signs of his coming and end of the world, says: And they
shall see the Son of man come in the clouds of Heaven^ with power and great
glory, and he shall send his Angels with a great sound of a Trumpet, and they
shall gather his Elect together from the four Windes^ etc. and then says to
his faithful ones, When these things begin to come to pass, then look up and
lift up your heads, for your redem^tion draws nigh: Then know that the
Kingdom of God is nigh at hand, Mat. 24. Luke 21.30.31.

This is the redemtion, which all the faithful looked for, even that
deliverance of the whole house and Seed of Israel, out of all Countries,
whereof the Prohets had spoken. And here we see by what means the Lord will
gather them and bring them together in that day, even by his holy Angels, whom
he will send forth with a great sound of a Trumpet^ Ezekiel. 37 12, 13.
They shall gather his elect together from the four Winds, Ezekiel. 39.28.
as well they of the ten Tribes of Israel, and of the Gentiles also, as them
of Judah and Beniamine, he will leave none of them any more there, Ezekiel 37.14.
he will open their graves, and bring them up out of their graves, and place
them in their own land, where their fathers had dwelt, and they shall know
that the Lord had not only spoken it, but that he has now performed it,
according as Ezekiel prophesied, Ezekiel. ^7 They being now delivered from the
hands of their enemies shall serve the Lord without fear in holiness and
righteousness before him all the days of their life, according to the
prophecy of Zacherias, Luke 1. And as David in his Psalm of the Covenant
says unto the people of Israel, 1 Chronicles. 16.29, 30, 31, 32, 33.
O give thanks unto the Lord, for he is good, for his mercy endures for ever,
and say, ye save us, O God of our salvation, and gather us together, and
deliver us from the heathen, that we may give thanks to thy holy name, and
glory in thy praise, 1 Chro. 16.34.35.

And now upon this great redemption, shall the Kingdom be restrored to
Israel, which the Apostles so desired to know the time of that which Christ
commended to his little flock, Act. 1.6.
to comfort them in the time of their affliction saying, fear not little
flock for it is you fathers good pleasure to give you the Kingdom, Luke 12.32.

And of which he says again, And I appoint unto you a Kingdom, as the father
has appointed unto me, that ye may eat and drink at my table in my Kingdom,
and sit on Throne judging the twelve Tribes of Israel, Luke 22.29, 30. meaning
the ungodly of all the Tribes. And whereof he spoke also, unto the unbeleeving
Jews, and all other Hippocrite and workers of iniquity to their shame in
their condemnation saying: When ye shall see Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, and
all the Prophets in the Kingdom of God and your selves cast out: Luke 13.27.
where is to be noted, that the ungodly shall see the righteous in the Kingdom
of God, when themselves are cast out.

This is the Kingdom, which God had prepared for his chosen from the
foundation of the world, to be inherited now at this time, when Christ shall
come in his glory to judge the quick and the dead, as himself also further
declares saying. And when the Son of man shall come in his glory, and all
his holy Angels with him, then shall he sit in the Throne of his glory, and
before him shall be ga^hered all Nations, and he shall separate them as a
Shepherd does his sheep from the goats, and he shall set the sheep on his
right hand, and the goats at the left, then shall the King say unto them on his
right hand, come ye blessed of my father, inherit the Kingdom prepared for
you from the foundation of the world, For I was an hungry, and ye gave me
meat, I was athirst, and ye gave me drink, I was a stranger and ye t^oke me
in, naked and ye clothed me, I was sick and ye came unto me, I was in prison
and ye visited me, etc. And unto them on his left hand, Depart from me ye
cursed into everlasting fire, etc.

In which happy sentence to them that shall stand on Christ's right hand at
this day of Judgment, Christ in foretelling us of it, does give us to
understand, as a fair fore-admonition to us all, what manner of persons they
are, and must be found to be, in respect of works, that shall inherit this
Kingdom. And hereby also, we may perceive, what it is to make us friends with
the goods of this world, called the Mammon of unrighteousn^sse, because men
love them so much, setting their hearts upon them, and by many unrighteously
gotten: And who the friends are, that can, and will receive us into everlasting
habitation, even Christ himself, and God his father also. So that whosoever
shall receive one of those little ones that believes in Christ, in Christ's
name, receives Christ, and he that receives Christ, receveth God the Father
that sent him, (for so he has said;) and he that shall give a cup of cold
water to one of the least of Christ's brethren, because he belongs to Christ,
he shall not lose his reward, because Christ counts it as done to him self,
and he will stand his friend, when the great day and time of n^ede shall come,
and all frien^s else will fail him.

These be the works of Abraham which do show the faith of Abraham, and of
Abraham's children that shall inherit the kingdom.

And when Christ shall so come in his glory, and shall sit in the Throne of his
glory, and be possessed of his Kingdom, which God the father had appointed unto
him as he said Luke 22.20. (for the possession of his Kingdom, Luke 22.20.
and his appearing in glory to Judge the quick and the dead, or both together,
as Saint Paul says 2 Timothy 4.1. and the Saints poss^ssing the Kingdom also
depends upon his, and begins as from his and by him is continued.) This
Throne and kingdom of Christ I say is not to cease or be taken from him, nor
he from it; God will settle him therein, according as he said, and swear to
his father David, long beforre, saying; But I will settle him in my house, and
in my kingdom for ever, and his throne shall be established for evermore. 1
Chro. 17.14.

And again, My Covenant will I not break, nor alter the thing that is gone
out of my lips. Once have I sworn by my holiness, that I will not lie unto
David, his seed shall endure for ever, and his Throne as the Sun before me,
it shall be established for ever as the Moon, and as a faithful witness in
heaven, Psalm. 89.34, 36.

Christ is not to come to sit and pass sentence of Judgment only, and so to
depart away as some think, but he is to continue, to reign upon his thrown,
in this kingdom for ever^ according also, as in another Psalm. it says; Thy
Throe O God is for ever and ever, a Septer of righteousness is the Septer of
thy Kingdom. Psalm. 45.6. as also Heb. 1.8.

And of this throne and Kingdom of Christ, and the endlesnes thereof, spoke
the Angel Gabriel unto the blessed Virgin Mary, when he was sent unto her,
saying; F^are not Mary, for thou have found favor with God, and behold thou
shall conceive in thy womb, and bring forth a son, and shall call his name,
Jesus: he shall be great, and shall be called the Son of the highest, and
the Lord God shall give unto him the Throne of his Father David, and he shall
reign over the house of Jacob for ever, and of his Kingdom there shall be no
end. Luke 1.30.31, 32, 33.

Which Kingdom of Christ, was also foreshewed unto the Prophet Daniel in a
vision, as he says; And I saw in the night vision, and behold one like the
Son of man came with the clouds of heaven, and came to the ancient of days,
and they brought him before him, and there was given unto him dominion, and
glory, and a Kingdom, that all people, nations, and languages, should serve
him; his dominion is an everlasting dominion, and his Kingdom that, which
shall not be destroyed. Dan. 7.13.14.

And where he says again (foreshewing also, that the Saints shall possess
the Kingdom with Christ, and reign with him, when those great Monarchs and
usurpers of it, are removed, Dan. 7.16.17.) But The Saints of the most high,
shall take the Kingdom, and possess the Kingdom for ever, even for ever and
ever, verse 18. as also in verse 27. And the Kingdom, and the greatness of
the Kingdom under the whole Heaven, shall be given to the people of the Saints
of the most high, whose kingdom is an everlasting Kingdom, and all powers
shall serve and obey him. According to that which the Prophet Micha testifies
from the Lord saying; And I will make her that halteth, a remnant, and her that
was cast far off, a great Nation; and the Lord shall reign over them in
mount Sion from hence forth, even for ever. Mich. 4.7.

Much more might be mentioned from the Prophets and Scriptures to this purpose,
for which of the Prophets have not prophesied thereof; and what words can there
be spoken more fully, and clearly, to show the perpetuity of this Kingdom of
Christ, and of his Saints, on the earth, under the whole heaven, then these
that has been spoken in these several places of the Scritures, before
mentioned, for ever, even for ever, for ever and ever, for evermore, for ever,
even for ever and ever, for an everlasting possession, an everlasting Kingdom,
that which shall not be destroyed, there shall be no end, as the Sunn^, and
as the Moon, etc.

And how can it be thought that all these things, and words should be spoken
in such a manner, and but a thousand years meant, and to be here in this
poluted world fulfilled on a latter off^sping of Jews remaining^ or as the
Millinaries would have it of a coming of Christ, and resurrection of the
beheaded Saints, or of all the Saints since the beginning of the World to that
time, and then at the end of those years, to cease, or to be delivered up, as
they immagine and teach. I say except men were besotted with willfulness, and
blindness, that having once conceived an opinion, and taken it up, will wrest
all Scriptures even from their plain intention, to make them serve for their
purposes, rather then let their opinion fall, or harken to any thing that may
be said against it. It is true, the Throne and Kingdom, wherein Christ is now
at this present, unto which after his sufferings, God the Father exalted him at
his right hand in the heavens, to sit and reign with him there, till he had
put all his enemies under his feet, the last enemy being death. This he is to
resign, and deliver up to God the Father, at the end of the world, when God
shall have put all enemies under his feet, as Saint Paul says, Then comes
the end; when he shall have delivered up the Kingdom to God even the father;
when he shall put down all ru^e, all authority and power, for he must reign
till he has put all enemies under his feet, the last enemy, that shall be
destroyed, is death, for he has put all things under him, but when he says
all things are put under him, it is manifest that he is excepted that did put
all things under him, and when all things shall be subdued unto him, then shall
the son also himself be s^biect unto him that did put all things under him,
that God may be all in all, 1 Cor. 15.

Where the Apostle shows plainly, that in some consideration Jesus Christ
the Son of man, the Son of David, is not subject unto God the father now,
being at his right hand reigning with him in the heavens, as he shall be then,
at the end of the world, when God shall have put all things under him, himself
only excepted, Nor God all in all, now, as he shall be then, because, now,
Christ (in his human person) sits in his Throne with him, God having once
settled him in the Throne of his Father David, according to his oath which he
swear unto David, he is to leave the other to him that gave him this, and to
be suiect unto him, and to honor him as his head, even as his Spouse the
Church, is to be subject unto him, and to honor him as her head.

And herein shall the son loose no honor, for as he is God he is the same
for ever: Nay, rather he shall receive much more glory and honor; for although
the glory and honor whereto he is now exalted at the right hand of God, in the
heavens, be great (in respect of his human nature) far above all that ever
any man else was exalted unto, or ever shall; yet it is seen of no man, and
believed but of a few: neither are all his enemies now subdued. But when all
enemies, all authority, and rul^ of Monarks and powers of this world of
wickedness shall be subdued and death the last enemy, and he himself sitting
in the Throne of his glory, with all his redeemed, openly, in the sight of all
his, and their enemies, ruling them with a rod of iron, as in the world to come
it shall be, Heb. 2.5, 6, 7, 8. This his glory will be greater.

And these words of the Apostle in 1 Cor. 15. For he must reign till he has
put all enemies under his feet, (alluding in way of proof unto the words of
David, Psalm 110.1.) do show plainly that it is the Kingdom wherein he
reigns now at the right hand of God, in the heavens, that he is to deliver
up and resign unto God his Father at his coming. But this Throne and
Kingdom, which God will now settle him in after all enemies are subdued, he is
never to resign, or deliver up, neither shall it b^e taken from him, nor he
from it, nor be destroyed, or have an end, as has been declared.

In this Throne he may admit his brethren that followed him in the regeneration
that overcome, to sit with him, and will as he has promised saying; To him that
overcommeth, will I grant to sit with me in my Throne, even as I overcame, and
am set with my father in his Throne, Revel. 3.21.

In this Throne Christ is to reign under God the Father, as his King,
according as he said to David, I will settle him in my house, and in my
Kingdom for ever, etc. 1 Chro. 17. It is Gods Kingdom then.

And the Lord God calls this Son of David, his anointed one, his Son,
his King, and the hill whereon he shall sit to reign, his hill; as in Psalm. 2.
where he says, not withstanding all those heathen, and people, Kings and
Rulers, that took counsel against him, and against his Anointed, that said,
Let us break their hands asunder, and cast their cords from us, yet have I set
my King upon my holy hill of Sion.

And the King shall receive of God the Father that which he bid ^im ask,
saying; ask of me and I will give ^hee the he^th^n for thine inheritance, and
the uttermost ends of the earth for thy possession, thou shall break them with
a rod of iron, and dash them in pieces like a potters vessel, verse 8.9.

Which power also the King will give to the Children of Sion, as he promised
saying; And he that overcommeth and keeps my words unto the end, to him will
I give power over the Nations, and he shall rule them with a rod of iron, and
as the vessels of a potter shall they be broken to shivers, even as I have
received of my father, Revel. 2.16.17.

And it shall be fulfilled which David his father foretold of him saying, He
shall judge the poor of the people, he shall save the children of the needy^
and shall break in pieces the oppressor, they shall fear thee as long as the
Sun and Moon endures throughout all generations, he shall come down like
rain upon the mowen grass, like showe^s that water the earth. In his days
shall the righteous flourish, and abundance of peace, so long as the moon
endures, he shall have dominion also from Sea to Sea, and from the river to
the ends of the earth, they that dwell in the wilderness shall bow before him,
and the enemy shall lick the dust: The Kings of Tarshish and of the Isles
shall bring presents, the Kinsts of Sheba and Seba shall offer gifts, yea all
Kings shall fall down before him, all nations shall serve him. Psalm. 72.

And the children of Sion shall be joyful in their King, and the Lord will take
pleasure in his people, and will bewtifie the meek with salvation, as he also
said.

The high praises of God shall ^ee in their mouths and a two edged sword in
their hands to ex^cute vengance upon the heathen, and punishment upon the
people, to bind their Kings in chains, and their Nobles with fet^ers of iron
to execute upon them the judgment written; this honor have all the Saints,
Psalm. 149.

And it shall now be fulfilled al^o which is written, O clap your hands, O ye
people shout unto God with the voice of triumph, for the Lord most high is
terrible, he is a great King over all the earth he has subdued the people under
us, Psalm. 47.
and the Nations under our feet, he shall choose our inheritance for us, the
excellency of Jacob whom he loved; God (...) gone up with a shout, the Lord
with the sound of a Trump, sing praises unto our God sing praises, sing praises
unto our King sing praises, for God is the King over all the earth, sing ye
praises with understanding, God reigns over the heathen, God sits upon the
Throne of his holiness, the Princes of the people are gathered, even the
people of the God of Abraham, for the shields of the earth belong unto God, he
is greatly exalted, Psalm. 47.

And great shall the Lord be in this day, Psalm. ^^
and greatly shall he be praised in the city of our God, in the mountain of
his holiness: Bewtifull for situation, the joy of the whole earth, is mount
Sion, in the sides of the North, the City of the great King, God is kn^wne in
her palaces for a refuge; for l^^ the Kings were assembled, they passed by
together, they sa^ it, and so they marviled; they were troubled, and they
hasted away, fear took hold upon them, there, and pains as of a woman in
travill.

So terrible to the wicked of this world, shall mount Sion be, in the day of
her glory, and so great an astonishment to all those that formerly oppressed
her, who although they shall not enter in, through the gates of the City, to
see or understand of her felicity, and joys within, or anyway partake of her
pleasures, yet they shall understand of her power, and see with fear, and
grief, her brightness, and glory without: It is for the Princes of the people
of the God of Abraham to enter in through the gates into the City, and for
their Kings to come, and bring their glory and riches into it, as it is
written, Esaias 60 11. Revel. 21.24.

And they shall say, As we have heard, so have we see^e, in the city of the
Lord of hosts, in the City of our God; God will establish it for ever, Selah.
Psalm. 48.8.

The holy City the new Jerusalem, which had been so long withdrawn from the
earth; because it was not (by reason of the wickedness and pollutions thereof)
meet to receive her, being Gods eternal Tabernacle: when Christ her Lord and
King shall have purged the earth and heavens of all their pollutions, and vain
corrupt workers of men that are therein, as he will do in the great day of his
coming, according as his Apostle Peter witnesses saying, But the the day of
the Lord will come as a thief in the night, in the which the heavens shall
pass away with a great noise, and the elements shall melt with fervent heat,
and the earth also, and the works that are therein shall be burnt up. 2 Pet.
3.10.

And as the Apostle John also says, And I saw a great white Throne, and him
that sat thereon, from whose face the earth and the heaven fled away and there
was found no place for them. Revel. 20.11.

These things being done, and that there shall be new heavens and a new earth,
as the Lord also promised Esaias 65.17. according to 2 Pet. 3.13. and as it was
foreshewed unto the beloved Disciple, who says; And I saw a new heaven and a
new earth, etc. Revel. 21.1. Then shall that holy City come down from heaven,
as he says, And I saw the holy City, the new Jerusalem, coming down from
God out of heaven, perpared as a Bride adorned for her husband, ver. 2.

For pollutions and curses may not abide where the Throne of God and of the
Lamb is, nor where this holy city shall stand, as it is said; And there shall
be no more Curse, but the Throne of God and of the Lamb shall be in it, and
his servants shall serve him. Revel. 22.3.

Neither is this world, being polluted, and so possessed with wickedness as
now it is, capeable of so excellent, and glorious a creature as she is, and
shall be seen to be, in this day of her appearing in glory, being now made
ready, perfectly adorned with all her ornaments, as the Bride for the marriage
of the Lamb that bought her, her Lord and King Christ Jesus. And blessed are
they that are called unto the marriage supper of the Lamb.

Now shall this holy city Jerusalem, b^ing forth, and receive all her
children at once, even in one day without any more travill or pains, as it is
written; Before she traviled she brought forth, before her pain came s^ee was
delivered of a man child: Who has heard such a thing, who has seen such
things? shall the earth be made to bring forth in one day; shall a Nation be
borne at once, for as soon as Sion travilled she brought forth her Children.
Esaias ^6.7.8.

So that now, when the Lord shall apeare to their joy that were hated, and cast
out for his names sake; And to render recompense to his enemies, as in the 5
and 6. verses he said, then shall the earth in whose bowels the bodies of the
Saints had slept, and whom she had bread and brought up, and Sion also their
spiritual Mother, bring ^orth and receive all their children at once, even in
one day; and she shall remember no more her sorrow, for joy that her man-child
is borne; for so, by that name it pleases the Lord to title her children, as
also in Revel. 12.5. She shall now be adorned with them all, according as her
Lord foreshewed her in the time of her captivity, when she complained saying,
The Lord has forgotten me, my Lord has forsaken me, and he told her nay, he
had graven her upon the palms of his hands, and comforting her, told her also
that hi^ children should make have, and bids her lift up her eyes round
about and behold, showing her (as it were in a vision) all her children (which
she longed for) hasting unto her, and said; All these gather themselves
together and com^ to thee. As I live says the Lord, thou shall fur^^^r lo^th
thee wi^h them all as with an ornament, and bind them on ^hee as a Bride does,
for thy wast and thy desolate places, and the land of thy destruction shall
even now be to morrow, by reason of the inhabitants, and they that swallowed
thee up shall far away^ the children which thou shall have, after thou have
lost the other, shall say again in thine ears, the place is to straight for
^e^ give place to me that I may dwell: then shall thou say in thine heart who
has begotten me these, seeing I have lost my children, and am dessolate, a
captive, and removing too and fro, and who has brought up these. Behold, I was
left alone, These where had they been, etc. Esaias 4^. Here the Lord comfort
Sion with her children of the Gentiles, that were to be brought in unto her by
the Gospel of Jesus Christ, which was to b^e preached amongst them by his
Apostles and Servants as in the 22 verse appears, who were to supply the
loss of all her other lost children of the natural house of Israel.

Therefore now, these being all accomplished unto her rejoice ye with Ierusal^m
and be glad with her; all ye that love her rejoice with joy with her all ye
that mourn for her, that ye may su^k and be satisfied with the breasts of her
consolation, that ye may milk out, and be delighted with the abundance of
her glory; for thus says the Lord; Behold, I will extend peace to her like a
river, and the glory of the Gentiles like a flowing stream; then shall ye
suck, ye shall be borne upon her sides, and be dandled upon her knees, as one
whom his mother comfort, So will I comfort you, and ye shall be comforted
in Jerusalem.

And when ye see this, your heart shall rejoice, and your bones shall flourish
like an hear be, and the hand of the Lord shall be known toward his
servants, and his indignation t^wards his enemies, Esaias 66.10, 11, 12, 13, 14.
etc.

The children of Jerusalem are now to suck and be satisfied, to milk out and
be delighted with the abundance of her consolation, and the abundance of her
glory, etc. it is not said with the milk of the principles or doctrine of
Christ, or form of government and discipline of the Gospel as some would have
it, or at least expound it and to concern cheefely, their thousand years
Church of the Jews. Nay, the children of Jerusalem being now all accomplished
unto her by the word of Christ, they shall have no need of Doctrine or
discipline, or governors, or teachers of that kind or manner any more. But the
government of this new Jerusalem shall be peace it self, and her exactors
righteousness it self. The Lord her righteousness, and the righteousness of
all her children, he being now personally in the midst of her, And salvation
being her walls, and her Towers the glory of God, her gates, his praise, as it
is written of her; God himself also dwelling with her, and with all her
Children, as in his own Tabernacle; As Saint John heard it proclaimed from
heaven as he says, and I heard a great voice from heaven saying; Behold, the
Tabernacle of God is with men, and he will dwell with them, and they shall be
his people, and God himself shall be with them, and be their God, and God
shall wipe away all tears from their eyes, and there shall be no more death,
neither sorrow, nor crying, neither shall there be any more pain for the
former things are passed away. And he that sat upon the Throne said, Behold, I
make all things new, etc. Revel. 21.

This Jerusalem is that same which God spoke of before, to the Prophet Esaias
chap. 65. having foreshewed him this great redemption and salvation of Israel,
and how all their former troubles should be forgotten and hidden from his eyes,
and that he would create new heavens and a new earth, etc. then says, Be ye
glad and rejoice for ever in the things that I create: for behold I create
Jerusalem a rejoicing and her people a joy, and I will rejoice in Jerusalem,
and joy in my people, and the voice of weeping shall be no more heard in her,
nor the voice of crying, etc. verse. 17, 18, 19.

And this is the same Tabernacle whereof God spoke to the Prophet Ezekiell, he
having foreshewed him also this great redemption of the whole house of Israel
from all their captivities. Graves, etc. to their own land, and saying, And
they shall dwell in the land which I have given unto Jacob my servant, wherein
your fathers have dwelt, and they shall dwell therein; they, and their
children, and childrens children for ever: ( hereby the way we are to
understand by They, and their children, etc. Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, and
all their seed or children of the promise to whom it belonged) and my servant
David shall be their King for ever. Moreover (says the Lord) I will make a
Covenant of peace with them, it shall be an everlasting covenant with them, and
I will place them and multiply them, and I will set my Sanctuary in the midst
of them for evermore; my Tabernacle also shall be with them, yea I will be
their God, and they shall be my people: And the h^a^hen shall know that I the
Lord do sanctify Israel when my Sanctuary shall be in the midst of them for
evermore, Ezekiel. 37.

This is that Country and City which the holy Fathers sought, mentioned in
Heb. 11.

This is the place whereof God spoke to David, where he said: Also I will
ordain a place for my people Israel, and will plant them, and they shall dwell
in their place, and shall be moved no more neither shall the children of
wickedness wast them any more as at the beginning, etc. 1 Chronicles. 17.9.

This is that purchased possession, until the redemption whereof, the faithful
are Sealed with the holy Spirit of promise, the earnest of that their
inheritance, spoken of by Saint Paul, Ephe. 1.13, 14.

This is that Eternal Tabernacle which God is the builder of, and not man
spoken of in Heb. 8. 2. and 9.11. which Christ has purchased with his own
blood for our Eternal inheritance, as in verse 12.

This is the place, which Christ spoke of to his Disciples when he said, I go
to prepare a place for you, John 14.

And this is that Building of God, not made with hands, eternal in the
heavens, spoken of 2 Cor. 5.1.

This is that inheritance incorruptable and undefiled and that fades not away,
reserved in heaven for us (who are kept by the power of God through faith unto
salvation) ready to be revealed in the last time, spoken of in 1 Pet. 3, 4, 5,
6. the times of restitution of all things, whereof he spoke in Acts 3. for then
it is to be revealed from heaven, as John foresaw, Revel. 21. when all things
shall be new.

This is the Kingdom, which cannot be shaken, spoken of in Heb. 12.27, 28.

This is that City of which he says, for here we have no continuing city, but
we seek one to come, Heb. 13.14.

And this is the glory which Saint Paul says, the children and heirs of God,
that suffer with Christ, shall receive as joint heirs together with him, for
the manifestation whereof, the earnest expectation of the creature waits, and
until which the whole creation travelleth together in pain, as in Romans 8.17,
18, 19, 20, 21, 22, 23.

And this is the rest, which is said to remain unto the people of God, spoken
of in Heb^ 4. where he exhorts saying, Let us therefore labor to enter into
that rest, le^t, etc. verse 9.10.11.

Now all these promises and testimonies being of one and the same eternal
inheritance, as does plainly appear, and that it belongs to all the
faithful, as is also manifest, and being so acomplished, as before is declared.

Then Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, and all the holy Fathers before them, and
their children, and their childrens children after them, to the thousand
generations, even all their seed to this worlds end, (for there shall be no
increasing of children any way, afterward) shall inherit according to the
promise the Land of Canaan, which God gave unto the Fathers, that good Land
which he espied for them, the glory of all lands, as the Scriptures title it;
And not that Land only, but every habitable part of the world besides, yet
that land principally, as the glory of all the rest: There the Fathers
sojourned in expectation thereof, upon the promise, There by faith they took
order, and gave charge to have their bones laid, expecting their resurrection
to that end. Thither their children were brought from their servitude in Egypt
to possess it typically: There God revealed his counsels and testimonies by
his servants the Prophets: There was the Temporal typical Jerusalem, There
was David^ Throne, There was Jesus Christ the true king, and heir of all
things borne, There he suffered and underwent the shame, from thence he
ascended into Heaven, and to the same place he shall come again as it is
written. And his feet shall stand in that day upon the Mount of Olives, which
is before Jerusalem etc. Zech. 14.4. And there shall his Throne be, upon the
holy hill of Sion according to Psalm. 2.

For although his Kingdom, and dominion, shall reach throughout all the World,
from Sea, to Sea, and from the river to the ends of the earth, as it is said,
where also his Saints shall inherit and reign, yet there shall be his Throne,
and his glory most eminent, even there where he suffered the reproach, and that
shall all his enemies, in that day, see and know; For God will get his servants
praise, and fame, in every land where they had been put to shame, according as
he said, Zeph. 3.19.

And all the Seed, and children of the promise since the beginning of the
world, the true Israel of God, shall now be a nation before the Lord for ever,
and be Kings, and Priests unto God, and shall reign on the Earth, as the
twenty four Elders declared; and (being all of them, the Children of God, and
of the new Jerusalem, redeemed by the blood of the Lamb) The Lamb will now
(among all the rest of his promises, and gifts) perform this also, in Rev. 3.
Where he says, Him that overcome^h will I make a pillar in the house of my
God, and he shall go no more out, and I will write upon him the name of my
God, and the name of the City of my God, The new Jerusalem, which comes down
out of Heaven from my God, and my new name, ver. 12. Where we see also as in
Rev. 21. that it is to come down out of Heaven.

I ask now, If these things be so as has been declared, or no, if they be
truly so, then I ask where ye will have ground for your doctrine of a thousand
years glorious Church of the Jews, in the Land of Canaan, or of any other,
that ye will have rise from the dead before the end of this world; or what have
ye to object against that which has been^ said.

If ye object and say, here is not in all this, a word spoken of heaven, that
the Saints after the resurrection of the body, and end of this world, shall
ascend with Christ, and Christ with them, to live and reign there, in the
presence of God, and with all his holy Angels for ever. I confess, I have not
spoken a word to that purpose, and the reason is, because I find not a word in
all the holy Scriptures that says it, and what they speak not, I am not
bound, in this case, to believe, though I deny them not heaven, God may take up
of them into heaven, as he did Paul, if he so please, though he has not said
it, That the Saints shall inherit the earth, and dwell therein for ever, there
are a h^ndred words in the Scriptures of God, to prove, as ye may see, by that
which is written. And when Christ comes in his glory, his holy Angels shall
come with him, and God himself will dwell with his people, and they shall be
his Tabernacle; as has been declared.

And this I say yet further, that if you can break Gods covenant with the day,
and his covenant with the night, and that there should not be day and night in
their seasons. If ye can remoove the Sun, the Moon, and the Stars out of
their places, and from their order, and put an end to the days of Heaven: Ier.
31.35.36.37.
then ye may break, and put an end to the things before declared, otherwise
they shall stand, and not fail for ever, as the Lord has said, Ier.
31.35.36.37. Ier. 33.20.21. Neither shall these ordinances, Ier. 33.20.21.
ever depart from before the face of the Lord.

What were it, that all these excellent promises and sayings, in Scripture
should only intend a thousand or two thousand years glorious Church of the
Jews, or of any other, to be in the time of this world, and then to cease, and
how many absurdites would follow, too many to relate. The Jews had almost two
thousand years time in their troublesome Typical estate, and there has been
near one thousand six hundred years since, wherein all that glory has been
trodden down, and the people dispersed, as well the Saints that were then in the
land, as the other, one whom the wrath of God, (which was written) is ceased
upon. Deuteronomy. 28.
And will ye have this glorious estate, that has been so many thousand years
spoken of, and looked for, of all the faithful upon Gods promises, since the
beginning, to last but for a thousand years, or two, as some would have it,
and to concern only, and belong to, a remnant of Jews remaining, descended of
the most viperous generation of them, that ever were, as Christ himself
charge them; such as were to fill up the measure of their Fathers
wickedness, and that these should be all of them generally called and saved,
this is beyond all sound aprehention, and besides all Scriptures of truth; such
a calling, and such a saving, was never known to be of the best dissent
natural, that ever was, nor was ever known to be the manner of Gods dealing,
and proc^eding in any age, with any people whatsoever. But to choose out, from
among them, and their Children, here one, and there one, as Abell; leaving
Cain, Isaac leaving Ishmael, Jacob leaving Esaw, and so in all times, both
with Jews, and Gentiles, seldom many of one man's Children; and less times
all like (as is hoped) was, with Jacobs sons, but as it is written. Though the
Children of Israel be as the sand of the Sea, Esaias 10.22 23.
a remnant shall be saved, for God will finish the work (as Saint Paul says)
and cut it short in righteousness, because, Romans 9.27^ 28.29.
a short work will the Lord make upon the earth, and as he says again from
Esaias, Exc^pt the Lord ^f Sabbath had lef^ us a seed, we had been as Sodom,
and been made like unto Gomorrah Romans 9.

And as Christ himself says (for showing how it would be to the worlds end.
Strait is the gate and narrow is the way, Esaias. 1.9.
which leads unto life, and few there be that find it. Mat. 7.14.

If ye say the Scriptures speak much of the Jews calling, and especially
Saint Paul in Romans 11. My answer is; it seems to do so, but there is a
great mistaking of the Apostles words, and meaning by many, for he speaks
only of a remnant of elect Jews, and chiefly of those in his own time,
which the Christian Romans had their eye upon Marvelling that so few (of so
great and religious a nation did believe the Gospel of Christ) and confessed
him, which was the occasion of the Apostles writing unto them in this manner,
to inform them as concerning the reason thereof; and proves unto them by
former experience, and testimonies of the Prophets, that they were always but
few (in comparrison of the great number of obstinate ones) that did believe in
their ^earts to salvation, as in Chap. 9. from the testimony of Esaiah, and in
this Chap. by that, in the time of Eliahs. And so, all his arguments are to
prove, that God did never cast away his elect people of Israel, Nor would, but
that they should all come in, according as many of them did, especially in
those days, for then they had the most excellent means, that ever they had,
or shall have while the world stands; which (because the Rulers, and greatest
number of them did so wilfully reject, filling up the measure of their Fathers
sins, who persecuted, and kille^ the Prophets, and they now, Christ himself)
was therefore, to be taken from them, and the wrath of God to cease upon them
to the uttermost, according as Moses had foretold long before Deuteronomy, 28. from
the 15. verse to the end of the Chap. And as Christ himself pronounces saying^
For these be the days of vengance that all things that are written might be
fulfilled, But woe be to them, that are with child, and to them that give suck
in those days, for there shall be great distress in the land, and wrath upon
this people, and they shall fall by the edge of the sword, and shall be led
captive into all Nation^, and Jerusalem shall be trodden down of the Gentil^s,
till the times of the Gentiles be fulfilled, Luke 21.22.23.24. As also Saint
Paul testifies Thesalo.

And the time being now come that the Gentiles should hear the word of the
Gospel, that Gods elect among them; which (by Gods appointment) were now in
these latter days (to be many in number) might be brought in^. So long, as
until the times of the course of the Gospel among the Gentiles, for the
bringing in of all Gods Elect of them, be accomplished: Jerusalem is to be
trodden down of the wicked unbeleeving Gentiles. And so long also shall
blindness continue upon the generation of those vipers that Christ spoke to,
that they may fill up their measure, as they did the measure of their fathers,
according as they said, his blood be upon us and upon our children. These are
that part of Israel of whom Saint Paul says, Blindness in part, is happened to
Israel until the ful^esse of the Gentiles be come in; the fullness of Gods
Elect Gentiles, for so he means, and so the words themselves do express:
And these are those other sheep of whom Christ spoke in John 10. which being
brought in, there shall be one fould and one Shepherd, one Nation, and one
King for ever,

And all the blinded Jews and Gentiles also that have rejected the grace of
God in Christ, shall see these sheep of the Gentiles, that come from the East
and the West and North and South, sit with Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, and all
the Prophets, in the Kingdom of God, and themselves cast out as Christ has
spoken.

So their blindness shall last no longer, they shall now see what they
rejected, and what is come of it, according also as Christ said to their
fathers: for I say unto you ye shall not see me henceforth, till ye shall say,
Blessed is he that comes in the name of the Lord, Mat. 23.39. for every eye
shall see him, and all tongues shall confess at this day, that Jesus is the
Lord, to the glory of God the Father, as it is written.

And as touching that living and reigning with Christ for a thousand years
spoken of in Revel. 20. of the souls of them that were to be beheaded, because
they would not worship the Beast nor his Image, nor would receive his mark,
etc. which is there said to be the first resurrection. This being the only
Scripture they make use of, to prove a thousand years glorious estate of a
Church of the Jews as some would have it; or as others of the faith full
disceased, whom they will have to rise from the dead a thousand years before
the end of the World, and resurrection of the ungodly etc.

Therefore to remove these, opinions and stop all objections against the clear
truth (if possible it may be) My ^nswer is, in brief this; First, they are
utterly mistaken in the word Souls, because they will have it to intend bodies,
as well as souls; for although sometimes in Scripture souls only are named,
when both bodies and souls are meant, as in Gen 46.15. and so the 27. verse,
where it is said, All the Souls of the House of Jacob which came into Egypt,
were three score and ten; yet I say it cannot be so meant here: my reasons are,
first, These souls which Saint John says, he saw, are the souls of men be
headed, and not of living men; but if ye say John foresaw them risen, and so
names the soul for both, my answer is, This cannot be, the soul may not be
named for the body, nor with the body in this case, as to mean both; because
the soul of a regenerate man being now alive by faith, cannot be said either
to dye with the body, or to rise with the body, neither is there any
resurrection of the soul after the death of the body, and therefore may not be
named for the death of the body, nor for the resurrection of the body, neither
is there such an instance in all the Scriptures, as to say when a righteous
man's body dies or is dead, there is a soul dead, although it may be so said
of an ungodly man^ because his soul is always dead spiritually. And to say of
a regenerate man, that when his body rises from the dead, his soul rises
with it, is to say a manifest untruth. When those Saints rose from the dead, at
the time of Christ's suffering, it is not said their souls rose, but th^^^
bodies only, as in Mat. 27.52.

When John saw, under the Altar the Souls of them that were slain, for the
word of God. Revel. 6.9. He apprehended their bodies to b^ dead, as the text
shows plainly, in that the Souls cried How long Lord, holy and tru^, do
thou not Judge and avenge our blood on them, that dwell on the earth, (they
being in heaven) and it was said unto them, that they should r^st, a little
season until their fellow servant^, and their brethr^n, that must be killed as
they were, should ^e fulfilled, verse. 10, 11. neither were ^he bodies of the
first to rise before the last were slain as the words declare.

Therefore my conclusion is, that the living and reigning with Christ, and the
first resurrection^ in this place spoken of is of, the soul only, and no^ of
the body, and that it begins here while the soul and body are together^ as
Christ himself declares saying, Verily, verily I say unto you, The ^ower is
coming, and now is, when the dead shall hear the voice of the Son of God,
and they that hear it shall live. John 5^25. And then afterward speaks unto
the Jews saying, marvel not at this, for the hour is coming in the which
all that are in the graves shall hear his voice, and shall come forth, they
that have done good^ ^^to the resurrection of life, and they that have done
evil unto the ^^surrection of condemnation. verse. 28.29. Here we see the
resurrection of the bodies of good and band out of the graves, are both
together in one hour, and that the resurrection of the Souls of the faithful
is daily all the time before, as he says, the hour is coming and now is;
And as touching this first resurrection of the Soul, Saint Paul says, Ye are
buried with Christ in baptism, wherein also ye are risen with him, etc. Col.
2. And aagaine, If ye be risen with Christ, seek those things which are above
where Christ sits at the right hand of God. Colos^ 3^ 1.2.3.

And the Soul being once risen with Christ, lives always now, though his
body die or be beheaded, and it may truly be said of him to his great
comfort, even while he is in the body; Blessed and holy is he, that has part
in the first resurrection, for on such, the second death has no power. But
they shall be Priests of God and of Christ, and shall reign with him. I will
not say now, a 1000 years, in that manner with out the body, because those
years are almost expired; So long a time being past since the first sufferings
of Saints for those causes, of not worshipping the Beast, etc. began, who had
the full time of the thousand years before them to come: (as they, whose
Souls John saw under the Altar, that cried How long Lord, holy and true, do
thou not Judge and avenge ^ur blood on them that dwell upon the earth; it is
not every Soul a thousand years, but a thousand for all. But this I say unto,
and of every such soul, that he shall live, and reign with Christ, until his
commi^g in glory. And then he shall live and reign with him, soul and body
for evermore world without end. And this I say further, That whosoever has not
part, here, in the first resurrection, let him be sure whosoever, he be, the
second death will cease upon him, body and soul for ever, he shall have no
other first resurrection, after the death of his body to help him, or make him
blessed and holy.

As concerning the other things of this twenty chapter, and also of the 11. to
the Romans before spoken of. If the Reader please to inquire for a book
entitled The deliverance of the whole house of Israel from all their
captivities; he may see in the same, the particular matters o^ both, in a more
full manner declared, which I hope through the grace of God with his diligent
observation, shall clear the truth of all these things, plainly unto him.

And now let me a little advise the Reader (whosoever he be) first that he
would take heed, he have not the word of God, and Gospel of Jesus Christ
(whereby his Soul and body should live e^ernally) in respect of persons, I
mean, so as to esteem, or disesteeme, that which he shall hear spoken or see
written, according as the speaker or writer is in place, or name of acount in
the world. But that he would with all carfulness and diligence of mind,
search and inquire into every thing, that he hears or reads, and as he
shall find things clear to his understanding, confirmed to his soul and
conscience by the word and spirit of God, to be of God, and hi^ truth: So to
embrace, and keep them without asking after, or saying in his mind, or
harkning to any that shall say unto him; I, But who, or what is the Author, as
if the knowledge of the person, place, and repute of the Author would make the
matter much better, or worse, whereas the words and matters of a speaker or
writer, in divine things especially, do best discover unto the Children of
wi^edome, what the Author is. And Christ shows plainly, that the fruit
whereby his faithful shall know the true Prophets and the false, is their
words, which proceed from the good, or from the evil treasure of the heart,
and ^aith, that men by their words shall be justified, and by their words
shall be condemned, Mat. 12.33, 34, 35, 36, 37. Luke 6.45.

And what does now so prove unto the faithful, the goodness of the Prophets
and Apostles as their words?

And secondly, my advice unto the Read is, that he would himself betake him
to the diligent search and study of the Scriptures, with earnest desire, and
humble request unto God in his heart, to guide and instruct him by his holy
Spirit unto the understanding of the same. For without all doubt, the holy
Scriptures of the Prophets and Apostles are the most sure, and clearest
Preachers of the truth and ways of eternal life, that are to be found in the
world, and such as we may be sure off, will not deceive us: And let the Reader
take heed that his trust or dependence be not on any man whatsoever, though
he be never so high in esteem, or take never so much upon him.

And this I say further unto him for his comfort and encouragement whatsoever
he be, if he can prefer wisdom and understanding in his heart, before all
things in the world, I mean the true wisdom which is from above, and shall
with his whole soul desire and seek it at the hands of God, he shall
assuredly attain unto it, let him not doubt, for so sure as the Lord God which
promises, will not fail of his word, if he can, and shall so prefer it. So
seek it, he shall have it.

Let him not harken or give heed unto any, that shall say, it is not for you
to search the Scriptures, and study them so, you are unlearned and cannot
understand them, you have not the tongues, wherein they were written, etc. As if
God had promised and tied the understanding of his word and Gospel of Salvation
to those and such like common gifts, which men may abound with and perish. Nay,
take heed of these, for they speak not the words of wisdom unto you, but of
falsehood and deceit. If they did understand in their heart what true wisdom
is, and from whence it comes, they would not so speak, but would know that
God is the instructor, and free giver of this wisdom: to the learned, and the
unlearned without respect of persons. And that he has often times confounded
the wisdom of the wise and mighty of the world by weak and despised things,
as Saint Paul declares, proving it from the Prophet Esaias, saying, For it is
written, I will destroy the wisdom of the wise, and bring to naught the
undeestanding of the prudent: Where is the wise, where is the Scribe^ where is
the disputer of the world, has not God made the wisdom of this world
foolishness, etc.

And againe^ Ye see your calling brethren, how that not many wise men after the
flesh, not many mighty, etc. But God has chosen the foolish things of this
world to confound the wise, and the weak things of the world to confo^nd the
mighty, and base things of the world, and things which are de^pised has God
chosen, and things which are not to bring to naught, things that are, that no
flesh might glory in his sight, 1 Cor. 2.19, 20, 26, 27.

Saint Paul was learned, yet these are his sayings: Although peradventure some
dare be so bold as to say, they are now out of daet, because they would have it
so to be conceived of the people, to the end they should not seek
understanding from the Scriptures, but depend upon them for instruction, and
have them in admiration, as has been the policy and practice a long time, of
them of the Church of Rome, to keep the people from the Scriptures, that they
might remain in ignorance, and exalt them in their minds, and honor them as
Gods Prophets, and their words of error and deceit, as Gods oracles. Take
heed of such I say, for although they do not like to have any to be Lords
over them in such respects, yet they, by this, show plainly, that they would be
Lords over you.

But howsoever, the Lord says to the humble in heart, that he will teach them
his ways, and that his secrets are with them that fear him, and that he will
dwell with him that is of an humble and contrite heart. And Christ says, Ask
and ye shall have, seek and ye shall find, knock and it shall be opened unto
you: Nay more, Behold I stand at the door and knock, if any man open the
door I will come in to him, and will sup with him, and he with me. Rev. 3.20.
Here is no excepting of persons, though never so poor or despised, never so
low of place or calling in the world, shepherd, clown or other, if he can so
seek the Lord and his wisdom and ways, if he can so open, he will come in
to him, he will comfort him and teach him, for th^^ is nothing under the Su^ne,
wherein the Lord does tak^ the like pleasure, as to be conversant with, men to
acquaint them with his ways and truth, that they should admire his goodness
and set forth the same to his praise, and what honor, what preferment, what
treasure, what dignity unto man in this world, is like it. To be so in account
with God, that made heaven and earth, and beloved of him, and to know it to be
so, as all the holy Fathers, Prophets and Saints have done, there is no
comparison.

And all this out of doubt, is to be attained, God is still the same, he can
make known his love and his ways now, as well as heretofore: and the time is
now come into the world, and incoming, wherein he will do it more abunda^tly,
then has been for many years since the Apostles times, because he will now
gather in his last fruits, he will have his truth known, and his word truly
understood of his people, for to that end it is written, that they may walk in
the light thereof to their comfort and salvation, and the praise of his Name.

Therefore my advice is, neglect not so great a treasu^e.

And so I commend him unto the Lord, and to the word of his grace (for his
guidance, and protection) unto whom be all honor and praise both now and for
ever, Amen.

And so I rest his friend in Chris^^ I. E.

FINIS.
Errata.
PAge 6. l. 4. for concerning 1. considering. and p. 8. l. 19. r. Psalm. 5.9 10.
p. 14. l. 20. 1. Psalm. 114.5. p. 26. l. 3. for words r. work^s. and l. 6. r.
Revel. 2.26.27. p. 28. l. 5. for workers r. works. p. 28. l. 24. for curses r.
the ^urse. p. 30. l. 1. r. shall be fare away.


