COOPERS HILL.

A Poem.

Printed in the Year M.DC.XLIII.

Coopers Hill.
SUre we have Poets, that did never dream
Upon Pernassus, nor did taste the stream
Of Helicon, and therefore I suppose
Those made not Poets, but the Poets those.
And as Courts make not Kings, but Kings the Court;
So where the Muses, and their Troops resort,
Pernassus stands; if I can be to thee
A Poet, thou Pernassus art to me.
Nor wonder, if (advantaged in my flight,
By taking wing from thy auspicious height)
Through untrac't ways, and airie paths I fly,
More boundless in my fancy, then my eye.
Exalted to this height, I first look down
On Paul's, as men from thence upon the town. Paul's.

Paul's, the late Theme of such a Muse, whose flight Mr Waller.

Has bravely reached and soared above thy height:
Now shall thou stand, though Time, or Sword, or Fire,
Or Zeal (more fierce then they) thy fall conspire,
Secure, while thee the best of Poets sings,
Preserved from ruin by the best of Kings.
As those who raised in body, or in thought
Above the Earth, or the Aires middle Vault,
Behold how winds, and storms, and Meteors grow.
How clouds condense to rain, congeale to snow,
And see the Thunder formed, before it tear
The air, secure from danger and from fear;
So raised above the tumult and the crowd
I see the City in a thicker cloud London.

Of business, then of smoke; where men like Ants
Toil to prevent imaginary wants;
Yet all in vain, increasing with their store,
Their vast desires, but make their wants the more.
As food to unsound bodies, though it please
The Appetite, feeds only the disease;
Where with like haste, though several ways they run:
Some to undo, and some to be undone:
While Luxury, and wealth, like War and Peace,
Are each the others ruin, and increase,
As Rivers lost in Seas some secret vein
Thence reconveies, there to be lost again.
Some study plots, and some those plots t'undoe,
Others to make 'em, and undo 'em too,
False to their hopes, afraid to be secure,
Those mischiefs only which they make, endure,
Blinded with light, and sick of being well,
In tumults seek their peace, their heaven in hell.
Oh happiness of sweet retired content!
To be at once secure, and innocent.
Windsor the next (where Mars with Venus dwells,
Beauty with strength) above the valley swells
Into my eye, as the late married Dame,
(Who proud, yet seems to make that pride her shame)
When Nature quickens in her pregnant womb
Her wishes past, and now her hopes to come:
With such an easy, and unforced Ascent,
Windsor her gentle bosom does present:
Where no stupendous Cliffe, no threatening heights
Access deny, no horrid steep aftrights,
But such a Rise, as does at once invite
A pleasure, and a reverence from the sight.
Thy Masters Emblem, in whose face I saw
A friend-like sweetness, and a King-like aw;
Where Majesty and love so mixed appear,
Both gently kind, both royally severe.
So Windsor, humble in it self, seems proud
To be the Base of that Majesticke load.
Than which no hill a nobler burden bears,
But Atlas only, that supports the spheres.
Nature this mount so fitly did advance,
We might conclude, that nothing is by chance,
So placed, as if she did on purpose raise
The Hill, to rob the builder of his praise;
For none commends his judgment, that does choose
That which a blind man only could refuse;
Such are the Towers which th'hoary Temples graced
Of Cibele, when all her heavenly race The Mother of the gods.

Do homage to her, yet she cannot boast
Amongst that Numerous, and Celestial host
More Heroes, then can Windsore, nor does Fames
Immortal book record more noble Names.
Not to look back so far, to whom this I Will
Must owe the glory of so brave a Pile;
Whether to Caesar, Albanact, or Brute,
The British Arthur, or the Danish Knute,
(Though this of old no less contest did move,
Then when for Homers birth seven Cities strove)
(Like him in birth, thou should be like in Fame,
As thine his fate, if mine had been his Flame.)
But whoso'ere it was, Nature designed
First a brave place, and then as brave a mind;
Nor to recount those several Kings, to whom
It gave a Cradle, or to whom a Tomb;
But thee (great Edward) and thy greater son,
He that the Lillies wore, and he that won, Edward the third, and the black
Prince.

And thy Bellona, who deserves her share
In all thy glories; Of that royal pair
Which waited on thy triumph, she brought one, Queen Philip.

Thy son the other brought, and she that son;
Nor of less hopes could her great off spring prove, The Kings of France and
Scotland.

A Royal Eagle cannot breed a Dove.
Then did thou found that Order: whether love
Or victory thy Royal thoughts did move, The Garter.

Each was a Noble cause, nor was it less
In The institution, then the great success,
Whilst every part conspires to give it grace,
The King, the Cause, the Patron, and the place,
Which foreign Kings, and Emperors esteem
The second honor to their Diadem.
Had thy great destiny but given thee skill
To know as well, as power to act her will,
That from those Kings, who then thy captives were,
In aftertimes should spring a Royal pair,
Who should possess all that thy mighty power,
Or thy desires more mighty did devour;
To whom their better fate reserves what ere
The Victor hopes for, or the vanquished fear;
That blood, which thou, and thy great Grandsire shed,
And all that since these sister Nations bled,
Had been unspilt, had happy Edward known
That all the blood he spilt, had been his own;
Thou had extended through the conquered East,
Thine and the Christian name, and made them blessed
To serve thee, while that loss this gain would bring,
Christ for their God, and Edward for their King;
When thou that Saint thy Patron did design, St George.

In whom the Martyr, and the Soldier join;
And when thou did within the Azure round
(Who evil thinks may evil him confound)
The English Arms encircle, thou did seem
But to foretell, and Prophecy of him,
Who has within that Azure round confined
These Realms, which Nature for their bound designed.
That bound which to the worlds extremest ends,
Endless her self, her liquid arms extends;
In whose Heroicke face I see the Saint
Better expressed, then in the liveliest paint;
That fortitude which made him famous here,
That heavenly piety, which Saint's him there,
Who when this Order he forsakes, may he
Companion of that sacred Order be.
Here could I fix my wonder, but our eyes,
Nice as our tastes, affect varieties;
And though one please him most, the hungry guest
Tastes every dish, and runs through all the feast;
So having tasted Windsor, casting round
My wandering eye, an emulous Hill does bound St Annes Hill

My more contracted sight, whose top of late
A Chapel crowned, till in the common fate Chertsey Abbey.

The neighboring Abbey fell, (may no such storm
Fall on our times, where ruin must reform.)
Tell me (my Muse) what monstrous dire offense,
What crime could any Christian King incense
To such a rage? was it Luxury, or Lust?
Was he so temperate, so chaste, so just?
Were these their crimes? they were his own, much more.
But they (alas) were rich, and he was poor;
And having spent the treasures of his Crown,
Condemns their Luxury, to feed his own;
And yet this act, to varnish over the shame
Of sacrilege, must bear devotions name;
And he might think it just, the cause, and time
Considered well; for none commits a crime,
Appearing such, but as it is understood,
A real, or at least a seeming good.
While for the Church his learned Pen disputes,
His much more learned sword his Pen confutes;
Thus to the Ages past he makes amends,
Their charity destroys, their faith defends.
Then did Religion in a lazy Cell,
In empty, ayrie contemplations dwell;
And like the block unmoved lay, but ours
As much too active like the Storke devours.
Is there no temperate Region can be known,
Betwixt their frigid, and our Torrid Zone?
Could we not wake from that Lethargicke dream,
But to be restless in a worse extreme?
And for that Lethargy was there no cure,
But to be cast into a Calenture?
Can knowledge have no bound, but must advance
So far, to make us wish for ignorance?
And rather in the dark to grope our way,
Then led by a false guide to err by day?
Parting from thence 'twixt anger, shame, and fear
Those for what is past, and this for what is too near:
My eye descending from the Hill survaies
Where Thames amongst the wanton valleys strayes;
Thames the most loved of all the Oceans sons,
By his old sire to his embraces runs,
Hasting to pay his tribute to the Sea,
Like mortal life to meet Eternity:
And though his clearer sand no golden veins,
Like Tagus and Pactolus streams contains,
His genuine, and less guilty wealth t'explore,
Search not his bottom, but behold his shore;
Over which he kindly spreads his spacious wing,
And hatches plenty for the ensuing Spring,
Nor with a furious, and unruly wave,
Like profuse Kings, resumes the wealth he gave:
No unexpected Inundations spoil
The Mowers hopes, nor mock the Plough-mans toil:
Then like a Lover he forsakes his shores,
Whose stay with jealous eyes his spouse implores,
Till with a parting kiss he saves her tears,
And promising return, secures her fears;
As a wise King first settles fruitful peace
In his own Realms, and with their rich increase
Seeks war abroad, and then in triumph brings
The spoils of Kingdoms, and the Crowns of Kings:
So Thames to London does at sirst present
Those tributes, which the neighboring countriss sent;
But at his second visit from the East,
Spices he brings, and treasures from the West;
Finds wealth where it is, and gives it where it wants,
Cities in Deserts, woods in Cities plants,
Rounds the whole Globe, and with his flying towers
Brings home to us, and makes both Indies ours:
So that to us no thing, no place is strange
Whilst thy fair bosom is the worlds Exchange:
O could my verse freely and smoothly slow,
As thy pure slood, heaven should no longer know
Her old Eridanus, thy purer stream
Should bathe the gods, and be the Poets Theme.
Here Nature, whether more intent to please The Forest.

Us or her self with strange varieties,
(For things of wonder more, no less delight
To the wise makers, then beholders sight.
Though these delights from several causes move,
For so our Children, thus our friends we love.)
Wisely she knew the harmony of things,
As Well as that of sounds, srom discords springs;
Such was the discord, which did first disperse
Form, order, beauty through the universe;
While dryness moisture, coldness heat resists,
All that we have, and that we are subsists:
While the steep horrid roughness of the wood
Strives with the gentle calmnesse of the slood.
Such huge extremes when Nature does unite,
Wonder from thence results, from thence delight;
The stream is so transparent, pure, and clear,
That had the selfe-enamour'd youth gazed here, Narcissus.

So fatally deceived he had not been,
While he the bottom, not his face had seen.
And such the roughness of the Hill, on which
Dyana' her royles, and Mars his tents might pitch.
And as our surly supercilious Lords,
Big in their frowns, and haughty in their words,
Look down on those, whose humble fruitful pain
Their proud, and barren greatness must sustain:
So looks the Hillupon the stream, between
There lies a spacious, and a fertile Green; Egham Meade.

Where from the woods, the Dryades often meet
The Nayades, and with their nimble feet
Soft dances lead, although their airie shap
All but a quick Poeticke sight escape;
There Faunus and Sylvanus keep their Courts,
And thither all the horrid host resorts,
(When like the Elixar, with his evening beams,
The Sun has turned to gold the silver streams)
To graze the ranker Meade, that noble Herd,
On whose sublime, and shady fronts is reared
Natures great Master-peice, to show how soon
Great things are made, but sooner much undone.
Here have I seen our Charles, when great affairs.
Give leave to slacken, and unbend his cares,
Chasing the royal Stagge; the gallant beast,
Rowz'd with the noise, 'twixt hope and fear distressed,
Resolv's it is better to avoid, then meet
His danger, trusting to his winged feet:
But when he sees the dogs, now by the view
Now by the scent his speed with speed pursue,
He tries his friends, amongst the lesser Herd,
Where he bur lately was obeyed, and feared,
Safety he seeks; the herd unkindly wise,
Or chases him from thence, or from him flies;
Like a declining Statesman, left forlorn
To his friends pity, and pursuers scorn;
Wearied, fora ken, and pursued, at last
All safety in despair of safery placed;
Courage he thence assumes, resolved to bear
All their assaults since it is in vain to fear;
But when he sees the eager chase renu'd,
Himself by dogs, the dogs by men pursued;
When neither speed, nor art, nor friends, nor force
Could help him, toward the stream he bends his course;
Hoping those lester beasts would not assay
An Element more merciless then they:
But fearlesse they pursue, nor can the sloud
Quench their dire thirst, (alas) they thirst for blood.
As some brave Hero, whom his baser foes
In troops surround, now these assail, now those,
Though prodigal of life, disdaines to die
By vulgar hands, but if he can descry
Some Nobler foe's approach, to him he calls
And begs his fate, and then contented falls:
So the tall Stagge, amids the lesser hounds
Repels their force, and wounds returns for wounds,
Till Charles from his unerring hand lets fly
A mortal shaft, then glad and proud to dye
By such a wound, he falls, the Crystal flood
Dying he dies, and purples with his blood:
This a more Innocent, and happy chase
Then when of old, but in the selfsame place,
Fair Liberty pursude, and meant a Prey Runny Meade where the great Charter
was first sealed.

To tyranny, here turned, and stood at bay.
When in that remedy all hope was placed,
Which was, or should have been at least, the last.
For armed subjects can have no pretense
Against their Princes, but their just defense;
And whether then, or no, I leave to them
To justify, who else themselves condemn.
Yet might the fact be just, if we may guess
The justness of an action from success, Magna Charta.

Here was that Charter sealed, wherein the Crown
All marks of Arbitrary power lays down:
Tyrant and Slave, those names of hate and fear,
The happier style of King and Subject bear:
Happy when both to the same Center move;
When Kings give liberty, and Subjects love.
Therefore not long in force this Charter stood
Wanting that seal, it must be sealed in blood.
The Subjects armed, the more their Princes gave,
But this advantage took, the more to crave:
Till Kings by giving, give themselves away,
And even that power, that should deny, betray,
"Who gives constrained, but his own fear reviles,
"Not thank't, but scorned, nor are they gifts, but spoils,
And they, whom no denial can withstand,
Seem but to ask, while they indeed command.
Thus all to limit Royalty conspire,
While each forgets to limit his desire.
Till Kings like old Antaeus by their fall,
Being forced, their courage from despair recall,
When a calm River raised with sudden raines,
Or Snowes dissolved o'reslowes th'adjoyning Plains,
The Husbandmen with high raised banks secure
Their greedy hopes, and this he can endure.
But if with Bogs, and Dammes they strive to force,
His channel to a new, or narrow course,
No longer then within his banks he dwells,
First to a Torrent, then a Deluge swells;
Stronger, and fiercer by restraint, he roares,
And knows no bound, but makes his powers his shores.
Thus Kings by grasping more then they can hold,
First made their Subjects by oppressions bold,
And popular sway by forcing Kings to give
More, then was fit for Subjects to receive,
Ran to the same extreme; and one excess
Made both, by stirring to be greater, less;
Nor any way, but seeking to have more,
Makes either loose, what each possessed before.
Therefore their boundless power let Princes draw
Within the Channel, and the shores of Law,
And may that Law, which teaches Kings to sway
Their Scepters, teach their Subjects to obey.
FINIS.

