DIRECTIONS TO A PAINTER.
By Sir JOHN DENHAM.
NAy Painter, if thou dare design that fight,
Which Waller only courage had to write,
If thy bold hands can without shaking draw
What even th'Actors trembled at when they saw,
Enough to make thy Colors change like theirs,
And all thy Pencils bristle like their Hairs.
First in fit distance of the prospect main,
Paint Allen tilting at the Coast of Spain;
Heroic act! and never heard till now!
Stemming of Herc'les pillars with the prow!
And how he left his Ships the Hills to waft,
And with new Sea-marks Cales and Dover graft.
Next let the flaming London come in view,
Like Nero's Rome, burnt to rebuild it new;
What less'r Sacrifice than this, was meet
To offer for the safety of the Fleet?
Blow one ship up, another thence will grow:
See what free Cities and wise Courts can do!
So some old Merchant, to insure his Name,
Marries afresh, and Courtiers share the Dame:
So whatsoever is broke, the Servants pay't,
And Glasses are more durable than Plate.
No May'r till now, so rich a Pageant faign'd,
Not one Barge all the Compani^s contained.
Then Painter, draw Cerulean Coventry,
Keeper, or rather Chancelour of the Sea,
And more exactly to express his hue,
Use nothing but Vltra-Marinish Blew.
To pay his fees, the silver Trumpet spends,
And Boat-swains whistle, for his place depends.
Pilots in vain repeat their Compass over,
Until of him they learn that one point more.
The constant Magnet to the Pole does hold,
Steel to the Magnet, Coventry to Gold.
Muscovy sells us Pitch, and Hemp, and Tar;
Iron and Copper, Sweden; Munster, War;
Ashly, Prize; Warwick, Customs; Cart'ret, Pay;
But Coventry does sell the Fleet away.
Now let our Navy stretch its Canvas Wings,
Swollen like his purse, with Tacking like his strings,
By slow degrees of the increasing gale,
First under sail, and after under sale:
Then in kind visit unto Opdam's Gout,
Hedge the Dutch in, only to let them out.
So huntsmen fair unto the Hares give Law,
First find them, and then civilly withdraw.
That the blind Archer, when they take the Seas,
The Hambrough-Convoy may betray with ease.
So, that the fish may more securely b^^e,
The Angler baits the River over night.
But Painter, now prepare to enrich thy piece,
Pencil of Ermins, Oil of Ambergreece:
See where the Duchess with triumpha^t trail
Of numerous Coaches, Harwich does assail!
So the Land-Crabs, at Natures kindly call,
Down to engender to the Sea do crawl.
See then the Admiral with Navy whole,
To Harwich through the Ocean carry Co^l:
So Swallows buried in the Sea at Spring,
Return to Land with Summer in their Wing.
One thrifty Ferry-boat of Mother Pearl,
Sufficed, of old, the Citherean Girl;
Yet Navies are but proper^ies when here,
A small Sea-Mask, and built to court your Dear:
Three Goddesses in one, Pallas for ar^,
Venus for sport, but Juno in your heart.
O Duchess! if thy Nuptial pomp was mean,
It Is paid with intrest in thy Naval Scene.
Never did Roman Mark within the Nile,
So feast the fair Egyptian Crocodile;
Nor the Venetian Duke with such a state
The Adriatic marry, at that rate.
Now Painter, spare thy weaker Art; forbear
To draw her parting passions, and each tear;
For Love, alas! has but a short delight:
The Sea, the Dutch, the King, all call to fight.
She therefore the Dukes person recommends
To Brunker, Pen, and Coventry, ^e^ friends;
To Pen much, Brunker more, most Coventry:
For they she knew were all more fraid then he:
Of flying Fishes one had saved the Fin,
And hoped by this he through the air might spin*
The other thought he might avoid the Knell,
By the invention of the Diving Bell;
The ^^i^d had tried it, and affirmed a Cable
Coyl^ round about him, was impenitrable.
But the^e ^he Duke rejected, only chose
T^ keep far off; let others interpose.
Rupert, that knew no fear, but health did want,
Kept state suspended in a Chair volant;
All save his head shut in that wooden case,
He she^'d but like a broken Weather glass;
But armed with the whole Lion Cap-a-Chin,
Did represent the Hercules within.
Dear shall the Dutch his twinging anguish know*
And see what valor whet with pain can do.
Cursed in the ^e^n time be that treacherous Iael,
That through h^s princely Temples drove the Nail.
Rupert resolved to fight it like a Lion,
And Sandwich hoped to fight it like Arion;
He to prolong his Life in the dispute,
And charm the Holland Pirates, tuned his Lute,
Till some judicious Dolphin might approach,
And land him safe and sound as any Roach.
Now Painter, reassume thy Pencils care,
Thou have but skirmish'd yet, now fight prepare.
And draw the Battle terrible to show,
As the last Judgment was to Anneslow.
First let our Navy scour through silver froth,
The Oceans burden, and the Kingdoms both;
Wh^^e very bulk may represent its birth,
From Hide and Paston, burdens of the Earth;
H -- whose transcendent panch so swells of late,
That he the Rupture seems of Law and State;
Paston whose belly bears more Millions
Than Indian Carrocks, and cont^ins more tuns.
Let sh^als of Porpo^ses on every side
Wonder in swiming by our Oak^ out-vy'd;
And the Sea fowl all gaze, to behold a thing
So va^^, mo^e swift and strong than they of wing.
But with presaging George, yet keep in sight,
And follow for the Relics of a fight.
Then let the Dutch with well-dissembled fear,
Or bold despair, more than we wish, draw near:
At which our Gallants, to the Sea but tender,
And more to fight, their easy Stomachs render,
Wi^h breasts so panting, that at every st^oke
You might have felt their hearts b^a^ through the Oak:
Wh^^e one concerned in the Interval
Of straining choler, thus did vent his Gall:
Noah be damned! and all his Race accursed,
Who in Sea brine did pickle Timber first!
What though he planted Vines, he Pines cut down,
He taught us how to drink, and how to drown:
He first built Ships, and in his Wooden Wall,
Saving but eight, ever since endangered all.
And thou Dutch Necromantick Friar, be damned,
And in thine own first Mortar-piece be ram'd!
Who first invented Canon in thy Cell,
Nitre from Earth, and Brimstone fetch from Hell.
But damnd and treble d^mnd be Clarendine,
Our seventh Edward, with all his House and Line!
Who to divert the danger of the War
With Bristol, ^ounds us on the Hollander:
Fool-coated Gownman! sells, to fight with Hance,
Dunkirk; dismantling Scotland, quarrels France:
And hopes he now has business shaped, and power
TO out-last our Lives or his, and escape the Tower;
And that he yet may see, ere he go down,
His dear Clarinda circled in a Crown.
By this time both the Fleets in reach dispute,
And each the other mortally salute:
Draw pensive Neptune biting of his Thumbs,
To think himself a Slave, whoever o'ercomes.
The frighted Nymphs retreating to their Rocks.
Beating their blew Breasts, tearing their gr^en Locks.
Paint Echo slain, only the alternate sound
From the repeating Cannon does rebound.
Opdam ^ails placed on his Naval Throne,
Assuming Courage greater than his own;
Makes to the Duke, and threatens him from far,
To nail him to his Boards, like a Petar;
But in the vain attempt, took fire too soon,
And flies up in his ship to catch the Moon.
Mounsieurs like Rockets mount aloft, and crack
In thousand sparks, then dancingly fal^ back.
Yet ere this happened, Destiny allowed
Him his revenge, to make his death more proud;
A fatal Bullet from his side did range,
And battered Lawson: Oh too dear exchange!
He led our Fleet that day too short a space,
But lost his knee; since died in Glory's Race:
Lawson! whose Valor beyond Fate did go,
And still fights Opdam in the L^ke below.
The Duke himself, tho Pe^ did not forget,
Yet was not out of dangers random set.
Falmouth was there, I know not what to act;
Some say 'twas to grow Duke too, any contract:
An untaught Bullet in its wanton scope,
Dashes Him* all to pieces, and his Hope.
Such was his rise, such was his fall, unprais`d;
A chance-shot sooner took him than Chance raised:
His shattered Head the fearless Duke distains,
And gave the last first-proof that he had brains.
Bartlet had heard it soon, and thought not good
To venture more of Royal Harding`s Blood:
To be immortal he was not of age,
And did e^vn now the Indian Prize presage;
And judg`d it safe and decent, cost what cost,
To lose the day, since his dear Brother`s lost:
With his whole Squadron straight away he bore,
And like good Boy, promised to fight no more.
The Dutch Auranea careless, at us saild,
And promised to do what Opdam faild;
Smith to the Duke does intercept her way.
And cleaves there closer than a Remora:
The Captain wondered, and withal disdained,
So strongly by a thing so small, detain`d,
And in a raging brav'ry to him runs,
They stab their ships with one another Guns:
They fight so near, it seems to be on ground,
And even the Bullets meeting, Bullets wound.
The noise, the smoke, the fire, the sweat, the blood,
^s not to be expressed, nor nnderstood.
Each Captain from his quarter deck commands,
They wave their bright Swords glittering in their hands.
All Luxury of Wa^, all man can do
^n a Sea Fight, did pass between them two:
But one must conquer, whosoever fight,
Smith takes the Giant, and is made a Knight.
Marlbrough that knew, and durst do more than all,
F^lls undistinguisht by an Iron-Ball:
Dear Lord! but born under a Star ingrate!
No Soul more clear, nor no more gloomy fate!
Who would set up Wars Trade that means to thrive?
Death picks the Valiant out, Cowards survive:
What the Brave merit, the Impudent do vaunt,
And none's rewarded but the Sycophant:
Hence all his Life he against Fortune fenc`d,
Or not well known, or not well recompensed:
But envy not this pr^ise (...) his memory,
None mo^e prepared was, or less fit to die.
Rupert did others and himself excel;
Holms, Tydiman, Minus; bravely Sanson fell.
What others did, let one omitted, blame,
I shall record, whoever brings in his Name:
But unless after stories disagree,
Nine only came to fight, the rest to see.
Now all conspire unto the Dutchmens lo^s;
The wind, the fire, we, they themselves do cross.
When a sweet sleep began the Duke to drown,
And with ^oft Diadems his Temples crown:
And first He orders all the rest to watch,
And They the Foe, whilst He a Nap does catch:
But lo, Brunkar by a secre instinct,
Slept not, nor needed, he all day had winkt.
The Duke in bed, he then first draws his steel,
Whose virtue makes the misled Compass wheel.
So ere He waked* both Fleets were innocent:
And Brunkar Member is of Parliament.
And now, dear Painter, after pains, like those,
'Twere time that I and thou too do repose.
But all our Navy escaped so sound of Limb,
That a sho^t space serv`d to refresh and trim;
And a tame Fleet of theirs does Convoy want,
Laden with both the Indies, and Levant:
P^int but this one Scene more, the World`s our own,
And Halcyon Sandwich does command alone:
To Bergen we with confidence made haste,
And the secret spoils by hope already taste;
Though Clifford in the Character appear
Of Supra-Cargo to our Fleet and their*
Wearing a Signet ready to clap on,
And seiz all for his Master Arlington.
Ruyter whose little Squadron skim'd the Seas,
And wasted our remotest Coloneys;
With Ships all foul, returned upon our way;
Sandwich would not disperse, nor yet delay;
And therefore like Commander grave and wise,
To escape his sight and flight, shut both his Eyes,
And for more state and sureness, cutting true,
The left Eye closes, the right Mountague;
And even Clifford proferr'd in his zeal,
To make all safe, to apply to both his Seal.
Ulysses so, till Sirens he had past,
Would by his Mates be pinioned to the Ma^t.
Now can our Navy view the wished Port,
But there (to see the fortune!) was a Fort:
Sandwich would not be beaten, nor yet beat;
Fools only fight, the Prudent use to treat.
His Cousin Mountague by Court-disaster,
Dwindled into the wooden Horse`s Master,
To speak of peace seemed amongst all most proper,
Had Talbot then treated of naught but Copper:
O^ what are Forts, when void of Ammuition?
With friends or foes what would we more condition?
Yet we three days, till the Dutch furnished all,
Men, Powder, Money, Cannon, -- treat with Wall!
Then Tydiman, finding the Danes would not,
Sent in six Captains bravely to be shot.
And Mountague, though dressed like any Bride,
And aboard him too, yet was reached and died:
Sad was the chance, and yet a deeper care
Wrinkled his Membrains under forehead fair.
The Dutch Armado yet had the impudence
To put to Sea, to waft their Merchants thence;
For as if all their ships of Walnut were,
The more we beat them, still the more they bear.
But a good Pilot, and a favoring Wind,
Brings Sandwich back, and once again did blind.
Now gentle Painter, ere we leap on shore,
With thy last strokes ruffle a tempest over;
As if in our reproach, the Wind and Seas
Would undertake the Dutch, while we take ease:
The Seas the spoils within our Hatches throw,
The Winds both Flee^s into our Mouths do blow:
Strew all their Ships along the shore by ours,
As easily to be gather*d up as Flowers:
But Sandwich fears for Merchants to mistake
A Man of War, and among Flowers a Snake.
Two Indian ships pregnant with Eastern Pearl,
And Diamonds, sat the Officers and Earl:
Then warning of our Fleet, he it divides
Into the Ports, and so to Oxford rides.
Mean while the Dutch uniting, to our shames,
Ride all insulting over the Downs and Thames!
Now treating Sandwich seems the fittest choice
For Spain, there to condole, and to rejoice:
He meets the French; but to avoid all harms
Ships to ^he Groyn: Embassies bear no Arms:
There let him languish a long Quarantain,
And never to England come, till he be clean.
Thus having ^ought, we know not why as yet,
We Have done we know not what, nor what we get:
If to espouse the Ocean all this pains;
Princes unite, and do forbid the Bains:
If to discharge Phanaticks, this makes more;
For all Phanaticks are, when they are poor:
Or if the House of Commons to repay,
Their Prize-Commissions are transferred away:
But for triumphant Check-stones if, and shell
For Duchess Closet, 't has succeeded well.
If to make Parliaments as odious pass,
Or to reserve a standing force, alas!
Or if, as just, ORANGE to re-instate,
Instead of that, he is regenerate:
And with four Millions vainly given as spent,
And with five Millions more of detriment,
Our sum amounts yet only to have won
A bastard Orange for Pimp Arlington.
Now may Historians argue con and pro;
Denham says thus; though always Waller so:
And he good Man, in his long sheet and staff,
This penance did for Cromwels Epitaph:
And his next Theme must be of the Dukes Mistress,
Advice to draw Madam l' Edificatress.
Henceforth, O Gemini! two Dukes Command,
Castor and Pollux, Aumarle and Cumberland.
Since in one ship, it had been fit they would went
In Petty's Double-Keel'd Experiment.
TO THE KING.
By Sir JOHN DENHAM.
IMperial Prince! King of the Seas and Isles!
Dear Object of our Joy, and Heavens smiles!
What boots it that thy Light does gild our days,
And we lie basking in thy milder Rays;
While swarms of Insects, from thy warmth begun,
Our Land devour, and intercept our Sun?
Thou, like Jove's Minos, rul'st a greater Creet;
And for its hundred Cities, count'st thy Fleet.
Why will thou that state- Daedalus allow,
Who builds the Bull, a Labrinth and a Cow?
If thou art Minos, be a Judge severe,
And in's own Maze confine the Engineer*
O may our Sun, since he too nigh presumes,
Melt the soft Wax wherewith he imps his plumes!
And may he falling leave his hated Name
Unto those Seas his War has set on flame
From that Inchanter having cleared thine Eyes,
Thy native sight will pierce within the Skies,
And view those Kingdoms calm with Joy and Light,
Where Is Universal Triumph, but no Fight.
Since both from Heaven thy Race and Power descend,
Rule by its pattern there to reascend.
Let Justice only awe, and Battle cease:
Kings are but Cards in War, they are Gods in Peace*
DIRECTIONS TO A PAINTER.
By Sir JOHN DENHAM.
SAndwich in Spain now, and the Duke in love,
Let Us with new Generals a new Painter prove:
Lilly's a Dutchman, danger's in his Art,
His Pencils may Intelligence impart.
Thou Gibson, that amongst the Navy small
Of Muscle-shells, command Admiral,
Thy self so slender, that thou show no more
Than Barnacle new hatched of them before:
Come mix thy Watercolors, and express,
Drawing in little, what we yet do less.
First paint me George and Rupert rattling far
Both in one Box, like the two Dice of War;
And let the terror of their linked Name,
Fly through the Air like Chain-shot, tearing Fame:
Jove in one Cloud did scarcely ever wrap
Lightning so fierce, but never such a clap.
United Generals sure are the only spell
Wherewith United Provinces to quell:
Alas, even they, though shell'd in treble Oak,
Will prove an Addle Egg, with double Yolk.
And therefor next uncouple either Hound,
And loo them at two Hares ere one be found:
Rupert to Beaufort; halloo! ah there Rupert:
Like the fantastic hunting of St. Hubert,
When he with airy Hounds, and Horn of Air,
Pursues by Fountain-bleau the witchy Hare.
Deep providence of State! that could so soon
Fight Beaufort here, ere he had quit Taloon.
So have I seen, ere Humane Quarrels rise,
Fore-boding Meteors combat in the Skies.
But let the Prince to fight with Rumor go,
The General meets a more substantial Foe:
Ruyter he spies, and full of youthful heat*
Though half their number, thinks the odds too great.
The Fowler watching so his watery spot,
And more the Fowl, hopes for the better shot.
Though such a Limb was from his Navy torn,
He found no weakness yet, like Sampson shorn;
But swollen with sense of former Glory won,
Thought Monk must be by Albemarle outdone:
Little he knew with the same Armand Sword,
How far the Gentleman out-cuts the Lord.
Ruyter, inferior unto none for Heart,
Superior now in Number and in Art;
Asked if He thought, as once our Rebel-Nation,
To co^quer Theirs too, with a Declaration
And threatens, though he now so proudly sail,
He shall tread back his Iter Boreale:
This said, he the short period, ere it ends,
With Iron-Words from Brazen-Mouths extends:
Monk yet prevents him, ere the Navies meet,
And charges in himself alone a Fleet;
And with so quick and frequent motion wound
His murdering sides about, the Ship seemed round;
And the Exchanges of his Circling Tire,
Like whirling Hoops, showed of triumphant Fire.
Single He does at their whole Navy aim,
And shoots them through a Porcupine of Flame.
In noise so regular his Cannons met,
You Would think that Thunder was to Music set:
Ah had the rest but kept a time as true,
What Age could such a Martial Consort show!
The listening Air unto the distant shore,
Through secret Pipes conveys the tuned rore;
Till as the Eccho's, vanishing, abate,
Men feel a dead sound like the pulse of State.
If Fate expire, let Monk her place supply,
His Guns determine who shall live or dye.
But Victory does always hate a Rant;
Valor's her Brave, but Skill is her Gallant:
Ruyter no less with virtuous Envy burns,
And Prodigies for Miracles returns:
Yet he observed how still his Iron-Balls
Recoy^d in vain against our Oaken-Walls;
How the hard Pelle^s fell away as dead,
By our enchanted Timber fillipped.
Leave then, said he, the invulnerable Keel,
We Will find they'^e feeble, like Achilles Heel:
He quickly taught, pours in continual Clouds
Of chained Dilemma's through our sinew'd Shrouds,
Forests of Masts fall with their rude embrace,
Our stiff Sails masht, and netted into Lace;
Till our whole Navy lay their wanton mark,
Nor any ship could sail but as the Ark.
Shot in the wing, so at the Powder's call,
The disappointed Bird does fluttering fall.
Yet Monk disabled, still such courage shows,
That none into his mortal gripe dare close:
So an old Bustard, maimed yet loath to yield*
Duels the Fowler in New Market field.
But since he found it was in vain to fight,
He imps his plumes the best he can for flight.
This, Painter, were a Noble Task to tell,
What indignation his Great Breast did swell!
Not Virtuous Men unworthily abused,
Not Constant Lover without cause refused,
Not honest Merchant broke, nor skilful Player
H^st off the Stage, nor Sinners in despair;
Not Parents mocked, not Favorites disgrac^d,
Not Rump by Monk or Oliver displaced,
Not Kings deposed, nor Prelates ere they die,
Feel half the Rage of Generals when they Fly.
Ah rather than transmit th'story to Fame,
Draw Curtains, Gentle Artist, over the shame:
Cashier the memory of Dutell, raised up
To taste, instead of Death, his Highness Cup:
And if the thing were true, yet paint it not,
How Bartlet, as he long deserved, was shot;
Though others, that surveyed the Corpse so clear,
Said he was only petrifi'd for fear:
If so, th`hard Statue Mummi`d without Gum,
Might the Dutch Balm have spar`d, and English Tomb.
Yet if thou will, paint MINNS turn`d all to Soul,
And the Great HARMAN charkt almost to Coal;
And IORDAIN old, worthy thy Pencils pain,
Who all the while held up the Ducal Train:
But in a dark Cloud cover Askew, when
He quit the Prince to embarque in Loeustein;
And wounded Ships, which we immortal boast,
Now first led cap^ive to an Hostile Coast.
But most with story of his Hand and Thumb*
Conceal (as Honor would) his Grace's Bum,
When the rude Bullet a large Collop tore
Out of that Buttock never turned before:
Fortune (it seems) would give him by that Lash,
Gentle correction for his fight so rash.
But should the Rump perceive't, they would say that Mars
Had now revenged them upon Aumarle's Arse.
The long disaster better over to vail,
Paint only Jonas three days in the Whale;
For no less time did conquering Ruyter chaw
Our flying General in his spungy Jaw.
Then draw the youthful Perseus all in haste,
From a Sea-Be^st to free the Virgin chaste;
But neither riding Pegasus for speed,
Nor with the Gorgon shielded at his need:
So Rupert the Sea-Dragon did invade,
But to save George himself, and not the Maid;
And though arriving late, he quickly mist
Even Sails to fly, unable to resist.
Not Greenland Seamen that survive the fright
Of the cold Chaos, and half eternal Night,
So gladly the returning Sun adore,
Or run to spy the next years Fleet from shore,
Hoping yet once within the Oily side
Of the fat Whale, again their Spears to hide:
As our glad Fleet, with universal shout,
Salute the Prince, and wish the second bout.
Nor Winds, long prisoners in Earth's hollow vault,
The fallow Seas so eagerly assault;
As fiery RVPERT, with revengeful Joy,
Does on the Dutch his hungry Courage cloy;
But soon Unrigg'd, lay like an useless Board;
(As wounded in the Wrist, Men drop their Sword.)
When a propitious Cloud between us stepped,
And in our aid did RVYTER intercept.
Old Homer yet did never introduce,
To save his Herce^, Mists of better use.
Worship the Sun, who dwell where he does rise;
This Mist does more deserve our Sacrifice.
Now joyful Fires, and the exalted Bell,
And Court-Gazzets, our empty Triumphs tell!
Alas! the time draws near, when overturned,
The lying Bells shall through the Tongues be burned;
Paper shall want to print that Lie of State,
And our false Fires, true Fires shall expiate.
Stay Painter, here a while, and I will stay;
Nor vex the future Times with my survey:
See not the Monky Duchess all undrest?
Paint thou but her, and she will paint the rest.
This sad Tale found her in her outward Room,
Nailing up Hangings not of Persian Loom:
L^ke chaste Penelope that never did rome*
But made all fine against her GEORGE came home.
Upon a Ladde^, in her Coat, much shorter,
She stood, with Groom and Coachman for Supporter;
And careless what they saw, or what they thought,
With Honi Pense full honestly she wronght:
One Te^ter drove, to lose no time nor place,
A once the Ladder they remove, and Grace.
Whilst thus they her translate from North to East,
In posture just of a four-footed Beast*
She heard the News: but altered yet no more,
Than that which was behind, she turned before;
Nor would come down, but with an Handkercher,
Which pocket soul did to her Neck prefer,
She shed no tears, for she was too viraginous,
But only snuffling her Trunk Cartilaginous,
From scaling Ladder she began a story,
Worthy to be had in Memento Mori;
Arraigning past, and present, and futuri,
With a Prophetic, if not Fiendly Fury:
Her Hair began to creep, her Belly sound,
Her Eyes to sparkle, and her Udder bound;
Half VVitch, half Prophet; thus the Albemarle,
Like Presbyterian Sybil, 'gan to snarl:
Traitors both to my Lord, and to the King*
Nay now it is beyond all suffering!
One valiant Man by Land, and he must be
Commanded out to stop their leaks at Sea:
Yet send him Rupert, as an Helper meet;
First the Command dividing, then the Fleet:
One may if they be beat, or both be hit,
Or if they overcome, yet Honors split:
But reckoning GEORGE already knocked in the head,
They cut him out like Bief, ere he be dead:
Each for a Quarter hopes; the first does skip,
But shall fall short though, at the Gen^rals^hip:
Next they for Master of the Horse agree;
A third the Cockpit begs; not any Me:
But they shall know, ay marry shall they do,
That who the Cockpit has, shall have Me too.
I told George first, as Calamy told me,
If the King brought these over, how it would be:
Men that there pick his pocket to his face,
And sell Intelligence to buy a place.
That their Relig`on`s pawn`d for Clothes; nor care,
It Is run so long now, to redeem`t, nor dare.
O what egreg`ous Loyalty to cheat!
O what Fidelity it was to eat!
Whilst Langdales, Hoptons, Glenhams ^tarv`d abroad
And here true Roy`lists sink beneath their load.
Men that did there affront, defame, betray
The King, and so do here; now who but they!
What! say I Men! nay rather Monsters; Men
Only in Bed, nor to my knowledge then.
See how they home return`d in Revel Rout,
With the small manners that they first went out:
Not better grown, nor wiser all the while,
Renew the causes of their first Exile:
As if, to show the Fool what `tis I mean,
I chose a foul Smock, when I might have clean*
First they for fear disband the Army tame,
And leave Good George a Gen`rals empty Name:
Then Bishops must revive, and all unfix
With Discontents, to content Twenty Six:
The Lords House drains the Houses of the Lord,
For Bishops Voices silencing the Word:
O Barthol^mew! Saint of their Calendar!
What`s worse, th` Ejection, or the Massacre?
Then Culpepper, Gloucester, and th` Princess dy`d;
Nothing can live that interupts an Hide.
O more than humane GLOUCESTER! Fate did show
Thee but to Earth, and back again withdrew.
Then the fat Scrivener does begin to think
^Twas time to mix the Royal Blood with Ink.
Barkley that swore as often as he had Toes,
Does kneeling now her Chastity depose;
^ust as the first French Card`nal could restore
Maidenhead to his Widow, Niece, and Whore.
For Portion, if she should prove light, when weigh`d,
Four Millions shall within three years be paid,
To raise it, we must have a Naval War,
As if `twere nothing but Tara -- Tan -- Tar:
Abroad all Princes disobliging first,
At home all Parties but the very worst.
To tell of Ireland, Scotland, Dunkirk, 's sad;
Or the Kings marr`age: but he thinks I`m mad:
And sweeter Creature never saw the Sun,
If we the King wish Monk, or Queen a Nun.
But a Dutch VVa^ shall all these Rumors still,
Bleed out these Humors, and our Purses fill;
Yet after four days Fight, they clearly saw
`Twas too much danger for a Son-in-Law:
Hire him to leave, for six score thousand pound:
So with the Kings Drums Men for sleep compound.
But modest Sandwich thought it might agree
With the State-Prudence, to do less than He:
And to excuse their timerousness and sloth,
They found how George might now be less than both
First Smith must for Legorn, with force enough
To venture back again, but not go through:
Beaufort is there, and to their dazzling Eyes
The distance more the Object magnifies;
Yet this they gain, that Smith his time should lose,
And for my Duke too, cannot interpose:
But fearing hat our Navy, George to break,
Might yet not be sufficiently weak;
The Secretary, that had never yet
Intelligence, but from his own Gazzet,
Discovers a great secret, fit to sell,
And pays himself for`t, ere he would it tell;
Beaufort is in the Channel; Hixy here!
^oxy Thoulou! Beaufort is ev`ry where.
Herewith assembling the supreme Divan,
Where enters none but Devil, NED, and NAN*
And upon this pretense they straight design`d
The Fleet to sep`rate, and the VVorl^ to blind:
Monk to the Dutch, and Rupert (here the VVench
Could not but smile) is destin`d to the French.
To write the Order, Bristol`s Clerk is chose,
One slit in`s Pen, the other in his Nose;
For he first brought the News, it is his place;
He`ll see the Fleet divided like his Face,
And through the cranny in his grisly part,
To the Dutch Chink Intelligence impart.
The Plot succeeds: the Dutch in haste prepar`d,
And poor Peel-Garlick George`s Arse they shar`d;
And then presuming of his certain wrack,
To help him late, they send for Rupert back.
Officious Will seem`d fittest, as afraid
Left George should look too far into his trade.
At the first draught they pause with Statesmens care,
They write it fou^, then copy it as fair;
And then compare them, when at last its sign`d,
Will soon his Purse-strings, but no Seal could find*
At night he sends it by the common Post,
To save the King of an Express the cost.
Lord, what ado to pack one Letter hence*
Some Patents pass with less circumference.
Well George, in spite of them thou safe do ride,
Lessen`d I hope in naught but thy backside;
For as to Reputation, this Retreat
Of thine exceeds their Victories so great:
Nor shall thou stir from thence, by my consent,
Till thou have made the Dutch and Them repent.
`Tis true, I want so long the Nuptial Gi^t,
But as I often have done, I`ll make a Shift;
Nor will I with vain pomp accost the shore,
To try thy valor at the Buoy i`th` Nore.
Fall to thy work there, George, as I do here;
Cherish the Valiant up, Cowards cashier:
See that the Men have Pay, and Bief, and Beer,
Find out the Cheats of the four Millioneer.
Out of the very Beer, they sell the Malt;
Powder of Powder, from powder`d Bief the Salt.
Put thy hand to the Tub; instead of Ox,
They victual with French Pork that has the Pox.
Never such Cotqueans by small Arts to wring,
Ne`er such ill Huswives in the managing!
Pursers at Sea know fewer Cheats than they,
Marr`ners on shore less madly spend their pay.
See that thou have new Sails thy self, and spoil
All their Sea-market, and their Cable-coyl.
Look that Good Chaplains on each ship do wait,
Nor the Sea-Diocess be impropriate:
Look to the sick and wounded Pris`ners; all
Is prize; they rob even the Hospital.
Recover back the Prizes too; in vain
We fight, if all be taken that is taken.
Now by our Coast the Dutchmen, like a Flight
Of feeding Ducks, ev`ning and morning light;
How our Land-Hectors, tremble, void of sense,
As if they came straight to transport them hence:
Some Sheep are stolen; the Kingdom`s all arraid,
And e`vn Presbyters now call`d out for aid.
They wish ev`n George divided to command,
One half of Him at Sea, th` other on Land.
(...) ^hat`s that I see! Ah `tis my George again!
(...) they in sev'n weeks have Rigg`d him then.
(...) curious Heav`ns with Lightning him surrounds*
(...) v^^w him, and his Name in Thunder sounds.
But with the same swift goes, Their Navy's near:
So ere we hunt, the Keeper shoots the Dee^*
Stay Heaven a while, and thou shall see him sail,
And George too, he can thunder, lighten, hail.
Happy the time that I ever wedded George,
The sword of England, and the Holland Scourge.
Avaunt Rotterdam-Dog, Ruyter avaunt,
Thou Water-Rat, thou Shark, thou Cormorant.
I Will teach thee to shoot Scissers: I Will repair
Each Rope thou losest, George, out of this Hair.
It Is strong and course enough; I Will hem this shift,
Ere thou shall lack a Sail, and lie adrift:
Bring home the old ones; I again will sew,
And darn them up, to be as good as new.
What twice disabled! Never such a thing!
Now Sovereign help him that brought in the King*
Guard thy Posteriors, George, ere all be gone;
Though Jur^-Masts, thou'st Jury-Buttocks none.
Courage! How bravely (whet with this disgrace)
He turns, and Bullets spits in Ruyters face!
They fly, they fly, their Fleet does now divide,
But they discard their Trump: our Trump is Hide.
Where are you now, De Ruyter, with your Bears?
See where your Merchants burn about your Ears.
Fire out the Wasps, George, from the hollow Trees,
Crammed with the Honey of our English Bees.
Ah now they are paid for Guinney: ere they steer
To the Gold Coast, they find it hotter here.
Turn all your ships to stoves ere you set forth,
To warm your Traffic in the frozen North.
Ah Sandwich! had thy Conduct been the same,
Bergen had seen a less but richer Flame;
Nor Ruyter lived new Battle to repea^,
And oftener beaten be, than we can beat.
Scarce had George leisure, after all his pain,
To tie his Bre^ches; Ruyter's out again:
Thr^^e in one year! Why sure this Man is wood^
B^a^ him like s^ock-^^sh, or he will never be good.
I see them both again prepare to try;
They first shoot through each other with the Eye.
Then -- But the Ruling Providence that must
With humane projects play, as wind with dust,
Raises a storm. So Constables a fray
Knock down; and send them both well cuff'd away.
Plant now New England Fir^ in English Oak,
Build your Ships Ribs proof to the Cannon-stroke:
To get a Fleet to Sea, exhaust the Land;
Let longing Princes pine for the Command:
Strong March-panes! Wafers light! so thin a puff
Of angry air can ruin all that Huff:
So Champions having shared the Lists and Sun,
The Judge throws down's Award, and they have done,
For shame come home, George; it is for thee too much
To fight at once with Heaven and the Dutch.
Woes me! what see I next! alas, the fate
I see of England, and its utmost date.
Those Flames of theirs at which we fondly smile,
Ki^dle like Torches our Sepulchral Pile.
War, Fire, and Plague against us all conspire;
We the War, God the Plague, who raised the Fire?
See how Men all like Ghosts, while London burns,
W^nder, and each over his Ashes mourns!
Cursed be the Man that first begat this War,
(...) ill hour, under a Blazing Star.
^o^ Others sport two Nations fight a Prize;
Between them both, Religion wounded dies.
So of first Troy, the angry Gods unpaid,
Razed the Foundations which themselves had laid.
Welcome, though late, dear George: here had thou bin,
We'd escaped: (let Rupert bring the Navy in.)
Thou still must help them out, when in the mire;
General at Land, at Plague, at Sea, at Fire.
Now thou art gone, see Beaufort dares approach,
And our Fleets angling, as to catch a Roach.
Gibson farewell, till next we put to Sea:
Truth is, thou`st drawn her in Effigy.
TO THE KING.
By Sir JOHN DENHAM.
GReat Prince! and so much Greater as more Wise;
Sweet as our Life, and dearer than our Eyes:
What Servants will conceal, and Councels spare
To tell, the Painter and the Poet dare.
And the assistance of an heavenly Muse
And Pencil, represent the Crimes abstruse.
Here needs no Fleet, no Sword, no foreign Foe;
Only let Vice be damned, and Justice flow.
Shake but, like Jove, thy Locks divine, and frown,
Thy Scepter will suffice to guard thy Crown.
Hark to Cassandra's Song, ere Fate destroy
By thine own Navy's wooden Horse, thy Troy.
As our Apollo, from the Tumults wave,
And gentle Calms, though but in Oars, will save.
So Philomel her sad Embroidery strung,
And vocal Silks tuned with her Needles Tongue.
The Pictures dumb in Colors loud reveald
The Tragedies of Courts so long conceald;
But when restored to voice enclosed with wings
To Woods and Groves what once the Painter sings.
DIRECTIONS TO A PAINTER.
By Sir JOHN DENHAM.
DRaw England ruined by what was given before,
Then draw the Commons slow in giving more:
Too late grown wiser, they their treasure see
Consumed by fraud, or lost by treachery;
And vainly now would some account receive
Of those vast sums which they so idly gave,
And trusted to the management of such
As Dunkirk sold, to make War with the Dutch;
Dunkirk, de^ign'd once to a Nobler Use,
Than to erect a party Lawyers House.
But what account could they from t^ose expect,
Who (...) grow rich themselves, the State neglect:
Men who in England have no other Lot,
Than what they by betraying it have got;
Who can pretend to nothing but Disgrace,
Where either Birth or Merit find a place.
Plague, Fire and War, have been the Nations curse,
But to have these our Rulers, is a worse:
Yet draw these Ca^sers of the Kingdoms woe,
Still urging dangers from our growing Foe,
Asking new Aid for War with the same face,
As if, when given, they meant not to make Peace.
Mean while they cheat the Public with such haste,
They will have nothing that may ease it, past.
The Law against Irish Cattle they condemn,
As showing distrust o'th King, that is, of them.
Yet they must now swallow this bitter P^ll,
Or Money want, which were the greater ill.
And then the King to Westminster is brought,
Imperfectly to speak the Chanc'lors thought;
In which, as if no Age could parallel
A Prince and Council that had ruled so well,
He tells the Parliament He cannot brook
What ^re in them like Jealousy does look:
Adds, That no Grieva^ces the Nation load,
While we are undone at home, despised abroad.
Thus past the Irish, wi^h the Money-Bill,
The first not half to good, as the other ill.
With these new Millions might we not expect
Our Foes to vanquish, or our selves protect,
If not to beat them off usurped Seas,
At least to force an honorable Peace?
But though the angry fa^e, or folly rather,
Of our pe^verted State, al^ew us ^ei^her;
Could we hope less than to defend our Shores,
Than guard our Harbors, Forts, our Ships and Stores?
We hoped in vain: Of these, remaining are,
Not what we saved, but what the Dutch did spare.
Such was our Rulers generous stratagem;
A policy worthy of none but them.
After two Millions more laid on the Nation,
The Parliament grows ripe for Prorogation:
They rise, and now a Treaty is confessed,
Against which before these State-Cheats did protest:
A Treaty which too well makes it appear,
Theirs* not the Kingdom's Intrest, is their care.
(...)tatesmen of old, thought Arms the way to Peace;
(...) threadbare Policies as these:
(...) for the State's defense,
They (...) too little for their own expense:
Or if (...) they any thing can spare,
It is to bu^ Peace, not maintain a War*
For which gre^^ work Ambassadors must go
With b^re submissions to our arming foe:
Thus leaving a defenceles^ State behind,
Vast (...) preparing by the Belgians find;
Against whose (...) what can us defend,
Whilst our great (...) here depend
Upon the Dutch good Nature: For when Peace
(Say they) is making* Acts of War must cease.
Thus were we by the name of Truce betrayed,
Though by the Dutch nothing like it was made.
Here, P^inter, let thine Art describe a story
Shaming our warlike Islands ^ntient Glory:
A scene which never on our Seas appeared,
Since o^r first ships were on the Ocean steerd;
Make the Du^ch Fleet, while we supinely sleep,
VVi^hout Opposers, Masters of the Deep:
Make them securely the Thames mouth invade,
At once depriving us of that and Trade:
Draw Thunder from their floating Castles, sent
Against our Forts, weak as our Government:
Draw Wollage, Deptford, London, and the Tower,
Meanly abandoned to a foreign Power.
Yet turn their first attempt another way,
And let their Cannons upon Sheerness play;
Which soon destroyed, their lofty Vessels ride
Big with the hope of the approaching Tide:
Make them more help from our Remisness find,
Than from the Tide, or from the Eastern wimd.
Their Canvas swelling with a prosperous gale,
Swift as our fears make them to Chattam sail:
Through our weak Chain their Fireships break their way,
And our Great Ships (unmanned) become their prey:
Then draw the fruit of our ill-manag`d cost,
At once our Honor and our Safety lost:
Bury those Bulwarks of our Isle in smoke,
While their thick flames the neighboring Country choke.
The Charles escapes the raging Element,
To be with triumph into Holland sent;
Where the glad People to the shore resort,
To see their Terror now become their Sport*
But Painter, fill not up thy Piece before
Thou paint'st Confusion on our troubled shore:
Instruct then thy bold Pencil to relate
The saddest Marks of an ill-govern'd State.
Draw the injured Seamen deaf to all command,
While some with horror and amazement stand:
Others will know no Enemy but they
Who have unjustly robbed them of their pay:
Boldly refusing to oppose a fire,
To kindle which our Errors did conspire:
Some (though but few) persuaded to obey,
Use^ess for want of ammunition stay:
The Forts designed to guard our ships of War,
Void both of Powder and of Bullets are:
And what past Reigns in peace did never omit,
The present (whilst invaded) does forget.
Surpassing Chattam, make Whitehall appear,
If not in danger, yet at least in fear.
Make our dejection (if thou can) seem more
Than our pride, sloth, and ignorance did before:
The King, of danger now shows far more fear,
Than he did ever to prevent it, care:
Yet to the City does himself convey,
Bravely to show he was not R^n away:
Whilst the Black Prince, and our Fifth Harry's Wars,
Are only acted on our Theaters:
Our Statesmen finding no expedient,
(If fear of danger) but a Parliament,
Twice would avoid, by clapping up a Peace;
The Cure's to them as bad as the Disease:
But Painter, end not, till it does appear
Which most, the Dutch or Parliament they fear.
As Nero once, with Harp in Hand, surveyed
His flaming Rome; and as that burnt, he played:
So our Great Prince, when the Dutch Fleet arrived,
Saw his ships burnt; and as they burnt, he --
DIRECTIONS TO A PAINTER.
By Sir JOHN DENHAM.
PAinter, Where wast thy former work did cease?
Oh `twas at Parliament, and the brave Peace!
Now for a Cornucopia: Peace all know
^rings Plenty with it: wish it be not Woe.
^raw Coats of Pageantry, and Proclamations
Of Peace, concluded with one, two, three Nations.
^anst thou not on the Change make Merchants grin
^ike outward smiles, whiles vexing thoughts within?
Thou art no Artist, if thou can not faign,
And counterfeit the counterfeit disdain.
Draw a brave Standard, rufling at a rate
Much other than it did for Chathams fate.
The Tow'r-Guns too, thundering their Joys, that they
Have escaped the danger of b^ing ta^en away:
These, as now mann`d, for triumphare, not fight:
As painted fire for show, not heat or light.
Amongst the Roar of these, and the mad shout
Of a poor nothing-understanding Rout,
That think the On-and-Off-Peace now is true,
Thou might`st draw Mourners for Black Bartholmew*
Mourners in Sion! Oh `tis not to be
Discover`d; draw a Curtain courteously
To hide them. Now proceed to draw at night
A Bonfire here and there; but none too bright,
Nor lasting: for `twas Brushwood, as they say,
Which they that hop`d for Coals now flung away*
But stay, I had forgot my Mother: Draw
The Church of England `mongst thy Opera,
To play their part too; or the Dutch will say
In War and Peace they`ve born the Bells away.
At this end then, two or three Steeples ringing,
At th` other end draw Quires, Te Deum singing;
Between them leave a space for Tears: Remember
That `tis not long to th` Second of September.
Now if thou skill`st prospective Landscape, draw
At distance what perhaps thine Eyes ne`er saw:
Poly^^on, Spicy Islands, Kits, or Guinney;
Syrrenam, Nova Scotia, or Virginia?
No, no, I mean not these; pray hold your laughter
These things are fa^ off, not worth looking after:
Give not a hint of these: Draw Highland, Lowland
Mountains and Flats: Draw Scotland first, the Holland.
See, can thou ken the Scots frowns? Then draw
That something had to get, but naught to lose.
Can thou through fogs discern the Dutchmen drink^ thos^*
Buss-Skippers, lately Capers, stamp to think
Their Catching-craft is over: some have ta`en,
To eke their War, a VVarrant from the Dane.
But passing these, their Statesmen view a while,
In ev*ry graver countenance a smile:
Copy the piece there done, wherein you will see
One laughing out, I told you how 't would be!
Draw next a pompous Interchange of Seals*
But curs`d be he that Articles reveals
Before he knows them: Now for this take light
From him that did describe Sir Edward's fight:
You may perhaps the truth on it doubt; what tho?
You Will have it then Cum Privilegio.
Then draw our Lords Commissioners advance,
Not homewards, but for Flanders, or for France*
There to parlier a while, until they see
How things in Parliament resented be.
So much for Peace. Now for a Parliament:
A petty Session draw: With what content,
Guess by their countenance who came up post,
And quickly saw they had their labor lost:
Like the small Merchants when they Bargains sell;
Come hither Jack: What say? Come kiss: farewell.
But `twas abortive, born before its day;
No wonder then it died so soon away.
Yet breathed it once, and that with such a force,
It blasted Thirty Thousand Foot and Horse.
As once Prometheus man did sneez so hard,
As routed all that new-raised standing Guard
Of Teeth, to keep the Tongue in order: So
Down fall our New Gallants without a Foe.
But if this little one could do so much,
What will the next? Give a Prophetic touch,
If thou know how; if not, leave a great space*
For great things to be pourtray`d in their place.
Now draw the shadow of a Parliament,
As if to scare the upper World `twere sent:
Cross your selves, Gentlemen, for shades will fright,
Especially if`t be an English Sprite:
^^ermilion this man's guilt, ceruse his fears;
Sink the others Eyes deep in his Head with cares:
Another thought some on Accounts, to see
How his Disbursements with Receipts agree.
Peep into Coaches, see Perriwigs neglected,
Crossed arms and legs of such as are suspected,
Or do suspect what is coming, and foresee
Themselves must share in this Polutrophy.
Painter, have traveled? Did thou e`er see Rome?
That fam*d piece there, Angelo's Day of Doom?
Horrors and anguish of Descenders there,
May teach thee how to paint Descenders here.
Can thou describe the empty shifts are made,
Like that which Dealers call, Forcing of Trade?
Some shift their Crimes, some Places; and among
The rest, some will their Countries too, ere long.
Draw in a corner Gamesters, shuffling, cutting,
Their little crafts, no wit, together putting:
How to pack Knaves `mongst Kings and Queens, to make
A saving Game, whilst Heads are at the stake:
But cross their Cards, until it be confessed,
Of all the play, fair dealing is the best.
Draw a Veil of Displeasure, one to Hide,
And some prepar`d to strike a blow on's side*
Let him that built high, now creep low to shelter,
When Potentares must tumble, Helter Skelter.
The Purse, Seal, Mace, are gone, as it was fit;
Such Marks as these could not choose but be hit:
The Purse, Seal, Mace, are gone; Bartholmew day,
Of all the days i`th`year, they are ta`en away.
The Purse, Seal, Mace are gone, but to another
Mitre; I wish not so, though to my Brother:
I care not for Translation to a See,
Unless they would translate to Italy.
Now draw a Sail playing before the wind,
From the North-West; that which it leaves behind,
Curses or outcries, mind them not, till when
They do appear Realities, and then
Spare not to paint them in their Colors, though
Crimes of a Viceroy: Deputies have so
Been serv`d ever now. But if the Man prove true,
Let him, with Pharaoh`s Butler, have his due.
Make the same wind blow strong against the shore
Of France, to hinder some from coming o`er
And rather draw the Golden Vessel burning,
Even there, then hither with her freight returning,
`Tis true the Noble Treasurer is gone:
Wise, faithful, loyal; some say th` only one:
Yet I will hope we have Pilots left behind
Can steer our Vessel without Southern VVind.
Women have grossly snar`d the wisest Prince
That ever was before, or has been since:
And Granham Athaliah in that Nation,
Was a great hinderer of Reformation.
Paint in a new Piece painted Iezabel;
Giv`t to adorn the Dining Room of Hell:
Hang by her others of the Gang; for more
Deserve a place with Rosamond, Jane Shore, etc.
Stay, Painter; now look here`s below a space,
I`th`bottom of all this, what shall we place?
Shall it be Pope, or Turk, or Prince, or Nun?
Let the Resolve write Nescio. So have done.
Expose thy Piece now to the world to see:
Perhaps they will say of It* of Thee, of Me,
Poems and Paints can speak sometimes Bold Truths,
Poets and Painters are Licentious Youths.
Quae sequuntur, in limine Thalami Regii, a nescio
quo nebulone scripta, reperibantur.
Bella fugis, Bellas sequeris, Belloque repugnas
Et Bellatori, sunt tibi Bella Thori
Imbelles Imbelliae amas, A^daxque videris
Mars ad opus Veneris, Martis ad Arma Venus.
Clarindon's HOUSE-WARMING.
WHen Clarindon had discern`d beforehand,
(As the Cause can eas`ly foretell the Effect)
At once three Deluges threatening our Land;
`Twas the season he thought to turn Architect.
Us Mars, and Apollo, and Vulcan consume;
While he the Betrayer of England and Flander,
Like the King-fisher chooses to build in the Broom,
And nestles in flames like the Salamander.
But observing that Mortals run often behind,
(So unreasonable are the rates they buy-at)
His Omnipotence therefore much rather designed
How he might create a House with a Fiat.
He had read of Rhodope, a Lady of Thrace,
Who was dig'd up so often ere she did marry;
And wished that his Daughter had had as much grace
To erect him a Pyramid out of her Quarry.
But then recollecting how the Harper Amphyon
Made Thebes dance aloft while he fidled and sung,
He thought (as an Instrument he was most free on)
To build with the Jews-trump of his own tongue.
Yet a President fitter in Virgil he found,
Of African Poultney, and Tyrian Did,
That he begged for a Palace so much of his ground,
As might carry the measure and name of an Hyde.
Thus daily his Gouty Inventions he pained,
And all for to save the expenses of Brickbat,
That Engine so fatal, which Denham had brained.
And too much resembled his Wives Chocolatte.
But while these devices he all does compare,
None sollid enough seemed for his strong Castor;
He himself would not dwell in a Castle of air,
Though he had built full many a one for his Master
Already he had got all our Money and Cattle,
To buy us for Slaves, and purchase our Lands;
What Joseph by Famine, he wrought by Sea-Battel
Nay scarce the Priests portion could escape from his hands.
And hence like Pharaoh that Israel pressed
To make Mortar and Brick, yet allowed them no straw,
He cared not though Egypt's Ten Plagues us distressed,
So he could to build but make Policy Law.
The Scotch Forts and Dunkirk, but that they were sold,
He would have ^emolisht to raise up his Walls;
Nay even from Tangier have sent back for the mold,
But that he had nearer the Stones of St. Paul's.
His Wood would come in at the easier rate,
So long as the Yards had a Deal or a Spar:
His Friend in the Navy would not be ingrate,
To grudge him some Timber who framed him the War,
To proceed in the Model he called in his Allons,
The two Allons when jovial, who ply him with gallons,
The two Allons who serve his blind Justice for balance,
The two Allons who serve his Injustice for Tallons.
They approve it thus far, and said it was fine;
Yet his Lordship to finish it would be unable;
Unless all abroad he divulged the de^ign,
For his House then would grow like a Vegetable.
His Rent would no more in arreas run to Worster;
He should dwell more noble, and cheap too athome,
While into a fabric the Presents would mus^er;
As by hook and by crook the world clustered of Atome.
He liked the advice, and then soon it assayed;
And Presents crowd headlong to give good example:
So the Bribes overlaid her that, Rome once betrayed:
The Tribes never contributed so to the Temple.
Straight Judges, Priests, Bishops, true sons of the Seal,
Sinners, Governors, Farmers, Banquers* Patentees.
^ring in the whole Mite of a year at a meal,
As the Chodder Clubs Dairy to the incorporate Cheese
Bul^^a^es, Beak^s, Morley, VVrens fingers with telling
Were shriveled, and Clu^terbuck, Eagers and Kips*
Since the Act of Oblivion was never suc^^selling,
As at this Benevolence out of the Snips.
'Twas then the Chimny-Contractors he smoakd,
Nor would take his beloved Canary in kind:
But he swore that the Patent should never be revoked;
No, would the whole Parliament kiss him behind.
Like Jove under Aetna o'erwhelming the Giant,
For foundation the Bristol sunk in the Earth's bowel;
And St. John must now for the Leads be compliant,
Or his right hand shall else be cut off with the Trowel.
For surveying the building, Prat did the feat;
But for the expense he relied upon Worstenholm,
Who sat heretofore at the Kings Receipt;
(...) received now and paid the Chancellours Custom*
By Subsidies thus both Clerick and Laick,
And with matter profane, cemented with holy,
He finished at last his Palace Mosaic,
By a Model more excellent than Lesly's Folly.
And upon the Tarrus, to consummate all,
A Lanthorn, like Faux's surveys the burnt Town,
And shows on the top by the Regal G^lt Ball,
Where you are to expect the Scepter and Crown
Fond City, its Rubbish and Ruins that builds,
Like vain Chemists, a flower from its ashes returning;
Your Metropolis House is in St* James's Fields,
And till there you remove, you shall never leave burning
This Temple of War and of Peace is the Shrine;
Where this Idol of State sits adored and accursed:
And to handsel his Altar and Nostrils divine,
Great Buckingham's Sacrifice must be the first.
Now some (as all Builders must censure abide)
Throw dust in its Front, and blame situation:
And others as much reprehend his Backside,
As too narrow by far for his expatiation.
But do not consider how in process of times,
That for Namesake he may with Hyde Park it enlarge,
And with that convenience he soon for his Cr^^^*
At Tybourn may land, and spare the Tower-Barge.
Or rather how wisely his S^all was built near,
Le^t with driving too far his Tallow impair;
When like the good Ox, for public good cheer,
He comes to be roasted next St. James's Fair.
Upon his House.
HEre lies the sacred Bones
Of Paul beguiled of his Stones.
Here lie Golden Briberies,
The price of ruined Families:
The Cavaliers Debenter-Wall,
Fixed on an Eccentrick Basis;
Here 's Dunkirk-Town and Tangier-Hall,
The Queens Marriage and all;
The Dutchman's Templum Pacis.
Upon his Grandchildren.
KEndal is dead, and Cambridge riding post?
What fitter Sacrifice for Denham's Ghost?
FINIS.

