

THE DEMANDS Of the Rebels in Ireland, Unto the State and Council of Dublin,
February, 3. 1641.

The Names of the chief of them are these. The Lord Mount Garret. Delvin, Don
Luce. Cargena, Limbrey, Oneale.
With diverse others.

Containing fifteen several Heads, all which are most unreasonable and
Impudent.

London, Printed for John Thomas, 1641.

The Rebels Demands.
WE in the Name of all the Nobility, Gentry, and Commonalty of Jreland, before
God and all the World: as most reasonable in the sight of all good and
indifferent men: W^e the above-written do require of the Crown of England,
and that Crown Ministers of State that do Officiate in this Kingdom in that
Kingdoms behalf, these particulars.

For the Church.
I. BEcause as good Christians we ought in the first place to have the
chiefest care of our souls, which care we can no way better express then in
pure and constant profession of Christ's ancient, only true and Catholic
Religion, we therefore the Earls, Barons, and Gentlemen under written do
demand the full, free, open, general, and uncontrollable profession of the
ancient and only true Roman Catholic Religion in this ancient Kingdom and
Dominion of Ireland.

II. Knowing that we cannot enjoy our Religion, and the public profession of
it in a universal National way, as by us is meant and intended, except we may
likewise have our Churches, Oracles, and convenient Temples and Chapels: We
therefore demand all our Churches, Chapels, Oracles, Temples, as well private
Parishes, as general and City Cathedralls to be given up to our use the Native
Inhabitants of this Kingdom.

III. Seeing that Religion cannot be enjoyed or exercised but by the men of
learning and abilities fitted to that purpose, nor learning cherished, but by
maintenance and revenue, we therefore demand restoration of all Religious
houses, whether Abbeyes, Priories, Monasteries, or ancient Universities, their
ancient Lands and Demeanes.

For the Kingdom.
I. THat all Lands and Livings be restored unto those owners if yet living or
to their undoubted heirs, and very nearest of kin that were taken away either
in Queen Elizabeth's or King James his days.

II. That the Children and heirs of the Nobility, that neither of those
foresaid Princes reigns suffered either loss of life or honor, be restored
to their former dignities

III. That the Scots be removed out of the North of Ireland, and the right
owners which now beg about Ireland in great want and misery, though of most
high blood and birth, among the Nobles of that Country.

IIII. That the King entrust with his Magazins, Forts, Castles, and
Block-Houses of Jreland, Catholic Commanders, and those that may be well
relished and liked of the Country, as he sets over his Militia, of England,
and Scotland, Protestants, and Puritans.

V. That the King set over them a Deputy professing the Roman Catholic
Religion.

VI. That for what Hostility has been summoned there, may not only be a
Pardon but an Act of Oblivion.

VII. That the Merchants and Traders of the Irish Nation, may be as free in
their Trade, and have as much privilege and favor in their Customs either in
England or Scotland, as the Scots of late are granted in England, or the
English in Scotland.

VIII. That the Earl of Cork in particular, be caused to render back, if
not all, yet a considerable portion some way valuable toward the maintenance of
poor impoverished Children of the Nobility and Gentry undone by him, it being
his usual course first to entitle the King, and then to seize men's estates.

IX. That they may enjoy entirely all the Privileges and Franchises granted
them by Edward the fourth.

X. That no Companies or Troops of theirs be hindered from going over to serve
the King of Spain, or any other Catholic Prince, the King of England having
no need of them; and they not having any employment or means to live upon in
the Country.

XI. That no Irish passing beyond Sea be forced to take any Oath, containing
clauses in it contrary to the profession of his faith, and persuasion of his
conscience.

XII. That they may have a Trienniall Parliament as in England, and that the
Catholics may have the choice of their Parliament men.

FINIS.

