THE HONEY-COMBE OF Free Justification by Christ alone.

Collected out of the mere Authorities of Scripture, and common and unanimous
consent of the faithful Interpreters and Dispensers of Gods mysteries upon the
same, especially as they express the excellency of Free Justification:

Preached and delivered by JOHN EATON, Master of Arts, sometime Student in
Trinity College in Oxford; and fifteen years Minister and Preacher at
Wickham-market in SUFFOLK.

Dr. Luther in Galath. 2. 11. Paul reproving Peter in the face of the
Congregation, has here no trifling matter in hand, but the chiefest Article of
all Christian Doctrine; the Majesty and Utility whereof, who so rightly
esteems, to him all other things shall seem but vile, and nothing worth: For
what is Peter? what is Paul? what is an Angel from heaven? what are all
creatures to the Article of Free Justification? which if we know, then are we
in the clear light: But if we be ignorant thereof, then are we in most
miserable darkness.

LONDON, Printed by R. B. at the Charge of Robert Lancaster, and are to be sold
in Pope's Head Alley, Anno 1642.

A brief Advertisement To the Reader.
Christian Reader,
THe faithful Author hereof had intended, (as thou may perceive by the
ensuing Preface) to have added the Quotations, more exactly, and more at large,
of those Authors, which are made use of in the ensuing Treatise: but it is come
to pass, by his departure out of this life unto the Lord, that that matter is
not finished. Notwithstanding most Quotations are set down, though not in so
large a manner as was intended. Yet for a more full supply of that defect, I
entreat thee, Christian Reader, to take notice of these two things: First, that
it falls out often in the following Book, that one and the same passage of an
Author is several times alleged, upon diverse occasions; yet it may be, the
Authors name, and the place of his works, out of which it is taken, not quoted
above once: In which case by an easy observation, that which is expressed in
one place may be supplied unto all the rest. Secondly, oftentimes the name of
an Author is set down, but not the particular place, out of which the
sentence is cited. In which case ordinarily thou may have recourse to that
Author named, in his Notes or Commentaries upon the place of Scripture
immediately before urged: or if the Authors name be not set down, yet may
thou usually find him among those collected by Marlorat. But that which fully
recompenseth all defect, is, that the Texts of Scripture (which only is able to
make wise unto salvation, 2 Timothy 3. 15.) are carefully, and considerately
alleged: For if we receive the witness of man, the witness of God is
greater, 1 John 5. 9. And indeed, the Testimonies of the Learned are not
therefore urged, that our Faith should be built upon them, which were
Idolatry in a high degree, even a giving of the most spiritual worship of
God, to wit, Faith unto the Creature; and not to believe God upon his own word,
without the attestation of salse, and sinful man. But they are alleged that
they may be helps to evidence, and apply unto us the word of God; in the
evidence whereof alone, made to appear unto us, by what helps soever, we are
to rest: And to stop the mouths of those who cast an imputation of singularity
upon the truth of God; whereby many are deterre^ even from the examination of
it. But unto thee (Christian Reader) concerning this following discourse, I
have two, as it seems to me, very reasonable requests. First, that thou
would pass no censure upon the Book or Author, 'till thou have fully and
carefully examined it, by that un-erring Rule of Gods word; whereby thou can
not be deceived, lest thou fall into the number of those that speak evil of
those things which they know not, Jude 10. Secondly, that after thou have done
so, thou would not suffer thy self to be swayed from judging according to
that Rule, by any respect whatsoever; and to that purpose, that thou would
take for thine example, the Lord Jesus, of whom it was prophesied, That he
should not judge after the sight of the eyes, neither reprove after the hearing
of the ears, that is following sense, reason, or any other corrupt humane
principles of judging, But that with righteousness he should judge the poor,
and reprove with equity, Esaias 11. 3. 4. Always considering how dreadful a
thing it is, that the only Rock of Salvation, should be unto a man a stone of
stumbling, and a Rock of offense, whereat he should stumble, and fall, and
never rise up again. As for the Author himself, I had intended to have
acquainted thee fully as well with his life, and conversation, as this Book
does with his Faith and Doctrine, whereunto all the opportunities fail at this
time: yet I hope (God willing) to do it hereafter. For indeed his faith, and
zeal, and diligence in doing his calling, and his faith, patience, and
cheerfulness in suffering for the same, were so exemplarie, that they are
worthy to be set forth as a pattern; not only to all Gods People and Ministers
now, but even to all succeeding generations. And the Lord grant that by his
example, not only all his people may have their feet shod with the preparation
of the Gospel of peace, Ephesians. 6. 15. Even with a readiness, both to embrace
it themselves, and to declare it unto others: But especially that the feet of
his Ministers may become beautiful by preaching the Gospel of Peace, and
bringing those glad tidings of good things, Romans 10. 15.

ROB. LANCASTER.

The Preface to the Reader.
To the Christian Reader, enlightened in some measure of truth to see his lost
estate, by the horrible filthiness of the least sin in the sight of God; and
thereby terrified with the multitude of his manifold sins, Grace, Mercy, and
Peace be multiplied from Jesus Christ our Lord, and only Savior.
CHristian Reader, because the Dead Faith does go very far in the profession
of the Gospel, and is very like the true, lively, justifying, and saving faith;
yea as like the true saving faith, both in it self, and in resembling all the
actions of the true faith, as the shadow or image in a looking-glass is like,
does resemble, and imitate the substance or party that looks into the glass;
because the dead faith consists of these three parts, greatly resembling the
true saving faith. As first, such as lie in the same may have great knowledge
in the whole word and will of God, and may join therewith the reading of all
the Doctors and Expositors in the Church: and also may be zealous Preachers of
the same, as S. Paul declares, Romans 2. 17. saying, Behold thou art called a
Jew, that is, one of Gods chosen above all the Nations of the earth, and
restest in the Law, that is, stayest thy self only upon the doctrine delivered
from heaven, and gloriest in God, namely, that he is thy Savior, and Redeemer,
Psalm. 78. 35. and know his will, and approvest the things that are
excellent, being instructed in the Law, or word or doctrine from heaven:
Neither thus have thou knowledge for thy self only, but also art confident,
that thou art a guide of the blind, a light to them that are in darkness,
verse 19. an Instructor of the foolish, a Teacher of the ignorant; having the
whole form of knowledge, and of the truth in the law, or word, etc. Secondly,
such may think that they have a strong faith in all Gods graces through Christ,
and that they believe them as well and as truly, as any can do: as it is
expressed Revel. 3. 17. saying, Thou say, that thou art rich (namely, in the
treasures and benefits of the Gospel) and increased in goods, amd have need of
nothing; but thou know not that thou art wretched, and miserable, and poor,
and blind, and naked. Thirdly (which is most dangerous of all) such as are in
this dead faith, may have, not only a kind of earnest repentance as King Saul
had, described 1 Samuel 24. 16, 17. and as King Ahab had, who rent his clothes in
great repentance, and p[ut on sack cloth upon his flesh, and fasted, and lay in
sack cloth, and walked so mournfully, that the Lord, the searcher of hearts,
said: See thou not how Ahab is humbled before me? But also such may have a
great zeal of Gods glory, Romans 10. 2. in devout, holy desire, and walking (as
they are persuaded) in all Gods holy Commandments, Romans 9. 31, 32. so
zealously mortifying their sins legally, that concerning the good works, and
righteousness of the good and holy law of God, they may be unreproveable, and
unblameable; and yet lie in sin, death, and in a damnable estate, as Paul did,
Phil. 3. 6. And many other Jews before their conversion out of the dead faith,
Acts 22. 3. who were devout persons, Acts 13. 50. Instantly serving God day
night, Acts 26. 7. whereby such striving (as it were) who shall serve and
worship God the best way, by the best works, they are distracted thereby into
diverse sects, errors, schisms, and divisions about works. And yet,
notwithstanding all this great knowledge and zeal, whilst they lie sleeping in
this dead faith; in which spiritual sleep the Lord of wisdom Christ Jesus
has foretold and forewarned us, that many, in the last days of all, shall
slumber and sleep, Math. 25. 25. And therefore shall these last days be most
perilous and dangerous times; because men shall abound in all cloaked
corruptions, having a form and show of godliness, but denying the truth and
power of the same, 2 Timothy 3. 1. to 6. verse. These, because they have not on
the wedding garment, Math. 22. 11, 12. do not only bear a name, by this dead
faith and blind zeal, that they live, when they are dead, Revel. 3. 1. but
also do give Christ hereby but a Judas his kiss, saying, hail Gospel, but do
betray it; and so do lie under greater sin, wrath and damnation, than if
they had never known and professed Christ at all. And because the only means
to call these people out of this most dangerous dead faith, and to rectify
their straggling zeales, is to lay forth the glory of the wedding garment of
Christ's perfect righteousness, that only makes us fit Brides for so glorious a
Bridegroom as Christ Jesus is, Hosea 2. 19. which is put on, only by
understanding, and a joyful faith, and right embracing the excellency of Free
Justification by Christ alone, Revel. 3. 18, 19.

Therefore have I here endeavored (pro meo modulo) to lay forth, in this
Treatise, this said excellency of Free Justification. For which, to perform
some spark of faithfulness herein to Gods Church, our Kings, and to my
Country, I have suffered much hurry; and have, by diverse imprisonments, in
some measure, approved my ministry in tumults, and in labors, by ill report
and good report, 2 Cor. 6. 4, 5, 8. Because we ought not (gentic Reader) to
content our selves (as too many do) with the bare name of Free Justification,
and know it (as they that are in the dead faith do) with a carnal knowledge
only; whereby such do popishly and blasphemously think and say, that this only
saving benefit opens the gate to all wickedness: neither must we content our
selves (as it is Heb. 6. 4.) with a mere taste only of this heavenly gift, as
it is often called, Romans 5. 15, 19. which bare taste only makes us to lie in
the fearful danger of falling away from it, Heb. 6. 4, 5. worse than the
Galathians did. But if we have one spark of spiritual life by the Gospel; we,
but especially Gods Ministers, must labor (they by preaching, and you by
hearing, reading, and meditating upon it) to get a true, lively, and rejoicing
knowledge of it; for when it works joy, peace, and content with God in the
heart, then has a man the true and right knowledge of it: And when a man has
a true, and right saving knowledge and faith of it, then it has brought him
into the Kingdom of heaven, Math. 11. 11, 12. and works in his heart peace,
and great joy in the holy Ghost, Romans 5. 1, 2, 3. Because the Kingdom of
heaven is righteousness, peace, and joy in the holy Ghost, Romans 14. 17, 18. as
it is further proved in the Treatise following.

Now this joyful right knowledge is wrought and attained by this means,
namely, by marking, and often rubbing the memory, and by deeply meditating upon
Gods word of grace, and testimonies of the faithful Expositors, as they
express the Excellency of free Justification in the truth of faith. For as it
is necessary that we dive into the knowledge of this benefit, ut intellectus
rapiatur vero, that our understanding may be enlightened and possessed with
this only soule-saving truth of God; so it is necessary that we look into the
Excellency of it; ut voluntas rapiatur bono, that our will and affections may
be ravished and carried after the goodness and excellency of the benefit; this
being the right true means, both of begetting and increasing true faith, and
of going with a right foot to the truth of the Gospel, Gal. 2. 14. as it is
manifest Romans 10. 15, 17. where it is said, that the feet that bring glad
tidings of peace, and glad tidings of good things are both beautiful, making
the coming of the true Preachers of the Gospel comfortable; and also mighty
for the working of faith and true prayer, and all good life, and godly
conversation. For thus is the whole man converted, by this benefit, unto the
assured knowledge of his free salvation by Jesus Christ. For ignoti nulla
cupido, of that thing whereof the goodness and excellency is not known, there
is no desire. And seeing the dead faith is a cold apprehending of Christ, and
his wonderful benefits, upon a use, and custom of the Country; because all
the Country that we live in, is of that belief, as we generally and
confusedly conceive, rather than a sound understanding of the Excellency of the
same; whereof ensues either a lukewarm careless life, led unthankfully for
the same, or else a breaking forth into a blind zeal of some new strange
works and life; by which we may provide (as we think) more safely for our
salvation. Because it is most true, which the Apostle testifies, that these
false-zealous ones, whilst they are ignorant of the righteousness of God,
cannot choose but go about to stablish their own righteousness, and so do
not submit themselves to rest contented in the righteousness of God, Romans 10.
2, 3. What other salve is there then to cure the cold disease of this dead
faith, and selfe-loving zeal, than to lay forth the Excellency of free
Justification, that may inflame the heart so with the fiery coals of Gods love
toward us, that it may flame forth with a right zeal of keeping within our
lists of obedience, to our Protestnt godly governors; and within the limits of
our vocations, to do them thankfully and zealously to the glorifying of God,
and benefiting of our brethren and neighbors, for so excellent, and glorious,
and full sufficient a benefit? Yea this is the benefit by which we are newborn again, and reclaimed from all profaneness, Sects, Schisms, and
Divisions whatsoever. Which made S. Paul to travel in birth again, like a
loving mother, with the distracted and seduced Galathians, until by reducing
them to the truth, and purity of free Justification, defaced Christ was formed
in them again, Gal. 4. 19. And yet they professed, that they constantly
embraced Christ, and held Justification by him: but because the false brethren
had persuaded them, it was not sufficient for their salvation, except they
joined therewith the obedience and keeping of the Law; thereby they lost
Christ, life, and their free salvation by him. Which evidently declares, that
then only are people newborn again truly, and Christ is formed truly in
them, when for the assurance of their salvation, they wholly rest in the
joyful knowledge and full sufficiency of their free Justification; then is
Christ rightly formed in them. This is the Antidote and preservative against
all sweet, poisonous doctrines of our works, and vainglorious well-doings: this
is the preservative against these infectious and contagious times: this is the
Ark of Noah, that will bear us up above all the floods, and billows of these
tempestuous days of sundry Sects, Schisms, and straggling opinions: this is
the anchor, whereunto the cable of our faith being firmly fastened, will make
us to stand strong against all the violent ways and winds of Satan's blusterous
temptations both on the right hand, and on the left. Yea let us know for a
certainty, that free Justification is the very head, heart, and soul of all
Christian religion, and true worship of God; without the true and joyful
knowledge whereof, our religion is headless, our profession and worship is
heartlesse, and our very zealous conversation is a mere corruption of the
Gospel, and rottenness, like a body without a soul that stinketh before God.
Briefly in a word, as the perfect righteousness of Christ is only worthy to be
acknowledged for the wedding garment; because all the righteousness of our
unperfect Sanctification is (as the Prophet says) as filthy, menstruous,
stained rags, Esaias 64. 6. so true faith of free Justification, being the having
on of this wedding garment, because it alone does truly abolish all the filthy
nakedness of our sins out of Gods sight, and it alone does make us perfectly
holy, and sufficiently righteous in the sight of God freely, without works:
Therefore it alone does make us fit Brides (as I said before) and is only meet
to marry us to so glorious a Bridegroom, as is the King of glory, Christ
Jesus. Yea though a man do abound in the riches and honors of this world,
having his Barnes full of Corn, and his Coffers full of Coin, and he
himself being clothed in purple and fine linne^, does fare well and
deliciously every day; yet if he not freely taking by the hand of a thankful,
rejoicing faith, and so not putting on this wedding garment of Christ's perfect
righteousness (that may make him rich in God) can sleep one night in his bed
in any security; he is not only the fool in print, mentioned Luke 12. 20. but
also this night may the Devils fetch away his soul from him; and then whose
shall these things be, which he has provided? In this case (says the Lord of
wisdom) is every one (be he rich, or be he poor) that, by not putting on, by
free Justification, the wedding garment of Christ's perfect righteousness, is
not rich in God, verse. 21. Oh then let not such an one dare to lay down his
head upon his downe-pillow to sleep one night in safety, nor (as David said)
suffer his eyelids to slumber, until by taking freely this joy full benefit,
and by putting on this wedding garment, he has attained this heavenly
wisdom, better than his fine gold, by which he may lie down safely, and
sleep sweetly, Prove. 3. 13. to 26.

But I have here laid forth this Excellency of free Justification in the words,
testimonies, and common consent of the faithful Expositors, and Dispensers of
Gods mysteries, 1 Cor. 4. 1, 2. for three principal Reasons.

First, because as this mystery of free Justification only and freely saves
us; so by the rebelliousnesse of our blind and sinful natures, and unbelief
of our hearts, and the exceeding subtlety of Satan, it is of all the rest of
the benefits of the Gospel, which all depend upon this benefit, the most
difficultly learned, and the most hardly believed. It being most true, that Mr.
Fox says in his Preface before Dr. Luther upon the Galathians, That Learning
cannot reach it, wisdom is offended at it, Nature is astonished, Devils do not
know it, Men do persecute it; And briefly, as there is no way to life so
easy, so there is none so hard: Easy to whom it is given from above; but hard
to the carnal sense, not yet inspired: the ignorance whereof is the cause and
root of all the Errors, Sects, and Divisions that are in all Christendom.
Therefore I thought it fit in this case to imitate the example not only of
learned and ancient Bid, (who makes an exposition of all the Epistles of S.
Paul, with the mere sentences, sayings, and expositions of S. Augustine,
collected and gathered together, as the expounded texts and verses are
dispersed and scattered here and there in all S. Augustins works; and therefore
are called Collectanea Bedae:) but rather to imitate S. Paul himself; who
discerning how hardly free Justification is rightly understood, soundly
embracing, contentedly rested in, and constantly retained; as is for ever
recorded by the example of the soon and dangerous fall of the Galathians, Gal.
1. 6. does therefore in writing to the Galathians, come forth not singly by
himself alone; but (as it were) guarded with the association, company, and
consent of all his believing and faithful brethren, saying thus: And all the
Brethren with me, Gal. 1. 2. Upon which words Dr. Luthers exposition is very
remarkable, saying thus: Quasi dicat Paulus, as if Paul should say, lest I
should be alone, I add moreover and besides my self, all the Brethren which
write this Epistle, as well as I, and bear witness with me, that my doctrine
is good and godly. Therefore lest we should seem, or they might say, that I
only set my self proudly against them, I have my Brethren with me, all of one
mind, as faithful witness, which think, write, and teach the self same
thing that I do; and I, that only which they do. For the better discerning
whereof: first I set down the sweet, powerful, and forceable Scriptures, as
the flowers containing the honey; then I add the expositions, testimonies, and
consent of the learned Writers, as the honey it self; which they, like the
laborious Bees of the Lords garden, have, by faith, sucked and gathered out of
the said flowers of Scriptures; setting the sentence and saying of each Author
by it self, as giving to each Be his own and (as it were) proper cellulam of
honey: I changing nothing in the substance of their sayings, but only the
connecting conjuctions, that may most fitly conjoyn the coherence of their
testimonies together. And yet thus is composed in one continual flowing
speech, this Treatise, as one whole and entire honey Comb of Free
Justification. For which one benefit, David that had good experience of it, and
yet saw it, but a far off darkly, Heb. 11. 13. yet pronounces the word
teaching the same, to be sweeter than honey, and the honeycomb, and more to
be desired than Gold, yea, than much fine Gold, Psalm. 19. 10. I have moreover
noted in the Margin the name of each Author; and would (but that the Book would
grow into a needless bigness) have expressed the whole Latin sentence of
such Authors as write in Latin; but yet I have set down the beginning of the
Latin sentences in the Margin, or the principal Original word of chiefest
Emphasis in the sentence, and have noted with figures the places where to find
the same, That such as aredesirous to go to the Original, may know where to
find these sentences and testimonies.

The second reason of expressing the excellency of Free Justification, in the
words and testimonies, and common consent of the Learned Orthodox Writers, is
this; That whereas S. Paul testifies, that there is but one true saying faith,
Ephesians. 4. 5. sealed by one Baptism, that has always, in all Ages, most
freely and most certainly saved all the Elect: Here thou may see as in a
clear looking-glass, what that one Faith is, that has so unfallibly in all
Ages, saved all the people of God; which must needs tend to the strengthening
of thee in thy most holy Faith, Iud. 20. strongly and effectually, when thou
hear them pronouncing with their own mouths, and with consent, what truth of
Faith does apprehend in this mystical, maine benefit; plainly showing how they
have believed with the heart unto righteousness, and how they have confessed
the same unto salvation, Romans 10. 10. And also does stop the mouths of the
common Adversaries of Faith and free grace; that upon the diverse and different
measures of Faith in this maine benefit of free grace, in Orthodox and
Protestant Writers, of this maine mystery of the Gospel, Ephesians. 4. 7. do
object much difference, dissent, and dis-agreement, in this only point of free
salvation, amongst the said Protestant Writers; and thereby little sweetness
and excellency in this glorious free benefit. Who have their vanity here
confuted, and dispelled with the common consent of all the best, Orthodox and
Protestant Writers, as, (...) according to the Analogy and nature of right and
pure Faith, they express the excellency of Free Justification.

The third reason is this, That many being much troubled in mind in these most
dangerous days; (not knowing which way to turn them among so many minds so
diversely distracted about matters of religion, and therefore have some regard to
that primarie and principal admonition in this case of the Prophet, Ierem. 6.
16. saying, Stand in the ways, and inquire for the old way, which is the good
way, that you may walk in it, and find rest for your souls:) may here see,
what that old way, and good way is, even the same, in which old Enoch, Noah,
Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, Joseph, David, Daniel, and all the faithful to this
present time have walked in, and found rest to their souls; and so is manifest
to be the old way, and only good way that by walking in it, only brings peace
and rest unto our souls: For being justified by faith, we have peace with God
through our Lord Jesus Christ, in this life, Romans 5. 1. And whom he justifies,
them he also glorifieth in the next life, Romans 8. 30. Therefore give me leave
(gentle Reader) to exhort thee to be careful to keep and (...) fast this
precious benefit; and not only to keep ^ut also to keep it pure, without the
mixing and mi^^^ing of works with it, resting wholly upon it only forthy full,
free, and perfect salvation; lest thou loose, with the foolish Galathians, this
maine and only means of thy Free Salvation; and to that end meditate much and
often in the excellency of Free Justification, and ponder these sayings of the
learned Writers; and mark their reasons of true faith grounded upon these
Scriptures, and believe according as God speaks in these eminent Scriptures,
Romans 4. 18. And decline not from them to the conceits and reasons of Reason.
For as meditation (as both the word of God teaches, and is plentifully
testified by all experienced Divines) is a most profitable religious duty, for
the increasing of thy most holy faith, Psalm. 45. 10. And as the Spirit of God
by Solomon, exhorts thee to acquaint thy self with the sentences of the wise:
So none are more godly, wise for thee unto salvation, 2 Timothy 3. 15. than the
true and faithful Dispensers and Stewards of God, writing upon the excellency
of this great mystery: who are enriched thereunto by the spirit of faith, 2
Cor. 4. 13. and do ground themselves upon the pure Word of God expounded by
faith, and not corrupted by reason: So that he that despises these
testimonies, does run directly into the sin which the spirit of God
forbids, saying, Despise not Prophecy, 1. These. 5. 20. that is, the
Dispensers of Gods mysteries, speaking unto Edifying, to exhortation and
comfort, 1 Cor. 14. 3. But yet try all things, and keep that which is good. 1
These. 5. 21. But whosoever despises these, despises God and Christ, Luke 10.
16. Again, no matter of Religion can be meditated in, more profitably, than
this Article of free Justification, that only and freely saves us. For thou
shall find that the very reading and meditating upon it, either in this Book
or in any other, where thou shall find the excellency of it, more powerfully
laid open (for I ingenuously acknowledge my weakness herein;) This meditation
(I say) being an effectual means to apprehend it deeper and deeper, and to
increase thy knowledge and faith in it (especially, when thou feel thy
conscience pricked and troubled with sin) will even breath the spirit of God,
and life into thy soul, as Paul testifies, saying, Received you the spirit by
hearing the Law? Or by hearing of faith, viz. of free Justification preached?
Gal. 3. 2. And so will be, as it were the soul of thy soul to revive thee to
eternal life: yea, thou shall feel that thy often meditating in this heavenly
gift (like Naamans seventimes washing of himself in the River Iordane) will
assure thee clearer and clearer, that all the spiritual leprosy of thy
sins, is washed away clean out of Gods sight. By which renewing, as it were
thy Baptism, thou may be anew strengthened with the spiritual inward seal
of joy and gladness, Ps. 51. 7, 8. Neither let thy unworthiness of so great a
benefit deter thee from taking it; because it is given thee freely: I say
freely, that is, God respecting no worthiness in thee to deserve it; nor, no
unworthiness in thee to hinder thy free taking of it: but only pitying thy
misery does give it thee freely to this end, to declare the glory of his free
Grace, and to heal freely all thine unworthiness; and to make thee freely
worthy of all the other benefits, and blessings of God, both temporal and
eternal. Thus (Christian Reader) if Christianly passing by all my weaknesses
in handling this glorious free benefit; yet if thou shall here find that the
learned Writers collected have said some thing that may edify thee in thy most
holy faith, then shall I be well content and fully satisfied. Commending thee
to God, and to the word of his Grace, which is able to build further, I with
all my poor endeavors do wholly rest,

Thine in true Christian affection, JOHN EATON.

The Contents of this Treatise according to the order of the Chapters.
CHAP. I.
OF the necessity of Free Justification, and of the right and joyful knowledge
thereof shown, 1 Because of Gods extreme hatred of sin, 2 Because
Justification is the sum of the Gospel, 3. The foundation of the Church both
before and since the coming of Christ, 4 The strongest Arms against assaults
of the Devil. page 2. 3. and infra.
CHAP. II.
OF the nature of Free Justification, as 1 What it is, page 7 2 Who are capable
of this glorious benefit, ibid. 3 How it is wrought upon us, page 20 Three
maine things revealed in the word of God concerning sin, page 8. and infra. A
pithie opening of the ten Commandments, page 11 A fivefold punishment
belonging to the least sin, page 17 That we are two manner of ways made
righteous. p. 22
CHAP. III.
OF the parts of Justification, as 1 Of the first part, p. 24 2 Of the
excellency of this first part described by six Emphaticall Scripture phrases,
expressing the same, where the said Texts are opened and explained. p. 29
CHAP. IIII.
OBjections against this first part of Justification (especially against the
fifth emphaticall Scripture phrase, expressing the excellency of this first
part of free Justification) answered, and the faith thereof described and
cleared, page 43 1 The distinction and difference of the Objectors is to be
marked, ibid. 2 Their objections from places of Scripture are answered, as
first, Sins we have in us, 1 Ioh. 1. 8. and who can say his heart is pure? for
in many things we sin all, Iam. 3. 2. Ergo, God who is Almighty, and searches
the hearts and reins, sees them in us: Can any thing be hid out of his
sight? page 47 Secondly, He that made the eye, shall not he see? Psalm. 94. p.
52 3 God knows the sins of his justified children, infinitely more perfectly
than they themselves do, as you your self confess, Ergo, he sees them in
them; because knowing and seeing are all one in God. All which places are fully
discussed and cleared. Two reasons showing how knowing and seeing in God may be
said to differ, p. 68 How God knows the sins of his children and of
Reprobates. p. 71
CHAP. V.
WHerein other Scriptures objected are cleared and answered, as 1 That all
things are open and naked to Gods eyes, etc. Heb. 4. 13. p. 73 2 God knows
our sitting down and rising up, and understands all our thoughts, Psalm. 139.
p. 76 3 Against thee have I sinned and done evil in thy sight, Psalm. 51. 4. p.
80 Paul complains of sin, and says, O wretched man that I am, who shall
deliver me! etc. Ergo. p. 87 5 If our hearts condemn us, God is greater than
our hearts, and knows all things, 1 Ioh: 3. 20. p. 88 6 God saw sin in the
justified Church of Corinth, and punished them for the same, 1 Cor. 11. And
also in diverse of the Churches of Asia, Revel. 2. and 3. Ergo, the children of
God are not made so perfectly holy and righteous in the sight of God, that God
sees no sin in them, p. 92 7 Paul had remnants of sin in him, and prayed
thrice against the same, that it might depart from him, 2 Cor. 12. 7, 8. Ergo,
the children of God are not made by Justification so perfectly holy and
righteous from all spot of sin in the sight of God, that God sees none in them,
p. 84 The maine essential difference between the Law and the Gospel, p 83 How
the Justification of a Church and of a particular man are different. p. 92
CHAP. VI.
WHerein is contained an answer to the second rank of objections of such
examples of David and others, as were justified persons; and yet God saw and
took notice of sin in them, and corrected and punished some of the^ for the
same, p. 97 A distinction between the time of the Law, the time of Ioh.
Baptist, and the time of Christ's death upon the cross, p. 98. and infra. Two
reasons why sins were not punished in John Baptists time. p. 104 A threefold
prerogative of the New Testament, p. 110
CHAP. VII.
COntaining answers to the third rank of objections, expressing certain
Reasons, proving that the justified children of God are not made so perfectly
holy and righteous from all spot of sin in the sight of God, that God sees no
sin in them: as, 1 God does correct with crosses and afflictions, yea and
punish his justified children for sin, ergo. p. 120 Where are discussed two
several sorts of crosses, 1. Legal, 2. Evangelicall, p. 121. and deinceps.
Together with the uses of Evangelicall crosses, p. 127 3 Scriptures explained,
p. 129 Twelve Absurdities arising from the confounding of the aforesaid
crosses, p. 135
CHAP. VIII.
COntaining answers to three other objected Reasons, as, 1 If we be made so
perfectly holy and righteous from all spot of sin in the sight of God freely,
that God sees no sin in us, what need we to pray daily in the Lords prayer,
forgive us our trespasses? p. 147. 154 2 The holy Ghost is God, and it is he
only that shows us our sins, ergo, he himself must needs see our sins in
us, p. 158 3 The Lord by his spirit does daily mortify our sins in us, Romans 8.
But he sees those sins in us which he does mortify, ergo, Free Justification
does not make us so perfectly holy and righteous from all spot of sin in Gods
sight, that he sees no sin in us, p. 163 Three several offices of the
Trinity, shown forth in our Justification, p. 153 Mortification of sin
distinguished, p. 169 The foundation of Enemites, Anchorites and Nunneries, p.
172
CHAP. IX.
COntaining an Antidote against doubting, to kindle and work faith in us, and
to be a preservative against all objections whatsoever, 1. of the world, 2. the
flesh, and 3. the Devil p. 174 Where we must mark first, the causes of all
doubting, p. 175 2 The remedies against the same, as 1 The nature and
definition of true Justifying faith must be marked, described, Romans 4. 17. to
25. p. 176 The description of Abraham's faith, ibid. 2 The second spiritual
weapon is, that we are to arm our selves against sense, sight, feeling, and
natuturall Reason, and how this may be done, p. 180 3 The third spiritual
weapon to overcome all doubting is not to forsake our Baptism, but much and
often to meditate upon the four things, containing the very essence of our
Baptism, p. 185 4 The fourth spiritual weapon is, that we are to sense our
selves against the greatest multitude of all sorts round about us, by the dead
faith, boldly wrangling against the Ministers of Christ; and how we may be
fenced against the same, p. 198 5 The fifth weapon against doubting, is to have
often before our eyes the great dignity, and excellency of believing Free
Justification, p. 235 6 The last weapon or remedy is to set before our eyes the
inconveniences and evils of doubting: which are eight, p. 241 1 To make God a
liar. ibid. 2 To make God for sworn, and our selves Covenantbreakers, ibid. 3
To make God a deceiver, p. 242 4 To rob God of the praise of his Almighty
power, ibid. 5 To rob him of the glory of his perfect Justice, ib. 6 To rob God
of the honor of his grace, mercy, and rich boun^y, p. 220 7 To spoil Christ of
the glory of his Name [Iesus;] and secondly, of the glory of his Godhead; and
thirdly, of his Kingly, Priestly, Prophetical Offices, p. 243 8 Unthankfully
to reject and loose the free-giving graces of God, etc. ibid. The Christians
triumph against all sin by true Justifying Faith, p. 250 The difference,
between the literal and spiritual knowledge, p. 215. and p. 224. and 226
Three privileges of Faith laid open, p. 235.
CHAP. X.
DEclaring the second part of Free Justification, making the true Believer
completely, sufficiently, and perfectly holy and righteous in the sight of God,
p. 253 1 Four reasons showing how inseparable this second part is from the
former part, ibid. 2 What this second part of Free Justification is, p. 257 3
It is opened and explained by the four causes of it, p. 258 The manner of the
Justification of the Elect, p. 271 The righteousness of Christ making us holy
and righteous objectively and passively, illustrated by two lively similitudes,
p. 274. and infra. That the form of Christ's perfect righteousness does not
only give us the name, but the very being of persons made perfectly righteous,
proved by Scriptures, p. 293, 395, 300, 303
CHAP. XI.
PRoving that the true Believer is not only made righteous, but also
completely, fully, and sufficiently and perfectly righteous in the sight of God
freely, p. 313 This is proved by four places of Scripture and by the consent
and Reasons of the learned, ibid. Our righteousness exceeds the righteousness
of the Angels, 320 The natural, civil, and religious works of Believers, are
made perfect in the sight of God, p. 322 How the New Testament surpasses the
Old, p. 335 God calls righteous men Righteousness in the Abstract, p. 341
CHAP. XII.
Showing that the justified children of God are so perfectly, and excellently
righteous before God, that they are made unutterably glorious in the sight of
God, p. 343. and p. 354 Whereof the Arc is a lively Type, p. 346 Two evident
Reasons, declaring the same, p. 345 A true and godly looking-glass to be often
used of Christians, p. 348
CHAP. XIII.
STrengthening Faith against natural reason and unbelief, p. 361 2 The
objections of unbelief are two; the first is propoun^ed and answered, ibid.
With four strong and sufficient Arguments to resell the same, p. 375 The
second objection with the Particular answers to it, is in p. 384 Helps to
strengthen our weak Faith, p. 385 A threefold Remedy, against our sins, to
believe, occasioned by the inestimablenesse of the treasure, p. 391
CHAP. XIIII.
OF the Vtility and Majesty of Free Justification, p. 401 Declared in six
excellent fruits or effects, ib. 1 Illumination fourefold, p 402 For by
Justification men see, 1 The foulness of the least sin, ibid. 2 The
perfection of Gods justice, p. 404 3 The true meaning of the tenth
Commandment, and so of all the rest, p 405 The treasures and glory of Gods
Kingdom, p 406 2. It not only delivers us from the fivef^^^ ^^nishment of
sin, Chap. 2. But puts us also in possession of six glorious benefits, p.
407 1 Reconciliation with God, ibid. Whereof there be two comfortable fruits, 1
Protection against all evil, p. 415 2 Procuration of all good, p. 415 Heaven
opened, and all Creatures leap for joy, p. 410 A paradise of Gods loving
protection, p. 416 Two uses of our perfect reconciliation, p. 420
CHAP. XV.
1 OF the four other benefits wrought upon us by Free Justification, p. 423 2
The giving of the holy Ghost, ibid. 3 Union into Christ, p. 429 Where it is
evidently proved that this union is not imaginary, but real and substantial,
ibid. Six similitudes illustrating this Union, p. 419 4 Adoption, p. 431 5
Lastly, assured glorification, p. 445
CHAP. XVI.
OF the other four fruits or effects, declaring the Vtility and Majesty of
Free Justification, p. 447 1 Peace and joy in the conscience, ibid. 2 A good
judgment and right discerning of all spirits and doctrines, p. 440 3 It
rooteth up coveteousnesse and the love of all vain pomp, p. 452 The last and
maine point showing the Vtility and Majesty of Justification is Sanctification,
and true Evangelicall repentance, p. 457 Ten differences between Justification
and Sanctification, p. 459 For Justification works 1 True love of God, ibid.
2 Of this love, arises true grief at sin, and zeal against all sin, p.
460 3 It causes the true fear of God and cheerful obedience, p. 461 4 True
trust and confidence in God, p. 443
THere are some faults escaped in Printing, as Objections for Objectors,
abolish for abolishing, see for so, possible for impossible, and some others;
but most of them so small and literal, that we are confident the judicious
Reader will make no scruple to pass by them.

THE Honey-Combe of Free Justification by Christ.
Collected out of the mere Authorities of Scripture, and common, and unanimous
consent of the faithful Interpreters and Dispensers of Gods mysteries upon the
same, especially as they express the excellency of Free Justification.
CHAP. I.
Of the necessity of the joyful knowledge of Free Justification.

But now is the Righteousness of God made manifest without the Law, having
witness of the Law and of the Prophets: to wit, the righteousness of God, by
the faith of Jesus (...).
Christ unto all, or in all, and upon all that believe, Romans 3. 21, 22.

Here he handles the principal and chiefest point Tractat principalem locum,
qui est de Iustitia Christiana, item de sapientia Christiana, seude gloria
Christi, Luth. in Psalm. 130, 459. Sisalutem querimus quaerenda prin^m ju^itia
est, etc. Calv. in Romans 1. 17. and Marlor ibid.
of salvation, which is concerning Christian Righteousness, or concerning
Christian Wisdom, or the glory of Christ.

For if we seek at Gods hand for salvation, that is for life, we must first
seek for Righteousness; by the which being reconciled unto God, we being thus
in his favor, do obtain life.

For that we may be beloved of God, we must first of necessity be righteous,
seeing he hates unrighteousness.

For whereas the Gospel is said to be the power of Prius justos esse necesse
est. Cal^ and Marlor ibid.
God unto salvation, even therefore, because it reveals the righteousness of
God, we must therein mark the Sclater upon the Roman. cap. 1. 17.
necessity of righteousness unto eternal life: such a necessary antecedence
there is of righteousness, as that without it there is no hope to be saved;
Gods justice inclining him to punish, his purity to hate all unrighteousness.
For God is of pure eyes and cannot see evil, he cannot behold wickedness, but
he must needs destroy the sin, or the sinner, Habak. 1. 13. Habak. 1. 13.
Calv: in Galat. cap. 2. ver. 16. sermo. 12.


Because God being the sovereign Righteousness, he must needs hate us, whilst
he sees us in our sins: then stands it in hand for us to be made righteous,
before we can be in Gods favor: Yea, I add further, that it must be (with)
such a righteousness, so completely Sclater ibid.
perfect, as that it may endure the strict censure of Gods justice, Galath. 3.
10. Gal. 3. 10.


Now then the exhortation of our Savior easily Sclater ibid.
follows, That we should therefore first and principally above all things
seek the Kingdom of God and his righteousness, Math. 6. 33. such a
righteousness as may stand before God, and endure the trial of his justice.
There is a remnant of this Principle even in nature, if it be not too far
degenerate, That it is righteousness, whereby Gods favor and Kingdom must
be obtained: and therefore the very Gentiles by the light of nature, have
performed some both religious offices toward God, and civil duties to men, as
it were to win and procure Gods favor thereby: But what this righteousness
is, and how to be found, here nature shows her blindness, and vanishes away
in vain confidence of selfe-righteousnesse, and civil honesty: of which
notwithstanding our Savior pronounces that it is utterly unavaileable to Gods
kingdom Phil. 3. 8, 9. Haec summa Evangelii, hae^ summa est omnium
beneficiorum Christi, Calv: Romans chapt. 1. 17. Marlor:
Mat. 5. 20. and Paul that had as much of it as any counts it but dunge and
dross in comparison, Philip. 3. 8, 9.

Therefore is Justification the very sum of the Gospel; yea this is the sum
of all the benefits of Christ: for with them that are made righteous and
reconciled, God is present: he endues them with new Tractat ergo pricinpalem
^^il nostre salutis Iustificationem scilicet, cuius pura cognitio sola
Ecclesiam servat. Luth. in Psalm. 130. Est Sol illuminans Ecclesiam, paradisus
seu ca^um gratiae, Luth. ibid. E contra, cum hac etc. simulamitti^ur christus,
etc. ibid. Eoni igitur Pastoris est etc. Lut. in Psa. 130.
light, and with eternal life, he hears them, he defends them in all
their troubles.

Therefore he handles here the principal and chiefest point of our salvation,
namely, Justification; the pure knowledge whereof alone saves the Church; for
it is the knowledge of the truth and of life, for which the Gospel is called
the power of God unto salvation. Yea, it is the Sun enlightening the Church;
it is the Paradise or rather heaven of grace.

On the contrary, when this knowledge of Justification is lost, together with
it is lost Christ, and life, and the Church: neither any judgment of doctrines
or of spirits is left, but darkness and blindness possesses all things.

Therefore it is the duty of a good Pastor, that he suffer not himself to be
drawn away with any disputations from the daily and continual handling of
this point.

For unless the special grace of Christ do help, Mr. Fox, Preface before
Luther upon the Galathians Sect. 7.
hard ^t is to flesh and blood to comprehend this mystical and joyful
doctrine of Justification: so strange it is to carnal reason, so dark to the
world, so many enemies it has, that except the spirit of God from above do
reveal it; Learning cannot reach it, Wisdom is offended, Nature is astonished,
Devils do not know it, Men do persecute it: Briefly, as there is no way to
life so easy, so there is none so hard: easy to whom it is given from above;
hard to the carnal sense not yet inspired: the ignorance whereof is the root
of all the errors, sects, and divisions in the world. Omnis gene^is
tentationibus obruuntur any mi, Luth. P^al. 130.


Yea, this point being lost, men's minds are overwhelmed with all kinds of
temptations.

Therefore give all diligence, that you may have this principal point,
diligently known, and firmly Hunc igitur prin^ipalem locum date operam ut
diligenter etc. and firmiter fundatum habeatis, Luth. Psalm. 1, 0. verse 4
grounded. Neither let any of you be so arrogant, that he should think, that
he has fully attained this divine and heavenly wisdom: For whilst Satan, and
the world, and our own reason are of any force, we shall never be perfect in
this knowledge.

Yea, I do therefore so much beat upon it, because Ego ideo saepius eum
incul^o, Luth. in Psalm. 130.
I know that Satan goes about nothing more, than that he may take away this
knowledge from the sight and minds of men: hitherto principally tend all the
stirs which he raises up both publicly and privately, that men busying
their heads in new disputations, should forget this article: for Satan feels
the force and power of this article.

For Justification, by which of unjust we are made just Homily of
Justification, 2 part.
before God, is the strong Rock and foundation of Christian Religion.

Upon this foundation of Gods free promise and Acts and Monuments in the
history of Luther.
grace first builded the Patriarks, Kings, and Prophets: upon the same
foundation also Christ the Lord builded his Church; upon the which foundation
the Apostles likewise builded the Church Apostolical and Catholicall.

For this doctrine advances and sets forth the Hon il^e of I^stification, 2
part.
true glory of Christ, and suppresseth the vain glory of man: this whosoever
denies, is not to be reputed for a Christian man, nor for a setter forth of
Christ's glory, but for an Adversary to Christ and his Gospel.

Yea, herein lies the Touchstone of all truth and Acts and Mo^^^m^nts in the
history of Luther.
doctrine, as the only principal original of our salvation.

Yea, this doctrine bri^geth with it all good things, as well ghostly as
bodily; namely forgiveness of sins, Luther upon the Galathians chap. 1. ver. 6.
true righteousness, peace of conscience, and everlasting life. Moreover, it
brings light and sound judgment of all kinds of doctrine, and trades of
life. It approves and stablisheth civil government, household government, and
all kinds of life that are ordained and appointed of God. It rooteth up all
doctrines of error, sedition, confusion, and such like: and it puts away the
fear of sin and death: and to be short, it discovers all the subtle
sleights and works of the Devil, and opens the benefits and love of God
toward us in Christ.

And to conclude this point: by the preaching of Luther upon the Galathians
chap. 1. ver. 1.
this doctrine the Devil is overthrown, his kingdom is destroyed; the law,
sin, and death, (wherewith as most mighty and invincible tyrants, he has
brought all mankind in subjection under his dominion) are wrested out of his
hands. Briefly, his prisoners are translated out of the kingdom of darkness,
into the kingdom of light and liberty. Should the Devil suffer all this?
Should not the father of lies employ all his force, and subtle policies to
darken, to corrupt, and utterly root out this doctrine of salvation and
everlasting life? Indeed S. Paul complains in all his Epistles, that even in
his days the Devil showed himself a cunning workman in his business, by
darkening and hindering this doctrine of Justification.

Now for use, let this suffice in this place, to stir up Gods children by
these and the like reasons, to fortify their judgments in this maine point of
Christian faith. The Article of Justification is the very sum of the Gospel;
that once corrupted, there can be no soundness; that truly and thoroughly
understood, and believed, and applied, arms against all assaults of Satan: and
let us be exhorted, as to edify our selves in all other points of our most
holy faith; so specially in this; which who so holds not aright, surely he
holds not the head, nor ever can be saved.

Thus we see the necessity of earnest teaching, and diligent learning of this
doctrine of Justification: Let us now proceed to show the nature of it, and
what it is.

CHAP. 11.
Of the nature of Justification, what it is, who are capable of the same, and
how it is wrought upon us.

Justification is, when we feeling what lost creatures we are in our own
selves, and in all our works and holy walkings by reason of our sins, and
sighing up unto Christ for help, are by the power of Gods imputation, so
clothed with the wedding garment of Christ's own perfect righteousness, that
of unjust we are made just before God: that is, all our sins are utterly
abolished out of Gods sight, and we are made from all spot of sin perfectly
holy and righteous in the sight of God freely. And this is Gods pardon or
forgiveness (which few understand) great above man's, and glorious, and
wonderful, like God himself, Acts 13. 38, 39, 40. the joyful faith Acts 13.
38, 39, 40.
whereof sanctifies us, and makes us to do the duties of our vocations
faithfully, and to walk to the glory of God in the spiritual meaning of all
Gods ten Commandments zealously, Tit. 2. 14. Tit. 2. 14.


In this description of Free Justification, first are described the persons who
they are that are capable of this benefit; namely, such as truly feel what
lost creatures they are in themselves, and in all their works: this is all the
preparative condition that God requires on our part to this high and heavenly
work; for hereby is a man truly humbled in himself, of whom God speaks,
saying, Thus says he that is high and excellent, he that inhabiteth the
eternity, whose name is the holy one, I dwell with him that is of an humble and
contrite spirit, to revive the spirit of the humble, and to give life to them
that are of a contrite heart, Esaias 57. 15. Esaias 57. 15.
For Christ came to seek and save that which was lost, Luke 19. 10. Luke 19. 10.


Secondly is expressed the cause of this lost state, namely their sins; for
siane only and nothing but sin is the cause of all our misery: this is the
true plague sore of the soul; this is the deadly leprosy of hell: of this
spoke David when he said, There is no whole part in me by reason of my sins,
Psalm. 38. Psalm. 38.


Thirdly, we must not have only a glymmering knowledge of this by the light of
nature, as the Gentiles that had not the word; who living in unrighteousness,
wickedness, covetousness, maliciousness, envy, murder, debate, d^ceit, and
such like, did yet know by the light of nature, that they that commit such
things are worthy of death, Romans 1. 30. But this Romans 1. 30.
light of nature must by the word (given by the mercy of God reveal our
reveal our misery more fully) be so Psalm. 147.
increased, that the terrors of the Almighty do work in our hearts a true and
thorough feeling of our lost condition: which is brought to pass, by marking
out of the word of God three maine things revealed in the same, concerning
sin.

First, the infinite horriblenesse of the least sin Three n^aine t^i^gs
re^eal^d cen. erning sin.
in the sight of God, there being no sin little before God; for God would not
in the equity of his justice pronounce such infinite punishment, as his
everlasting curse and endless torments upon the least sin, Galat. 3. 10. if
the least sin were not an infinite Galat 3 10.
horrible thing in his sight: and why? because all sin is the image of the
Devil, and spiritual high treason against the highest spiritual Majesty; and
so was horrible before the law was given: but after that God himself appeared
in such fearful Majesty, and gave a law forbidding the least sin in such
terrible thundering and lightening: now is the least sin become double
horrible; because now the doing of the least sin is in respect of the law
forbidding it in such terrible Majesty: First, a despising of God, appearing in
all that Majesty, and a contemning of that high authority of the lawgiver, so
terribly appearing: yea, the sinner, by his lust and concupiscence against the
law does, as it were, trample under the feet of his affections all that Majesty
of God that was manifested in such fearful thundering and lightening. Is it
any marvel then, that God said unto David, Why have thou despised me in doing
that which is evil in my sight? 2 Samuel 12. 9, 10.
2 Samuel 12. 9, 10. Secondly, hereby sin is become rebellion against God, as
Daniel confessed, saying, We have sinned, and broken thy Commandments, and
have rebelled against thee, Dan. 9. 5, 6. But how horrible Dan. 9. 5, 6.
Rebellion is, Samuel declares, saying, Rebellion is as the sin of
witchcraft, and transgression is wickedness and idolatry, 1 Samuel 15. 23. And
thus the Law entering 1 Samuel 15. 23.
upon sin, does make the fault thereof so greatly to abound, Romans 5. 20. that
sin is made out of measure Romans 5. 20.
sinful by the Commandment so terribly forbidding it, Romans 7. 13. so that
in sin these six evils Romans 7. 13.
do concur: first, a despising and contempt of the 1 Contemptus majestatis
Dei^ 2 Superba contumacia adversus Legem.
majesty of God, forbidding the least sin in such terrible thundering and
lightning: Secondly, a proud stubbornness against the law, and revealed will of
God: 3 Nefanda imaginis Dei conspurcatio and destruction. 4 Imitatio Satau^^
hostis Dei improba prodit^^ne and defectione. 5 Intolerabilis ingratitu^o. 6
Imago Satanae.
Thirdly, an horrible defiling and destroying of the image of God, wherein man
was created: Fourthly, an imitation and doing like the Devil the enemy of God,
by a wicked treason, and revolting from God. Fifthly, an untolerable
ingratitude, and unthankfulness of the creature against the Creator. Sixthly,
that which in it self is a foul and abominable thing; that sin is the very
image of the Devil, which for men to bear, that were made to the image of
God, nothing can be more detestable: the least sin for the horriblenesse of
it, though it be but in thought only, defiling us and all our good works and
holy walking, and making them in the sight of God like a menstruous cloth,
Mark. 7. 23. Esaias 64. 6. now if Mark 7. 23. Esaias 64. 6.
our good works be by sin so loathsome, how horrible then are our evil
works? have we not just cause to cry out every one of us, and say with David,
Be merciful to my sins (O Lord) for they are great, Psalm. 25. 11?

The second maine thing to work this true feeling The second maine thing
concerning sin.
of our lost estate is to look into the multitude of our sins, which we daily
commit in thought, word, and deed, by breaking all Gods ten Commandments;
which we must know, not only in a gross confused generality, but take notice
of particulars in each Commandment, wherein we have offended; both in leaving
undone, that which we should have done, and by doing that which we should not
have done: if not in the gross act, which the world and light of nature
condemns; yet in the spiritual breach, which (as we have heard) is horrible
before God. For the Law Romans 7. 14. Ioh. 4. 24.
is spiritual (says S. Paul;) And God is a spirit (says Christ) and must be
obeyed and worshipped in spirit, and truth: and herein we may see our sins to
be many and innumerable; concerning which, although I refer thee to such
Catechismes, as lay open Gods ten Commandments at large, for the fuller
sight hereof; yet to sharpen thy stomach unto Free Justification, and because
the Paschall Lamb must be eaten with sour herbs, give me leave to give thee
a glimse of this pure glass of the Law, that thou may see some few spots of
thy foul leprosy, in the spiritual breach of all Gods Commandments.

As in the first Commandment, namely, Thou shall have no strange gods before
me, containing the inward A pithy opening of the 10 Commandments.
worship of God: though herein differing somewhat from the Gentiles, thou
confess but one God, which also the Devils do; yet look how many profits and
pleasures do steal away thy love, fear, trust and obedience from God, to the
committing of sin, so many idols (in this lost state) have thou in the sight
of God: yea, look how many sins thou do commit in thought, word, and deed
in a day, so much thou corruptest in thee the pure inward worship of God, and
so many idols art thou guilty of, and so many strange Gods have thou in the
sight of God.

Secondly, in the second Commandment, containing any graven Image of God the
father, nor any Picture of Christ, as the Papists do; yet look how often, and
how many allurements have enticed thee to neglect either the preaching or the
zealous hearing of the word being offered either in season or out of season;
look how often thou have neglected to bow thy knees in solemn prayer to God,
three times a day with Daniel, David, and Peter, for the holy Ghost to be given
thee: look how often thou have neglected to confer (as the prudent Sergius
Paulus did) with the faithful minister, and with other faithful children of
God, to be resolved of such doubts of the assurance of thy Justification and
salvation, as may arise in thy mind: look how often thou have neglected either
the administering or receiving of the holy Sacraments; so many Images art thou
guilty of, that have stolen away thy heart from the zealous performance of the
pure outward worship of God.

Thirdly, in the third Commandment; although Mat. 5.) of taking Gods Mat. 5.
34, 35, 36.
name in vain; look how often thou have rashly taken up and used the titles of
God, as Lord, and Jesus, and Christ, who is God blessed for ever, etc. look how
often thou have unreverently used the properties of God, as his grace to
practice vanity, his mercy to sin, his Judgments to cursing, and have abused
his providence in crying out upon luck and fortune, and such like; look how
often in the creatures, thou not marking the power of God in making the
creatures, his wisdom in fitting them to thy necessities, his goodness in
giving them unto thee; but turning them from their right use, as the drink to
drunkenesse, thy tongue to lying, and such like; so abusing them to sin and
vanity; so often art thou souly guilty of taking Gods name in vain, which God
so terribly thunders against.

Fourthly, in the fourth Commandment; although John was) on the Lords day with
holy and heavenly meditations; look how often thou have not consecrated the
whole day as glorious to the Lord: and seeing on the Lords day, the Lord rose
again for thy justification, look how often thou have not profited in the
assurance of justification and salvation; look how often thou have gone to the
public congregation and Church in an holy-day-garment to the eyes of men; but
have neither gone out, nor come home in the holy day-garment of Christ's perfect
righteousness by free justification, so not celebrating with joy, but rather
denying the power of his resurrection; look how often thou have not regarded
thy family how they have profited; look how often thou have not visited the
sick, and endeavored to reconcile jarres, but performing the worship of God
upon custom and fashion, have followed on the Lords day thy worldly thoughts,
or spoken a vain word, so often have thou been a damnable breaker of the Lords
Sabbath.

Fifthly, in the fifth Commandment; if such as care not to grieve, offend, and
displease their superiors; and forgetting their outward reverence of lowly
gesture and humble speech, do use contemptuous gestures, and stubborn words;
look how often men envying greater gifts in another, do not profit by the
same; and look how often inferiors obey not Magistrates, parents, and
Ministers, cheerfully, speedily, and faithfully, so often are they foully guilty
of dishonouring fathers and mothers.

Sixthly, when thou have not committed the gross Four ways guilty of u
urther, though no bodily hurt be done. Matt. 5. 21, 22, 23, 24.
four manner of ways; though thou have done no bodily hurt unto any; as
first; if thou be but angry rashly, that is, for carnal and worldly respects,
although thou speak never a word, but go away only discontented; yet thou
art so true and deep a murderer in the sight of God, that thou have pulled
that same judgment upon thine own head, that the Scribes and Pharisees
allotted and adjudged unto him that did outrightly kill a man. But secondly, if
thou say Raca, that is, do express thine anger with taunting and
reproachful terms, as, marry come up, fie you sir, surely you are an hot
shot, and such like; now thou art a murderer in an higher degree, and have
pulled an heavier judgment of murder upon thine head. But if so far
forgetting meekness, gentleness, and patience, the very heart of this
Commandment, thou say, fool; that is, if thou burst forth in thine anger into
open railing, as to say, Rogue, Rascal, Knave, Whore, Drab, Beast, and such
like; now thou art a murderer in the highest degree of spiritruall murder,
and have pulled an high judgment of hell fire upon thy head. Yea further, if
thy brother have ought against thee, that is, if thou have not such sincere
love, so that thou have given any matter of wrong, and discontent, and just
complaint, not being by labor, money, and counsel helpful to the needy, thou
art guilty of such deep murder in the sight of God, that till thou be
reconciled unto thy brother, God abhorres all thy sacrifices, service, prayers,
and worships. (O Lord) how horrible then in the sight of ^od is the gross act
of killing a man! And thus according to this fouresold rule and interpretation
of Christ, must all the rest of the tonne Commandments be spiritually
understood.

Seventhly, as in the seventh Commandment; although thou have not peradventure
committed the

Eighthly, so likewise in the eighth Commandment; although peradventure thou
art not guilty of covetous heart, greedy after gain, look how often in the
works of thy vocation thou have had more respect to thine own advantage, than
to thy neighbors profit; look how often thou have used the least oppression or
extortion; look how often thou have not been liberal according to thy ability,
and free-handed to the poor; look how often thou have used any deceitful
words, or fraudulent deeds to overreach thy neighbor in buying or selling, or
to the lessening of his goods any other way, to the worth of a pin: so often
art thou guilty of stealing, and have played the errant thief in the sight of
God.

Ninthly, in the ninth Commandment; although so often art thou guilty of
bearing false witness against thy neighbor in the sight of God:

Lastly, in the tenth Commandment; if thou have menstruous cloth, that is,
abominable in the sight of God, Esaias 64. 6. May thou not in a due
examination Esaias 64. 6.
of thy conscience in these premises, both of the horriblenesse of the least
sin before described, and now in the multitude of them, cry out with the
Lepers under the old Law, I am unclean, I am unclean? may thou not truly cry
out, I am a Leper, I am a Leper? may thou not justly say with S. Paul, the
Law is spiritual, but I am carnal, sold under sin? may thou not in a
feeling of the multitude of thy sins say with David, My sins have taken
such hold upon me, that I am not able to look up: yea they are more in number
than the hairs of my head; therefore my heart has failed me? O Lord touch our
hearts with the sight of our manifold sins.

But add hereunto the third and last maine thing The t^i^d and last maine
thing revealed concerning sin is the fi^efold punishment.
revealed in Gods word concerning sin, and it will show thee thy full misery
in this lost condition; namely the fivefold punishment belonging to the least
sin: as

First, the everlasting curse of God, saying, Cursed is every one that
continues not in all things that are written in the book of the Law to do
them, Gal. 3. 10. Gal. 3. 10.
In which definitive sentence of God, thou must mark the perfection of his
justice against the least sin; namely, that he must needs curse the creature
that has the least sin in his sight; for who knows not but that if a man
could continue in all things (as God created him) he should not have the least
sin in the sight of God, but be perfectly holy and righteous from all spot
of sin, in the sight of God: but if he have the least sin in the sight of
God, he does not continue in all things, and so is certainly accursed, or else
God should be changeable and false, seeing one jot or tittle of this word
cannot pass away, until it Math. 5. 18.
be fulfilled, Mat. 5. 18. the reason whereof the Prophet Hab. expresses,
saying, God is of purer eyes Habak. 1. 13.
than to see sin; he cannot behold wickedness, but he must needs destroy
the sin, or else the sinner from before him.

Secondly upon this curse of God follows hardness of heart: as God denounces,
saying, So I gave them Psalm. 81. 12.
up to hardness of heart, and left them to walk in their own counsels.
Whereby if thou be not under this curse thy self, thou may see the
greatest multitude round about thee, both of high and low, rich and poor,
young and old, to lie under this plague of plagues, even hardness of heart;
that is, to have by the dead faith no sense and feeling of this their cursed
estate, and lost condition, and fearful misery by sin; as the Apostle
testifies, saying, Being past feeling, they commit sin even with greediness,
Ephesians. Ephesians. 4. 19.
4. 19. whereby under this hardness of heart, they live like Pharaoh, but to
heap up unto themselves, as treasure, wrath against the day of wrath, and of
the declaration Romans 2. 5.
of Gods just judgments, Romans 2. 5.

Thirdly, hereupon all manner of miseries and afflictions to body, goods, and
name are ready to Pharaoh, of this cursed estate; as it is expressed Deuteronomy. 28.
saying, The Lord shall send upon thee cursing, Deuteronomy. 28. 20.
trouble, and shame. And the Lord will smite thee with a consumption, and with
the fever, and with a burning ague, and with fervent heat: yea, he shall smite
thee with the botch, and with the Emerods, and with the scab, and with the
itch, that thou can not be healed. Yea the Lord will smite thee with
madness, and with blindness, and with astonying of heart, etc. verse 20. to
the end of the chapter.

Fourthly, uncertain death is ready for the least Deuteronomy. 28. 66. Thy life shall
hang before thee (as Deuteronomy. 28. 66.
it were upon a twine thread) and thou shall have just cause to fear both day
and night; for thou shall have no assurance of thy life. And again, This night
shall the Devils fetch away thy soul: So is every one that by Justification is
not rich in God, Luke 12. 20, 21. Luke 12. 20, 21.


Fifthly and lastly, when death, which is so uncertain, Go ye cursed into
everlasting fire prepared for the Devil and his Angels, Matt. 25. 41. Math.
25. 41. Verse 48.
And these shall go into everlasting pains, ver. 48. O fearful sentence!
more terrible than was ever any thunderclap that beat the poor creature all
to pieces: may we not now see with feeling horror, what lost wretches we are
by sin? is there any to turn us unto for help in this case? God is angry
with us, all his creatures are ready at his beck to execute judgments upon us:
what can we do then, but only sigh up to Christ for help? who infinitely
graciously says, come unto me all ye that feel your selves weary and heavy
laden, and I will ease you: which he does by no other means but by free
Justification: the manner whereof how he works it upon us to ease and refresh
us, is as here follows.

This heavy laden conscience thus sighing up to How Justification is wroug^t
upon us.
Christ for help and ease, being like the wounded Israelites looking up to the
brazen serpent: first God imputes to such his sons righteousness, as the
holy Ghost testifies, saying, Blessed is the man to whom God imputes
righteousness without works, Romans 4. 6. But Romans 4. 6.
because Gods imputation is an immediate act of God himself, it is not a weak
imaginary thing (as the Papists blasphemously scoff) like man's imputation: but
it is of such a strong and powerful, real working, and effectual operation,
that it conveyeth (as the Sun conveyes his beams into a dark house) that
perfect righteousness of Christ, to be (as S. Paul Romans 3. 32.
says) in us, and upon us; so powerfully that we thereby are made of unjust,
just before God; but how? not inherently, and actively, but objectively and
passively, as the dark house is made light with the Sunbeames. For the Lord
Christ (being Sol justitiae, the Calv. Instit^t. l b. 3. cap. 11. sect 23.
Sun of righteousness, Malac. 4. 2.) does in such sort communicate his
righteousness with us, that after a certain mavelous manner, he pours the
force thereof into us, so much as serves to satisfy the justice of God.

For seeing before the Tribunal seat of God, it is esteemed no righteousness,
except it be the perfect and absolute obedience of the Law; as Christ alone
Suam juslitiam in nos transferendo, nos jusl^ reddit.
is thus righteous, so by conveying his righteousness upon us, nos justos
reddit, he makes us righteous.

So that as the Brazen Serpent was of strength, through the promise of God, to
strike health into Acts and Monuments upon Patr.
the wounded and dying beholders, and made them again strong and healthful:
much more is the body of Christ, being the object of our faith, of power to
strike righteousness to our souls; and so to make us not inherently and
actively (as the Papists hold) but objectively and passively, freely in the
sight of God, and truly, and really just and righteous.

For, as by the disobedience of one man Adam, many were made sinners, before
they have done any evil work: so by the obedience of one man Christ, are many
made freely righteous, before they have done any good Romans 5. 15.
work, Romans 5. 19. Because by his knowledge my righteous servant shall
justify, that is, make many just and righteous: for he shall bear their
iniquities, Esaias 53. 11. Esaias 53. 11. Calv. i^ Esaias i^id.


The Philosophers gave many goodly precepts of righteousness; but they could
not bestow that righteousness Philos^p^i multa prae^lara praecep^a
tradiderunt, etc. Pei s^^justi si^nt.
upon any: yea the law of God it self which contains the perfect rule of
righteousness, yet through our weakness it is unpossible that by it we can
attain unto righteousness: but in the school of Christ men are not only
taught righteousness, but Doctrine of the Church of England in the sermon. o^
Iusti^cation, part 3.
by being justified, are in very deed made righteous: For to justify is, that
of unjust we are made just before God.

For so says the Apostle Paul, He that believes in Si^ enim dicit Apostolus,
etc. Ex impio facit justum, August.
him that justifies the ungodly: what is meant by justifies the ungodly or
wicked? that is, which of a wicked and ungodly man makes him just: si
justificatur impius, ex impio justus fit: that is, if a wicked man be
justified, of wicked he is made just and righteous.

So that the word, that we are justified, is not to be taken only in the
judicial signification; namely, that Zanch. in Ephesians. 2. 5.
God only reputeth, accounts, and pronounces us just and righteous, and so
quitteth us from all guilt and Loco commu. de ^ustificat. Sect. 13, 14, 15, 16,
17, 18, 19, 20.
punishment only: in which judicial signification some do barely rest: But
also it must be taken in the natural and proper signification, as it is made
of justus and sio; the force whereof is to be seen in other like words, as in
albifico to make white, sortifico to sortifie, or make strong: because so
powerful a thing is the Lords imputation of righteousness, that it does vere
and reipsa facere nos justos, that is, truly and in very Two manner of ways
made righteous.
realnesse make us just and righteous: And that also two manner of ways.

First, by imputing unto us his Sons righteousness,

And secondly he renews us by his spirit unto inherent vere and reipsa, truly
and in very deed made us righteous: then he reputeth, accounts, and
pronounces, and calls us righteous, absolving us thereby from all guilt and
punishment, which otherwise would stand neither with his perfect truth, nor
power, nor wisdom, nor justice.

Therefore God does justify no wicked man, but Perk. in Heb. 11. ver. 7.
first makes him just and righteous in and by Christ; and then accounts him
so.

Because he was wounded for our transgressions, he was broken for our
iniquities, the chastisement of our peace was upon him, and by making us of
unjust just and righteous before God: thus by his stripes we are healed, Esaias
53. 5. Esaias 53. 5.


Thus is Christ the Physician which heals all our Doctrine of the Church of
England in the sermon of our misery, part 2.
diseases: thus is he the Savior which saves his people from all their sins.

Let us all then with one accord burst out with joyful voices, and say with
the Prophet, Praise the Lord O my soul, and all that is within me praise his
holy name: praise the Lord O my soul, and forget not all his benefits, which
so wonderfully forgiveth all thine iniquities; that of unjust making thee
freely just before God, thus heals all thine infirmities: for by his stripes
we are made whole.

But how perfectly we are healed, is to be seen by the parts of Justification
following.

CHAP. III. Of the parts of Justification, and first of the first part, and
excellency thereof.
THe parts of Justification are two. The first part of free Justification is
that, whereby we being by the power of Gods imputation so clothed with the
wedding garment of Christ's perfect righteousness, that of unjust we are made
just before God; have thereby all our sins that we feel daily dwelling in
us, so (above our reason, sense, and feeling, that it may be by the faith of
Gods power) quite taken away from before God, and so utterly abolished out of
his fight, that we have not one spot or wrinkle of sin, or any such thing in
the sight of God; because the blood of Christ does make us clean from all sin:
as these Scriptures following do abundantly testify.

In those days (of the Kingdom of Christ) and at Ierem ^0. 20.
that time, says the Lord, the iniquity of Israel shall be sought for, and
there shall be none; and the sins of Judah, and they shall not be found: but
how comes this John 1. 25. Praecipuum Christi officium breviter quidem sed
dilucide exponit, etc. quod sci^^c^t ^^ccata mundi tollens, etc. Quioquid est
injustiti^ per Christum tolli*
to pass? thus;

Behold the Lamb of God that takes away the sin of the world.

Here he lays forth briefly, yet plainly, the chief office of Christ: namely,
that by the sacrifice of his death, taking away the sins of the world, he
reconciles men unto God; as if he should say, whatsoever unrighteousness there
is that may alienate or estrange men from God, by Christ it is taken away: this
is Hoc su^mum est be^^sicio^ um, ex quo reliqua pendent.
the sum of all bessings, upon which all the rest depend: out of this
fountain do the streams of all good things flow forth upon us. But how does
Christ Esaias, saying, I, even I have put away thy transgressions like darkness,
and abolished thy sins as a Esaias 43. 25. and 44. 22. Tollendi ver^^^ bifariam
exponi potest, etc. Velquod peccata aboleat, Marlor ibid.
mist, Esaias 43. 25. and 44. 22.

For this word Tollendi may be expounded two manner of ways: either that
Christ has taken upon himself the burden wherewith we were oppressed, as 1
Pet. 2. 24. or else, quod peccata aboleat, that he does clean put out and
abolish our sins.

For Christ taking upon him our sins, they could Luth. sermon. upon Christ's
Resurrection.
not remain and abide upon him: what then became of them? they must needs
vanish away, and be utterly Oportet ea evanesc^re, ac penitus occid^re, ac in
nihi^umredigi. is instar Christi peccati exp^rs est.
abolished and brought to nothing; whereby faith works so mightily, that he
that believes that Christ has taken away his sins, is as clean without
sin as Christ himself.

And it is no matter, that we feel sin and death still in us, as if Christ
had not taken them away; because Luth. ibid.
God thus stablisheth the faith of his power: and therefore that there may be
place for faith, we feel the contrary; for it is the nature of faith to feel
Fi^^s ejus naturae est, ut nihil sentiat; sed missa facta ratione ^laudat
oculos, etc.
nothing; but letting go reason, shuts her eyes, and opens her ears to
that which is spoken by God, and cleaves to the word spoken both living and
dying; and thus glorifieth the Word of the Lord, Act. 13. 48. which Act. 13.
48. Etsi peccatorum semus in no^ts velctus est, ideo solummodo, ^t nos ad fidem
adigat, and fidem cumulatiorem reddat, etc.
indeed does the deed. And therefore although the feeling of sin is left in us,
only to the end to drive us to faith, and to make faith the more abound: yet
has Christ taken away our sins from before God and utterly abolished them.

For one Adam brought one sin into the world, but Adam unus, unum peccatum,
Iste vero unus, non solum illud unum, sed cuncts abstubt. August. Hic mentio
sit maculae a qua purgamur.
Christ being but one, has taken away not only that one; but also together
with it, he has taken away all, that he found added thereunto.

Where also is mention made of the blot or stain, from which we are made
clean. This blot or stain, the Apostle calls sin: that is, the breaking and
violating of the Law of God; which (as before is showed) of all things is the
most woeful, most foul, and extremely Heming in 1 Ioh. 1. 7.
abominable; wherewith God is horribly angry; and is most abominable, both in
the sight of God, and of the holy Angels.

This then is the stain or blot, whereof Christ by Atque haec est maculae a
qua purgamur, Heming, ibid.
taking away our sins, does make us clean; signified, given, ratified and
sealed to the true seed of the faithful by their washing in baptism.

For this is the efficacy of that purging and clensing which is wrought upon us
by the blood of Christ; Abomni maculae omnium peccatorum. Heming, ibid.
and given, sealed unto us, in our Baptism: Namely, that he makes us clean,
not only from this or that spot of sin, but also from all spots of all sins.
Sive magna sunt, sive parva, sive multa; Hic Agnus tollit universa. Luth. Perk.
etc. Heb. 10. 14. Luth. Sermon. in Lu^e 2. ver. 21.


That is, whether they be great, or whether they be little, whether they be
many, even all, past, present, and to come; this Lamb of God takes away all;
For with one sacrifice has Christ made perfect for ever all them that are
sanctified, Heb. 10. 14.

This is to preach the Gospel; which, who so hears and believes; he truly
knows and acknowledges the finger of John, and him whom he pointed to, even
Christ, that Lamb of God, that takes away the sins of the world.

Yea all sin, as sins of commission, and sins of omission; Luth. sermon. of
Original sin.
actual sins, and original sins; all are done away: For, because original
sin is worse and more horrible than any actual sin; because it is the spring
Originate peccatum quod sons and origo omnium peccatorum sit, etc.
and fountain of all other sins: therefore has God so ordained, that no man
shall come to salvation, unless he be pure and clean from this sin: and
therefore he gave the 10th Commandment, wherein he forbids this original
sin; and wills that we Deus ita ordinavit, utremo sa utem consequi, nisi
hujus pec a^^ purus sit, etc.
be as clean again, and righteous, as Adam was before his fall: but, because
we cannot perform this thing; therefore has he given his own Son for us unto
death, that he might both from this sin, and from all sins flowing from this
original sin, free us by his blood, and so make us clean. Then hereupon do
arise in us good and holy desires and affections, contrary to the former
pravitie and corruption; as namely humility, purity, gentleness, and all
other virtues; and then all good works are practiced, and that also with a
willing heart. The author and cause of all which, is this grace of
Justification; by which alone this original sin is done away, and we made
clean and acceptable before God.

Which Christ actually fulfilled, when bleeding out his blood and life upon the
Cross, he cried out, it is finished, or perfected, John 19. 30. (...).


For the blood of Jesus Christ the Son of God does (...)
make us clean from all sin, 1 John 1. 7. Thus does our good Physician Jesus
Christ most effectually cleanse the spiritual leaprosie of our sins; because
by his own blood he has made us clean from all sin.

For that saying of S. John, that the blood of Christ does make us clean from
all sin, is to be understood, as preventing an objection; for whereas S. John
had said, that by receiving the Gospel, and Word of life, we have joyful
Fellowship with God, If we walk in the light, as he is in the light; one may
object and darkness of sin, when we have endeavored to walk in the light of
righteousness, and to avoid the darkness of sin, never so much; yet seeing
we are even conceived in iniquity, and feel our selves even sinks of sin, how
can any mortal man have any such fellowship with so pure and clean a God, as
S. John writes? To which he answers: August. Haec est vera pax, etc.
purgatis and reconciliatis sicut maculati and a^^nati, etc. Heming, 1 Ioh. 1. 7.


For this is true peace, and firm knitting us with our Creator, in that we
are made clean, and so reconciled again by the Mediator of life; as we were
made foul, and so estranged from him by the Mediator of death.

But now the excellency of this first part of Justification, which the holy
Apostle calls the deep things of 1 Cor. 2. 10.
God, 1 Cor. 2. 10. which deeply considered, calls us out of the dead faith,
and makes us to give our selves wholly to God by faith, and to our neighbor by
love, to walk in all Gods Commandments zealously: this excellency (I say) of
this first part of free Justification; namely, how truly and utterly our
sins are abolished out of Gods sight, and how perfectly clean the blood of
Christ does make us from all sin; the holy Ghost does express it unto us by
six principal and most emphaticall phrases or similitudes: wherein first,
observing this rule, that the similitudes of the Scriptures must have a truth
correspondent to the similitude; and secondly, marking how these six phrases
Six Emphaticall Scripture phrases, describing the first part of Justification.
exceed one another in perfectness and sweetness: we may ascend (as it were)
by certain steps or stairs to the full height of comfort and joy.

The first phrase is this; Look how far the East is from 1 Psalm. 103 12.
the West, so far has God removed our sins from us, Psalm. 103. 12.

The sense, and sum whereof is this; that having Summa est, long late que
pro orbis magnitudine effundi misericordiam, Dei super fideles. Ne quid
impediat cursum ejus. Aboleri prorsus little peccata, Calvin, Ibid. Nisi enim
peccata a nobis removerentur, locus divinae ergo nos miscricordiae esse non
potest, Muse. Ibid.
said in the eleventh verse, That look how great and wide the world is from
East to West, from Heaven to Earth; so largly is the mercy of God powered out
upon the faithful; lest there should be any thing to hinder the course of
this large mercy; in the twelfe verse, the Prophet adds that their sins are
utterly abolished.

For unless our sins be removed away from us, there can be no place for
such large mercy of God to come upon us.

The second phrase expressing more fully this perfect abolishing of our sins,
is this, That there is no God, (...)
like unto our God, that takes way iniquity, and casts all our sins into
the bottom of the Sea, Micah. 7. Mich. 7. 19, 19.
18. 19.

The meaning whereof is; That God does cast all Projicit in mare veluti
talentum plum^i, etc. ut amplius no^ compar^ant, Pel. Ibid.
the sins of the faithful, into the bottom of the Sea, like a talent o^ lead
from our eyes, that from thenceforth they may never appear before God any more.

For God does so remove away the sins of the faithful Deus removet e conspectu
ita ut amplius non redeunt in conspectum.
out of his sight, that they may never return into his sight any more.

Because Christ himself did set upon sin, and did prevail over it, and with
his righteousness swallowed it up; and it was enforced to be extinguished of
him Luth. Sermon. in Ioh. 20.
no less, and no otherwise, than a spark of fire cast into the wide Sea. And
thus has God cast all our sins into the bottom of the Sea.

The third phrase expressing yet more fully the perfect (...).
to himself a glorious Church: How, or wherein glorious? Answ. That is, not
having now at this present Non dicit, non habituram, sed non hab^ntem.
time (as the Greek and Latin Participle of the present time does signify)
one spot or wrinkle of sin or any such thing, Ephesians. 5. 25, 26, 27. Ephesians. 5.
25, 26, 26.


For thus teach we; That the Church has not one spot or wrinkle of sin; but is
perfectly righteous by free Justification and Faith only in Christ, which
serves to approve her to the eyes of God. Again, she is holy in life and
conversation; but this latter way is unperfect, and serves to approve her to
the eyes of men: And thus do allege this place, Augustine, Luther, Zanch.
Downham, Willet, Hall, Heming, and many others saying thus.

The Church is made cle^n; that she may have August. Mu^datur ut non hab^at
maculam. Non potest h^bere caput illud nisi coadignum co^pus, condignam uxor^m:
haec est Sponsa Christi non habens maculam; per lavacrum en^m ^uferuntur
peccata. Interna purg^tio.
no spot: that head can not have a body but agreeable and suitable unto
himself: such an husband does not marry a wife but like unto himself;
therefore he says, That he might make her to himself a glorious Church, not
having (now) one spot or wrinkle, nor any such thing: for by her baptism her
sins are taken away.

For when a man is baptized, he receives this benefit of grace, signed and
sealed unto him, as with the very seal of God; whereby the inward washing and
making clean, which is wrought by the blood of Christ is given, ratified, and
sealed to him that is baptized, if afterward being come to years, his
unbelief do not seclude him from the benefit.

Therefore that saying of S. Paul is to be holden fast Qua^e ^irmiter tenendom.
H^ming, in 1 Ioh, 1, 7.
firmly, who testifies; That Christ so loved his Church that he gave himself
for it, to make it holy, and has made it clean, by the washing of water
through the Word, that he might make it to himself a glorious Church, not
having spot or wrinkle or any such thing; but that it should be holy and
without blame. In this saying of S. Paul, five things are to be Five things to
be marked. Christo sol^.
marked: First, that to Christ alone is given the virtue and power of making
clean to Godward, as S. John also affirms saying, the blood of Jesus Christ
does make us clean from all sin: for it is he alone that washes effectually.
Secondly, is expressed the washing of water, which is the outward sign, and
seal of the inward Extern^m symholum interioris purgationis, Veritas, etc*
making clean. Thirdly, is to be marked the truth correspondent, and
answering to the sign; and that is, the mystical or secret making clean of
the soul, Occulta mundatio animae, ac interna a pecca^i maculis a^^^c^o.
and the inward washing from the spots of sin. Fourthly, is added, Through the
word; that it may be marked, that the force and efficacy of baptism, is not in
the water; but in the Word of promise, which is signified and sealed by the
washing. Fifthly, is to be noted the Analogy, agreement or likeness of the
sign with the thing signified: The sign, is the washing with water; the
agreement or likeness of the sign, with the thing signified, is this; That as
the water outwardly washes the body: so the blood of Christ, does inwardly
make clean the soul from all the foulness, uncleanesse, and filthiness of
sins. Thus God said unto Paul, Arise and be baptized, and wash away thy sins,
Act. 22. 12.

So that, this is the efficacy of the purging which is V^ sapra.
wrought by the blood of Christ; namely, that it makes us clean, not only from
this or that spot of sin, but even from all spots of all sins.

Where therefore, there is no spot left, there remains Vbi nulla s^perest
macu^a ibi nihil, etc.
nothing to be purged in Purgatory: For, what is more foolish then to go about
to purge and Quod est mundi^simum.
make that clean, which is most clean already? But God makes his Church
glorious, and does not leave D. Sutli^f. de Purgato. contra B^llarm.
in her one spot, or wrinkle, or any such thing.

But all, or whole sin being taken away, neither the At toto peccato sublato.
Nulla pars remanet. D. Sutliss^ ibid.
fault, nor the guilt, that is (as some speak) neither the matter, nor the
form of sin, nor any part thereof remains. Here let Protestants going about
to deny this see; how they lay not again the foundation of Purgatory, that
these men so plucked up by the very roots.

The fourth Scripture phrase expressing yet an higher degree of Christ's utter
abolishing of all our sins out of Gods sight, and how perfectly clean we
are made from all sin is this; that the blood of Christ does make us from all
sin in the sight of God whiter than snow: as God says by the Prophet Esaias;
Though your sins were as Crimson, they shall be made as white as Snow, Esaias,
1. 18. Yea David's faith goes further, and Esaias 1. 18.
reaches to that which to man's reason is impossible: saying, Wash thou me,
and I shall be whiter then snow: can any thing be whiter than Snow? Yes says
David, if God take in hand to make me clean with the blood of the Messiah, I
shall be whiter than snow, Psalm. 51. 7.
Psalm. 51. 7.

But here does arise a Theological Question; how Sed hic ^ritur theologica
Quaestio, etc. in Psalm. 51. 7. Answ.
we can be made in the sight of God purer and whiter than Snow; when, yet
notwithstanding, the relics of sin do always cleave unto us? I answer; by
reason of that purity which we have of Christ in spirit, and in faith, and in
the Sacraments appointed by him, A Christian is truly said to be purer and
whiter than snow; Yea, rather purer than the Sun, and the Stars;
notwithstanding the spots of the spirit, and of the flesh, do cleave unto
them: because they are covered and abolished from before God, with Christ's
cleanness and purity, which we attain by the hearing of the Word, and by
Faith.

Say thou not therefore I have sinned very much; Ne mi^i dixe^is permultum
peccavi, etc. Chrysostom. ^omi^. 3. paenitent.
How can I be healed of this load of sin which I feel in me? Thou can
not, but thy God can; yea, and can so do it, that he can clean put out and
abolish thy sin: mark diligently this saying; for God does put out, and
abolish sin so clean, that there remains no print of them. In the healing of
the body, it is not so; For, when a Physician has healed a wound, yet a scarre
remains; and although he endeavor to take it away, and abolish it a thousand
ways, yet he cannot do it: But God, when he puts out sins, he abolisheth them
so clean, that there remains no scarre, nor any print thereof, but with the
healing, he gives the fresh color; because he does not only put out and
extinguish the sin, and makes it not to be; yea, and as if it had never
been; but also supplies in place thereof, and puts in righteousness, and so
takes it altogether, and so clean away from before himself, that there
appears no scarre, nor print, nor sign of scarre. But let this be proved by
the Scriptures, that the faith thereof may abide firm: I will bring in before
you wounded men, a people full of boyles and ulcers: and these were the Jews,
a people that from the soales of their feet unto the crown of their heads were
full of filth, rottenness and soars; being become like Sodom and Gomorrah:
yet unto these says the Lord Christ, Come unto me; and that you may know my
power, that no sin can withstand my might, I will not leave you a scarre, or
print, or sign of scarre: for though your sins were as red as Crimson, they
shall be made as white as snow. What? is here any scarre after the color of
making clean? is here any blackness? is here any spot? Thus as you see the
greatness of the promise; so also you see the Majesty of the performer; for
to God all things are possible; of a man unclean and foul, he can make him
before himself, pure and clean, (yea as David confesses) whiter than snow.

And therefore Christ's garments, which in the Mountain shined as white as
snow, did signify his August. Vestis tanquam ^ix dealbata, significat
Ecclesiam, etc.
Church, which he has made so clean, from all spot of sin, that she is
supra nivem, whiter than snow.

This then is the glory of God in me, that I being Haec est gloria D^i m^me,
etc.
a sinner in my self (for what should he remit and abolish, if I were not a
sinner?) do yet notwithstanding believe that heaven and earth shall sooner
Quod peccater in me ipso exist^ns, etc. creda^ tamen potius c^lum terramque
ruitura, quam me non else per Christi sanguinem a^ ombibus peccatis ipsa ^ive
pur. orem and candidiorem: Si non credis, facis D^um cum summa and horrenda
blasp^emia, mendac em, etc. Pomeran. in Psalm. 51. 7.
fall, than that I am not by the blood of Christ, from all my sins in the sight
of God, more pure and white than very snow: if thou beleevest not this, thou
make God with thy highest and horriblest reproach and blasphemy, a liar:
Beatus qui intelligit; Blessed is he that understands.

The fifth Scripture, phrase expressing yet in an higher degree, how truly all
our sins are utterly abolished out of Gods sight; and how perfectly clean
the blood of Christ does make us from all sin, is this; That God himself,
whose eyes are all seeing, and searching the heart and reins, yet testifies,
that he does see no sin in his justified children; and to the glory of his
work wrought in the Brazen-Serpent, wherewith he had newly healed his people,
he doubleth his speech saying; God sees no iniquity in Jaacob; and he sees
no transgression in Israel, Numb. Numb. 23. 21.
23. 21. Which is much more truly verified in exhibiting the true substance
Christ Jesus, whereof the Brazen-Serpent was but the shadow; not only quoad
effectum, in respect of the effect of their sin, as not to punish them for
the same; but also quoad causam, in respect of the cause of punishment, which
is sin it self: for if sin it self be so perfectly abolished out of Gods
sight, as it is expressed in the two first emphaticall phrases; if we have not
one spot or wrinkle of sin in his sight, as it is proved in the third phrase;
if the blood of Christ has made us so perfectly clean, that we are in the
sight of God from all sin whiter than snow; and all this, because we are by the
wedding garment of Christ's righteousness made from all spot of sin perfectly
holy and righteous, in the sight of God freely: then as a true consequent, it
necessarily follows, that this phrase also must needs be true in respect of
sin it self, which is worse than the punishment, That God sees no iniquity in
his true Jaacob, nor he sees no transgression in his justified children: Which
figure of the Brazen Serpent, S. Paul seeming to allude unto, flatly affirms
the same truth to be fully verified in the substance Christ, saying; And you
that were enemies by your evil works, has he now reconciled: but how? or by
what means? Even in that body of his flesh through death, to the end to make
you so holy, that you are without blame and without fault Colos. 1. 22. Non
simpliciter sed in conspectu suo, Zan. h. ^^i. Non qu^d^m si^e ^e^cato est ali
quis ^oputus, s^c nec Israel: sed quoni^m del^ta est iniqu^tas, Pell. in Num^.
ibid*
in Gods sight, Colos. 1. 22. Not simply, but in the sight of God; he says not
indeed, that any people is with out sin and so not Israel it self neither, but
because their iniquity is (though mystically above reason, sense and feeling)
yet truly put out from before God, and utterly abolished, so he sees no
iniquity in Jaacob; and so he sees no trangression in Israel: the true cause,
whereof is yet more fully expressed by Zanch. saying, utpote quae sanguine
filii Dei sunt extinctae; because their iniquities are extinguished and clean
put out by the blood of the Son of God.

For in as much as mankind is utterly marred, and ^alv. s^rm. in Ephesians. cap.
1. 7.
given over to all naughtiness; God must needs be a mortal enemy to us, and
an adversary against us, till the remembrance of our sins be buried out of
his sight.

Because God being the fountain of all justice and Calvin, ibid.
righteousness, does utterly hate and abhor the evil that he sees in us:
Therefore until such time as our sins be abolished, and clean put out, it is
impossible for us to hope, that God should either love, or favor us.

Blessed therefore are they whose sins are covered; for Psalm. 32 1, 2. Quod
^egitur non apparet: non quod non est, sed quod co^tectum est, Marlo. in Romans 4
ibid.
that which is covered does not appear; not because it is not; but because it
is covered, for they are said to be covered in respect of our sense, and
feeling; because we always feel them in us, as if they were not abolished,
but only covered out of Gods sight: but yet with the wedding garment of Christ's
righteousness so covered, Non remissis solum, sed plane de^etis, Luch. s^r. in
March. 11.
that from before God the blood of Christ does not only cover them, but utterly
abolish them.

For Gods forgiving, is his covering; his covering, Sanguis Christi peccata
nofir^ non tant^m ^perit, sed etiam coram Deo penitus del^t, Be^. in 1 Pet. 4.
8.
is a taking of them away; Ioh. 1. 29. his taking them away, is a clean
putting of them out, Esaias 43. 25. and 44. 22. his putting of them out, is an
utter abolishing of them from before himself, Heb. 9. 26.

For our bearing with one another, is called our covering of a multitude of
sins: But before God, the blood of Christ alone, does not only cover them;
but also utterly abolish them.

Because, by Gods forgiveness of sins, all things, Luth. s^rm. of the sum
of a Christian life, Tim. 1. 5, 6 7.
which are not pure and clean, are put out, consumed, abolished; as a drop of
water is consumed and abolished of the heat of the Sun (or rather, as the
Sunbeames abolish darkness, as the Prophet Esaias says, Esaias 44. 22.

Therefore blessed is he, whose sin is covered, for that which is covered, is
not seen: that which is not Ierom. in Psalm. 32. 1, 2.
seen is not imputed; that which is not imputed, shall not be punished.

Whereupon we have to mark first of all, that we Calvin, in Ephesians. Sermon. cap.
1. 7.
can obtain no favor at Gods hands, nor be received of him, till our sins be
wiped out, and the remembrance of them clean put away.

The reason whereof is as I said before, that God Calvin, Ibid.
must needs hate sin, wheresoever he sees it.

But let it suffice us, that he receaves us into his Calvin, Ibid.
favor freely, only because the remembrance of our sins is buried out of his
sight. And again, let us understand, that the same can not be done, but by
the death and passion of our Lord Jesus Christ: And this is the thing wherein
we must wholly rest.

Because by Christ's becoming a curse upon the Luth. in Galath. Cap. 3. ver. 13.
Cross, by this means, the whole world is so purged, and made so clean from
all sin that God does see nothing else in the whole world of true believers,
but a mere cleansing and righteousness. This is the wedding garment, whereby
the Church of Christ is from the soale of her seet, to the crown of her head so
Ornala est ab imo pede usque ad verticem, ut nihil mal^^um in ea conspiciatur
and nulla macula deformitatis appareat: sed Coram Deo, etc. Luth. 95. ver. 9.
13.
adorned, that no sin may be seen in her, nor no spot of deformity may
appear: but yet before God, not in the sight of men. For God sees no spot in
her, because he sees nothing in her, but his Sons righteousness, wherewith
his Church is clothed, and whereby she has salvation, life, and glory: for
seeing she has put on Christ himself, to Godward by Justification; and to
man-ward by Sanctification; although she has some sin in the imperfections
Brightman, in Revel. 3. 4.
of her Sanctification that the Devil sees; and every one of us in our
consciences do feel it: Luth. ibid. Psalm. 51. Id Diab^lus cernit, sed Deus
non videt.
but God sees none; for by reason of Christ, with whom she is clothed, she
is all fair, without spot or wrinkle: as Christ himself testifies, saying:
Behold thou art fair, my love; behold in mine eyes, thus clothed as thou art,
with my righteousness, thou art all fair, and there is no spot in thee, Cant.
Hall in Cant. Cant. 4. 7.
4. 7.

Whosoever, therefore have not confidence in this Quicunque igitur in hoc uno
non fidu^t, quod per mortem Christ's, etc. Peccata subla^a sunt, ne peccanostra
videre possit. Proculdubio periere, Luth. Psa. 130. 6
one point, that our sins are so taken away by the blood of Christ, that God
does not see our sins in us; without doubt they are damned, as long as they
continue to rob the blood of Christ of this honor, and his wedding garment of
this glory.

The sixth and last Scripture phrase expressing in the highest degree the
almost infinite abolishing of all our sins out of Gods sight, is this: that we
have so perfectly none before him, that he himself testifies, that he does
not so much as Remember any sin in us. And this is wonderful sweet; for if a
Father do forgive his child some great fault, the child indeed is freed from
blows and beating; But if his Father do but Remember it, the very remembrance
of the fault breeds some discontent, and sower looks: but then is the peace,
and love, and loving countenance of a Father toward his child full and
complete, when he does not so much as Remember any fault; So does God say: I,
even I am he that so utterly abolish and put away ^hine iniquities, that I will
not so much as Remember thy sins, Esaias, 43. 25. Which saying is also true, Esaias
43. 25.
not only quoad effectum (as I said before) in respect of the effect of their
sin; as, that he does not remember them to punish them: but also quoad causam,
in respect of the sin it self; for first every one will easily grant, that
God truly remembers no sin in his Sons righteousness from all eternity: then
secondly, that we being hereby of unjust made just, that is, perfectly holy and
righteous from all spot of sin in the sight of God freely in that
righteousness only; now as God looks upon us in this justified estate, he
remembers no sin in us: not simply, but as we are in this new glorious estate;
because there was never any sin in it: as some King marrying a poor maiden,
and having clothed her in sumptuous and princely apparel, may be said, now to
remember in that sumptuous attire no beggary in her any more: And thus does the
Prophet say:

In those days (viz. of Christ's Kingdom) and at that time, says the Lord,
the iniquity of Israel shall be sought for, but there shall be none: and the
sins Ierem. 50. 20. Luth. in Galat. cap. 1. 4.
of Judah, but they shall not be found, Ierem. 50. 20. Because Christ has put
away the sins of the whole world, and has fastened them unto the Cross, and
put them so clean out by himself.

That according to Paul's Divinity, there is no Luth. in Galat. 3. 13.
sin, no death, no malediction any more in the Church.

Because Christ appeared in the end of the world, Heb. 9. 26.
(...), ad abolitionem peccati, that is, to the abolishing, evacuating, or
utter vanishing away of sin, Heb. 9. 26.

And therefore that there is no more sin, etc. in Luth. in Galat. sap. 3. 13.
the Church, since Christ now reigns, we daily confess in the Apostles Creed,
when we say, I believe that there is an holy Church; which is indeed nothing
else but as if we should say, I believe that there is no sin in the Church of
God; for they which do believe in Christ, are no sinners, Romans 5. 8, 9. but
are holy Romans 5. 8, 9.
and righteous, lords over sin and death, and living for ever. But faith only
sees this; for we say, I believe there is an holy Church. But if thou believe
reason, and thine own eyes, thou will judge clean contrary; for thou see
many things in the godly which offend thee; thou see them sometimes to fall
into sin, and to be weak in faith, and to be subject unto wrath, envy, and
such other evil affections: therefore (say thou) the Church is not so holy.
I deny the consequence: for if I look upon mine own person, or the person of
my brother, it shall never be in Gods sight so absolutely holy: but if I
behold Christ, who has sanctified and made clean his Church, then it is
altogether holy; for he has taken away the sins of the whole world.

And therefore does S. John testify, that in Christ (that is in his body the
Church) is no sin, 1 John 1 John 3. 5. Non de Christ. persona hic ^git, sed
de tol^ corpore, Marl. ibid.
3. 5. for here he speaks not of the person of Christ, but of his whole body:
totum enim Christi corpus purum esse oportet: for the whole body of Christ must
needs be pure and clean.

So that true Divinity teaches, that there is no Luth. Galath. cap. 3. 13
sin in the Church any more.

Because (as I said before, and do repeat again for the better marking) by
Christ's dying upon the Cross, he has purged and made us so clean from all
sin in the sight of God, that God does see nothing else in the whole world of
true believers but a mere clensing and righteousness.

Now because true divinity teaches that there is no sin in the Church any
more: hereupon it is that God testifies, that he does remember our sins no
more: saving thus:

Behold the days come, says the Lord, that I will make a new covenant with
the house of Israel, not like the covenant that I made with their fathers, when
I led them by the Ierem. 31. 31, 32, 34. Heb. 10. 14. 15, 16, 17,
hand out of Egypt: the which my covenant they brake, although I was an
husband unto them, says the Lord.

But this shall be the covenant that I will make with Huc pertinet locutio
Prophetae, tun remittipeccata cu^ memoria little deletur coram Deo, Calv. in
Mic. 7. 19. Habehant Patres sublege easdem quas hodie habemus de remissione
peccatorum promissiones etc. Atqui Propheta quasinovit quiddans and prius
inauditu^ affert: promittit nullam sub novo faedue peccatorum fore memoriam.
Nunc ergo Deus peccatorum non recordatur alioqui frustra diceretur, etc. Calv.
in Heb. cap. 10. 18. Hoc enim Christus praestitit solus, ut non veniant amplius
in memoriam cora^ Deo, Call. Ier. ib.
them, etc. I will so forgive their iniquities, and with one offering make them
so perfect for ever, that I will remember their sins no more, Ierem. 31. 31,
32, 34. Hebr. 10. 14. 15, 16, 17. Hitherto tends the saying of the Prophet,
that then our sins are (under the new Testament) forgiven, when the very
remembrance of them is put out from before God.

For the fathers under the Law had the same promises of forgiveness of sins
which we have, and trusting to the same, they called upon God, and did rejoice
in forgiveness and pardon obtained: But here the Prophet brings, as it were, a
certain new matter, and before not heard of, promising that under the new
Testament, with one offering the children of God should be made so perfect for
ever, Heb. 10. 14. that there shall be no remembrance of sin before God.

Now then God does not so much as remember our sins; because now there is one
cleansing made for them all, once making us perfect for ever. Otherwise the
Prophet should say in vain, or to no purpose, that this should be the benefit
and glory of the new Testament, that God will not so much as remember our sin.

For this Christ alone has brought to pass, that our iniquities may not so
much as come in remembrance before God any more.

Nothing therefore concerns us more, than that Nihil igitur nostra magis
interest, quam ut secure statuere nobis liceat, non venire in memoriam, etc.
Marl. Ioh. 20. 23.
we do securely and joyfully assure our selves that our sins come no more
into remembrance before God.

CHAP. IV. Objections answered, and the justifying faith described and cleared.
NOw before we proceed to the second part of Justification, I think it will not
be amiss to answer certain objections, which the two enemies of free
Justification, namely, natural reason and unbelief, do raise up against this
first part of Justification: but before we come to the objections, it is not
impertinent to say something of the objectors, or persons making these
objections; of whom discretion wills us to note, that they are of three The
different sorts of objectors are three 1
sorts.

The first are Papists, who although they grant that we are justified by the
free grace of God, through the merits of Christ, whereby all sins, when a man
is justified, be pardoned him; yet they can by no means brook, that we are made
perfectly holy and righteous from all spot of sin in the sight of God freely,
without any good works, or holy walking wrought by us: this (say they) is false
and heretical doctrine, and in their deep wisdom and learning they cry out
(as it was objected against Paul) that this opens the gate to all wickedness,
and that then men may live as they list; And that the Law of God becomes
unprofitable; And that then men may continue in sin, that this grace of so
perfect abolishing our sins may abound; with many other such like cavills,
which by the Protestant Antagonists, are fully answered, especially by Calvin,
from the eleventh chapter, to the twentieth of the third book of his
Institutions.

The second sort of objectors, are such as being in Second sort of objectors.
name Protestants, and professing themselves utter enemies to Papists, in that
(as they say) they will not give the least piece of Justification to works and
holy walking, and will seem both to themselves and others to hold Free
Justification perfectly: And yet, because of their being in the dead faith,
they do not understand it; and because by conceiving it after a carnal humane
witted-fashion, they feel no sweetness in it: therefore declining in
affection unto the stablishing of their own righteousness, they not only
nullify Free Justification, and make it as good as nothing; but also making
the light of nature described, Romans 2. 14, 15. and natural Romans 2. 14. 15.
reason their chiefest guide; they weaken the faith of others, by running into
the very objections of the Papists; and shake hands with them in the maine
points of salvation, with whom they would seem to be at utter variance. And
all this (I say again) because they lie in the dead faith, whereby they
understand not the nature and excellency of Free Justification: and yet one
such may do us more harm in weakening our faith than many Papists; not only,
because they profess with us one and the same profession, in letter; and so
are like homebred flattering enemies; but also, because by great literal
learning and teaching, they may bear a great name, that they live, when by the
dead faith they indeed are dead, Rev. 3. 1. Therefore Revel. 3. 1.
that these objectors do not weaken our faith, we must learn to discern
these underminers of our faith. But peradventure some will say, how may we
discern them? I answer, by knowing and diligent marking The nature of the dead
faith.
the nature of the dead faith, which is this; to hold the very truth after a
sort, as far as the light of nature, good memory, and good humane wit can
reach; and herein to think themselves rich and increased in goods, and have
need of nothing, Revel. 3. 17. being ashamed Revel. 3. 17.
not to hold as all the Country of our profession is thought to hold, sticking
fast to such phrases of Scripture as seem to agree with their human wit and
reason: but because such by hearing, do hear after a literal manner, but do
not understand; and by seeing, do see after a carnal human-witted fashion,
but do not perceive; Mat. 13. 13, 14. therefore they talk of that which they
Matt. 13. 13. 14.
hold, as men talk of things in their sleep, and can say, Siboleth, but not
Shiboleth: Judge. 12. 6. that is, can Judge. 12. 6.
say something; but not make a clear and perspicuous confession of the
mysteries of Christ: but if that be pressed upon them, that S. Paul calls
(...), the deep things of God, 1 Cor. 2. 10. expressed by such 1 Cor. 2. 10.
phrases of Scripture as are correspondent, to the glory and nature of God, and
which Christ calls the mysteries and secrets of the Kingdom of heaven, Matthew.
13. 11. Matt. 13. 11.
which is but the excellency and deepnesse of the things which they themselves
seem to hold; especially being tried, as Nicodemus was, with a new John 3. 4.
phrase which they have not heard of; expressing but the old matter, which like
blind Mill-horses they daily run round in, and have daily heard: then with
Nicodemus they count it absurd, and do judge it very foolishness it self, 1
Cor. 2. 14. and cry out, 1 Cor. 2. 14. Mar. 1. 27. Ioh. 3. 9.
What new doctrine is this? Mar. 1. 27. How can these things be? Ioh. 3. 9.
and then they fall a wrangling with Nicodemicall conclusions, and do not keep
neither in word nor deed to that which they hold: but speak like men in a
spiritual frenzy flat contraries and contradictories; and then fall to
sophisticating, raging and calumniating; that is, to a changing and wresting
ones words and meaning; and finally, if at length they be not renewed and
changed with Nicodemus, they fall to railing and persecuting, Act. 13. 45, 50.
Act. 13. 45. 50.
The dead general calling, or dead faith, and literal knowledge in the same,
being the death of all the Prophets and Apostles that spoke spiritually. And
thus by the excellency of Christ's benefits laid open, the thoughts of many
hearts are opened to be very bad, that seemed a long time by an appearance of
Sanctification to be very good, Luke 2. 34, 35. Luke 2. 34. 35.


The third sort of objectors are such, as are not The third sort of objectors.
Agents, but mere Patients, that is, do not make, but take objections; and
being troubled with the same in mind, and having their faith weakened thereby,
do only desire to be resolved of their doubts: now although these last are to
be dealt with all in all gentleness; yet the two first sorts standing more
obstinately upon their own conceits, there is little good to be done upon
them, except they be more roughly and roundly dealt withal. Their objections,
ranked in three bands. First, from Scripture. Secondly* Examples.


Let us now therefore come unto their objections; whereof because they would
gather an whole army, and do rank them into threebands; as first Scriptures,
and secondly Examples, and thirdly Reasons; let us set upon some of the
principallest objections, as it were Thirdly, Reasons.
upon the chief captains, and the rest like rascally soldiers, will soon
take them to their heels.

The first, whereof is this; what? do you define Justification unjust, it
makes us just before God, that is, perfectly holy and righteous from all spot
of sin in the sight of God freely? yea and so perfectly righteous, that God
sees no sin in his justified children, as your Scriptures and authorities would
seem to press, in your fifth emphaticall Scripture phrase? why, but sins we
have in us, that is undeniable; for, who can say his heart is pure? And James
3. 2.
if any man say he has no sin, he deceives himself, for in 1 Ioh. 1. 8.
many things we sin all; And therefore shall not the Lord, who is omnipotent
and omniscient, and the searcher of all hearts and reins, shall not he see it
in them? why, can any thing be hid out of Gods sight? D. Bishop against, M.
Perkins, chap. 4. Sect. 2. Answ.
It is a madness to think it.

Unto which I answer, and grant, that we all have sin in us, and that in many
things we sin all; yea, I say more, that we all sin, not only in many
things, (as you say) but even in all things, and (which these objectors cannot
abide) that all our very righteousness D. Bishop against M. Perkins, ibid.
sect. 3.
of Sanctification and holy walking, is as a mensturous cloth, that is,
mortal and damnable sin, if God should behold it out of Justification: for
this sinning in all our actions is our misery before God; and he that desires
not to be delivered of these evils in the sight of God, bewrayes the very
ground of his hypocrisy; namely, that he never yet understood, much less
felt, what an horrible thing the least sin is in the sight of God: for this is
our spiritual leprosy before God; this is our spiritual Plague-soare, and
sickness to the death of hell-fier: But shall any man therefore conclude, that
because the justified children of God have them, and see them and feel them in
themselves, therefore they have them in the sight of God? and that he sees them
in them, when by making them perfectly holy and righteous from all spot of
these and all other sins before himself, he has utterly abolished them out of
his own sight: why? is not God able to abolish those sins that we feel daily
dwelling in us, out of his own sight; although he does not abolish them out of
our sight, that we may here live by the faith of his power? Certainly, this
were to have as much faith as an Ox or an Horse, for they believe but what
they see and feel; but it is the true nature, and very essence of faith to
believe clean contrary to that which we see and feel in our The nature of
true faith.
selves, if God has spoken the contrary: and has God not only spoken the
contrary, saying to his Church and justified children, that indeed, feel, see,
and complain of their spiritual blackness; Behold (notwithstanding thy
seeing and feeling) behold thou art fair my love, behold thou art all fair,
and there is no spot in thee? whereby God sees no iniquity in his true
spiritual Church, nor he sees no transgression in his true justified Israel:
And has not only with admiration expressly spoken it; but also given the means
to effect, and bring it to pass; namely, that the blood of Jesus Christ his
Son does make us clean, even from that which does defile us before God, Mark.
7. 20. 21. that Mark. 7. 20. 21. 1 John 1. 7.
is, from all sin it self, 1 John 1. 7. And has he not only spoken, and given
the powerful means to effect it; but also sworn it, saying, By my self have
I sworn, that in me, you shall have righteousness and strength, whereby the
whole house of Israel shall be justified: that is, made perfectly holy and
righteous from all spot of sin in the sight of God freely, and glory in the
Lord, Esaias 45. 23, Esaias 45. 23, 24, 25.
24, 25. as indeed, there can be no greater glorying that we are justified
then this, that God sees no sin in us; by reason that being clothed with
Christ's righteousness, we are made there by perfectly holy and righteous from
all spot of sin, in the sight of God freely. And when, not only God the Father
has thus spoken and sworn; but also Christ the Son has really given himself
to make us holy, and has made us clean, (...).
that he might make us to himself a glorius Church and (...).
people, not having (now at this present time) as both the Greek, and Latin
Participles signify) one spot or wrinkle of sin, or any such thing; because
by his death upon the cross he has made us so holy, that we are without all
blame and without all fault in his sight, if we continue rooted and grounded in
this Ephesians. 5. 25, 26, 27. Colos. 1. 22, 23.
faith, Ephesians. 5. 25, 26, 27. Coloss. 1. 22, 23. And has not only sworn it,
and by his Son wrought it, but also sealed the truth and power of the same upon
us, by his own seal of Baptism: and not only so sealed it upon us, but also
confirmed the assurance thereof unto us by so many faithful dispensors of Gods
mysteries, as is before showed, as with a cloud of witnesses: shall we,
notwithstanding all these sayings and doings of God say in the secrets of our
hearts by unbelief, hold thy peace, God; hold thy peace Christ; you may say
what you will: but I can by a subtle distinction of mine own brain, of taking
away out of Gods sight, not the sin, which I see, but the guilt, which thou
have forgotten to speak of, make an evasion from all this, and will believe my
sense, sight, and feeling rather then you. Is this faith? is not this to make
God no God? but to make our reason, sense, and feeling our God? If we had no
sin in us, and if we did see, and feel no sin in us, what place were there left
for faith to believe these sayings of God, that we have no sin in the sight of
God? but now because we have sin in us, and do see it, and feel it; therefore
should we so much the rather upon these sayings of God, believe the clean
contrary to our sense and feeling, that we have no sin in the sight of God:
this is true faith* and where there is reasoning from sense and feeling, there
is not faith. For if Abraham had not believed, that he and his wife were
fruitful, and should have children clean contrary to that which they both had,
and saw, and felt in themselves; he being almost an hundred years old, and
dead; and his wife both barren in her youth, and in her age past childbearing;
he had never grown to so mighty a Nation; but he doubted not to believe clean
contrary to that which he both had, saw, and felt in themselves, and so was
strengthened in true faith, and gave glory to God; being fully assured that he
which had promised was also able to do it, how contrary soever it seemed to his
present sight, sense, and feeling: so if we could believe that God is able
above our reason, sense, and feeling by his Sons blood and righteousness
utterly to abolish out of his own sight all our sins being the work and image
of the Devil, which Christ came purposely to destroy; and that he does make us
whiter than snow, from them all, so that we have not now one spot or wrinkle
of sin, that defiles us, nor any such thing, in the sight of God; and that he
is faithful to do this, as he has spoken it, Ephesians. 5. 26, 27. contrary Ephesians.
5. 26. 27
to our reason, sense and feeling; then have we true faith; then should we
truly glorify God, and Christ, and find Sanctification and all other blessings
both spiritual and temporal, with a fuller hand then we do: Which people
do much fail of, because they mark not, that there is a twofold making of us
clean and abolishing of our sins made mention of in Gods word, and testified
in the consent of the former witnesses of Justification.

First, a mystical and secret abolishing of our sins, A twofold cl^nsing or
abolishing of sin. 1 Mystical. John 1. 29. 1 John 1. 7.
wrought only by Christ and his righteousness, in the sight of God only,
mentioned, John 1. 29. saying, Behold the Lamb of God that takes away the
sin of the world: And 1 John 1. 7. The blood of Jesus Christ the Son of God
does make us clean from all sin; and in many other such like places of
Scripture, which is called mystical, because it is wrought, seen, and
apprehended above reason, sense, and feeling; that is, by faith only, and is
the mere and sole glory of Christ's Godhead, Heb. 1. 3. Heb. 1. 3.


Secondly, a gross and palpable abolishing of our 2 Gross and palpable.
sins, wrought by us, by the help of Gods spirit, to our sense and feeling by
sanctification, mentioned by S. Paul, 2 Cor. 7. 1. saying, Let us cleanse our
selves from 2 Cor. 7. 1.
all filthiness of the flesh: and 1 John 3. 3. He that has 1 John 3. 3.
this hope does purify himself as he is pure: which later way we shall never
feel to be perfected in us, until the life to come, that there may be place
for the first way, and for faith: for, as I said before, what place were there
left for faith, to believe that Christ has made us perfectly holy and
righteous in the sight of God freely, if we could see and feel our selves to
be so in the sight of God? But if sticking only in this later, we idly
prattle and talk by the light of nature, of Gods power and presence, and
all-seeing and allsearching nature, after a Gentileish and Heathenish manner,
to the frustrating of his word and promises; because we see and feel the
contrary: as if God were not able, or cannot abolish that sin, which we daily
feel dwelling in us, out of his own sight above our reason, sense, and
feeling: then we reject faith, dishonor God, rob him of his power, spoil him
of his truth* and find him to be no more our God, than the Gentiles and
Heathen did; although they also talked goodly and vainegloriously of his power
and providence, and presence, and all-seeing and all-searching nature. For that
saying of the learned is most true, that it is not the light of nature, or
reason, talking Not the light of nature, but faith only gives God his due glory.
and discoursing of the almighty power, providence, and presence of God that
gives him the glory of his Godhead; but it is faith only, placing Gods power,
and all-seeing nature in the fulfilling of his promises, and verifying the
truth of them to be in us and upon us, which unto the natural man and Gentile
seems foolishness; that makes us to pass the Gentiles and Heathens in
talking of Gods power, and all seeing and all-searching nature, and gives him
truly the glory of his Godhead: whereas the contrary seeming to glorify him,
does indeed rob him of the glory of his Godhead. Two Scriptures objected.


Whereby we may now see how unbeleeving Gentileish, and Heathenish that
Papisticall cavil is, saying, Do we see sins in our selves, and does not God
see them in us much more? this is absurd, and makes God blind, confirming the
same by Psalm. 94. He Psalm. 94. 8, 9, 10. Answ.
that made the eye does not he see? To which I answer, that if God had not
appointed the clothing us with his Sons righteousness to be the means to
abolish them out of his own sight, but not out of our sight, sense, and
feeling, that we may here live by the faith of Gods power, and not by sight and
feeling; then it were a good, true, and strong objection and argument: but now
that God has appointed the means of clothing us with the wedding garment of
his Sons righteousness, which is of this nature (as is before testified)
mystically to abolish all those sins that we feel daily dwelling in us, out of
Gods sight, as truly as the Sunbeams do abolish darkness out of a dark
house, Esaias 44. 22. and to make us so clean, that from Esaias 44. ^2.
all spot of sin we are made perfectly holy and righteous in the sight of God
freely (as shall be further manifest in the second part of free Justification.)

Now it is first an unbeleeving, secondly a beastly, and This cavil is 1
Vn^eleeving.
thirdly a blasphemous argument and cavil. First (I say) unbeleeving and
heathenish, because no more could be objected and said (in respect of sin it
self, and the being of it in the sight of God) than if no Redeemer were come
that has died to be the Lamb of God that has taken away the sin of the
world; than if there were no Jesus that saves his people from their sin it
self; than if there were no blood of the Son of God, that of foul creatures
does from sin it self, which only defiles us in Gods sight, Mark 7. 22. 23.
Mark 7. 22. 23. 1 John 1. 7.
makes us clean from all sin, 1 John 1. 7. as is before testified by all the
witnesses of God. Yea then, if for the abolishing of our sins out of Gods
sight, and for the making of us reipsa, in very deed perfectly holy and
righteous from all spot of sin in the sight of God freely; the name of Christ
had never been so much as once heard of, or as if not being risen again, he
lay still with the two thieves buried in his grave; I speak not concerning the
guilt and the punishment; but I say, in respect of making us pure, and clean
in the sight of God, from all spot of sin it self, which being the image of
the Devil, is worse than the guilt and the punishment: seeing also that to be
made clean from all spot of sin in the sight of God, and yet to have one spot
of sin in the sight of God, are (...), flat contraries and contradictories that
utterly overthrow and mar one another.

Secondly this cavil is beastly, not only because it 2 Beastly.
follows merely present sense, and feeling like a beast, but also because it
speaks contrary to sanctified reason; for is God blind, because he sees his
Sunbeams abolish darkness out of a dark house? wherefore did he make his
Sunbeams, Gen 1. not to see darkness abolished Genesis 2. 4.
in the world, where he has set his Sunbeams to reign? so if the
wedding garment of Christ's righteousness, wherewith we are clothed, has
above our reason, sense, and feeling abolished (as the Prophet Esaias says) all
our sins out of his own sight as darkness, and made us perfectly holy and
righteous from all spot of sin in the sight of God freely; is God blind,
because he sees his Sons wedding garment abolishing our sins, and making us
that were darkness, all light in his sight? is not this contrary to spiritual
sanctified reason? except we will say, that the wedding garment of Christ's
righteousness is not able to abolish the spiritual darkness of our sins,
above our reason, sense, and feeling, out of Gods sight, as perfectly as the
Sunbeams do abolish the bodily darkness out of a dark house; And that (as
will be further showed in the second part of free Justification) would be true
blasphemy indeed.

Again, suppose a poor man is grown not only very poor, but also in very
great debt, and being by reason of his poverty not able to pay it, is cast into
prison; but being in this extreme poverty, a rich brother of his dies, who
being very rich, has be queathed unto his poor brother thousand thousands;
who entering upon the same, takes possession thereof: and when by it all his
debts are paid, and he being delivered, of poor is made very rich, in
apparel, money, goods, and lands with his brothers riches: is God now blind,
because he sees his poverty done away and abolished, and he made very rich
with his brothers riches? and is it not the simple sight of ^od, or his
all-seeing sight that sees him rich without any disparagement to his all-seeing
sight? And shall we give this power and honor to a mortal man, that he is
able thus to put away and utterly abolish his brothers poverty, and to make him
rich to Gods all-seeing sight; and shall not Christ the eternal Son of God,
our elder brother, although mystically, above our reason, sense and feeling
(that it may be by faith) be able much more with all his righteousness to
abolish all our sins, and to make us perfectly holy and righteous from all
spot of sin, in his Fathers simple and all-seeing sight, but he must needs
put out his Fathers sight and make him blind? Is not this a beastly cavil?

Thirdly, it is not only unbeleeving and beastly, but 3 Plasphemeu^.
also blasphemous and ungodly: first because in alleging Psalm. 94. He that
made the eye shall not he see? to prove that the learned Protestants over-shot
themselves in Psalm 94. 8, 9, 10.
saying, that God has made his children so perfectly holy and righteous in his
sight that he sees no sin in them, in and by their Justification. Hereby
these Objectors do make Christ's wedding garment to be (by their alleging
this Scripture) no better a covering and abolisher of our sins out of Gods
sight, than the covering which the wicked and ungodly (there spoken of) do
make to themselves by their hypoerisie and security: saying thus in effect,
that as the wicked and reprobates (there properly spoken of) committing sin,
although they hide and cover them over with such fair pretenses and shows,
that they are as secure as if God did not see them; and yet notwithstanding (as
the Prophet truly says) God does both know and see them to be horrible and
abominable in his sight: even so the children of God; terrified more with the
horriblenesse of sin, in the sight of God, than with the punishment, although
they flying to Christ, he (by clothing them with the wedding garment of his
own righteousness) do not only cover them (which similitude is spoken in
respect of our feeling of them continually dwelling in us) but also in respect
of God, has utterly abolished them out of his Fathers sight, by making them of
unjust just; that is, re ipsa, in very deed, perfectly holy and righteous from
all spot of sin in the sight of God, freely: yet notwithstanding (say these
Objectors alleging this place for their proof) he sees their sins in them:
which is as much as if they should say, he sees them not of unjust made just;
that is, perfectly holy and righteous, from all spot of sin in the sight of
God, freely: but sees them still although there been no punishment belonging to
them for the same) in the soul pickle of their sins: seeing the least sin,
although there were no punishment for it, yet for the very nature of it, is
ever horrible and abominable in the sight of God.

But how comes God to see them in us, after he has covered them out of his
own sight? These Objectors answer; By looking under the covering. But I would
gladly know of them, wherefore did God cover them out of his sight, if he
peep under the covering to see them again? Or, I would know of them, whether
God so cover our sins out of his own sight, as men cover things with a net,
that lie as naked to view as they did before they were covered? But howsoever
by thus alleging of this Scripture, hereby the justified (excepting some
difference of guilt and punishment) yet in respect of the sin it self, which
is worse than the guilt and punishment, being the image of the Devil; and in
respect of Gods seeing the very being of sin in them, are made all one with the
Reprobate and wicked.

Secondly, Gods covering is made all one with man's covering, nay rather with
the deceitful covering which the wicked make to themselves.

And thirdly, the wedding garment of Christ's righteousness is made all one in
respect of the being of sin it self in Gods sight, with the hypocrisy and
security of the wicked. Are not every one of these points horrible blasphemy
against Christ and his righteousness? Thus handsomely and thus properly does
unbelief and infidelity allege Scriptures: may we not worthily suspect these
Objectors in alleging other Scriptures against the truth, that allege this
so absurdly?

Again, secondly, this allegation seeming to stand for, and defend the
all-seeing nature of God, is blasphemous; not only because it robs God of his
power; namely, that God cannot above our reason, sense, and feeling make his
children so perfectly holy and righteous from all spot of sin in his sight
freely, that he does see no sin in them: but also, whereas by the truth of his
Word, and by the power of Christ's blood, and by the testimony of all the former
faithful witnesses, he does so: and true faith that sees invisible things more
plainly, than any demonstration can make them, and does see it more brightly
than any bodibly sense can discern it: but on the other side, unbelief is
blind and cannot see and discern invisible things; yet she is not content to
be blind her self, but also being as bold as blind Bayard, she would go
about to make God blind also; viz. that he cannot see this his own mystical
and supernatural work, wrought in and upon his children, by the blood and
righteousness of his own Son, but he must needs be blind: thus this blind
bold Betteresse unbelief makes God to her self both impotent, blind, and a
liar, 1 John 5. 10. and then 1 Ioh. 5. 10.
lays the blame of all this upon faith. And thus men stumbling at the block of
their own sense, sight, and feeling, do break the neck of their faith, and so
endanger to break the neck of their souls. Wherein the example of Zachary the
Father of John Baptist, is written Zachary, an example of unbelief.
to terrify us, who being so good a man, was yet notwithstanding at the very
entrance of the Gospel, for an example of all unbelief, stricken dumb nine
months; because he did not believe the Angel Gabriel that spoke of
fruitfulness in him, contrary to the course of nature, and work of God in him
by nature, which he saw and felt in himself: how much more if we believe not
Christ the Prince of Angels, speaking of perfect cleanness in us Can. 4. 7.
And of perfect righteousness Cant. 4. 7. Romans 8. 4.
in us, Romans 8. 4. contrary, but to the work and Image that the Devil has
wrought, and defiled us with, in the sight of God; and for which Christ shed
out his dearest heart-blood to destroy, take away, and abolish the same out of
his Fathers sight: how much more (I say) if we believe neither the word of
Christ, nor the blood of Christ, contrary to our sense, reason, sight and
seeling, do we deserve to be smitten with everlasting dumbness, to be never
able to speak feelingly of the mercies of God any more? The Lord keep us from
this Judgment, by taking warning of the Prince, that would not believe the
Prophet of the Lord; because his reason, sense, and feeling, spoke strongly the
contrary; and therefore was shamefully trodden under-foot to death, that he
might never 2 King. 7. 20.
enjoy the promise, 2: King. 7. 20.

Now therefore, for the weaker understanding and memory, briefly to re-collect
what has been said against this first objection breathing out nothing but Six
absurdities arising from former objections.
unbelief, do arise and ensue these six maine absurdities.

First, the nature and essence of Faith, to believe what God speaks, contrary
to Reason, sense, and feeling is denied.

Secondly, Justification of unjust, making us Just, that is, reipsa, perfectly
holy and righteous from all spot of sin in the sight of God freely, is
destroyed; and so baptism is denied, and Christ is denied: for look how much
sin God sees in us, so much unrighteousness he sees in us; look how much
unrighteousness he sees in us; so much do we come short of being made
perfectly holy and righteous, from all spot of sin in the sight of God freely;
and so Christ is made an unperfect workman, and baptism is damnified. And
again we see, that the truly learned hold, that until the cause be thus
taken away, which is sin it self; the effects of guilt and punishment, do
not truly cease.

Thirdly, by it hypocrisy is nourished; for hypocrisy, glory of the Godhead
of Christ, Heb. 1. 3. and so all her good works remain Heb. 1. 3. Luke 16. 15.
abominable in the sight of God Luke 16. 15. But sincerity, that sees what an
infinite horrible thing the least sin is in the sight of God, though there
were no hell to punish it, labors not, through self-love, so much to have the
guilt and punishment taken away, which is the less; as to have the blood and
righteousness of Christ, that may take away and utterly abolish, out of Gods
sight, the sin it self, which is the greater, as is to be seen in the
example of David, Psalm. 51. 2, 3. 7. Psalm. 19. 12.
and other Saints, Psalm. 51. 2, 3, 7. and Psalm. 19. 12. and so has both the
sin and the effects thereof abolished out of Gods sight.

Fourthly, by this objection, seeming to defend the Cor. 1. 25. And 1 Cor. 1.
25.
weighty and well worthy the marking is that Admonition of that heroic
dispenser of Gods mysteries, Luth. in Galax.
saying thus: True Christian Divinity (as I give you often warning) sets
not God forth unto us in his Majesty, as Moses and other doctrines do; it
commands us not to search into the nature of God, but to know his will set
out to us in Christ. But there is nothing more dangerous than to wander with
curious speculations into heaven and there to search out God in his
incomprehensible power, wisdom, and Majesty. If thou seek thus to comprehend
God, it cannot be but thou must fall as Lucifer did, and in horrible despair
lose God and all together. For as God in his own nature is unmeasurable,
incomprehensible, and infinite; so he is to man's nature intolerable.

Whetefore if thou would be in safety, and out of peril of conscience,
bridle this climbing and presuming spirit, and so seek God as Paul reaches
thee, saying, We preach Christ crucified, to the Jews a stumbling 1 Cor. 1.
23. 2^
block, and to the Gentiles foolishness: But unto them that are called, we
preach Christ, the power of God, and the wisdom of God: For to this end, he
came down, was born, crucified, and dyed, that he might keep us from climbing
up into heaven, and from the cutious searching of the Divine Majesty, to the
opposing of his power against his will, and to the descanting upon by humane
wit; and doubting of his promises, uttered both in his word, and by his
faithful Dispensers of his mysteries; until we find out away to understand
them plausible to humane reason, to the great darkning of Christ's benefits. But
the Gospel must be so preached, that the benefits procured by his cross, be to
them that perish, foolishness; but 1 Cor. 1. 18.
unto us which are saved, it is the power of God, 1 Cor. 1. 18. For thus will
God destroy the wisdom of the wise, and will bring to nothing the
understanding of the prudent, verse 19. Therefore when soever thou have to do
in Verse 19.
the matter of Justification, and disputest with thy self, how God will be
found: then know thou, that Luth. ibid. in Galath.
there is no other God, besides this man Jesus Christ: embrace him, setting a
side all curious speculations of the Divine Majesty: for he that is a searcher
of Gods Majesty, shall be overwhelmed by his glory. But out of the matter of
Justification, when thou must dispute with Jews, Turks, Papists, Heretics
and such like; concerning the power, wisdom, and Majesty of God, there employ
all thy wit and industry to that end, and be as profound a Disputer as thou
can: for then thou art in another vain; but in the case of righteousness,
thou must withdraw thy mind wholly from all cogitations and searching of the
Majesty of God, and look only upon this man, Christ: thus doing, thou shall
perceive the love, goodness and sweetness of God how great it is: And thou
shall see his wisdom, power, and Majesty sweetened, and tempered to thy
capacity: The Reason whereof is plain, which is; because in Christ, God has
made himself after a sort, little, that he might so submit himself to our
capacity. In Christo Deus quodammodo paruum se secit, ut ad captum nostrum se
subm ttat. Call. in 1 Pet. 1. 21. Marlor.
Now if God vouchsafe to speak unto us according to our capacity; is it not
high sin for us, not to believe in things concerning us according to our
capacity? The second error, that this objection runs into is, That it supposes
Gods power, and Almighty nature to be diminished and weakened, when indeed it
is the more magnified and exalted; because to believe and acknowledge that God
is able with his Sons righteousness, of unjust to our reason, sense, and
feeling, to make us above our reason, sense, and feeling Just; (that is, not
having one spot or wrinkle of sin, in his sight) is to attribute, that to the
working of Gods power, which to reason, sense, and feeling, is impossible; and
so greatly glorifies the power of God: Just as Abraham did, who withdrawing his
eyes from considering his own and his Wives barrenesse, and believing that he
was fruitful, and his seed should be as the Stars of the Firmament, when yet
he felt the clean contrary in himself: hereby he stood strong in true faith,
and gave glory to God: but how? by knowing that he which had spoken it, was
also able to do it: and thus he magnified Gods power and glorified his truth.
Whereas contrariwise by this unbelieving objection, God is made (as is before
showed) first, impotent in his power: secondly, false in his word and promises:
thirdly, blind that he cannot see his own and his Sons proper work in, and upon
us: whereby fourthly, the whole Godhead (as Luther truly says) is abolished to
them by unbelief; And the wedding garment of Christ's righteousness
undertaking of unjust to make us just, that is, perfectly holy and righteous
from all spot of sin in the sight of God freely is frustrated and made void.
And thus unbelief does all these things in truth, wherewith she burdens
faith falsely.

Fifthly, although the guilt, that is, (as it is defined) Mark. 7. 21, 23.
Hence it follows, that the Justified Mark. 7. 21. 23.
must needs remain still more foul in his sight, with the many ugly sins that
he sees in them', being the image of the Devil, than any swine can be
defiled over body, head and ears in our sight with mire; and more foul and
loathsome, with the ugly sin that he sees in them, being the poison of hell,
than any Spider or Toade can be full of loathsome poison in our sight; and thus
their dear Saints, are as foul as ugly Devils in the sight of God, with that
vile and ugly sin that he sees in them: but that their remains no guilt nor
punishment to be inflicted upon them, for the same.

Sixthly and lastly, hereby are overthrown all the Ephesians. 5. 27. Ephesians. 5. 27.
Fifthly, God will not acknowledge, much less adopt for his Sons and
daughters, those whom he sees full of the image of the Devil. Sixthly, no
unclean thing can enter into the kingdom of Christ, which is the the kingdom
of heaven here on earth; for except a man be born again, that is, made a
perfect new creature to the eyes of God by Justification, and declare the same
by being made a new creature to the eyes of men by Sanctification, he cannot
see the Kingdom of God, Ioh. 3. 3. because the Kingdom of God is nothing John
3. 3.
but righteousness, and peace, and joy in the holy Ghost, Romans 14. 17. Romans
14. 17.


Now then we may easily see whether these Objectors slipping from the
excellency of free Justification, taught by the first and purest Orthodox
writers of the same, are not to rectify their judgments; and seeing they go
about to maintain their unbelief with Papisticall cavils, whether a Minister,
upon pain of the for feiture of his faithfulness, be not to convince them
sharply, that they may be sound in faith, Tit. 1. 9. 13. And thus have I stood
more largely in confuting Tit. 1. 9, 13.
this objection; because I find by daily experience, that this cavil against
the excellency of free Justification does stick so fast between the teeth of
natural reason, sense, and feeling, that many stumbling (as I said before) at
this block of their sense and feeling, do greatly endanger the breaking of the
neck of their faith; and so make it a dead says, good for nothing, neither to
glorify God, nor save their souls; but hereupon I may be briefer in the rest.

The next objection is this: God knows the sins of his justified children
(as you your self confess) infinitely more perfectly than they themselves
do: ergo, he see them in them; because Knowing and Seeing are all one in God;
for his seeing is a phrase borrowed from the bodily eyes of men, and applied
metaphorically of God.

To which I answer; that this objection is like that neglecting what was near
him under his feet, before he was aware, he was down in a ditch: for whilst
it does aspire, and climb up into heaven to look what is in God, it neglects
what a perfect abolishing of all our sins out of Gods sight, the blood of
Christ wrought near us, Romans 10. 8. here below Romans 10. 8.
on earth, and falls into the ditch of wrangling against the excellency of free
Justification. True it is, that God does not see (as the Anthropomorphites
fondly thought) with bodily eyes, as men see; but yet to say, that God does not
see, but only know, is somewhat bold, seeing the Prophet says, he that made
the eye, shall not he see? Psalm. 94. 9. And again, if we Psalm. 94. 9, 10.
do not know that the word to know (as far as we are able to conceive of
it) is (...) also applied to God, whilst we avoid the sin of the
Anthropomorphites we may make of God a mental idol. And why? because the
nature of God is so incomprehensible, that the very Angels do cover their
faces being not able to comprehend his knowing or seeing, much less any man.
What then must be our wisdom? to come down unto his word, where he submits
and applies himself to our capacity: and if we do see, we shall find, that
although Gods knowing and seeing be all one in God; yet to us they are not all
one, in that sense wherein S. Paul calls the one simple and pure wisdom of
God, the manifold wisdom of God; that is, one and simple to God, but manifold
to us. Again, because God is of one, pure, simple and uncompounded nature; his
mercy and his justice (says Augustine) are all one in God; and yet they are
not all one to us: nay more, what can be more contrary than his mercy and
justice to us, and in us? so likewise although Gods seeing and knowing be all
one in God, and although they be of so near affinity, that often times How
Gods knowing and see^ gma be said to differ by two reasons
the one be put for the other; yet that unto us there is a difference between
them, is evident by these two strong reasons.

First, because the Scriptures do distinguish between Psalm. 94. Psalm 9. ^^ 10.
verse 9, 10. where they are both distinctly set down, but also in continual
practice, saying no where that God knows not the sins of his children; but in
many places both expressly and equipollently, that he sees no sin in his
justified children, by reason that he has, by the wedding garment of his Sons
righteousness, utterly abolished them out of his own sight: now this
distinction, if all men, Devils and Angels would gainesay it, must stand.

The second reason is, because if we do not by curious Luther truly says) by
curious speculations of the divine majesty, fall with Lucifer, and lose God,
his Gospel, and all together, we may discern some difference even in nature,
between knowing and seeing, both before God, men, and Angels; for to know a
thing, is to understand the nature of it, although the thing it self be
abolished, taken away, and have no substance, existence, and being, really
before them; but properly to see a thing, is, before God, men, and Angels, to
have the thing it self unabolished, not taken away, but having existence, and
real being presently before them. As for example, Genesis 1. it is not said that
God saw the Genesis 1. 10.
light, the Sea, the Sun, and Moon, and other creatures, before he had given
them an existence, and being: but when he had given them a real existence and
being before him; then it is said, that God saw them, and saw that they were
good. As again let me instance in an example or two: God now knows the flood
that covered the earth, and drowned the whole world; but he now sees it
abolished, that is, sees no existence and being of the flood, covering and
drowning the earth; for if he did, it would soon be woe with us all: so
likewise God knows the Sacrifices of killing Bulls, and Goats, that were used
in his first Church; but now he sees them abolished in his Church, that is, he
now sees no killing of Bulls, and ^oats in his Church; for if he did, he
should see his Church to be Judaicall. Again, God knows what flood of fire
shall burn up the world; but yet he does not see it, by existence and being,
burning up the world; for if he did, our houses would he too hot for us to
dwell in. Again, yet more plainly, God knows both the wicked and good men,
that lived upon the earth a thousand years ago; but he sees them not now
living upon the earth: but he sees the wicked in hell, and the good in heaven,
where they have now their existence, and present being before him. Let me add
a proose of Scripture; whilst Nathanaels existence and being was under the
Fig Tree, the Godhead of Christ did see him under the Fig Tree; but when he
was come from thence unto Christ, although the Godhead of Christ did then know
that he was under the Fig Tree; yet he does not say, my Godhead does now see
thee under the Fig Tree, but I saw thee when thou wast under the Fig Tree: but
now I see thee here before me. So that seeing or not seeing has no relation
to any change in God, who is unchangeable, but altogether respect unto the
change wrought before God upon the creature. As (to come nearer to examples
confirming our present purpose) whilst the existence and being of the Leprosy
of Naaman was in and upon him, God did see it in him and upon him, and saw him
foul, and leprous: but when he was healed, and so his Leprosy abolished,
although God knew more perfectly then he what Leprosy he was healed of, yet he
did not see any leprie upon him, when he was healed; but saw his own new
work of his flesh restored and come to him as the flesh of a young child: and
is it not gross unbelief to think that the River of Christ's blood is not
able to do as much, and make as great a change in the sight of God upon us
mystically above our reason, sense, and feeling, in abolishing the lepry of our
sins, and in making us perfectly holy and righteous from all spot or sin in
the sight of God freely; as the River of Jordan was powerful by Gods
appointment to abolish from before him the bodily disease; seeing this was but
a figure of the other; and seeing the abolishing of the bodily disease was a
destroying of the work of God; but the abolishing of the spiritual disease is
a destroying of the work of the Devil? Hereupon I say, and distinguish thus:
That God How God knows the sins of his children, and of Reprobates.
knows the sins of the wicked and reprobate infinitely more perfectly than
they themselves do; and he knows the sins of his justified Children
infinite more perfectly than they themselves do, according to that confession
of David, saying, Who knows the number of his sins? or who knows how often
he erres? Psalm. 19. 12. None but God. And here in is no Psalm. 19. 1^.
difference between the children of God and the wicked: for how could the
children of God praise and magnify God for his abolishing of all their sins
out of his own sight, if he did not know what sins, and how many he has
abolished? But here in lies the difference, that God knows the sins of the
wicked infinitely more perfectly than they themselves do, and sees them in
them, John 8. 24. because they are not John 8. 24.
abolished, and they made perfectly holy and righteous from them all in the
sight of God. But although he knows the sins of his justified children
infinitely more perfectly than they themselves do; yet he sees them abolished
out of his own sight, that is, he sees none in them, because being clothed
with the wedding garment of Christ's righteousness, they are above our reason,
sense, and feeling, not only abolished out of Gods sight, but also are made
perfectly holy and righteous and whiter than snow from all spot of sin in the
sight of God freely. Thus God did know the sins of Abraham, and left the
sense, sight, and feeling of them to abide to himself, and before men, for
which mendid reprove him, that he might live by the faith of Gods power in
abolishing them out of his own sight, and not by sense and feeling: And yet
they were so utterly abolished out of Gods sight, and he was thereby made so
perfectly holy and righteous from all spot of sin in the sight of God, that
although men did reprove him (as we ought to reprove one another in love) yet
we read not that God took notice of any sin in him; neither did God, being
so familiar with him, once rebuke him in all his life after his calling for any
one sin, but did only try and exercise his faith. But why did men rebuke him
and not God? because he was not perfectly holy and righteous to his own sense
and feeling and to menward by his sanctification, but was perfectly holy and
righteous from all spot of sin to Godward by justification; because he was
the pattern and Father of them that are freely made so holy, that they are
without all fault, and without all blame in the sight of God. Collos. 1. 22,
23. So likewise God did know the stingings and poisonous Colos. 22. 23.
swellings and soreness of his people wounded in the Wilderness with fiery
Serpents; and yet when by merely looking upon the Brazen Serpent they were
healed, he saw no poisonous swellings and soreness in them, but saw his new
work of health and strength in them, and saw them go in this health and
strength against their enemies: And shall not the true substance, the Son of
God, Christ Jesus, figured by that shadow, heal us much more, though above our
reason, sense, and feeling, and perfectly abolish all the hellish sores and
poison of the fiery Serpent Satan out of Gods sight; by making us perfectly
holy and righteous from all spot of sin in the sight of God freely? This
being so livelya shadow to teach us the power of the true substance Christ
Jesus, O let us hold fast the grace so miraculously fignified, but more
lovingly by his blood exhibited. And thus much for the difference between Gods
Knowing and Seeing of sin. Now let us proceed to other Scriptures objected,
which may hereby be the more briefly answered.

CHAP. V. Wherein other Scriptures Objected, are cleared, and answered.
AND first concerning that place Heb. 4. 13. Heb. 4. 13.
whereat these Objectors do so much stumble, namely: That all things are open
and naked to Gods eyes, etc. Which without judgment and understanding they
hold out like the shield of Achilles strongly against the excellency of free
Justification; viz. that the children of God are made so perfectly holy and
righteous in the sight of God, that God does see no sin in them: when as it
makes nothing against it, but rather for it being rightly understood: for it
being the Apostles scope in all the third and fourth Chapters to exhort the
converted Jews purged and made pure in the sight of God by Christ alone, Heb.
1. 3. unto constancy in faith, and threatening and terrifying Heb. 1. 3.
the hypocrites among them with fear of Gods revenging eye, he tells them
throughout the whole Epistle, that if they continue sound in the faith,
embracing Christ constantly as their only high Priest, with the blood of Bulls
and Goats, Heb. 9. 13. purging them Heb. ^. 13.
by himself, and cleansing them with his own blood: then God does behold
them, their consciences, their bodies, their souls, their spirits, and all
made pure and clean in his sight, it being open and naked in his sight, that
Christ has with that one Sacrifice, made all them that are sanctified to be
in his sight by justification perfect for ever, Heb. 10. 14. But if they be
unbeleeving Heb. 10. 14.
hypocrites, distrusting Christ's purifying and clensing them from all their
sins in the sight of God, and so falling from Christ by unbeleefe; then how
hidden and secret soever their unbeleefe and hypocrisy lay for a season; and
although they seemed to themselves and others never so holy and righteous by
the Mosaicall purifyings and legal righteousness, yet their sins were not
abolished out of Gods sight; and so all their unbeleefe and hypocrisy
(whatsoever they thought of themselves and what fair show soever they made for
a time to others) yea, all their corruption lay open, manifest and naked to his
eyes, with whom (in our profession) we have trifling dealing with him who would
at length in due time bring it to light, as being naked in his sight; and so
would be revenged of all unbeleefe and hypocrisy. This place being all one in
effect with that which Paul more fully exprosseth in another place, Tit. 1. 15.
saying, To the pure, (namely, Tit. 1. 15.
made pure in the sight of God by justification freely) all things are pure;
their hearts, their od^sciences, their minds and all are pure in the sight of
God; because they are made perfectly good trees in the sight of God freely by
justification, and then cannot choose but declare the same to the eyes of men by
sanctification. But to the selfe-deoeiving, unbeleeving hypocrites, though they
think never so well of themselves, deceiving with a fair appearance, and
legal zeal and devotion, both themselves and others; yet nothing is pure: but
their inward hearts and consciences are defiled, and all their good and
religious works are manifest and naked, to be in Gods sight abomination, Hag.
Hag. 2. 14. Luke 16. 15.
2. 14. Luke 16. 15. Thus the Apostle giving to all faithful Ministers a true
pattern of right exhortation: that is, not to mingle and confound the Law and
Gospel, and so to mar both; but to give pure Law, to whom the Law belongs,
and to give true and pure Gospel, to whom the Gospel belongs; and thus to
divide the Word of God aright, 2 Timothy 2. 15. for how 2 Timothy 2. 15.
fearful a thing is it to say that the sins of Gods repenting and justified
children lie naked to Gods eyes? and to show what little sight such objectors
have of the horriblenesse of the least sin in the sight of God, is notably
expressed by that industrious labourer in the Lords Garden; speaking of Christ's
being crucified Perk. upon the Creed.
naked upon the Cross, and saying thus: that Christ was crucified naked, came
to pass by the goodness of God, that we might have a remedy for our
spiritual nakedness: which is when a man has his sins lying open before Gods
eyes, and by reason thereof he himself lies open to all Gods judgments: so
were the Laodiceans blind and naked; so the Israelites that made the Golden
Calfe were naked; etc. that is, first their sins lay naked and open before
God; and secondly, by reason of their sins, they themselves are subject to
his wrath and indignation. Now Christ was crucified naked, that he might take
away from us this spiritual nakedness; and also gives us the garment of
righteousness to cloth us withal in the presence of God, called white
raiment, Revel. 3. 18. because our nakedness, that is sin, makes Revel. 3. 18.
us more vile in the sight of God, than the most loathsome creature that is,
can be unto us; until we have put on the righteousness of Christ, to cover
the deformity of our souls, that we may appear holy and without spot before
God. Thus says he, and thus all things are naked; that is, both the hidden
and mystical perfect pureness, and cleanness of the godly in the sight of
God by Justification; and the hidden and secret foulness and hyprocrisie of
the wicked; even all things are open and naked in his sight. Obj. out of Ps.
139. 2.


The same answer in effect, cleers also the objection out of Psalm 139. Thou
know my sitting down and my rising up, etc. know all my thoughts: Ergo
(say these Objectors) he sees some wicked thoughts. To which I answer, as I did
before; true it is, that God both I erenties two baskets of figs; whereof one
was exceeding good, and the other was exceeding bad, Ierem. 24. 2. For the
Justified children of God, and ^^rem 24. 2. two (...) of hgs.
all their thoughts, words, and deeds, are exceeding good in the sight of God,
not to their sense and feeling by the perfection of their Sanctification; for
so not some are wicked before God (as is here objected) but all are wicked Romans
4 5. because although that be a Romans 4. 5.
good foundation of a godly life, unseperable from Justification, which S. John
lays, saying; He that is born of God sins not, neither can sin; because
the seed of God abides in him, 1 Ioh. 3. 6, 9. that is he cannot 1 John 3. 6.
9.
choose but wrestle and strive against all sin both in himself and in others,
and zealously follow holiness; Tit. 2. 14. Yet this foundation of their
sanctification Ti^. 2. 14.
is too weak to make them, and all their thoughts, words, and deeds exceeding
good in the sight of God; because all their righteousness and goodness of
Sanctification is by reason of the imperfection thereof, if it should be
beholden out of Justification, but as a menstrous cloth, that is very wicked
and mortal sin; And the more any man is not an hypocrite, the more with S.
Paul, Romans 7.
Romans 7. he feels, and bewailes, and condemns not some (as is here objected)
but all his best thoughts, best best words, and Dan. 9. 5. 20. Esaias 64. 6.
best deeds of great wickedness, Dan. 9. 5. 20. Esa. 64. 6.

But how then come all the thoughts, words, and

I answer, by the perfection of their Justification; Answ. Justification makes
the whole course of life to be pure and acceptable.
whereby not only their persons are Justified; that is, of unjust are made
just, that is perfectly holy and righteous in the sight of God, which is to be
exceeding good: but also all the figs in the basket; that is, all their
thoughts, all their words, and all their deeds are justified in the sight of
God; that is, all the evil of all their thoughts, words, and deeds, and all
the imperfections of their Sanctification are mystically, that is, above their
reason, sense, and feeling, utterly abolished out of Gods sight, and all their
thoughts, words and deeds; are made perfectly holy and righteous from all spot
of sin in the sight of God freely? is not this to be exceeding good? And
this is manifest by the foresaid saying in Titus, To the pure, all things are
pure: all their thoughts, all their deeds, their rising up, their lying down,
their standing and their walking, and all is pure in the sight of God; which
unseperably and unfallibly brings forth Sanctification also, manifesting and
declaring this Justification more and more to their sense, and feeling, and
also to the eyes of others, to the glorifying of God for the same outwardly
also, Matthew. 5. 16. Hereupon (although Matthew. 5. 16.
this benefit was veiled and lay more hid in his days as shall be (further
showed hereafter) yet hereupon (I say) did David in Psalm 139. glory with
Psalm. 139 17.
such comfort and boldness in Gods spying out all his ways; not glorying in
the perfection of his Sanctification, that that was able to endure such
searching into, and trial in Gods sight; for so to think were Pharisaicall and
Papisticall; because of his own righteousness of Sanctification and holy
walking, he speaks clean contrary in other places, saying, If thou do search
and mark what is done amiss, O Lord, who might abide it? Psalm. 130. 3. And
again; By his righteousness Psalm. 130. 3.
of Sanctification and holy walking, shall none living be found righteous,
Psalm. 143. But he rejoiced Psalm. 143. 2.
in a glimmering sight of Justification, that he and all his righteousness,
and rising up, and lying down, was made righteous, acceptable and pure in the
sight of God, in the righteousness that should fully be revealed and exhibited
in the Messiah to come; collecting by his sincere holy walking as by the
plainest evidence of those days, that he was justified in the sight of God,
Thus in the virtue and power of Justification only, are all the thoughts,
words, and deeds of Gods Justified children, like the sacrifice of Abell, that
is excellent in the sight of God, Heb. 11. 4. Thus did Christ H^b. 11. 4.
testify of Nathanael, saying, Behold a true Israelite in whom is no guile;
that is, (as the Hebrew phrase signifies) no sin, Esaias, 53. 9. not by the
perfection of his Esaias 5. 9.
sanctification, although the truth of his sanctification, and sincere holy
walking was a manifestation thereof outwardly: but by the virtue and power of
free Grace by I ustification, and that word of free promise, saying, The
iniquity and sins of the true Israel shall be sought for, but there shall be
none, Ierem. 50. 20. Thus by free Justification Ierem. 50. 20.
only, in all the rising up and lying down, and being of Nathanael under the
fig tree did the Godhead of Christ see a true Israelite in whom was no guile,
Ioh. 1. 47. The same is likewise evident in Abraham, that although his rising
up, and lying down, had Ioh. 1. 47.
many even outward sins, and all his thoughts, words, and deeds had many
imperfections of Sanctification; yet (as I said before) God saw them all
abolished out of his sight, by his rejoicing in the day of Christ, John 8. 56.
Ioh. 8 56.
whereby God was so far from seeing Abraham to have one spot or wrinkle of
sin, or any such thing in his sight, Ephesians. 5. 27. Colos. 1. 22. that he not
only did not (as Ephesians. 5. 27. Coloss. 1. 22.
S. James speaks) cast him in his teeth with any sin; but also when in outward
appearance he seemed to lie in his distrust, lying and dissembling, and
equivocating that his wife was his sister, even then did God power out many
needful blessings upon him, as sheep, and oxen, and he-Asses, and
menservants, and maide-servants, and shee-Asses and Camels; and plagued
Pharaoh and his house; Pharaoh and the King of Gerar.
and received his prayer for the removing away of judgments from the King
Gerar, when the heathen King seemed in that action more sincere, just, and
righteous than he; because even then, though mystically to us, yet truly all
his thoughts words, and deeds, all his rising up and lying down, were made
perfectly holy and righteous from all spot of sin in the sight of God freely.
Thus did God always see Abraham a true Abraham in whom, in his sight, was no
guile; so excellent a thing is Free Justification.

But on the other side, of them that are not Justified, Actions naught with out
Justification.
although their actions be as sincere, as was the King of Gerars, yet God both
knows and sees all their rising up and lying down; that is all their
thoughts, words and deeds, to be like Ieremies other basket of figs
exceeding bad; their sincerest thoughts and actions nothing profitting them,
except Justified Abraham pray for them; because God sees in all their best
thoughts, best words, and best deeds, nothing but sin, although in some more
sin than in others, according to that saying, Prove. 21. 27. The sacrifice or
Prove. 21. 27.
prayer of the wicked is abomination, (when he brings it with his good
mind) how much more when he brings it with a wicked mind? And all because
their sins are not abolished out of Gods sight, nor they made perfectly holy
and righteous from all sin in the sight of God freely; and so both they and
all their best seeming, Luke 16. 15.
very holy, sincere, good works are sin, loathsome and abomination in the
sight of God, as these Scriptures further Tit. 1. 15. 16. Page 2. 15. Obj. out
of Psalm. 51. 4.
prove, Tit. 1. 15, 16. Hag. 2. 15. Luke 16. 15.

The next place of Scripture much stumbled at, is Ps. 51. 4. where David says,
Against thee only have I sinned and done evil in thy sight. As also that place
of Scripture, Psalm. 90. 8. Thou have set our iniquities before and Psalm. 90. 8.
thee, and our secret sins in the light of thy countenance: ergo, the
children of God are not freely made so perfectly holy and righteous from all
spot of sin in the sight of God, that God sees no sin in them.

To which I answer, that the true cause of stumbling Law, and the voice of the
Gospel; between the voice of Gods children, judging of themselves in their
temptations according to their sense and feeling, and their voice of Faith. For
in the first of the foresaid places, David being also at that time under the
Schoolmastership of the Law, Galat. 4. 1, 2. does plainly pronounce Gal. 4. 1.
2.
his dangerous case by the Law, and judging according to his present sense and
feeling, what he was to find at Gods hand by the Law; in which sense he says
in an other place, I am cast out of thy sight. Psalm. 31. 22.
And so if we judge according to the Law, it is questionless that all our
sins are in Gods sight: and (as it there follows, showing plainly that the
saying is legal) God is clear when he judges us for the same, to misery,
death and damnation; but in the seventh he makes a flat Antithesis and
opposition between this state, and that there expressed; saying, Purgeme with
Hysop, and I shall be clean; wash thou me and I shall be whiter than snow. And
this is the voice of the Gospel, and faith.

Now all the Question is, what sin God saw in David, under the time of the
Gospel; against which we should not wrangle; but for which we should now leap
for joy. So likewise concerning the other place of Scripture, viz. Thou have
set our secret sins in the light of thy Countenance.

This sentence is also merely legal, describing our Moses describes and
bewaileth our miserable case, that all men are in by nature, and by the Law, as
the words in the precedent, and subsequent verses do fully show; namely, that
we pine away in the anger of God, and are consumed in his wrath: For which
Augustine makes this saying all one with that place, that describes our lost
state, in the Second to the Ephesians. saying, Ephesians. 2. 1. 2, 5.
We were by nature the children of wrath, as well as others. And whilst we are
in this case of nature, it is no question, but that God sets all our secret
sins in the light of his countenance, and so are consumed in his wrath. But in
the second part of that Psalm, Moses apprehending by faith the restoring of
man again by the Messiah to come, does pray for the performance, and full
accomplishment of the same, in that God would be pacified toward his servants,
and fill us with mercy in the morning. And now by the blood of Christ, whereby
the day spring from on high has visited us, all our secret sins are utterly
abolished out of his sight; whereby all anger and wrath (as the Apostle says)
is slain, Ephesians. 2. 16. Ephesians 2. 16.
And the nature of all our crosses, afflictions, and even of death it self, is
hereby as greatly changed, as was the water, which at the marriage at Caana was
turned John 2. 9. 10.
into wine: but that every man has the benefit, fruit, and experience hereof,
according to his faith, Mat. 9. Math. 9. 29.
29. Heb. 11. This is to preach the Gospel, this is to Heb. 11. 6. Mark 16. 15,
16. Romans 10. 15.
make our feet beautiful in bringing the glad tidings of peace, and the glad
tidings of good things. But if we Ministers of the Gospel (as some fail too
dangerously The main difference between Law and Gospel. Luth. in Galat. 3. 2.
herein) do not wisely discern, and heedfully distinguish between such voices
of the Law, and the voice of the Gospel, especially in this essential
difference: That the Law only teaches what we ought to do; but the Gospel
teaches what we ought to receive; Therefore the Law and the Gospel are two
contrary doctrines: for Moses with his Law is a severe exactor, requiring of us
by fear, and hope of reward, what we should work, and that we should give:
briefly it requires by precepts, and exacteth by threatenings: Contrariwise,
the Gospel gives freely, and requires of us nothing else, but to hold out our
hands, and to take that which is offered. Now to exact, and to give, to take
and to offer, are clean contrary, and cannot stand together: because the voice
of the Gospel stands only in freely receiving good things of God L^^ in
Galat. 3. 12.
to the praise of the glory of his grace. Contrariwise, the Law and works
consists in exacting with threats, in doing by works, and in giving to God;
but faith and the voice of the Gospel requires no works of us, or that we
should yield and give any thing unto God, but that we believing the promise of
God, should receive of him: As Abel offering his sacrifice, gives unto God:
but he believing, receives of God. Whereupon the voice of the Law exacteth and
constrains men to holy walking by fear of punishment, and hope of reward,
and makes Hypocrites; but the voice of the Gospel constrains to holy walking
by love, and makes true Christians. And if this difference be not marked in
reading the Scripture, and distinctly applied to due persons in preaching, the
Law and the Gospel are mixed and confounded together; and so neither true Law
preached, nor true Gospel; but an hot^hpotch of both, to the marring of both;
just like the mingling and mixing together of water and wine, which makes
flash matter of both, and is rejected of God, Esaias 1. 22. And therefore most
worthy Esaias 1. 22.
of often reading, and faithful remembrance for the avoiding of diverse
inconveniences, is that Treatise in the book of Martyrs, united by English
Professors to Scottish Patrick places, concerning the true discerning, right
distinguishing, and fit applying of the Law and the Gospel, to the quite
overthrowing of Popery, plainly showing, that as the Law and the Gospel are
joined together in both the Testaments, as well in the new, as in the old; so
they ought in a mixed congregation to be joined together in preaching; but yet
distinguished to diverse persons, applying the Law to whom the Law belongs, and
applying the Gospel to whom the Gospel belongs; and so to divide the Acts and
Monuments upon Patricks places.
word of God aright. But because commonly the greatest multitude do lie under
the Law; therefore does Christ and the Apostles (as it is there said) much and
often supply the part of Moses: And as Christ himself until his death was
under the Law, (which Law he came not to break, but to fulfill) so his S^rmons,
for the most part, run all upon the perfect doctrine and works of the Law,
showing and teaching what we ought to do by the right Law of justice, and what
danger ensues in not performing the same. All which places, though they be
contained in the book of the new Testament, yet are they to be referred to the
doctrine of the Law. As for example, where Christ thus preaches: Blessed are
they that are pure in heart, for they shall see God, etc. Mat. 5. Again, Math.
5. 3.
Except ye become as little children, ye shall not enter into the Kingdom of
heaven, Mat. 18. Item, Not Math. 18. 4.
every one that says, Lord, Lord, but he that does the will of my father shall
enter into the Kingdom of heaven, Mat. Math. 7. 21.
7. Item, the parable of the unkind servant justly cast into prison, for not
forgiving his fellow servant, Mat. 18. The casting of the rich glutton into
hell fire, Math. 18.
Luke 16. Item, He that denies me before mea, I will Luke 16. 23.
deny him before my Father, Luke 12. these with many Luke 12. 9.
other such like places revealing sin, and threatening punishment do (I say)
pertain to the doctrine of the Law. So then to know when the Law speaks, and
when the Gospel speaks, and skilfully to discern the voice of the one from
the voice of the other, that neither preachers nor hearers take the Law for the
Gospel, nor the Gospel for the Law; this rule is to be observed, that when
there is any moral work commanded to be done upon pain of punishment, or upon
promise of any reward either temporal or eternal; there is to be understood
the voice of the Law. Contrariwise, where the promise of life, favor,
salvation or any blessings and benefits are offered unto us freely, without all
our deservings, and simply without any condition annexed of any Law, either
natural, ceremo^iall, or moral; all those places, whether they be read in the
old Testament, or in the new, are to be referred to the voice and doctrine of
the Gospel: hitherto this witness: which rule Two Uses of (...).
diligently observed, has especially these two excellent uses.

First, it serves to apply the Law, and the Gospel

Secondly, it serves to give to each their due proper Luther truly says) they
pervert the Gospel, and become the Ministers of the Devil: And yet (says he)
such perverters of the Gospel can abide nothing less, then to hear that they
are perverters of the Gospel, and the Apostles of the Devil; nay rather they
glory above others in the name of Christ, and boast themselves to be the most
sincere Preachers of the Gospel: But because they mingle the Law with the
Gospel, they must needs be perverters of the Gospel: because it does not only
blemish and darken the knowledge of Grace; but also it does take away Christ,
with all his benefits, and utterly overthrows the Gospel.

The next place of Scripture likewise objected, is Romans 7. viz. That Paul was a
man as perfectly justified as any: and yet he complains of sin in himself,
and Romans 7. 24. Objected.
says, O wretched man that I am, who shall deliver me? ergo, The children of
God are not made so perfectly holy and righteous from all spot of sin in the
sight of God, that God sees none in them.

To which I answer, that all ought to have that feeling Paul had; but yet the
argument follows not, because it is not Saint Paul's intent in that place, to
discribe in what state he and the justified children of God do stand in the
sight of God; but what he and all the true children of God by the imperfection
of their sanctification do feel in themselves: For he there describing the
battle that is in Gods children between the flesh and the spirit, does show
that whilst they look into themselves and compare the imperfection of their
sanctification with the perfection of the spiritual Law of God, they do find
and feel no good thing in themselves, but mere wretchedness: which makes
them so much the more to go by faith wholly out of themselves, and in the sight
of God to be found only in Christ, and in his righteousness, Phil. 3. 9.
Whereby all those sins and Phil 3 9.
imperfections of their sanctification, that they feel in themselves as a
menstruous cloth, are above their sense and feeling utterly abolished out of
Gods sight by justification, and they made from all spot of sin perfectly holy
and righteous in the sight of God freely. Which the Apostle testifies in
another place, saying, He that knew no sin was made sin for us, that we being
translated into him might be made the very righteousness of God, 2 Cor. 5. 21.
this is their state in the sight of 2 Cor. 5. 21.
God: For indeed (as I said before in the answer to the first objection) what
place is there for faith to believe that we are thus perfectly holy and
righteous in the sight of God, if we did not feel the contrary in ourselves?
and how may they that are of faith, with faithful Abraham be blessed, Galat.
3. 9. if they feel no Gal. 3. 9.
wretchedness in themselves, which feeling must continue until having gotten
the victory by faith, they triumph in the experience of Gods truth? And
therefore should these objectors not only fix their eyes upon the battle, but
look also upon the ensuing victory: for after this battle between feeling and
faith, presently follows the victory; the Apostle not only giving thanks to
God that he was delivered by Christ Romans 7. 25. but also showing wherein that
victory did Romans 7. 25.
consist, both in the cause of it, and in the effects of triumphing: the effect
of triumph in these words: Now then there is no judgment, no punishment, no
condemnation to them that are in Christ Jesus: The cause why, follows, because
the righteousness of the Law, though not inherently and actively of us, yet
objectively and passively is fulfilled in us, Romans 8. 4. whereby Romans 3. 5. 4.
above our sense and feeling, we are made perfectly holy and righteous from all
spot of sin in the sight of God freely. Which (as I said before) contrary to
their sense and feeling is the state in which they stand (Romans 5. 2.) complete
Romans 5. 2.
in the sight of God, Colos. 2. 10. Colos. 5. 10. 1 John 3. 20. Objected.
Clered and expounded.


The next place of Scripture, by which they will seem to triumph, is 1 John 3.
20. where Saint John says, If our hearts condemn us (of sin) God is greater
than our hearts, and knows all things. Which objection although I might easily
without absurdity put off, with the former distinction between Gods knowing
and seeing: yet because the true meaning of the Apostle makes strongly for the
present truth, which they think by misunderstanding the same to make strongly
against it; therefore is this place to be further opened: Herein lying their
error, that they apply this to the justified children of God, which is spoken
of the wicked and hypocrites: for Saint John setting down in all that Epistle,
the marks of discerning true Christians from hypocrites, both the verse going
before, and the verse following after do plainly show, that the twentieth
verse is spoken of hypocrites: The true meaning whereof is this: If our hearts,
that is, our consciences do accuse and condemn us of willing practicing any
sin; it declares, first, that we are blind, and see not what an infinite
horrible thing the least sin is in the sight of God, that it cannot be
abolished, but by the blood of the Son of God, and yet dare willingly practice
it. Secondly, the accusation, terrors, and condemning of conscience for the
same show our unbeleefe, that we do not truly trust Christ, that he with his
blood alone has made us clean from all sin in the sight of God, and so rob
Christ of his glory; not believing that by clothing us with his own
righteousness, of unjust he has made us just, that is, perfectly holy and
righteous from all spot of sin in the sight of God freely, whereby all
accusation, terrors, and condemning of conscience would cease, and end in
peace; for being justified by faith, we have peace toward God through our
Lord Jesus Christ, Romans 5. 1. Thirdly, by Romans 5. 1.
our willing practicing of any sin, we are unthankful for so great benefits
literally professed; and so being blind, unfaithful, and unthankefull in Gods
covenant, we are hypocrites: and then that sin that our evil condemning
conscience does accuse us of, being not abolished, is much more odious in Gods
sight: yea, although we flatter our selves thinking and seeming to our selves
to be, for all this, true Christians: yet God knows and sees all our
unbelief, distrust, unthankfulness and hypocrisy, much more than we our
selves do, and must needs much more condemn us, than our own accusing evil
consciences; he being so infinite in knowledge, and perfect in justice, and as
the fountain of righteousness hating so infinitely all unrighteousness. But
then in the next verse follows the antithesis or contrary description of a true
Christian, saying, Beloved, if our conscience does not condemn us, then have
we boldness toward God: that is, if the peace of conscience casting out the
accusations, terrors and condemnings of conscience, do reign in your heart,
then it shows plainly, that in truth Phil. 4. 7. Colos. 3. 15.
you yield to Christ the glory of his blood and righteousness in making both
you and your consciences of unjust just, that is, perfectly holy and righteous
from all spot of sin in the sight of God freely; and so are no hypocrites in
the Covenant of God; because he has made you good consciences quitting and
excusing you of all sin two manner of ways.

First by Justification, that not only cleeres your holy and perfect concerning
the conscience, Heb. 9. 9. 14. whereby Heb. 9. 9. 14.
being once purged with Christ's blood, we have no more conscience of sin,
Heb. 10. 2. 14. that is, no more Heb. 10. 2. 14.
accusations, terrors, and condemnings of conscience for sin; because (as it
was said before) Being justified by faith, that is, made perfectly holy and
righteous from all spot of sin in the sight of God freely, we have peace
toward God through our Lord Jesus Christ. Whereupon arises a threefold
boldness; as first, Abraham's A threefold boldness arises from true
justifying faith.
friendship and familiarity with God: secondly, a boldness to promise to our
selves from God all good things, both temporal and eternal: and thirdly,
boldness to pray for the same, with assurance to receive whatsoever we ask;
because the prayer of a righteous man, that is made perfectly holy and
righteous in the sight of God freely, cannot but avail much, I am. 5. 15, Iam
5. 15, 16, 17
16, 17.

And as our consciences are thus made good to John, This is the Commandment of
all Commandments, that we believe in the name or power of Jesus Christ, that
of unjust he makes us just, that is, perfectly holy and righteous in the sight
of God freely; by which we practice all Commandments, and so do manifest that
we have the holy Ghost, and are not hypocrites neither toward God by
Justification, nor toward men by Sanctification.

To the next Scriptures, viz. that God saw sin in the justified Church of the
Corinths, and punished them for the same, 1 Cor. 11. and also in the Churches
of 1 Cor. 11. 30.
Asia, Revelat. 2. and 3. ergo the children of God are Rev. 2. and 3. objected,
and cleared.
not made so perfectly holy and righteous from all spot of sin in the sight
of God freely, that God sees no sin in them: I say, that as this is a
Papisticall cavil also objected against the Protestants defending the
perfection of free Justification; so do I answer with the Protestant
Antagonists, that these examples, when people and whole Churches are alleged,
as the Corinths, the Churches of Asia, and the Church of the Hebrews, and such
like; they alter the question, and come not within the compass of that whereof
we speak: for it is one thing to speak of the Justification Justification of a
Church and a particular man different.
of the whole body of a people, and another thing to speak of the Justification
of one particular man; because a true particular child of God is justified
absolutely, but an whole Church or Nation is not justified absolutely, but
respectively; Some in the same, and sometime the greater multitude falling
away, and are collectively reproved being Reprobates: in which sense Paul said,
that all Asia was turned away from him, 2 Timothy 1. 15. Again, othersome may be
2 Timothy 1. 15.
in the dead general calling of Christianity of Gods election, but not yet
effectually called, nor justified, Bearing a name that they live, but they are
dead, Revel. 3. Revel. 3. 1.
1. Such were they of whom the Apostle speaks, saying, some have not the
knowledge of God, I speak this to your shame, 1 Cor. 15, 34. Such also were the
lukewarm 1 Cor. 15. 34.
Laodiceans, that were not yet clothed with the white raiment, that their
filthy nakedness do not appear, whom yet in love, for the Election sake,
Christ rebuked, and willed to get on the white garment, that their filthy
nakedness might not appear before Revel. 3. 17, 18, 19.
him, Revel. 3. 17, 18, 19.

Again, other some although they be justified, and thereby all their sins
utterly abolished out of Gods sight; yet they find the fruits, effects,
benefits, experience, and comforts of the same, but weakly, according to their
weak faith, whereby they are exercised with many crosses, and afflictions, to
the raising up of their faith to apprehend more fully the Grace of
Justification, that has abolished all their sins out of Gods sight: such (as
it appears) were those Corinthians, of whom the Apostle speaks in that
eleventh to the Corinthians, saying, For this cause many of you are sick, and
many weak, etc. For what cause? namely, because you discern not the Lords body.
Here was weak faith, according to which they found agreeable that great axiom
of the Gospel, Be it unto thee according to thy Matt. 15. 2^.
faith.

But fourthly and lastly, some are absolutely justified, and these are they
that are here spoken of properly: such were those few names in Sardis, which
had not defiled their garments, that is, they had not mixed and corrupted Free
Justification, whereby they walked with Christ in white, that is, in the glory
of the same, for they thereby are worthy, Revel. 3. 4. Such also are those
Revel. 3. 4. Revel. 7. 9, 13.
great multitudes of all Nations, spoken of Revel 7. which were clothed with
long white Robes, viz. Of Christ righteousness; and had Palms of victory over
sin, death, the Devil, and all evils in their hands of faith. And cry with a
loud voice, that is, joyfully and zealously, saying, salvation comes of our
God, that sits upon the Throne, and of the Lamb, that is, withdrawing
utterly from their works, and ascribing the whole cause and glory of their
salvation, only and alone to God the Father, and to his Son Jesus Christ. And
they have washed and enlarged their long Robes, that is, they have extolled,
dignified, and magnified the glory of Free Justification, as Paul did, 2 Cor.
3. 7, 8, 10, 11. saying, If the 2 Cor. 3. 7, 8, 10, 11.
ministration of condemnation were glorious; much more does the ministration of
righteousness exceed in glory. And again, I count all things loss, and do
judge them to be dung, that I may be found in Christ, not having mine own
righteousness of sanctification, by my walking after the Law, which is but
dung; but the righteousness which is of God by the faith of Jesus Christ,
Philip. 3. 9. moreover Psalm. 3. 9.
these have made their long Robes white in the blood of the Lamb; that is, they
believe that the blood of Christ, has made them in the sight of God from all
sin whiter than snow, Psalm. 51. 7. and so has made them Psalm. 51. 7.
perfectly holy and righteous from all spot of sin in the sight of God
freely. For thus has Christ washed us from our sins in his blood, Revel. 1. 5.
Therefore are Revel. 1. 5.
these in the presence of the Throne of God, that is, under his most loving and
safe protection, Psalm. 91. and Ps. 121. Psalm. 91. 1. Psalm. 121. 5.
And they serve him day and night in his Temple, that is, continually and
zealously in his true Church. And he that sits in the Throne of power and
glory, will dwell among them, that is, will manifest and declare himself and
his goodness among them more and more, Psalm. 103. 7. These are they that are
absolutely justified; Psalm. 103. 7.
and these are the matter and argument of this Treatise.

The last place of Scripture, but not the least pressed, is 2 Cor. 12. 7, 8.
objected and cleared.
2 Cor. 12. 7, 8. viz. Paul both had the remnants of sin in him, and also
prayed thrice, that the same might depart from him: ergo, the Justified
children of God are not made so perfectly holy and righteous, that they have
not one spot of sin in the sight of God. To which I answer, that although
this might be referred to the former objection out of the seventh to the Romans
where it is fully answered; yet because it is so much urged, it is not amiss
to open this place more fully, that these Objectors may see how carelessly they
trifle with the Scriptures; and so take Gods Name in vain, in alleging, by
their ignorance, that so much against the truth, which being thoroughly marked
makes stongly for the truth. True it is, that Paul and all the true children of
God both have and feel the remnants of corruption dwelling in them; yea, and
the more grace they have, the more by their true hatred of sin, and love of
righteousness wrought in them by their Sanctification, do they feel sin to
be like a thorn or splinter run into their flesh; whereby they cannot choose,
but pray thrice, and thrice, and thrice; that is continually groan by the vigor
and force of their Evangelicall, continual, true repentance, and still sigh to
be freed from the same; of which although God does not, for the exercise of
their Faith, free them to their sense and feeling, until the time of their
appointed change; yet does he call them by his Word and Spirit, to see better
and better by the eye of faith, that Two advantages by being healed from sin.
he has perfectly healed them thereof in his own sight, before they pray; as
if he said, yea I have healed thee with a twofold or double advantage, both to
thee, and to me.

For first, my Grace (of Justification, which is the Mother and abundant grace,
of graces, Romans 5. 15, 17.) Romans 5. 15, 17.
is sufficient for thee; that is, although mystically above thy sense and
feeling, that thou may not live by sense and feeling, but by faith of my
power, yet truly it makes thee sufficiently righteous in my sight: How
sufficiently? that is, perfectly holy and righteous, from all spot, or wrinkle
of sin, or any such thing in my sight freely, Ephesians. 5. 27. which thy
sanctification can never effect and Ephesians. 52.
bring to pass; is not this to be sufficiently righteous?

Again, thou art not only made sufficiently righteous in my sight: but also
the second advantage is, that hereby my power is made perfect in thy weakness;
that is, when thou feel nothing but weakness and infirmity in thy self,
then for me notwithstanding, to make thee sufficiently, and perfectly holy and
righteous, from all spot of sin in my sight freely; herein my power is mightily
magnified: for if thou had no sin in thee to thy sense and feeling, how
could thou live by faith? and how could thou above thy sense and feeling
be made perfectly holy and righteous in my sight, from that which thou have
not? Thus it is plain, that although God knows the sin that dwells in his
sanctified children, yet he sees them abolished out of his own sight; and sees
them sufficiently and perfectly holy and righteous from all spot of sin in his
own sight, and sees, and defends his power to be therein greatly magnified.
Which wrought such true contentment in S. Paul, in the midst of all his
infirmities, that he cried out, that he rejoiced in his infirmities, that this
power of Christ in Justification might dwell in him, whereby he came to feel
this Miracle even of contraries to be reconciled together in him; namely, that
when he was weak, then was he strong. Which when we begin to feel to work in
us also, then do we truly begin to live the life of faith.

Thus having blown over these clouds of their doubts obscuring in their minds
the bright Sun of Free Justification, arising of the soggy mist of
misunderstanding these Scriptures, let us now proceed to the second rank of
objections, as follows.

CHAP. VI. Wherein is contained an answer to the objection of the examples of
David, and such like persons as were Justified; and yet God saw, and took
notice of sin in them, and punished them for the same.
THe second rank of objections is mustered together, of the examples both in
the old and new Testament of such persons, as were Justified, and yet not
withstanding God saw sin in them, and punished some of them also for the same;
ergo, the children of God are not made by Justification, so perfectly holy and
righteous, that they have no spot, or wrinkle, in the sight of God; concluding
with an epiphonema, or acclamation how it comes to pass, that God should see
sin in them, and not in us. To which I answer, that although this doubt is
most plainly cleared both by the express Scripture it self, and by the common
consent of the best orthodox Writers in the Church; yet through little
understanding and marking, and less practice of the same, not only the Papists
(especially pressing the example of David) do greatly stumble, to the overmuch
dignifying and extolling of works; A threefold difference of the time of the
Church.
but also some Protestants do dangerously halt herein. But how is it cleared?
I answer, By a threefold distinction, and difference of time, for distingue
tempora (says Augustine) and loca contraria conciliantur; that is, distinguish
the times, and then places and things that seem contrary, will be reconciled.
Now these three several times were these: first, the time of the Law,
secondly, the time of John Baptist, and thirdly, the time of the Gospel; the
difference whereof is this, that the first time was glorious; the second, more
glorious; and the third time was most glorious of all.

For first, the time of the Law was glorious, because 1 First the time of the
Law. Heb. 13. 8.
Jesus Christ was in the same; yesterday, and to day, and the same for ever,
Heb. 13. 8. Whereupon David said even in his days, That great and glorious
things are spoken of thee, thou City of God, Psalm. 87. 3. Psalm. 87. 3.
But yet both Christ, and these glorious things, were veiled; yea and greatly
obscured, and darkened: but how? or with what veil? even with the bondage
terrors, and legal government, not only of the Ceremonial Law (as the Papists
hold) but also of the moral Law, whereby sin was severely taken notice of,
and also punished sharply in Gods children. For they having then but a little
glimmering under types, figures, and shadows of the glory of Free
Justification, and of the other glorious benefits of the Gospel and good things
to come, Heb. 10. 1. for supply whereof Heb. 10. 1.
they were chiefly driven to righteousness, with the legal rigor and
government, wherein God was eager in all the Old Testament to exact, and extort
their good works, and righteous living; to this end, greatly magnifying and
extolling, the legal righteousness of holy and righteous living; promising
and giving large temporal benefits, whilst they did them, Deuteronomy. Deuteronomy. 28.
28. And not only severely threatening the failers in in them, Levit. 26. but
also sharply whipping the disobeyers, Levit 26.
being with the same Majesty that he spoke unto them ten the Commandments in
thundering and lightening; suddenly ready also, to take vengeance on every
offense, both upon good and bad, with stern and horrible punishments. Thus was
Moses for an unadvised word, not only typically, but also legally and morally
stricken with death, that he entered not into the land of promise; thus was
Vzzah stricken dead, for staying up the Arc; thus was Jonah cast into the Sea;
thus was Eli his neck broken, for not correcting his children; hence came their
Captivities, and carrying away into Babylon: Hence came their terrible Famines,
whereby the mothers were driven to eat their own children; with such like
examples innumerable, the whole preaching of the Prophets running chiefly upon
this strain: Hereupon it was, that the Apostle said unto the Hebrews,
converted to the Gospel, Ye are not Heb. 12. 18, 19, 20, 21.
come to the bodily mountain, nor unto the burning with fire, nor to
blackness and darkness, and tempest, so terrible that Moses said, I fear and
quake. And again, Romans 8. 15. Ye have not received the spirit of bondage to
fear Romans 8. 15.
again. Yea God kept the people of the Old Testament under this bondage of
fear with such severity, that the Manichees and oaths Heriticks fondly
conceited upon the same, that there were two Gods, one ca'v. Insitut. ^^^ 2.
cap. 11. sect 3.
of the Old Testament, that governed the people in rigorousnesse; and another
of the New Testament, that governes peoples in gentleness. Whereas it is but
one, and the same God that governed his people of the Old Testament with such
severity and rigor, for Two causes of the severity of the Old Testiment.
two causes or respects: First to show that nothing pleased him, but that
perfect righteousness revealed in his Law: And therefore if their foot did
step a little awry from the same, they were presently for their disobedience
severely punished: Secondly to make them by the burden hereof to groan for the
coming of the Messiah, that should freely cloth them with that perfect
righteousness, which as the Apostle says, Romans 3. 21. Romans 3. 21.
Was witnessed in that Law; which the Apostle testifies, in the Epistle to the
Galath. 3. 24. and is the proper Gal. 3. 24.
meaning of that place: namely, that the Law executed with such severitie was
the Jews Schoolmaster to drive them to Christ, that they might be made
righteous by faith. Hence it was, that although they were the true children of
God, as well as we, and heirs of the same blessings, that we be; yet (as the
same Apostle there testifies, Galath. 4. 1, 2, 3. they were in comparison Gal.
4. 1, 2, 3
of us, like little children, and like Wards in The Church of the Old Testament
under the three infirmities of infants.
their nonage; and thereby under these three infirmities of little children,
from which we are now freed.

As first, they had not a clear sight, and a ripe understanding by the death of
Christ of the greatness of the riches of the Gospel, and of the worth of their
spiritual treasures (as little children, and Wards know not the worth of their
rich lands and inheritance) but saw them darkly as things a far off, Heb. 11.
13. it being Heb. 11. 13^
true that a learned Dispenser of Gods Mysteries Calv. Insiit. lib. ^. cap. 11.
sect. 5.
says: That it behoved, before the Sun of righteousness was risen, there
should neither be so great brightness of revelation, nor so deep sight of
understanding: And therefore God so gave them in measure, the sight of his
word, that they saw Christ and his riches, as yet, a far off, and darkly.

Secondly, like heirs in their nonage, that have not Received not the
promises, Heb. 11. 13. but (as it were) little pittances of Heb. 11. 13.
their riches outwardly, administered unto them under shadows, types, and
figures, of the blood of Bulls, and Goats, which were not able to make them
perfect concerning the conscience, Heb. 9. 9. and therefore were feign to be
renewed every year, Heb. 10. 1, 2, 4, 11. Because the Old Heb. 9. 9. Heb. 10.
1, 2, 4, 11. Heb. 7. 19.
Testament made nothing perfect, Heb. 7. 19. That being likewise true, that the
foresaid Dispenser of Gods Mysteries, says, That the store of heavenly riches,
whereof there is offered unto us in the Gospel, a more plentiful enjoying,
they did but a little sip of it.

Thirdly, as the little Child whilst he is a Child, is Galath. 4. 1. But to
them that object that David and Gal. 4. 1. Object.
Daniel, and the Prophets, were not little children to us, but we rather
little children to them; they having more freedom of conscience from the fear
and bondage of the Law, than we. I answer, that that Calvin, That although
they feeling the oppression and bondage of the Law, did fly to the succor of
the Gospel, then twinklingly and glimmeringly shining a far off: yet we deny
that they were so endued with the spirit of freedom and assuredness, that they
did not in some part feel both fear and bondage by the Law; yea in such
measure, that in comparison of us, they were both children, and under the
testament of bondage and fear. Nay, S. Paul is not content to liken them to
little children under the Schoolmasters rod: But also to men shut up in prison,
and to servants under an hard Apprenticeship, eagerly longing for their
freedom by the coming of Christ, that might fully reveal the making them
perfectly holy and righteous from all spot of sin in the sight of God freely,
Galath. 3. 23, 24. Thus was Gal. 3. 23, 2^
the glory of Free Justification, hid and veiled under the severity and rod of
the Law, whereby they seemed not justified, but rather, as the Apostle says,
as slaves and servants, ever for their defaults under the whip, and more like
malefactors in prison, than sons and heirs of such glorious benefits, as is
the fullness of Free Justification. And such were the children of the Old
Testament.

The second time coming between the Law and ^. the time of John Baptist.
the Gospel, was the time of John Baptist, continuing unto the death of Christ,
and was more glorious than the time of all the Prophets before, by reason of
the glory of his ministry; for although he revealed sin terribly by the Law,
so that the Scribes and Pharisees that thought themselves so holy and righteous
were glad to be washed of him; yet because he pointed with his finger to the
Messiah, that was now come, and preached, yea, and sealed by Baptism a more
full exhibiting of free Justification, saying, look how truly I wash your
bodies with water, so truly is the Messiah come among you, ready with his
blood to wash away all your sins; for you may behold and see among you the
Lamb of God that takes away the sin of the world, John 1. 29. Whereupon
although John came short of John 1. 29.
two points that made the ministry of all the former Prophets very glorious;
as first, to foretell things to come; and secondly, to confirm the same with
miracles, whereof John did neither: yet so glorious was his ministry that
among all the Prophets borne of women, arose not a greater Prophet and Minister
than John: because by his pointing to the Messiah now come and present; he did
not only preach and seal by baptism a fuller exhibiting of the glory of free
Justification; but thereby also the former legal severity that then lay upon
the children of God and the school-masterlike government began to slack and
cease: for although John laid open culpas, their sins, and the danger of the
same belonging to the wicked, and so divided and applied the Law rightly: yet
de poenis, that is, concerning any punishments inflicted upon Gods children, we
read none; but rather many judgments and punishments by Christ's miracles were
healed and removed away. Whereupon, though Peter's foul fault of denying and
gross forswearing his Master, and others sins were in that middle state
taken notice of, yet no punishments were inflicted upon them for the same: for
Ambrose says of Peter's denial and tears we do read: but of any satisfaction
or punishment we read not, no not when the ungrateful Samaritans Luke 9. 53,
54.
(though afterward converted) refusing to receive Christ, James and John would
in a legal rigor have had fire to come down from heaven to consume them, yet
would Christ inflict none, whereof two reasons may be yielded: first, because
the upshot and fullness Two reasons why sins were not punished in John
Baptists time.
of all punishment of all the sins of the Elect was now going to be acted and
executed in the death of Christ upon the Cross, drowning all punishments and
Schoole-master-like whippings inflicted in former times. And secondly, because
the Bride Galat. 4. 4. was as one Galat. 4. 4.
grown to full age, no longer under a schoolmasters, but preparing to attire
herself in the wedding garment of that righteousness, which her Bridegroom
had now actually wrought, Mat. 3. Herein to marry her Mat. 3. Hos. 2. 29.
unto himself in righteousness for ever. Hos. 2. 29. And this expiring of the
schoole-master-like whippings vailing and darkening free justification, Christ
himself testifies, saying, The Law and the Prophets prophesied until John:
since that time, the Kingdom of God is preached, and every man presses into
it, Luke 16. 16. Matthew. Luke 16. 16. Matthew. 11. 13.
11. 13. for what was the prophesying of the Law, or what else did the Law
prophecy, and what did the Prophets, agreeing with the Law, principally preach
to the children of God then, but (as if they had not been justified) a severe
exacting of righteousness with large promises to the doers of the same, as if
they were to merit the favor of God and his blessings temporal and
spiritual; but with threats of wrath and anger and sharp punishments to his
children failing in the same? and not only threatening these things, but also
executing the same sharply upon them, as we heard before: this was the
prophesying of the Law until John being the mere schoole-master-like
government that ceased with John: which the Apostle to the Galat. testifies
more fully, saying, But after that faith (that is Christ the object of faith)
is come, we are no longer under a Schoolmasters, Galat. 3. 25. upon Gal. 3. 25.
which words of the Apostle, the exposition of the learned Interpreters is
worth the marking, saying thus, Iam Paedagogii munus expirasse, nec locum
amplius habere, diserie affirmat: that is, now the Apostle flatly, or
expressly affirms that the office of the schoole-mastership is expired, and
has place no more. Not but The Law is to preached.
that the Law is to be preached, (as hereafter shall be further showed) but
that the former legal whippings of the old people of God under the old
Testament, driving them as little children to obedience by fear, thereby
vailing and darkening free justification, was now expired and ended; which the
said learned interpreters express more largely thus: But we Jews and people
of God under the old Testament, were in times past children under the Law, as
under a schoolmasters ferula: But Christ being exhibited and come, now being by
faith grown to full age, we are under the schoolemastership of the Law no
more; as not needing that legal schoolemastership, being emancipati by our
full grown age. The Law therefore has the use of that direction no more, and
therefore it ought not to be joined and mingled with faith. After this manner
does the Apostle lay forth not only the use of the Law, but also shows, why it
ought to be but for a time: hitherto these witnesses. Now when the rising
Solis Iustitiae of the Sun of righteousness had dispelled the mist of this
pedagogie, John Baptist being filled with joy in hearing the voice of the
Bridegroom began so to open the Kingdom of Heaven by preaching, and sealing
by Baptism such a clear manifestation of free justification; that not only
unperfect Apollos, that knew but the Baptism of John only, became servent, and
zealous in the way of the Lord, Acts 18. 25. but also many others were so
replenished Acts 18. 25.
with joy and zeal, that they even pressed with violence into the Kingdom of
Heaven and the violent took it by force, Mat. 11. 11, 12. And such were the
children of Mat. 11. 11, 12.
the middle time, in the time of John Baptist.

But now thirdly, the third time from which Christ Thirdly the time from which
Christ groaned out his blood and life. John 19. 30.
groaned out his blood and life upon the Cross, crying out, it is finished,
John 19. 30. namely, that both Culpa the sin it self, and reatus the guilt,
and poena the punishment, and all, by the full exhibiting of the
wedding garment, by this infinite means of his own death upon the cross, are
so utterly and infinitely abolished, and such an everlasting righteousness is
so fully brought in upon Gods children; and his glorious resurrection
manifesting this righteousness to be so fully wrought upon us, that this time
is most glorious of all; yea, as the Apostle says, Exceeding in glory, 2 Cor.
3. 9. 10, 11. For now is fulfilled and finished that 2 Cor. 3. 9, 10, 11.
Zechat. 13. 1.
Prophecy of Zechary saying, In that day there shall be a fountain opened to
wash away sin and uncleanesse. Why, were not the sins of Gods people washed
away before that day that the Prophet speaks of? Yes; but whereas they had
before vessels, as the Brazen Sea, and such like to wash in, signifying their
spirituallwashing, then at that day of Christ's death, the full flowing
fountain of Christ's blood should so abundantly wash them clean from all their
sins, that they should, from all their uncleanesse, be made in the sight of God
whiter than snow. Now is fulfilled and finished that Prophecy of Daniel,
saying, Seventy weeks are determined upon thy people to finish transgressions,
and to make an end of sins, and to make a reconciliation for iniquity, and to
bring in everlasting righteousness. Does the Prophet promise here no more than
the people of God had before those seventy weeks? what a kind of prophecy
were that? yes, although all the children of God, had as Calvin says, a little
sip and taste of all these graces, by which they were saved; yet, the full
fountain and flowing stream of them were after those seventy weeks of
years, at the death of Christ poured out upon the holy City of Gods Church, in
a more excellent manner, and in a more abundant measure. And this the Prophet
Jeremy also testifies to be proper to the time of Christ, saying thus, in
those days, and Ierem. 50. 1^^.
at that time, says the Lord, the iniquity of Israel shall be sought for, but
there shall be None. This None, spoken as God speaks in truth, is a glorious
condition: but when shall this be? even in those days, and at that time that
Daniel before spoke of, namely at the death and resurrection of Christ, wherein
as Calvin speaks, The flowing store of Christ's riches are disbursed unto us.
Hence come those mighty voices of the dispensers of Gods mysteries before set
down, full of spiritual Majesty and glory, passing the Ministry of John
Baptist: Namely, first of Luther, saying, And that there is no more sin in
the Church since Christ now reigns, (mark here is the, third time specified,
since Christ now reigns) we daily confess in the Apostles Creed, when we
say, I believe that there is an holy Church: which is indeed nothing else, but
as if we should say, I believe that there is no sin in the Church of God: for
they which believe in Christ are no sinners, but are holy and righteous, Lords
over sin and death, and living forever. But faith only sees this, etc. So
likewise does Calvin magnify this third time, saying, Now therefore under the
new Testament, God does not so much as remember our sins, because there is now
made one cleansing for them all, once making us perfect for ever. Otherwise the
Prophet should say in vain, or to no purpose, that this should be the benefit
and glory of the new Testament, that God will not so much as remember our sins
any more, Ierem. 31. 34. Hence from the glory Ierem. 31. 34.
of this third time is that saying of Luther; That whosoever have not
confidence in this one point, that his sins are so perfectly taken away and
utterly abolished out of Gods sight, now by the blood of Christ, that God does
see no sin in us, without doubt they are damned; viz. so long as they continue
to rob this third time of her glory, and Christ of this full revealed efficacy
of his blood. And what should I stand to recite any more of the witnesses of
the glory of free justification before set down, seeing as one says of Luthers
speeches, so I may say of all their testimonies before expressed, that they are
sayings of high contemplation of Christ, and mighty voices of free
justification, full of spiritual Majesty, describing the glory of this third
time, which Saint Paul says, does exceed in glory, and wherein (as Calvin
truly says) the least Minister does now in his Ministry Calv. Institut. lib.
^. cap. 94 Sect. 5.
excel and pass John Baptist, because he could not thus express this same
incomparable strength and glory, which after John's time appeared in his
resurrection: which glory Peter does generally describe to consist 1 Pet. 1.
The glory of the new Testament consists in three things.
mainely in three things.

First, that the old Prophets did diligently search into this glory; but found
that the full stream thereof should not be administered unto them, but unto us.

Secondly, that it should consist in the sufferings and most wonderful actual
death of the very Son of God.

Thirdly, in such glorious effects ensuing the same, that the very Angels stand
in admiration ((...)) at the glories that follow upon those actual sufferings
of the Son of God. For now the veil of the Paedagogie before mentioned, is
rent into two pieces from the top to the bottom, Mat. 27. 51. Now the way to
the holy of Math. 27. 51. Heb. 9. 8.
holyes, before shut up, is gloriously opened, Heb. 9. 8. Now the Queen comes
forth, clothed with the vesture of gold of Ophire, being all glorious within,
Psalm. 45. 9. 13. Psalm. 45. 9, 13.
and enters with joy and gladness into the Kings palace, verse 15. that is,
into the Kingdom of heaven here Verse 15.
set up on earth by Christ, which is the joyful glorious time and state now
under the Gospel, Mat. 11. Math. 11. 11, 12.
11, 12. which Kingdom of heaven is this glorious new-revealed righteousness,
and peace, and joy in the holy Ghost, unspeakable and glorious, Romans 14. 17. 1
Pet. Romans 14. 17. 1 Pet. 1. 8.
1. 8. Now this Queen makes her children Princes in all lands, Psalm: 45. 16.
Revel. 1. 6. Now appears the Psalm. 45. 16. Revel. 1. 6.
great wonder in heaven, a woman clothed with the Sun, and having the Moon
under her feet, and a crown of twelve stars upon her head: as shall be
further showed in the second part of Justification.

Now we see, the Bride that was before a child, and under the rod, must not now
if she chance to tread her foot a little awry, have the rod brought forth
again to whip her being a Bride and a Queen, and in her marriage attire, and
wedding-garments, Revel. 19. Rev. 19. 7, 8, 9.
7, 8, 9. Now the heirs that were before haeredes pupilli, heirs in their
nonage, are now become haeredes adulti and emancipati; that is, come to their
full age, and freed from their former child-like condition; because we have (as
the learned interpreters shew^ received Ius Adultorum, consisting in a
threefold prerogative, The threefold prerogative of the new Testament.
contrary to the three former infirmities of heirs in their nonage: as

First we are more capable to conceive by the death Paul said; To me is given
this grace, that I should preach among the Gentiles the unsearchable riches of
Christ: Because the saying of Calvin Institut. lib. 2. cap. 11. sect. 5. 6.
is most true; that it is meet that the presence of Christ should have this
excellency of prerogative, that from it should arise the clear revealing of
the glory of the heavenly mysteries, whereby we attain in a manner into the
secret closets of heaven. Whereupon Brentius also Brentius in Galat. 4. 1.
truly says, Tempus Evangelii facit statim ex auditoribus summos Doctores, hoc
est, perfect justos; non quidem in carne, sed in Christo; that is, the Gospel
makes us of hearers presently great Doctors, that is, perfectly righteous; not
indeed in the feeling of the flesh, but as we are translated into Christ. And
therefore for this first prerogative is the joyful exclamation of Christ very
patheticall, worthy greater marking and better feeling and experience in our
hearts; saying, Blessed are your eyes for that which you see, and your ears
for that which you hear; for many Kings and Prophets have desired to hear
those things which you hear, and have not heard them, Mat. 13. 16, 17. Math.
13. 16, 17.


The second privilege is, That we are emancipati, this (says Calvin) being
the sum of difference between Institut. lib. 2. cap. 11. sect. 9.
the old Testament and the new: that the old Testament did strike into men's
consciences trembling, and did drive to obedience with fear; but the new
carries us to the glorifying of God with fullness of joy. The Apostle plainly
testifying that the Law was a schoolmaster to drive to Christ, that we might be
made perfectly holy and righteous in the sight of God freely by faith; and then
flatly avoucheth, that faith being once come we are no more under the
schoolmaster, Galat. 3. 24, 25. Gal. 3. 24, 25.


The third prerogative of heirs come to their full Calvin truly says, that
whereas the old people had but Institut. lib. 2. cap. 9. sect. 1. 4.
a sip of the treasures of the Gospel, there is offered unto us now in the
Gospel such a plentiful enjoying of the same, that for the inestimable flowing
store of those riches exhibited to us, it is now not without cause said, that
at Christ's coming, the heavenly Kingdom of God, called the Kingdom of heaven,
is here erected in earth; because the children of God are hereby entered into a
fuller fruition of all the unsearchable riches of the Gospel, which the very
Angels desire to look into: whereby being mounted upon the chariot of the
Gospel, running upon these four wheels: First, Wisdom; Secondly,
Righteousness; Thirdly, Sanctification; And fourthly, Redemption, 1 Cor. 1.
30. 1 Cor. 1. 30.
they are swiftly carried to the glorifying of God in all joy, and zealous
conversation, Tit. 2. 14. And these are the Tit. 2. 14.
children of the new Testament, these are the right children of the Gospel, and
these are the true and natural children of faith. And thus does this third
time, viz. of the Gospel, excel both the other times, and exceed in glory: for
thus says the Apostle, If the ministration of death graven in the tables of
stone was glorious, so that the children of Israel could not abide to behold
the face of Moses, for the glory of his countenance; which glory was to be done
away: how shall not the ministration of righteousness, that is this third
time, fully exhibiting the righteousness of Christ, making the children of God
perfectly holy and righteous from all spot of sin in the sight of God freely,
much more exceed in glory? changing us into the same image from glory to 2 Cor.
3. 7, 8, 9, 10.
glory 2 Cor. 3. 7, 8, 9, 10. And thus the least minister in this kingdom of
heaven here upon earth, by laying out and administering these full treasures of
the Gospel, is greater than John Baptist, Mat. 11. 11. upon which Math. 11. 11.
place the faithful Expositors say faithfully thus: Magnitudo haec ad docendi
munus refertur, etc. that is, this greatness of the least Minister above John
Baptist is to be referred to the office of teaching: wherein Christ shows,
that by how much John excelled all the Prophets that were before him; so much
do the Ministers of the Gospel excel John Baptist: for if John were therefore
greater than all the Prophets that were before him, because he went immediately
before Christ, that presently followed him, or because he pointed to him being
present; how shall not an Apostle, or any other less Minister of Christ be
greater, who not only preaches, Christ to be come: but also lays forth the
mysteries (or as another says, Magnalia regni) the great things of his
Kingdom; or as the express word of God says, magnifica Dei, the magnificent
and wonderful things of God, as the spirit gives them utterance, Act. 2. 4.
11. Act. 2. 4. 11.


But alas, herein, not only the Papists stumble (as I said at the beginning of
this chapter) building upon David's sharp punishment after he was forgiven, and
such like examples of executing the pedagogicall severitie, their works of
satisfactions; as also upon the large promises of blessings, temporal and
eternal, made unto legal workings, do build their merits, and magnifying of
works. And surely the Apples and Nuts, and Cakes, and the rod of temporal
punishments, with which (as they themselves do write) God did govern Bellarm
concio. 13. in Galat. 4. Gal. 3. 25.
that first people, as little children, buried by S. Paul, Gal. 3. 25. ever
since the coming of Christ, and now rotten, are fit foundations for their
childish and rotten buildings: not only these (I say) do thus play the
children again; but also we Ministers of this glory of the Gospel, too many
among us, do not only limp in our practice, and lisp in our speech, but even
halt down right; being so far from passing John Baptist in opening the
kingdom of heaven, that we come not near him; neither in his inward fullness
of joy in hearing the voice of the Bride-grome, that then was come to enrich so
royally the Bride; nor in outward washing the people from all their sins,
that is, in not preaching and opening the glory of Free Justification as he
did; much less do we lay out the glory of the third time, that does exceed in
glory. But contrariwise, we slide back to the legal teaching of the Old
Testament, from which we not understanding the intent of God in such high
commending, and sharp exacting of works and legal righteousness, do fetch
our principal vein of preaching; and do make it our common and chiefest
manner of teaching, only a little as the old Prophets did, to glance at Free
Justification, mercy and grace in general terms; but all our maine labor is
to command things that are right, and to forbid wicked doings, to promise
rewards to the followers of righteousness, and to threaten punishments to the
transgressors; which seems both in preachers and people a good and plausible
course to flesh and blood, because it is the teaching of reason, and the light
of nature Romans 2. 14, 15.
described, Romans 2. 14, 15. to be thus in the very Gentiles: namely, that the
Gentiles which have not the Law, do by nature the things contained in the Law:
much more then do they approve and allow of the hearing of it; For they have
the effect of the Law written in their hearts accusing them with fear of
punishment for their evil doings; and excusing them with hope of speeding well
for their well doings: this kind of teaching the people do like and applaud as
agreeing with that light of nature: but what comes hereof? truly we sow up
again (in respect of the former Pedagogie of the moral Law) the veil that
was rent in two pieces, from the top to the bottom: we shut up again the holy
of holies: we hide and darken, if not put out the benefits of Christ,
preaching, as if the children of God were not made perfectly holy and righteous
from all spot of sin in the sight of God freely. We confound the Old
Testament with the new: we bring back the full grown heir to School again to
be whipped of his Schoolmaster, contrary to the express doctrine and
direction of the holy Ghost, saying, that after faith is come, we are no
longer under a Schoolmaster, Gal. 3. 25. And if we do not pull off the Gal.
3. 25.
wedding garment over the Brides head; yet we bring forth rods to whip the
Queen, standing at the right hand of the King, in the Vesture of the gold of
Ophir, Psalm. 45. 9. We do hinder true Sanctification; and either Psalm. 45. 9.
with legal threats or rewards do cause but a constrained hireling sanctity,
which is hypocritical legal holiness, or else do cause people to run,
though more cautiously, yet the faster, into the iniquities and sins so
vehemently with legal terrors forbidden; according to that old true saying:
nitimur in vetitum semper, cupimusque negata; we rush the faster into things
forbidden, and always desire the things denied us. And all this because we do
not first stablish and root them in the assurance and joy of Free Justification
without works; for the seeking for further assurance by works, though not as
causes, but as effects, makes people set the Cart before the Horse, and to
confound, by the violence of the light of nature, the effects with the causes;
and so to labor after the supposed works of sanctification more than after
faith, that should give to Christ only, the sole glory of our assurance;
therefore they should first have assurance, and then do, that which they do,
in thankfulness for their assurance: True it is, that I cannot assure thee, of
me; but by my confession with my mouth, Romans 10. 10. and thankful obedience
Romans 10. 10.
in my deeds: But the having of Christ alone, and his righteousness, with his
other free benefits depending thereupon, must assure me. And these are they
that are only able to change men's hearts, and to amend their natural
preposterous perverseness, and to carry them with all joy, and love, and zeal
as strong as fire and death, to glorify God in all holy and zealous
conversation: which nothing but the seeing of the bounty of God in these riches
freely bestowed, with the excellency and unsearchable worth and glory of them
powerfully preached with joy and zeal, can effect and bring to pass. Which
for Preachers now to fail in, is bad enough.

But if we be offended at the mighty voices of faith and Justification, used
by the learned, to express the glory of this third time; and when we dare not
for shame deny the glory of Free Justification, thus testified by the common
consent of the learned, yet will say; I dare not say so of Justification, as
Luther says; that is (as Luther truly says) I dare not say my Creed, in the
true meaning thereof, and thereupon to traduce, calumniate, and to persecute
them, that use these sayings testified by the learned, to be but speeches full
of spiritual majesty and glory; this is far worse: For this is to be like
the Owl, An apt similitude.
that can see a little, if she have but a little glimmering light; but if the
Sun be up, and shine forth with her bright beams she is stricken stark
blind. But faithful Ministers should above others, like John the Evangelist
not only mount a loft with the Eagle, but also be Eagle-eyed to look against
such bright beams, Solis Justitiae of the Sun of Righteousness, without
dazzling: But if the sayings of the faithful Dispensers of Gods mysteries,
expressing the glory of this third time do dazzell our eyes; let us (as the
best remedy) anoint our eyes with eye salve, that so with the Eagles brood,
we may look more directly upon the glorious beams of the Snnne of
Righteousness, lest failing hereof, we beat length cast down out of the
Eagles nest, as a bastard brood. But if we do thus anoint our eyes, we may
easily by right marking the differing glory of these three times, answer the
former proposed question; namely how it comes to pass that the faithful
dispensers of Gods mysteries avouch, that God saw sin in these Justified
persons exemplified, and yet now sees none in us? but that the weakest capacity
may not stumble at this phrase of the learned, expressing the glory of free
justification, I will for the weaker memory make all, that has been spoken of
this point, clear and manifest by a brief and plain antithesis thus:

First, God saw sin in them, as the veil not fully yet An antithesis showing
the difference between the state of the old Testament and new. Rom 3. 21. Zach.
13. 1. Dan. 9. 24. Ierem. 50. 20. 1 John 1, 7. Heb. 10. 14, 17, 18. Gal. 4. 1,
2, 3.
revealing and manifesting the glory of free justification, Romans 3. 21. but he
sees none in us, as the veil is removed away, and the glory that we are made
perfectly holy and righteous from all spot of sin in the sight of God freely,
is fully revealed and fully manifested, Zachar. 13. 1. Dan. 9. 24. Ierem. 50.
20. 1 John 1, 7. Hebr. 10. 14. 17, 18.

Secondly, God saw sin in them, as they were haeredes pupulli, children that
had need of the rod by reason of their nonage, Galat. 4. 1, 2, 3. but he sees
none in us, as being haeredes adulti full-growne heirs, and emancipati, Gal.
4. 4, 5. Gal. 4. 4, 5:


Thirdly, God saw sin in them, and punished them for it, as they were under the
Schoolmaster of the Law, Galat. 3. 23, 24. But he sees none in us, as we Gal.
3. 23, 24.
after faith is come, that we are made perfectly holy and righteous from all
spot of sin in the sight of God freely, are no longer under a Schoolmaster,
Gal. 3. 25. Gal. 3. 25.


Fourthly, God saw sin in them, as they were not made perfect concerning the
conscience, Heb. 9. 9. but he sees Hebr. 9. 9.
none in us, as we being perfectly purified with Christ's blood actually and
fully exhibited, Hebr. 9. 13. 14. Heb. 9. 13, 14. Heb. 10. 1. 2. 14. 22.
Have no more conscience of sin, Heb. 10. 1, 2. 14. 22.

Fithly, God saw sin in them, as they were come unto the Mount burning with
fire, and to darkness and blackness and tempest, Heb. 12. 18. 21. but he sees
none in Heb. 12. 18. 21.
us, as we are come to Mount Zion, and to the City of the living God, and to
the celestial Jerusalem, Heb. 12. 22, 23, 24. Heb. 12. 22, 23, 24.


Sixthly, God saw sin in them, as being under the time of the Law, and spirit
of bondage to fear: but he sees none in us, as we are under the time of the
Gospel and spirit of joy and love, that casts out that fear, Romans 8. 15. 1
Ioh. 4. 18. Romans 8. 15. 1 John 4. 18.


Seventhly, God saw sin in them, as their Prophets and Teachers being lesser
than John Baptist, came not preaching and opening the Kingdom of Heaven; but
he sees none in us, as the least of our Prophets and Teachers being in their
Ministry greater then John Baptist, do bring us fully into the Kingdom of
Heaven, Matthew. 11. 11. Luke 16. 16. Which Kingdom Matthew. 11. 11. Luke 16. 16.
of Heaven is not meat not drink, much less sin and punishment, but
righteousness and peace, and joy in the holy Ghost, Romans 14. 17. Romans 14. 17.


Eighthly, God saw sin in them, as they were under the Old Testament, that made
nothing perfect; but he sees none in us, as we are under the New, and better
Testament, stablished upon better promises, and makes us perfect, Heb. 7. 19.
and 8. 6. and 10. 1, 2. 14. and Heb 7. 19. and 8. 6. and 10. 1, 2. 14. and 11.
39, 40. 1. lewel.
11. 39, 40. All which is worthily expressed by that Reverend Jewel of England,
saying thus, Our elder Fathers in the Old Testament were under a Schoolmaster,
and had not the perfect knowledge of this light: But now God has scattered all
these Clouds, and we behold as in a mirror the glory of God with open face. Our
elder Fathers in the Old Testament, had only a dim candle to guide their
feet, we have the bright Sun Beams (O wonderful difference:) They had only
the green blade of the corn, we have the plentiful increase, even as in the
time of harvest ((...) exceeding advantage:) They had the shadow, we have the
light; they had only a drop to refresh themselves, we have the whole stream of
Gods mercies powered upon us: Now is that new Jerusalem the glorious City of our
God revealed from on high: Now has the bright Sun of righteousness appeared
from on high: Now has God made the new heavens and the new earth, and has
fixed his Tabernacle and dwelling place among men. O that our tongues were
untied, and our lips touched with the burning coal from the Altar Christ, that
we might layout the worth and glory of these things, then should we be right
Ministers of the Gospel of Christ; then should we make our feet beautiful, by
bringing these glad tidings of peace, and these glad tidings of good things,
not confounding but truly distinguishing between the glory of the Old
Testament, and the exceeding glory of the New; yet I end this point, saying
with Calvin, That this distinction Christ himself meant of, when he said, the
Law and the Prophets are unto John, and that from thence forth the Kingdom of
heaven (that is, the fullness of the treasures of the Gospel) is preached, and
Luke 16. 16.
every man presses into it, Luke 16. 16.

CHAP. VII. Containing Answers to certain Reasons Objected.
NOW let us proceed to their third and last Third and last sort of Objectons.
sort of Objections; namely their Reasons, which prove their matter, no better
than their misunderstood Scriptures, and examples, but only bewray more
unbeleefe. First, they say that God does correct with afflictions and crosses,
yea and punish his Justified children for sin: Ergo, they are not with the
wedding garment of Christ's righteousness made so perfectly holy and righteous
from all spot of sin in the sight of God freely, that God sees no sin in them.
For (say they) will a loving father correct and punish his children for no
fault? Now because this also (as well as the former that went before, and the
rest that follow after) is a Papisticall cavil, much pressed by them also, to
prove that the Justified children of God are not made both from culpa the sin,
and reatus the guilt, and poena the punishment, perfectly holy and righteous in
the sight of God freely. And because some Protestants writing in their books
of Gods correcting his children for sin are not rightly understood, and on the
other side by the Thomisticall distinctions of the Schoolmen, of a fourefold
punishment, the Law and the Gospel (as Luther justly complains) are much
confounded: yea, and that in the books of the ancient Fathers (except somewhat
in Augustine) the true and clear difference in this case, between the Law and
the Gospel is not rightly distinguished; which (as he truly proves and
experience shows) brought the Gospel of Grace into much corruption with
works, and men's consciences into great danger; therefore is this point
somewhat the more largely to be handled, and reduced to the purity of the
Scriptures; which is done by marking, that the clear fountain of Gods Word
does distinguish crosses and afflictions, but into two sorts. The first sort
are legal Two sorts of afflictions.
crosses, and the second are Evangelicall crosses and afflictions.

First, the legal crosses are the lashes of the Law, 1 Legal.
and belong to such persons as are not converted, at the leastwise actively and
declaratively: and as these unconverted persons are of two sorts, the Reprobate
and the Elect; so likewise the use and operation of these legal crosses is
twofold, either Vindicative, or Corrective: Vindicative are such afflictions as
God executes Vindicative.
upon the wicked and Reprobates not converting them; but for their malicious
wickedness, as with flashes and flames of his wrath, destroying and
confounding them: in which sense God is called the God of vengeance, Psalm. 94.
1, 2. saying, O Lord God to Psalm. 94. 1, 2.
whom vengeance belongs: O God to whom vengeance belongs, show thy self:
Lift up thy self, thou judge of the earth, render a reward to the proud. But
corrective afflictions are such lashes of the Law, as are executed Corrective,
upon those persons that are the children of God by Election, but not yet
converted, and so under the Law; and therefore those afflictions are not in
wrath to confound them, but in mercy to prepare them unto their conversion: and
thus whilst they live loosely, and wickedly, and lukewarm Laodiceans, not
effectually called and converted, these crosses and afflictions do serve to
correct them for their sins; because as God, whilst they are not yet
converted, sees them in their sins, or (which is all one) sees sin in them, by
reason that they are not yet abolished out of his sight, being yet in the
kingdom of darkness and sin, as the Ephesians and such others were before
their conversion, Ephesians. 2. 1, 2, 3. So he lays crosses and afflictions upon
Ephesians 2. 1, 2, 3.
them, as the rods and lashes of the Law, for their sins; that so they may look
into the horriblenesse and foulness of them, and feeling a taste of Gods
wrath, and seeing their most fearful danger by the same, may fly to Christ;
that he by his blood may wash away, and utterly abolish all their sins out of
Gods sight, and make them perfectly holy and righteous from all spot of sin in
the sight of God freely: which grace of Justification, bringing forth also
Sanctification, truly converts them unto God. Thus the Schoolmaster of the
Law, that held the Church of the Jews, as little children under the rod,
until the coming of Christ (as is before declared) is also a Schoolmaster to
drive with the lashes of crosses and afflictions the unconverted Gentiles also
unto Christ: and so is that saying of S. Paul common both to Jew and Gentile;
That the Law is a Schoolmaster to drive us to Christ, that he may heal both
our souls of sin, and our bodies Gal. 3. 24. Lament. 3. 39, 40. 1 Samuel 12.
14, 15. Psalm. 89. 30, 31, 32. 1 Cor. 11. 31, 32. Revel. 3. 18, 19.
of afflictions, by making us righteous freely by faith, Gal. 3. 24. Examples
for these legal crosses and afflictions are these, Lament. 3. 39, 40. Why is
the living man sorrowful? Man suffers for his sins: 1 Samuel 12. 14. and Psalm.
89. 30, 31, 32. and 1 Cor. 11. 31, 32. and Revelat. 3. 18, 19. where although
the lukewarm Laodiceans had not gotten on the white garment of Justification,
that their filthy nakedness might not appear; yet for the Election sake they
are rebuked, and threatened, and chastened in love, to get the same white
raiment on, that their filthy nakedness may not appear: with many such places
both in the old Testament, and in the new, innumerable. All which places are
easily discerned to be legal by that infallible rule of discerning the voice
of the Law, and the voice of the Gospel, one from the other, before set down
out of Patricks places in the answer to the objection of Psalm 51. 4. which
legal rebukes, afflictions, and corrections, because they are the Elect upon
whom they are executed, and that to so profitable an end, as to drive them to
Christ, that he may convert them: hereupon are the many commendations of them,
both in the Scriptures, and writings of the learned: as that they give
understanding, that they are medicinable, that they that endure them are
blessed, that they are tokens of Gods love, and such like: not that they are
such in themselves, or have any virtue in them perse to convert, or heal, or
make blessed; for the law, with all her rods and lashes, can do none of these,
for they are the sole glory of Christ alone: But per accidens, because they
prepare us, and drive us to Christ, unto whom when we are come, out of him
alone we draw virtue by faith, that heales and converts us, and makes us
blessed, healing us by faith only with the wedding garment of his own
righteousness. And because there are always in every congregation many
unhumbled persons not terrified with the horriblenesse of the least sin; but
are cold, dead, lukewarm, and secure ones, to be called at the least (as I
said before) actively and declaratively at all hours; and many mere civil
honest men, yea and sometimes many holy hypocrites, conceited of their own
holy walking and righteousness; therefore must a faithful Minister, though
(as I said before) not mix and mingle the Law and the Gospel, as one would
mingle black and white together, and mar both; but yet ever and always
preach the Law to the humbling of such persons: And he must not only and
always preach it, but also (wherein many of us do too much fail, just as
Luther prophesied, that it would come to pass after his time, that the very
Law would not be preached in his true vein and nature again) we must
always preach it to such persons, as killingly as we can; or else (as Luther
truly says) To preach the Law truly, is to preach it killingly. 2 Cor. 3. 6,
7. Romans 7. 9.
it does make but hypocrites; for the more killingly the Law is preached, the
more truly it is preached, 2 Cor. 3. 6, 7. Romans 7. 9. that is, it must be
preached first spiritually, as Christ expounds it in the fifth, sixth, and
seventh chapters of Math. and secondly as nigh as we can possibly, by laying
out the horriblenesse of the least sin in the sight of God: and then the
multitude of them in the spiritual breach of each Commandment, both by
commission, and omission: and thirdly the five fold punishment that God daily
executes in
one place or other; we must preach it as nigh (as I said) as possibly we can,
with the same majesty that God spoke it, in thundering and lightening, and
terrible earthquake, and flaming fire, reaching up to the midst of heaven; for
which right nature of it, it is called the fiery Law, Deuteronomy. 33. 2. that so it
may be to secure Deuteronomy. 33. 2.
ones, and unto them that are under it, the lightening of Gods wrath, the
thundering of his anger, the messenger of death, the hammer and rattling of hell
to break in pieces the hard stones, that lie secure in the least sin. Now when
the preaching of the ^aw showing the horriblenesse of the least sin in the
sight of God, and the fearfulness of Gods wrath for the same, has thus
humbled and terrified, and killed men; then they fly willingly to Christ by
faith, and sighing up to him; he by his full satisfactory punishment, heales
all their soars, by making them perfectly holy and righteous from all spot of
sin in the sight of God freely: then this also sanctifies them, and makes them
full of comfort, joy, love, and zeal of glorifying God in all holy and godly
conversation, by zealous doing, and cheerful walking by love in all Gods
Commandments; which is the true Evangelicall Repentance continually walked in,
that Christ is said to give, by turning away every one from his iniquities,
Acts 3. 26. And hitherto of legal crosses and afflictions. Act 3. 26.


Now on the other side, Evangelicall crosses arise 2 Evangelicall. Why
Evangelicall crosses are not to correct and punish for sin.
of the Gospel, and are laid upon them that are thus truly actively and
declaratively converted, not to correct and punish them for their sins, as
before: for this were to mingle, to mix and confound the Law and the Gospel:
this were to deny Christ's satisfactory punishment; because it is therefore
fully satisfactory, because we have thereby not one spot or wrinkle of sin,
nor any such thing in the sight of God, Ephesians. 5. 27. Ephesians. 5. 27.
It is therefore fully satisfactory, because by his death upon the cross he
has made us so holy, that we are without all blame, and without all fault in
the sight of God freely, Colos. 1. 22. yea, this were to deny, that of unjust
we Colos. 1. 22.
are made just, that is, perfectly holy and righteous from all spot of sin in
the sight of God freely. And briefly this were to deny the express words of S.
Paul, saying, That after ^^ith is come, that we are made thus perfectly holy
and righteous in the sight of God, we are no longer under a Schoolmaster,
Galat. 3. 25. But the Evangelicall crosses Gal. 3. 25. The use of Evangelicall
crosses are two: First, trial of faith.
and afflictions, upon the justified and converted, have also these two uses:
first, to try their faith: and secondly, to exercise that faith, that has made
them so perfectly holy and righteous from all spot of sin in the sight of God
freely.

First, (I say) for the trial of their faith, to try them how they will stick
to the assurance of this truth of God, and power of Christ, in this work of
the wedding garment wrought upon them by his blood; when the feeling of sin in
the flesh, and these crosses and afflictions coming as it were in the neck of
the same would, to sense and feeling, persuade them to the clean contrary,
viz. that the blood of Christ has not made them clean from all sin, 1 John 1,
7. and 1 John 1, 7.
that Christ has not made them perfectly holy and righteous from all spot of
sin in the sight of God freely: unto which temptation if we yield, what is this
but to deny Christ and his blood?

Secondly, they serve to exercise, increase, make 2 To exercise and increase
our faith.
strong, and to give us an experimental feeling in our selves of that faith,
that has made us perfectly holy and righteous from all spot of sin in the
sight of God freely. For it is true that the faith of Gods children is weak,
and will sometimes stagger and droope; and their sanctification will be like
the Moon, as it were, in the wane, and fail as Abraham's did sometimes; but
because they are clothed with the Sun (as shall be further showed hereafter in
the second part of Justification) that is, because the wedding garment of
Christ's righteousness wherewith they are clothed never fails them; therefore
although the said weakness of their faith, and other imperfections of their
sanctification be covered and utterly abolished from before God, with the
perfection of Christ's faith, and complete sanctification, wherewith they are
clothed, and thus being translated into Christ they still abide complete in
the sight of God, Colos. 2. 10. Yet by these crosses Colos. 2. 10.
faith to themselves-ward, and to their own experience and feeling is made
more strong, and raised to apprehend more fully, from faith to faith, that
wedding garment of Christ's righteousness, that has made them to stand so
perfectly holy and righteous from all spot of sin in the sight of God freely:
which power of Christ, in thus justifying them, makes them to say with Saint
Paul in their greatest afflictions, When I am weak, then am I strong, 2 Cor.
12. 10. because when they feel 2 Cor. 12. 10.
crosses and afflictions upon them, which properly are the effects of sin, and
of one not justified in the sight of God, it makes them to examine themselves
whether they be justified, and to look better and deeper into the worth of it,
and to apprehend it more strongly, and to cling the faster unto it, with prayer
to God for the virtue and comfort of it: And finding in their consciences that
they give to Christ the glory of his blood, by believing that they are
justified, it makes them to rise up in great joy in the very midst of those
afflictions; and this greater joy increases and brings forth more abundantly
all experimental graces of sanctification, that gives experience both to them
selves and to others that they are made perfectly holy and righteous from al
spot of sin in the sight of God freely: and so blessed and saved for ever; this
is that which is meant, Ioh. 15. 1, 2, 3. Where Christ says, Now are you John.
15. 1, 2, 3.
clean through the Word that I have spoken unto you, etc. That is, now already
by my word of Free Justification are ye made perfect good trees in the sight
of God freely; but it rem^ineth, that this faith of yours be exercised with
many crosses and afflictions, that so it may be made strong; and bring forth
the good fruits of Sanctification the more abundantly. This is to be seen in
the lives of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, and very clearly in Joseph's, afflicted
of his brethren, sold into Egypt; and in Egypt for his faith, and chastity,
and filial fear of God, plain evidences of his Free Justification (though not
as yet clearly revealed and manifested, Romans 3. 21.) Romans 3. 21.
was cast into prison, expressly testified by the holy Ghost, to be for the
trial and exercise of his faith, Psalm. 105. 19, 22. The like is to be seen in
the three Psalm. 105. 19, 22.
Children of Israel cast into the hot fiery Oven; and of Daniel cast into the
Lions Den; and many others to be seen, as in a clear Looking-glass, in the
eleventh to the Hebrews, whose faith by much exercising in troubles, was made
so strong, that they brought forth much and wonderful fruit. Hence of this
second sort of afflictions do arise far greater praises, than of the first
sort: as that they fashion us like to the Image of Christ, that they are more
precious than gold; that they manifest and declare the rich graces wrought in
us by Justification and the spirit of God. For when we see sin in our flesh,
and feel crosses and afflictions, as it were, punishments upon us for the
same: then to believe that the blood of Christ has made us in the sight of God
clean from all sin, 1 Ioh. 1. 7. and that we have not one spot, or wrinkle of
1 Ioh. 1. 7.
sin in the sight of God, or any such thing, is a mighty trial and
manifestation of our faith in the blood of Christ, and a wonderful giving to
Christ the glory of his death, and resurrection, Romans 4. 20. but who? and Romans
4. 20.
how few, when afflictions come, do here stand? as Saint Paul speaks, Romans 5.
2. But then if we do so, this causes Romans 5. 2.
God to return with all experimental comforts and blessings unto us; as three
places of Scripture for confirmation Three Scriptures opened and explained.
of all this, are worthy the opening, as three sufficient witnesses, by which
every word must stand.

As first, Romans 5. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5. where the Apostle says, 1 Romans 5. 1, 2, 3,
4, 5.
Being justified by faith, that is, made perfectly holy and righteous from all
spot of sin in the sight of God freely, We have peace toward God; that is,
all beating, blows, and anger is ceased through our Lord Jesus Christ: for
says the Prophet, He was wounded for our transgressions, he was bruised for
our iniquities, the chastiment of our peace was laid upon him: that is, all
correction and chastisement for all sin, needful for the making of perfect
peace between God, and his justified children, was laid upon him, and with his
strips we are Esaias. 53. 5.
healed: wherein we stand, and rejoice under the hope of the glory of God. And
not only so, but we glory in afflictions, also knowing that they are not now
whippings, corrections, and punishments for our sins, as before the blood of
Christ had made us clean from all sin: for surely a a child has little cause
to glory in his whipping for his faults, but has rather shame, and dejection;
but we glory, because now they are changed into a new nature, and use; namely,
to work patience, that is, a quiet contented suffering and enduring to have our
faith tried; whether we will contrary to our present sense and feeling give
this glory to Christ's blood, that he has justified us, that is made us
perfectly holy and righteous from all spot of sin in the sight of God freely:
whereby God says unto us, as he said unto Abraham; Now I know that thou
beleevest in my Sons blood: then this patient enduring of trial, brings
forth experience, that by Gods gracious deliverances from those afflictions,
his Sons blood has made us clean from all sin in the sight of God: as Ezekiah
said, being healed of his sickness, Now I know that thou have cast all my sin
behind thy back. Then this experience brings forth a sound hope, and trust in
God, that is a flat promising unto our selves from God, and a very expectation
of all good things and blessings both temporal and eternal. And this hope
makes us not ashamed, that is, shall not be frustrated; because the love of God
in justifying us with his Sons blood, being thus experimentally powered abroad
into our hearts, by the holy Ghost, assures us that if he spared not his own
Son, when we were sinners, to justify us, much more being now justified, that
is, no sinners in his sight, will he with him, give us all things also, Romans
8. 32. Thus we see, how the weddinggarment Romans 8. 32.
of Christ's righteousness put on in Justification, does not only make us
complete freely in the sight of God, Coloss. 2. 10. but also the faith hereof
being exercised Coloss. 2. 10.
with crosses and afflictions, makes us in our own feeling and experience
complete to our selves more and more.

The second proof confirming this, yet more plainly is, Iam. 1. 2, 3, 4, 5, 6.
saying, Brethren count it a matter James 1. 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, explained.
of all, or exceeding joy, when ye fall into diverse temptations or trials:
mark how he baptiseth crosses and afflictions, as it were with a new name,
taken from the change of the nature of them by the Gospel, and from the end and
use of them, calling them temptations and trials; as when it is said God
tempted Abraham, Genesis 22. 1. so crosses and afflictions are to tempt Genesis 22. 1.
and try us, whether we will believe, when we seem to feel the contrary; that
his Sons blood has made us, perfectly holy and righteous, from all spot of
sin, in his sight freely. But to what end does he so try us? it follows.
Knowing that the trial of your faith works patience; that is a quiet and
contented waiting, by reason that sin, the cause of all evil, is done away,
to see a good issue, and the foresaid experimental use of them; and this
patient waiting brings forth that perfect work that thus we may be perfect, not
only inwardly, mystically, and freely to Godward in Christ's perfectness,
Coloss. 2. 10. Heb. 11. 4. but also grow perfect Coloss. 1. 10. Heb. 11. 4.
and entire, lacking nothing to our selves-ward, and in our own experimental
feeling, declaratively and outwardly. And if any man lack this wisdom, of thus
rejoicing exceedingly for these causes in afflictions, let him ask it of God:
but let him ask in Faith; that is, in assurance that Christ is hi^ sufficient
wisdom, and has made him sufficiently perfect to Godward, in Christ's own
complete perfection, in that foundation of all experimental blessings, that
Christ has justified him, that is, made him perfectly wise, holy and
righteous; and so entire and lacking nothing to Godward: and herein waver not,
because it is Christ's own glory; for he that wavereth in this efficacy of
Christ's blood, is like a wave of the Sea, ^ost of the wind and carried away, to
the robbing of Christ of the glory of his blood: neither let that man think,
that he shall receive any thing of the Lord: that lets go this foundation
of all blessings, that only gives him acceptable, and approved entrance unto
God to find all experimental outward blessings whatsoever.

The third place of Scripture, declaring the true nature of these Evangelicall
crosses and afflictions, is that of 1 Pet. 1, 6, 7. laying out also the fruits,
effects, and 1 Pet. 1. 6. 7. explained.
profits of the same; saying, Now (for a season) you have manifold temptations:
mark again, how Peter also calls their afflictions by the name of temptations
and trials; but to what end, and use are they? namely, That the trial of your
faith (in Christ the Son of God freely justifying you) being much more precious
than gold that perishes (though it be tried in the fire) may be found to your
praise, and honor, and glory, at the appearing of Jesus Christ. More examples
of these crosses and afflictions, merely Evangelicall, are these places, 2 Corinthians. 11. In stripes 2 Cor. 11.
above measure, in prison more plenteously, in death often. Of the Jews five
times received I forty stripes save one. I was thrice beaten with rods: I was
once stoned, I suffered thrice shipwracks: in journying often, in perils of
waters, in perils of Robbers, in perils in the City, in perils in the
Wilderness, in perils in the Sea, etc. In weariness and painfulnesse, in
watchings often, in hunger and thirst, in cold and nakedness. What sundry
variety of crosses and afflictions are here, and yet all Evangelicall? Again,
2 Cor. 12. 9. Very gladly therefore will I rejoice rather 2 Cor. 12. 9.
in my infirmities, that the power of Christ, which is Free Justification, Romans
1. 16, 17. may dwell in me. Therefore Romans 1, 16. 17.
I take pleasure in infirmities, in reproaches, in necessities, in
persecutions, in anguish for Christ's sake: For when I am weak, then am I
strong. And again, 1 Pet. 4. 13. 1 Pet. 4. 13.
But rejoice, in as much as you are made partakers of Christ's sufferings, etc.
And again, Heb. 10. 34. Ye suffered Heb. 10. 34.
with joy the spoiling of your goods. And that place to the Heb. 12. 5, 6, 7,
8. necessary to be explained and Heb. 12, 5, 6, 7, 8. necessary to be
explained.
answered, because it is so much objected: where the Apostle says: For whom
the Lord loves, he chastises, and scourges every Son whom he receives;
But if ye be without chastening, whereof all are partakers, then are you
bastards, and not Sons, etc. Although the Apostle speaking to a whole Nation
(as the plural number shows) it is (as I said before) beside our question;
because an whole Nation and Church consists of diverse sorts of Professors
collectively reproved: yet I answer more fully and plainly thus: that the place
is most true, and verified upon all Gods children, two manner of ways.

For if we understand the place of the common and worser sort among the
Hebrews, in the dead general calling, not yet converted and effectually
called, or putting their hand to the plough, were ready to look back; as it may
seem, that he did mean such by his telling them of their hands that hung down,
and of their weak knees, and of their halting, and that their turning out of
the way, may be healed, as he does with much sharpness reprove them diverse
times in that Epistle: then that place is legal, and to be understood of
legal corrections and punishments, that must be the Schoolmaster to drive
them home effectually to Christ; that so they may be soundly healed, by being
truly, and in sincerity, made partakers of Gods holiness and righteousness by
Justification, and so bring forth better fruits of righteousness by
sanctification; and so belongs to the first sort of crosses and afflictions,
that (as I said) are legal.

But if the place be to be understood of the better sort of Professors, truly
converted, and absolutely justified, such (as he says in another place of the
same Epistle) as suffered with joy, the spoiling of their goods: and of these
he seems to speak most properly, because he says, that although they
suffered with joy the spoiling of their goods; yet they had not resisted unto
blood: then this place is Evangelicall, and to be referred to Evangelicall
crosses and afflictions; not only because he makes no express mention of
suffering for any sin; but also because he says expressly, that by those
crosses and afflictions, their faith was exercised for their profit, that they
might be made partakers of Gods holiness, which is principally done by Free
Justification: for although being by their faith once justified, they are ever
justified, having all the imperfections of their Sanctification that they daily
feel in themselves, ever abolished out of Gods sight, being made clean and
whiter than snow in his sight from 1 John 1. 7.
all sin, 1 John 1. 7. and they ever perfectly holy and righteous from all
sin and rebuke before God, and in his sight, Colos. 1. 22. yet the trialls and
exercising of Colos. 1. 22.
that faith, that has made them such before God, makes them still partakers of
Gods holiness and righteousness, both of Justification and Sanctification
more and more experimentally in themselves, by the increase of their faith,
from faith to faith, as I said before, Romans 1. 17. Yea God has so wonderfully
Romans 1. 17.
dignified faith, that although the least grain of mustard seed of true faith,
does make the true child of God perfectly holy and righteous from all spot of
sin in the sight of God freely: yet be he never so perfectly holy and righteous
in the sight of God; yet he finds the fruit, experience, and benefit thereof,
but according to his faith; according to that maine Axiom of the Gospel: Be it
unto thee according to thy faith: whereupon it is most certain, that God
chasteneth every son whom he receives; and that also with a double or twofold
A twofold chastisement of Gods people.
chastisement; both with the chastisement, or crosses and afflictions of
correction, and with the chastisement, or crosses and afflictions of trialls;
but yet not to be mixed and mingled, and confounded together: but first before
faith, with the afflictions and crosses of corrections, to be the lashes of
the Schoolmaster of the Law to drive them to Christ; but after faith is come,
with the glorious crosses and afflictions of trialls and exercisings of our
faith, to make our faith strong, that may bring us into real experience of all
Gods blessings and graces. Neither is this distinction any new device; but such
as not only walks in the old and good way of Gods word, but also is testified
by the Dispensers of God mysteries, Ante remissionem esse supplicia peccatorum:
post remissionem autem, certamina exercitationesque justorum, Aug. de peccat.
merit, and remis. lib. 2. cap. 34. Vide D. Abb. against satisfactions. Twelve
absurcities in mingling Evangelicall and Legal crosses. 1
both ancient writers, and modern Antagonists against the Papists: for
Augustine says thus: Before forgiveness or Justification, they are the
punishments of sin; but after forgiveness, they are the fights and exercises
of the just. This distinction of crosses and afflictions must be diligently, in
preaching and teaching observed; because the first are Legal, causing fear,
that by love must more and more be cast out, 1 John 4. 18. and the other are
Evangelicall, causing joy and love: for if this distinction of Legal and
Evangelicall crosses be not diligently kept and distinguished, then there will
follow these twelve maine absurdities and inconveniences.

As first, not a true and right dividing of the word of God, by reserving and
applying the Law and the Gospel to their due, right, and proper objects to whom
they rightly belong in the congregation; as to apply the Law, and merely
nothing but the killing Law, and that also in his full vigor and force to the
loose, careless, and secure ones in the least sin, to whom the Law belongs;
until they be terrified with the horriblenesse of the least sin in the sight
of God: And on the other side to apply the Gospel, and merely nothing but the
healing and quickening Gospel, to the humbled and terrified ones, to whom only
the Gospel belongs, to raise them up to joy, love, and zeal of glorifying God
2 Cor. 3. 7, 8, 9, 12. Mark 2. 11, 12. Luth. in Galat. cap. 3. 19.
for the same, 2 Cor. 3. 7, 8, 9, 12. Mark 2. 11, 12. whereupon the saying of
Luther is most true; That unless the Gospel be thus plainly discerned, and in
practice distinguished from the Law, the true Christian doctrine cannot be kept
sound and incorrupt: But contrariwise, if this difference be known (and kept)
then is also the true manner of Justification truly known and kept.

Secondly, to tell these humbled ones terrified with Matthew. 22. 2. and Matthew.
22. 2.
to make the children of God, or rather Spouse of Christ, not to have on the
wedding garment in the marriage feast, ver. 11, 12. Verse 11. 12. 3


Thirdly, not feeling how powerful the treasures of the Gospel alone are, both
to abolish all sin from before God, and by joy and zeal thereof to mortify
all sin in our selves, they go to borrow help by fear from the whippings of
the Law; as if the Gospel that kills the old man, and makes us alive, and
raises us up from the spiritual death to life, were not able to increase that
life begun, and sufficient to bury the old man utterly, except it borrowed
help of the whippings of the Law; and so make a miscillane and mixture of the
Law and Gospel; and thus preach (as Luther truly says) neither true Law not
true Gospel, but a miscillane and marring of both; and thereby make miscillane
Christians, that is mere hypocrites, Gal. 4. 25. Gal. 1. 4. 25. 4


Fourthly, by this mixture and mingling of whipping to righteousness joined
with free justification in the faithful, as Luther truly says upon these
words of the Apostle, viz. They intend to pervert the Gospel of Christ, Gal. 1.
7. The preachers of the Gospel (says he) become Galat. 1. 7.
the Apostles of the Devil; because this mingling does not only blemish and
darken the knowledge of Grace, but also it takes away Christ, with all his
benefits, and it secretly undermines, and utterly overthrowes the Gospel. And
yet (says he) such perverters of the Gospel, can abide nothing less, than to
hear that they are the Apostles of the Devil; nay rather they glory above
others in the Name of Christ, and boast themselves to be the most sincere
preachers of the Gospel; but because they mingle the Law with the Gospel (as if
one should mingle black and white and mar both, and so darken Grace) they
must needs be perverters of the Gospel: because

Fifthly, they deny Christ to have by himself alone made us whole, that is,
perfectly holy and righteous from all spot of sin in the sight of God freely;
for all the Devils in hell cannot deny, but that look how much sin God sees
in us, and whips us for the same, so much do we come short of being of unjust
made just, that is, perfectly holy and righteous from all spot of sin in the
sight of God freely.

Sixthly, they blemish and extenuate the glory of loving Father, but also our
well pleased Father, at perfect peace, and perfect reconciliation with us, so
perfectly satisfied by Christ, that we have not one spot or wrinkle of sin, or
any such thing in his sight freely, Ephesians. 5. 27. and thereby Ephesians. 5. 27.
are without all fault, and without all blame, and reproof in his sight (as
the original words import, Col. 1. 22.) Colos. 1. 22. verse. 23.
If we continue rooted and stablished in this faith, verse. 23. But alas, here
we are so far from being grounded and stablished in this faith, that we lose
not these benefits (as James says) by wavering; but by wrangling,
contradiction and gaine-saying them, we cast them quite away: but how far
more Evangelically does a right Reverend Divine indeed, as it were with one
stroke B. Ba^ing upon the Lords Prayer, the fifth Petition.
by taking away both the cause and and the effect, beat down both these
absurdities; reasoning both from the abolished cause, which is sin, and removed
effect, which is correction, and all punishment against the Papists, after this
manner and invincible demonstration: Ejus quod non est, non est poena; Peccatum
remissum non est, John 1. 29. Ergo peccati remissi non est poena. John 1. 29.
That is, of that which is not, there is no temporal punishment, correction,
or pain: Forgiven sin is not, or has no being before God, John 1. 29.
Therefore of forgiven sin there is no temporal punishment.

Seventhly, this mingling of the Law and the Gospel, miscillane Christians
never knew what an horrible thing the least motion of sin is in the sight of
God, and therefore fear not horrible corrections for them, until they come
for dallying with Gods Justice, and for their unbelief, and robbing of Christ
of the glory of the chastisement of our peace, Esaias 53. 5. to bear it
themselves, they come to be Esaias 53. 5.
chastised and corrected in hell, where, I dare warrant them, they shall have
correction enough, and nothing but just and due correction for their sins.

Eighthly, whilst the light of nature and reason thinks to provide the better,
and greatly to further the care and diligence of holy walking, with fear of
corrections and whippings and lashes of crosses and afflictions (which fleshly
and Papistical wisdom is the very kore of this soar) she does indeed greatly
hinder true sanctification, and the Evangelicall true Repentance, and holy
walking both in the whole, and in the parts of the same.

First, in the whole most evidently; for seeing the least sin is the
plague-soare of the soul, making us sick, and unable to do any spiritual
duty, pining away even unto the death of hell, and nothing can heal us of the
same, but free justification, by making us by the blood of Christ perfectly
holy and righteous from all spot of sin in the sight of God freely: and thus by
his stripes we are healed, and truly made whole, Esaias 53. 5. and seeing Esaias
53. 5.
sanctification is but the lively stirring about, that comes of this healing by
justification, can we then stir lively in the duties of sanctification,
before we feel our selves healed of the deadly sickness of our sins, by
Justification? was Naaman the Syrian so religious toward the true God, so
loving to the Prophet, so meek, gentle, and liberal to his servant, before he
felt himself freely healed of his Leprosy? and shall not the perfect healing
of us from all sin (a thousand times worse Leprosy) do the same much more in
us, when we are once come to see by faith how perfectly holy and righteous we
are made from all spot of sin, the spiritual Leprosy, in the sight of God
freely, and that also not in the water of Jordan, but in the laver of the blood
of Christ? Again did the sinful woman in the Gospel wash in true Repentance
the feet of Jesus Christ with her tears, and kiss them so often in such love,
until by perceiving that much both for matter, manner, and measure was
forgiven her, she loved much? Luke 7. 47.

Then for the parts of sanctification and Repentance, Luke 7, 47. Two parts of
sanctification. 1 Mo tificanon.
and first mortification: seeing the least motions of sin, even in thought only
are such horrible poison of hell, so poisoning us, and all our holy walking of
sanctification that (as Christ says) they defile all unto damnation: when we
see that nothing can make us spiritually clean from them, except the Son of God
be killed to temper for us, with his blood, so precious an Antidote or
confection, as is justification, only able to make us mystically perfectly holy
and righteous from them all in the sight of God; and so first makes our inside
of our cup even of our minds and consciences passively pure and clean in the
sight of God freely, Titus 1. 15. or else these worms of our souls, Titus 2.
15.
even the very stirring motions only will as truly and certainly kill us, as
they killed Christ? do we not then begin to see in the stream of Christ's
blood washing us from them, the vileness of these evil thoughts, and leasts
motions, and begin to hate them, as the venomous vipers of our soul, either
eating out our heart, or the heart of Christ Jesus? and thus hating the evil
thoughts and first motions of sin, does not this make us much more to hate and
crucify the gross acts, and outward practices of the same? So for the second
part of sanctification called vivification, being Secondly, vivification.
a quickening with joy, love, and zeal of Gods glory, by cheerful walking in
all his commandments. Did the tenth Leper return with such joy, did he
praise God with such a loud voice, and did he fall down and worship Christ so
fervently before he felt himself healed of his Leprosy? which was (as the
learned shows) a true tipe and figure of our free justification? Vid. Ma^lo in
Luke 17.
or did the children of Israel, stung in the Wilderness with fiery Serpents,
go powerfully, and cheerfully, and courageously against their enemies, until
by looking upon the Brazen Serpent they felt themselves perfectly healed of all
their poisonous stingings, which is the liveliest figure of the efficacy of our
free justification of all? Thus we see how the lessening of the glory of our
justification extinguisheth the vigor of our sanctification, both hindering
our joy, lessening our love, and quenching our zeal, that otherwise, by the
exceeding greatness of Christ's benefits, would exceedingly abound, Esaias 61. 3.
Titus 2. 14. Esaias 61. 3. Titus 2. 14. 9


Ninthly, this Doctrine that God sees sin in his justified children, to correct
and punish them for the same, expells the filial fear, and brings in the
slavish and servile fear, and makes his children to serve him with
eye-service; for whereas the filial fear is to avoid the evil that the
child knows to dislike and displease his father, and to do the good that
pleases and likes him; not for fear of blows, punishment, and beating, if
his father should see him, but with a single eye, like nature, loving
inclination, and dutiful affection of love and reverence, though his Father
neither saw him, nor would punish him for the same. But on the other side, the
servile fear, looks only to the masters eye, and avoydeth evil doing, and
does the commanded good duties either for his wages, or for fear of blows and
beating; whilst it is not marked, that this filial fear is by the fall, and
corruption of nature lost in natural children, whereby their Parents are
constrained to use the servile fear, and to drive their children from evil,
and to do their duties, with blows, corrections, and beatings; whereby they
serve them not only with much eye-service, but also very aukwardly oftentimes:
When we Preachers do neglect to ground in the peoples hearts, great joy for
the greatness of the free-given treasures of Christ, that should work and
cause this filial fear, loving inclination, and dutiful, and truly filial
affections; and go about to square Gods children, according to the corrupt
pattern of natural children, corrupted with the slavish fear, with blows and
beatings: we must needs quench in them the true filial fear, and stablish in
them the servile fear that should be cast out, 1 Ioh. 4. 18. and cause in the
children 1 Ioh. 4. 18.
of God, this eye-service, which if it be naught in sanctified servants to
their earthly masters (as the Apostle says Ephesians. 6. 6.) how abominable is it
much more in Ephesians. 6. 6.
the children of God, to their heavenly Father, and makes but hypocrites?

Tenthly, this Doctrine, that God sees sin in his Heb. 8, 9, 13. by bringing
back haeredem adultum, Heb. 8. 9. 13.
the full-grown Heir, to be again haredem pupillum, the Heir in his nonage:
it brings back again the full grown Heir to be whipped again under the
Schoolmaster; after faith, that we are made perfectly holy and righteous from
all spot of sin in the sight of God freely, is come: Expressly contrary (as I
said before) to the words and doctrine of the Apostle Gal. 3. 25. It Gal. 3. 25.
strips the Queen and Bride of her wedding garment, Revel. 19. 7, 8. of the
vesture of the gold of Ophir, by Revel. 19, 7, 8.
which she is all glorious within, with her clothing of broidred gold, Psalm.
45. 9. Ephesians. 5. 27. to stand naked to Psalm 45. 9. ^phes. 5. 27.
be whipped with rods of crosses and afflictions for sin; for sin is
nakedness. It makes not the New Testament in the administration of
righteousness and of the spirit, above the Old Testament to exceed in glory, 2
Cor. 3. 7, 8, 9, 10. whereby the least preachers in the 2 Cor. 3, 7, 8, 9, 10.
kingdom of heaven, that should be greater than John Baptist, do come so
short of him, and of unperfect Apollos, Act. 18. 25. That Luther calls such
justly, first, Act. 18. 25.
Taske-masters, because (as the Taske-masters in Egypt) they lay many precepts
and tasks upon the people, which for want of the spirit (that comes by the
preaching of Free Justification, whereof they speak but little, Gal. 3. 2.) the
people are not able to do, and being not Gal. 3. 2.
done, they all to beat them with the whippings and corrections and lashes of
the Law; and it comes to the poor people accordingly, because it is unto them,
according as they believe; and they must believe as they are taught: but they
are not taught by such kind of Teachers, as people that are made perfectly
holy and righteous from all spot of sin in the sight of God freely; so that
all that they do, must be done for joy and thankfulness, that they are made
so perfectly, holy and righteous from all spot in the sight of God freely.
Which is to preach powerfully, the glad tidings of good things, Romans 10. 15.
Secondly, he calls such Romans 10. 15.
patchers; because they do not only patch unto the wedding garment of Christ's
righteousness, making his children, perfectly holy and righteous in the sight
of God freely, the old patches of the duties of the moral Law, to make them
good, and better and better; and more holy, and more righteous every day in the
sight of God, by the holy walking of sanctification (as they call it) but also
by the lashes of the Law do whip them thereunto. Hereby secretly laying the
foundation of meriting works, and the first corner stone in building of all
Popery, and Anabaptisme.

Eleventhly, this Doctrine that the justified children Free Justification, and
the other great benefits of the Gospel freely bestowed and already possessed;
and thereupon bringing forth great joy, and zealous obedience: but if we be
driven thereunto by corrections, and whippings, it is not free and cheerful
obedience, but it is made compulsive; but all that thankfulness whereunto we
with whippings are compelled, is no thankfulness; and indeed, all such
obedience is not worth a a butten, except it be willing and cheerful for joy
of Free Justification, and then it is true sanctification indeed, Psalm. 110. 3.
Esaias 55, 5. Psalm. 110. 3. Eay 55. 5. 12


Twelfthly and lastly, Summa Summae, the upshot of all is this: That when we
Preachers of the Gospel, not feeling in our hearts the vigor and power of the
freegiven treasures of Christ, do not trust to, nor rely upon the pressing of
them as sufficient (where they are felt and enjoyed) operative causes of all
holy walking, and godly conversation: then we degenerate and decline thereby
to the legal teaching of the Old Testament, more agreeable to the light of
nature described before, of constraying men to holiness and righteousness
with legal arguments of large blessings, if they do well, but with terrors of
corrections and punishments for their evil doings; which either does little
good at all, or at the best makes but self-deceiving legal zealous hypocrites,
and so go not with a right foot to the truth of the Gospel, Gal. 2. 14. and
purity Gal. 2. 14.
of the first Primitive preaching, of constraining men to holiness adn
righteousness by joy and love, by preaching with joyful inflamed hearts and
fiery tongues, Acts 2. 4. the exceeding excellency and glory Act. 2. 4.
of the unsearchable riches of Christ; which as it was the true course of the
first manner of preaching of the Gospel in the Primitive Church, as is evident
in all these Scriptures, Act. 8. 8, 38, 39. Act. 13. 38, 39, Acts 8. 8. 38, 39,
and 13. 38, 39, 42, 44, 52. 1 Pet. 1. 8. Epes. 3. 8.
42, 44, 52. 1 Pet. 1. 8. and which S. Paul defines to be the very essence of a
Preacher of the Gospel, Ephesians. 3. 8. saying in the person of all true Preachers
of the Gospel; unto me the least of all Saints is given this grace, that I
should preach among the Gentiles, the unsearchable riches of Christ; so it is
the only means sanctified with the blood of Christ, to cause people to abound
in all godly and zealous conversation. And thus have I somewhat the more largly
hunted and taken this little Fox, Can. 2. 15. because Cant. 2. 15.
it is so nourished not only by the Papists that press it exceedingly out of
the examples of the old Testament against the perfection of Free Justification,
maintained by Protestants; but also some of us Protestants by lisping the
language of Ashadod, do go about with the same to undermine the very root of
the Lords Vine, that is Free Justification, by going about to prove (as we see
here) by it, that we are not by the wedding garment of Christ's righteousness
made perfectly holy and righteous from all spot of sin in the sight of God
freely, full-sufficient of it self (the more it is rightly known) to
constrain us with all joy to holiness, and righteousness, not by fear, but
by love, and Evangelicall zeal, as strong as fire and death, Cant. Cant. 8. 6,
7. Tit. 2. 14.
8. 6, 7. Tit. 2. 14.

CHAP. VIII. Containing Answers to three other Reasons Objected.
THe second reason objected, is this; we pray daily in the Lords Prayer,
forgive us our trespasses, but he sees those trespasses and sins in us, which
he forgives; ergo we are not made perfectly holy and righteous from all spot of
sin in the sight of God freely. And again thus: If God have by the
weddinggarment made us perfectly holy and righteous from all spot of sin in his
sight, so that that phrase is true, that God sees none in us, what need we to
pray unto him daily to forgive us our trespasses? the Papists a little
otherwise in words, but all one in effect do bend these objections against our
assurance by faith, that our sins are forgiven, saying thus, If your faith be
an assurance that your sins are forgiven, what need you daily to pray to God to
forgive you your trespasses? for this were needless, if we were before assured
of pardon, and salvation. Now because this matter of prayer is an exceeding
weighty point (for what can be more weighty than a right acceptable prayer in
the sight of God?) therefore is this point the more fully to be handled; and so
much the more, because these Objectors would, by these objections, give an
appearance that they never yet made a good prayer to God: and no marvel,
because as it is an easy matter to pray, and that sometimes earnestly by the
light of nature; so it is an hard matter and rare to pray rightly by the light
of grace. For the very Gentiles, by the light of nature, understood that God
did know and see their sins, and also they prayed to God for mercy and
forgiveness of the same, and that earnestly, Jonah 1. 5. Jonah 1. 5. 14.
14. but they left out, in the name of Christ; and therefore their earnest
prayers were but much babbling, Mat. Math. 6. 7. Object. Answ.
6. 7. But we (will some say) do pray in the name of Christ. To which I
answer, that yet many do think (when they say, for Christ his sake) that they
do pray in the name of Christ, yea and earnestly also, as they are persuaded
in their own mind; and yet is their prayer but hypocritical, made rather in
the light of nature in them, and in the custom and religion of their country,
and in a legal zeal, than truly in the name of Christ: such are the prayers
of the Papists; such also are the prayers of the Anabaptists; such are the
prayers of the Familists; such are the prayers of the Brownists, and of many
other hypocritical Protestants among us, making long prayers of many requests
out of the word of God by a good memory, yea and very zealously sometimes by
the legal zeal; all which are persuaded that they pray earnestly in the name
of Christ; when yet indeed and in truth they are done but in the
selfe-deceiving hypocrisy of the legal zeal, and so are no good prayers
before God.

But peradventure you will say, how then may we Quest. When our prayers be
sincere and good before God.
know, that we have, or do make good prayers to God, that are not wrought
merely by the seeming sincerity of the light of nature, and in the legal zeal?

I answer, when we come in the name of Christ Answ. consisting in two points.
rightly, which is not in a mere verbal, but in a real manner, and
consists in these two essential and infallible points.

First, if we have by the unchangeable nature and truth of God revealed in that
sentence, Cursed is every one that continues not in all things, and by the
death of Christ, such a true sight above the Gentiles, what an infinite
horrible thing the least sin is in the sight of God, that we dare not (as the
Gentiles did, and men in the light of nature still do) press, and rush into
the presence and sight of God in the least sin, and so give him the true
glory of his justice: Because (as the first Protestant Dispensers of Gods
mysteries, that rightly make the justifying faith the first entry unto God) do
truly say; if he be justly condemned of the contempt of his Princes majesty,
that dares press into his sight and presence defiled with foul, filthy, and
loathsome dung, that is exceeding loathsome in his Princes sight: how much more
is he to be condemned of filthy hypocrisy in the sight of sin, that dares
press and enter into the sight and presence of God, foul with the least sin
in him and upon him, that is a thousand times more filthy and loathsome in the
sight of God, than the loathsomest dung that can be, to the eyes of a Prince:
and so rob God of the glory of his justice, and infinite hatred of the least
sin?

Secondly, that he may not (as hereby justly he Adam, from God, and from Genesis
3. 8.
prayer, he must, in his prayers, come in some faith, hope, and comfort of his
Baptism; wherein God said unto him in the power of his own ordinance, Arise,
and be baptized, and wash away thy sins in calling upon the name of the Lord
Jesus, Acts 22. 16. for when Acts 22. 16.
a Christian feels himself fallen into some sin, as the only means to raise
him up again, must be to return by faith unto the efficacy of his Baptism,
by considering the horriblenesse of the least sin, that he being an infant,
could not be admitted into the favor of God, and fellowship of his Church and
children, except he were first washed from all his sins: and then considers how
freely, when he was not able in his infancy to send up one groan, or sigh unto
God for his original filth, not to think a good thought of God; yet even then
to save him freely, Christ opened his side, and poured out upon him his heart
blood, to wash away all his sins past, present and to come; and clothing him
with the wedding garment of his own righteousness, did seal the same up unto
him to put him out of all doubt thereof, by his oath, and own seal of
Baptism; and therefore now sighing up to Christ in the sense and feeling of
his sins, may be much more assured, that he will continue his grace so freely
begun unto him; we being thus found first of Christ before we sought after
him, he will preserve us still in that his wedding garment from all sin in his
fathers sight continually and for ever: for whom he once justifies, he
justifies for ever, because (as the Apostle says, Heb. 10. 14.) Heb. 10. 14.
He has with one sacrifice upon the cross made perfect by justification to
the sight of God, continually, and for ever, all them that be sanctified:
wherewith notably agrees that witness of a learned dispenser of Gods
mysteries, saying, That we ought to know that at what time Calv. Instit. lib.
4. cap. 15. Sect. 3.
soever we be baptized, we are at once washed and made clean for all our life;
therefore so often as we fall We must go back to the remembrance of baptism,
and therewith we must arm our mind, that it may always be certain and assured
of the forgiveness of sins; for though when it is once ministered it seems to
be past, yet by following sins it is not abolished; for the cleanness of Christ
is therein bestowed upon us, that always flourishes, is oppressed with no spots,
but overwhelmeth and wipeth away all our filthiness, and so preserves us in
perfect righteousness to Godward for ever: as this (I say) is the only means
whereby after our falls we return unto him; his washing us thus in his blood
first, making us to wash our selves declaratively in tears of love and
Evangelicall repentance, so is it the only means to come rightly unto God in
prayer: thus we come in the wedding garment: thus we come rightly in the name
and power of Christ's blood that we were baptized in: thus our prayer is the
prayer of a righteous man that prevails much with God: thus we come in faith,
wherein St. James bids us not to waver, for then we rob the blood of Christ of
his glory in us, and then we obtain nothing of the Lord.

Whereby we see that they that will press by prayer into the presence of God,
foul in their sin, until they have obtained pardon by prayer, do fail both
in the first point of right coming, not knowing the horriblenesse of sin
revealed in the Word, and have but a gentilish conceit of the foulness of it,
and so are ready with the Gentiles and Papists to make their prayers to be, ex
opere operato, or in the name of Christ, ex Condigno, the means of the pardon
of their sins. But they fail much more in the second point, both by ignorance
of the glory of Gods free pardon given them in their baptism, and also in not
coming to pray in the wedding garment of Christ's righteousness, ever
preserving and presenting them perfectly holy and righteous from all spot of
sin in the sight of God freely; whereby they not praying in this faith, not
only obtain nothing of the Lord; but also lie naked to all his judgments,
because God sees not the sprinkling of the blood of the Lamb; that is, the 1
John 1. 7.
cleanness wrought by his Sons blood, 1 John 1. 7. upon the door posts; that
is, the very entrance of their prayers and confessions; for how can it be less
dangerous to enter after a more peculiar manner (as we do by prayer) into the
presence of the most holy, and most pure God, infinitely hating all sin, without
the wedding garment, without which God cannot abide to look upon us, but
says, Bind him hand and foot, take him away, and cast him into utter
darkness, where is nothing but weeping and gnashing of teeth? Mat. 22. 13. But
if we come Matthew. 22. 13.
in the faith of this wedding garment, freely abolishing all our sins out of
Gods sight, then all the three persons of the blessed Trinity do magnify the
glory of their proper offices, with one unanimous consent upon us; for we must
mark, that although our justification be the work of the whole Godhead, yet
the three persons have their several offices therein peculiar and The Trinity
have several offices in justification.
proper to each person, which of us ought to be discerned, and rightly
distinguished: as

First, the Son comes down freely to us, when else the Lamb of God that
takes away the sin it self, John John 1. 29.
1, 29. by making us perfectly holy and righteous from all spot of sin in the
sight of God freely, 1 John 1. 7. And this 1 John 1. 7.
must be our first ground of entering by prayer unto God; whereupon (as the
Apostle says) we have holdnesse and entrance with confidence through this
faith in him, Ephesians. 3. 12. Ephesians. 3. 12.


Secondly, the sin being gone, the Father forgives Psalm. 32. My sins being
Psalm 32.
covered, and by the imputed righteousness of the Messiah to come, utterly
abolished out of thy sight, ver. 1. then thou forgavest the punishment of my
sin, ver. 5. Verse 1. Verse 5.
and then powers out all manner of blessings upon us both temporal and
eternal; not only for our good, but principally to dignifie and glorify the
blood and righteousness of his own Son in us and upon us.

And thirdly, the holy Ghost reveals and seals the assurance, comfort, and
expectation of these blessings 1 Cor. 2. 9, 10, 11, 12. Ephesians. 1. 17, 18.
Object.
1 Cor. 2. 9, 10, 11, 12. Ephesians, 1. 17, 18.

But hereupon will some peradventure reply and say, if our prayers be naught,
except we come thus to pray clothed in the wedding garment of Christ's
righteousness, which is Gods royal pardon, the royalty whereof is such, that
it preserves us even from our baptism, and presents us ever perfectly holy and
righteous Why we ask daily forgiveness of sins.
from all spot of sin in the sight of Godfreely: What need we then to pray
daily to God to forgive us our trespasses, if we have not one spot in the sight
of God before we pray? especially (as the Papists object) if the nature of our
faith be such an assurance, that it assures us that we are so clean before we
pray? Answ. for three causes.


I answer with the Protestant Antagonists against the Papists, that in three
respects, we continue daily to to ask of God forgiveness of our sins.

First, because the more faith any child of God Phil. 3. 8, 9. Phil. 3. 8, 9.
which he sees and feels in himself to be as a menstruous cloth, but in the
wedding garment of his Sons righteousness, making both him and all his own
righteousness perfectly holy and righteous from all spot of sin in the sight
of God freely: the feeling of the great imperfection of his own
righteousness, which is subject to sense, and visible, sharpneth his faith to
cling by faithful prayer the faster to that perfect righteousness wherewith
he is clothed above sense and feeling, and invisibly.

Secondly, by daily praying for this glorious justi sying forgiveness they
grow to fuller assurance, and more comfortable feeling that they are by Gods
glorious forgiveness made perfectly holy and righteous from all spot of sin in
the sight of God freely; for although the wedding garment, and the truth of God
in clothing with the same, be full and perfect, and always alike (as is
before noted) not subject to any alteration, never increasing, nor diminishing;
yet our faith being weak, gives at the first but weak assurance, and is
greater or lesser; sometimes (as I said before) has a full, and sometimes a
wane; but by daily fervent prayer, giving to Christ this glory of his wedding
garment, it grows stronger and stronger, to a plerophory and full assurance
unto joy unspeakable and glorious; which the Author to the Hebrews, Chap. Heb.
10.
10. presses earnestly upon us, saying, Seeing God does so gloriously forgive
us, that with his one offering he has made us so perfect for ever, that he
remembers our sins no more; so that there needs no more sacrifices, punishments
or satisfactions for sin, having hereby brethren, boldness to enter into the
holy of holies, by the blood of Jesus, by the new living way of Free
Justification, which he has prepared through the veil; that is, his flesh;
Let us draw near with a true heart in full assurance of faith, having our
hearts sprinkled and purified, and made perfectly clean by the blood of Christ
from a troubled unquiet and evil conscience, and our body washed with pure
water of Baptism, sacramentally pure by exhibiting and sealing unto us, and
putting us out of all doubt both of justificatio^, that makes us perfectly pure
to Godward, and of sanctification that more and more makes us pure to manward,
Let us hold fast this profession of our faith without wavering (much more
without wragling against it) because he is faithful that has promised, and by
his blood works this upon us.

Thirdly, by daily praying for this benefit, we come David gives us to
understand that Free Justification (as we shall see further hereafter) is bliss
and happiness, Psalm. 32. Psalm. 32. 1, 2.
1, 2. and therefore a freedom from all misery and sorrow: But for the
exercise of our says (as we heard before) we still live in misery, and much
sorrow, and seem wholly strangers to all claim to a blisful estate; therefore
being still in case as if our sins were not forgiven, and we thereby made
perfectly holy and righteous from all spot of sin in the sight of God freely;
we still pray for the forgiveness that does effect the same praying that we
may not only possidere possess it, but also frui enjoy it; that is, not only
certainly have the benefit it self, but also reap the fruits, effects, and
blessings, both spiritual and corporal, temporal and eternal, belonging to
the same; that as we have heard, so we may see; and as Christ said unto Martha,
Said I not unto thee, that if thou would believe, thou should see the
glory of God? John 11. 40. whereupon Luther very John 11. 40.
aptly (in his exposition upon the Lords prayer) does (...), make a twofold
justification, one internal A twofold justification.
invisible and secret, the other external, visible, and experimental; the
internal invisible and secret must go before we say, Our Father which art in
Heaven, because before we are justified, and whilst we are in the state of
nature, we are the children of the Devil, and of wrath Ephesians. 2. 3. but when
we are justified with Ephesians. 2. 3.
this internal and secret Justification, and made thereby the children of God,
then after the other petitions for eternal and temporal, spiritual and
corporal blessings, we say rightly forgive us our trespasses; this is, show
by granting and giving us these blessings, that thou have justified us, that
is, made us freely righteous from all our sins: both these Justifications
(says he) Christ showed in the history of Mary Magdelen: the first, when he
turned his back upon her, and yet said secretly unto Simon, many sins are
forgiven her: The second, when Christ turned to her, and said to her face, Thy
sins are forgiven thee, go in peace: The first makes clean; the other
makes outward peace: the first is of mere faith; the other consists in
outward experience: the first God exercises upon men of excellent spirit, such
as Daniel, and Paul were; the other upon weaklings that need refreshment. But
to conclude this point in brief, every one that prays, Prayer is either made
in the faith of our Baptism, or out of it.
must needs pray in faith of his baptism; or out of faith: If he pray out of
faith, by the light of nature and legal zeal, his prayer is abominable,
because he has not on the wedding garment, signified in baptism, which is the
washing of him clean by the blood of Christ from all sin it self in the sight
of God, 1 Ioh. 1. 7. 1 Ioh. 1. 7
but remains still foul in his sin, and thereby abominable, both he, his
prayer, and all that he does. But if he pray in faith, by that faith only he is
clean in the sight of God from all sin freely, before he begins to pray for
forgiveness, being a true saying, that a reverend Protestant writes against
the Papists: that if the promise of God mentioned, Esaias 65. 24. namely Esaias 65.
24.
Before they call I will answer, be verified upon them in any matter, it is
chiefly true in their prayers for justification, because it is their faith that
causes God to Answer before they call: but the faithful prayer that follows,
is like the breath of the living faith, and has a twofold use (as aforesaid)
working fuller assurance, and further experience of all blessings, spiritual
and corporal. Because it is an infallible axiom in true Religion, that bona
opera non praecedunt justificandum, sed sequuntur Iustificatum; that is, good
works of prayer, or any such like, do not go before a man be justified, but
they follow after a man is before justified. Whereupon Luther agreeing with
Austin, Captivitate Patylonica, Tom 2. page 71. b.
says, promissio Dei non impletur orando, sed solum credendo; Credentes autem
oramus, and quodlibet opus bonum facimus: that is, the promise of God
justifying us, is not fulfilled by praying, but only believing; but when we
believe then we pray, and do any other good work. And thus (as I said at the
first) have I handled this point the more fully; because it is exceeding
weighty.

THe third Reason objected is this, The holy Ghost Third Reason Objected.
is God, and shows us our sins: and shall not he being God, and showing us
our sins, much more know and see sin in his justified children? ergo, the
children of God are not made by Christ's wedding garment, so perfectly holy and
righteous, that they have not one spot or wrinkle in the sight of God freely.

To which I answer, that the holy Ghost being true, of sin and of the wages
thereof, which is death, by the light of nature, whereby they are left without
excuse, Romans 1. 20, 31. and 2. 14. 15. Romans 1. 20. 31. and 2. 14. 15.
Yet none comes to know and see them rightly and effectually, except the holy
Ghost do show them their sins. But to show his children their sins, he uses
two glasses, and puts them into the hands of his Ministers for that purpose,
the one is the glass of the Law; the other, is the glass of the Gospel.

Now whilst his children are unconverted, the holy A twofold representation of
sin.
Ghost both knows their sins, and also sees them in them, and wills his
Ministers to hold out unto such constantly the glass of the Law, that they may
see the Leprous faces of their souls in the same, wherewith the spirit working
open the eyes of their conscience, Genesis 3. 7. to see better then by the light
of nature, that Genesis 3. 7.
the foulness of sin is so horrible, that he must needs curse the creature
that has the least sin in his sight, saying, Cursed is every one that
continues not in all things that are written in the book of the Law, Gal. 3.
10. Gal. 3. 10.
and to see the unchangable truth of this definitive sentence, that Heaven and
Earth may pass away, but one jot or tittle of this sentence cannot pass,
until it is fulfilled, and to see the horriblenesse of Gods curse due to the
least sin: thus the holy Ghost shows us our sins, whereby they begin to see
their Leprosy to be very foul, and their misery most fearful for one
sin, much more for many sins; whereby they are so terrified, and so
effectually humbled, that they desire nothing more between heaven and Earth,
than to be healed of this their deadly Leptosie, and hellish poison of the lest
sin: this is the holy Ghosts, and not the light of natures, first showing us
our sins.

Now when this first work is thus wrought: then the spirit wills his Ministers
to hold forth, likewise constantly before their faces the glass of the Gospel,
wherein they hear that nothing can heal them of their spiritual Leprosy and
woeful misery, but the blood of the Son of God, which they apprehending, the
spirit also does by imputation cloth them with the wedding garment of Christ's
righteousuesse, wherewith he abolisheth, first out of his own sight all their
sins, and then gives them the eye of faith, whereby they also see their sins
utterly abolished out of the sight of God the Father, Son, and holy Ghost, one
God blessed for ever. And yet they seeing with this eye of faith, no less
image and Idea in this glass, than the gaping wounds, and goared bloody side
of the Son of God, hanging upon the Cross, and streaming out his blood and
life to wash away and abolish all their sins; as they see them thus utterly
abolished; so the spirit shows them hereby the horriblenesse of their
abolished sin more in the blood of Christ than before, when they saw them not
abolished in the glass of the Law: as if a father his son having committed
some A smile.
act of theft, should not be content to chide, beat, and all to rate him,
saying, he should be hanged, and were worthy to be hanged; but also lead him
out (strictness of justice so requiring) and show him a man hanging as his
pledge and surety, and dying for him upon the Gallows, this sight must needs
pierce his affections; and although it show him his foul fault abolished; yet
he sees therein the vileness of it more than before: so although the spirit
of God do show us in the death of Christ our sins abolished out of his
sight; yet he makes us thereby both to discern in our selves, and with S.
Paul in the seventh to the Romans, to bewail in our feeling, for the exercise
of our faith, those sins which before we counted but small or no sins; and to
see the exceeding vileness of them, far more by viewing them in the blood of
Christ, by which they are abolished out of Gods sight, than if they were still
abiding in the sight of God: and although the sight, sense, and feeling of
these sins, be by a greater light in the Law, never so strong in their own
selves; as sometimes it is stronger than it should be, being re^dy to cast the
children of God down into despair: Yet as before whilst they were under the
Law, the spirit did by the glass of the Law simply show them their sins, with
the curse and wrath of God due to the same: so now being under the Gospel, and
under grace, he does not simply show them their sins, as before, but it is the
true office, and true work of the spirit to show them their sins abolished out
of Gods sight: that is, as he himself does see them clothed with the
wedding garment abolishing their sin, and making them perfectly holy and
righteous from all spot of sin in the sight of God, and in his own sight
freely; and thereby enters into them himself, as fit Temples for himself to
dwell in, and also knits them as meet and fit members into the body of Christ:
so does he open their eyes of faith, to see contrary to their Reason, and to
their strong contrary sense and feeling, that Testimony of Christ to be true,
and verified in in them, viz. Thou art fair my Love, behold thou art all
fair, and there is no spot in thee, Cant. 4. 1. 7. And that Cant. 4. 1. 7.
this is the testimony of the holy spirit unto the children of God under the
Gospel; and that these are the things which the holy Ghost shows unto them,
Christ himself testifies, saying, When the spirit of truth is come, he shall
glorify me: mark that, but how, or after what manner shall he glorify
Christ? it follows: for he shall take of mine; namely that the blood of Jesus
Christ the Son of God does make us clean in the sight of God from all sin,
1 Ioh. 1. 7. Ioh. 1. 7. Ioh. 16. 14.
And shall show it unto you: Ioh. 16. 14. certainly, if the spirit do not show
us this, nobody will show it us; for the whole world, the flesh, our own sense,
and feeling, and the Devil do all show us the contrary: but yet (says Christ)
when the spirit shall come, he shall judge contrary to all these, for he shall
judge the whole world of Believers, in my ascension of nothing but
righteousness, verse. 10. Because as Luther truly says Verse 10.
upon that place, In eo enim transitupeccatum in justitiam absorptum est: that
is, in that passage of his into heaven, the sin of Believers is absorpted and
swallowed up into righteousness. Whereupon it follows of necessity, that such
preachers as blend these two glasses and intermix them, and so do darken them,
and such people as see not that they are clean from all sin in the sight of
God freely, may justly suspect themselves to be sensual (as Jude says) not
having the Spirit, showing plainly that they see no more of the foulness of
sin, then the light of nature teaches: and so did never look rightly by the
spirit into the glass of the Law, to be truly touched with the foulness of
sin it self: Secondly they did never look rightly into the glass of the
Gospel, to see themselves translated out of sin into righteousness, and
unbelief being blind to discern these things of the spirit, 1 Cor. 2. 14. 1
Cor. 2. 14.
as before she went about to make God blind: so now she falsifies the
witness of the holy Ghost, saying, that he testifies of ^inne, the work of the
Devil in the justified children of God, when taking only of Christ, and of his
benefits, and showing them to Believers, he testifies only of righteousness,
John 16. 10. and so glorifies Ioh. 16. 10. 1 Ioh. 1. 7.
Christ, and his blood, 1 John 1. 7.

THe sourth reason objected is this, The Lord by Fourth Reason objected.
his spirit does mortify our sins daily, Romans 8. and shall he not see those
sins, which by his spirit he does mortify? ergo, the children of God are not
with the wedding garment of Christ's righteousness made perfectly holy and
righteous from all spot of sin in the sight of God freely.

To which I answer, That as this reason does seem Christ of his glory; against
which my heart yearns. But, oh that it did burn more against it! But that we
may understand the deceit of this argument we must mark two things: first, that
the express words of the Text, in this objection serpent-like suppressed, are
these; If ye, that is the faithful do mortify the deeds of the body by the
spirit, Romans 8. Romans 8. 13.
13. Secondly, we must mark, that this mortifying is all one, with that saying
of S. John, And he that has this 1 Ioh 3. 3.
hope, does purify himself, etc. And with that saying of S. Paul, who
although as an elect vessel to preach unto the Gentiles, did most of all urge
and press free Act. 9.
Justification; yet he says, Let us cleanse our selves, from all filthiness
of the flesh and spirit, 2 Cor. 7, 1. Now 2 Cor. 7. 1.
we must not understand, that we purify, that we mortify, that we cleanse
our selves, no not by the spirit properly to the sight of God. For this is the
mere and only, and proper work of Christ's blood, and of the spirit, clothing
us with Christ's righteousness, who thus alone by himself only purifieth us
from our sins, properly in the sight of God; as the Apostle says, Heb. 9. 14.
For if the blood of Bulls and Goats sprinkling Heb 9. 14.
the unclean, sanctifies to the purifying of the flesh: How much more shall
the blood of Christ, who through the eternal sprit offered himself without
spot to God, purify your conscience from dead works? etc. and is set down to
be one of the maine things, that declare the glory of Christ's ^od-head, Heb. 1.
3. where among other praises Heb. 1. 3.
of the power of his Godhead, this is one, That he has purified us from our
sins by himself; and therefore it is rightly said in the Doctrine of our
Church, taught by the first Restorers of the Gospel in this land, in King
Edward days, That it is the greatest arrogancy and presumption of man, that
Antichrist could set up against God, to affirm, that we take away, that we
purify, that we cleanse our own sins out of the the sight of God, either in
whole, or in part.

But how then (will some say) do we purify, and

I answer, that we cleanse, and mortify, and purify Christ of that glory
which his blood has freely done, before we begin; but when the
wedding garment wrought by his blood, has freely purified them out of Gods
sight, then the spirit (we being thus first clean in his sight) enters into us
to dwell in us, which otherwise he would not do, but being entered, and
dwelling in us, he enables us by walking holily and righteously, to avoid and
purify out of our own sight, sense, and feeling, and out of the sight of other
men, that sin which the wedding garment has purified and abolished before, out
of the sight of God: and so we merely declare before the spirit, that he
himself and Christ's righteousness have originally and properly cleansed and
purified away, and utterly abolished them out of Gods sight freely. And this is
that which S. Paul expressly teaches in the sixth to the Romans; for having
showed in the three next precedent Chapters, how freely of unjust we are made
just; that is, perfectly holy and righteous from all spot of sin in the sight
of God freely, unto natural reason objecting, that then we may live freely in
sin as we list; he answers, nay, that is impossible; for (says he) how can
we that are dead to to sin, live yet therein? That is, if a man be by
Justification as perfectly freed from all sin in the sight of God, as he is
freed from the traffic and business of this life, that is dead, which must
needs be, if we be made perfectly, holy and righteous from all spot of sin
in the sight of God freely, how can such an one practice and live in sin? nay
he cannot choose but show and declare the same by holy and righteous living, to
the sight of men, and mortify them to himself, and to his own feeling, as he
is by Justification dead to them in the ^ight of God: And this Luther testifies
very aptly saying thus: Delectio bonaque tua opera delent peccatum tuum sed
coram te, ut tu quoque deleta sentias, quae nimirum fides delet coram Deo, id
quod non sentis: that is, thy love and good works, do put out and abolish thy
sins, but before thy self, that thou may also feel them to be abolished,
which yet thy Justification only puts out before God: but this (being above thy
sense and feeling) thou do not feel. But the manner hereof the holy Ghost
himself does clearly illustrate An apt similitude of a Lantern.
unto us, by an apt similitude of a Lantern: for as the Lantern is both dark
in it self, and does cast forth no light to abolish the darkness round about
it, until the candle be in it; but when the candle is put into it, then the
darkness of it is abolished, and it also casts forth light to the abolishing
of the darkness round about it; and yet it is not the Lantern that puts out
the darkness properly, but only the candle in the Lantern, and the Lantern
does only declare by casting out beams of light, the candle that properly puts
out the darkness: Just so it is in the case of our Justification: the children
of God, before and until they be justified, are like dark Lanterns, both dark
in themselves, and casting forth no beams by sanctification of any light to
enlighten others: but when the spirit of God, by the hand of his Ministers,
has set into their souls, by the socket of faith, the candle of Free
Justification; then do they cast forth the beams of Sanctification, and holy
walking to the abolishing of the darkness of sin in themselves; and round
about them, to the enlightening of others: and yet their Sanctification does
not put out the darkness of their sins properly; but does only show and
declare the candle of Free Justification to be in them, that properly before
God puts out and abolisheth all the darkness of their sins, by making them
perfectly holy and righteous from all spot of sin in the sight of God freely.
And for the confirmation of this, as in the mouth Three places places of
Scripture for confirmation.
of two or three witnesses every word does stand; so three places of Scripture
may be sufficient.

The first is of our Savior Christ, Mat. 5. 16. saying, 1 M^th. 5. 16.
Let your light (namely of Justification, which only was that, that enlightened
the blind Pharisee Nicodemus, John 3. 14, 15.) so shine before men (namely by
Sanctification) that they may see the beams of your good works, and so
glorify you Father which is in heaven.

The second place of Scripture teaching this more 2 Ephesians. 5. 8.
plainly, is Ephesians. 5. 8. where the Apostle says thus: You were once darkness
(there is the dark lantern without the candle in it) but now are light in the
Lord (mark how he says, not light in themselves, but light in the Lord; there
is the lantern made light with the candle of Justification set into it) walk
as the children of light; there is Sanctification, as the beams showing and
declaring, that the candle of Justification is in us, that only makes us light
in the Lord.

The third place of Scripture teaching this yet more 3 Phil. 2. 15, 16, 17.
fully and largely, is Philip. 2. 15, 16, 17. where the Apostle says, Be ye
blameless and pure as the Sons of God, without rebuke in the midst of a
naughty and crooked generation: but how may we do all this, thus powerfully
mortifying in our selves the corrupt conversation reigning in the world? by
shining by Sanctification as lights and lanterns in this dark world. But by
what means may we be made such shining lanternes? By holding out (says he, as
a lantern does a candle) the word of life, that is, Free Justification, by
which only we live, Romans 1. 17. and therefore is Romans 1. 17. Romans 5. 18.
expressly called the Justification of life, Romans 5. 18. the holding out of
which candle of Justification, is to show and declare, in the mortifying of our
sins by Sanctification, that this candle is in us, that properly abolisheth
our sins, and makes us originally and properly blameless and pure as the
Sons of God, without rebuke, first in the sight of God freely, Colos. 1. 22.
Colos. 1. 22.
and then makes us declaratively blameless and pure as the Sons of God, to the
eyes of men; unto which similitude he subjoynes the very essence of a Minister
of the Gospel, and the essential mark by which he is to be discerned, saying,
that if they did show by shining like bright lanterns, and declare that the
candle of Justification is thus in them, that only gives to Christ such great
glory, and to men assuredly eternal life; and if they did constantly hold out
this candle of the word of life, for which he counted his own holy walking of
Sanctification as nothing and dung, Philip. 3. 8, 9. then although he were
slain upon the Phil. 3. 8, 9.
Altar, and service of working this faith in them; yet he would be glad, and
rejoice with them all. And this doctrine, that we do not purify, mortify,
and cleanse our sins out of Gods sight, but only declare, that Christ's blood
has truly, originally, and properly abolished them out of Gods sight freely,
the doctrine of Doctrine of our Church.
our Church also taught by the first restorers of the Gospel in this land, does
clearly witness and testify, saying; good living, and good works of fasting,
liberal alms, and such mortifications of our corrupt natures, do not
purify, and cleanse away the spots of our iniquities out of the sight of God;
for that were indeed to deface Christ, and to defraud him of his glory: But by
cheerful doing them in thankfulness of heart, they declare openly and
manifestly unto the fight of men, that Christ has washed away all our sins,
and that his blood has purified us in the sight of God, and cleansed us of all
the spots of our iniquities freely; whereby we show evidently that we are not
hypocrites, only making, by a legal zeal, a fair show of good fruits like
choke-pears, but are in truth the Sons of God, and elect of him unto salvation:
for it is an exceeding weighty point, worthy the diligent marking, and yet not
sufficiently marked; that there are Two kinds of mortification of sin.
two kinds of mortification of sin: the one legal; the other Evengelicall.

And this is the difference between them: that the 1 Evangelicall.
Evangelicall mortification, believing with the heart, and confessing with the
tongue; Romans 10. 10. that the Romans 10. 10.
blood of Christ has made us clean in the sight of God from all sin, 1 John
1. 7. that only poisons us before God, unto the death of hell, and so we are
freely and 1 John 1. 7.
preciously healed of the same: hereupon by crucifying our corruptions so
abolished out of Gods sight, we will not eat of this deadly poison of hell any
more: as David said of the delightful, and well-pleasing conversation of the
wicked in sin: Let me not eat of their delicates; But let the righteous
rather smite me friendly, and reprove me. And thus the Evangelicall zeal does
mortify sin to our selves, in mere thankfulness, that the spirit of God
dwelling in us shows us that we are clean, and by the blood of Christ have no
sin to mortify in the sight of God.

But the Legal mortification, desiring to be her 2 Legal.
own Physician, and striving for fear of punishment, either temporal, or
eternal, or upon a secret hope lurking in the heart, of procuring and
retaining Gods favor and good will, by her diligent endeavors of crucifying
and mortifying sin out of the sight of God, by the assistance (as she says)
of Gods spirit by her self; thus robs Christ of the foresaid glory of his
blood; and by all her diligent laboring against sin, does never obtain the
assistance of the spirit, which comes only by the foresaid healing by Free
Justification, Gal. 3. 2. And so has her sins by all her diligent Galat 3. 2.
laboring in mortification, never truly mortified nor abolished, neither
before God, nor themselves. And this was the old Pharisaicall mortification,
who (as the Apostle testifies) did with a legal fervent love of God, Romans 10.
2. follow the law of righteousness, Romans 10. 2. Romans 9. 31. Acts 26. 7.
Romans 9. 31. instantly serving God day and night, Acts 26. 7. for they had
certain special points, and sentences of the Law written round about in the
borders The Pl^a^isaicall st^ict^esse.
of their garments, that they might never be out of their eyes: they prayed, no
men more; they fasted twice in the week; the bed that they lay upon (as
Epiphanius writes) was but little more than a span broad, and yet that they
might sleep with less ease, they strewed sharp things under them. Briefly all
their life in appearance was such, and all their apparel and behavior so
seemly and decent, that if a man would paint out wisdom, sobriety,
mortification, and perfect holiness, he could have no better pattern. And
therefore they were called Pharisaei, that is, divided; Why called Phar^^^^.
as men in holiness and perfection of life far passing all the rest of the
people, and that also by the assistance of Gods Spirit, as they thought and
professed; for as the good Jews professed that they had the benefit of all
spiritual graces, but by the Spirit of God, confessing that God gave them his
good Spirit to instruct them, Nehem. 9. 20. and acknowledge that Nehem 9. 20.
Verse ^0.
it was the Spirit that spoke in their Prophets, verse. 30. And as David said,
Stablish and uphold me with thy free Spirit, Psalm. 51. 12. so these merely
legal devout Psalm. 51. 12.
ones, that by their devoutnesse drove Paul out of their coasts, did profess
that all their devotions and mortifications were by the spirit: whereupon
Zidkiab, that struck Micaiah a box on the ear, said, When went the 1 Kings 22.
24.
Spirit of the Lord from me unto thee? But because they sought not
mortification at the fountain of the Spirit which is Free Justification,
Galat. 3. 2. but (as Galat. 3. 2.
the Apostle says) Being ignorant of the righteousness of God, and going
about to stablish their own righteousness, did not submit themselves to the
righteousness of God, Romans 10. 3. therefore they were utterly void of the Rom
10. 3.
Spirit, and had not one spark of true mortification. Yea, this very opinion
of mortifying sin our selves The heart of P^p^ry.
by the Spirit properly out of the sight of God, is the very heart of Popery,
the very essential form of Anabaptisme, the very root of all Justiciaries,
the very pride of Lucifer, the very joining in check-mate with Christ, or
rather in parting stakes with him to take the greater part of glory to our
selves; in granting that he does abolish and take away the guilt and the
punishments which are the lesser, but we purify away and mortify and cleanse
our selves by the spirit from sin it self, which is the cause and greatest
of all evils. when as it is the sole glory of Christ alone properly to to
purify, and cleanse away from before God by himself alone all sin
especially, Heb. 1. 3. for by this self mortifying Heb. 1. 3.
and selfe-cleansing our sins by the spirit properly out of the sight of God,
such must needs go about to make themselves good, and every day better and
better in the sight of God, which is the patching with God before spoken of,
and just the Papists second Justification, and flat denial and nullifying of
the true Justification; yea, this legal mortification is the groundwork and
foundation of the Eremites first The foundation of the Eremites, and of
Anchorites and of Nunneries.
living by roots in the Wilderness, even to mortify their sins by the
spirit out of the fight of God; of Anchorites shutting themselves up in walls
to mortify their sins out of Gods sight by the spirit; and was the first
foundation stone in the building of all Nunneries and Abbeys to mortify their
sin out of Gods sight by the spirit: and although these devout legal
morter-makers, mortifiers (I should say) of their sins, do appear both in
their own opinion, and in the judgment of others to be by their legal,
zealous, holy, and godly living, the most religious, and most holy men in the
world, yet they are nothing so in truth, but do overflow with all manner of
hidden corruptions, which they themselves see not; as envy, malice, disdain,
preposterous judgment, selfeconceitednesse, pride, contempt of God in his
chiefest matters, slavish fear, and utter retracting under fair pretenses, to
do zealously the duties of their vocations, where any danger appears, being
blindness it self in the right understanding of the Gospel, full of secret
grudgings, whisperings, evil speakings, and manifold breakings, or rather flat
contemnings of the ninth commandment, by evil surmisings, and misconstruings
of the words and deeds of others, wherein especially they bew^^y themselves.
And to conclude, these Saints (as Luther says) are the bondslaves of Satan,
and therefore are driven to think, speak, and do whatsoever he will, and are
the generation that Solomon speaks of Prove. 30. 12. that are Prove. 30. 12.
pure in their own conceit, by their mighty mortifying of their sins out of
Gods sight by the spirit, and yet are not, for want of having on, by faith
only, the wedding garment of Christ's righteousness truly washed from their
filthiness; and is (as Luther truly says) a pestilent generation, although
in outward appearance, they seem to excel all others in good works, in
holiness and straightness of life, and think themselves to lie in the very
lap of God, and to be his true Saints by mortification, when they are in truth
but white Devils, by their darkening and annihilating of Free Justification.

Thus, although (as Luther truly says) When we have the express Word of God,
we ought rather to contemn objections than to repel them; especially when the
Word of God is seconded with the unanimous consent of the faithful dispensers
of Gods mysteries (as we see before) yet have^ endeavored to remove away these
stumbling blocks, that lay in the way of the weak believer, leaving the full
overthrow of these objections, against the former consent of the learned, to my
brethren of higher gifts, and larger talents than my self. And although more
peradventure is objected against this first part of Justification, humane wit
being a very fertile field to bring forth thorns and briars to choke the
truth, and good seed of the Word; And it is also most true, which the first
restorers of the Gospel do say concerning Free Justification, that contenders
will ever forge matter of contention (even when they have no occasion
thereunto) whereby they may with captious cavillations obscure and darken Free
Justification; yet I think they may either be referred to some of the former
objections, or will be such slight ones, that a weak faith will easily
overthrow them: But if faith be not first in our hearts, no Answers, be they
never so clear, will serve at all; because it is true that Austin says, Non
credimus intelligendo, sed credendo intelligimus: That is, we come not by
understanding the reason of Gods mysteries, to believe; but first believing
without reason, as little children, then we come to see and understand the
reason of them: And by believing are able to answer all objections whatsoever,
as Saint John says, This is our victory that overcommeth the whole world of
opposition, even our faith. And therefore now let us proceed to add something
for the kindling and preserving of our faith.

CHAP. IX. Containing an Antidote against doubting, to kindle faith, that so
our faith may be a preservative against all Objections of the world, the flesh,
and the Devil, whatsoever.
NOW although first, the express Word of God; secondly, the unanimous consent
of the faithful interpreters of Gods mysteries; and thirdly, the removal of
these Objections might be sufficient to make us strong in the assurance, that
we in and by the wedding garment of Christ's righteousness are made so
perfectly holy and righteous before God freely, that we have not one spot or
wrinkle of sin, or any such thing in the sight of God; yet such is the
frowardness of our natures against Gods promises, that for all this, still we
will be wavering and doubting: The reason whereof, Luther laying his finger
upon the very boil, notably expresses in these words, saying, But what
lets that one dares not challenge to himself this Title, that he is
perfectly righteous in the sight of God? even a timorous conscience, for we
always feel sin, and our life is ever frail: the cause whereof (says he in
another place) is our corrupt Nature, and our blind Reason, which will measure
the Kingdom of God according to her own opinion: whereby it thinks
(notwithstanding Christ's clensing away of our sins out of Gods sight) that
those things so cleansed, are yet unclean before God, which seem unclean to
it self; wherefore that opinion must be removed out of our minds, seeing the
Heavenly voice has said, The things which God has purified, pollute thou not;
that is, count not thou unclean, Acts 10. 15. And because the Apostle puts
doubting, Acts 10. 15.
and unbeleefe in a manner for all one, Romans Romans 4. 20.
4. 20. which doubting is the maine desire of the Devil, and the first and
chiefest sacrifice that he longs after, as being most dishonorable to God,
and most injurious to Christ; therefore that we may be found at the least
wrestlers and strivers against this sin of sins, we must fence our selves with
certain remedies drawn out of Gods Word, wherewith being armed, as with
spiritual weapons, we may by casting down imaginations, and all strong holds
that exalt themselves against the knowledge of Christ's benefits, be able not
only to resist, but also at the length to overcome all doubtings: which armor
or spiritual weapons I will propose in six points: whereof although Remedies
against d^u^ting, cr spiri^uall weapons consisting in six points.
some of them have been briefly touched before; yet because they are of great
moment for the working of faith in us, may here, with the common consent of the
learned Interpreters be more largely confirmed.

FIrst therefore, because we cannot be saved except Abraham, Luke 19. 9. and we
cannot become the children of Abraham, but Luke 19. 9.
by walking in the steps of the faith of our Father Abraham, Romans 4. 11, 12.
because the Apostle plainly avoucheth that as many as are of faith, the same
are Romans 4. 11, 12.
the children of Abraham, and blessed with faithful Abraham, Galat. 3. 7. 9.
Therefore first (I say) it Galat. 3. 7. 9.
behooves us exceeding greatly to mark, as being the very life of our soul,
and to have ever before our eyes the description of Abraham's faith that he
walked in, The description of Abraham's faith by four principal things.
exactly described purposely for this end, by the holy Ghost, Romans 4. In which
description four principal things are set down, which the Apostle flatly
testifies, that we must in this case of Free Justification expressly imitate,
if we will be the natural children of Abraham.

The first is the right object, ground, and matter of The^r Object and ground
of his faith.
faith, whereupon faith must rest, which is a promise of God giving a real
being of the thing, to be already so indeed as he has spoken it before
himself, although to outward sense, sight, and feeling, it seems not to be; as
when God said to Abraham, thou art fruitful, and thy seed shall be as the
stars of the sky for multitude, and yet he saw and felt both in himself and
in his wife, nothing but barrenness; so likewise in the case of our
Justification, God says, that the blood of Jesus Christ his Son does make us
clean, 1 John 1. 7. Psalm. 51. 7.
1 John 1. 7. and whiter than snow from all sin, Psalm. 51. 7. whereby we are
made so perfectly just and righteous in the sight of God freely, that we are
fair, yea, and all fair, and there is no spot in us, Cant. 4 7. all Cant. 4.
7.
which is by Gods speaking it really, so indeed spiritually in the sight of
God, and yet we see and feel nothing but soulenesse and spottednesse. And this
object and matter of faith is expressed in the Text in these words, Verse 17.
Before God that quickneth the dead, and calls Verse 17.
those things that be not, as though they were: the meaning whereof is this,
God calls; that is, works, effects, causes and makes that thing to have
a true and real being before himself by speaking it, which to Beza in Romans 4.
17: quae ^cc^t, essicit Deus, apud quem jam sunt, quae alioqui reipsa non sunt,
ut qui vel verb^ quid vis possit ex nihilo effice^e.
sense, sight, and feeling is not; and yet to have by his call as true and
real a being before himself, as though it were and had an outward being to
sense, sight, and feeling: therefore does Beza rightly thus expound those
words, saying, What God calls, those things he effects, before whom those
things are already, which otherwise indeed are not, as he that can with his
word make what he will of nothing.

Secondly, follows the battle of faith, in which the 2 The battle of Abraham's
faith.
order of nature, and sense, and reason, grounded upon natural causes, do
show a flat contrariety, and impossibility of the matter spoken and promised;
against Piscat. in Romans ^. 18. Contra spem scilicet quam come pe^e poter ^
exconsideratione na^^raererum.
which faith opposes the mere word, and power of God speaking; and this
battle of faith is expressed in the next verse in these words, verse 18. Which
Abraham above, or contrary to hope, believed under hope, according to that
which was spoken; that is, contrary to hope, namely, which he might conceive by
the consideration of the nature of things: But under hope, namely, which
Subs^e, scilicet quam concipere poterat ex consideratione potentie Dei
loqu^ntis. 3. The victory o^ Faith.
he did conceive by the consideration of the power of God, which had spoken.

Thirdly, follows the victory of faith, by which it shuts her eyes and
considers not, nor looks upon, but (as it were) winketh at, and turns quite
from, and forgets the order of nature, and natural causes, and things that
do to reason, sense, sight, and feeling, show a contrariety and impossibility
in the matter promised and spoken; and rests wholly and only upon the Word,
and promise, and power of God speaking; whereby visible things, that to reason
are contrary to the promise, do become as things of nothing, and having (as it
were) no being; and invisible things spoken by God, become to be the only
things that Quicquid in se ipso ac circa se intueri poterat, promissionis
co^plemento adversabatur.
have substance and ground with us: and this victory of faith is expressed in
the next verse in these words, verse 19. That he not weak in faith considered
not, or would not think of his own body, which was now dead, nor Ergo ut
locum Divin. 8 veritati saocret, ab ils quae in conspectu erant, animum
yetraxit, and quasi oblitus est. Calv. Marlor. in Romans 4. 19.
the deadness of Sarahs womb, etc. that is, whatsoever he could behold either
in himself, or about himself, was against, and contrary to the accomplishment
and fulfilling of Gods promise; and therefore to give place to the truth of
God, he wholly withdrew his mind from the things which he saw and felt, and
did as it were forget himself; because it is truly said of another
Interpreter of Gods mysteries: That seeing the Cum tanta sit potentia Dei
aequum est, etc.
power of God is so great, that quickens the dead, it is meet that we believe
him, even when he promises things impossible to nature, and to the judgment
of our reason.

Fourthly, hereupon follows the Triumph of faith, 4. The ^^iumph of Faith,
yielding to God only upon the foresaid grounds of his truth and power, his
full glory of truly sufilling upon us that which he has spoken; whereby he
has ascribed unto him the glory of his truth and power, and we have the
blessing and benefit thereof for ever; and this triumph of faith is expressed
in the next verses in these words, That he doubted not of the promise of God by
unbelief, but was strengthened in faith, and gave glory to God, Being fully
assured, that he which had spoken it was also able to do it. All which (the
Apostle flatly testifies) must be imitated of us, in the case of Free
Justification by Christ, who was delivered to death to abolishour sins out of
Gods sight, and is risen again for our full justification, Romans 4. 15. The
manner whereof Romans 4. 15. Luther.
is notably expressed, by that Hercules of Gods glory, upon the song of
Zachary, saying thus, In what place soever the borne of salvation, Jesus
Christ, is exalted, there is no access neither for sin nor death, wherefore
a Christian is both foul, and yet without sin. How comes this to pass?
after this sort: Beloved you have often heard that God leaves in us an
appearance and feeling, whilst we live here, both of sin, death, and the
Devil; God suffers these to remain, and takes them not quite away from
sense and feeling; for this appearance must continue, that we may perceive, and
feel that we are nothing else of our selves, but sinners subject to sin and
Satan: But all this is but a certain outward appearance before my sight, and
the sight of the world, which know and judge no otherwise, but that sin and
death are present; and yet under this appearance, lies hid innocence, life,
and Faith is the substance of things not appearing.
dominion, and victory over sin, death, and Satan; for because faith is the
evidence, and substance of things not appearing; therefore that faith may have
place, it is necessary that all things which are believed, be hid; but they
cannot be more deeply hid than under the contrary object, sense, and
experience: But when as we see all our sins laid upon Christ, and to be
victoriously conquered of him by his resurrection, and do confidently believe
this; then they are dead, and brought to nothing; for being laid upon Christ,
they must not remain so, but are swallowed up in the triumph of his
resurrection. So says S. Paul, Christ was delivered to death for our sins,
and is risen again for our Justification; that is, by his death he has taken
upon him our sins, and thereby utterly abolished them out of the sight of God,
as the Sunbeames abolish darkness, and by his resurrection has made us
perfectly righteous; so that a true Christian may be bold to say, Lord God,
maker of the whole world, it is true that I feel sins in my self, but
through Christ, that has taken them away out of thy sight, I am certain that
I am perfectly righteous, good, and holy before thee, etc. for of these things
must a sincere Christian be partaker, and of these things he ought to glory, if
he be a true Christian; and he that cannot glory of these things, is not yet a
Christian.

THe second spiritual weapon to overcome doubting 2 The second spiritual
weapon against deubting.
is, that whereas our reason, sense, sight, and feeling are our strongest
enemies; not only to drive us into doubting; but also sight, by saying, I see
sin in me, and sense, by truly saying, I feel sin in me, and reason by
saying, it is impossible but this should make me foul in the sight of God,
will thus strongly persuade us, that we are not made perfectly holy and
righteous, from all spot of sin in the sight of God freely: we must mark out
of the former description, that it is the very nature, heart, and essence of
faith to mortify these enemies, and to tell them, that they are all lying
sophisters, of true principles assuming false inferences, and to believe the
clean contrary to them; because God and the blood of Christ do assure us the
contrary, namely, that we seeing by the light of Gods word, that one spot of
sin makes us in the sight of God foul, like the Devil, and accursed, Galat.
3. 10. the blood of Christ does make us so Gal. 3. 10.
clean, 1 John 1. 7. that we are whiter than snow, 1 John 1. 7. Psalm. 51. 7.
from all spot of sin in the sight of God, Psalm. 51. 7. But if thou ask me,
how, and by what means may I Abraham did the deadness of his body, and the
deadness of Sarahs womb, by not considering the same, Romans 4. 19. and by
trusting in the word alone spoken, Romans 4. 19.
although (as Christ dealt at first with the woman of Math. 15.
Canaan) God himself, and all creatures pretend otherwise than the word
speaks: thus Sarah stumbling at the first, yet at length got the victory over
her doubting, by forgetting her barrenness, and old age, that pretended
impossibility, and by judging him faithful that had spoken, Heb. 11. 11. And
thus does faith Heb. 11. 11.
make a man shut his eyes against what he sees, and seeles in himself, and
does bore his ears, Psalm. 40. 6. Psalm. 40. 6.
to hear what God speaks. Because it is most true that Luther says, That
this is the chief virtue, and cunning of faith, that it sees those things
that are not seen or felt; and sees not those things, which are felt, yea
which are now sore upon us, and do press and urge us. As on the contrary
side, diffidence and unbeleefe sees nothing, but that which it feels
agreeing with natural reason, neither can it rest upon any other thing, but
that which it feels.

But faith says otherwise, it rests only in the word, and trusts wholly
unto it; neither doubts it that any thing will fall out otherwise than the
word speaks. This is a right and strong faith, when as a man leaves sense,
wisdom, reason, and trusts wholly to the word of God.

For this cause those things are of God laid upon faith to overcome them, which
the whole world is not able to bear, as sins, death, the world, and the
Devil; neither does God suffer it to be occupied with small matters.

Because this right faith thus trusting to, and relying upon the testimony of
the word of God, does perceive, and firmly believe things to nature
impossible, and therefore incredible to humane reason; and yet firmly believes
them, merely considering the truth and power of God, speaking, calling and
thereby effecting the same.

For faith says, I believe thee, O God, when thou speak; and what says
God? impossible things, lies, foolish, weak, absurd, abominable, heretical,
and devilish things, if thou believe reason.

For reason does not understand, that to hear the word of God, and to believe
it, is the chiefest service that God requires of us: but when God speaks,
reason judges his word to be heresy, and the word of the Devil; for because
it is against reason, it seems unto it absurd and foolish.

Therefore Abraham killed reason by faith in the word of God, whereby seed was
promised to him of Sarah, who was barren, and now also past childbearing: unto
this word reason yielded not straitway in Abraham, and yet bore more sway in
Zachary; but it fought against faith even in him, both he and especially Sarah
judging it to be an absurd, a foolish, and impossible thing, that Sarah who was
now not only ninety years old, but also was barren by nature, should bring
forth a son. Thus faith wrestled with reason in Abraham; but herein faith got
the victory, killed and sacrificed reason, that most cruel, and pestilent
enemy of God, and gave glory to God.

So all the godly entering with Abraham into the darkness of faith; when
feeling, and reason would persuade them that they are not clean from all spot
of sin in the sight of God, they crucify feeling, and kill reason, saying,
reason, thou ar^ foolish, thou Reason to be killed by faith.
do not savor those things which belong unto God; therefore speak not
against me, but hold thy peace; judge not, but hear the word of God, saying,
that the blood of Jesus Christ has made us so clean, that we are whiter than
snow, from all sin in the sight of God freely, and believe it.

Thus faith corrupts not the word by seeking for a meaning of it, that may be
agreeable to reason* but kills reason, and slays that beast, which the
whole world, and all creatures cannot kill; and so gives glory to God.

Thus sincere Christians that have overcome the foresaid timorous conscience,
and have a good conscience, and in whose heart the spirit of God abides,
although they feel their sins: Yet they are enforced to say: Howsoever sin
is, yet I know no sin by my self, neither am I subject to death, and hell
(and here they strive and wrestle, and at length overcome;) But I find it
far otherwise, if I set my life before my sight; here life, and the word,
must be separated far a sunder. If thou will consider life, I will set before
thee the lives of S. Peter, Paul, and John, and thou shall find even them not
to have lived without sin; when thou desire to be holy and righteous
before God, lean not to thy life, unless thou will perish forever. For thou
must trust only to grace, and to the wedding garment of Christ's righteousness
revealed in the word, and nto to life or works; but being clothed in this
wedding garment all thy sins are quite abolished out of Gods sight, and so
thou may glory safely that thou art perfectly good, godly, holy and righteous
in Gods sight, Esaias 45. 25. Esaias 45, 25.


Yea, God cannot defer, or delay, where there is this sincere heart that
trusts in him alone, all other things being left, looking only to the naked
word of God, there God cannot hide himself, but reveals himself, and comes
unto such an heart, and makes his abode there, as the Lord says, Ioh. 14. 21,
23. I will come Ioh, 14. 21, 23.
unto him and will dwell with him. Now what can be more joyful than for a man
to give credit to the naked word of God? And as to be plucked from it by no
affliction, or temptation; so to shut his eyes against every assault of Satan,
to become a fool, that he may be wise, 1 Co^. 3. 18, 19. The obediences of
the Gospel.
that is, to lay aside humane sense, understanding, reason, and wisdom, and to
say daily in his heart, God has spoken it, he cannot lie; this is true
mortifying of our selves, and right obedience to the Gospel: and I say that
nothing is more joysull than such a faith.

THe third means to overcome all doubting, is The third remedy against
doubting.
much and often to meditate upon our baptism: yea, as often as we feel, that
we have by any sin pierced and wounded our soul with the sting of death (for
the sting of death is sin, 1 Cor. 15. 56.) so often must we call 1 Cor. 15. 56.
to mind, especially these four things wherein the very essence and virtue of
our baptism consists.

First, that God in baptism gave unto us his Son 2 Four special things to
be considered in Baptism.
in the likeness of water, signifying that Jesus is no Jesus unto us, but as
he has first and before all things with his blood washed away out of the sight
of God all our sins: as S. John says, Revel. 1. 5. And has washed Revel. 1. 5.
us from our sins in his blood; and by clothing us with the obedience and
righteousness contained in his blood, does so perfectly deck and adorn us, as
fit Brides unto himself, with that wedding garment of his own righteousness,
that he does not only of unjust make us just, but also preserves us (as is
before showed) in the same, above our sense and feeling, ever and continually
perfectly holy and righteous from all spot or wrinkle sin, or any such thing in
the sight of God freely, Ephesians. 5. 26, 27. because (as the Apostle testifies)
with one sacrifice upon the Cross, he has made Ephesians. 5. 26. 27.
pefect, for ever and continually, all them that are sanctified, Heb. 10. 14.
For (says Luther) the blood of Christ Heb. 10. 14. Christ's blood as p^rging
soap and niter.
has in it such sharp salt, and such purging soap and niter, as that it takes
away from before God, and abolisheth all foulness, and all spots, so that in
one moment it consumes sin and death, takes them away and utterly abolisheth
them. And because we must mark, that at the time of our baptizing, it is not
the man or Minister, that does baptize us, properly: But it is God, the Father,
Son, and God properly is the Baptizer.
holy Ghost, that is, the true, right, and proper baptiser of us; the reason
whereof is, because it is not the work of the Minister, that baptizeth
outwardly, nor the Baptism of man, but the Baptism of Christ and of God; for
the minister or man does nothing in The Minister ^^ly is ^n the n^m^ and place
of God.
his own authority, but stands by Gods appointment in the place and steed of
God, and supplies the room of God: whereupon we ought to receive our baptism
at the hand of man, no otherwise, than if Christ himself, or rather, as if God
himself did baptize us with his own hands: and therefore we must take heed
that we do not so divide Baptism, as to attribute the outward baptism to
man, and the inward to God; but we must attribute both to God, and count of the
man or minister baptizing us, but as the instrument (like the axe in the
Carpenters hand,) God himself using it, to square thee himself to the glory
of his grace; by the which God sitting in heaven does reach down his own
ordinance of Baptism, coming merely from himself out of heaven as his hand;
and does pour water upon thee with his own hands, and does pronounce that he
has washed thee clean from all thy sins, speaking unto thee in earth
himself, with his own mouth, by the voice of the Minister. And this the very
words used in thy Baptism, do make clear unto thee; when the Minister
pouring water upon thee, said, I baptize thee in the name of the Father, and of
the Son, and of the holy Ghost, Amen: That is, I wash thee clean from all thy
sins, but how? what in thine own name and power? No, for alas, that were able
to do no such work, and just nothing, but, as the Brazen-Serpent healed the
Israelites, that is, in the mere ordinance, name and power of God the Father,
Son and holy Ghost, as if he should say; that which I do, I do it not in
mine own strength, name, or power but it being none of my work, but standing by
God, own appointment and ordinance in his place and stead, and supplying his
room, I wash thee in the name and power of God, that thou may count no
otherwise of it, than if God had done it visibly himself. This sense is full
of comfort, and an effectual help of faith, for a man to know, that he was
baptized not of man, but of the Trinity himself, by man; who standing in his
stead, did the work signified, as truly in his name and power, as if God
himself had been the very outward and visible agent, and worker. But (I say)
because God himself is all in all the proper workman in our baptism;
therefore in his outward sign of washing by water, he does (although inwardly
and mystically to himself, yet) so thoroughly wash us with the blood of Christ,
that it is as much when any one is baptized into faith, as if he were visibly
washed not with water, but with the purging blood of of Christ. And hereupon
both for the Agent God, and for the mean of Christ's blood, is Baptism such a
magnificent work, and has such virtue, and so great power, (as the holy Ghost
by S. Paul restifieth) that it is indeed the laver and washing of the new
birth, and the renewing of the holy Ghost, Tit. 3. 5. That is first it makes
Tit. 3. 5. New ^re^t^ras two ways.
us new born creatutes to Godward by Justification, by abolishing all our
sins out of Gods sight, and making us perfectly holy and righteous from all
spot of sin in the sight of God freely, whereby we are adopted the sons of God:
and secondly, it does renew us by the holy Ghost to be new creatures to
menward by sanctification; whereupon S. John saying, that Christ came by water
and blood, and repeating blood with a vehement emphasis, says again, Not by
water only, but by water and blood, does give us to understand, that in
Baptism of water, we must have principal respect to the blood of Christ,
whereby Baptism is of such efficacy, and of so great operation and power,
that it washes away from before God all sin, drownes and abolisheth death,
heales all our infirmities, and makes us clean from all our faults: this
indeed, we see not to be done, with carnal eyes; but the faithful in Christ
neither ought, nor yet do desire to see with bodily eyes; but they apprehend
the Word, and believe it, and so glorify Gods Truth, Seal, and Ordinance; so
that whatsoever is there promised, they persuade themselves to be as sure and
certain, as those things which they even see and feel before their outward
eyes. Briefly in a word, to be baptized, is nothing In Baptism a principal
respect is to be had to the blood of Christ.
else to spiritual eyes, than to be washed with the most precious blood of
Christ, and to be made so clean, that we are made from all sin in the sight
of God, whiter than snow. And this is that perfect cleansing by the blood of
Christ, which David speaks of, Psalm. 51. where he says, Wash me thoroughly
from mine iniquity, and make me clean from my sins: Purge me with Hysop, and
I shall be clean, wash thou me and I shall be whiter than snow. And this is
the first thing that we must call to mind concerning our Baptism.

Secondly, we must call to mind, that God in our Baptism gave us Christ,
making us thus clean from all our sins, appropriated unto thee, that art
baptized: that is, given unto thee in particular, as if at that time that thou
wast a baptizing, there had been (in respect of thy particular and perfect
washing and saving) no more to be saved by the blood of Christ, but thou only
in the world: whereby God said in the virtue and power of his own ordinance
unto thee in particular, as he said unto Paul, Arise, and be baptized and
wash away thy sins, mark thine in particular, in calling on the name of the
Lord Jesus: whereby thou have just cause to say with S. Paul, Christ has loved
me, and given himself for me in particular, Gal. 2. 20. Gal. 2. 20.


Thirdly, we must call to mind that God in our freely, that is, God
respecting no worthiness in us, to deserve this rich grace, not respecting no
unworthiness in us, to hinder the same, not requiring any other condition at
our hands, but that in time we feel our selves lost by sin, and freely take
this rich grace of Christ freely to heal us. Because the Apostle says, All
have sinned, and thereby are deprived of the glory of God; But are justified
freely by his Grace through the redemption that is in Christ Jesus, Romans 3. 23,
24. And Romans 3. 23. 24
to show how freely he thus of unjust, makes us perfectly just in his sight,
he brings us to the laver of baptism even whilst we are Infants, and does then
and there sanctify us to himself with his blood, and makes us clean by the
washing of water through the word, Ephesians. 5. 26. When we are not only mere
lumps Ephesians. 5. 26.
of original sin, far more soul in the blood of our souls, than we were
a little before in the blood of our bodies, yea so soul, that we might not be
admitted into the communion of the Church, and Saints of God, until we were
washed in the blood of the Son of God, but also were not able to send up one
sigh unto God in any sorrow for the same. This rich grace of Gods washing us so
freely, even when we were without feeling of our misery, in the very blood of
our original sin is plainly described by God in Ezech. 16. Ezekiel. 16.
saying, When I passed by thee, I saw thee cast out and polluted in thine own
blood; then said I, even when thou wast in thy blood, thou shall live: yea,
when thou wast in thy blood, I said, thou shall live: then washed I thee with
water, yea, I thoroughly washed away thy blood from thee, and anointed thee
with Oil: I clothed thee also with broidred work, and I decked thee with fine
linen, which is the righteousness of the Saints, Revel. 19. 8. And covered
Revel. 19. 8.
thee with the silk of mine own righteousness. Thus wast thou decked with Gold
and Silver, and thou wast exceeding beautiful, for thou wast perfect through
my beauty which I had put upon thee, says the Lord: shall not we then as
freely take these riches as God, when we were yet in our blood, so freely gave
them us?

Fourthly and lastly, we must call to mind, that God, God; but there is the
question: to which I answer; None ought to question Gods e^^ectuall washing of
himself, and why?
why should thou make question of thy self, when God has revealed no
exception or question of thee? nay, rather when God has done the clean
contrary; that is, has revealed the putting it out of question, that he has
adopted thee to be his son? First, because thou had a day of thy Adoption
of Gods own appointing, and acting; namely, in thy Baptism: Secondly, thou
wast expressly in the act of thy adoption, that it might be known, that thou in
particular wast Adopted: Thirdly, God did by the hand of his Minister set to
his sign and seal of Adoption upon thee; whereby he did give his last Will and
Testament sealed unto thee in particular, by his own seal of Baptism, as the
deed of his hand into thine own hand, pouring water upon thee in particular:
dare thou think that God did jest, or mock with thee? can there be now any
doubting, that thy sins are for ever washed out of the sight of God, and thou
Adopted an heir of all the riches of thy elder brother Christ Jesus, his last
Will and Testament being made good unto thee by the death also of the Testator?
Heb. 9. 17. Heb. 9. 17.
Certainly thou can not miss of thy rich inheritance, except by careless
neglect, thou despise and forsake (as alas too many do) or like a mad child
do with wilful contempt tear in pieces, and break the seal wilfully of
this last Will and Testament, sealed unto thee so undoubtedly in thy Baptism;
especially (as I said before) that last Will and Testament, so sealed unto thee
in particular, standing in force by the death of the Testator.

But peradventure some man may say, you speak of Obje^t.
ma^vellous, great, and excellent things of Baptism: but I see nothing of all
this wrought in Baptism; I could easily believe you if at some time I might
see some such thing wrought before mine eyes.

I answer (as I said a little before) Christians must not see, but believe; and
these things must be seen in the Looking-glass of Christ's blood, with
spiritual eyes; for so is the will of God that thou should not bodily see
these things here on earth, but godlily believe them; neither should thou
doubt of them by unbeleefe, but with faithful Sarah overcome doubting by
judging him faithful in his word and ordinance, that has spoken and sealed
them unto thee, and so Heb 11, 11.
give glory to Christ's blood, and receive at the last the reward of thy faith,
even the salvation of thy soul, 1 Pet. 1. 9. For grant that God should visibly
manifest 1 Pet. 1. 9.
and reveal the things which the holy Ghost, and all the holy Trinity in the
presence of all the Angels that stand with admiration looking into the same,
do work upon thee in thy Baptism; whereof God to 1 Pet. 1. 12
strengthen and satisfy thy weakness, gave in the Baptism of his Son,
that was for thee, some little taste and glimmering, even to thy bodily ears
and eyes of the glory of thy Baptism; wherein the Heavens were opened, and the
holy Ghost came down, and God the Father made a Sermon himself, that in his
Son, given and sealed unto thee in thy Baptism, he is perfectly well pleased
with thee: although this Our mortal conditions notable to endure the full
manifestation of Gods glory.
be much, if it be well marked, yet thy mortal condition would not be able to
endure, no not one moment, the full manifestation of that divine and Heavenly
Majesty: And therefore for this cause, even for thy sake, does God as it were
put on another face, and comes forth in another form and appearance, more
familiar, and tolerable unto thee; and because he would God deals familiarly
in his ordinances.
not have us to wander in our own opinions, and carried away with our own
devotions, to seek him, and his grace with great labor, where he will not be
found; therefore he comes forth covered with familiar outward signs, and
plain visible seals, bidding his Ministers to wash us with a little water,
and add those few words, I baptize thee in the name of the father, etc. and
wills us to fix and fasten our eyes and ears upon the same, being such as our
mortal nature is well able to bear and endure; and yet therein gives us
himself, and all his inestimable riches, to be certainly found by faith, Romans
4. 16. and so freely enjoyed of Romans 4. 16.
us. But if we neglect these, and as small matters do smally regard them,
thinking to find God in more difficult labors of our own endeavors, then we
mar grace, and with the Scribes and Pharisees, thinking scorn of John's
Baptism, We despise the counsel of God against our selves, Luke 7. 30. and
do vanish away Luke 7. 30.
with them, in our own legal devotions. And therefore thou must say thus,
Indeed I see nothing in Baptism but a sprinkling with a little water, neither
do I hear any thing else, than a few words which the Baptizer pronounces,
namely, I Baptize thee, or wash thee in the name of the Father, etc. This
indeed I hear with my ears, and see with mine eyes; but the word and faith
do tell me, that God himself is there present, and works the works there
spoken, himself; and hereupon that washing and laver is of such efficacy, and
of so great virtue and power, that it Regenerates a man, and does wash away out
of Gods sight all his sins, wherewith he was foul, and being swallowed up
utterly abolished them. And although it cannot be denied, but that all of us,
even every mothers child among us have done little better, than Baptism
gen^rally neglected.
did the Scribes and Pharisees, who (as it is said before) by setting light of
the Baptism of John, despised the counsel of God against themselves, because
either by profaneness, or in love of our own blind devotions, we have been
too ignorant of this right way of God, Acts 18. 25. and by a careless neglect
of them, Act 18. 25.
have too much forsaken our baptismes; yet by due meditating of these four
points, and by printing them effectually in our hearts and affections, we
return to our baptism again; whereby although we have changed our selves
from the same toward God; yet because God is not changed toward us, and
because his gifts are without repentance, therefore by thus returning to our
baptism, we declare, that we do abide before God perfect, and blessed in the
fame for ever: whereupon comfortable is the testimony of that learned Dispenser
of Gods mysteries, saying thus, We indeed Calv. Instit. lib. 4 cap. 15. Sect.
17.
being blind, and unbeleeving, did in a long time not hold fast the promise
sealed unto us in our baptism; yet the promise it self (for as much as it was
of God, that is unchangeable) continued always staid, steadfast and true;
although all men be liars and faith-breakers, yet God cease not to be true.
But now since by the grace of God, we have hegun to wax wiser, we accuse our
own blindness and hardness of heart, which have been so long unthankful
for so great goodness, and do believe that the promise it self is not
vanished away; but rather thus we consider, God has promised to give us these
unsearchable riches freely; and since he has not only promised, but also sealed
it unto me in particular in baptism, he will undoubtedly perform it to all
them, that believe it. Thus we return unto our baptism, thus we cleave fast
uno it, and thus we glorify the seal of baptism and ordinance of God, and
enjoy the benefit and blessing, and all the glory of baptism for ever.

Hereupon also does Luther say very profitably thus, Luther In all terrors of
conscience it is our wisdom to have recourse to our Baptism.
That it will be not a little profitable, if a man fall into sin, and being
terrified and cast down with the same, do first before all things remember
his Baptism; and apprehending with boldness the free goodness and promise of
God, which he has forsaken, confess the same to God, rejoicing that he has
yet this so great safeguard of his salvation, that he is baptized; and
detesting his wicked ingratitude that he has so much failed from the says and
truth thereof: for his heart will be wonderfully comforted, and be greatly
encouraged to the hope of grace, if he consider the free promise of God, not
only made, but also upon no consideration, nor stop of any unworthiness,
sealed unto him; how unpossible it is that God should lie, and fail him in the
same; and so must needs remain sound and firm unto him, and not changed for
his changing, and such as cannot be changed with any sins of men: as S. Paul
testifies, saying, If we believe not, he abides faithful, he cannot deny
himself, 2 Timothy 2. 13. certainly this mere truth of God, sealed 2 Timothy 2. 13.
unto him by Baptism, will be his shield and buckler to save him; so that if
all other things fail him, yet this truth of God will not leave him destitute:
for he has what he may oppose to his insu^ting adversary; he has what he may
object against his conscience troubled with sin; he has what he may answer
against the horror of death and judgment; and to conclude, he has what may be
a comfort in all temptations; namely, this mere truth of God sealed unto him
from God, saying, God is true in his promises, whereof he has given me his
pledge, and seal in Baptism; If God be thus unfallibly and unchangeably, on
my side, who can be against me? For if the children of Israel, when they were
to return to repentance, did first, and before all things call to remembrance
their deliverance out of Egypt, and by the remembrance thereof did return
unto God, who so graciously brought them out; and therefore is so often
inculcated by Moses and the Prophets, and is made by* God himself the very
preface to the keeping of all the ten Commandments: how much more should we
call to mind our deliverance out of our Egypt of sin, the Devil, death,
and hell, and by the remembrance thereof return unto him, who so freely
brought us out, by the washing of the new birth, and renewing of the holy
Ghost? which is likewise to this end urged by the Apostles, and pressed upon
us, Tit. 3. 3, 4, 5. and Tit. 3. 3, 4, 5.
this is chiefly to be done in zealous celebrating the Lords Supper; for so at
the first in the Primitive Church were these two Sacraments, Baptism, and the
Lords Supper, zealously frequented, and helped one another: this is the
preaching that ought earnestly to be pressed upon people. This promise, that he
that believes, namely that the Son of God justifies him, making him perfectly
holy and righteous from all spot of sin in the sight of God freely, and is
baptized, that is, and has received the assurance hereof, by having it by Gods
own sign and seal of Baptism sealed un to him, he shall be saved, Mark 16.
16. this Mark 16. 16.
(I say) is the promise, which as the head, heart, and soul of Religion, ought
daily to be inculcated: thus should Baptism be continually repeated; and
because our faith is not the foundation of our Baptism, but our Baptism is
the foundation of our faith, therefore should it be continually urged, that our
faith may be daily increased and nourished in the same, and that for two causes.

First, because although Satan has not been able to Esaias 60. 2. but look after
other Esaias 60. 2.
means of assuring themselves of the forgiveness of their sins, and after
other ways of coming to heaven.

Secondly, because the power and virtue of our Baptism Baptism makes us
strong against all temptations.
repentance, and effectually strengthening us against all temptations: as we
read of a certain holy virgin in the Primitive Church (when as yet custom and
long use had not made Baptism to seem small) who as often as she was tempted,
did resist and overcome with objecting her Baptism, saying briefly, I am a
Christian, and am baptized, as the Spouse in the Cant. Cant, 5. 3.
says, I have put off my coat, how shall I put it on? I have washed my feet,
how shall I defile them again? for the eni^y presently understood the virtue
and power of Baptism, and the faith of the same, which depends upon the mere
truth of God, freely promising it, and so fled from her. And this point have I
the more largely prosecuted, because although it be an high point of magnifying
Gods truth, and the sole glory of Christ, and the right honoring of Gods
ordinance of Baptism, and the next means of raising us up to the true*
Evangelicall repentance, and right zeal of Gods glory; yet it is of us too
little practiced. God in his rich mercy grant that we may (as it was said
before) wax wiser, and more joyfully embrace the same.

THe fourth enemy assaulting our faith, and driving The fourth Remedy against
doubting.
us strongly to doubting, and against which we have need to arm our selves,
is the great multitude commonly called the world; of whom S. John speaks
saying, We know that we are of God, and that the whole world lies in
wickedness, 1 John 5. 19. for although 1 John 5, 19.
God has some of all sorts, high and low, rich and poor* that are true
believers; yet the greatest multitude of all sorts, although they glory by the
dead says that they believe; yet they discern not the mysteries of Christ;
and therefore are so far from believing with the heart, and confessing with
the tongue, that we are so clothed with the wedding garment of Christ's
righteousness, that we are made perfectly holy and righteous from all spot of
sin in the sight of God freely, that hereupon condemning the very sayings of
the learned, in the former fifth Scripture phrase, expressing the same, they
bring forth all their munition, and artillery drawn out of the storehouse of
natural reason, and sharpened with seeming Scripture wrested to the
strengthening of reason; and hereby whet their tongues to contradict, to
gainsay, wrangle against, and oppugn the same, with all might and maine
possibly they can. But against this scandal we are sufficiently forewarned,
and thereby strongly fore-armed with that one watchword of the holy Ghost,
saying, That Christ brings the most certain testimony of himself and of his
benefits, from his Father, but no man receives his testimony, John 3. 32.
which (as the John 3. 32.
learned interpreters do well express) must not be so understood, as if no
man at all does receive Christ's testimony (seeing both the Apostles, and many
others believing, have, and daily do receive the same) but because very few in
comparison do receive it, who if they be compared with the huge multitude
that make a show of receiving it, by the dead faith, but in truth do not, do
appear to be in a manner, none. Indeed almost all do profess that they do
believe, and do think in a general confused manner, that they do receive
Christ, and his benefits; so that Abraham himself could not see the day of
Christ more John 8.
clearly than they do, saying and thinking by the dead faith, I am rich, and
increased in goods, and have need of nothing, when they know not, that they are
wretched, and miserable, and poor and blind, and naked, Rev. 3. 17. Revel. 3.
17.
this is not to receive Christ, and the rich benefits testified by him, but
only to dream that we have received To receive Christ truly includes four
things.
Christ; but to receive Christ, and his benefits truly, does necessarily
include in it these four particular points.

First, to know the time when we were without

Secondly, to see the excellency and worth of having Christ and his benefits,
how worthy they are to be received and retained; for no man will take, and
advisedly receive that which he sees to be little worth, except it be for
custom, and fashion sake, because all men do so, with whom we live: Aesops
cock contents himself with a barley corn, neglecting a pearl, because he
knows not the worth of it.

Thirdly, it imports an having of Christ and his

Fourthly, and lastly, he that has received to himself the enjoying of
Christ, and his benefits, of such The Kingdom of heaven (that is, the true
enjoying of Christ and his benefits) is like a treasure hid in the field, which
when a man has found, he hides it, and for joy thereof goes and sells Matthew.
13, 44.
all that he has, and buyeth that field: But alas, how few are there at this
day that do thus? and therefore how few have found this treasure? how few
receive and consider this very testimony of Christ? may we not well say, in a
manner none? but what is the kore of this sore? even this, because it is a
difficult and hard matter to believe with Abraham, the excellency of the things
that God speaks contrary to our sense, sight, and feeling, and to reason
builded upon the same; and therefore the paradoxes and mysteries of Christ must
be wrested to agree with reason, or else the world, that is, the greatest
multitude will be so far from receiving With what cunning Christ's is by many
rejected.
them, that they will utterly reject them. But how, and after what manner will
they dare to reject Christ and his benefits? even with a threefold cunning
device:

First, to palliate their unbeleefe; for we must suppose that they are no
unbeleevers of any old ancient truth; therefore although God himself, the
ancient of days, has spoken it, and has the unanimous testimony of the
Orthodox Interpreters and Dispensers of Gods mysteries, yet it must bear the
title first of new Doctrine, and then it is enough to reject; so when Christ
came a Minister of the old and ancient truth of God, but to confirm the
promises made of old unto the Fathers, Romans 15. 8. yet when he began to preach
Romans 15. 8.
the same, the greatest multitude cried out, what new Doctrine is this? Mark
1. 17. whereupon it is most Mark. 1, 17.
true, that is testified by the Apology of the Church of England, saying, We
wot not by what means, but we Part 5.
have ever seen it come to pass from the first beginning, that as often as
God did give but some light to any people, and open his truth unto men, though
the truth were not only of greatest antiquity, but also from everlasting; yet
of the foresaid greatest multitude it was called newfangled, and of late
devised. Yea, Eusebius writes that the Christian Eusebius.
Religion that was ever of old from the beginning, for very spite was called
(...), that is to say, New and strange. But as Christ unto the Scribes and
Pharisees objecting, that he brought in a certain new Religion, said, If ye
believed Moses, ye would believe me also: So it may be answered to these, that
if they believed the excellency of Free Justification, they would not stumble
at the saying of the Scriptures, and unanimous consent of the learned
Interpreters, as they express the same.

Their next manner of rejecting the benefits of the Gospel is, That going about
to measure them by humane reason, and finding that reason agrees with them no
righter than a Rams horn; that Reason may not leese her glory, no fault must
be found with Lady Reason; but Christ's benefits must bear the blame, namely,
that they are foolish and absurd, and so The Gospel is foolishness to Reason.
foolish and absurd things are not to be received of such wise men as the whole
world is: these little remembering, and less regarding to lay the blame where
it is, namely, That the natural man not only perceives not the things of Gods
spirit, but they are also foolishness unto him, 1 Cor. 2. 14. but least of all
practicing 1 Cor. 2. 14.
that admonition of the Apostle, That if any man will be wise, let him become a
fool, that he may be wise, 1 Cor. 3. 18. but this is an hard saying to such
wise heads: 1 Cor. 3. 18.
who can hear it?

Then thirdly, when they have concluded of Christ's benefits, that they are not
only strange, but also foolish Doctrine; lest they should be blamed of
unbeleefe, they think it the best, to sharpen the uttermost of their wits by
contradicting, sophisticating, wrangling, gaine-saying, and especially by
absurd calumnious consequents of their own collections and hatchings, as with
mere Niocdemicall conclusions, yea and by mockings, jestings and deridings,
utterly to beat it down. But weighty is that admonition of our Church taught by
the first Restorers of the Gospel in this Land, saying, The worldly Doctrine of
our Church.
wisemen scorn the Doctrine of Christ, as foolish to their understandings:
yea, will some say, to some of that blind time; nay say the foresaid faithful
witnesses, These scorners have ever been, and ever will be to the end of the
world: And therefore let us that have one spark of the true fear of God, if
we cannot understand the sense and reason of the sayings of the holy
Scriptures, yet let us not be scorners, jesters, and deriders, for that is the
uttermost token and show of a Reprobate, of a plain enemy to God and his
wisdom, etc. And therefore if we will be profitable hearers and readers of
holy Scriptures, we must first deny our own selves, and keep under our
carnal senses: Reason must give place to Gods holy Spirit, etc. For indeed by
gaine-saying, wrangling, jesting, and deriding the things which men understand
not, what do they else but stumble at the stumbling stone laid in Zion* which
the Apostle teaches is chiefly done in gaine-saying, and wrangling against
Free Justification, as these Scriptures testify, Romans 9. 30, 31, 32, 33. Romans
9. 30, 31, 32, 33. and Romans 10. 3, 4. 10. 21.
and Romans 10. 3, 4, 10, 21. whereby they pull that stone upon their own heads,
which falling upon them will grind them to powder, Mat. 21. 44. And yet when
Christ Matthew. 21. 44.
in the excellency of his benefits is powerfully preached, the greatest
multitude stick not violently to rush upon him with their contradictions,
wranglings, derisions, and calumniations; the reason whereof Calvin truly
expresses, saying thus, Whereas all the Calvin.
mysteries of God are to fleshly reason Paradoxes, yet is reason of such
impudency, that she will not stick to set up her bristles against the same, and
to purse that which she does not understand with malapert and saucy
gaine-sayings and wranglings. And although it dares not for shame of the world
oppose it self directly and grossly against the person of Christ; yet if
Christ's words may not be wrested to sort and agree with natural reason, they
shall be condemned to be very foolish, and his Ministers that pronounce and
maintain them, to be very absurd in their opinions, if no worse; so that
although it is true that a Minister ought to be exceeding watchful, that he
speak (especially in this carping age) very circumspectly of God and his
mysteries, left by any means he give an occasion to the wicked to calumniate
Gods truth: yet it is most true that Calvin testifies, proving it in the
example of Paul, that there was never such wariness and sobriety of speaking
in the servants of God, which could make silent unclean and poisonous tongues;
because it is most true which again he notes upon those words of Paul, Romans
3. 5. (I speak as a man) that Saint Paul sairh not, Romans 3. 5.
I speak as the wicked, but I speak as a man; wherein sharply taxing humane
reason, he shows that it is the proper nature thereof, to be always wrangling
against the wisdom of God, and calumniating his faithful Ministers, that
teach the same: And therefore Luther set it down for an unfallible mark, that
Galat. 5. 11.
the Gospel is not truly preached, and is not the Gospel indeed, if it be so
brewed, and so fitted agreeable to reason, that all approve of it, and yield
unto the meaning of it peaceably; for then indeed how should the Prophecy of
old Simeon be verified, that Christ should be set up for a sign and mark of
contradiction, Luke 2. 34. how should he be a stumbling Luke 2. ^4.
stone, and rock of offense laid in Zion? how should wise Festus judge Paul to
be mad? Acts 26. how should Ac^s. 6.
Christ be to the Gentiles foolishness? yea, the deep things of God, which
Beza expounds to be but the excellency of Christ's benefits, being judged of
natural wise men to be foolishness? is it possible for the wisdom of the
world to hold her peace from speaking against foolishness? especially if the
foolishness of Christ dare offer to prefer it self above their wisdom:
and to conclude, how else should Christ be not only the rising, but also the
fall of many in Israel? The truth whereof is notably testified by the Doctrine
of our Church, delivered by the foresaid first restorers of the Gospel in this
Land, saying thus, The holy man Simeon says, that Christ is set forth for the
fall and rising of many in Israel: and as Christ Jesus is a fall to the
Reprobate, which yet perish by their own default: So is his word, yea the
whole Book of God a cause of damnation unto them through their own
incredulity. And as Christ himself, the Prophets, the Apostles, and all the
true Ministers of his Word, yea every jot and tittle in the holy Scripture have
been, is, and shall be for ever more, the savor of life unto eternal life,
unto all those, whose hearts God has purified by true faith: so likewise
Christ himself, the Prophets before him, the Apostles after him (mark) all
the true Ministers of Gods holy Word (mark further) yea every word in Gods
Book is unto the Reprobate the savor of death unto death. The reason whereof
Calvin upon those words of the Evangelist, From that time many of Jesus his
Disciples went back, and walked no more with him, most truly expresses,
Cal^in in Ioh: 6. 66. Nunquam enim ^anta poterit caut^o adbiberi quin multis
saying thus; Never can there be so great wariness used, but that the Doctrine
of Christ is an occasion of scandal to many, because the reprobate devoted to
destruction, scandali occasio sit Christi doctrina: quia reprobi exitio devoti,
venenum ex cibo salu^errimo, and se^ ^x melle s^gunt.
do draw poison out of most wholesome meat, and do suck gall out of honey. And
mark (says Luther) where this fall is, even in Israel, that is, in that people
that will seem to be Christ's own people; and being in the Chruch, as the Apes
and Peacocks were in Solomon's Family, that is, apish Saints, and painted
Peacock-Iusticiaries, will prosesse nothing less than to be contradictors of
Christ: yet thus is Christ ever oppugned of the greatest multitude, both in his
word, and in his true Ministers, under the name of greatest friendship with
Christ. Briefly Luther well notes, that a wise Minister does aim but at the
gathering of the Elect, by the example of S. Paul, who said, I suffer all
things for the Elects sake, that some may be saved: as for the rest, that are
the greatest multitude, he, or rather Christ himself divides them but into two
sorts, Swine and Dogs; between which there is only this difference, that a
Swine, if one go about to drive him from the mire, or from his s^vill, only
gives a grunt, and away he goes to the rooting in the earth; so profane and
worldly men, if one go about to drive them from sin, or to pull their noses
out of the Earth, they only give an hoggish grunt, and away they go to the
rooting more eagerly in the earth and earthly things: But the nature of the
Dog is, that if one go about to drive him from his vomit, or from his
stinking carrion, he will presently fly in ones face, and be ready if he can
to pull out ones thtoat; so these, especilly, Iusticiaries Iusticiaries worse
enemies to the Gospel than the openly profane.
enamoured with their own holy walking and legal righteousness; if one go
about to draw them from the high prizing of the menstruous clothes of their
own righteousness, and lay before them the inestimable riches of Christ, and the
precious wedding garment of his righteousness, they are ready for thy good
will, with calumniations, reproaches and slanders, all to rend and tear thee,
and with false accusations, if they can, to pull out thy throat; but they will
not leave their stinking carrion: both agree in this to set light of the
wedding garment of Christ righteousness, that only puts them in possession of
heaven and heavenly things; though for their ingratitude, and grievous contempt
of the same, they be justly bound hand and foot and cast into utter darkness,
where is weeping and gnashing of teeth, Matthew. 22. 5, 6. 12, 13. Matthew. 22. 5.
6. 12. 13.


And to conclude this point, if we would but mark and remember how the world,
that is, the greatest multitude of all sorts, that we shall have to do with
all, in the world, with all their wisdom, judgment, gravitie and
righteousness are described in the word of God, we would make them no pattern,
either of our believing or doing to the hindering of our walking in the narrow
way of the true justifying faith. And therefore How to arm our selves against
the multitude.
to a^me our selves against this great multitude, neither knowing, nor
discerning, nor believing the excellency of Free Justification, and thereby
driving us to doubting, we must remember; first that Christ would not pray for
the world. Ioh. 17. 9. Secondly, that therefore Ioh. 17 9.
the world cannot receive the Spirit of God, to know the things of God, Ioh.
14. 17. Thirdly, that therefore the whole world lies dead in darkness and
Ioh. 14. 17.
wickedness, 1 Ioh. 5. 19. Fourthly, that therefore the 1 Io^. 5. 19.
world shall be damned, 1 Cor. 11. 32. and therefore no president for us, to
lead us into doubting, though 1 Cor. 11. 32.
they by their dead faith deny the excellency of Free Justification, and the
excellency of the other benefits of Christ, never so impudently; because it is
notably well said of Calvin, upon those words of Christ, Verily, verily, I say
unto thee, That we speak that which we know, and testify, that which we have
seen, but ye receive not our testimony, Ioh. 3. 11. That this is the
complaint of Calvin upon Ioh. 3. 11.
Christ, against many such jolly, grave, and learned heads, as Nicodemus was:
saying, that we are hereof to gather, that it is (as it were) a fatal thing
to the word of God in all ages to obtain credit, but with a few: whereupon
Christ spoke in the plural number, saying, But ye receive not our witness,
because this belongs to the greater number, and in a manner to the whole body
of the people; with which we ought to be armed as with a buckler; that
notwithstanding all the wilfulness of men, we may go forward in the obedience
of faith and of the Gospel: this principle indeed is to be holden, that our
faith be founded and grounded upon God speaking: but then when we have God for
our Author, being, as it were, lifted up thereby above the heavens, we ought
boldly to trample the whole world rather under our feet, and set light of it
from aloft, than that the unbelief of any should trouble us, or cause us to
waver.

But here it is replied: No, I am not so fond as to A reply:
respect the profane world, or the greatest multitude, either led by their
great wit, or enamoured with their blind devotion: But other Ministers being
both zealous Preachers, and such Teachers as are of great knowledge and of
excellent learning, do hold the contrary; namely, that the children of God are
not freely without works, made so perfectly holy and righteous in the sight of
God, that God sees no sin in them.

To which I answer, that although the express Free Justification, and learned
Teachers that have greatly strengthened my faith herein; who in their judicious
Interpretations upon the same Scriptures, and other Writings of great knowledge
and of excellent learning, have so concurred in one consent, that they have,
and do put me out of all doubting. And if any man will show me that these
zealous Preachers, and grave Teachers, have in their Writings and
Interpretations of those Scriptures said or writ more of the excellency of Free
Justification, than they may say by the truth of those Scriptures, or that I
have said more than they do say: then (oh doubting Objector,) will I also
doubt with thee, and grant that thou have some just cause by reason of some
learned Teachers to doubt.

But if thou reply, That thou speak not of such A Reply.
learned Teachers as are Writers, but of such learned men, as are now living
Speakers and Preachers: And again, even of those learned Writers, all do not
write of those Scriptures after the same manner; and if they do, yet those
that are learned can allege many sayings of the same learned Writers and
Interpreters of those Scriptures, that in other places, do seem to unsay, and
to hold the clean contrary to that which they have written upon those
Scriptures; namely, showing that the children of God, are not by Free
Justification, made so perfectly holy and righteous from all spot of sin in the
sight of God, that God sees no sin in them: A threefold Answer.
Unto which I give a threefold answer.

First, that thou have more cause to take heed, that the unbelief of thine own
heart do not rather beguile thy self with a prejudicate opinion, that those
learned Preachers, that thou speak of, now preaching with lively voice, do
hold the contrary, than that they disagree from the foresaid learned Writers
and Interpreters: or that these learned Writers, and Interpreters dissent from
themselves in other places, and unsaying that which they have said, do hold
contraries: For S. Paul says truly, that if we love not the truth to hold fast
unto it, God, by our prejudicate opinion, will in justice, send us strong
delusions to believe our own ^es; namely, that the learned Teachers do speak
and hold contraries, when indeed they do not; true it is, that it is possible
for good and faithful men in their writings, and preachigns to appear to
speak, and so to appear to hold contraries, when in truth they do Two reasons
of seeming contrariety in men's* writings and sermons*
not; whereof there are two principal reasons: first, when by the reader, the
circumstances of the speaker or writer, and of things spoken and written, as of
persons, times, and places, and such like are not understood and marked: and
secondly, because the Writers themselves consisting of two men, of the old man,
and of the new man, and both these men in them being ruled and guided by a
twofold light, the light of nature, and the light of grace. First, we must
mark that the old man in them is ruled with the light of nature, described,
Romans 2. 14, 15, 16. Romans 2. 14. 15. 16.
Namely, that the Gentiles which have not the Law, do by nature, the works and
things contained in the Law, because they have the effect of the Law written in
their hearts: their thoughts and consciences accusing them with fear of
procuring punishment, when they do evil, but excusing them, with hope of
speeding well for the same, when they do well. But on the other side, the new
man is ruled by the light of grace, which is, when a Christian seeing by the
eye of faith, that all his sins are washed away and abolished from before
God, only by the blood of Christ, and he made perfectly holy and righteous in
the sight of God freely, does by the power of sanctification flowing from the
same, abstain from all sin, not for fear of punishment, which is slavish;
and does all good duties zealously, not to procure reward for the same, which
is hyreling-like; but because he sees that all is too little that he does, and
that he cannot be thankful enough, do what he can, in glorifying God, for
his already blessed estate only by Free Justification, Gal. 3. 8, 9. And
although the Gal. 3, 8. 9.
more that any child of God is endued with this light of Grace, the more
Spiritually and Divinely, he both speaks and writes: yet so strong, like
Goliath, are the remnants of the old man in the best children of God, The old
man is strong i^ the best.
and so busy is the foresaid light of nature in the best Writers (excepting
only the writings of the Prophets and Apostles) that this old man will be
foysting in somewhat of the light of nature, with the light of Grace; and
thereby, except the Writer be exceeding wary, corrupting the one with the
other, to the quite marring of both. Which, as it should teach Preachers and
all others, that which is too lamentably neglected now adays, how wary they
should be to speak, but much more to put pen to paper to write any thing in
the Church, especially in matters of Divinity and salvatition, lest they give
advantage to the Adversary; and forget that saying of Ierom, Grande (inquit)
periculum In Gal. 1. 10. Parcus, ibid.
in Ecclefia loqui, ne forte interpretatione perversa de Evangelio Christi,
hominis fat Evangelium, aut quod pejus est, Diabol^: That is, it is (says he)
a great danger to speak in the Church, lest peradventure, by a wrong and
preposterous interpretation, it be made of the Gospel of Christ, the gospel of
man; or that which is worse, the gospel of the Devil: so also it must teach
such as are readers of other men's books, and writings, especially Preachers and
young Students in Divinity, to take heed, that even in the best Writers A
necessary caution in reading of Authors.
they do not take all things hand over head; but first to ground themselves in
the perfect distinction between the Law and the Gospel, faith and works; as it
is notably described upon Patricks-Places in the book of Acts and Monuments of
Martyrs; that so faith (as Paul says, Gal. 3. 12.) may not be of works, Gal.
3. 12.
nor works made grace, lest grace, be no more grace, Romans 11. 6. And thereby to
keep Free Justification pure Romans 11. 6.
and in her true glory, without any mixture, as the alone soule-saving grace,
and only soule-saving glory of Christ: that so, where they find in faithful*
Writers, the excellency of Christ's benefits by their light of grace worthily
extolled and magnified, that same they may embrace as evidences of the light of
grace reigning in them; but where some thing of the light of nature extolling
and dignifying works, so darkning grace and the glory of Christ's free benefits,
drops from their pens, before they are aware; yet to make a charitable
exposition of the same: ever trying all things and keeping only that which is
good: but ever preferring those things most, that make most for the glorifying
of Christ in the excellency of those benefits of the Gospel, which he works
upon us alone by himself, without our working with him: And ever in love and
thankfulness accepting the Writers willing endeavors, and covering by love
such infirmities, as by the remnants of the old man in them have (as I said)
dropped from their pens, by the overflowing of the light of nature in them,
before they were aware. And to this end, let us ever in reading, remember that
reproof that Luther justly Luther, A common error in reading, and the ground
thereof.
gives of some; saying thus, So it happens unto imprudent and ill-disposed
readers, that those things that are of infirmity in the Fathers, and other
holy Writers, they make all to be of high authority: Which is the fault not of
the Authors, but of the Readers, who snatch up out of the Fathers that which
they spoke of infirmity, and hold them so fast, that they do oppose them also
against that which in another place, the same Fathers have spoken by the light
and power of the Spirit: and do so urge and press them, that the better must
give place to the worse: whereby it comes to pass, that they attribute
authority to the worser sayings, because they agree more to the sense of their
flesh and reason; and take away authority from the better sayings, because they
agree not to their sense and reason. Therefore if we will not err in reading
good Authors, we must follow that notable rule, that Luther gives in the same
case; saying, This only I say of those holy Who magnify f^ee grace are chiefly
to be followed*
men, that when they vary among themselves; th^se are rather to be followed,
which have spoken the best things for free grace without works, leaving them
which by the infirmity of the flesh, have spoken rather after the flesh and
reason, than after the Spirit. So likewise, those Write^s that vary from
themselves, are in that part to be chosen, and holden fast unto, where they
speak after the Spirit, but to be relinquished, where they savor of the flesh
and natural light of reason. This is the duty of a Christian Reader, and of
the clean beast, that has ^loven boofes and cheweth the Cud. But now setting
aside judgment, we devour all confusedly whatsoever a good man says; or
that which is worse, by a perverse and preposterous judgment we refuse the
better things, and approve the worse: Yea, in one and the same Authors we
attribute and apply that authority and Title of holiness to their worser
things, which they have deserved for their best things spoken after the Spirit,
and not after the flesh, and natural light of reason.

My second answer to this objection, that other Ministers All are nor
enlightened with the same measure of truth.
with one and the same measure of truth; who thereupon may disceptare, that is,
argue about a matter, but not dissentire, that is, be of a contrary judgment
and resolution, flatly to hold the contrary. And it is possible that one man
may have labored more, and so see further in some one point than another;
though he come behind many others, that are rich in all other gifts, and of
excellent learning; who yet should show themselves to be of Cains brood, and
Devils incarnate, if we should willingly and wilfully envy an higher talent
in our brother* in some one gift: non omnia possumus omnes; and we be all of
us set and appointed by God to be, by our particular gifts, mutual helpers of
another, but not hinderers and enviers one of another.

And thirdly I answer, that although some one, or consent of the learned
Orthodox writers, and so flatly hold the contrary; yet is their great knowledge
and great learning no sufficient cause, to drive thee into wavering, and
doubting of the excellency of Christ's benefits: because the holy Ghost has so
sufficiently armed us against this scandal, in teaching so plentifully in his
word, that there is a twofold knowledge A twofold knowledge.
or learning: the one a literal knowledge, or a literal learning, and the
other a spiritual knowledge: the understanding and marking of which point,
because it is of so great use, that thereupon depends, in a manner, the whole
essence of salvation, both to discern in what state thou thine owne-selfe do
stand, that make this objection, who peradventure may be learned, and of
great knowledge; and also to keep thee from many scandals and delusions by
others, that seem to be of great learning and knowledge; therefore to leave us
without all excuse, is the holy Ghost most diligent to describe these two
knowledges unto us very largely.

First, the literal knowledge is described, Romans 2. 1 Literal. Romans 2. 17.
from verse 17. to the very end of the chapter, after this manner: Behold thou
art called a I^w, that is, thou art called to be a member of the Church of
God, even of one called, and professing Gods revealed glorious truth; and
restest in the Law, that is, thou take the word of God, and the doctrine from
heaven to be thine only rule, and warrant, and wilt not (as thou say) go
one hairs breadth from the word; yea, and gloriest in God, namely, that he is
thy Father, Savior, and Redeemer, and know his will, that is, thou art
skillful in the word of God, and can try the things that differ, and are
excellent, by reason thou ar^ instructed and very learned in the word of God.
Neither only have thou thus, knowledge enough for thy self, and for thine own
use alone, but also art a rich storehouse for others; for thou art confident,
and take upon thee to be a Guide to the ^linde, a Light to them that are in
darkness, an Instructor of them that lack discretion, a Teacher of the
ignorant, and have the whole form of knowledge, and of the truth in thy
breast: is it possible that the exquisitest knowledge that is can be more
gloriously described? and yet all this is there showed, to the end of the
chapter, to be no knowledge indeed; but only (...), that is, a mere shadow or
show of great knowledge, and of the truth, quans vulgo apparentiam vocant,
which (as Calvin Calvin ibid.
says) men commonly call an appearance of knowledge; because (as the Apostle
says in diverse verses following) it consists but in the letter only, that
is, is merely literal, learned by good wit, and good memory; but is not by the
working of the spirit of God in spirit, and in truth; being agreeable with that
which the Apostle says in another place, habent (...), that is, they have a
show of very godliness, but they deny the power of the same; for they had
(which is the Apostles scope in this description) a confession of the
forgiveness of their sins by Gods mercy in the Messiah; but they had not a
joyful spiritual feeling knowledge of the excellency of Free Justification,
which is the soul of all this great knowledge; and when the soul is away, all
the rest is nothing else but a dead carcass of knowledge: as the Apostle
shows in all the whole Epistle following, Chap. 9. 30, 31. and 10. 2, 3.
Whereby they that are in this literal knowledge, although they seem to be
greatly enlightened in the whole word of God, and to be excellent learned men,
yea and very zealous with a legal zeal, Romans 9. 31. and 10. 2. yet because
they are in Rom 9. 31. and 10. 2.
this point destitute, as Calvin speaks, interiore luce, of the true inward
spiritual light, it is incredible to think how blind they are in
understanding the excellency of Christ's benefits; so that none is so blind as
such as are in this literal knowledge, as it is plainly testified by the
Propher Esaias 42. 18, 19. saying, Hear Esaias 42. 18, 19.
ye deaf, and look ye blind, that you may see. Who so blind as my servant?
or deaf, as my messenger that I send? yea who so blind as the perfect? (that
is, that by this literal knowledge think themselves perfect) and who so blind
as the Lords servants? yea such in this literal knowledge are not only more
blind than the very plough-boy; but also more blind and ignorant than the
ox, and the ass that the plough-boy drives before him: as the same Prophet
witnesses, saying, The ox knows his owner, and the ass his masters crib;
but Israel has not known; my people (as by this literal knowledge they
profess themselves) has not Esaias 1. 3. Object.
understood, Esaias 1. 3. But how then (will some man say) may these blind men,
seeming so learned in this literal knowledge, be discerned from such as are
truly enlightened? I answer, this the same Prophet Esaias Two manner of ways how
we may see and know many things, and yet not keep them
Seeing many things, but thou keep them not; for such an one as is in this
literal knowledge, does not keep that which he professes that he knows; and
that also two manner of ways, that is neither in word, nor in deed.

For first he fails in the foundation, that is, he I Not ^^ judgment.
keeps it not in judgment; for how can he keep that which he has not, that
is, does not understand? Indeed let a man run with them in the same round of
the ordinary letter, or usual phrase, that they like blind mill-horses are
customably without understanding used unto, thereby rocking themselves and
others asleep in the cradle of custom; what in Christ's mysteries is carnally
and customarily conceited, and ordinarily spoken, rather than caring to
understand what is said; and whilst they are applauded for learned men, so long
they are reasonably quiet, and will sing the same song of the dead letter,
containing the outward shell of Christ's mysteries; and will some of them run as
fast as you will, with you, in a legal zeal flowing from the light of nature,
of works, works, works, and a preposterous holy walking: But if a man press
the same truth, which they seem to hold, and to awake them out of their
lethargy of Custom, do preach Nove, but not not Nova; nay if one express the
same truth which they seem to hold, but even with an old phrase, used of the
best Interpreters that understand rightly the mysteries of Christ, which they
have not before heard of, or which they are not customarily acquainted withal
(especially if it be a phrase going to the quick of the truth, and expressing
the excellency of the matter, which they daily, like Parrots, do blindefoldly
prattle of;) then although it be but one and the same truth, and the old
doctrine which is daily taught; yet upon presumption and high conceit of their
great learning, they cry out, New doctrine, errors, false doctrine, heresy,
blasphemy: and what not? adding ever something thereto out of their own
Cimmerian darkness, to make the matter more odious; and thus they keep not, no
not in word and judgment to that, which they seemed to hold: but when the
excellency of Christ's benefits are pressed upon them, by the express word of
God, then they fall to sophisticating, equivocating, and plain denial (if
they cannot fashion it to agree with their natural reason, and earthly
conceit, and humane wit) even of that truth which they seemed before to hold,
at leastwise in letter: so that by not understanding what they have spoken in
one sentence, they are so far from keeping to that which they have said
(especially dealing in the mysteries of Christ, that are above humane wit, and
the light of reason) that they often times speak the flat contrary in another
sentence: thus (as I said) not keeping, neither in judgment, nor in word and
confession to that truth, which they themselves profess in other terms. An
evident example hereof, is Nicodemus, who being a great learned Rabbin and
teacher in Israel, knew by the dead literal knowledge, those usual places
often repeated in the Prophets, where God promises to give unto his people new
hearts, and new spirits, that they might serve him in walking holily in all his
Commandments: And yet because he felt not the power and truth of it in
himself, being but in this dead literal knowledge; although in his daily
teaching he talked of these promises, and called for a new life in holy walking
in all Gods Commandments; yet when Christ giving an example to all preachers,
how they should awake people rocked asleep in the cradle of custom, not by
teaching, Nova, but yet by preaching Nove, spoke of the same truth which he
daily beat upon, but in a new phrase that he had not heard of, expressing but
the excellency of the doctrine, namely, that A man must be newborn; then was
Nicodmus quite beside his books, and thought that Christ spoke very absurdly,
if not erroneously: the old doctrine uttered with a new phrase, expressing but
the truth and deepnesse of it, made it seem new and false doctrine to the old
blind literal Doctor; and therefore it is well noted upon the same place by
Musculus, saying, Exemplar quoddam in hoc viro propositum est, in quo
deprehenditur, doctos alioqui and prudentes viros, nondum renatos, ad doctrinam
regni Christi capiendam plane stupidos esse and ineptos: that is, there is in
this man a certain example set before us, wherein we may see, That men,
although wise and learned, yet not being newborn again, are to the
conceiving of the mysteries of Christ, and of the doctrine concerning his
kingdom, merely blockish and sottish. Yea, and he adds further, saying, ut
non solum rem ipsam non intelligant, sed neque declarationem illius, Christi
verbis propositam capiant: that is, they are so far from understanding the
matter it self, that they conceive not the very declaration thereof set before
them by the words of Christ himself. Whereupon (as the learned well note)
Christ seeing that he lost both his time and labor, in teaching a man so high
in his own conceit, and yet so greatly ignorant, is constrained to fall to
chiding of him, saying, Art thou a principal teacher in Israel, and know
not these things? quasi diceret, O miseram ovium conditionem etc. as if he
should say, oh miserable condition of those sheep, whereof the Pastor, that
has the cure of them, is so grossly blind, and so unskilful in divine
matters: hitherto thou have been reverenced as a principal Teacher in Israel,
and yet know not those things, of which it is a shame that thy very scholars
should be ignorant; and lest any should think that this was a blindness, and
just reproof peculiar and proper only to Nicodemus, and not of all such as are
in this dead literal knowledge, it is upon the same place well noted of the
learned, saying, Est autem haec generalis objurgatio, qua Christus, etc. But
this is a general reproof, wherewith Christ reproves all such Rabbis and
great Teachers as lie by the literal knowledge in the same blindness with
Nicodemus. And thus we see the first way how they that are in this literal
knowledge, do only but sophisticate about the mysteries of Christ, seeing many
things, but they keep them not, viz. they do not keep to them in word and
judgment, but profess them one way, and deny them, and speak contrary to
themselves diverse other ways.

The second way how these do see many things, but Not in life and conversation.
action nothing agreeing with that which they profess, and seem to know and
see. As for example; such as are in the mere literal knowledge of Free
Justification, do find by reading, and thereupon do profess, that Free
Justification is the strong Rock and foundation of Christian Religion, the head
Article of salvation, the sole-saving grace of Christ, the cause of
sanctification, and of all godly living, the advancer of the true glory of
Christ; but yet because by this literal knowledge of it, they feel not the
truth and power thereof in themselves; therefore whose feet do such labor to
fasten upon this strong Rock of Christian Religion? whose house of Religion
almost is not builded upon the sands of their repentance and holy walking;
having this rocky foundation laid in their hearts no more in a manner than the
Papists lay it? whose Religion is not headless for want of sound joy for this
head point of salvation? how many are truly sanctified, and serve God
cheerfully, joyfully, and zealously, by the joyful knowledge of it? yea,
rather although such seem to hold strongly contrary to Papists; yet they are,
in this chief point of salvation, of the Papists minds, coming forth with
the Papists objections against it, that people learn it too fast; and although
it be the only sacred ordinance that God in his high wisdom has appointed to
be the only cause and means to make men to live truly a godly life; yet such
stick not in their rotten wisdom of Reason to belch out this blasphemy, that
it opens the gate to all loose and wicked living, and are so far from
continually pressing this point, by showing the horriblenesse of the least sin
in the sight of God, and the excellency of this benefit, perfectly healing us
from all sin in Gods sight, and so planting it soundly in men's hearts to effect
these happy ends, that almost they never speak of it, but find themselves
grieved with them that do; or if their text chance to press them to it, they
lightly touch it, and soon pass it over, being as it were glad when that text
is past. Is this to keep to those foresaid most glorious Titles of the
excellency of Free Justification, which they so gloriously profess in words,
and is it not rather before God and men a Three sorts be in this I^terall
knowledge. 1 Prop ane. 2 Civil.
denying them in deeds? and thus do they in all the rest; for these that are
in this literal knowledge, first, either they live profane lives; or
secondly, but outwardly civil honest lives, caring no more than for their
profits, honors, and pleasures; or thirdly, at 3 (...) ^^alo ^.
the best, which is worst of all, do but delude the simple blind devoted
people, with a legal zeal of holy walking for fear of punishment, or hope of
reward, and speeding well for the same: seeming, yea, and being as hot as a
toste against outward vices, and earnestly calling for all active moral
duties, which they call holy walking in all Gods Commandments; as if herein
did consist the maine point of salvation, Do this and live; and yet abound
themselves with all These last are inwardly most abomi^able.
manner of inward hidden corruptions, as envy, calumniating, slavish fear, and
glorious outward painting of their rotten old Adam. All which is notably
testified by the Doctrine of our Church, taught by the Martyrs and first
Restorers of the Gospel in this Land, saying thus, By outward shows of good
works they appear to the world: How? the most religious and holy men of all
others, making the outside of the cup and platter (that is, the outward
appearance both of their persons and vocations) so clean, that they seem to
the world: What? most perfect men: Wherein so perfect? both in teaching and
living. And yet because the inside is not clean (which (as it is showed in the
Sermons before) only the comfort and joy of Free Justification truly works
and effects) Christ (who sees their hearts not justified with his own
righteousness) knows that they are in the sight of God most unholy, most
abominable, and farthest from God of all men; their judgment being
preposterous, their doctrine sour leven of mingling the Law and the Gospel
together, and so marring both: and their life the hidden secret hypocrisy:
that is, not suspecting themselves of hypocrisy, they delude their own selves
with supposed sincere hearts, respecting (as they think) only Gods glory;
being inwardly full of all manner of filth, as pride, envy, covetousness,
ambition, vainglory, hatred, disdain, unbeleefe, conceitednesse of
themselves, contempt of those whom they like not, calumniating them, and such
like; and yet (as I said) so adorning and painting their old Adam that reigns
in them, with such a fair outward new coat, not of Christ's righteousness able
utterly to abolish their corruptions freely from before God; but of their own
righteousness, that they seem not only unto others, but also to their own
selves in all respects admirable and excellent men: and such were they, that
because they excelled in great learning, and were zealous toward God, Romans
Romans 10. 2.
10. 2. in following righteousness by holy walking in all Gods Commandments,
Romans 9. 31. serving Romans 9. 31.
God instantly day and night, Acts 26. 7. said hereupon Acts 26. 7.
unto Christ, in the high conce it of their literal knowledge, Are we blind
also? John 9. 40. unto whom Christ John 9. 40.
answering, said, If ye were blind, ye should have no sin; but now ye say, we
see, therefore your sin remains, verse. 41. And thus much of the description
of the literal Ve^s^ 41.
knowledge, whereby men only sophisticating about the mysteries of Christ,
would be Doctors and Teachers of the Word, but by not understanding what they
say, nor whereof they affirm, 1 Timothy 1. 7. they neither in 1 Timothy 1. 7.
word, nor deed keep to that which they seem to hold, but speak flat
contraries.

But on the other side, the spiritual knowledge, 2 Thespirituall knowledge.
and right illumination, by the true spiritual learning, whereof the Prophet
thus speaks, saying, And they shall be all taught of God: is likewise (that
we may not be babes in the knowledge of it) as largely described by the
Apostle, 1 Cor. 2. from verse 9. to the very end of the Chapter, also saying
thus, the things which neither eye has seen, nor ear has heard, neither
have entered into the heart of man, are they which God has prepared for them
that love him. But (will some say) if they 1 Cor. 2. 9. etc.
be such things as neither eye has seen, nor ear has heard, nor have entered
into the heart of man, what is any man the better for such things? true says
the Apostle, not into the heart of the natural man, verse 14. but yet God has
revealed them unto us by his Spirit, for the Spirit searches all things, yea
the deep things of God: for (says he) what man knows the things within a
man, save the spirit of man which is in him? even so the things of God knows
no man, but the Spirit of God: Now we have received not the spirit of the
world, but the Spirit which is of God, that we might know the things that are
freely given to us of God; but the natural man, or (...), the man endued only
with a mere humane soul, perceives not, nor receives the things of the
spirit of God, for they are foolishness Verse 14.
unto him; neither can he know them, because they are spiritually discerned,
and so forth to the end of the Chapter: out of which two descriptions both of
the literal knowledge, before expressed, and of the spiritual knowledge, he
has so largely described by the Apostle, let us (because to discern these two
knowledges, the one from the other is a point of great moment, the one being
but a condemning knowledge, making our damnation only the greater; and the
other being a true saving knowledge;) let us (I say) for further perspicuity
and cleerenesse herein mark some maine and principal differences whereby they
may be discerned the one from the other, wherein for brevities Six maine
differences between the literal and the true spiritual knowledge. 1
sake I will only briefly touch these six following.

First, the spiritual knowledge apprehends the things which neither eye has
seen, nor ear has heard, nor heart of natural man can conceive; that is, it
conceives the mysteries of God above reason, yea, and contrary to natural
reason, sense, and feeling; but the literal knowledge apprehends not the
mysteries of God, but after a carnal manner, as they are new-fashioned, as it
were, and made agreeable to reason, sense, and feeling; and hence come so many
objections from reason, sense, and feeling.

Secondly the literal knowledge does (...), Romans Cor. 2. 12. that is, the Romans
2. 18.
literal knowledge so knows the mysteries of Gods Word, as a man knows a
thing by reading of it, or 1 Co^. 2. 12.
as a man knows a thing that is told him of a strange Country; but he has no
experimental certainty of it in himself, whereby it is true in such that is
Matthew, 13. 14.
written, Matthew. 13. 14. by hearing ye shall hear, but not understand, and by
seeing ye shall see and not perceive: but the spiritual knowledge does (...);
that is, so knows the mysteries of Christ, as he knows a thing that sees it
with his very eyes, and has experimental feeling of it in his own self; so
that he that is in the literal knowledge only is like a man that lying in the
morning in his bed, and hearing that the day is broke, and peradventure seeing
a little at the holes and crevisses of his windows, may talk of the day
light, and of the actions of the day light to be done in the same; but because
his windows and doors are close shut, he still without doing any thing, lies
in darkness; when as he that is in the, spiritual knowledge, is like one that
is abroad in the open clear morning, working and walking by the light of the
same.

Thirdly, the literal knowledge being (...) deep things of God; whereby they
are raised up to no joy and zeal for the deepnesse and greatness of the same:
but the spiritual knowledge does (...), 1 Cor. 2 10. see the deep things of
God, 1 Cor. 2. 10.
that is, as Bez^ well expounds it, excellentiam Evangelicae Doctrinae, the
excellency of the benefits of the Gospel, working joy, and zeal of Gods glory
by discerning the greatness and excellency of the benefits wrought upon us;
from whence flows the cold and formal working of great learned Clerks, making
a show of doing something, and think in their own hearts that to proceed any
further is needless, when they that are in the spiritual knowledge do think
both that there is need, and also that they can never do enough.

Fourthly, the literal knowledge, judges of the should, as it were, by a
ladder reached down to Why the holy, Ghost speaks in humane ph^as^s.
us, ascend up to the height and excellency of Gods working and dealing upon
us, correspondent to the glory of his great majesty;) they that are in t^is
literal knowledge do stick fast in the humane phrase, as it were, in the foot
and first step of the Ladder; but ascend not to the greatness and excellency
of the work of God, correspondent to the greatness and excellency of his
Majesty; whereby they hold fast to those phrases that are correspondent to
humane reason, and to good humane wit, but cannot abide to have those humane
phrases reduced and understood according to other Phrases, expressing in the
same case, the true nature and excellent working of God above reason, and
passing those humane similitudes; and so compare, and flatly measure,
spiritual things with earthly things; because as a learned Dispencer of Gods
mysteries says, habent literam, sed non habent spiritum; whereby they can say
in the mysteries and benefits of Christ Sibboleth, but not Shibboleth, Judge.
12. 6. That Judge. 12. 6.
is, they come very near the truth, and are as Christ said to the young man,
not far from the kingdom of heaven; but they cannot frame to pronounce the
asperate that has God in it; that is, they cannot yield to the truth and
mystery correspondent to the nature, and perfect working of God; for that is
foolishness unto them, 1 Cor. 2. 10. But on the other side, ^ Cor. 2. 10.
they that are in the spiritual knowledge have received not the Spirit of the
world to judge worldly, carnally, and after an humane witted fashion, of the
mysteries and benefits of the Gospel; but have received the Spirit, which is of
God, that they may see after a spiritual manner the things freely given of
God; that is, correspondent to the high nature, perfect operation and glorious
working of God; whereby although they gladly use the similitudes and humane
representations in the Scriptures, as an help to their weak capacities; yet
they stick not in them, but ascend by them, as it were by steps, to the high
working of God above all humane representations, and earthly excellencies; not
comparing or measuring spiritual things with earthly things, but measuring
spiritual things, as the Apostle says, with spiritual; yea, even with ^od
himself, the spiritual worker and Author of them; making them in our
apprehension correspondent and agreeable to the Almighty nature, and glorious
working of so wonderful a workman.

Fifthly, the literal knowledge although it be never Paul, who before his
conversion, followed the righteousness of the Law, Romans 9. 31. and was zealous
toward God, Act. Rom 9. 31. A^ts 22. 3. and 26. 7.
22. 3. serving God instantly day and night, Act. 26. 7. And yet was but in
this literal knowledge: Yea, as this literal knowledge finds a man in death
and condemnation; so it leaves him in death and condemnation; saving that it
leaves him in greater condemnation, than if he never knew any thing at all.
B^^ the spiritual knowledge wholly changes him that is in it, and makes him to
leave his old corrupt course of life, and to live a godly conversation; and not
only makes him that was profane, or merely civil, to become zealous of Gods
glory; but also changes the legal zeal of advancing works into the
Evangelicall zeal of advancing Christ's benefits, and to do all good duties
zealously in mere thankfulness for the same; because he that by this
spiritual knowledge with open face beholds (as in a looking glass) the
glory of the Lord, is changed into the same image from glory to glory, as by
the Spirit of the Lord.

Sixthly and lastly, as the spiritual knowledge discerning Cor. 2. 14. and
because great learning 1 Cor 2 14. The ground of contention and wrangling
against^r^e justification.
counts it her wisdom to confute that which she takes for foolishness;
hereupon arises unfallibly against the preaching of the excellency of Christ's
benefits strong sophisticating, and bold contention: because the literal
learning being mounted up upon the horse of pride (for this knowledge puffs
up, 1 Cor. 8. 2.) 1 Cor. 8. 2^
And being pricked forward with two spurs, the one of envy at her brothers
gift of preaching the glory of Christ, and the other of vain glory lest this
literal learning loose some of her praise, she rusheth out like a warre-horse
into the battle of contention; and yet lays all the blame hereof upon the
preaching of the excellency of Christ's benefits; yea so strongly does this
literal knowledge judge the excellency of Christ's benefits to be mere
foolishness, and thereupon so impudent in contention against the same, that
Luther upon these words: Then is the slander of the ^uther upon Gal. 5. 11.
Cross abolished, Gal. 5. 11. proves with many arguments, that Paul takes it
for a most certain sign, that the Gospel of Christ, and righteousness of
faith are not rightly preached, and is not the Gospel, if it be preached
without contention against it; for (says he) when the cross is abolished,
and the rage of the false Apostles wrangling, sophisticating, and persecuring
cease on the one side; and offenses and scandals on the other-side, and all
things are in peace; this is a sure token that the Devil keeping the entry of
the house, the pure doctrine of Gods Word, is taken away. Because (says he) it
cannot be, but as long as the Gospel flourishes, the cross and offense
thereof must needs follow it; or else truly the Devil is not The Devil rages
against the Gospel.
rightly levelled at, and hit, but slightly glanced at: but if he be rightly
hit indeed, he rests not, but begins horribly to rage, and to raise up by
these literal vainglorious men all the troubles he can. And again, notably
writes Luther upon these words, (but as then he that was borne after the
flesh, persecuted him that was borne after the spirit, even so is it now) whose
whole exposition is worthy to be often read of the children of faith; the sum
and effect whereof is thus, This persecution Luther, on Gal. 4 and 29 verse.
always remains in the Church, especially when the word of God is powerfully
brought to light, and the doctrine of the Gospel flourishes, (to wit) that the
children of the flesh mock the children of the promise, and persecute them: And
therefore Paul in this place armeth the godly asore-hand, that they should not
be offended with these persecutions, sects and offenses; As if he should say;
if we be the children of the promise, and born after the spirit, holding that
righteousness comes without works merely by the promise, we must surely
look to be persecuted of our brother, which is born after the flesh, that is,
after the Law and works, and yet shines in the righteousness, and glorious
works of the Law: that is to say; not only our open enemies, which are
manifestly wicked, shall persecute us; but also such as at the first were our
dear friends, with whom we were in religion familiarly conversant in one
house, which received from us the true doctrine of the Gospel, shall become our
deadly enemies, and persecute us extremely; for they are brethren after the
flesh, and will persecute their brethren, which are born after the Spirit, and
so raise hurries and molestations. Indeed, they lay the blame and fault in our
doctrine, when they themselves are the authors of these troubles and
persecutions: But because they are persuaded by this literal knowledge, that
they persecute that which is absurd and but mere foolishness, they cannot
believe this, that they are the authors of these troubles; and much less can
they believe, that it is they which murmur, rise up, and take counsel against
the Lord, and his anointed: nay rather they think that they maintain the
Lords cause, that they defend his glory, and do him acceptable service in
persecuting us. The reason whereof is this (expressed by Luther in other places
upon the Galathians, speaking against vainglory, and therefore as worthy the
often reading as the former, the sum also whereof is thus:) That such is the
nature of these literal and vainglorious Ministers of Satan, That they can
make a goodly show, that they are very charitable, humble, lovers of concord,
and are endued with all other fruits of the Spirit; also they protest, that
they seek nothing else but the glory of God, and the salvation of men's souls;
and yet, being full of vainglory, and doing all things to seem learned and
godly, and so to get praise and estimation among men, they do nothing else,
but with their cavills, sophisticating, and calumniations under a color of
clearing the truth, paint over, and hide their own ignorance, bemuddy the clear
truth, disquiet the minds of the simple, and trouble men's consciences, and so
are the true and proper authors of dissension and sects. And this Paul
complained of, not only respecting the present times, but also foresaw in
spirit that there should be an infinite number of such in the Church; even to
the Worlds end: for when God sends faithful laborers into his harvest, by
and by Satan raises up his ministers also, who will in no case be counted
inferior to those that are rightly called; here straightwaies rises
dissension; the wicked will not yield one haires-bredth to the godly: for they
take themselves, that they far pass them, in wit, in learning, in godliness,
in spirit, and in all other virtues. And on the other side the godly, although
The godly in matters of charity are flexible, but unyeelding in matters of
faith.
in matters of charity, they are as flexible as a reed, enduring all things,
and suffering all things; yet in matters of faith, knowing that a little leven
does leven the whole lump, they dare not; and much less ought they to yield to
the wicked, lest the doctrine of faith do come in danger. For alas the
faithful Minister knows that the Gospel is not delivered unto us, that we
should thereby seek our own praise and glory, or that the people should honor
or magnify us, which are the Ministers thereof; but to the end that the
benefits and glory of Christ might be published and known; and that the Father
might be glorified in the bounty and riches offered unto us in Christ his Son;
who thereby enricheth us with his heavenly and eternal good things: as for the
other, they regard not this; but to get praise and liking, and estimation with
the people, do rather sophisticate and wrangle against the benefits of Christ,
thus provoking one another, and envying one another; which is a sure token that
neither such Teachers, nor such Hearers do live and walk after the spirit, but
after the flesh and works thereof; and so consequently with the Galathians to
hold the truth, they with the Galathians do loose the true Doctrine, Faith,
Christ, and all the gifts of the holy Ghost; and by kicking against the
benefits of Christ, become worse than the heathens, and prove mere minist^rs
of Satan; some of them never failing from time to time to accuse the benefits
of Christ, not only of error, but also of heresy and blasphemy. Whereupon
comes most truly to pass, that Luther says in the former alleged place: That
he that will preach Christ truly, and confess him to be our righteousness,
must be content to hear that he is a pernicious fellow, and that he troubles
all things: because it cannot be, but that Ismael must persecute Isaac: and yet
Ismael was outwardly, and in his own opinion, a lover of religion: he
sacrificed and exercised himself in well-doing; therefore he mocked his
brother Isaac and so persecuted him; But Isaac again persecuteth not Ismael:
Whereupon the same faithful Dispenser of Gods mysteries concludes with a
weighty saying, That who so will not suffer the persecution of Ismael, let him
not profess himself to be a Christian. But if those that lie in this literal
knowledge, be such mere mocking and persecuting Ismaelites, until God opens
their eyes, and converreth them; let any man judge whether they be any just
cause, by their sophisticating and wrangling, to stop our faith and to make us
to doubt and waver in the excellency of Christ's benefits; though they excel in
all literal learning, and in the legal zeal, shining (as I said before) in
the righteousness and glorious works of the Law and holy walking never so
much.

THe fifth Remedy to overcome doubting, and to grow The fifth Remedy against
doubting.
strong in says, is to set often before our eyes the dignity, glorious nature,
and exceeding excellency of believing; namely, that the belief that the blood
of Christ does make us clean from all spot of sin in the sight of God
freely, is such a good work in the sight of God, as passes all other good
works whatsoever; nay rather if all the good works and holy walking that were
even done, or shall be done in the world were heaped together, and compared
with this one work of believing, yet all they joined together, are not
comparable to belief: which is not only testified by Christ himself in his
answer to the Jews, when they asked him (dreaming of works) What shall we
do, that we may work the works of God? He answered, and said This is the
work of God, that is, the work of all works, that ye believe on him whom he
has sent, namely to justify, and make you freely righteous in the sight of
God: but also many reasons grounded upon the very heart and Essence of the
Gospel, confirm the same, as especially may appear by these three maine
privileges of faith: As Three maine privileges of says. 1 It gives
exceeding glory to God, four ways. to Justice.


First, for the exceeding honor and glory that we give to God the Father, and
that also four manner of ways: as first this belief and laying hold only of
Christ and his righteousness as only able, and full sufficient, to make us from
all spot of sin perfectly righteous in Gods sight freely, makes us as
Chrysostom says, to conceive a right and high estimation of God for his
perfect justice of hating all sin, and loving perfect righteousness, in that
he could bestow no benefit upon us, as a benefit; excepthe had first given us
so wonderfully his own Son to justify, and make us perfectly righteous in his
own sight: and so we give him the praise, honor, and glory of his justice.
Secondly, if we believe, and take 2 Of truth.
fast hold of this benefit, that God, by washing us in his Sons blood, has
made us clean from all spot or wrinkle of sin in the sight of God freely,
thus perfectly blessing us, Galath. 3. 8. we give him the glory Galat. 3. 8.
of his truth, having so gloriously and manifoldly promised the same, and by
believing, do set to our seal that God is true, John 3. 33. Thirdly, if so
far beyond John 3. 33.
our carnal sense and feeling, and outward appearance, 3 Of power.
and all outward likelihood we believe that God, by clothing us with his own
Sons righteousness, has made us clean from all spot of sin in his own sight
freely, truly performing upon us such unlikely to present sense and feeling,
yea and impossible things, we give him the glory of his omnipotent Romans 4 19,
20.
power, Romans 4. 19, 20. Fourthly, by believing that God by clothing us with
the wedding garment of 4 Of rich grace
his Sons perfect righteousness has made us perfectly holy and righteous from
all spot and wrinkle of sin in his own sight freely, and that he has made us
hereby (as I said before) truly blessed persons, Galath. 3. 8, 9. Galat. 3. 8.
9.
We give him the praise, honor, and glory of his rich Grace, great mercy, and
glorious bounty, Ephesians. 2. 7. Ephesians. 2. 7. Luth^in Galath. cap 3. verse. 6. fol.
110.
And therefore it is most true which that magnanimous Dispenser of Gods
mysteries testifies of faith, saying thus, Paul (by these words, Abraham
believed) of faith makes the chiefest worship, the chiefest duty, the chiefest
o^edience, and the chiefest sacrifice; Let him that is a Rethorician amplify
amplify this place, and he shall see that faith is an almighty thing, and that
(as it may appear by the whole ele^enth chapter to the Hebrews) the power
thereof is infinite and inestimable; for it gives glory unto God, which is the
highest service that can be given unto him. Now to give glory unto God, is to
believe in him, to count him (in that which he speaks) true, wise, righteous,
merciful, almighty: This Reason does not, but says; this is that which makes
us divine people, and (as a man would say) it is the creator of a certain
divinity, not in the substance of God, but in us: for without faith God loses
in us his glory, wisdom, righteousness, and mercy. To conclude, no majesty
and divinity remains unto God where faith is not: but the chiefest thing that
God requires of man, is that he give unto him his glory, and his Divinity.

The second maine privilege of faith is, that if we The second maine
privilege of faith is in four things.
believe that Christ, by washing us in his own blood, has made us whiter than
snow, from all spot or wrinkle of sin in the sight of God freely; that then
we give to Christ, his Son, his due glory: especially in these four points.
First, we yield him the virtue of his name, for he is called Jesus, because he
does thus perfectly save his people from their sins, Mat. Math. 1. 21.
1. 21. Secondly, we yield him hereby the glory of his Godhead, that he is able
to make us, above our reason, sense, and feeling, from all spot or wrinkle of
sin, in the sight of God whiter than snow; as also we give him hereby the
glory of his Kingly power, that he is a true Melchisedec, that is, King of
righteousness, by making his true subjects, in the sight of God from all spot
or wrinkle of sin, or any such thing, perfectly righteous freely. Thirdly, we
give to Christ the glory and truth of his Prophetship, who did long before, and
especially by the mouth of David, prophecy, that if he did take in hand to
purge us, we should be clean, and when he did take in hand to wash us, we
should be whiter than snow, Psalm. 51. 7. which Psalm. 51. 7.
if we believe to be by his blood now done, and wrought upon us, we make him,
by believing, a true Prophet, and give him his glory of fulfilling the truth of
his prophesying. Fourthly, by believing, we yield and give unto him the virtue
and glory of his Priesthood, who was wounded for our iniquities, and broken and
bruised for our transgressions; but to no other end, than that the chastisement
of our peace might be upon him, and that by his stripes we might be healed,
Esaias 53. 5. Esaias 53. 5.
which if we believe, that by his blood we are, from all our sins, made in his
sight whiter than snow, and so perfectly healed in Gods sight, we give him the
true glory of his Priesthood: because if the Priest offering but the blood of
Bulls, and Goats, made the believers clean from all their sins before the
Lord, Levit. 16. 30. Levit. 16. 30.
how much more shall the blood of Christ, who through the eternal spirit
offered himself without spot to God, by making us clean in the sight of God
from all sin, purge our consciences from dead works to serve the living God?
Heb. 9. 14. of which the more we assure our Heb. 9. 14.
selves, the more do we yield him the virtue and glory of his Priesthood;
whereby is brought to pass, that God not so much as remembering our sins any
more, there is no more sacrifice for sin, Heb. 10. 17, 18. because Heb. 10.
17, 18.
with one offering he has made perfect continually and for ever all them that
are sanctified, Heb. 10. 14. Oh Heb. 10. 14.
Jesus Christ, who will not believe in thee magnificently?

The third privilege of faith, yielding to God The third privilege of faith
is to glorify the word and spirit of God.
so great honor and glory, is, because that we believing the plain and naked
word of God, speaking simply and plainly to the weakest capacities, without
wresting and wringing it a gemino sensu, from the proper and Grammatical sense
of the words, to sort and accord as they shall be most agreeable to humane wit,
and natural reason, do greatly glorify the word of God, speaking in the
mysteries of Christ in his proper sense, and plain and literal, and
Grammatical signification, captivating our sense and understanding to the
Scripture, speaking so far above reason, sense, and feeling: And do also
greatly glorify the spirit of God and holy Ghost, speaking in the Scriptures;
because we have an ear to hear what the spirit says unto us, Revel. 2. and
11. and not what men's glosses Revel. 2. and 11.
do make agreeable to humane wit, not expressly taught in the word; the reason
whereof is, because, as Luther truly says, major est verbi Dei authoritas, quam
De captivitate Babylonica.
nostri ingenii capacitas: greater is the authority of the plain and simple
grammatical speaking of Gods word, than the capacity of our shallow wits: quam
etsi philosophia non capit, fides tamen capit: which plain speaking, although
Philosophy and humane reason cannot conceive, yet faith is able to comprehend:
and therefore he gives this worthy and stable rule against the wresting of the
words of the Scripture from their proper sense to the maintaining of error,
sounding more fit to humane reason; namely, Quod verbis divinis non est ulla
facienda vis, neque per hominem, neque per Angelum, sed qu^ntum fieri potest in
simplicissima significatione servanda sunt, etc. that is, to the words of the
divine Scripture must no wresting sorce be offered, neither by man nor Angel;
but as much as can be possible, they must be kept in their most simple and
plain signification; and except the manifest circumstance do constrain, they
are not to be taken out of the signification that is grammatical and proper,
lest there be given an occasion to adversaries to clude the whole Scripture:
in which consideration for neglecting the grammatical speaking, Origin was of
ancients justly rejected; because thereby the words of the Scripture may be
extenuated and set light of, and may with great injury be made void of their
own significations; and as if the holy Ghost Con^utatio Luthera. Rationis I
atonia. sol. 22^.
were such an one as could not utter his matters with apt and fit words, except
men did help thereunto with their devices. For (says he in another place) If
it shall be admitted, that the authority of the Scripture does rest upon
doubtful and uncertain words, what may not a master of any opinion be able to
prove or dis-prove, to hold or defend; because when the authority of a
Scripture does press him, he may by this means elude, and so interpret it, as
that it shall not oppress him? And therefore (says he) must the sincerity of
the Scripture be diligently kept; neither let any man presume to utter it
better and more sincerely with his own mouth, than God has spoken it with his
mouth; for none speaks better than he that best understands it; but who
understands the things of God better than God himself? yea how small is it
that man understands of the things of God? But rather let wretched man give
glory to God, and either confess that he understands not the words of God, or
cease to profane them with new, or his own proper words; that the lovely
wisdom of God may remain unto us pure, and in his proper and native kind;
ever letting this to be our wisdom, to captivate our sense and understanding
to the words of God, but not captivating the words of God to our reason and
humane understanding. And so believing above our reason, and relying contrary
to sense and feeling, upon the bare and naked plain word of God, we greatly
glorify the word of God: whereupon Paul said; Brethren, pray for us, that the
word of God may have free passage, and be glorified, even as it is with you. 2
These. 3. 1. And again when the Gentiles heard the 2 These. 3. 1.
word of God expressed Esaias 49. 6. and cited by Paul, Esaias 49. 6.
they were glad, and by believing the same, it is said, that they glorified the
word of God, Acts 13. 48. whereupon Acts 13. 48.
Calvin truly notes thus: Et certe tunc debito honor prosequimur Dei
sermonem, cum nos illi obedienter fide subjicimus; that is, then truly do we
yield to the word of God his due honor and glory, when obediently we submit
our selves unto it by faith.

The sixth and last weapon to resist and overcome The sixth and last Remedy
against doubting.
doubting, and to work faith in us, is to set before our eyes the great
inconveniences and evils that come of doubting, being yielded unto, and much
more by wranglings maintained: which inconveniences and Eight evils by doubting.
evils are briefly these eight.

First, by doubting whether we be made in the sight John testifies, saying, he
that believes not God, has made him a liar; because God testifying in his
word, that the blood of Jesus Christ his Son does make us in his sight so
clean from all sin, that we are whiter than snow: we believe not this record
that God gives of his Son, 1 John 5. 10. 1 John 5. 10.


Secondly by the same reason, we make God to Esaias 45. 23, 24, 25. Esaias 45. 23,
24, 25.
By my self have I sworn, that in me you shall have righteousness, and
strength, whereby the whole house of Israel shall be justified; that is, made
perfectly holy and righteous from all spot of sin in the sight of God freely,
and glory in the Lord. And secondly, Baptism is Gods sacramental oath, by
which God has sworn unto us in particular, that he has washed every one of
us in particular, and made us whiter than snow, from our sins in his blood,
Revel. 1. 5. and we Revel. 1. 5.
have sworn to take this benefit freely by believing it, and to become
zealously thankful for the same; whereof if we now willingly doubt, we make
God forsworn, and our selves covenant-breakers with God; and so flat forsakers
of our Baptism.

Thirdly, by the same reason, we make God a deluder,

Fourthly, by the same reason, we rob him, in our see and feel dwelling in us;
as though he were not able to make good upon us his promise, oath, and seals
above our reason, sense, and feeling.

Fifthly, by the same reason, we rob him in our Romans 3. 26. Romans 3. 28. 6


Sixthly, we rob him in our selves of the praise and glory of his free grace,
great mercy, and rich bounty; if we doubt for any unworthiness in us, that he
has not, with the wedding garment of his Sons righteousness, made us
perfectly holy and righteous from all spot of sin in the sight of God freely.

Seventhly, we spoil Christ in our selves of the Jesus, in doubting that he
not making us perfectly holy and righteous from all spot of sin in the sight
of God freely, has not saved us from our sins; of the glory of his Godhead,
as not able to effect the same; and his Kingly and Prophetical, and Priestly
offices, of their virtue and power, as not having done the same; and so abolish
by our doubting whole Christ to our selves, and do frustrate and make void his
Gospel and joyful news, which he has brought from heaven.

Eighthly, by our unbelief and doubting we most despise the counsel of God
against our selves, Luke 7. 30. and thus Luke 7. 30.
by this unbelief and doubting do leese the free-given graces of God, and
cast our selves down headlong into everlasting damnation. Because it is most
true that the Prophet Esaias says, If ye believe not, ye shall not be
established, Esaias 7. 9. which the Apostle Esaias 7. 9.
James most strongly confirms, saying, In faith, this is, nothing wavering;
for he that wavereth is like a wave of the sea, driven with the wind and
tossed to and fro. Neither let that man think that he shall receive any thing
of the Lord; a double, or doubtful minded man is unstable in all his ways, I
am. 1. 6, 7, 8. Fearful examples Iam 1 6, 7, 8.
ever to be set before our eyes, to make us strive against Fearful examples of
doubting.
doubting, much more to take heed of wrangling against the excellency of Gods
mysteries, are

First, Peter, who whilst he rested upon the word 1 Peter
Come, went safely upon the waters; but when he looked at the outward swelling
of the winds and waves, and began upon the likelihood of them to prevail to
doubt, presently he began to sink, Mat. 14. 30. so Math. 14. 30. 2 Zachary


Secondly Zacharias, when he began to consider outward appearances, and
likelyhoods of impossibilities of that which the Angel had spoken by reason of
his own old age, and his wives impossibility to natural reason to conceive,
and thereupon doubted of that which was from heaven spoken, was presently
stricken dumb, Luke 1. 20. Luke 1. 20.


Thirdly, the Prince that looking upon outward and 3 The Prince
present unlikely hoods, and thereupon with the other old unbeleeving Jews,
Psalm. 78. 41. did limit the power Psalm. 78. 41.
of God, and so did run into doubting and unbelief, was trodden under foot of
the people, and died, 2 King. 7. 17, 20. The reason whereof is concluded by 2
Kings 7. 17, 20.
God, that the just by faith shall live; but if any withdraw himself (namely
by doubting and unbelief) my soul (says God) shall have no pleasure in him,
Heb. 10. Heb. 10. 38.
38. But we are not they which (by doubting and unbelief) do withdraw our
selves unto pe^dition, and follow not the righteousness of works, and
preposterous holy walking, according to the law of righteousness, as the Jews
did, Romans 9. 31. but follow faith unto the Romans 9. 31.
conservation of our souls, verse 39. and therefore Verse 39.
brief, but wise and faithful like Luther, ^o him that has an ear to hear,
is that saying of Luther, namely, De liberate Christiana.
that the first and principal care of every Christian man ought to be in this
especially, That setting aside all confidence in Gods sight of holy walking, he
strengthen his faith more and more, and by daily encreasings grow in knowledge:
Whereof? not of works, but of Christ Jesus, and of him crucified for him; being
so delivered to death, to abolish from before God his sins, and risen again
to make him freely righteous: which is the admonition of Peter, 2 Epist. 3. 18.
for as much as none other works do make a true Christian. The same advice
gives Christ himself, the Lord of wisdom, who in the sixth of John, when
the Luth. ibid. John 6. 28.
Jews asked a question, what they should do to do the works of God
(excluding the multitude of works and their preposterous holy walking,
according to the law of righteousness, Romans 9. 31. wherewith he Romans 9. 31.
perceived them to swell, and to be puffed up in themselves, seeming humble, yet
full of pride, Luke 18. 11.) Luke 18. 11:
did prescribe unto them one only rule, saying, This is the work of God, to
believe on him (to make you freely righteous, Romans 10. 3, 4.) whom he has
sent, for him Romans 10. 3, 4.
has God the father sealed thereunto; whereof rises such a necessity of
believing, and resting only upon this before God, that Christ makes this the
short and long of all, That he that believes, (viz. That the blood of Christ
the Son of God, does make him clean from all spot of sin in the sight of
God freely, 1 Ioh. 1. 7.) and is Baptized, (that is, has this 1 Ioh. 1. 7.
my washing of him clean from all sin, with my blood sealed unto him putting
him out of all doubt hereof by Baptism) shall be saved; but he that believes
not this, shall be damned, Mark. 16. 16. This is Christ's short Mark. 16. 16.
and long: But why is he damned, that believes not this? The reason hereof is
the horribleness of unbelief, notably expressed by the learned Calvin, saying
thus, No injury more grievous can be offered unto God the Father, (...) in Ioh.
3. 33. shows the horriblenesse of un^eliefe.
and unto Christ his Son, than when the joyful news of his Gospel is not
believed, (for the truth of God is not acknowledged:) But God cannot be
spoiled of his truth, but his whole glory and Majesty are abolished: Therefore
look how much the faith of the godly makes to the glory of God; so much on the
contrary, does the unbelief of the wicked, not believing in Christ, make to
the grievous reproach of God: Not that their wickedness does hurt the truth of
God, but that in respect of them, or as much as lies in them they accuse, and
condemn God of falsehood and lying.

But peradventure some man will say, What is this

I answer, That this is plainly expressed by the learned Beza, saying thus,
Significat hoc loco (...), etc. Beza in Romans ^^ 20.
that is, unbelief in this place signifies Absence of assent or agreement to
the word spoken, and uttered by God, such as is of them, to whom the words of
the Gospel (except they be brewed to agree with humane reason) are vel
ludibrio, vel offendiculo, that is, either toyish, as a merriment, or else an
offense to them, as absurd, foolish and hurtful: so that the power of God
promising so great, so difficult and so unlikely a thing is utterly rejected,
as if he did promise that which is impossible to himself; or else they do
despise, nullify and set light of his will revealed in the same, as speaking
one thing, and willing an other; thus running into all those eight
inconveniences and evils spoken of before: because most true, and weighty, and
therefore worthy often to be thought upon, is that testimony of Luther, saying
thus, As there is no honor De liber^ate Christianae.
like unto the opinion conceived of truth, and righteousness, wherewith we do
reverence, willingly obey, and most highly esteem of him whom we do believe;
for what are we able to ascribe to any person more than truth, righteousness,
and goodness of all parts, perfect and absolute? And contrariwise, it is a
detestable reproach to conceive a secret opinion of a man, to be false,
faithless and wicked: so stands the case between God and the soul of man by
belief; for as long as it believes steadfastly in God that promises, it does
account him in that which he speaks (even above reason, sense, and feeling)
to be true and righteous, than which opinion can nothing be more acceptable to
God. This is the highest honor of God: But on the otherside, what rebellion?
what impiety? what greater reproach can there be unto God, than not to believe
him what he promises? for what is this else, than either to make God a liar,
or to be doubtful that he is true? this is as much as to ascribe truth to
himself, and to his own reason, and to condemn God of lying and foolshood;
whereby does not such an one deny God, and set up his own reason as an image to
himself in his own heart? what avail works and holy walking in the chaste and
meek works of the Law, being done in this impiety and unbelief, though they
seem never so Angelical and Apostolical? And yet notwithstanding, when they
of Cains brood hear faith to be entreated of after this sort, that it alone
does justify us, by making us perfectly holy and righteous from all spot of
sin in the sight of God freely; They cannot sufficiently marvel at our
madness, as it seems unto them: God turn this away from me (say they) that I
should affirm my self perfectly, holy and godly; far be this arrogancy
and rashness from me: I am many ways a miserable sinner: I should be mad if
I should arrogate holiness and righteousness unto my self; and thus they
mock at faith, and count such doctrine as this for execrable error, and go
about with mighyt and maine to extinguish the Gospel: these are they that deny
the Faith of Christ, and persecute it in the whole world, of whom Paul
speaks, saying, In the later times, many shall depart from the faith, 1 Timothy
4. 1. But he that 1 Timothy 4. 1.
believes must plainly confess, that he is holy, godly, righteous, the Son
of God, and certainly saved; The Confessi^a of Faith.
and that also by the only mercy of God, in the wedding garment of Christ's
righteousness making him thus righteous in the sight of God; whereof if he
should any thing doubt, he should procure exceeding ignominy and reproach to
baptism, which he has received, and to the Lords supper; and also reprove the
word and grace of God of falsehood. For that this sacrifice of Confession of
this Faith, is thus necessary, is expressly testified, by S. Paul saying, With
the Romans 10. 10.
heart, man believes unto righteousness, that is, by believing only, he is
made perfectly holy and righteous from all spot of sin in the sight of God
freely; But with the tongue man confesses it unto salvation: this is the
sacrifice of thanksgiving, sealing up as it were unto himself his assured
salvation. And in comparison All religions not comparable to the sacrifice of
faith.
of this sacrifice of faith and confession (says Luther) aqll the Religions of
all Nations, and all the works and holy walkings of all Monks, and
merit-Mongers (whereof there are more than many are aware of) are nothing at
all: for by this sacrifice, first (as I said before) they kill reason, a great
and mighty enemy of God; for reason despises God, and reproves Luke 1. 18. 2
King. 7. 2.
him in that which he speaks, Luke 1. 18. 2 Kings 7. 2. denies his wisdom,
justice, power, truth, mercy, Majesty and Divinity. Moreover, by the sAme
sacrifice, they yield glory unto God, that is, they confess him to be, in that
which he speaks, above their reason, sense and feeling, just, good,
faithful, and true; Heb. 11. 11. They confess by believing such
impossibilities, Heb. 11. 11.
as reason would pretend, that God can do all things; and that all his words
and works are holy, true, lively, and effectual, etc. which is the highest and
most acceptable obedience unto God.

To be able, therefore to give this glory unto God by faith, is the wisdom of
wisdoms, the righteousness of righteousnesses, the religion of Religions, and
the sacrifice of sacrifices: wherefore there can be no greater, nor more holy
Religion in the world, nor more acceptable service unto God, than faith is. All
which is evidently manifest by that saying of John Baptist, Ioh. 3. 33. That
Ioh. 3. 33.
although Christ coming amongst us to testify the rich treasures of his
Gospel, no man almost receives his testimony; yet ^e that has received his
testimony, has set to his seal, that God is true. Upon which place Calvin
worthily, says thus, Truly except we be more than stony, this so excellent
praise of faith ought to kindle in our hearts an ardent desire of the same: for
what The honor of true faith.
a great honor is this, which God vouch safeth us wretched worms, that we
which are nothing but lies and vanity, should be counted worthy to approve and
make good, as it were, the sacred truth of God by our subscription; because he
that has received the testimony of Christ, has set to his seal, that God is
true? Seeing therefore that doubting of such rich benefits of Christ,
pronounced in the Word of God to be wrought upon us, is so dangerous and
hurtful; and constant Faith and Confession, that we are made with Christ's
righteousness perfectly holy and righteous, from all spot and wrinkle of sin,
in the sight of God freely, is so precious, so excellent, and so glorious; let
us (with strong assurance, that the blood of Christ has mde us in the sight of
God clean from all sin, against our reason, sight, sense, and feeling,
against the World, the Flesh and the Devil, and against all objections and
enemies of our faith whatsoever) make with S. Paul, this Christian and joyful
triumph, as here follows: The Christian triumph against all sin perfectly
The Christian triumph against all sin.
abolished by the blood of Christ out of the sight of God; uttered by the true
justifying faith, magnificently glorifying God.

Who dare lay any thing to the charge of Gods chosen? Rom 8. 13.
that is, who dare accuse them, that they have one spot or wrinkle of sin, or
any such thing, in the sight of God? why may none dare so to accuse them?
Because it is God that justifies them, that is, makes them perfectly holy and
righteous from all spot of sin in the sight of God freely: whereupon a
faithful Dispencer of ^ods mysteries challenging the whole world, reasons
against all men invincibly thus; Deo justificante and absolvente, quis ausit
accusare? that is, God making righteous and clearing, who dares be so bold, as
to accuse them before ^od of anything? First, because they are made just, that
is, perfectly holy and righteous, from all spot of sin, in the sight of God
freely; who dares be so impudent, to charge a just and righteous man of a crime
before a righteous discerning Judge, and looks not to have the blame to light
upon his own head? Secondly, because it is God that justifies them, and makes
them blameless before himself; who dares be so bold as to confront God, and
charge them with any matter of blame and fault in his sight? seeing the
heavenly voice has also given warning from heaven saying, The things that God
has made clean, Acts 10. 15.
let no man count unclean, Act. 10. But guiltie-making sin, only causing
condemnation, being thus perfectly taken away and utterly abolished, who shall
condemn them? Why not? Why? Because it is Christ, who is dead for them, that
is, Christ has undergone by death all condemnation both temporal and
eternal, that they should have borne; and by washing them in his blood, has
made them in the sight of God from all their sins whiter than snow. Nay
rather Christ is risen again, namely, to justify them, that is, to make them
perfectly holy and righteous in the sight of God freely; Who is also at the
right hand of God, and makes intercession for them, That is, there stablishing
an everlasting reconcilement unto them: For if the blood of Bulls, and of
Goats, and the Ashes of an Heifer, sprinkling them that were unclean, made them
clean concerning the flesh, and made them clean from all their sins before
the Lord, Heb. 9. 13. Levit. 16. 30. How Heb. ^. 13.
much more shall the blood of Christ, which through the eternal spirit offered
himself without fault to God, by making us clean, and from all sin white^
than snow, purge our consciences from dead works to serve the living God? Heb.
9. 14. Whereupon, Chysostome Heb ^. 14. C^rysostome in Rom 3. 25.
tryumpheth well, saying, If the slaying of beasts did wash away sins, much
more this blood; if the Type and Figure had such force, much more shall the
truth it selse perform the same: thus is the Prophecy of Daniel now
powerfully and completely fulfilled, That transgressions are finished, perfect
reconciliation for iniquity is made, and sins are made an end of, and
everlasting righteousness is brought in. Whereupon the faithful Dispensers of
Gods mysteries do excommunicate justly, saying, Anathema ergo sit. qui
dixerit, Christum non omnia fidelium peccata delevisse; that is, Cursed
therefore is the man, who shall say that Christ has not utterly abolished all
the sins of the faithful. Whereby the children of God, have no more conscience
for sin Heb. 10. 2.
Heb. 10. 2. Seeing God himself testifies, saying, Their sins and iniquities
will I remember no more, Heb. 10. 17. Heb. 10. 17.
Now, where there is such a perfect remission of these, There needs no more
offering, or suffering for sin, verse 18. Because with one offering has
Christ made perfect verse. 18.
continually and forever all them that are sanctified, or made holy, Heb. 10.
14. And thus much of the first Heb. 10. 14.
part of Free Justification, serving for the perfect and infinite abolishing of
all our sins, from before God, by the blood and righteousness of Christ,
seen and apprehended, and enjoyed only by faith: Now it remains that we
proceed to the second part of Free Justification, as follows.

CHAP. X. Of the second part of Free Justification, making the true Believer
completely, sufficiently, and perfectly holy and righteous in the sight of God
freely.
COncerning which second part of Free Justification, how necessarily,
unseperable it is from the former part; although the learned Writers give many
reasons thereof, unto whom, for larger considerarion, I refer the Reader; as
namely, to Doctor Willet in his Hexapla upon Dan. 9. 24. and to Polanus his
Partitions, in the common place of Justification, and to Master Downam in the
first part of his The second part of Justification, is inseparable from the
former part, for four Reasons.
Christian Warfare, in the Treatise of Justification, and to such others: yet
for brevities sake, I will specify only four principal and maine reasons,
why this second part of Free Justification, is of necessity unseperable from
the former part: as

First, for the property of Contraries; because as it intenso gradu, dwell
together at one time in the same subject, especially in privative contraries:
so it is principally true concerning sin, and of making the child of God,
perfectly righteous in the sight of God: As to instance in privative
contraries. If the Sun break into a dark house, and abolish all the darkness,
in that house; the house is made of necessity all light, and if the house be
made all light, there is no place for any darkness, but all the darkness is
abolished; so likewise is it in the case of our Justification, If God by the
power of his imputation, so cloth us with his Sons righteousness, that it
makes us in his sight perfectly holy and righteous, then all our sins must
needs be abolished out of his sight; if it put away all our iniquity like a
mist, as the Prophet Esaias says, 44. 22. abolish all our sins like darkness
out of Gods sight; then it leaves us of necessity, only and perfectly
righteous in the sight of God. Which S. Paul plainly testifies, opposing these
two contraries one against another, and showing how perfectly they expel one
another, and cannot both stand together in the same subject, saying thus, Ye
were once darkness; there is one contrary, expelled; that is, the sinful
state of nature abolished, and quite done away from before God, signified by
the word once, or in times past; But now are light in the Lord; There is the
other contrary remaining and reigning in them, that is, Free Justification
making them by an emphaticall figurative speech, put in the Abstract for the
Concrete even light it self; that is, perfectly holy and righteous in the sight
of God; not by their doings and holy walking, but, in the Lord. Thirdly, walk
(says he) as the children of light; there is sanctification unseperably
following, and showing, that we that before our Justification were darkness,
that is, mere lumps of sin and nothing else but sin inthe sight of God, are
now by Justification, changed and removed out of that condition, and are made
the clean contrary, even light in the Lord, that is, nothing else but
righteousness in the sight of God. Thus (says Luther) They that are called by
Christ, are translated out of sin into righteousness, out of sorrow into joy
and glad tidings of the Gospel, out of Gods wrath into his favor, out of death
into lise: Because (says he again) In the place of sin, succeeds
righteousness; in the place of wrath, reconciliation; in the place of death,
life; and in the place of damnation, salvation. Thus do Contraries not dwell
together in one and the same Subject; but sin being abolished by Christ's
righteousness, this wedding garment makes us and leaves us only and perfectly
righteous in the sight of God; which the Doctrine of our Church, taught by the
first Restorers of the Gospel in this Land, does plainly thus express, saying,
That by virtue of Christ's blood shed upon the Cross, we are not only clean
purged from our sins, but also made righteous again in Gods sight.

The second reason, why it is necessary that not only All c^^a^ures were
^^thout sin but man was righteous and had the Image of God.
that we be made perfectly holy and righteous, in the sight of God, is for the
full satisfaction of his justice; because, as God made us at the first, not
only clean from all sin, as he made his other creatures, as the sheep, the
Horse, the Lamb, the Birds and such like, all which he saw in their kinds to be
exceeding good: but also above all his other creatures he made us in Adam,
perfectly holy and righteous in his own Image; and says by his Law revealing
his constant will and nature herein, Cursed is every one that continues not in
that righteousness, in all things: So his Justice is not Justice is not
satisfied till man ^eturn to his ^^^^ity.
fully satisfied until he behold us, not only clean from all sin, but also
perfectly holy and righteous in his sight; and therefore the Apostle testifies
that as by the disobedience of one man many were made sinners; so by the
obedience of one man, must many be made righteous, Romans 5. 19. Romans 5. 19.


Thirdly, it is necessary for the glory of Christ; who, that he by himself may
perfectly heal us of the evil and loss, brought upon us by Adam, it is
requisite that he do not only free us from all sin, but also that he make
us perfectly holy and righteous in his fathers sight: Whereupon arises Paul's
comparison in the fifth to the Romans, between Adam and Christ; That as Adam
brought upon all his sin, and thereby death; So does Christ to heal
perfectly this sore, bring upon all his, righteousness, and thereby life:
Whereby the Apostle testifies, That the Gentiles, that followed not
righteousness, have attained unto righteousness, Romans 9. 30. Romans 9. 30.


Fourthly, it is necessary that not only our sin be abolished, but also that
we be made perfectly holy and Righteousness the cause of all good things.
for eternal life, and capable of all the blessings of the Gospel both
temporal and eternal, it is necessary that he make us perfectly holy and
righteous in his Fathers sight; the necessity whereof is plainly expressed by
the Apostle, Romans 5. 21. where he says, That Grace does reign by righteousness
unto eternal life, Romans 5. 21.
through Jesus Christ our Lord: As if he should say, Grace indeed, now reigns
to procure all blessings and benefits, both temporal and eternal upon us: But
how? By righteousness: But where shall we have it? freely by Jesus Christ our
Lord: that is, that the Grace of God may be of force to procure unto us all
blessings, Christ must of necessity, first make us with his righteousness,
perfectly holy and righteous in the sight of God freely: all which necessities,
the Doctrine of our Church, delivered by the first Restorers of the Gospel in
this Land, does seem to shut up in this one short sentence, That it had not
been enough to be delivered by his death from sin, except by his resurrection,
Ho^^^^, of the (...).
we had been endued with a perfect and everlasting righteousness. Now then
let us proceed to describe what this second part of Free Justification is;
which is as follows.

The second part of Free Justification, is a wonderful The d^fi^ition of the
second part o^ f^ee justification.
mystical work and benefit of the Gospel, by which we being, by the power of
Gods imputation, clothed with the wedding garment of Christ's perfect
righteousness, are so endued; or rather (thought not inherently and actively,
yet Evangelically and passively) so mystically formed with Christ's own perfect
righteousness; that we have, not only all our sins, together with the
imperfections of our sanctification, ever (whilst we are in this life) dwelling
in us, incomprehensibly swallowed up, and utterly abolished (as is before
showed in the first part;) but also we are, without the help of any good works
to make us righteous, made perfectly holy and righteous in the sight of God
freely: Shining now in this life with Christ's good works, more glorious in
perfect holiness and righteousness inwardly in the sight of God, than the
^unne shines gloriously in our eyes, when he shines in his brightest hue; by
which only we are made worthy of, and do take possession of all the rest of the
benefits and unsearchable treasures of the Gospel, as these Scriptures, and the
rest following do abundantly prove: Seventy weeks (viz. of years) are
determined upon the holy City, that is, the Church; what to do? not only to
finish trangressions, and so to reconcile iniquities, and to seal up and make
an end of all sin: but also to bring in everlasting righteousness, Dan. 9. 24.
whereupon Daniel. 9. 24.
the learned Interpreters, say thus: Here are two benefits rehearsed, which
should come by the Messiah: The first is the taking away of sin: The other is
the bringing in, and giving of a perfect and everlasting Righteousness.

For (says another) sin is finished, or come to an end, iniquity is clean
put out; and there is preached to the whole world an everlasting righteousness.

They which do believe in Christ, by faith in him are purified, and have
gotten and attained an everlasting righteousness. But for the better
understanding of this description of this second part of Justification; let us
briefly open those four points that are used to explain and fully to clear a
matter: as first the efficient The four causes of this second part of
Justification.
cause of our Justification; secondly, the formal cause; thirdly the material
cause; and fourthly the final cause; all in this head point of salvation, very
necessary the marking.

First, the efficient cause of our Justification is twofold. The first and
primary efficient cause, who is it that undertaketh to justify, and make us so
perfectly holy and righteous, is God himself, the Father, the Son, The
efficient cause.
and the holy Ghost; these are the first efficient cause of our Justification,
which evidently shows the full ableness of these workmen; and how easily
this work may be brought to pass, and wrought upon us; and how dangerous a
matter it is, to extenuate, diminish or any way to disparage this excellent
work: the description of whose working is under a similitude notably expressed
by the Prophet Ezekiel saying, In the day that thou wast born, when I passed by
thee, I saw thee cast out, and polluted in thine own blood, and I said unto
thee when thou wast in thy blood, thou shall live: yea, even when thou wast in
thy blood, I said unto thee, thou shall live: Then washed I thee with water,
yea, I thoroughly washed away thy blood: For I even I am he, that puts away
and abolisheth thine iniquities, and will remember thy sins no more, Esaias,
43. 25. Ierem. 31. 34. And not only so, But Esaias 43. 25. Ierem. 31. 34.
also I clothed thee with broydred work, I girded thee about with fine linen,
and covered thee with silk; I decked thee also with ornaments, and I put
bracelets upon thy hands, and a chain on thy neck: thus wast thou decked with
gold and silver; and thus wast thou perfect through my beauty, which I put upon
thee. All which (as a learned Writer, treating of Free Justification, truly
says) signifies, that God purges us with the blood of Christ from all sin,
and adorneth us with the rich robe of his own righteousness; and thus he, and
none but he, by himself alone, makes us in his own sight perfectly holy and
righteous freely. Yea, how absolutely God resumes this work wholly and only into
his own hand, is notably expressed Why God only works righteousness.
by the Apostle, with Gods intent and reason, why he so reserves this work
only in his own hand, saying, That he may show, declare or manifest, at this
time; what? his righteousness, namely, wherewith he justifies us, far
passing the righteousness of men or Angels, That he might be just, that is,
declared to be just, in that none can please him, but such as are righteous in
his sight, with such a perfect holiness and righteousness, and that he only
may be a maker of him righteous that believes in Jesus, Romans 3. 26. and hence
Romans 3. 26.
it is that this righteousness, wherewith we are made so perfectly holy and
righteous in Gods sight, is so often by S. Paul called the righteousness of
God; both because ^od alone works it upon us; and because it alone makes us
approvedly righteous in the sight of God. as where S. Paul says Romans 3. 21.
22. But now is Romans 32. 22.
the righteousness of God made manifest without the Law, having witness of the
Law and of the Prophets, to wit, the righteousness of God, by the faith of
Jesus Christ unto all and upon all, that do believe. Upon which place the true
Orthodox exposition of Chrysostom, is worthy the marking, who faith thus,
Paul, expresses two great matters in this place, both that thou art made
righteous, and that also without the Law thou attainest these good things;
moreover he said, not simply righteousness, but the righteousness of God,
declaring the gift to be the greater, for the dignity of the giver, and the
promise easily to be effected and done. Another reason, why God reserves this
work in his own hand to be wrought only by himself, is, because it is too great
and too glorious a work for any mere creature to do it, or to have any hand
in it; for what work can be more excellent, than to make a creature righteous
in the sight of God? seeing also it is the cause of removing all evil, and the
procuring of all good unto the creature? and this is testified by Augustine
saying, Quid magnificentius quam justificare impium, hoc est, ex impio justum
facere? that is, what is more magnificent than to justify a wicked man, that
is, of a wicked man to make him just and righteous? And therefore the
conclusion of Zanchius, upon this point is most true, saying, Solus etiam est,
qui potest, etc. that is, It is only God alone, that of a man conceived of
unclean seed, can make him clean, Job 14. 4. especially (say I) Job 14. 4.
in this case of making him above sense and feeling, perfectly righteous in the
fight of God freely.

The second efficient cause of our Justification, together The second efficient
Cause of our ^ustification.
with the meritorious means more immediately working and effecting the same, is
Christ, as he is the Mediator, both God and man: who (as it is Revel. 1. 5.)
washing us from our sins in his own blood, and Revel. 1. 5.
procuring unto us thereby a perfect righteousness, cried out upon the Cross,
It is finished; that is, the prophecy of Daniel, prophesying that seventy
weeks of years should be fulfilled, before iniquity should be sealed up and
finished, and sin made an end of, and abolished, and everlasting righteousness
brought in, is now accomplished and finished: but how? By the slaying (says
Daniel) of the Messiah: so that it is Christ, and the blood of Christ that has
by himself purged us from our sins, and made us righteous freely, Heb. 1. 3.
and therefore (says the Apostle) Heb. 1. 3.
we are justified freely by his grace; but how? through the Redemption that is
in Christ Jesus, Romans 3. 24. his Romans 3. 24.
blood alone justifies us; and therefore very aptly speaks Augustine, saying
there have been, are, and shall be many just men: just us autem and justificans
nemo nisi Christus; that is, but both just, and also justifying, and making
others righteous, there is none but Christ. Upon the truth whereof arises that
unlike likeness between Adam and Christ, which the Apostle speaks of, Romans 5.
wherein none must participate, Romans 5.
nor be any Agent or doer with Christ; namely, that as by the disobedience of
one man Adam, many were made perfect sinners, before they have done or thought
any evil work; as namely, Infants which are perfect sinners, before they begin
to speak or think any evil, all their evil actions afterward but showing how
evil one man Adam has made them; so by the obedience of one man, Christ, are
many made perfectly righteous before they speak or think any good work; all
their good works of Sanctification done afterward, but showing how perfectly
good Christ has made them to Godward freely. Whereupon the exposition of
Chrysostom upon that place, is very proper, saying Chrysostomes Exposition.
thus; As Adam, unto all that came of him (although they had not eaten of the
tree) became the author of sin and death: So Christ, unto all that are of
him, although they have not lived righteously, became a procurer of
righteousness and life, even that righteousness which by his Cross, he
freely gives unto us all: hence he is called Jehovah, our righteousness, that
is, the only cause making us righteous, and also Mel^hisedec.

The second maine point to be considered and Secondly, the Formal cause.
marked in our perfect Justification, is the Formal Cause, or the very form
it self, making us perfectly holy and righteous in the sight of God: wherein
two things are to be marked: first, what it is: secondly, the excellency 1 What
it is. 2 The excellency of it.
of it: for the first, namely what this formal cause, forming us perfectly
righteous, is, we must observe that it is the perfect obedience, both active
and passive of the Mediator Christ, which (being made under the law) he
performed in fulfilling the whole law for us perfectly; whereof Christ spoke
when ^e said unto John the Baptist; Let it be so now; for thus it becomes us
to fulfill all righteousness, Mat. 3. 15. Math. 3. 15.
so that the perfect holiness and righteousness, not of the Godhead, but of the
humane nature of Christ wherein he performed perfect obedience, both active and
passive in fulfilling the whole law of God, is the formal cause of our
Justification; which only after the nature of the form, dat nomen and esse,
that is, gives unto us not only the name, but also the true being of righteous
men in the sight of God: and that it is this obedience of Christ alone, that is
the only form that makes us perfectly righteous in the sight of God, is flatly
expressed by the Apostle, Romans 5. 19. saying Romans 5. 19.
that as by the disobedience of one man (Adam) many were made sinners: so by
the obedience of one man (Christ) shall many (he means, both Jews and
Gentiles, present and to come) be made righteous. Upon which place the words
of the learned Expositors are very effectual, saying thus: The Apostle flatly
pronounces that we are made righteous with Christ's righteousness, and withal
shows what manner of righteousness it is, when he calls it obedience;
saying, By the obedience of one man many are made righteous: where it is to be
marked, what it behooves us to bring into the sight of God, if we will, by
works, be made righteous; namely, the obedience of the Law, and Perfect
obedience our righteousness
that also not in one or two parts perfect, but in all points absolute; which
because we are not able to attain unto by our holy walking, therefore this of
mere grace he communicates unto us. And this (I say) is only that, which
forms us and makes us perfectly righteous in the sight of God; which Luther
Luther in his Treatise of threefold righteousness
in his Treatise of threefold Righteousness handles notably, the short sum
whereof is thus: As there is a sin that is essential, original, and another
man's, which yet makes us sinners, whereof is mention, Psalm. 5^. Behold I was
borne in iniquity, and in sins has my mother conceived me; and whereof
Christ speaks, saying, An evil tree cannot bring forth good fruit: And Romans
5. By one man's disobedience many are made sinners: Romans 5.
and again, By the offense of one man the fault is come upon all men unto
condemnation: So there is a justice or righteousness contrary to this, which
likewise is essential, original, and another man's, and yet makes us
righteous, which is the righteousness of Christ, whereof Christ speaks, John
3. 3. Except a man be borne again John. 3. 3.
of water and the holy Ghost, in this free righteousness figured in beholding
the brazen Serpent, he cannot see the kingdom of God: and Romans 5. By the
righteousness Romans 5.
of one man, is the free gift of righteousness come upon all men, unto
Justification of life: and again, By the obedience of one man are many made
righteous: this is (as I said) our Lot, our capital Foundation, our Rock, and
our whole Substance in which we rejoice, and glory for ever; wherein we are
made the righteousness of God, 2 Cor. 5. 21. and wherein Christ is made unto
us wisdom, 2 Cor. 5. 21.
righteousness, sanctification, and redemption, 1 Cor. 1. 30. and whereof the
Apostle says, Other foundation may 1 Cor. 1. 30. 1 Cor. 3 11. Romans 1. 17. Romans
10. 10.
no man lay, 1 Cor. 3. 11. This is made ours by faith: Romans 1. 17. The just by
faith shall live: and again, Romans 10. 10. With the heart man believes unto
righteousness. This is bestowed upon us in Baptism, this is that which
properly the Gospel preaches, Romans 1. Romans 1.
and it is not the righteousness of the law, but the right ousnesse of free
grace: By this a man is made Lord of all things; because his righteousness
has looked down from heaven; and herein mercy and truth are met together,
righteousness and peace have kissed each other: truth shall spring out of the
earth; for without this mercy a man in all his righteousness is an hypocrite;
and without this righteousness his conscience is unquiet; this grace makes a
man true and just, and this true righteousness brings peace: thus Christ
frames all them that belong to him with this same one righteousness of his
own, strange and undeserved of others, and makes them just, righteous, and
saved; that as by another man's sin we were made sinners, lost and damned, so
by another man's righteousness we are made righteous and saved; and therefore I
called this righteousness an essential righteousness, and eternal, and (as
Daniel says) everlasting; because when a man has it, it always abides and
remains, neither does sometimes fail, as the actual righteousness does, as
it is said, Psalm. 111. Psalm. 111. 3.
3. his righteousness endures for ever and ever. Only Christ is eternal and
everlasting, and therefore his righteousness is everlasting; and yet ours, and
makes us everlasting. This is the mercy of God the Father, this is the grace of
the new Testament, wherein the Lord is sweet to them that taste him. In this
must we be saved, and in no other; for there is no other name given under
heaven, by which we must be saved, Acts Acts 4. 12.
4. 12. and therefore said David, deliver me in thy righteousness. But as
there is another sort of sin, called actual sin, which is the fruit of
original; and these, whether they arise in thought, word, or deed, are our
own proper sins: so contrary unto this there is a righteousness called
actual righteousness, flowing from faith, and from the foresaid essential
righteousness; and this is our righteousness, and our own proper
righteousness; not because we alone do work it, but because we work together
with the foresaid first righteousness, called the righteousness of another,
hitherto Luther: but this first righteousness, called the righteousness of
another, is the form that makes us perfectly righteous in the sight of God, as
we see before; wherewith Zanchius speaking by the same spirit, although he
differ a little in words, yet agrees all one in sense, saying thus: The formal
cause, that is to say, the righteousness wherewith we are justified or made
righteous, is twofold: A twofold righteousness
the one by which we are reputed, and also are truly and perfectly righteous to
Godward; whereof the Apostle speaks, Romans 5. saying, By the obedience of one
are many made righteous: this is our true righteousness. But (says he) there
is another righteousness, which being communicated unto us by the spirit of
Christ, and indeed inherent in us, and showing it self outwardly by works,
consists of the mortification of the old man, and quickening of the new man,
of an hatred of sin, and love of righteousness, by which we are just; but
how? before men, and are acknowledged and counted for righteous before them.
And this righteousness we affirm to be an effect of that former: and although
the Apostle does not separate this from the former; yet he places our true
Justification, and the making of us righteous to Godward, in the former: thus
says Zanchie. But in another place he shows, that this righteousness of
Christ is the only formal cause of our Justification and salvation: yet more
plainly, namely upon those words of the Apostle, That Christ died in the body
of his flesh, to make us holy and unblameable, and without fault in Gods sight,
Colos. 1. 22. he says thus: Zanchie on Colos. 1. 22.
Here we have the formal cause of our salvation, which is holiness of life,
and true righteousness, by which it is brought to pass that we are, (...)
without fault and unblameable in the sight of God. But this (says he) cannot
be the righteousness of our works, and holiness of life begun in us, because
that is unperfect, as David himself said: Enter not into judgment with thy
servant, for no flesh is righteous in thy sight: only the righteousness and
holiness of Christ is perfect in the sight of God; and this being imputed unto
us is the ^ormall cause of our salvation. Thus it being sufficiently showed
what the formal cause of our Justification, making us thus perfectly righteous
in the sight of God, is; now let us mark a little the excellency of it, both in
the nature, and in the operation of it. First, concerning the nature of it,
although 2 The excellency of the formal cause is both in the nature and
operation.
that does show the excellency of it, which is said before; namely, that it is
an obedience, and a fulfilling of the Law in all points absolute, yea and a
perfect everlasting righteousness; yet the thing that shows it to be
exceeding excellent, is because it is a righteousness that passes the
righteousness, not only of men, but also, as Calvin truly says, even of
Angels; because it is the righteousness of that person that is not only man,
but also God; for which cause it is called often in the new Testament the
righteousness of God, and amongst other places most emphatically, Romans 3. 21,
22. where S. Paul beginning to Romans 3. 21, 22.
write of it, says thus: But now is the righteousness of God made manifest
without the law, having witness of the law and of the Prophets, to wit, the
righteousness of God, by the faith of Jesus Christ, unto all, and upon all that
do believe. Why it is called the righteousness of God.
Where it is twice together called the righteousness of God, not only because
God is the free giver of it, and because God himself approves of it, as the
only 1 Because of the person both God and man.
righteousness pleasing God, but also because it is the righteousness of that
person that is very God, and therefore of wonderful operation and efficacy:
as it is plainly testified by the learned Dispensers of Gods mysteries, saying
thus, This righteousness is called the righteousness of God, not only because
it is the free gift of God, and because God by giving the same shows himself
to be righteous, that is, faithful and true; and because it is opposed to the
righteousness of man: but also because it is the righteousness of that person
that is both God and man: And therefore a far more excellent righteousness
many ways, than that which Adam had in the state of innocence; for that was
the righteousness of a mere man, this is the righteousness of him that is
both God and man. Then for the effects: The righteousness of Secondly, the
effects of Christ^ righteousness.
Christ is meritorious of eternal life; it overcame death, subdues the Devil,
none of which Adams righteousness could do. And again, Christ's righteousness
is eternal and immutable, but Adams righteousness was Thirdly, immutable.
but temporary and mutable. Fourthly, we are in Christ's righteousness
Restored to a more excellent Fourthly, restoring to an everlasting estate.
state, than we lost in Adam, which was but terrene and mutable; but by this
Justice and perfect righteousness, we receive an heavenly, everlasting and
immutable kingdom. Hence it is, that S. Paul prized this righteousness so
highly saying, touching the righteousness which is in the Law, I was
unrebukeable, But I count all things loss, and do judge them but dung, that I
may be found not having mine own righteousness which is after the Law, but
that which is through the faith of Christ, even the righteousness which is of
God through faith, Philip. 3. 8, 9. therefore I conclude the excellency of this
point, with that excellent note of learned Beza that these things being
diligently considered, do manifestly declare, what is meant by that word, the
Righteousness of God: Namely that perfection and high integrity, with which
whosoever is endued, he is presented before God (...) (...) as S. Paul says
Coloss. 1. 22. that is, so holy that he is Coloss. 1. 22.
unblameable, and one that cannot be reproved of any fault.

The third point to be marked in our perfect Justification, The third cause is
the subject matter; and is twofold.
is the Subject of this righteousness, or the Matter formed with this
righteousness; and it is to be observed that this subject or matter formed
with this righteousness is twofold; either the subject or matter inherently,
legally and actively formed with this righteousness; or the subject and matter
Evangelically and freely formed, and made righteous with this righteousness.

First, the subject or matter inherently, legally and Mat. 5. 18. was to this
end, conceived of the Mat. 5 18.
holy Ghost; and being formed perfectly righteous in his mothers womb, was
thus borne inherently and perfectly righteous: and in the residue of his whole
life, afterward fulfilled the whole Law, actually, workingly and perfectly;
for which cause the Apostle says, that he was made under the Law, Gal. 4. 8.
because he Gal. 4. 8.
actually fulfilled, both actively and passively, the whole Law; for which
cause also he is inherently and actively called (...), That holy and just one
Acts, 3. 14. and Acts. 14. 1 Pet. 1. 19.
the Lamb without spot, or blemish, 1 Pet. 1. 19.

But secondly, concerning the subject or matter Evangelically here offer
themselves to be marked of us: first, who they be that are thus Evangelically
and freely made Two things to be marked.
all light, and perfectly righteous; and secondly, the manner how, they are
thus Evangelically and freely formed, and made all light, and perfectly
righteous in the sight of God.

Concerning the first, we are to observe, that none 1 The Elect called are made
thus righteous.
are made thus perfectly holy and righteous, but such of the Elect as are
effectually called: because although all the Elect shall be justified in their
time, and none but the Elect shall be justified (for whom he justifies, those
he glorifieth; but he glorifies none but the Elect;) yet the very Elect, are
not actually and really justified; but are darkness, and live in sin and
darkness, until they be effectually called, as Paul expressly testifies
saying, Whom he calls, them he justifies, Romans 8. 30. But who are thus
effectually called? Romans 8. 30.
Namely, such as do mark in the death of Christ the exceeding horriblenesse
of the least sin, there being no sin little in the sight of God; and
thereupon come to a feeling of their misery, and lost state, by true terror in
their souls, for the multitude of their sins; thereupon making this
conclusion upon themselves, that if God dealt so sharply with the green tree,
Christ, for the sin which he had not done, but wherein he was only a surety
for others, in what a case of burning in Gods wrath and justice, is he that is
a dry tree, utterly dry of goodness, and has, as the principal, committed
and done, himself, so many sins? and thus is Christ made unto him first
Wisdom, 1 Cor. 1. 30. 1 Cor. 1. 30.
to see his sins, and therein his lost estate; then this Romans 8. 26.
makes him with deep groans, Romans 8. 26. to sigh up to Rom 7 24.
Christ for some help in this misery, Romans 7. 24. Which is the turning of his
spiritual eye of says to the true spiritual brazen-serpent Christ, as really
as the Israelites turned their bodily eye to the bodily brazen-serpent; and
thus is this Elect effectually called to Christ; and then is he justified
freely, that is most certainly helped and healed by being made perfectly holy
and righteous from all spot of sin in the sight of God freely, as certainly
as he does with true groans, s^gh up to Christ for this help; and as certainly
as the old Israelites were helped and healed of their bodily stingings, by
their bodily looking up to the brazenserpent: and thus secondly, is Christ made
unto him Righteousness: then follows hereof, thirdly, Sanctification; and
fourthly, full assurance of Redemption, unto eternal glory, 1 Cor. 1. 30. 1
Cor. 1. 30.


Now secondly, for the other point, namely, the 2 How the Elect are justified
and made perfectly righteous in Gods sight.
manner how the Elect are thus justified, and made perfectly holy and righteous
in the sight of God, is thus:

The God by the power of his imputation, conveying his Sons righteousness to
be in us, and upon us, does in his own sight so cloth us, body and soul, both
within and without, with the wedding garment of his sons perfect
righteousness, that we have our sins hereby not only utterly abolished out
of Gods sight; but also are Evangelically and freely formed, that is, are in
truth and reipsa, in very deed made, although not inherently and actively (as I
said in the beginning, the Papists would have it;) yet objectively and
passively, perfectly holy and righteous in the sight of God freely.

This I will clear more fully with a similitude or two, and then confirm it
with undeniable poofes: First, I say, as nothing does effect this, but Gods
imputation of his Sons righteousness (for which cause the Apostle says,
Blessed is the man unto whom God imputes righteousness without works, Romans 4.
6. Yea, hereupon Romans 4. 6.
he makes mention of this word Imputing and counting righteous, no less (as
I take it) than eleven times, in that fourth chapter; which not only shows
that it is an action wrought immediately by the very thought, as it were of God
himself, only, and thereby must needs be very spiritual and mystical to us,
far above our reason, sense, and feeling; but also it must needs be wrought
upon us very freely, without any working of ours:) So likewise we must mark
that this imputing being an immediate act, proceeding, as it were, out of Gods
own breast, is not a light, small, weak, and imaginary thing, like man's
imputing, as the Papists imaginarily and scoffingly conceit: but Gods
imputation is a lively, mighty, operative and real working imputation, and
counting nothing like ours; for man may impute, and count a thing to be so, or
so: and yet the thing, if it were not such before, becomes such, never the more
for our imputing or counting it, to be so; but Gods imputing and counting,
being Almighty gives a real being and true existing of the thing before
himself, as he counts it; for God did but count that there should be light,
and there was light; and he did but count that his other creatures should be,
and presently they were so as he counted: so he does but impute his Sons
righteousness unto us, and counts us perfectly righteous in the same, and this
imputing does so operatively and really conveigh the righteousness of Christ
to be in us and upon us; as Paul testifies, saying, The righteousness of God,
by the faith of Jesus Christ is (...), that is, not only unto all, but also
also upon all that do believe, Romans 3. 22. That though mystically above our
Romans 3. 22.
sense, and feeling; yet not imaginarily (as the Papists prattle against us)
nor yet only outwardly like painted Tombs (as they likewise cavillingly
object;) but truly both inwardly are clothed with the same in the sight of
God, and richly roabed, and decked and adorned in the same; as the faithful
soul in the Prophet Esaias joyfully confesses, saying, I will greatly rejoice,
and be exceeding glad in God my Savior, Why? Because he has clothed me with
the garment of salvation: What garment is that? why, he has covered me with
the r^ab of righteousness, as a Bridgroome decketh himself with ornaments, and
as a Bride adorneth her self with her jewels, Esaias, 61. 10. Hence are the
Saints said so often Esaias 61. 10.
in the Revelation, to be clothed with long white Roabes washed in the blood
of the Lamb; Hence does God the Father command his servants, the Ministers, in
the calling in of the Gentiles to the Gospel (signified by the return of the
Prodigal child) to bring forth the best garment, and to put it on upon them
ministerially, as he working with his Ministers, does by the power of his
imputation cloth them with it mystically, Luke 15. Luke 15. 22. Psalm. 132. 9.
Hence it is said, Psalm. 132. that the Ministers powerfully coming forth,
clothed not only personally with it for themselves only, but also
ministerially to cloth the people with it, the Saints do shout for joy;
because it being objectively and passively in us, and upon us, does not only
abolish our sins, but does form us, and reipsa in very deed make us (not
inherently and actively as the Papists hold, neither yet imaginatily as they
cavil, but objectively and passively) perfectly holy and righteous in the
sight of God. Now by these words objectively and passively, I mean, we doing
nothing hereunto, and we working nothing, but only are mere patients suffering
another ab extra, even God to work all in us: as may be further cleared in the
manner Two similitudes.
how, by two fit similitudes and lively representations: as

First, take a drinking glass that is blue, or red, and the truth; because
that Gods powerful imputation, after a more real, mighty and effectual
manner, does the same in truth, that is but resembled in this shadow: and faith
that went so far, as to say, wash thou me, and I shall be whiter than snow,
goes higher than any similitudes can reach unto, and sees the soul being
clothed with Christ's righteousness, to be (although not inherently, yet less
imaginarily, and colourably, but truly and reipsa, in very deed) made perfectly
holy and righteous in the sight of God; so effectually that the very power
thereof begins inherently to change the heart by sanctification also, to the
eyes of men, more and more; whereas we see that the bluenesse or redness of
the glass, works no inherent change upon or in the drink: but because faith
reasons and concludes from the power of God thus; That if so poor and silly
a creature as a piece of glass, be able by the force of the light to cast her
beams into it, and to make the liquor to lose, to the view and sight of men,
her own color, and to look (whilst it is in the glass) of the same color,
that the glass is of; were it not impiety, and flat blasphemy not to grant,
that Christ can much more being true and Almighty God, translating me out of
Adam to be a member in himself, by clothing me, both within and without,
with his own righteousness, conveigh much more, by the power and force of his
spirit, his own righteousness to be thought not inherently and actively, yet
objectively and passively in us; and so by this means abolish all our sins
from before God, and make us only perfectly holy and righteous in the sight of
God freely? herein consisting the Analogy of the truth with the similitude,
that Christ by reason of his Godhead, and power of his spirit, does that in
truth above our reason, sense and feeling, which the red glass does only in
show, that is, make us in truth perfectly holy and righteous in the sight of
God freely: not imaginarily and colourably, as the Papists fondly cavil, but
really truly, and reipsa in very deed, like the working of an Almighty Creator;
this faith (I say) shall find by the very fruits of sanctification flowing
from the same, that he is not made only colourably righteous, but that he is
vere and reipsa truly and in very deed, with Christ's righteousness, made
perfectly holy and righteous in the sight of God freely. Hence for the lively
representation of this truth do so many Divines both learned and judicious so
much use this similitude, saying thus: As he that beholds any thing through a
red glass, does take it to be red as is the color of the glass; so God the
Father beholding us in his Son, does take us to be of the same nature, and
quality that he is, that is, perfectly righteous, for which cause he says to
his Spouse in the Canticles, (though she felt and complained, that she was
black, and full of infirmities to her sense and feeling and own inherent active
righteousness;) yet says Christ that knows better what in this respect he
has wrought upon her, than she her self, Behold thou art fair my love,
behold thou art all fair, and there is no spot in thee. And for this cause it
is, that he loves us, and sets his heart upon us, and will not be removed
from us, etc. Which is not for the shadow, but for the true substance of his
own righteousness, though not inherently to our sense and feeling, and
actively; yet by Gods imputation objectively and passively conveyed into us,
so utterly abolishing our sins from before God, and making us not imagina^ly,
but truly, and reipsa, in very deed, perfectly holy and righteous in the sight
of ^od freely.

A second similitude illustrating this truth yet The second similitude.
more fully, is this: Let an house or shop be made toward the East, and let
the Sun beat upon the same all day long; yet whilst the windows and doors are
fast shut up, the house still remains dark and unprofitable; because the walls
being corpora opaca, dark bodies, can cast forth nothing, but darkness; but
let the windows and doors be opened, then do the Sunbeams beat in, and
dispell all the darkness that was there before; and the house is made all
light, and profitable to the use of man. But yet it is not inherently and
actively light, as the Papists conceit of their manner of Justification; for if
that light did come actively out of the walls, then the house would not (at the
least immediately) be beholding to the Sun without it, in the Firmament; but
the house would be inherently and actively light, immediately enlightening its
own self; but in that it is enlightened by the Sunbeams, the house is all
light in deed, and yet no Agent, and Doer in making its self light, but is
altogether passively and objectively light: so is it in the case of our
Justification; and being a similitude much used by the holy Ghost, it passes
all other humane similitudes, by running (contrary to the old proverb) quatuor
pedibus: for

First, man's soul and body is like this house, or Esaias 60. 2. Behold Esaias 60.
2.
darkness shall cover the earth, and gross darkness the people: And again,
If we say that we have fellowship with God, and walk in darkness, we lie, 1
John 1. 6. And again, He that is in darkness walks in darkness, and
knows not whither he goes, because the darkness has blinded his eyes. 1
John 2. 11. 1 John 11. 2


Secondly, Christ Jesus is like the Sun that shines in the Firmament, having
all true and full light and righteousness inherently, and actively in himself
only; and for this cause, is expressly called by the Prophet, Sol justitiae, the
Sun of righteousness, Mal. 4. 2. Mal. c. 4. 2.
saying, But unto those that fear my name shall the Sun of righteousness
arise with health in his wings.

Thirdly, his righteousness by the power of Gods Esaias 44. 22. Esaias 44. 22.
saying, I, (and not you, with your labor of mortification) even I will put
away your sins as darkness, and abolish your transgressions like a mist: and
as the walls of the house cannot of their own nature (being corpora opaca) but
cast forth all day long a shadowish darkness, that would obscure and make the
house all dark; and yet the Sunbeams do continually all day long swallow up
and abolish that darkness, and make the house light freely all day long: So
our natures corrupted with sin, although they can do nothing else
continually, but cast forth to our sense and feeling, the shadowish darkness
of innumerable sins, both in thought, word and deed, all day long; yet this
Sun of righteousness by the full revealing and exhibiting of free
Justification, being risen upon us, does shine upon us, with that continual
day spoken of Rev. 21. 25. Revel. 21. 25.
And thus Christ's righteousness by the power of Gods impuration, clothing us
both within and without, does although mystically above our sense and feeling,
yet spiritually and truly, continually abolish all our sins from before ^od
freely, and does make us perfectly holy and righteous in the sight of God
freely all day long, and continually; for which cause S. John speaking of the
power and operation of Christ's blood freely justifying us, speaks in the
present time saying: The blood of Jesus Christ, the Son of God, does make us
clean from all sin: Where although this work is so perfectly done and wrought
at one instant upon the faithful, that he might have spoken in the
preterperfect time, as the doctrine first Reforming our Church from Popery
often times, in diverse Sermons, speaks to the glory of Christ blood, saying,
The blood of Christ the Son of God has made us clean from all sin; and as
Saint John himself speaks, Revel. 1. 5. saying, Revel. 1. 5.
Christ the faithful witness has washed us from our sins in his own blood:
yet to show that this work is so perfectly done, that it is ever in present
action, continually making and keeping us thus perfectly clean in the sight
^od; therefore he uses the act of the present time, saying that it does make
us clean from all sin: as the Sunbeams beating into a dark house, at six
of the clock in the morning, have at that instant abolished the darkness that
was there before, and have made the house all light; and yet it does make it,
and does keep it light all day long: so we being by the power of Gods
imputation clothed with Christ's righteousness, it not only has made us
perfectly clean, from all sin in the sight of God; but also does make us,
and does keep us clean all day long. And this is testified by the faithful
Expositors upon that place, saying, Verbum praesentis temporis ((...) does make
us clean) continuum actum significat; that is, the Verb of the present time
signifies a continual action: but wherefore? because although ever and anon,
we do by new sins, as much as lies in us, even cut off our selves from the
love and favor of God, yet this continual and perfect imputation, does
continually abolish all our sins and ever and continually retain and keep us
in perfect righteousness and fellowship with God; which is more plainly
testified by the Author to the Hebrews saying, With one sacrifice, he has
made perfect for ever, or continually them that are sanctified.

Fourthly and lastly, faith believing that this wedding garment Act. 14. 27.
That God had opened the door of Acts 14. 27.
Faith unto the Gentiles; because although the Gospel do shine, by preaching,
never so brightly unto men; yet if this door of Faith be not opened, but
remains fast shut up, they still abide in the gross darkness of their sins:
but if the door and windows of faith, be opened, then the beams of Christ's
righteousness beating in do abolish all the darkness of their sins from
before God, and make them all light: which shows also, that it is not faith
that justifies us actively of it self, as it is a virtue (as the Papists
hold;) but passively, as it lets in the imputation of Christ's righteousness
into the soul; for if the door of the house be wide open, and yet there be no
Sun (as being not yet risen) to shine in the Firmament, that may cast in her
beams into the same, the house abides still dark, though the doors and
windows be open never so wide; but if the Sun shine, and cast her beams upon
the house, and then the door and windows thereof be open, then do those
doors and windows by passive receiving in the light, make the house all
light; even so does faith, by receiving the imputation of Christ's
righteousness, make a man all light in the Lord; and yet not inherently to his
sense and feeling, and actively (for then his sanctification should be perfect,
which is not so in this life;) but in that he is made all light, that is
perfectly righteous by the imputation of Christ's righteousness, ^^ is all
light, indeed both without and within; but yet mystically light, that is above
sight, sense, and feeling, and altogether objectively and passively light in
the Lord, and to the Lord: as the Apostle plainly testifies to the Justified
Ephesians, saying, Ye were once darkness, (there is the foul in the state of
sin, and of nature like the house dark at midnight;) But now are light in the
Lord; there is Justification by which Christ Jesus, the Sun of righteousness,
being risen upon a man, and mystically clothing him both without and within,
with his own righteousness, all his sins are mystically above his sense and
feeling, utterly abolished from before God, and he is objectively and
passively made all light: but mark how; he says not simply light, nor yet
light in your selves, but light in the Lord; as the house is not inherently
light in its self (as I said before) but made all light in the Sunbeams;
therefore (says he) walk as the children of light: there is Sanctification
that is always unseperable from Justification. Justification. And thus having
illustrated by these two similitudes, the manner how the true Believer is not
barely counted, but truly and reipsa made perfectly holy and righteous in the
sight of God freely, Let us come to some evident proofs of the matter, and
prove by undeniable Scriptures and testimonies of the learned and faithful
Dispensers of Gods mysteries, that we are by the power of Gods imputation,
though mystically, yet truly, so clothed both without and within, with Christ's
perfect righteousness, that it is even in us, thereby not only so truly and
utterly abolishing from before God all our sins, as is before showed in the
first part of Justification; but also that it does make us truly and reipsa
just, that is perfectly holy and righteous in the sight of God, thus dans nomen
and esse, that is, after the right nature of the form giving us not only the
name, but also the true being of just and righteous men in the sight of God
freely: And

First, that we are by the power of Gods imputation in us, is evident How the
righteousness of Christ is in us.
and plain, both expressly and equipollently by many places of Scripture; but I
will instance only in such as are so express and plain, that if unbelief do
not offer them open violence, to wrest them from the plain simplicity of the
Scriptures miraculous speaking to the weakest capacity, and so too grossly make
the Scripture like a nose of wax, are most evident and plain and utterly
undeniable, as namely, Cant. 1. 15. and 4. 1. 7. Where it is to be seen that
Cant. 1. 15. and 4. 1. 7.
when the Church here militant upon earth, had before complained that she was
black in the sight of God, both with the feeling of siane in her self, and
also besmootted with the crosses and miseries of this life, as true effects of
the same blackness in sin. Christ tells her flatly in effect, that she
mistakes the matter, and is deceived by her sense and feeling; and to draw her
from sense and feeling to live by faith in his word, to note that in this
respect, being clothed in his sight with his own righteousness, she was above
her own capacity in a double or treble wonderful estate, he often doubles
and trebles the sign of wonder and admiration used in the Scriptures, that as
the Spirit spoke in great wonder and admiration, Behold a virgin shall
conceive, and bear a son, Esaias 7. 14. so says Christ, Behold thou art
fair, my love; Esaias. 7. 14.
Behold thou art fair, thou have doves eyes; first commending her clear eyes
of faith for seeing invisible things, 2 Cor. 4. 18. which neither eye has
seen, nor ear 2 Cor. 4. 18.
of natural man can hear, nor heart of natural man can conceive, 1 Cor. 2.
9, 10. and then repeats with 1 Cor. 2. 9. 10.
deeper emphasis again for fuller certainty, saying, yea, thou art all fair,
and there is no spot in thee: where we are to mark, that he says not (as
unbelief blends this looking-glass of Gods word, wherein the soul should see
her beauty by her clear eyes of faith) although thou are black, yet I am all
fair for thee; But thou art all fair my love: neither does he say, although
thou have many spots in thee, yet there is no spot in me for thee: But there is
no spot in thee; so that we must not so grossly pervert the words of Christ,
and so palpably turn, by unbelief, away the blessing pronounced upon our
selves, as to turn, thou, and thee, into I, and me; but so by faith to shut
our eyes, and open our ears, as to know that the Church, and every true
believer is so perfectly fair in the sight of God, that she has not one spot
in her; not inherently and actively by the perfection of her holy walking,
which then she might feel in her self; but mystically above her sense and
feeling, and objectively and passively, to Godward, by being so clothed both
within and without with Christ's righteousness, that above our sense and
seeling it not only truly and utterly abolisheth all our sins from before God
(as is before showed in the first part of Justification,) but also (wherein
consists the true wonder, and the work of the dove-like eye of faith, to see
the same) it makes us, though mystically, yet truly, perfectly holy and
righteous from all spot of sin in the sight of God freely. And this place,
not only all Interpreters both ancient and modern, that I have read, do
expound to be verified upon the children of God by Justification; but also Paul
himself (as some learned Expositors teach) speaking of the love of Christ in
justifying his Church, does allude unto this place, saying, Christ gave
himself for his Church to sanctify it, and has (as the original word
imports) made it clean by the washing of water through the Word, namely, of
the free promise of Justification; in which sense S. John also says, He has
washed us from our sins in his own blood: to what end or intent has he done
this? viz. not imaginarily to count us, but to make us, not to ourselves, that
is to our sense and feeling, but to himself a glorious Church, corres^ondent
to her husband Christ: how? or wherein glorious? that is, not having now at
this present time (as the learned know that the Greek and Latin Participles of
the present time do evidently import, the Apostle not saying, non habituram,
that is, the Church is in such case now as not to have hereafter one spot or
wrinkle; but non habentem not having now at this present time) one spot or
wrinkle of sin or any such thing; which cannot be spoken of our
sanctification now in this life, but yet is true and truly verified upon us
mystically in the sight of God, by Free Justification, as Christ says, Now are
ye clean through the word that I'have spoken unto you, Ioh. 15. 3. And again,
He Ioh. 15. 3.
that is washed, (says Christ to Peter) needs not, save to wash his feet;
that is, but to declare by the holy walking of sanctification, that he is
washed: why? Because, He is clean every whit, that is, not imaginarily, but
truly perfectly holy and righteous from all spot of sin in the sight of God
freely: and because some unbeleever, or some weak Christian may say, yea I
shall be so clean and truly righteous in the next life: nay says Christ, I do
not say you shall be so clean, but you are clean, but not all, speaking of
Judas, that should betray him; plainly teaching that all they that are not in
Judas his case, that is, which although they deny for a while in weakness as
Peter did; yet do not obstinately and finally deny that Christ does truly wash
them now in this life from all their sins; are now in this life, clean every
whit, that is, not im^ginarily, but truly perfectly holy and righteous from all
spot of sin in the sight of God freely; and they shall at length come to
confess the same, and glorify Christ for it, as Peter did, although it seemed
so strange unto him at the first, that Christ was feign to tell him, that if
he did not so truly and thoroughly wash him, that he were thereby clean every
whit, he had no part in him, but was in Judas his condition.

Wherein we see how necessary it is above all things, and that this indeed, is
that one thing that is only necessary, that we labor to come to assurance of
faith, that we are by the power of Gods imputation so clothed both within and
without with Christ's perfect righteousness, that it being thus even mystically
in us, it so makes us not imaginarily, and slightly, but truly and perfectly
clean every whit in the sight of God: and to conclude and shut up this point,
that this word of righteousness is near us, that it is not only in our mouth,
but also, though mystically, yet truly, in our hearts, making us truly and
perfectly righteous in the sight of God; whereby there is no A second Scripture
proving Christ's, righte^usnesse to be in us is Romans 8. 4.
judgment or condemnation belonging unto us, is utterly undeniable by one
place of Scripture, that I will allege more, and that is, Romans 8. 4.

For many granting that there is no condemnation to them that are in Christ
Jesus, yet they do not sufficiently mark the cause why, expressed in the
fourth verse, that is, the ground, and full assurance stablishing the
conscience, why there is no condemnation or Judgment to them that are in
Christ Jesus: namely, because the righteousness of the Law is fulfilled in us,
Romans 8. 4. For (says S. Paul) that which was impossible Romans 8. 4.
to the Law, namely, to make us inherently perfectly, holy and righteous in the
sight of God, by our doing and fulfilling it, by reason it was weak through the
infirmity of our flesh, God sending his own Son, in the likeness of sinful
flesh, (viz. that he might show what the power and Almightinesse of his
Godhead was able to do above the Law) for sin so arraigned, condemned, and
executed sin in his own flesh, that he might mystically and utterly abolish
the same from before his Father: but why? or to what end or intent did he so?
namely, that by the power of his imputation of the same unto us, the
righteousness of the Law might be fulfilled in us: what inherently and
actively for us to fulfill it? (as the Papists pervert this place?) no, but
that impleretur, it might be, mark Be, passively and objectively fulfilled in
us; bringing forth this effect in us, not to walk after the flesh, but after
the Spirit. And therefore, whereas Durandus the Papist would prove by that
place. That Christ had by his death brought this to pass, that we may
inherently and actively fulfill the Law, because Paul says, The law must be
fulfilled in us: true (says he very actutely) it is fulfilled in nobis, but
not a nobis; that is, whereas God is true and unchangeable in that definitive
sentence, Cursed is every one that continues not in all things to do them;
and Heaven and Earth may pass away, but one jot or tittle of this sentence,
cannot pass away until it is fulfilled: Therefore God passing in truth,
justice and constancy, a thousand thousand times that heathen King that having
made a just Law, that whosoever committed adultery with another man's wife,
should loose both his eyes, that had carried him into that pestiferous
inconvenience to the Commonwealth; and therefore his own and only Son, being
taken committing that fact; that he might be found true, just, and unchangable
in his Law, did (that his Son might not be made utterly unserviceably for the
Commonwealth) first, put out one of his own eyes, that had brought forth so
incontinent a Son, and secondly, put out one of the eyes of his Son, that so
the rigor of his Law might be satisfied, and he be found true, just, constant
and unchangeable in his Law; God, I say passing this King in these virtues (if
I may so speak) as far as the substance passes the shadow, that he might be
found (correspondent to his excellent nature,) true, just, and unchangable in
his Law, and definitive sentence, belonging to the same, saying, Cursed is
every one that continues not in all things to do them.

First, that we may not be quite marred and utterly

Secondly, by the power of his imputation, does so truly How we continue in all
things perfect in Gods sight.
continue in all things to do them in the sight of God, not inherently and
actively, by our own doing, but because his Sons perfect doing all things is
objectively and passively so truly in us, that we are made perfectly holy and
righteous in the sight of God with that doing freely, and so the rigor of his
Law is satisfied and fulfilled truly in us, and God continues correspondent to
his most excellent nature, true, just, constant and unchangable in his Law;
because we continue in all things, to do them in his sight, in nobis, in our
selves, and yet doing nothing herein (as the learned Whittaker said) a nobis,
actively of our selves: Luther, of the argument of the Epistle to the Galath.
wherein we may see, how truly and Evangelically Luther, in showing the
argument of the Epistle to the Galathians, testifies this truth, saying, This
is a passive and heavenly righteousness, which we have not of our selves, that
is our active doings, but receive it from heaven; which we work not, but which
by grace is wrought in us, (mark merely passively wrought in us) and
apprehended by faith, whereby we mount above all Laws and Works. Then he
proceeds and says, What, (will some man say) do we then nothing? do we work
nothing for the obtaining of this righteousness? I answer (says he) nothing
at all: For like as the earth ingendereth not rain, nor is able by her own
strength, labor and travel, to procure the same, but receives it of the
mere gift of God from above: so is this heavenly righteousness a mere
passive righteousness, given us of God without our works or deservings; for in
this we work nothing, we render nothing unto God: but only we receive, and
suffer another to work in us (mark to work in us) that is to say, God:
therefore it seems good unto me to call this righteousness of faith, or
Christian righteousness, the passive righteousness: but that it is wrought in
us, not inherently and actively, but is thus in us merely mystically, that is,
after a secret and unutterable manner, utterly hid to reason, sense, and
seeling, and so to be comprehended and apprehended by faith only; he expresses
plainly in the next words, saying, This is a righteousness hidden in a mystery,
which Luther, ibid.
the world does not know, yea Christians themselves do not thoroughly
understand it, and can hardly take hold of it, especially, in the time of
tentations; therefore it must be diligently taught, and continually practiced;
for who so does not understand, and apprehend this righteousness (if he do
but know the horriblenesse of the least sin, in the sight of God) must needs
in afflictions and terrors of conscience be overthrown: for there is no comfort
of conscience so sirme and so sure as this passive righteousness.

Neither do these foresaid Dispensers of Gods mysteries only (as Doctor
Whittaker, and especially Luther abundantly) testify, That this righteousness
of Christ is mystically even in us, and passively wrought even in us, but also
other learned and faithful Restorers of the Gospel in the Church do testify,
as Calvin likewise, showing that those words of the Apostle, Romans 8. 4. Namely,
that the righteousness of the Law is fulfilled in us, is not wrought, (as the
Papists do expound it) by inherent and active fulfilling of the Law by us, but
passively by imputation, presently adds the manner how, saying, For the Lord
Christ, etc. And again, entreating upon those words in Job, 15. 15. Behold the
heavens are not clean in Gods sight: How much more is man abominable and
filthy, which drinks iniquity like water? he says more plainly after this
manner, That although man's nature be thus defiled, and made abominable by
sin, yet there remains this remedy against the same, That all our
filthiness is washed away with the blood of Gods Son; and his righteousness
being imputed unto us, and we thus clothed in his garments are acceptable to
our good God: why? because (says he) we have a perfect and more than
Angelical righteousness in us; he means not inherently and actively in us,
(for of this he is both against the Papists and against the Anabaptists in all
his writings a continual and earnest Impugner;) but mystically, objectively and
passively in us, as by the power of Gods imputation, we are though spiritually,
yet truly clothed with the garment of Christ's perfect righteousness,
abolishing mystically all our filthiness from before God, and making us
perfectly holy and righteous from all spot of sin in the sight of God freely:
the full passive manner whereof he enlarges out of Ambrose, by a similitude in
another place, plainly thus; That as Jacob having not of himself deserved the
pre-eminence of the first begotten Son, did cloth How Jacob got the blessing.
himself in the fair clothes of his elder brother, whereby Isaac smelling
the sweet and well pleasing savor of his eldest Son, Jacob got thereby into
the favor of his father, and received the blessing of the elder brother to his
own benefit and commodity: so we being, by the power of Gods imputation,
clothed with the precious pureness of Christ, The Lord Christ does in such
sort communicate his righteousness with us, that after a certain mavelous
manner he pours the force thereof into us, so much as belongs to satisfy
the Justice of God, whereby we get a testimony of righteousness in the sight of
God. Yea, so great a testimony of righteousness in the sight of God; that
Luther testifies that God does see nothing else in true believers, but a mere
cleansing and righteousness; saying thus, Christ by dying upon the Cross has
so purged and perfectly cleansed us from all ^^nnes, that God would see nothing
else in the whole world, if it did believe, but a mere How this righteousness
is in us and makes us, per(...) righteo^s ^ G^ds s^ght.
cleansing and righteousness.

Now that this righteousness, though mystically, yet is so truly in us, that
it makes us above our sense and feeling, perfectly righteous in the sight of
God, whereby we are not imaginarily counted righteous as the Papists do
cavil, but, Vere and reipsa facti sumus justi; that is, truly and in very
deed, made perfectly holy and righteous in the sight of God freely: although I
wonder that any Protestants of any reading should doubt thereof, much less by
mouth and pen deny it; seeing it is not only evidently taught in the
Scriptures, but also testified abundantly of all (except two or three at the
most) the best Dispensers of Gods mysteries, especially such, as by this
Doctrine reformed the Church, and were the first Restorers of the Gospel
amongst us: so that I dare undertake to collect out of Luthers works a
thousand testimonies of this Doctrine, That by the power of Gods imputation,
facti sumus justi, we are truly made righteous in the sight of God. And
although I have briefly touched this before in my first defining of Free
Justification; yet because, by reason of the old sore of outward seeing and
feeling the contrary, it is so hardly believed, it is necessary, that I
further prosecute this point; and prove both by plain Scriptures and common
consent of the learned, that by this form of Christ's perfect righteousness we
are not barely counted righteous, but are (after the nature of the from) truly
and in very deed made perfectly righteous in the sight of God freely; and that
as all other forms do, so this also gives us not only the name, but also the
being, of persons made perfectly holy and righteous, from all spot of sin, in
the sight of God freely. THe first plain express Scripture is, Romans 5. 19.
Scrip. 1. Romans ^ 19. Proving we are not only counted, but are indeed perfectly
righteous in Go^^ sight.
where the Apostle not speaking of sanctification, until he comes to the
sixth chapter, but only of free Justification, says thus, For as by the
disobedience of one man, many were made sinners: so by the obedience of one
shall many, what? be counted righteous? no, but made righteous. The Antithesis,
or rather likeness in contraries is very plain, that as the first Adam
infecteth all that come of him with such original corruption, that every
little Infant, before it has done, or thought any evil, is not barely counted
a sinner, but by his first birth is truly made a true and real sinner; so the
second Adam so truly endues, with his own righteousness, all that come of him,
that every little Infant before it has done or thought any evil, being
justified, is not barely counted, but truly made righteous; herein only lying
the difference, That the little Infants is by the first Adam made, so
inherently sinful with original sin, that it cannot but actually practice the
same afterward in life and conversation; but by the second Adam it is
mystically above sense, and feeling, that it may be by the faith of Gods
power, made so truly and really righteous to Godward, that it cannot but in
time, by discerning Christ's love inherently and actively, declare the same
afterward to men-ward by sanctification. Hence, is that saying of Chrysostom
before cited, That as Adam unto all that came of him (although they had not
eaten of the Tree) became the Author of sin and death: So Christ unto all
that are of him, although they have not yet lived righteously, became a maker
of them righteous, even with that righteousness which by his cross he freely
gives unto us all.

Herewith accords the Doctrine of our Church taught by the first Restorers of
the Gospel amongst us, saying more plainly thus: That we by the virtue of
Christ's blood shed upon the Cross, are clean purged from our sins, and made
righteous again in the sight of God; What? do the Doctrine of our Church, and
first Restorers of the Gospel, say, that we are barely counted righteous? no,
but that we are made righteous again; alluding without doubt by the word
(again) unto the state of Adam in Paradise, that as truly as the first Adam
made us sinners, when before his fall we had no sin in sight of God; So the
second Adam Christ has not come any whit short of his work also, and done
less upon us; but has made us though mystically, yet truly perfectly holy and
righteous again from all spot of sin in the sight God freely; this also do
other faithful Expositors, that were the first Restorers of the Gospel,
testify plainly unto us, adding also reasons why it must needs be so, that
Christ by conveying his righteousness into us, does indeed and truth make us
righteous in the sight of God, saying thus, For seeing before the Tribunal
Seat of God it is esteemed no righteousness, except it be the perfect and
absolute obedience of the Law, as Christ alone is thus righteous, so by
conveying his righteousness into us and upon us, nos justos reddit, that is,
he makes us righteous. Let us here mark three reasons plainly expressed why
we must of necessity, be not barely counted, Three Reasons why we are made
righteous.
but indeed and truth made righteous in the sight of God.

First, because before the Tribunal Seat of God, righteousness of the Law;
therefore no bare counting righteous will serve the turn.

Secondly, because God does by the power of his suam justitiam in nos
transferendo, that is, by conveying his righteousness into us, and upon us;
this is that mystical clothing before spoken of.

Thirdly, because nos justos reddit, that is, as they Quotquot ergo ex Deo
nati, etc. As many therefore as are born of God, and therefore ordained to
eternal life, justi constituuntur, are made righteous, non modo propter, sed
and per unius obedientiam, that is, not only for, but also, By the
righteousness of one man Christ: That is, not only for the righteousness
inherently and actively in Christ, but also by that righteousness objectively
and passively conveyed into us; and so though my^^ically, yet truly making us
perfectly righteous in the sight of God.

THe second proof of Scripture, proving that we Scrip. 2. Ephesians. 5. 25, 26, 2.
are not barely counted, but truly made righteous in the sight of God; is
Ephesians. 5. 25, 26, 27. where the Pro^ing we a^e not only counted, bu^ are i^deed
righteous in Gods sight.
Apostle says, that Christ gave himself for his Church; what to do? to
sanctify it, and has made it clean by the washing of water through the word;
but for what purpose and intent has he made it clean, by shedding his blood
for it? Namely that he might make it to himself a glorious Church, not having
spot or wrinkle, or any such thing: Mark how he says not, That he might count
it a glorious Church, but make it to himself a glorious Church. And whereas
some have objected that the word (might) imports that this place is to be
understood of our making righteous by our sanctification, by which we shall be
made so righteous, that we shall have no spot or wrinkle in the life to come. I
answer, that Six reasons proving the true meaning of that place of Scripture.
I think that this place is properly and chiefly to be understood of Free
Justification, for six reasons apparent in the Text.

First, for the scope of the place, which is to exhort

Secondly, our sanctification is wrought by us Free Justification.

Thirdly, the Apostle speaks in the aorist betokening, in the participle of
the pretertense, that he has made us clean; importing a thing already
perfectly done; which is proper only in this life to the work of Free
Justification.

Fourthly, for the means whereby this work is the blood of Jesus Christ the
Son of God does make us clean from all sin; it being proper to
Justification to be wrought only by the word of promise, and by faith resting
upon the same word of free grace: as Christ says, Now are ye clean through
the word that I have spoken unto you, Ioh. 15. 3.
Ioh. 15. 3.

Fifthly, because the Apostle says, That he might make us to himself, that
is, above our selves, and above our own reason, yea, altogether mystically, and
contrary to our selves, and to our own sense and feeling, has Christ already
made us fit brides for so glorious a bridegroom, which is only in this life by
Free Justification; neither does the word (might make us;) any whit hinder this
sense, How the sign (might) may be attributed to a thing already past and done.
because when this sign of the potentiall mood, does follow another action,
importing the purpose or intent of that precedent action, the sign (might) may
signify a thing that is already wrought and perfectly done; as any man may say
of his brother now living and counted a good Christian, That he was baptized,
that he might be a Christian; where the sign (might) does not import, that he
is yet no Christian, but shall be so hereafter, but merely the purpose and
intent of the precedent action, why he was baptized, although that purpose and
intent be now already fulfilled.

Sixthly and lastly, for the Participle of the present non habituram, that is,
the Church is now in such case, as that it shall not have one spot or wrinkle
of sin hereafter; but non habentem, not having now at this present time, one
spot or wrinkle of sin or any such thing, which is only true in this life;
not to man-ward by sanctification, but to Godward by Free Justification; the
Greeks and Latins having their proper Tenses and times, fitly to express the
same.

But if any object, or rather cavil yet further, saying, That he might make us
to himself; but that he might present us to himself.

To which I answer, that is all one, or rather confirms does make us to
himself a glorious Church, not having one spot or wrinkle of sin or any such
thing in the sight of God freely. Therefore it is well noted in the Margin of
our English Bibles upon this Marginall note upon the same.
place (and indeed should be better noted that ordinarily it is) that Baptism
is a token that God has consecrated the Church to himself, and made it (mark)
made it holy by his word, that is his promise of Free Justification and
Sanctification in Christ, not having one spot or wrinkle of sin, or any such
thing: why? Because (says the note) it is covered, and clad with Christ's
justice and holiness; thereby showing that the Church is without spot or
wrinkle, but inchoatively to men-ward by Sanctification, but made so perfectly
to Godward by Justification: and this Erasmus in his Paraphrase Erasmus in his
Paraphrase upon, Ephesians. 5. 26, etc.
upon the same place, collected out of the same ancient Expositors of Gods
Word, does more fully express, saying after this manner; Christ gave himself
unto death to make clean his Church, and so of a defiled one, he has made her
pure and holy; and whereas, she was unclean and foul, he has made her fair
and beautiful, having washed her clean in the stream of his own blood, and
has made her to himself a glorious wife, even the congregation, having now
(says he) neither spot, nor wrinkle, nor any such thing, but is in every point
both fair and faultlesse, because he has cleansed her, adorned her, and made
her perfectly trim in every point. Where we see that beside other equivalent
phrases of like force, he does four or five sundry times together avouch that
Christ does not barely count her, but has made her clean and righteous.

The like Scripture agreeing with this, is, Coloss. 1. Coloss. 1. 22. Proving
we are not only counted righteous, but made righteous in Gods sight.
22. where the Apostle says to those converted Christians; And you which were
in times past strangers, yea and enemies, (why?) because your minds were set on
evil works, has be now reconciled: how? or, by what means? In the body of
his flesh through death; but wherefore, or to what end, did he die in the body
of his flesh? viz. to make you, or (as other Translations say) To present you
holy and unblameable and without fault in Gods sight, and so you are perfectly
reconciled unto him. And this also does Erasmus in his Erasmus in hi^
Paraphrase upon th^s place.
Paraphrase upon this place notably testify, saying, Because there can be
betwixt God and sinners no peace, it has pleased him, not by the ministry of
Angels, but by the bodily death of his own Son, to forgive you all the
offenses of your former life, and make you (note how he says not, count you,
but make you) holy, unblameable and faultlesse in his sight.

THe third place of Scripture, besides many others, Scrip. 2. P^oving that we
are not only co^^ed but made righteous in Gods.
most evidently proving that the power of Gods imputation is not a bare
counting, but a true and real making righteous is, 2. Cor. 5. 21. where the
Apostle says that, God has made him to be sin for us, which knew no sin,
that we should be made the righteousness of 2 Cor. 5. 21.
God in him. In which place of Scripture, although the Papists deny (by the
consent (as they say) of the ancient Fathers) that Christ by the power of Gods
imputation was really made a true sinner; but only figuratively, being truly
but an Host or Sacrifice for sin; our English Antagonists do evidently prove
both by Scripture, and by the common consent of the ancient Fathers, as
Chrysostom, Augustine, and others, That as Christ was truly made an Host or
Sacrifice for sin, which is the effect of sin; so the cause thereof went
before, which was because by the power of Gods imputation, Christ so truly took
our sins upon him, and was so really in the sight of God clothed in the
same, that although not inherently and actively, How Christ was made a sinn^r.
(for so he was always and ever the Lamb of God without spot or wrinkle;) but
yet really he was made a true sinner; and so God having made him by his
imputation really a sinner in his sight, did count him a sinner, and did rend
and tear him upon the Cross, and dealt with him in wrath, as if he had
committed our sin himself, and dyed with bearing our sin in his own body
upon the Cross, as Peter says, 1 Pet. 2. 1 Pet. 2. 24.
24. And yet notwithstanding, to avouch our Savior Christ to be so a sinner,
is not (as the Papists collect and cavil) to say, that he was averted from
God, the slave of the Devil, and Son of Perdition; because these are
consequents only of inherent corruption and sin, whereof Christ was inherently
utterly free; but as he passively was made a sinner, and passively tasted of
these things, (as the Author to the Hebrews speaks) and as he truly cried
out, My God, my God, why have thou forsaken me? Whereupon, that saying of the
ancient Dispensor of Gods mysteries Oecumenius is true, saying thus: Christus
vehementer peccator erat* etc. that is, Christ was greatly a sinner; as who did
take upon him the sins of the whole world, and make them proper to himself,
and so was truly made a sinner; for that Christ was a sinner (says he) hear
the Apostle, saying, He made him sin for us. Which words of the Apostle,
Luther hearing with the right ear (overthrowing the whole world of
sophistical Papists, by proving, that in plain places of the Scripture,
speaking in the maine points of our salvation, the plain, proper, and
grammatical words of the Scripture, are the true and proper sense of the
Scripture) says, upon these words, thus: These words of Paul are not spoken in
vain, That God made him sin for us, which knew no sin, that we in him
might be made the righteousness of God, 2 Cor. 5. 21. And again that place of
Esaias, 53. saying, God laid upon him the iniquity of us Esaias 53.
all, we must not make these words less than they are, but leave them in their
own proper signification; For God dallieth not in these words, but speaks
earnestly, and of great love, to wit, that Christ, this Lamb of God should
bear the sin of us all. But what is it (says he) to bear? the Sophisters
answer, to be punished: very well. But wherefore is Christ punished? Is it not
because he has sin, and bears sin? Yes, he has, and bears all the
sins of all men in his body: not that he himself committed them, but for
that he received them being committed or done of us, and laid them upon his
own body; thus was he made a sinner for us, and hereupon became (as the Apostle
says) a curse for us.

But some (says he) will say, It is very absurd and slanderous to call the
Son of God a cursed sinner.

I answer, if thou will deny him to be a sinner, and to be accursed, deny also
that he was crucified and dyed: for it is no less absurd to say, that the
Son of God (as our faith confesses and believes) was crucified, and
suffered the pains of sin and death, than to say that he is a sinner and
accursed: But if it be not absurd to confess and believe, that Christ was
crucified between two Thieves, then it is not absured to say also, that he was
accursed, and of all sinners the greatest; and why? Because (says he) we must
as well wrap Christ, and know him to be wrapped in our sin, in our
malediction, in our death, and in all our evils, as he is wrapped in our
flesh, and in our blood: For unless (says he further) he had taken upon
himself my sins and thine, and the sins of the whole world, the Law had no
right over him, which condemns none but sinners only, and holds them under
the curse.

Thus mighty is Gods imputation of our sin upon his Son Christ: and as Christ
by the power of Gods imputation though not inherently and actively, yet
objectively and passively, was made in the sight of God really a sinner and
cursed; so on the other side, are we by the power of Gods imputation of his
Sons righteousness, made though not inherently, and actively, yet
objectively and passively really righteous and blessed, as Chrysostom
testifies, saying, He made the just a sinner, that he might make sinners
just; that is perfectly righteous in the sight of God freely.

THe fourth place of Scripture proving that we Scrip. 4. Heb. 10. 14. Proving
that we are not only co^nted, but truly made righteous.
are not barely counted, but truly made righteous in the sight of God is, Heb.
10. 14. Where the Apostle says, that Christ with one offering has made
perfect for ever, them that are sanctified, that is, such as are put apart unto
salvation, and declare the same by sanctification: although their
sanctification be very unperfect, yet by Justification God does not
imaginarily count them righteous; but perfectos reddidit, has made them in the
sight of God perfectly righteous continually and forever; where we see that we
must not, with the Papists, draw Gods imputing of his Sons righteousness
unto us, to an humane imaginarily counting righteous; but reduce our imaginary
counting to be an Almighty, a real making us righteous, yea, and perfectly
righteous in the sight of God. And therefore very aptly upon this place does
the Doctrine of our Church in the third part of the Sermon concerning prayer.
doctrine of our Church, and the first Restorers of the Gospel amongst us, say,
in the third part of the Sermon concerning prayer speaking against praying for
souls in Purgatory, after this manner: The death and blood of Christ, if we
apprehend it, with a true and steadfast faith, purges us, and cleanses us,
from all our sins in the sight of God. For (says Saint John,) The blood of
Jesus Christ has cleansed us, from all sin: Also Paul says, We be sanctified
and made holy (mark how he says not, counted holy, but made holy) by the
offering up of the body of Jesus done once for all. Because (as the said
Doctrine of our Church says in another place) If we confess our sins, God
is faithful and righteous to forgive us our sins, and to make us clean from
all sin: and not only made holy; but also Paul adds more, saying, With the
one oblation of his blessed body and precious blood, he has made perfect for
ever and ever, all them that are sanctified. This is the only Purgatory, (say
these Our only Purgatory is Christ's blood.
first Restorers of the Gospel amongst us) Where in all Christian men must put
their whole trust and confidence.

Now that Gods imputation and spiritual clothing with his Sons
righteousness, does so really make us righteous, that after the manner of the
form, dat nomen, and esse; that is, it gives us both the name and being
righteous, although it be clear and manifest by this former point, (because
whatsoever is made so, or so, we see by daily experience, that they be, and
are so called accordingly;) yet because it makes to the confirmation of the
former point, as evident effects of the truth of the former; let me briefly
touch this also. And first, that this spiritual clothing with Christ's
righteousness does so really make us righteous, that only that gives us the
name of truly just, and righteous persons in the sight of God, is manifest by
that often repeated axiom of the Apostle, The Just by faith shall live: For
although some do darken the sense, both of the Prophet and of the Apostle, by
saying, The Just shall live by faith: by joining the word (Faith) to the Verb,
or Predicate, shall live: yet the true sense and meaning of the Apostle, as it
is in the Hebrew and Greek, is, that by faith, should be joined with the
subject Just; as if the Apostle had said, they that are by faith made just,
shall live: for the Apostle showing, that the righteousness that saves us is
offered only in the Gospel, and is revealed to every one, from faith to faith;
that is, the more faith he has, and the more it does increase, the more he
sees, and embraces this righteousness, that truly makes him just and
righteous in the sight of God; he confirms the same by the Prophet Habakuk,
saying, The just by faith shall live; wherein he teaches two things evidently.

First, that it is faith only embracing, and applying just, and righteous in
the sight of God: And

Secondly, that this righteousness not only names Christ's righteousness is to
a Christian, as the soul is to the body.
is Christ's righteousness, that also sanctifies him; and so is like the life
that the soul works in the body, and makes him live a godly Christian life, in
this world; and also makes him to live unto eternal glory in the life to come.
And as the Physicians say, that the vital spirits are they that knit and
combinde the soul and body together; so faith is like those vital spirits,
that combinde the righteousness of Christ and the Christian together. Whereby
as the soul gives unto a man, both the name and essential being of a man, so
does the righteousness of Christ apprenhended by faith, give unto a man both
the name and essential being of a Christian; and makes him to live the life of
a Christian in this world, and to live unto eternal glory in the life to come:
and as by reason of the Divine understanding soul, made to the Image of God,
God is said to be near, and to dwell in us, (whereby as S. Paul says, Acts,
17. 28. In him we live Acts 17. 28.
and move, and have our being, and are of his generation;) so by reason of
Christ's righteousness apprehended by faith, Christ himself dwells in us
(says the Apostle) by this faith, Ephesians. 3. 17. Whereby in Christ Ephesians. 3. 1^.
we live, and move, and have our being, and are of his generation or
offspring; that is to say, Christians. All which S. Paul does testify, Gal.
2. 20. by his own Gal. 2. 20.
example, in the plainest words that can be, saying, I live not now but Christ
lives in me; and in that, I now live, I live by the faith of the Son of God,
who loved me, and gave himself for me; namely, to justify me by his blood,
and make me perfectly holy and righteous in the sight of God freely. The truth
whereof, Luther clearly seeing with the spiritual eye of faith, does with as
excellent a spirit testify the same, against the whole world of Papists,
saying, This is the true mean to become a Christian, even to be justified by
faith in Jesus Christ: and why? Because it is most true, that Master Downham
testifies of Justification, Downham of Justification.
saying, The believer is clothed with the most glorious robe of Christ Iesus^
his righteousness; and so appearing before God both clean from all sin, and
endued with a perfect righteousness, he is justified, reconciled and eternally
saved.

Now what can be required more to make a true Christian? I grant, that where
this is, there will follow unfallibly, a renewed sanctified life, with zeal of
Holy life makes not but only declares a Christian.
Gods glory; but this makes not a Christian; but consequently declares, and
outwardly shows that he is already, before, thus freely made a Christian;
because he being thus clean from all sin in the sight of God, as is here
described, has not only the name and imaginary counting, but also the
essential being of a person perfectly just and righteous in the sight of God
freely: hence it is that the children of God are called by no other name in all
the Psalms and whole word of God, more commonly than by the name of the
righteous, Just, and Saints; because they Believers are Saints two ways.
are so, two manner of ways.

First, they are righteous, Just, and Saints to Godward,

Secondly, They are righteous, Just, and Saints to his sight, therefore all
those large promises made in the Psalms and Old Testament, unto the righteous
cannot be understood (as the Papists conceive) of the Saints inherent
righteousness: because David that had so great a measure of inherent
righteousness, cried out that by this inherent righteousness shall none be
found righteous in Gods sight; whereupon those large promises made in the
Psalms unto the Just and righteous, must needs be understood of the first way,
by which they are objectively and passively with Christ's righteousness
imputed, though mystically, yet truly made perfectly righteous, just, and
Saints in the sight of God freely: and therefore it is well and truly noted by
Calvin, saying, to this effect: I grant, that the Saints are called righteous,
declaratively of their inherent holiness of life: yet for as much as by all
their endeavor, they do not fulfill righteousness it self, it is meet that
this inherent righteousness, such as it is, do give place to the Being made
righteous by faith, from whence it has that which it is. But yet Luthers
observation out of Paul strikes this nail more fully to the head, saying, That
Paul calls them only righteous, which are justified through the promise, or
through faith in the promise without the Law.

And no marvel that Paul calls them that are justified, only righteous, seeing
God himself having freely justified Abraham, made him thereby so truly God
calls Abraham, Justice and righteousness.
righteous in his own sight, that God was not content to call him by his
justification righteous; but even justice and righteousness it self, saying,
Esaias Esaias 41. 2.
41. 2. Who raised up Justice, or Righteousness from the East and called him
to his foot?

Now seeing it is most true, that Luther collecteth, That if the Father of the
Jewish Nation, was made so truly righteous in the sight of God without the Law,
and before the Law, that God called him Justice and Righteousness it self in
his sight; so that we his children may much more assure our selves, now under
the time of the Gospel, that we are made as righteous, as he was, by the same
means: What greater joy and fuller assurance can we have, than that we are not
imaginarily counted, and titularly called righteous; but are though mystically,
yet in truth, and in very deed, formed and made perfectly righteous in the
sight of God freely? seeing with the first and with the last, I am the same,
says the Lord, Esaias 41. 4. Whereby we Esaias. 41 4.
may see, how true that testimony of Master Downham, and of other our English
Divines, is, effectually beating down that Popish slander, That Protestants
hold in Free Justification, only a false-reputing, and imaginary counting
righteous in the sight of God, saying expressly of Free Justification, in diverse
places after this manner; Neither are we imaginarily righteous, but God makes
us perfectly righteous indeed, by washing away our sins with the precious
blood of Christ, and by appropriating and applying unto us his sons
righteousness, by virtue of his spirit principally, and a lively faith
instrumentally; and so being made really and in truth partakers of Christ's
righteousness, God reputes us not imaginarily, but as we are (mark as we are)
and that in truth perfectly just and righteous. The self same thing does
Zanchius, in his Treatise of Justification, upon Ephesians. 2. 5.
Zanchius abundantly testify in his Treatise of Justification upon, Ephesians. 2. 5.
saying likewise, expressly in diverse places, That we are not only reputed and
counted, but also vere sumus truly are, perfectly righteous before God; and
that also, because God by clothing us with his Sons righteousness, does
reipsa in very deed make us so. For says he, God forbid, that when the Apostle
says, God does justify the ungodly, we should so understand it, as that he,
which is simply wicked and ungodly, him God should absolve as godly, and should
p^onounce him to be righteous; which is in very deed unjust, seeing the
Scripture says that God does hate the wicked and his wickedness: And for as
much as God is the highest wisdom, truth, and justice; but all men by their
own nature are unjust and no man can make himself just and righteous, but only
God, Therefore it follows (says he) that God does absolve no man, and
pronounce him just and righteous, but him quem prius fecerit justum, that is,
whom first he has made righteous by his grace: then he shows how God does
make a man righteous by his grace, saying thus: But as the righteousness is
twofold (as we showed before) by which we are justified, that is (says he) by
which fimus justi, we are made righteous; so God bifariam facit homines Two
manner of ways made righteous.
justos, that is, does two manner of ways; make men righteous.

First, when not imputing their sins unto them he forgives all their
iniquities, because they are extinct and clean put out by the blood of Christ:
and on the contrary, by clothing them with his Sons righteousness, does make
them righteous, as the Apostle testifies, saying, By the obedience of one man,
(namely imputed) are many made righteous: Seeing then this is a true and
perfect righteousness, who (says he) may say, that they are not of unjust,
vere justos esse factos, truly made just and righteous, which have in Christ
gotten and attained this righteousness?

Secondly, God sanctifies them by inherent righteousness. Seeing then (says
he) God does with both these righteousness, nos justos reipsa efficere that
is, make us in very deed righteous, with the first, righteous before himself,
with the other, righteous before men, It can by no means be said, when God
does justify his Elect, that he does absolve men, that are simply, wicked and
unjust, and pronounce them just and righteous (because this were directly
repugnant, both to his high justice, and truth;) sed justos a se factos
absolvit, God absolveth only the just.
that is, first he makes them just and righteous, and then absolves them. Again
he says thus; Although God does make them righteous with both these
righteousness; yet he does not absolve, and pronounce them righteous, for
their inherent righteousness, because it is unperfect; but only, because he
has made them perfectly righteous before himself, with his Sons
righteousness imputed, standing complete before God, only by that.

Last of all, concerning this point, he shows how a man may know in his own
heart, and how he himself and others may discern, that he is justified,
absolved before God from all fault and blame, and freed from all sin, guilt
and punishment, and pronounced just before God, and an heir of his heavenly
kingdom; and so (as I said before) is made a true Christian freely Zanch. in
loco communi de Iustif in Ephe. 2. 5.
before God: namely, when he assenteth to this maine proposition of the Gospel,
and assumes the assurance of it to himself in his own heart, to wit, That The
maine proposition of the Gospel.
whosoever believes in the Son of God Christ Jesus, that by his obedience, tam
justus factus sit coram Deo, he is made as righteous before God, quam per
inobedientiam Adae injustus factus fuerat, as he was by the disobedience of
Adam, made unrighteous, for as much as the obedience of Christ, is not of less
force and efficacy to make him righteous, than was the disobedience of Adam,
to make him unrighteous: this man has the true faith, and him does God
acknowledge, count, and pronounce righteous, and so does quit him from all
faults that can be objected against him; and thereby free him from: all the
guilt and punishment due to his sins.

By all which it is cleerer than the noone day, That before a man can be free
from all guilt and punishment of sin, and from the power of the same, he must
not only be barely counted, but must first be, though objectively and
passively, yet truly and in very deed, made perfectly holy and righteous, spot
of sin in the sight of God freely. And therefore that the true Believer is
not only truly and indeed made righteous; but also perfectly holy and righteous
in the sight of God, freely; remains to be proved by the express Word of
God, and unanimous consent of all the best and faithful Dispensors of Gods
Gospel, in the next Chapter.

CHAP. XI. That the true Believer is not only made righteous, but also
completely, fully, sufficiently, and perfectly righteous in the sight of God
freely.
NOw that the excellency of Free Justification is such, and so great, that it
does not only make the justified person merely righteous, but also
completely, fully, sufficiently, and perfectly righteous in the sight of God
freely; although it might be proved by many proofs of Scriptures, yet I will
insist, with the consent and Four place^ of Scripture proving that the
ju^^fied are completely and (...), righteous.
reasons of the learned, but only in sour; and that with as great brevity, as
weighty a matter can possibly require.

THe first is Ephesians. 5. 25, 26, 27. where the Apostle, 1. Ephesians. 5 25, 26 27.
appropriating the work there spoken of, only to Christ and his blood, and
therefore belongs properly (as I showed before) to Free Justification, says
thus: Christ gave himself for his Church: for what cause? to sanctify it and
has made it clean by the washing of water, through the word. But to what end
or purpose has he so done? To make it to himself a glorious Church. How
glorious? Not only not having, now at this present time, one spot or wrinkle of
sin, or any such thing, as is before showed in the first part to Free
Justification, which is wonderful; but also holy, yea, unblameably holy. Can
possibly the wit and understanding of man wish and desire a more perfect
holiness, than to be so unblameably holy in the sight of God, who is of so
pure and perfect eyes? Whereupon the testimony of Polanus in his partitions,
treating of Free Justification, is worthy the marking, saying after this
manner, We must be perfect in Gods sight, and that in all the degrees of true
and entire righteousness, Ephesians. 5. 27. but so Ephesians. 5. 27.
perfect we cannot be, but Christ, Colos. 2. 10. whose true and entire
righteousness in every respect is imputed unto us: which thing Vrsinus also,
agreeing with others, propounds in the place alleged; for thus he writes,
The Repentant persons are perfect (mark, are perfect) in the sight of God, not
only in the parts of true piety, all which are begun in them (by
sanctification) but also in the degrees of true and entire righteousness of
Christ imputed unto them, as it is said, Col. 2. 10. Coloss. 2. 10.
In him we are (mark, we are) complete and perfect. Where we see, that the
righteousness of Christ, being the form that makes us righteous in the sight
of God, is not only absolute and perfect in it self, but also forms and
makes us perfectly righteous in the sight of God. And this is yet more fully
expressed by Hemingius upon 1 John 1. 7. saying, Non satis est, etc. Heming
upon 1 lohn 1. 7.
It is not enough to have our sins forgiven and cleansed away, unless also
righteousness be bestowed upon us; therefore the obedience of the Law is
required in Christ, that it may be imputed unto us, whereby we appear plene
justi, fully just and righteous in the sight of God. Where let us mark, that he
says not, that Christ may appear fully righteous in the sight of God, for us;
but, that we may appear fully and perfectly just and righteous in the sight of
God freely. The same is confirmed by other faithful Expositors; and Dispencers
Marlor. and P. Mart. in 1 Cor. 1. 8.
of Gods mysteries, upon 1 Cor. 1. 8. saying, Unto Believers, without all
controversy, is imputed the righteousness of Christ, by which it is brought
to pass that we appear, prorsus sancti and irreprehensibiles in conspectu Dei,
altogether holy and unblameable in the sight of God. Can any man wish any more,
than to be altogether holy and unblameable in the sight of God? The cause
whereof to be only Free Justification, is plainly expressed by Master Downham
in his Treatise upon Justification, saying, The Believer is clothed with the
most glorious robe of Christ Jesus his righteousness, and so appearing before
God both clean from all sin, and endued with a perfect righteousness, he is
justified, reconciled, and eternally saved.

And this making of us perfectly righteous in the sight of God, is Gods
forgiveness and pardon; which is not like man's forgiveness, but is great and
glorious, like God the forgiver; which few understand, and by not understanding
the same, do run into diverse absurdities, and yet is plainly taught and
testified by Acts 13. 38. 39.
Saint Paul, Acts 13. 38, 39. where when he had said, Be it known unto you, men
and brethren, that through this man is preached unto you the forgiveness of
sins: that we might understand, that Gods forgiveness is not a weak and
slender thing, like man's forgiveness, that does not make the thing forgiven
any whit the better; but that Gods forgiveness is a strong, mighty, and
powerful thing, that makes the creature forgiven, perfectly holy and righteous
in his sight; he presently adds in the next verse, by way of exposition, what
he means by Gods forgiveness, saying, Even from all things, from which ye
could not be justified, that is, made perfectly righteous by the Law of Moses;
By him every one that believes is justified, that is, made perfectly righteous
from all spot of sin in the sight of God freely. And this Calvin also plainly
witnesses, saying upon the same Calvin upon Acts 13. 38, 9.
place of Acts 13. after this manner; You see that after mention of sorgivenesse
of sins, Justification is added in place of an exposition. And this the Apostle
seems to press Romans 3. as a peculiar privilege of the New Testament to be
revealed under the time of the Gospel: Where speaking, ver. 25. of remission of
sins that are past, through the forbearance of God, he shows, that now
under the time of the Gospel, that forgiveness is revealed to be the
righteousness of God, made manifest without the Law, even the righteousness
of God, conveyed by the faith of Jesus Christ unto all, and upon all that do
believe; whereby God does more fully declare, at this time, the perfection of
his justice and righteousness, that he is just, and a maker of him just, and
perfectly righteous, that believes in Jesus. Again, this is yet more fully
expressed by the Author to the Hebrews, chapter 10. where citing the Prophecy of
Jeremy, that under Heb 10. 17.
the time of the Gospel, God will so forgive the iniquity of his people, that
he will remember their sins no more; he shows, that this is the meaning of
this perfect forgiveness, That by one offering Christ has made perfect for
ever all them that are sanctified, Heb. 10. 14. Heb. 10. 14.
Such a wonderful and glorious thing is Gods forgiveness.

And because the blessedness of the Church, and of the children of God, and
the assurance of their salvation, does consist in the forgiveness of their
sins, therefore does the Apostle in this first alleged place of the Epistle to
the Ephesians so gloriously describe both by the causes, by the nature, and by
the effects this forgiveness and remission of sins, saying, Christ gave
himself The cause, the nature, and the effects of our forgiveness described.
for his Church, there is the cause of forgiveness, to sanctify it; and has
made it clean, by washing of water, through the word; there is the nature of
Gods forgiveness, with the means and instruments of convaying the same: then
follows the force, operation, and efficacy of this forgiveness, to make it
to himself a glorious Church, not having, at this present time, one spot or
wrinkle of sin, or any such thing, but to be holy, and without blame. All which
declares what a powerful, operative, Gods forgiveness is powerful and
glorious.
wonderful, and glorious work, Gods forgiveness is, and how short we
Ministers come of laying forth, as the Apostle does, the excellency of Gods
remission and forgiveness of sins, being both perfect and glorious in its
own nature, and also making the true believers perfectly holy and righteous
from all spot of sin in the sight of God freely. As it is notably expressed in
Erasmus his Paraphrase upon the same Erasmus his Paraphrase upon Ephesians. 5. 26,
27.
place, worthy, for the evident clearing and concluding of this point, to be
repeated again and again, saying thus: That this might be brought to pass,
Christ gave himself unto death to make clean his Church, and so of a defiled
one, he has made her pure and holy; and whereas she was unclean and foul,
he has made her fair and beautiful, having washed her clean in the stream
of his own blood, and has made her to himself a glorious wife, even the
Congregation, not having now one spot or wrinkle, nor any such thing, but be in
every point (mark, in every point) both fair and faultlesse; for he has
cleansed her, adorned her, and made her perfectly trim (mark again, perfectly
trim) in every point.

THe second proof of Scripture evidently proving The second place of Scripture
proving that we are, being justified, fully righteous in Gods sight, ^^ Colos.
1. 22.
that Justification makes the true Believer perfectly holy and righteous from
all spot of sin in the sight of God freely, is Colos. 1. 22. where the Apostle
says unto the called and justified Colossians after this manner; And you which
were in times past strangers, Is that all? nay, and enemies to God, Why?
because your minds were set on evil works, has he now reconciled; that is, he
has set you in his perfect love again: this is an happy change and
alteration: but how, and by what means is this brought to pass? In that body
of his flesh through death, to make you holy and unblameable, and without
fault; and (as our new Translation says well) unreproveable in his sight. In
which saying is expressed such perfect making of us holy and righteous in the
sight of God, That if all the children of God, being troubled in their
consciences for the horribleness and vileness of their sin, should lay their
heads together to sue at Gods hand, for a perfect abolishing of all their sins
out of Gods sight, and for a perfect making of them completely righteous in the
sight of God, they could not invent a more full and perfect happiness, than is
here granted them; for can the heart of man wish more than to be so holy, as to
be without all blame, and without all fault, and unreproveable, as the
original Greek words import? And that also, as Zanchius well observes, non
simpliciter, sed in Zanchius Colos. 1. 22.
conspectu suo; that is, not simply and barely, but in the sight of God: whose
eyes (as it is in- Rev. 1. in- Rev. 1. 14.) are Rev. 1. 14.
as a flame of fire; that is, with unresistable purity searching the heart and
reins. Must not the Ecphonesis or Chrysostom upon Ephesians. 5. 26, 27.
acclamation of Chrysostom, upon this place, needs be true, saying, Et
sanemagnum est? etc. Surely it is a great matter, that he has given us a
righteousness, that makes us so perfectly righteous, as to be able to stand in
his sight. Whereupon the collection of Zanchius Zanchius upon the place.
upon this place must needs be true also, saying, Haec non potest esse justitia
operum, and sanctitas in nobis inchoata, etc. that is, This cannot be the
righteousness of works, and inherent holiness begun in us; why? because
(says he) that is unperfect; and of which David speaks, saying, Enter not
into judgment with thy servant, O Lord, for in thy sight shall none living be
found righteous: Only Christ's holiness and righteousness is perfect in the
sight of God. This therefore being imputed unto us, is the formal cause of our
salvation, qua fit ut in conspectu Dei simus (...); that is, by which it is
brought to pass, that Zanch. ibid.
we (mark how he says not, Christ for us, but we) are without all blame, and
without all fault, and unreproveable in the sight of God. Of which most happy
and joyful estate the learned in the Gospel do give two Two reasons of our
happy estate, are from the cause and from the effects of it.
principal reasons, the one taken from the cause of his happy condition, the
other from the effect of the same.

First, the cause why we are so perfectly holy and Calvin testifies upon Job.
15. 15, 16. saying, All our filthiness being washed away Calvin upon Job 15.
15, 16.
with the blood of Gods Son, and his righteousness imputed unto us, being
thus clothed with his garments, we are acceptable to our good God; why?
because we have more than an Angelical righteousness in us. Neither is this
perfect righteousness idly in us, but makes us as perfectly righteous in the
sight of God freely, as it Calvin upon Job 15. 15, 6.
is righteous in it self: As Calvin in the beginning of his next Sermon upon
the same place of Job plainly testifies, saying, Herein we have to consider
Gods great goodness toward us, in clothing us with a righteousness that
surmounteth the righteousness of the Angels: we are as wretched and miserable
sinners as can be (viz. in our sense and feeling) and yet notwit^ standing God
makes us (mark how he says not, makes Christ only for us) but makes us
righteous after a more excellent and precious manner than the very Angels are
(in respect of their own nature only) For (says he) Christ's righteousness is
given unto us, which far surmounteth the righteousness of the Angels. If
this perfect righteousness be, Our righteousness far execeding the
righteousness of the Angels
by the power of Gods imputation, not only in us, but also do make us thus
perfectly righteous in the sight of God; is it any marvel that we are so holy,
that we are unblameable, and without fault in the sight of God? The same in a
manner Chrysostom also testifies Chrys^stome upon Romans 9. 30. 31.
upon those words, That the Gentiles that followed not righteousness, have
attained unto righteousness: But Israel, which followed the law of
righteousness, could not attain the law of righteousness, Romans 9. 30, 31.
saying thus, Tu siquidem O Iudaee, etc. For thou O Jew (says the Apostle) have
not found that righteousness which is of the law; for having transgressed the
law, thou art made subject to the Curse. by another way, namely by faith, have
found a greater righteousness (mark, a greater righteousness) than this of
the Law:

For here (says he) three things are effected; first, that the Gentiles have
found and attained righteousness; secondly, that they have attained it, not
following after it, that is, bestowing no pains or labor about it; And
thirdly, they have found a greater than that which is by the Law: whereupon in
the next Chapter upon these words, Christ is the end or perfection of the Law,
for righteousness to every one that believes the same: Chrysostom concludes
thus, There is Chrysostom, in Romans 10.
no cause therefore why thou should fear as a transgressor of the Law, if so
be that thou beleevest in Christ: why? Because thou have fufilled this Law, and
have now received a far greater righteousness: Because it is most true that
Master Downham avoucheth in his Treatise of Justification, Master Downham in
his Trea^ise of Justification.
That we are made partakers of a more excellent righteousness, than we lost in
Adam, required again in the Law, even the righteousness of God, as the Apostle
says, Romans 3. 22. which consists not only in the absence (says Romans 3. 22.
he) of evil and sin; but also in the presence of all actual, perfect, and
everlasting holiness and righteousness; in which we being made thus perfectly
righteous in the sight of God, must needs be without all blame and without all
fault in his sight freely.

The second reason flowing from the effect of our 2 The second reason of our
happy e^ta^e.
justification convincing, why we are made so holy, that we are unblameable and
without fault in Gods sight, is because this ^imputing and mystical clothing
of us with Christ's righteousness, does not only make our persons both bodies
and souls perfectly holy and righteous, in the sight of God: but also all our
works, vocations, affairs and businesses, that we take in hand, are made
perfectly holy and righteous from all spot of sin in the sight of God freely:
so that,

First, all our natural actions, as our eating, and 1 The natural, civil and
religious works of b^leevers, are made perfect in the fight of God.
drinking, and the marriage bed, and such like are honorable, being made
perfectly holy and righteous in the sight of God.

Secondly, our civil actions as honest buying, and selling, and other works of
our civil vocations are made perfectly holy and righteous in the sight of

Thirdly, our religious works, as our prayers, and

How then are all these sorts of actions in Gods

I answer, freely, by the perfection of Justification: Tit. 1 15. Tit. 1. 15,
16. Hag. 2. 14.
16. but also (the Prophet Hag. 2. 14. cries out) So are all the works of
their hands, and that which they offer in the Temple is unclean: So on the
other side, To the pure, that is, to them that are justified, and washed, and
purified from their sins by the blood of the Lamb, all things are pure (says
the Apostle) and all the works of their hands, and whatsoever they offer in the
Temple, is perfectly holy and righteous in the sight of God freely; and thereby
acceptable and pleasing in the sight of God, whom nothing pleases, but that
which is pure and perfect.

But how, and after what manner, are they made so

I answer, because Justification does abolish from to be perfectly holy and
righteous in the sight of God freely, and by this means are made continually
acceptable and pleasing in the sight of God; if they be not pretended
infirmities of unbeleeving, and unjustified hypocrites, but mere infirmities
of imperfectly sanctified persons; for of such sanctified persons only, God
says by the Prophet, Malac. 3. 17. I will spare them, as a man spares his
son M^l. 3. 17.
that serves him; not as the Papists conceive, for their sanctification sake,
and goodness of their works; nor yet sparing them, as other semi-Papists
childishly conceive, for their good will and good endeavors, because they do
like a child the best that they can, and because their imperfections, be but
infirmities; nor that he will (as he has now more fully revealed in the
Gospel) accept of the imperfect works of his children, whilst they are
imperfect; seeing he has now revealed by his sons death, what an horrible
thing, the least imperfection is in his sight, that they are so loathsome as a
menstruous cloth in his sight, causing him to take his full stroke at them, in
his sons blood, to wash away and abolish the imperfections of them out of his
sight; but because in new tincture of his Sons blood and righteousness, he
has made them perfectly holy and righteous in his own sight, freely; therefore
he likes, and accepts them. For that Justification makes not only our persons,
but also our works perfectly holy and righteous in the sight of God, is not
only evident by the former Scriptures, but also, testified by all the best
faithful Dispensers of Gods mysteries, who say with one consent after this
manner: Postquam facti sumus Christi participes, non ipsi solum justi sumus,
sed opera nostra justa reputantur coram Deo, that is, after that we are made
partakers of Christ, not only we our selves are righteous, but also our works
are reputed and counted righteous before God: what? not righteous indeed, but
only imaginarily reputed and counted righteous? Nay, but because Gods counting
is not a bare imaginary thing, but a real working of the thing, as he reputeth
and counts; therefore as we our selves are so reputed and counted righteous,
that coram Deo reipsa justi sumus, we our selves are in truth just, that is,
perfectly righteous before God; so also, God so counts our works, perfectly
righteous before himself, that they are reipsa in very deed and truth,
perfectly holy and righteous in the sight of God freely, that is, not in the
worth and perfection of our doing them by sanctification; but in the making of
them, perfectly righteous in Christ's righteousness by Justification.

But what is the reason that our works, that as they

The learned answer thus; Propterea scilicet, quia quicquid est in illis
imperfection is obliteratur Christi sanguine, that is, Therefore verily,
because whatsoever imperfection All the imperfection of our works, is done away
by the blood of Christ.
is in them, is done away and abolished by the blood and righteousness of
Christ. And by this means only do our works please God; and for this cause
only, all the large promises made in Gods Word unto our works, are truly
verified, and fulfilled upon us; merely because we doing them in comfort,
faith, and thankfulness, that we are justified, all our works are thereby
justified as well as we; and made so perfectly holy and righteous in the sight
of God, that they fully please God, and pull down all blessings and benefits
whatsoever, both spiritual and temporal, freely upon us, only for, and by
Free Justification thus perfectly blessing, both us and our works: As it is
clearly testified by the foresaid learned Dispensors of Gods mysteries, saying
thus, Qui enim jam Christi Iustitia sunt induti, ii non sibi modo propitium
habent Dominum, sed operibus quoque suis, etc. That is, for they that are
clothed with Christ's righteousness, have God pleased, and favorable not to
themselves only, but also to their works; the spots and stains whereof, lest
they should come in any reckoning, are abolished with Christ's purity: unde
nullis sordibus infecta opera justa reputantur, that is, from whence our works
are counted righteous, seeing they are tainted with no spots of uncleanness
and foulness; and by this means, and not otherwise do men's works please God.

This learned Calvin also prosecuteth in the 7. 8, 9, ^^d 10. Sections of the
17. Chapter of the third book Calv. in the 7. 8. 9. 10. Sections of the 17. Cap
of the third Book of his Institutions.
of his Institutions, with clear demonstrations, saying thus, when the blot and
fault of imperfection is abolished, which is of force to defile our good works:
the good works which the faithful do, both are, and be taken for
righteousness, yea after this manner, for a full and perfect righteousness:
And thus we may (says he) truly say, that by only faith, not only we, but
also our works are justified; that is (as I have proved before) made perfectly
holy and righteous from all spot of sin in the sight of God freely, and so
truly pleasing God. Holy faith justifies our works.
And this the holy Ghost in the example of the sacrifice of Abel, does plainly
and expressly teach, Heb. 11. 4 saying, By faith Able offered unto God a more
excellent Heb. 11. 4^.
sacrifice than Cain, by which he obtained witness, that he was righteous;
where we see that not only Abel himself was just and righteous, that is
excellent; but his gifts were excellent, and that also excellent to Godward,
God himself (as the Text says) testifying of his gifts, that they were
excellent; which Title they could not have with God, except they were in truth,
perfectly holy and righteous in his sight; not for the perfection of Abels
doing them, but freely; because (as also it is said of Noah) he was made heir
of that righteousness which is by faith, verse, 7. This is the righteousness
of Christ, which is so mighty in operation, that by it, God not only (as Calvin
speaks) pretioso justitiae suae color nos tingit, that is, with the precious
tincture of his own righteousness does be-die us, our own selves, but also
with the same precious tincture does be-die all our good works and wholelife,
and conversation, making not only us our selves, but also all our works
perfectly holy and righteous in the sight of God freely; and yet not by these
works, made with this tincture, perfectly holy and righteous in the sight of
God, to deserve heaven as the Papists fondly conceit; because a Christian has
heaven freely, by the Free Justification of his person, before he has moved
himself to do any good work, because he is (as Christ testifies) translated
from death into life, by believing only, Ioh. 5. 24. But the works of the
Believer John 5. 24.
are with this tincture, and die, made thus perfectly The works of the
Believers are made, perfect that they may be a sacrifice of thanksgiving to God.
holy and righteous in the sight of God freely, that they may thus be a welcome
and acceptable sacrifice of praise and thansgiving before God; because (as I
said before) he has now revealed in his Gospel, that nothing is welcome and
acceptable before him, but that which is perfectly holy and righteous in his
sight; but that herein he manifests the bottomless gulf of his mercy, that
he m^kes mercy and truth so to meet together, and righteousness and peace so
to kiss each other, That he makes all things new, and all the works of his
children, with the mere tincture of his sons righteousness to be,
mystically above their sense and feeling, perfectly holy and righteous in the
sight of God freely; that so they may be a well pleasing sacrifice before him.
Which as it is expressly so taught every where in the Word of God; and namely,
in that saying of Peter, That the true believers do offer up spiritual
sacrifices, acceptable by Jesus Christ, that is, in the tincture of Jesus
Christ's righteousness, only made perfectly holy and righteous in the sight of
God, freely; so is it as plainly and truly testified, together with many other
witnesses, by a faithful Dispenser of Gods mysteries in our Church, testifying
thus against the Papists: If any Papist stand out here, and say, that Christ
takes our works, and dies them in his blood, and then offers them to his
Father, who accepts them as meritorious, not for our sakes, nor their own,
but only for Christ: I answer, That Christ in deed dies the works of the godly
in his blood, and so presents them unto his Father, and his Father accepts
them at his hands: but no way in respect of any satisfaction of sin, or merit
of salvation; but only as testimonies of our thankfulness and duty, and not
otherwise: Where we see it is plainly testified, that our works although they
be made perfectly holy and righteous in the sight of God, do merit nothing:
yet notwithstanding that they may be welcome sacrifices of our praise and
thanksgiving, and testimonies of our thankfulness acceptable before God; and
have the testimony of God, that like the sacrifice of Abel, they are excellent
before him; they must in the tincture of Christ's blood and righteousness, be
new died perfectly holy and righteous in the sight of God freely; which new die
and tincture nothing can ingraine upon them, but only the blood and
righteousness of Christ; which therefore is called often in the word and
Gospel, the righteousness of God; not only because it is the righteousness of
that person that is both man and God, or because it is a righteousness given
freely by God; but also because it being an Hebrew phrase to call whatsoever is
excellent, to be of God; seeing this righteousness is so excellent in it
self; and secondly makes the person clothed in the same excellent in the
sight of God; and thirdly makes not only his person, but also, all his works,
excellent in the sight of God; Is it not worthily called the righteousness of
God? But hereupon we may conclude this second proof of Scripture, That if
Christ's righteousness, do make not only us, our selves, excellently and
perfectly righteous in the sight of God; but also all our works excellently and
perfectly holy and righteous in the sight of God freely; The saying of the
Apostle must needs be true, that we are so holy that we are without all
blame, and without all fault in the sight of God freely, Coloss. Colos. 1. 22.
1. 22.

Whereunto Erasmus in his Paraphrase upon the Erasmus in his Paraphrase upon
the place.
same place, adds the reason and necessity thereof, drawn from the
horriblenesse of sin, saying thus, Because there can be betwixt God and
sinners no peace, it has pleased him, not by the ministry of Angels, but by
the bodily death of his own son, to forgive you all the offenses of your
former life; and showing further the power of Gods forgiveness how great it
is, he proceeds with the Apostle, saying, And makes you holy, unblamable,
and faultlesse in Gods sight; which to be the mere operation of the
righteousness of God, only able to effect this upon us; Beza, in his larger
Notes Beza, in his larger Notes upon Romans 1. 17.
upon, Romans 1. 17. does thus clearly testify, saying, Haec autem diligenter
considerata, etc. These things being diligently considered, do manifestly
declare, what is meant by that word (of the righteousness of God) namely, that
perfection, and high integrity revealed in the Gospel, with which whosoever is
endued, he is presented before God, (...), as the Apostle speaks, Col. 1.
22. that is, holy and unblameable; and qui nullius criminis possit postulari,
one that can be reproved and blamed of no fault. And I add, what can a man wish
and desire more for full perfection?

THe third proof of Scripture, proving that we, by 3 The third pla^e of
Scr^pture, tha^ the iust^^^^d are perfectly holy and ^ighteo^s in g^ds sight,
is Colos 1. 28. and ^. 10.
being clothed with Christ's righteousness, are not only truly made righteous,
but also perfectly holy and righteous in the sight of God freely, is Colos. 1.
28. and 2. 10. where, when the Apostle in the first place has showed, in his
own example, what is the proper office and duty of all Ministers and Preachers
of the Gospel generally; namely, to labor every where, to present every man
perfect in Christ Jesus; presently he adds in the next chapter, in way of
application unto the Colossians, that were by his labor converted, saying, And
ye are complete in him, which is the Head of all principality and power:
where we are to mark, that he says not, that being ingraffed into Christ, you
shall be complete hereafter in time to come; but, now in the present time, ye
are full, complete, and perfect, not by your own doings, but freely; because
you are the members of such an Head, that is the Head of all principalities and
powers, rich enough to make you also, without your own doings, rich in all
fullness and completeness of his own sufficient fullness, freely and perfectly.
Of which place of Scripture the learned Interpreters speak worthily thus: Est
autem sententia valde insignis, digna quam omnes pii semper in conspectu
habeant, etc. that is, This is a very notable saying, worthy that the godly
should have it always in their sight. For, first, it teaches very clearly of
Justification before God; for it shows (says Calvin) that the essence of the
Godhead, that is in Christ, does herein profit us, that being in him, nos
quoque perfecti sumus, we also are perfect: As if he said, That the whole
Godhead dwells in Christ, is even for this cause, That having gotten and
attained him, we have and possess full perfection; because with one oblation of
himself he has made perfect continually, and for ever, all them that are
sanctified.

Therefore they do a twofold or double wrong to God, that rest not in Christ
alone. For beside that, that they derogate from the glory of God, by desiring
something more than his perfection: And moreover, they are ungrateful and
unthankful, that they seek from elsewhere, that which, being in Christ, they
now have already: And what have we now already? Even that which these learned
Expositors testify in another place, namely, upon those words of the Apostle,
That I may know him, and the virtue of his resurrection, saying thus, For in
this virtue of his resurrection all things are bestowed upon us: As,

First, justitiae acquisitio, the attaining of righteousness.

Secondly, abolitio peccati, the abolishing of sin.

Thirdly, liberatio a reatu, freedom from all guilt

Fourthly, mortis victoria, victory over death. And

Fifthly, spes beatae immortalitatis, assured hope and For in him dwells the
fullness of the Godhead bodily, saying after this manner, Nulla igitur aliare
post Christum nobis opus est, etc. that is, After we have gotten Christ, we
have need of no other thing; for he that has Christ, has all things; In
Christ we have all th^^gs
and he that by faith is ingraffed into him, has no need to seek for
wisdom, or righteousness, or perfect freedom from elsewhere; per eundem enim
plene perficitur, and justificatur; that is, because by him he is fully
justified, and made fully perfect, that is (as I say still) perfectly holy and
righteous in the sight of God freely.

And this is Christ's full satisfaction that is wrought fully in us, and upon us
by Christ, which many talk of, but few understand, even as little, as they know
what is meant by Gods forgiveness: for because God made man perfectly holy and
righteous, at the first, and thereby a complete creature, his justice is not
satisfied, until he sees his creature as perfectly holy and righteous Gods
justice is not satisfied, ^ll he see us perfectly holy and righteou^.
in his sight, as he made him at the first: but none can undertake to bring
this to pass but Christ; and therefore he undergoing for us, and overcomming
that punishment of Gods justice, that we should have borne, and conveying, by
the power of his imputation, that justice and perfect righteousness that he
fulfilled for us, to be in us, and upon us in Gods sight, has thus by his
death fully wrought by himself alone, whatsoever the perfect justice of God
requires to be in us; and so has fully satisfied the justice of God, by making
us perfectly holy and righteous in the sight of God freely. And thus we being
in Christ made, as the Apostle says, complete in the sight of God, the justice
of God is fully satisfied: so that although the death of Christ, satisfying for
us, be without us in Christ; yet the virtue, fruit, and power of that
satisfaction is in us, making us perfectly holy and righteous, and fully
complete in the sight of God freely.

And therefore it is well observed of the faithful Dispensers of Gods
mysteries aforesaid, saying, concerning the death of Christ, after this manner:
Quoties de morte Christi loquitur Scriptura, fructum pretiumque illius in nobis
statuit; that is, as often as the Scripture speaks of the death of Christ, it
does place and set the fruit and price thereof in us; because (say they) by it,

First, a sordibus nostris mundati sumus, we are made

Secondly, restituti in justitiam, we are restored into

Thirdly, Deo reconciliati, we are reconciled to

Fourthly, per eam redempti, by it we are redeemed.

Fifthly, janua vitae aperta, the gate of life is opened

Sixthly, and lastly, vita acquisita est, everlasting Abbot against Bishop,
That our justification Doctor Abbot^ against Bishop.
is our satisfaction before God. For declaration whereof (says he) it is to be
observed, That sin consists partly in commission, partly in omission, partly
in doing that which we ought not to do, partly in not doing that which we
ought to do; satisfaction for sin must serve to acquit both the one, and the
other; It must take away what we have done, and supply what we have not done,
or else it cannot be called a satisfaction. But so does our Justification; it
abolisheth, though mystically, yet truly, all our sins from before God, and so
(as it was said before) makes us clean from all our spiritual foulness; and,
secondly, restores us into righteousness, so that we are made perfectly holy
and righteous in the sight of God freely; and so the justice of God in us is
fully satisfied, because we are made complete in the sight of God, and
sufficiently righteous. But that we may not ^ow too long in this sea of
happiness, let us proceed to the next place of Scripture.

THe fourth proof of Scripture therefore, proving 6 The fourth Scripture
proving the perfect condition of the justified children of God, is H^b. 10. 14.
that we, by being clothed with Christ's righteousness, are not only truly
made righteous, but also perfectly holy and righteous in the sight of God
freely, is Heb. 10. 14. where the Apostle says, For by one offering has
Christ made perfect for ever them that are sanctified. If they be once by him
alone made perfect for ever, who may presume to add any thing to these persons,
Nothing can be added to our righteousness.
to make them one jot more perfect in the sight of God? For the better
understanding whereof, let us mark the circumstances of the place, which do
much enlighten the matter. For, comparing the Sacrifices of the Old Testament
with that one Sacrifice of Christ, offered up by himself, in the New
Testament, he shows, That although the blood of Bulls and of Goats, being but
types, and figures, and shadows of the good things to come, are of such force,
as sprinkling the unclean did sanctify them to the purifying of the flesh, so
that the sacrifice being done and performed, they went away clean from all
their sins; yet notwithstanding those Sacrifices were so weak, that they could
not bring perpetual and continual quietness of conscience: so that when they
felt themselves to slip again, and to fall into new sins and infirmities, they
were fain to bring new Sacrifices to renew their peace of conscience: and why?
because it was impossible that the blood of Bulls, and of Goats, being but
shadows of the truth, should take away sin, and make the comers thereunto
perfect; for so the figures and shadows should go away, at least in outward
appearance, with the glory belonging and reserved as due unto the substance it
self. But when Christ, the truth it self, came, signified by those figures,
and did fully exhibit himself to perform fully the truth that was represented
in those figures; Then the blood of Christ, who through the eternal spirit
offered himself without spot to God, did so fully purge and purify our
consciences from dead works to serve the living God, that now there is no need
of any more Sacrifice for sin, because God does not so much as remember our
sins any more, Heb. 10. 17. 18. And Heb 10. 17, 18.
why? because with that one offering of himself he has made perfect for ever
all them that are sanctified. The new Testament passing the Old in four
circumstances.
Where let us mark the full perfection of the New Testament above the Old,
here compared the one with the other, and the New passing the Old in four
circumstances.

First, he says not inchoatively and imperfectly, as Heb. 7. 19. but perfectly.

Secondly, he says not, that he will make perfect,

Thirdly, not for a season to be by intercourses often

Fourthly, not only for long times, as whole years, for ever and ever, as the
doctrine of our Church speaks. Thus has Christ made all his children and
Church righteous, quarto modo, that Christ has made us righteous quarto modo.
is, omnes, solos, and semper: first, omnes, all that are sanctified: secondly,
solos, only they that are sanctified: and thirdly, semper, he has made them
perfectly righteous, continually, and for ever. Hence he is called Melchisedec,
that is, the King of righteousness, because he makes all his subjects thus
righteous: secondly, none but his subjects only: thirdly, all his subjects are
made perfectly holy and righteous, from all spot of sin in the sight of God,
only and for ever. And therefore did the Prophet Daniel, chapter 9. 24. prophecy
of Christ, That at his coming he should not only make an end of sin, but also
bring in an everlasting righteousness; that is, making the children of God
perfectly righteous from all spot of sin in the sight of God, for ever and ever.

Hence we see the reason why the learned do pronounce the justified children
of God to be not only fully and completely, but also sufficiently righteous
before God. For if the child of God be thus completely and perfectly righteous
in the sight of God, then he is sufficiently righteous in the sight of God: but
if he be not sufficiently righteous, then is he not perfectly holy and
righteous in the sight of God. But that the justified child of God is, above
his sense and feeling even sufficiently, righteous in the sight of God, is
plainly testified by God himself, 2 Cor. 12. where 2 Cor. 1^.
we may see, that Saint Paul, feeling the remnants of corruption hanging upon
him, and not only doubting (as the circumstances of the place show) that he was
not sufficiently righteous in the sight of God, but also grieving at the same;
and therefore praying thrice, that is oftentimes to God against the same; God
answered him, saying, My Grace (viz. of Free Justification, the Grace of graces
called often the Grace of God, and gift by Grace, Romans 5.) is sufficient for
thee; that is, makes thee Romans 5.
sufficiently and perfectly righteous from all spot of the remnants of thy
corruptions in my sight freely: and then adds the reason why he should be
content with this rich grace of Free Justification, saying, For the power of my
grace of Free Justification is manifested and made perfect in thy weakness;
because if thou had not weakness and corruption in thee, thou should have
no need of my grace of Justification: but in that I make thee, from all those
infirmities which thou seelest to hang upon thee, sufficiently and perfectly
righteous in my sight freely, herein my free Grace of Justification is greatly
magnified, and glorified. Which reason did so greatly content Saint Paul, that
he said, Very gladly therefore will I rejoice rather in mine infirmities: what,
simply? no, but that the power of Christ's grace, making me thus sufficiently
and perfectly righteous in the sight of God freely, may dwell in me. Thus we
may see how true that saying of Calvin is, of Justification in another place,
That Justification finding us naked of our own righteousness, does so cloth
and enrich us with the righteousness of Christ, that the saying in Luke 1. 52.
is fulfilled, He fills the hungry (...) 53.
with good things: for Paul hungring after his own inherent righteousness,
when his own inherent righteousness could never have made him sufficiently and
perfectly righteous in the sight of God, is sent away filled with the power and
rich grace of Christ, making him sufficiently and perfectly holy and righteous
from all spot of sin in the sight of God freely. Which treasure (says Luther)
Esaiah inwardly considering did in the tenth of his Prophecy say: The
consumption decreed shall overflow with righteousness: as if he had said,
Faith which is a brief and summary fulfilling of the Law, tanta justitia
credentes replebit, that is, shall replenish the Believers with so great
righteousness, ut nulla alia read justitiam opus habeant, that they shall not
have need of any other thing, to make them more righteous. Romans 10. 10.
Which Paul also does testify Romans 10. saying, For with the heart man
believes unto righteousness; whereby he has no need of works to make him
righteous in the sight of God; sed omni bono repletur, vereque filius Dei
efficitur, that is, but is replenished freely with all goodness, and truly
made the Son of God, John 1. 12. John 1. 12.


Yea, that the true Believer is made sufficiently and perfectly righteous
(because he is by Free Justification thus freely replenished with all
righteousness in the sight of God) is likewise plainly taught, and clearly
testified in the doctrine of our Church, taught by the Doctrine of our Church
in the Sermon of the resurrec^ion.
first Restorers of the Gospel in this land, saying in the Sermon of the
Resurrection of Christ after this manner; It had not been enough to be
delivered by his death from sin, except by his resurrection we had been
endued with a perfect and everlasting righteousness, whereby the true
righteousness, looking down from heaven, is in most liberal largeness dealt
by the holy Ghost upon all the world; by whose assistance we be replenished
with all righteousness, etc. Doubt not of the truth of this matter, how great
and high soever these things be: it becomes God to do no little deeds, how
possible soever they seem to thee. And no marvel that Justification makes us
so sufficiently and perfectly righteous in the sight of God, seeing David calls
it hereupon a great and plentiful Redemption, Psalm. 130. 7. And Paul calls
Free Justification, Psalm. 130. 7.
The receiving of the abundance of Grace, and of the gift of righteousness.
Romans 5. 17. reigning in righteousness Romans 5. 17.
unto eternal life through Jesus Christ our Lord, verse. 21. And although it
is true, that the children Verse 21.
of God may be called Saints to menward for their sanctification; yet the true
cause that makes them Justification makes Saints to God^ard.
Saints in the sight of God, is Justification; because by it alone, they are
made thus sufficiently and perfectly holy and righteous, from all spot of
sin, in the sight of God freely, by the blood of Christ only: as the Apostle
to the Hebrews plainly testifies, saying, Wherefore Jesus that he might
sanctify the people, that is, make them Saints, that is, perfectly holy and
righteous with his own blood, suffered without the Gate. Then let us not give
this precious name of Saints principally to our own holy walking by
sanctification, but to the blood of Christ in our Justification; because
sanctification is so far from being the cause of making us Saints to Godward,
that properly it does but declare that we are Saints to manward: wherein men
are much and often deceived, taking them for Saints which are no Saints.

But the right rule is that which Luther gives, saying thus: When I was a Monk
I did oftentimes most heartily Luther in Gal. 5. 18.
wish, That I might once be so happy, as to see the conversation and life of
some Saint or holy man: But in the mean Luther deceived in his opinion of
Saints.
time I imagined such a Saint, as lived in the wilderness, abstaining from
meat, drink, and living only with roots of herbs, and cold water, which
labored to attain such perfection, that they might be without all feeling of
temptations and sins: and this opinion of these monstrous Saints, I had
learned, not only out of the books of the Sophisters, and Schoolmen, but also
out of the books of the Fathers, as Hieron, and such like: But now in the light
of the Gospel we plainly see, who they are whom Christ and his Apostles call
Saints, not they which live a sole and a single life, or in outward appearance
do other great and monstrous works; or such only as are canonized in the Popes
Calendar for Saints in heaven: But they which being called by the sound of the
Gospel and Baptized, do believe that they be justified and cleansed by the
death of Christ. So Paul every where writing to the Christians, calls them
Saints, holy, the children and heirs of God, and such like. Whosoever therefore
(says he) do believe in Christ, whether they be men or women, Al^ bel^evers
are Saints.
bond or free, are all Saints: not by their own works, but by the works of God,
which they receive by faith. To conclude (says he) they are Saints through
such an holiness as they freely receive; not through such an holiness, as
they themselves have gotten, by their own industry and good works. Where we see
that he ascribes all the cause of being Saints unto their Justification;
although he shows afterward, That sanctification unseperably follows
Justification, and declares the same: For thus he says further, So Ministers
of the Word, the Magistrates of Commonweals, Parents, Children, Masters,
Servants, all are true Saints, if first, and before all things, they assure
themselves that Christ is their wisdom, righteousness, sanctification and
redemption. Secondly, if every one do his duty in his vocation, according to
the rule of Gods Word; and obey not the flesh, but repress the lusts and
desires thereof, by the Spirit, in some measure; though not all in like
measure. And against the corrupters of this order and doctrine he pronounces
an Anathema thus: And let him be holden accursed, whosoever shall not give
this honor unto Christ to believe, that by his death and word, he is Justified
and sanctified, and so made a Saint; for can we rejoice in this precious name,
with greater glory to Christ, than to ascribe it to the blood and
righteousness of Christ? and with greater assure^nesse and fullness to our own
selves; than to that means, by which we are made complete, and perfectly holy
and righteous, from all spot of sin in the sight of God freely?

Nay, if we will rejoice in that which God speaks, he gives us, in this glory
of Free Justification, yet greater matter of rejoicing: not being content in
this happy state of his own righteousness, to call us Saints, holy ones, and
the righteous every where in his word; but also being translated by this
benefit God calls the justified by the name of righteousness it self.
into Christ, he calls us, in a wonderful vehemency of our excellent
perfection, even Righteousness it self; and not simply righteousness it
self; but the righteousness of God, as the Apostle testifies, 2 Cor. 5. 21.
saying, He that knew 2 Cor 5. 21.
no sin was made sin for us: but wherefore, or to what end and purpose?
That we being translated into him, might be made, The righteousness of God.
Where we see that the Apostle is not content to say, that we are made
righteous, no nor prefectly righteous, but by a vehement speech, that which is
far more even the righteousness of God: being a figurative speech, when we
are not content to use the Concrete; but to express the excellent perfection
of a thing, we use the Abstract: as to say, he is not only patient, but very
patience it self; or not only very meek, but even meekness it self; so says
the Apostle, that we are made even the righteousness of God: the Chrysostom. in
2. Cor. 5. 21.
excellency of which speech Chrysostom perceiving, bursteth forth with this
just admiration, saying, Qualis sermo? quaemens ista commendare poterit? that
is, what a saying is this? what understanding can sufficiently commend and set
it forth? For (says he) he has made the righteous one, a sinner, that he
might make sinners righteous. Nay, he says not so neither, but that which is
far more, for he is not content to name the qualifying, but as it were the very
substance it self; for he says not, he was made a sinner, but sin: and he
says not, that we might be made righteous, but Righteousness it self: yea,
and the Righteousness of God: for it is of God, showing that it has no spot
or stain in it, from whence all sin vanishes away: as also that God wholly
performs it, thereby declaring the magnificence of the gift. What can be
spoken more excellently of this passing excellent new creation? for further
proof whereof; hence we may see the cause, why God having justified Abraham,
he is not content to call him righteous; but even righteousness it self;
saying, Esaias 41. 2. Who raised up Justice or righteousness Esaias 41. 2.
from the East, and called him to his foot? Is it not quiddam stupendum, that
the most perfectly righteous God, should call a mortal man not only righteous,
but righteousness it self? is it not a most dangerous thing to extenuate and
darken this glorious benefit? or can any mortal man extol and dignifie this
happy condition sufficiently? no, but because it is the immediate work of God,
it passes the reach both of men and Angels.

But thus much shall serve, pro meo modulo, of this first point, showing the
excellency of this second part of Free Justification, namely, that this
clothing us with the righteousness of Jesus Christ, does make us fully,
completely sufficiently, and perfectly holy and righteous, from all spot of
sin, in the sight of God freely.

CHAP. XII. That the justified children of God, are so perfectly and
excellently righteous before God, that they are made glorious in the sight of
God.
THE second point showing the exceeding excellency of Free Justification is,
That they are thereby made so perfectly clean, from all spot of sin, and so
perfectly holy and righteous; That before God they are made glorious, and do,
though mystically in respect of outward sense and contrary feeling, yet
inwardly and truly shine gloriously in the sight of God; as it is evidently
testified from Gods own mouth by many Scriptures, and unanimous consent of all
the best Dispensers of Gods Mysteries: the principal and chief whereof I will
briefly recite.

The first place of Scripture, is that notable prophecy, 1 The first place of
Scripture proving, that the justified children of God are made glorious in the
sight of God, is Psalm. 45.
Psalm. 45. Where under the Figure of Solomon marrying the King of Egypts
daughter; it is plainly prophesied, That Christ Jesus coming to marry unto
himself the Church of the Gentiles, to make her his Queen, and a fit Bride for
his own self, does first cloth her with the wedding garment of his own
righteousness, called in the ninth verse, The Vesture of the Gold of Ophir;
saying thus, On thy right hand does stand the Queen in a Vesture of the Gold of
Ophir: and then presently adds thereupon, That hereupon, she is all glorious
within, where we are to mark, That though he says, within: that is, mystically
to usward, and inwardly and spiritually to Godward; yet she is not only
glorious, but also all glorious within: and to show that the wedding garment of
his own righteousness, is the cause of all this perfect gloriousness, he
presently adds; for her clothing is of wrought gold, verse 13. Verse 13.
whereby she enters with joy into the Kings Palace, that is, into the Kingdom
of heaven; which is not meant, the kingdom of glory above, but the joyful and
glorious The happy est^re under the Gospel is called the Kingdom of Heaven.
state of the Church under the time of the Gospel; which in the new Testament,
(as Calvin well notes) for the full revealing of the Treasures of Christ, by
which we enter, even as it were, into the secret closets of heaven, is called
every where the Kingdom of Heaven.

The second place of Scripture not only confirming, Ephesians. 5. 25, 26, 27. Where
S. Paul being an elect vessel sent forth purposedly to deck the new Bride of
the Ephesians. ^. 25, 26, 2^.
Gentiles with this wedding garment of Christ's righteousness, shows that
Christ giving himself for us, has made us so clean, that he makes us hereby
to himself, that is, though mystically to us, yet spiritually and truly to
himself, a glorious Church (mark a glorious Church) or Congregation: but how,
or wherein glorious? he shows how, saying, not having now in this present
time, one spot or wrinkle of sin; this is very glorious indeed: but is there
all? no, nor any such thing; this is more glorious: but is there all then? no,
But makes her so holy, that she is unblamably holy; This is exceeding glorious
indeed: Thus has Christ made us to himself a gloous Church. Whereupon we may
see the truth of that saying of Chrysostom upon the like place of Scripture,
Chrysostom. upon Colos. 1. 22.
Colos. 1. 22. saying: non peccatis solum liberavit, etc. sed gloriosos and
illustres reddidit, that is, He has not only freed us from our sins; but
also has made us shining bright and glorious: Which to be truly wrought upon
us, in the sight of God by our Justification, Master M. Downham in his
Christian Warfare upon Justification.
Downham in his Christian Warfare upon Justification, clearly testifies,
saying, The bright shining Sun of righteousness, has made us freely so
perfectly righteous, that in him we also shine gloriously in the sight of God.
And Two Reasons why we are glorious in Gods sight.
no marvel, for these two evident reasons.

The first strongly pressed by Paul himself, who comparing the glory of the
Law with the glory of If the ministration of death written with letters, and
engraven in stones was glorious, so that the children of Israel could not
stedfestly behold the face of Moses, for the glory of his countenance, which
glory was to be done away; How shall not the ministration of the spirit be more
glorious? For if the ministration of condemnation was glorious, much more does
the ministration of righteousness exceed in glory. Where we are to mark, that
if the administration of the riches of the Gospel be so glorious, how glorious
are the riches themselves? and how glorious must they needs be that possess,
have, and enjoy those riches? As more particularly, If the administration of
this righteousness exceed in glory; How does this righteousness it self
exceed in glory? and then how unfallibly must they that are clothed with the
same, needs exceed in glory? yea, the glory of the shining of Moses face, and
the glory of the Law it self, the administration whereof made the face of
Moses so to shine, is (as the Apostle says) no glory in comparison of this
excellent glory.

The other reason is that which is before testified, by 2 Calv. in Job 15. 16.
Sermon. 59.
Calvin, and is grounded upon invincible divine reason, That if the
righteousness of the Angels be excellent, and makes them in truth gloriously
righteous; how glorious must we needs be in the sight of God, that (says he)
have a more than Angelical righteousness in us? Because, al^hough we daily
feel our selves filthy and loathsome, by drinking up iniquity like water; yet
God taking in hand to make us, above our sense and feeling, righteous from the
same in his sight; does cloth us with the righteousness of his son Jesus
Christ, which far surmounteth the righteousness of the Angels. A lively
figure of this our glorious state and condition by Christ in the sight of God,
was the Ark, which had not only a cover called the mercy-seat, made all of pure
gold; which was a Type of Christ, who was all purity and perfection it
Babington in Exodus
self: but also the Arc which the mercy-seat covered, being a Figure of the
Church, although it was made The Arc a lively type of our glorious state.
of fine Shittim-wood, signifying our sanctification: yet, besides this it was
covered all over, both within and without, with the same beaten gold, that the
mercyseat was made of: Whereby it appeared in view, both within and without, as
glorious as the mercy-seat it self: So are we clothed, both within and
without, with Christ's perfect righteousness, whereby our sins being abolished
out of Gods sight, we are made both within and without, even wholly, exceeding
glorious in the sight of God. And therefore, it is truly testified by Master
Smith writing upon Psalm. 51. verse 7. Upon those Master Smith upon Psa. 51. 7.
words, Wash thou me, and I shall be whiter than snow: That when a man is
washed from his sins by faith in Christ's blood, then he is made of a most
vile and loathsome sinner, and filthy unclean limb of the Devil, a blessed
member of Jesus Christ, beautiful and glorious in the eyes of God, being
covered in Christ's righteousness: Whereof he makes this worthy use, saying,
That this should therefore be a surpassing comfort to Gods children, That
although they seem vile, base, and miserable in the blind eyes of sinful men,
who thereupon despise, scoff, and contemn them; yet to remember that because
they are washed in the blood of Christ, and clothed with the most pure robe of
Christ's righteousness, they are even in this life, in so blessed and so
excellent state and condition, that they are most fair, most lovely,
beautiful and glorious in the eyes of God our heavenly Father.

So that in truth the Sun does not shine more gloriously in our eyes, than the
Church and true children of God, in this righteousness of Christ, shines
gloriously in the sight of God, as is clearly illustrated by Revel. 12. 1.
Showing the glorious condition of the Church.
that lively Icon expressed, Revel. 12. 1. Which every child of God should have
as a bright looking glass before their eyes, to see therein how gloriously the
Bridegroom Christ Jesus has decked their souls, with the wedding garment of
his own righteousness, as with the Vesture of the gold of Ophir; and although
they cannot look much in other looking-glasses without A true and godly
lookingglasse to be often used of Christians.
danger of pride and vanity; yet this will humble them; and therefore they
should never leave looking in this glass, until they begin to rejoice, for
this glorious state, with joy unspeakable and glorious, ^ Pet. 1. 8. And 1 Pet.
1. 8.
this it is: And there appeared a great wonder in heaven, a Woman clothed with
the Sun, and the Moon was under her feet, and upon her head a Crown of
twelve Stars.

First, observe, that it is not simply a wonder, but a ^
great wonder; so great, that a natural man cannot conceive the mystery of it,
but this glory from heaven, is ready to strik him more blind, as it did Paul
himself at the first, Act. 26. 13. and 8. 9. of which he also, Acts 26. 13.
and 8. 9.
when the skales were fallen from his eyes, said, Behold ye despisers and
wonder, and vanish away, for I will work a work (of free Justification, ver.
39.) in your days, which ye shall not believe, though a man would declare it
unto you, Act. 13. 41. Yet, it is such a great wonder, that Acts 13. 41.
it makes the children of God, that by the spirit do discern the deep things
of God, 1 Cor. 2. 10. 11. 12. to be 1 Cor. 2, 10, 11, 12.
^avished with joy and wonderment Ier. 33. 8. 9.

Secondly, where is this wonder? In heaven, that is, Ier. 33. 8. 9. 2.
in the joyful time and state of the Gospel, fully revealing the treasures and
mysteries of Christ; called therefore, especially for the full revealing of the
glory of Free Justification, every where in the new Testament, the Kingdom of
heaven, Mat. 11. 11. 12. Mat. 11. 11, 11. 3


Thirdly, what appeared? A Woman, that is, generally the true milirant Church,
but particularly every true believer; because they are married to Christ by
true faith as truly, as any woman can be married unto her husband, Hos. 2. 19.
Hos. 2. 19. 4


Fourthly, what is said of this Woman, amicta Sole, she is clothed with the
Sun, namely, that shines in the Firmament: that is, spiritually clothed
with this perfect righteousness of Christ, which swalloweth up, and utterly
abolisheth all the shadowish darkness of her sins; and makes her to shine in
perfect holiness and righteousness, as gloriously in Gods eyes, as the bodily
Sun shines gloriously in our eyes, when he shines in his brightest hue: Thus
has Christ made her to himself a glorious Church, Ep. 5. 27. For which the
Gospel Ephesians. 5. ^7.
teaching this, is said to exceed in glory, 2 Cor. 3. 9. 2 Cor. 3. 9.


Fifthly, and has the Moon under her feet; by the Moon is meant two things;
first our own righteousness, 5 By the Moon is meant first our sanctification
under our feet. 1
even of sanctification, which as it is like the Moon, because it is spotted
and changeable; so we must have it under our feet in two respects, as Marks to
discern, that we are clothed with the glorious Sun of Christ's
righteousness.

First, we must have it under our feet, by making no account of the
righteousness of our sanctification before God, by reason, and in comparison
of the wedding garment of Christ's righteousness, which is the Sun that we
are so gloriously clothed withal; so that we must make it no part of our
weddinggarment, but have it, in that respect, under our feet, that is, count it
as Esaias did, as a menstruous cloth, Esaias 64. 6. and as dung meet to lie under
our feet; as Paul did, saying, I count all things loss, and do judge them to
be dung, that I may be found in Christ: how? no^ having mine own
righteousness, which is of the Law, which the learned expound to be our
righteousness of works wrought according to the law, not only before our
Justification, but also our righteousness of sanctification, wrought according
to the law of God after our Justification. But in what then would Paul be
found? Only in the righteousness which is through the faith of Christ, even
the righteousness which is of God by faith, Phil. 3. 8, 9. Quasi dicat (say
the learned) pro nihilo habeo Phil. 3. 8, 9.
meam justitiam, modo mihi contingat vera justitia; that is, I count my
righteousness as nothing, so that I may be found in the true righteousness;
because (as Chrysostom says) When the Sun shines, it is but loss to
Chrysostom. in Phil. 3. 8, 9.
sit by a candle light. Why? because (says he) Dei est justitia, it is Gods
righteousness, it is wholly a gift from God. But the gifts of God do pass
and excel the weak good deeds that we do by our labor, magna mensura, in a
great measure.

Secondly, this Moon must be under our feet, because our life is like a
continual walking in this world, as it were in a dark night; and therefore we
must have the light of our sanctification, flowing from our Justification, as
the light of the Moon does come from the Sun, to direct our feet in this dark
world; and to give light, as the Moon does, to other men walking in the dark
night of this world, that they may see our good works, and glorify our Father
which is in heaven. And this is the second mark, showing that we are mystically
clothed with the glorious Sun of Christ's righteousness; because this
sanctification flows infallibly from our Justification, as the light of the
Moon comes from the Sun.

Again, the Moon signifies also the riches, honors, dignities, profits, and
pleasures of this world; which being changeable and unconstant as the Moon, the
justified children of God have them under their feet, The justified have the
variable riches of this life under their feet, signified by the Moon.
as it were; because being clothed with the glorious Sun of Christ's
righteousness, and thereby discerning the worth of the heavenly riches, they
set light of these earthly glories, shining to the dark world like the Moon;
and do tread them under feet, using them as if they used them not, being ready
to leave all, for the further advantage and advancing of the heavenly riches,
and for the glory of God. Thus Moses, being come to years of discretion,
refused to be called the Son of Pharaoh' s daughter; and chose rather to suffer
adversity with the people of God, than to enjoy the pleasures of sin for a
season: Esteeming the rebuke of Christ greater riches than the treasures of
Egypt. Why? Because he had regard to the recompense of the great reward of the
unsearchable riches (as Saint Paul calls them) of the Gospel. So the Christians
in the Primitive Church suffered with joy the spoiling of their goods, knowing
in themselves (by being clothed with the glorious Sun, and wedding garment
of Christ's righteousness) that they had in heaven a better and more enduring
substance. And this is the very Head of our sanctification, and the third mark,
showing, that we are the woman in heaven clothed with the Sun.

Sixthly, and lastly, this woman, or Bride, has upon her head (to signify
what an heavenly Queen she is) a Crown of twelve stars; that is, she has,
for a fourth mark, the doctrine of the Gospel delivered by the twelve
Apostles, and preached by Gods faithful Ministers (which are called stars in
highest account) as her Crown, counting them as her chiefest and highest
ornament, and saying with David, It is more to be desired than gold, yea, than
much fine gold, and sweeter also than the honey, and the honey-combe. And in
keeping the same she knows that there is a great reward, Ps. 19. 10, 11. Psalm.
19. 10. 11.
And this is the fourth mark, that we are the woman in heaven clothed with
the Sun: and he that is thus glorious to the eyes of men, by having the Moon
under his feet, and is also thus glorious in the eyes of God, by being clothed
in his sight with the glorious Sun of his Sons righteousness, must needs be a
great wonder to the world; because he is a wonder and admiration for beauty and
glory, even in the eyes of God: for which cause God cries out, doubling his
word of admiration and wonder, saying, Behold, thou art fair, my love: Behold,
thou art all fair, and there is no spot in thee, Cant. 4. 1, 7. Which
admiration of Christ Cant. 4. 1, 7.
at the glory of his Church, is by Doctor Hall pathetically Doctor Hall.
expressed after this manner, saying, O my Church, behold, in mine eyes, thus
clothed as thou art in my righteousness, oh how fair and glorious thou art!
how above all comparison fair and glorious! But the Prophet Esaias, prophesying
of the Kingdom and coming of Christ, expresses this glory of his Church more
gloriously, saying; The Moon shall be abashed, and the Sun ashamed, when the
Lord of hosts shall reign The Marginal Note in the Bible upon Esaias 24. 23.
in Mount Zion, and glory shall be upon his ancient men, Esaias 24. 23.

The meaning whereof the marginall note does well express saying, after this
manner, When God shall restore his Church (which is chiefly verified in the
full exhibiting of Christ to justify the same, Dan. 9. 24. and so Dan. 9. 24.
shall restore it to righteousness) the glory thereof shall so shine, and his
Ministers which are called his ancient men, that the Sun and Moon shall be
dark in comparison of the glory thereof. Which excellent glory of the Church
Calvin does yet more fully express after this manner, saying, When God shall
make clean his Church of her foulness and dross (which he truly performs by
Free Justification joyfully known) and so shall set up the Kingdom of Christ,
so great shall be the magnificence and glory thereof, in restoring the people
(to righteousness) that those things, which otherwise shine before men most
gloriously, as the Sun and the Moon, shall then be darkness. Is not this
excellent and magnificent beauty and glory indeed?

And yet the Prophet Esaias, not contenting himself herewith, but prophesying of
the coming of Christ to heal the people of God of their sins, prophesied
yet further of more exceeding glory, saying, Moreover, the light of the Moon
shall be as the light of the Sun, and the light of the Sun shall be
sevenfold, as the light of seven days, in the day that the Lord binds up
the breach of his people, and heals the stroke of their wound, Esaias 30. 26.
The meaning whereof is this, Esaias 30. 26. explained.
That, the light of the Moon, which is the glory of sanctification, forming us
actively righteous to the eyes of men, by which (as it was said before) the
children of God do shine in this dark night of the world, as the Moon, Cant.
6. 9. shall be as the light of the Sun, that Cant. 6. 9.
is, far more rich and plentiful than it was under the handful of the old
Church of the Jews, and far more spaciously spreading to all nations: But the
light of the Sun, that is, the glory and bright-shining of free Justification,
forming us passively righteous to the eyes of God, by which the children of God
shine in the sight of God most gloriously as the Sun, Cant. 6. 9. Ephesians. 5.
27. Cant. 6 9. Ephesians. 5. 27.
shall be sevensold. that is, most plentifully revealed, and perfectly
wrought; and shine forth as seven suns upon the Church, by the death of
Christ, Dan. 9. 24, 25. Dan. 9. 2^, 25.
by which many Prophets and Kings, and righteous men, have desired to hear the
things that we hear, and have not heard them, Matthew. 13. 17. Whereby (as it
was signified Matthew. 13. 17.
unto Paul in his conversion to the Gospel) such a light shined from heaven,
far surpassing the light of the Sun, Acts 26. 13. as that it makes the
children Acts 26. 13.
of God to shine in the sight of God, as gloriously as the light of seven
days; or as if seven Suns did shine forth together in them, and upon them.
But when is this performed? In the day that the Lord shall bind up the breach
of his people, and heal the stroke of their wounds; that is, when Christ,
dying to abolish the sins of his people, and rising again for their full
Justification, shall thus perfectly and gloriously heal the wounds of their
sins; for by his stripes only we are healed, Esaias 53. 5. Dan. 9. 24. Esaias
53. 5. Dan. 9. 24. The marginall note of the Bible upon the place.


Whereupon it is truly testified by the marginall note upon this place, that
when by the coming of Christ the Church shall be restored, the glory thereof
shall pass seven times the brightness of the Sun. Which Calvin upon the same
place expresses yet more fully, saying, Calvin upon the same place
Tanto Dei splendore illustrandos esse pios significat, etc. that is, he
signifies that the godly shall be enlightened, and shine with so great
splendour and glory, ut si coacerventur septem soles, etc. that is, if seven
Suns should meet together, their brightness and glory The glory of Christian
righteousness is unu^^erable.
would be far less than the glory of Gods children. Which similitude,
although it confirms the saying of Saint Paul, that the righteousness of
Christ administered unto us, does bring upon us exceeding glory, 2 Cor. 3. 9.
2 Cor. 3. 9. and seems unto the natural eye uncredible; yet the testimony of
Luther is most true, saying, Thus we must magnify the Article of the Christian
righteousness, against the righteousness of the Law and works, albeit no
eloquence is able sufficiently to set forth the inestimable greatness thereof.

Hence it is, for this inestimable greatness of glory wrought, though
mystically, yet truly and spiritually, upon the children of God by
Justification, fully revealed and exhibited in the Gospel, Romans 3. 21. that
Romans 3. 21.
the state and condition of Gods children, under the time of the Gospel, is
every where in the New Testament called The Kingdom of heaven; which when it
The estate and condition of the believers is called the kingdom of heaven, and
why.
but began to be preached, it suffered violence; and the violent took it by
force: for who would not press with all violence into such free-given glorious
righteousness, so certainly placing us in the kingdom of heaven in this life,
and in the kingdom of glory in the life to come? For which cause Christ
himself testified of John Baptist, saying, Verily I say unto you, Amongst them
that are borne of women, there has not risen a greater Prophet than John the
Baptist: Why? Because he passed all the other Prophets by preaching, and
sealing by Baptism a fuller exhibiting of the glory of Free Justification, by
pointing to Christ, and saying, Behold, the Lamb of God that takes away the
sin of the world, John 1. 29. And was filled with joy inhearing the voice of
the John 1. 29.
Bridegroom, that was now come to the Bride to effect the same, John 3. 29.
Whereby, even in his days, the Kingdom John 3. 29.
of heaven suffered violence, and the violent took it by force. And yet
notwithstanding, He that is least (says Christ) in the kingdom of heaven, is
greater than he, Matthew. 11. 11. By which kingdom of heaven he Matthew. 11. 11.
does not mean the place of glory above, but the time from which Christ,
groaning out his blood and life upon the Cross, cried out, that that which
John Baptist spoke of, was finished, Ioh. 19. 30. namely, that the John 19. 30.
seventy weeks of years, whereof Daniel prophesied, that Christ should die to
finish transgression, and to make an end of sin, and to bring in everlasting
righteousness, was now fully accomplished; because with that one offering of
himself upon the Cross, he has made perfect forever all them that are
sanctified, Heb. 10. Heb. 10. 14.
14. whereby (as Calvin truly says) for the inestimable flowing store of
grace, and the incomparable strength and glory that, above the days of John,
at length appeared in his resurrection, it is now not without cause said, that
the heavenly Kingdom of God is erected in earth, for the bringing in of such
an everlasting and glorious righteousness, as makes us in the sight of God
perfect forever; making also the true Believer, that by the eye of faith, feeth
and enjoys the same, to rejoice with joy unspeakable and glorious, 1 Pet. 1.
8. 1 Pet. 1. 8.


Is not this state and condition justly and worthily called the Kingdom of
Heaven? therefore Christ, speaking of the time of the Gospel, calls it every
where the Kingdom of Heaven, saying, Mat. 22. The Kingdom of heaven, is like
a certain King which makes a marriage for his Son: the surpassing royalty of
which marriage, is such and so great, that whosoever comes to the same in this
glorious weddinggarment of the Bridegroomes righteousness freely offered, is
in this Vesture, of the Gold of Ophir, married to this Royal Bridegroom, and
is made his Bride, and Queen in this glorious robe of his own righteousness
for evermore. Is not this state justly called the Kingdom of heaven? And is
expressly testified by S. Paul, saying, The Kingdom of God, is righteousness,
and peace, and joy in the holy Ghost. And whosoever in these things, namely, in
this Evangelicall righteousness, and in the peace that comes thereof (for
being justified by faith; that is, made perfectly and thus gloriously holy and
righteous from all spot of sin in the sight of God freely, and passively, we
have peace toward God, Romans 5. 1.) and in the joy of the holy Ghost, serves
Christ, (for this is the true service wherein Christ will only be served,
Phil. 3. 3.) he is Phil. 3. 3.
acceptable unto God, and approved of men, Romans 14. 17, Romans 14. 17, 18.
18. This is the Kingdom of heaven, which the Lord of wisdom it self
commands us first and above all things to seek, saying, seek ye first the
kingdom of God: but if thou ask the way and gate how thou maystenter Gods
righteousness the gate to heaven.
brings thee into his kingdom, places thee in his perfect love and favor,
and causes that all other necessary things for this life, as food and raiment
fit for thy place, shall be even cast upon thee, Matthew. 6. 33. Matthew. 6. 33.
Whereupon it is truly said of the learned Expositors, Est siquidem hoc regnum,
regnum Christi, etc. That is, This Kingdom verily is the Kingdom of Christ;
whereby he himself by his spirit and belief of the Gospel, reigns in the
minds of his Elect: but how? justificans eos and salvans, justifying, and
saving them: which gift of God, even Esaias testified to be so great, Vt
universam creaturam ad exul^andum and gratulandum provocet, that he provokes
all creatures to rejoice, and exult for joy, saying: Rejoice ye heavens for
the Lord has done it; shout ye lower parts of the earth, Burst forth into
praises ye mountains, For the Lord has redeemed Jacob, and will be glorified
in Israel; but how has he redeemed Jacob? and how will he be glorified in
Israel? namely, by putting away our transgressions as Esaias 44. 22. 23.
clarknesse, and our sin as a mist, Esaias 44. 22, 23. Proinde hoc regnum
Christi, recte caelorum regnum vocatur, etc. Therefore this Kingdom of Christ
(say the learned Expositors) is rightly called the Kingdom of heaven; Viget
enim in eo coelestis potentia, and omni terrenae incomparabiliter praestans,
that is, for there reigns in it an heavenly power, and passing incomparably
all earthly excellency, whereby we are freed from sin and death, and do
enjoy eternal peace, and the abundance of all good things: not seeing our
King, but yet worshipping him reigning in heaven, fide animi, with the faith of
our soul believing his Gospel.

But what is it to believe his Gospel? these learned Dispensers of Gods
mysteries, answer saying, credere Evangelio est gratuitam justitiam amplecti,
that is, to believe the Gospel is to embrace the free given righteousness,
making us perfectly, and thus gloriously holy and righteous, from all spot of
sin, in the sight of God freely. And this is the Kingdom of God, whereof
Christ spoke, when he sent forth his seventie Disciples, Luke 10. saying, Go
your ways and say unto them, Luke 10.
The Kingdom of God is come near unto you. But into whatsoever City ye shall
enter, if they will not receive you, Go your ways out into the streets, of
the same, and say, Even the very dust, which cleaves on us of your City, we
wipe off against you, And it shall be easier for Sodom, than for you:
Notwithstanding know this, that the Kingdom of God was come near unto you.
verse 9. 10, 11. verse 9. 10, 11.


O good Lord, if the sentence was so terrible in the mouth of the seventy
Disciples before Christ had dyed, to effect this, how fearful must it needs
be now after he has groaned out his blood and life upon the Cross, saying, It
is finished? and how happy and blessed are they that are Members and Citizens
of his Kingdom? but such Citizens were the Ephesians, when the Apostle said
thus unto them, Now therefore ye are no more Strangers and Forreiners, but
Citizens with the Saints, and of the household of God, Ephesians. 2. 19. For ye
Ephesians. 2. 19.
? are not come (says the Author to the Hebrews) with the people of the Old
Testament, unto the Mountain that might not be touched, nor unto burning fire,
nor to blackness, and darkness, and tempest, the sight whereof was so
terrible, that Moses said, I fear and quake: But ye are come unto the
Mount-Zion, and to the City of the living God, the celestial Jerusalem, and
to the company of innumerable Angels, etc. The glory whereof made S. Paul to
burst forth in such great thanksgiving, for the Justified and converted
Colossians saying; Giving thanks unto the Father, which has made us meet or
worthy to be partakers of the inheritance of the Saints in light.

But how has he made us so meet and worthy? he has delivered us from the
power of darkness, and out of this present evil world, as he says to the
Gal. 1. 4. And has translated us into the Gal. 1. 4.
Kingdom of his dear Son, by the forgiveness of sins, Whereby (says Luther)
we are translated out of sin into righteousness, out of Gods wrath into his
perfect favor, out of death into life. For (says he) when sin is taken
away, in the place of sin succeeds righteousness, in the place of wrath
grace and reconciliation, in the place of death life, and in the place of
damnation salvation: Is not this a blessed Kingdom, and are not they in a
truly blessed state and condition, that are Citizens in this Kingdom? for when
a man is translated out of sin into righteousness, who sees not, All
blessedness accompaineth the righteousness of Christ.
that all blessedness must needs follow thereupon; especially being so perfect
a righteousness, making us so perfectly holy and gloriously righteous from all
spot of sin in the sight of God freely.

Hence it is, that Christ is called Melchisedec, That is, the King of
righteousness and peace: and why? but because he makes all his Subjects above
their sense and feeling that it may be by faith of his power, perfectly holy,
and gloriously righteous in the sight of God freely; and so abounding in Peace
and Joy for the same. Such a new people (says Luther, writing against the
Jews, upon Daniel 9. 24.) and such a new Jerusalem is the holy Christian Luth.
on Dan. 9. 24.
Church gathered, of Jews and Gentiles. Hi cert^ sciunt, etc. These certainly
know, that by Jesus Christ, peccatum esse plene abolitum, that their sin is
perfectly abolished, all prophecy and promise is fulfilled, and an everlasting
righteousness is brought in. For he that believes in him, all his sins are
sealed up, made an end of, and abolished, and est in aeternum Iustus; and he
is made everlastingly righteous and for ever, for which we need not run to
Jerusalem. For (says he in another place:) In this Kingdom of L^th^ on his
Arga. before the Galath.
heaven, we be made righteous, by the Christian righteousness, which nothing
pertains to the righteousness of the Law, or active righteousness: But this
righteousness is heavenly, which we work not, but which by grace is wrought
passively in us, placing us in the Kingdom of heaven, where is no Law, no sin,
no remorse or sting of conscience, no death, but perfect joy, righteousness,
grace peace, life, salvation and glory: And thus is the Kingdom of heaven
Righteousness, and peace, and joy in the holy Ghost, Romans 14. 17.

CHAP. XIII. The Faith of Justification strengthened.
NOw because the two soresaid enemies of Free Justification, namely natural
reason and unbelief, will be objecting something against this second part of
Free Justification, to the darkning, and (if it can) to the utter frustrating
of the same: Let us now add something for the strengthening of Faith against
such objections: and they are only two, that I have at any time heard of: the
first objection and last refuge of unbelief is this.

Yea, I am perfectly righteous, and a sinner also in Object. O^ unbelief.
the sight of God; for as God, beholdes me in Christ, he sees me perfectly
righteous; but as he beholds me in my self, he beholds me a sinner, at
leastwise in the imperfections of my sanctification: for as when Christ hung
dying upon the Cross, God saw him a sinner, by the imputation of our sins
unto him, and yet notwithstanding saw him perfectly righteous also in himself:
so does he see us perfectly righteous in Christ, and sinners also in our
selves: To which objection, I answer.

First, generally that the scope of this Objection is Arc and Dagon stand
together, which by no means will be: but more particularly, I will first show
the weakness and falsitie of the two reasons, taking away the Pillars whereon
it rests, and then show the absurdities of the position it self. And first
of the later reason; which because it seems to be drawn from the Apostle,
appears to be the stronger; and therefore I will show the true meaning of the
Apostle, that we must hold too; and then wherein it is stretched upon the
tenter-books, to conclude, that, which the Apostle means not: For first
although it is true, That as by the Almighty power of Gods imputation, Christ
was clothed and (as Luther truly says) inwrapped in our sins, as he was
inwrapped in our flesh, and blood: So we by the same Almighty power of Gods
imputation, are clothed and inwrapped in Christ's own righteousness: whereupon
concurres this following agreement, That as Christ by Gods imputation As Christ
was truly a sinner and cursed; so is a Believer truly just and blessed in him
and by him.
putation was made, not an imaginary sinner, but really a true sinner for us,
and so truly and really suffered the curse of God, and true rending and tearing
upon the Cross, even unto true and real death, for true sin that God saw
truly upon him: so we likewise by Gods imputation of Christ's righteousness
unto us are made, not imaginarily (as the Papists cavil) but, really and truly
righteous from all spot of sin in the sight of God freely, and so truly and
really blessed; not to an imaginary life, for an imaginary putative
righteousness (as the Papists cavil;) but to a true and real inheritance of
everlasting life, for Christ's true everlasting righteousness, that God sees
truly upon us and we made truly perfectly holy and righteous from all spot of
sin in the sight of God freely, by the same: As this (I say) is the scope of
the Apostle, wherein we agree; so in other points stretched further, there is
great difference and utter dislike, especially in three things, overthrowing
this reason, because Three reasons why Christ was both a sinner and righteous
at one time, otherwise than we are.
it is streched further than the foresaid scope of the Apostle: For

First, that Christ might be a true and perfect Mediator, and Redeemer, it was
necessary, that our sins being imputed unto Christ, and he hereby made a
sinner, It Our sins are abolished by two means.
himself by his death and resurrection: and secondly, he sees them abolished
in and from us by that perfect and everlasting righteousness of Christ,
wherewith we are clothed, and made perfectly holy and righteous from all spot
of sin in the sight of God freely: For if God should not see our sins by his
Sons righteousness utterly abolished out of his sight; and so we not made only
and merely the righteousness of God in his sight: then our sins should stand
unabolished as check-mate with the righteousness of Christ, that is, invisibly
upon us; as if some darkness were so gross and thick, that God could not see
his Sun beams of force to swallow up and abolish the same, so we make by this
conceit, Christ's righteousness not able to abolish them utterly out of the
sight of God; which to say or think were grievously derogatory to Christ's
perfect and everlasting righteousness. But because Christ's righteousness,
wherewith we are mystically clothed, is of more force utterly to abolish our
sins out of Gods sight, than the Sunbeams coming with her full force into
a dark house is able to abolish darkness: therefore says Christ to his
Spouse, complaning of sin and darkness to her sense and feeling: Behold thou
art fair my love, behold thou art, not both fair and The B^leever cannot be
both fair and foul in Gods sight.
soul, as I was upon the Cross, but thou art all fair my love; and before me
by the power of my righteousness, there is not one spot in thee. And the Elect
vessel put a part to dispense this great mystery, shows the reason hereof,
saying, we have not one spot or wrinkle or any such thing in the sight of God,
Ephesians. 5. 27. why? Because Ephesians. 5. 27.
the righteousness of the Law is (though not inherently and actively, as the
Papists would have it;) yet Evangelically and passively fulfilled in us, Romans
8. 4. but for Romans 8. 4.
the righteousness of the Law to be fulfilled in us, in the sight of God, and
yet for God to see one spot or wrinkle in us, and so we to be both fair and
soul in Gods sight, are (...), flat contraries, that overthrow one another,
and cannot stand together: whereby we may see how true that saying of Luther
is; who (as Master Fox testifies) came forth in Paul's Luther came in Paul's
vein of preaching.
vein of teaching, and said, By Christ dying upon the Cross, he has so
purged our sins out of Gods sight, that God does see nothing else in the
whole world Luther in Ca^ chap. 3. verse. 13.
of true Believers, but a mere cleansing and righteousness.

A second reason and difference, why Christ was Heb. 10. 14. testifies, Heb.
10. 14.
saying, With one offering he has made perfect for ever all them that are
sanctified: hereby Christ's becoming a sinner for us is not frustrated, but
has attained his full and due end; and this is the true meaning of the
Apostle, 2 Cor. 5. 21. saying, He that knew no sin, was 2 Cor. 5. 21.
made sin for us: why? and to what end? That we being translated into him
might be made (he says not both sinners and righteous in the sight of God as
Christ was, but) the righteousness of God, that is, as the figurative abstract
imports, nothing but righteousness, and only and merely the righteousness of
God for ever; for which cause Daniel prophesied, that Christ by his death Dan.
9. 11. 23.
should make an end of sin, and bring in an everlasting righteousness, Dan. 9.
11. 24.

Thirdly, this comparison is misapplyed and deceives, The believer is made
righteous as Christ at his refur^e^tion.
of time; for we are not to compare the manner of our being made righteous in
the sight of God to the the time, case, and condition of Christ, whilst he hung
dying upon the Cross, when he was both a sinner and righteous; but to the
time, case, and condition of Christ when he was risen again from the dead,
when he had quite abolished our sin, that by Gods imputation lay upon him;
and having shaken off our sin, (as Sampson had shaked off his new ropes) was
only perfectly holy and righteous in the sight of God, by virtue whereof he had
shaken off death, and was risen again. Because although he merited our
Justification by his passion and death; yet he did fully accomplish the same by
his resurrection: as S. Paul testifies, 1 Cor. 15. saying, If Christ be not
risen, ye are yet in 1 Cor. 15. 17.
your sins. Therefore the contrary holds true, Christ being risen, we are not
in our siunes, that is, we are by his resurrection made perfectly holy and
righteous from all spot of sin in Gods sight freely. And yet more Romans 4. 25.
plainly speaks the Apostle, Romans 4. 25. He was delivered to death for our
sins, and is risen again for our Justification: that is, his rising again
has fully accomplished our perfect Justification, thus making us like to
himself, as he was in his resurrection, that is, only perfectly holy and
righteous from all spot of sin in the sight of God freely.

And thus do the Dispensers of Gods mysteries, the faithful Expositors
compare the manner of our being made righteous by Christ's resurrection in the
sight of God. Whereupon Luther says thus, Christ rising again the third day
from death, now lives for ever: and L^th in Gal. 3 13
there is neither sin nor death sound in him any more; but mere
righteousness, life, and everlasting blessedness: then faith lays hold upon
this innocence, and this victory of Christ, whereby by faith only we are made
thus perfectly righteous. Look then (says he) how much thou do believe this,
so much thou do enjoy it. If thou believe sin, death, and the curse to be
abolished, they are abolished. For Christ has overcome and taken away these in
himself, and will have us to believe, That like as in his own person there is
now after his resurrection, no sin nor death; so there is none in ours, seeing
he has performed and accomplished all things for us.

Hereupon also does Calvin say, that the ministry of John Baptist, being a
mean or middle between the Prophets and Apostles, although he passed all the
Prophets in saying, Behold the Lamb of God that takes Calv. inst. l^b 3. cap
9. sect. 5 The ministry of John Baptist a middle between the Prophets and
Apostles.
away the sin of the world, wherein he showed forth the Sun of the Gospel:
yet (says he) because he did not express that same incomparable strength and
glory, which at length appeared in his resurrection; therefore Christ says
that the least in the Kingdom of heaven is greater than he: must not
Preachers therefore take heed that they do not darken, much less drown this
incomparable strength and glory, that so far passed John's ministry now
accomplshed in his resurrection? But (alas) how few are there among us, that
know what this incomparable strength and glory of Christ's resurrection is? much
less do we cause people to press with violence above John into the kingdom
of heaven, by laying forth above him this incomparable strength and glory.

Now concerning the other reason, That as God

To which I answer, that God does behold us two Answ. God beholds us two manner
of ways.
manner of ways, first Physice, as we are his creatures, in whom we live, and
move, and have our being; and so God always beholds us in our selves, and
sees us merely his creatures, as to eat, and drink, and move, First, Physice.
and such like: secondly, he beholds us Theologice Secondly, Thologice.
two manner of ways: first in our selves; secondly, in Christ: as he beholds
us in our selves, we are corrupted, and sinful by the fall of Adam; which is
our cursed and lost estate before our Justification and conversion, wherein we
are out of Christ, and members of the Devil, and vessels of wrath and
damnation; which when a man sees, he desires nothing more, than to be
Justified, that he may be delivered out of that woeful estate; whom when God
has taken pity of, and Justified, then he is translated out of himself into
Christ, out of the old Adam, into the new Adam, out of the wild bitter Olive,
into the sweet Olive, and true vine Christ: Because he is translated out of
sin into righteousness, out of the curse, into blessedness, out of death
into life, and out of damnation into salvation, and so delivered out of his
former misery: so that he that holds, that God beholds us both in Christ, and
in our selves, must needs be an utter and monstrous hypocrite; because first
he sees not what an horrible thing it is to be in our selves; out of Christ
being most true, that Luther says, horrendum est de Deo extra Christum
cogitare; that it is an horrible Luth. in Gal. 1. and 3.
thing once to think of God, out of Christ. Secondly, he desires not to be
found out of himself; in Christ only: and thirdly, he discernes not the
antithesis, and flat contrariety, that is between the blessed estate, what it
is to be in Christ; and the cursed estate, what it is to be in our own selves
out of Christ; which cannot stand together, but do utterly overthrow one
another: for although it is true, that we may, yea, and ought to consider, and
ever and continually to remember, what we were, when we were in our own selves
out of Christ, as Paul teaches, Ephesians. 2. as namely, dead in trespasses and
sins, following Ephesians. 2.
the course of the world, without God in the world, the children Why we have
continual feeling of sin left in us.
of wrath; and such like. Yea, and God has left a feeling of these things to
dwell still in us, as if we were not translated out of sin into
righteousness; out of our selves into Christ, out of death into life, out of
damnation into salvation, That (as I have often said) we may live by the faith
of Gods power, working these upon us, by himself alone, and not by our sense,
sight and feeling: although (I say) we may, and ought thus to consider what we
were, yea, and are to our sense and feeling in our own selves; yet
notwithstanding we are not in our own selves, after that we are justified and
converted, but only in Christ, although we find the fruit, operation and power
thereof, but according to our faith. Proofs that being justified, we are not
in our own selves, but in Christ only, are evident in the foresaid Epistle to
the Ephesians. 2. saying, Ephesians. 2.
Remember that ye were in times past Gentiles in the flesh: that is, your own
selves and lost nature, ye were (I say) at that time out of Christ, and
without Verse 11. 12.
God in the world, verse. 11. 12. and were by nature the children of wrath,
verse. 3. But now (says he) being in Verse 3.
Christ Jesus, ye which once, or in times past were far off, are made near
by the blood of Christ, verse. 13. Now Verse 13.
therefore ye are no more (mark the word, no more,) Strangers and Forreiners,
but Citizens with the ^aints, and of the household of God, verse. 19. Thus are we
now being by Verse 19.
Justification translated out of our own selves into Christ. But yet we may be
considered (as we see here) what we were; yea, and what we are to our sense
and feeling, in and of our selves, being considered out of Christ: when yet we
are not out of Christ: as,

For example, a graft or branch of a wild bitter An apt similitutede.
Olive being grafted into the sweet Olive, and now partaking of the nature of
the sweet Olive, may yet notwithstanding be considered what it was, and what
it is, considered in and of it self; and yet, now it is not in it self, and
in its own nature and condition, but in the sweet Olive, and grown into the
nature of the sweet Olive. Or yet more plainly thus: A poor woman, that was in
extreme poverty, and in great Another plain fimilitude.
debt, and arrested, and cast into prison: although she be from thence taken
out, and married to a rich noble man, and so her debt discharged, and she made
of poor, rich in apparel, wealth and honor; yet notwithstanding, she may
be considered, and she her self ought in true gratitude, often to call to
mind, what she was, and what she is, considered in and of her own self: And
yet indeed she is not as she was, neither yet in her own self, but in her
husband, altogether in a free state, and in a rich condition. And in this sense
did S. Paul say, and the true right faith must ever say, I live not now, but
Christ lives in me: and in that I now live, I live by the faith in the Son
of God, who loved me, and gave himself for me; namely, to Justify me, and
thereby has made me by himself alone, perfectly and gloriously holy and
righteous, from all spot of sin, in the sight of God freely.

Neither does God behold us, being Justified in the imperfections of our
sanctification: why? because as I have abundantly showed before, both by
express Scripture, as also by the unanimous consent of all the best Dispensers
of Gods mysteries, That Justification does not only present us, and our
persons, perfectly holy and righteous, from all spot of sin in the sight of God
freely; but also takes away from before God, and abolisheth all the
imperfections of all our works out of the sight of God: so that to the pure and
to the believing all things are pure; as to the unbelieving nothing is pure;
but their best good works are filthy and abominable in the sight of God.

Now then when both the persons of the believing are by Christ's righteousness
perfectly pure in the sight of God; and when all the imperfections of their
works are abolished out of Gods sight, thus making them also perfectly pure and
righteous in the sight of God, how then does God see them in the imperfections
of their sanctification? but to say, when God has justified both us and our
works, that God sees us in the imperfections of our sanctification, is another
evident mark of an hypocrite, that was never An evident mark of an hypocrite.
yet truly humbled for the imperfections of his sanctification; nor ever yet
truly killed with the Apostle, by understanding the tenth Commandment, making
both him and all his righteousness, and best good works as a menstruous
cloth, that is, damnable sin in the sight of God: for then he would be glad
to take the benefit of Free Justification, to make him clean in the sight of
God, from all the imperfections of his best good works, in the imperfections of
his sanctification; for he would easily see, that if all his righteousness,
be as a menstruous cloth in the sight of God, by reason of the imperfections
of his sanctification, how horrible are the imperfections themselves, that make
his sanctification so filthy and loathsome in the sight of God: and how far
are these from the mind and faith of the Apostle, that would not be found in
his own righteousness of sanctification, that was of the Law, but only in the
righteousness which is of God through faith: and yet These dare be found in
the fight of God; and will uphold also, that God beholds his children in the
imperfections of their sanctification. But are not these imperfections of our
sanctification ever to our sense and feeling, like to continual running soars
in us? Psalm. 77. 2. and Psalm. 38. 3. and make us to our sense and Psalm. 77. 2.
Psalm 38. 3. Romans 7. 24.
feeling miserable? Romans 7. 24.

And is not Justification given us as the balm of Giliad, to heal these
soars of the imperfections of Justification as the balm of Giliad, to heal all
the sores and imperfections of our sanctification, Romans 8. 2. 3. 4.
our sanctification before God? Romans 8. 2, 3, 4. and when we have apprehended
by Faith free Justification to heal us of the same, are we not perfectly
healed from this menstruous cloth, and continual running sores of the
imperfections of our sanctification, in the sight of God? how then does God
behold us in the imperfections of our sanctification, that are perfectly healed
out of his sight? Psalm 103. 2. Psalm. 103. 2. I say 53. 5.
Esaias 53. 5.

Again, if Justification do not heal the children of God, of the
imperfections of their sanctification from before God, what serves it for,
after their conversion? have the children of God any sins to heal after
their conversion, but the imperfections of their sanctification? and if it
heal not these out of Gods sight, is not Justification nullified, and made of
no use, after a child of God is converted? says not the Scripture every where
the flat contrary? was it not from the spots and wrinkles of imperfections of
their sanctification, whereof S. Paul said to the converted Ephesians, that
they were to show the like to their Wives, as Christ in love, had made them
clean from all spot, or wrinkle, or any such thing before God? was it not from
the imperfections of their sanctification, whereof S. Paul said to the
converted Colossians, That they were made so holy, that they were without all
blame and without all fault in the sight of God? was it not most directly of
the imperfections of our sanctification, of which S. John spoke, saying, If we
walk in the light, as God is in the light, the blood of Jesus Christ his Son
does make us clean from all sin; 1 John 1. 7. And mark how he says from all
sin, 1 John 1. 7.
and therefore from the imperfections of our sanctification; except the
imperfections of our sanctification, which sometimes are too soul, even to the
eyes of men, be no sins. But if our Justification, by the blood of Christ,
do not make us in the sight of God clean from all the foul imperfections of
our sanctification, who then makes us clean from the imperfections The pri^e of
cu^ nature.
of our sanctification, but we our selves, by the spirit (as the Papists say?)
and this is that which our proud natures would feign challenge to our selves,
and is in truth the very kore of this sore: but what says the Doctri^e, that
first reformed our Church from Popery taught by them, which afterward confirmed
the same by their blood, saying, For a man to go about by his own works, (as
by repentance, mortification, and such like,) to take away and purge his Sermon
of f^ee Justification and tr^e salvation: second part.
o^n sins; and so to make himself righteous by his own works, either in
whole or in part, is the greatest arrogancy and presumption, that Antichrist
could set up against God. And yet we must mark that Antichrist alleges for
himself, That he cannot so take away and purge his sins, either in whole by
his first Justification by Christ; or in part, in his second Justification by
Christ; but by the merit of Christ, and aid and strength of the holy Ghost
assisting him. But yet he is worthily condemned for Antichrist; because he does
not give the glory of taking away and purging our sins, and so making us
perfectly holy and righteous from all spot of sin in the sight of God freely,
to Christ to have done it alone by himself, Heb. 1. 3. because Heb. 1. 3.
to purge away sin out of the sight of God, and to make righteous before God,
is the proper work of To purge away sin before God, is the proper work of the
Godhead.
the Godhead, and too high a work for any creature to perform. Whereupon it
follows, seeing we cannot purge and put away, from before God, the
imperfections of our sanctification; because it is true which Luther says,
that whilst we go about to purge and put away one sin, we defile our selves
with many more, as if one, to put away one spot in his face, should wash
himself in puddle mire; and if Justification neither abolish, nor put out of
Gods sight, the imperfections of our sanctification, we must needs remain
miserable still in the filthy menstruousnesse of our sanctification: but alas,
this is such a gross absurdity of an unbelieving dead heart, that it is not
worthy to spend so much ink and paper in confuting it: only by the falling of
these two Pillars to the ground, holding up this proposition, the proposition
it self (namely that We are both righteous, and sinners also, in the sight of
God, Four Arguments, proving that we are not both righteous and sinners in in
the sight of God.
being the last refuge of unbelief) falls flat to the ground; the falsnesse
whereof although it might be proved with many arguments, yet these sour shall
be sufficient.

First, it is contrary to the express and plain Scriptures and Word of God,
That when we are Justified Paul says Ephesians. 5. 8. Ye were once in times
Ephesians. 5. 8.
past darkness; There is the time of our being sinners, and in our sinful
nature passed, and gone: But now are light in the Lord; There is the time of
our Justification, and being righteous in the sight of God now present; and it
only still abiding, Walk (says he) as the children of light: There is
sanctification showing and declaring to men our new condition and state, that
we are now only in, before God. So likewise says Saint Paul, to the
Corinthians, And such were some of you: that is, some one way, and some another
way, were all of you foul and defiled in the sight of God, with all manner of
sins in time past: But (says he, as the Word of the present time imports,)
now ye are washed, now ye are sanctified, now ye are Justified in the name
or power of the Lord Jesus, and by the spirit of our God. What can be more
plain, That the time, state, and condition wherein they were foul and
sinful, was past and gone; but the time, state, and condition, wherein they
were washed, and made righteous to Godward by Justification, and also to
men-ward by sanctification was only present, and abiding for ever. So likewise,
Romans 5. 8, 9. Seeing (says the Apostle) Romans 5. 8. 9.
While we were yet sinners, Christ died for us; much more then being now
Justified by his blood, we shall be saved, etc. Where we see plainly, that
the time and condition The estate ^f justification abides for ever.
of being sinners, is confined to the time past; and the time and condition of
being Justified, and made no sinners, but perfectly righteous in the sight of
God, is confined to the time, and condition present to abide forever.

Secondly, that we are both righteous and sinners 2 Fro^t^^ cont^riet^ of the
states.
also, in the sight of God, both together, is disproved by the Antithesis and
contrariety, which God has put between these two states and conditions, which
meeting both together, do overthrow one another; for whilst we are sinners in
the sight of God, we are branches in the bitter wild Olive; but when we are
Justified and made perfectly holy and righteous in the sight of God, we are
ingraffed into the sweet Olive; or rather made branches in the blessed Vine,
Christ, Ioh. Ioh. 15.
15. But we cannot be branches in the wild Olive, and removed and ingraffed
branches into the sweet Olive, and into the blessed Vine Christ Jesus both
together: so likewise whilst we are sinners in the sight of God, we are under
the power of darkness; but when we are justified, and made perfectly holy and
righteous in the sight of God, God has delivered us out of the power of
darkness, and has translated us into the kingdom of his dear Son, Colos.
1. 13. We are not Colos. 1. 13.
then under the power of darkness, and translated out of it into the Kingdom
of heaven, both together. Again, whilst we are sinners in the sight of God,
we are members of the Devil; but when we were justified and made perfectly
righteous in the sight of God, We are made thereby the members of Christ: but
we cannot be the members of Christ, and the members of the Devil, both
together.

Thirdly, that we are both righteous and sinners also 3 It frustrateth the end
of our redemption.
in the sight of God, does frustrate and overthrow the end and intent of his
works of redemption, wrought upon us. For when we were sinners, and thereby
soul and loathsome in the sight of God, God gave us his Son, That the blood of
Jesus Christ his Son might make us clean from all sin: but to what end and
intent does he with his blood make us so clean from all sin? is it not to
the end and intent that we should not be sound foul and loathsome still, in
the sight of God, in any sin? If then notwithstanding, this washing and
making of us clean, we be still foul and loathsome in the sight of God, is
not this end and intent of Gods work disappointed and frustrated? And is it not
an evident sign of a dead unbelieving heart to conceive Gods promises so
vainly? So likewise for the second part of Free Justification: If God has made
us perfectly holy and righteous in his sight, to the end and intent that we
should not be found, as before, unrighteous in his sight; if we be yet found
unrighteous in the sight of God, is not his work disappointed and frustrated of
his end and intent?

Again, for the fruits and effects thereof: If we be cut out of the wild
Olive Tree, and graffed into the sweet Olive, to the end and intent, that we
should not be branches in the wild Olive, If we be still branches in the wild
Olive, Gods work of removing us out of the wild Olive, and making us branches
in the sweet Olive, or blessed vine, Christ Jesus, is frustrated. Briefly, if
when we were members of the Devil, we were by Justification translated out of
him, and made the members of Christ, to the end and intent that by
Justification we should not be the members of the Devil: if we be still
sinners in the sight of God, and so still the members of the Devil, Gods work
were overthrown, disappointed and frustrated; and is it not an horrible thing
so to conceive, and seem to maintain Christ's benefits, as to frustrate them
of their ends? and so to nullify them, and make them as good as none? This
made Paul, Luther, and such like faithful servants of Paul and Luther zealous
against deadheartednesse, and unbelief.
Christ, so zealous, and so to thunder against such dead-hearted, unbeleeving,
and wrangling Sophisters, as under a color of friendship with Christ, and of
upholding and maintaining his truth, did indeed overthrow and frustrate the
same.

And lastly, if we be no otherwise justified, than that we are both righteous
and sinners also in the sight of God, hereof will follow many absurdities.

As first, God should be, in his promises, Yea and Nay. But God is faithful
(says the Apostle) and all his promises are not yea and nay, but only, yea and
amen, 2. Cor. 1. 18, 19. 20. 2 Cor. 1. 18, 19, 20.


Secondly, if we be both righteous and sinners also in the sight of God, then
(as Luther truly says) we are justified, and not justified; we are healed,
and fore also.

Thirdly, that way that we are perfectly righteous, we are well, and have
reason to be well content with the same: but that way that we are in the sight
of God fore, and sinners, we must go look for new salves, and new means and
remedies of making us righteous in the sight of God: For Christ has healed us
in the sight of God one way, but we are sore in the sight of God another way;
and that way that we are sinners and sore still in the sight of God, Christ
has not healed us of, whilst we be sinners in the sight of God. And hence it
is indeed, that the Papists, and all They that are ignorant of free
Justification do pervert Sanctification and Repentance.
others that are ignorant of Free Justification. (that is, how perfectly we are
healed by the same in the sight of God) but are carried with a legal
holiness, do pervert Sanctification and Repentance; that whereas they are not
healing (for by Christ's stripes alone we are Esaias 53. 5.
healed) but are declarative, merely declaring to the eyes of men, that we are
healed, beautified, and approved of in the sight of God, by being by
Justification made perfectly holy and righteous, from all spot of sin, in the
sight of God freely; They confound them, and make Repentance, and
Sanctification and holy walking, and such like to beautify, heal, adorn, and
approve us to the sight of God; running hereby into a preposterous cark and
care to approve our selves to Godward, under the name of Sanctification and
Repentance, by our own righteousness, wrought in us by the spirit, as the
Papists say, and by holy walking in all Gods Commandments; confessing free
Justification by the By, but flatly preaching as if we were not made perfectly
holy and righteous from all spot of sin in the sight of God, freely: so that
take me the Papists Sermons, as namely Bellarmines, and in many of them, where
he does not evagare to by-Ceremonies, but keeps to the fundamental points of
Religion, and to the ordinary phrases of forgiveness of sins, Repentance,
Sanctification, Charity, Love, holiness of life by walking in Gods
Commandments, and of the imitation of the virtues and life of Christ, and
Little differ^nce between the sermons of Papists and many of our Protestants.
such like, and you shall find little or no difference between a Papists
Sermon, and the Sermons of many of our Protestants; but both a-like, jusling
Christ out of his office: because you shall find that both a-like preach
these, as if Christ himself alone had not made us perfectly holy and
righteous, from all spot of sin, in the sight of God freely: but suppressing
this, you shall hear abundantly, That doing of these, we are pleasing to God,
beautiful, approved, acceptable, just, righteous, holy, beloved, the children
of God, true Christians, blessed of God with all manner of blessings, heirs of
salvation: and what not? And yet you shall hear in some Protestants Sermons
that which I fear by these manifold absurdities, is far worse; namely, that
we are by Justification made as perfectly clean from all sin, and as
righteous as Christ himself in the sight of God; and yet we are sinners also
in the sight of God: these are like a shrewd Cow, that gives a good milch, and
then kicketh it all down, when she has done.

For certainly this is that which Chrysostom, Luther, Chrysostom Luther,
Erasmus, Pelican, upon Gal. 2. 17, 18, 19, 20, 21.
Erasmus, Pelican, and other Interpreters upon these verses, Galat. 2. 17, 18,
19, 20, 21. do say to be a making our selves transgressors, by building up
that again, which we grant to be destroyed: It is an abrogating Many Preachers
destroy what they buil^ed.
of the grace of Christ, and blasphemy, to say when Christ has made us
perfectly and sufficiently righteous, from all sin, in the sight of God
freely, that we are yet found sinners our selves before God; and so must needs
make up some righteousness to heal this sin by the law and good works,
wrought by the spirit, as the Papists say, in the sight of God: the words of
Chrysostom cited by Calvin, are plain, saying thus, Si quaerentes etc. If we
seeking to be made righteous in Christ, nondum plene justi sumus, sed adhuc
immundi; are not yet full and completely just and righteous, but are yet
unclean, neither Christ alone suffices to righteousness: it follows that
Christ is the Minister of that doctrine, which leaves men in sin: hoc absurdo
proposito, blasphemiae insimulat Paulus eos, qui partem justitiae attribuunt
legi, etc. this absurdity being proposed, Paul accuses all those of blasphemy,
which give to the law any piece of making us righteous, (although it be wrought
by the spirit, as the Papists say) and call it a righteousness, not of the
law, but of the Gospel. But (says Luther) Si hoc verum est, etc. if this be
true, that we are justified and made righteous by Christ, impossible est nos
esse peccatores, it is impossible that we should be sinners. But if we being
justified, are yet found sinners; then he that is justified and holy in Christ,
is not justified, or holy; but has need of the righteousness and holiness of
the law, besides the righteousness of Christ, to heal him, and make him
righteous that way, that he is yet a sinner in the sight of God, and is not
healed by Christ. Whereupon Luther truly concludes, saying thus, It cannot
be therefore, but that the Papists, and all such, as are ignorant of the
righteousness of Christ, aut non recte, tenent, or do not rightly understand
the same (namely, how perfectly holy and righteous it makes them from all spot
of sin, in the sight of God freely) it cannot be, but they must needs mingle,
and so confound the Law and the Gospel, turn Christ into Moses, and Moses into
Christ, and pervert the whole Gospel of Christ; yea, and run into those fifty
discommo^ities against Christ's glory, discovered in the Epistle to the
Galathians, laid open by Luthers exposition upon the same, and briefly
collected and prefixed in a short Table in the beginning of that Treatise of
Luther upon the Galathians, translated into English, and allowed by public
authority, plainly showing, how good life, and good works proposterously
taught, before there is a right faith, and joyful knowledge of free
Justification grounded soundly in the heart, Do under the name of the Gospel,
overthrow the Gospel, rob Christ of his glory, and procure many other fearful
and dangerous evils to the souls of men, and hurt of the whole Church. Being
exceedingly to be lamented, that so great evils are so dangerously neglected,
under a pretense, and fair visour of a godly life, and a careful endeavor, by
the spirit of God (as the Papists and others boast) of serving of God, and
walking religiously in all Gods Commandments.

The fourth absurdity is, That if we be both righteous and sinners in the
sight of God, we are reconciled and not reconciled; we are adopted and not
adopted; for wherefore are we reconciled and adopted, but because we are made
righteous, in the sight God? but therefore it must follow by the nature of
Contraries, that because we are sinners also in the sight of God, we are
neither reconciled, nor adopted. Briefly as we are righteous in the sight of
God, so we must go to heaven; but as we are sinners in the sight of God, so
we must go to hell. But is not this to be S James his double ^^nded man.
Saint James his double-minded man, in the highest degree, and in the highest
points of salvation, that is, unstable in all his ways? Neither (says he) let
that man think that he shall receive any thing of the Lord, Iam. 1. 7, 8. For
does not this says, when Christ has James 1. 7. 8.
undertaken to wash away our sins, which is the Devils dung, that only
defiles a man in the sight of Mark. 7. ^5.
God, Mark. 7. and utterly abolish them out of his Fathers sight; does not this
faith (I say) that we are both righteous, and sinners also in the sight of
God, deny the efficacy of the blood of Christ, to have washed away our sins;
and so leaves the abominable and loathsome dung of our sins, being the image
of the Devil, still in his fathers sight? And if Justification being brought
in, to this end, even to abolish our sin from before God, should yet leave us
foul and filthy to his Fathers view; does not this faith, not only frustrate
Justification of his appointed end but also, make it like the garments of
David's Messengers, which the Ammonites clipped so short, that they were not
Justification made like the garments of David's Messengers.
able to hide their shame? which is most horrible once to conceive of Christ's
glory, Free Justification; seeing Christ himself did command the Laodiceans to
get on his white-garment, that their filthy nakedness might not appear?
Revel. 3. 18. And if it were a terror, and a Revel. 3. 18.
smiting to David's heart, to cut off but a little of the lappet of Saul's
garment; ought it not to be an exceeding terror to a Christian heart to clip so
short the garment of Christ, as to think, that it does not utterly abolish and
clean put our of Gods sight all our sins? leaving none for us to put out
before his Father; and therefore has made it (as Bernard says) so large and
long a garment, for that end and purpose?

And therefore hearken to the advice of a well approved Labourer in our Church,
worthy ever the meditating, because it is most pithy, Evangelicall, and truly
saving, after this manner, Cast away the rags of thy own righteousness (as
S. Paul did, seeing his inherent righteousness was far better than thine,
Philip. 3. 8, 9.) And if ever thou will get the blessing, wrap thy Phil. 3. 8.
9.
self in this garment of the righteousness of thine elder Brother Christ; and
when thy Father shall savor the smell of thy garments, he shall bless thee;
and say, behold the smell of my Son, is as the smell of a field, which the
Lord has blessed: fear not to be complete in him; this long white robe needs
no inching or ecking, needs no patching; say with the holy Martyr, and live and
die with it in thy mouth, only Christ, only Christ: Consider what I say, and
the Lord give us understanding in all things.

The second Objection proceeds from the weakness The second objection is
from the weakness of faith.
of faith, arising from sense and feeling, whereof I have spoken and given
Armor of resistance in the ninth chapter: but because it much troubles the
faith of the weak Christian, let us hear the Objection, and show some further
remedy against the same: the Objection is this.

I feel not my self to have any righteousness,

First, to thy sense and feeling, I answer thus with Luther: Thou must not
feel, but believe that thou art thus righteous: and therefore the more thou
feel this unworthiness and sin, making thee whilst thou pulst down thy
eye, from the brazen-serpent, to look upon thy sore, by sense and feeling, to
cry out, Oh wretched man that I am, who shall deliver me from this body of
death! so much the more happy and blessed art thou; for it does make thee
presently to turn thy eye to the Brazen Serpent, Christ: Who presently delivers
thee and makes thee to say with the Apostle, in the sight by faith, of thy
perfect healing, I thank God through Jesus Christ our Lord, that there is no
judgment, punishment, or condemnation, for that which I feel. Why? what is
the cause that there is no judgment, punishment, or condemnation for the sin,
which I thus feel dwelling in me? The reason little marked, (but is pittiously
mangled and rent, from the first verse, of too many,) is this, Because the
righteousness of the Law, though not legally and actively, as the Papists
would have it; yet Evangelically and passively is fulfilled in us. And this is
thy present and immediate healing, by turning thy eye from thy sense and
feeling, up to the Brazen-serpent, Christ; presently showing thee by his
bleeding wounds A present healing.
that thou art above thy sense and feeling, made perfectly and gloriously holy
and righteous, from all spot of sin, in the sight of God, freely. And thus by
this thy feeling the contrary to this perfect healing, there is place for faith
to believe it; And therefore to strengthen our weak faith, that we are,
contrary to our present sense and feeling, thus perfectly righteous from all
spot of Three means to strengthen our weak faith.
sin in the sight of God, freely, We must use a threefold help.

First, it must be thy wisdom to have everbefore thy Abraham, walking in this
case of Free Justification; as a natural son in the steps of the faith of
our Father Abraham, after this manner before described; but thus applied: That
relying upon that God, That calls those things which be not, as though they
were, Romans 4. 17. that is, Romans 4. 17.
who gives to the things that appear not, as real a Being before himself by
his Call; or so speaking, as if they had a real Being to our eyes: thou must
above all hope of thine own feeling, whereby thou feel thine own
righteousness to be, but as a menstruous cloth, yet believe under hope of
Christ's righteousness, that thou art perfectly holy and righteous in the sight
of God, according to that which is spoken; The blood of Jesus Christ the Son
of God, does make us clean from all sin. And again, As by the disobedience
of one man Adam, many were made sinners: So by the obedience of one man Christ,
are many made righteous, verse. 18. And thou not weak in faith, must not
consider, Verse. 18.
or think upon thine own body, which thou feel dead in trespasses and
sins, by the fall of Adam; neither the violence thereby, of thy daily actual
sins, verse 19. neither must thou doubt of this promise of Verse. 19.
God, by unbelief; but be strengthened in faith, that thou art perfectly holy
and righteous, freely in the sight of God, and so give glory to God, verse. 20.
being fully Verse. 20.
assured, that he which has promised to accomplish it upon thee freely, by
clothing thee with his Sons righteousness, is also able to do it, verse 21.

The second help to strengthen our faith, that we are Verse. 21. 2
made thus perfectly and gloriously holy and righteous from all spot of sin
in the sight of God, freely; Is not to forget the comparison that Saint Paul
makes in this case, Romans 5. between the first Adam that made us, that is, both
body and soul sinners, and damned; and the second Adam Christ, that as freely
makes us both body and soul righteous and saved. And although there be some
difference in the manner namely, that Adam made us all sinners inherently and
actively, to our sense and feeling; but Christ makes us righteous in the sight
of God, objectively, Evangelically, and passively, and invisibly above our
sense and feeling, that there may be place for the faith of Gods power, of
truly and really doing it himself alone: yet notwithstanding we must take
heed that we give not more power to Adam in making us sinners, being but a mere
man; than to Christ in making us righteous, being both God and man: but let us
know that as the first Adam made us, before we our selves have done any evil
work, perfectly, completely, and only and merely sinners, and damnable in the
sight of God; so strongly that we cannot choose, but show the same in all our
life by actual sins to the eyes of men; so much more does Christ, make us
before we have done any good perfectly, completely, and only and merely
gloriously holy and righteous, and so perfectly saved in the sight of God; so
strongly, that he makes us to declare the same by sanctification, and a new
life to the eyes of men. Yea more, although our inherent righteousness of
sanctification, flowing thus from our Justification be imperfect in it self,
and makes all our actions imperfect in righteousness, yet so mighty is this
original righteousness (as Luther calls it, in respect of the secondarie,
inherent, actual righteousness of our The exceeding efficacy of our original
righteousness, that is Christ's.
sanctification) That as the Sunbeams lying continually in a house that can
cast forth continually nothing but shadowish darkness, does continually
swallow up that shadowish darkness, and makes both the house and all things in
the house all light; so does the glorious Sun of Righteousness, Christ Jesus,
by the power of his imputation, so cloth us with his own righteousness, that
continually swallowing up and abolishing the imperfections of our
sanctification, does make and continually preserve and present us, and all our
actions that were darkness in themselves, to be all light in the Ephesians. 5. 8.
Lord, Ephesians. 5. 8. that is, made perfectly holy and righteous, from all spot
of sin, continually in the sight of God, freely: Which comparison between
Adam and Christ, although it is proposed as equal, to show the truth,
reallnesse and verity between them, as verse. 19. where the Apostle says, that,
As by the disobedience of one man, many were made sinners: So by the obedience
of one, are many also made righteous: Yet in other places is the working of
Christ showed to be far more rich; plentiful and abundant, in making us
perfectly righteous, than the working of Adam, in making us sinners: so that
the Apostle, to express the plentiful working of Christ above Adam, does not
stick to use the words [ Abounding in the work of Christ above Adam,] less
than four times in the later part of that fifth chapter, saying: That although
through the offense of one, many be dead; Yet much more does the grace of God,
and gift by Grace, abound unto many: yea, although the Law entered in upon
sin, and made sin to abound, and to be out of measure sinful; yet grace in
Justification abounds much more; so that (says he) they which receive the
abundance of grace, and this gift of righteousness, do even reign in life,
by this Justification of life. But that saying, 2 Cor. 5. 21. is more
admirable, that He which knew no sin 2 Cor. 5. 21.
was made sin for us, that we being translated into Christ, might be made the
very righteousness of God: The Abstract importing (as I said before) that we
are made so perfectly, completely and gloriously holy and righteous, from all
spot of sin, in the sight of God, freely, That we are nothing else, but mere
righteousness in the sight of God. And has Christ's work passed Adams making
of sinners, in swallowing up and utterly abolishing all our sin, from before
God: as if Joseph's barnes had swallowed up the lean kine in Pharaohs vision;
and made us so richly, plentifully, and abundantly righteous in the sight of
God? and shall we be troubled more with the feeling of Adams work upon us, than
be filled with joy, with the exceeding glory of Christ's work upon us? should we
not by such regard of sense and feeling, that is, of old Adam, and weakness of
faith, greatly dishonor the Godhead of Christ in the second Adam? This
comparison between Christ and Adam, does Luther also strongly press for the
strengthening of faith, saying thus, For as we cannot deny, but that we are all
sinners, and are constrained to say, that through the sin of Adam, we were
all lost, were made the enemies of God, and guilty of eternal death (for this
do all terrified hearts feel and confess, and more indeed sometimes than
they should do;) so can we not deny, but that Christ died for our sins,
that he might make us righteous; for he died not to justify the righteous, but
the unrighteous; and to make them the children of God, and Inheritors of all
spiritual and heavenly blessings: therefore when I feel and confess my self
to be a sinner, through Adams transgression, why should I not say, that I am
made righteous through the righteousness of Christ, especially, when I hear
that he loved me, and gave himself for me? This did Paul most steadfastly
believe, and therefore he speaks these words with so great vehemency and
full assurance; which He grant unto us in some part at the least, which has
loved us, and given himself for us.

The third help to strengthen our weak faith, to believe thus perfectly and
gloriously holy and righteous, from all spot of sin, in the sight of God,
freely, Is for the inconveniences and evils that otherwise will follow this
distrust, briefly and plainly expressed by Luther, saying thus: Except thou
do believe above thy sense and feeling, and confess, that thou art thus
righteous in the sight of God, thou do great injury to Christ who has made
thee clean by the washing of water through the word; who also died upon the
^rosse, condemned sin, and killed death, that through him thou might
obtain righteousness, and everlasting life: these things thou can not deny,
except thou will openly show thy self to be wicked and blasphemous against
God; and utterly to despise God, and all his promises, Jesus Christ with all
his benefits; and so consequently thou can not deny, but that thou art
righteous.

Now concerning the other part of the objection,

To which I answer again with Luther, that there the inestimable greatness of
the gift is the cause that we do not believe it; and because this incomparable
treasure is freely offered, therefore it is despised. And secondly, because (as
Luther truly says in another place) the doctrine of the Gospel speaks of
far other matters than any Book of policy, or Philosophy, yea or the very
Book of Moses himself; to wit, of the unspeakable and most divine gifts of
God, which far pass the capacity and understanding, both of men and Angels;
whereby the inestimable A threefold remedy against fear of applying so great
riches.
greatness of Gods bounty in the gift engenders in us an hardness to believe
it. But for this there is a threefold Remedy, able to strengthen us effectually
in faith.

The first is expressed by Luther, saying after this We must not weigh so much
how great the thing is, that is given, and how unworthy we are of it (for so
should the greatness of the gift, and our unworthiness terrify us;) but we
must principally consider, first the greatness of the giver; and secondly,
that it pleases God freely to give us this unspeakable gift; unto us (I say)
which are so unworthy. Now if it be the pleasure of a great noble man to give
to a poor man a great gift, he does not refuse it, how great soever the gift
be; because it is the great man's pleasure that he should have it: so likewise
says Christ, Luke 12. 32. Fear not little flock, it Luke 12. 32.
is your Fathers good pleasure to give you a Kingdom: mark how he says first,
it is his pleasure; and secondly, to give unto you (says he) a Kingdom: to
whom? to you unworthy, which are his little flock. If I then be little, and the
thing great (nay rather, of all things the greatest) which God has given unto
me, I must think, that he also is great and only great, which gives it. If he
offer it, and will give it; I consider not mine own sin, and unworthiness,
but his fatherly good will toward me, which is the giver; and I receive the
greatness of the gift with joy and gladness, and am thankful for so
inestimable a gift given freely unto me, to me (I say) unworthy, by the hearing
of faith. A little glimmering of this bounteous nature of God, and our duty in
taking his freegiven benefits, we have in King Alexander the Great, who, when a
servant and soldier of his that had served him in conquering the world,
whereof he was now Monarch, being a poor man, came to King Alexander and
besought him, that he would bestow the value of twenty pounds upon his daughter
that was now to be married; the King presently commanded the value of a
thousand pounds to be given him: and when the poor man acknowledged that it
was too great a gift for him so poor a man to receive, the King answered, That
although he thought it too great a benefit for him to receive, yet it was not
too great for him to give; and therefore he should take it, and have it. Which
the poor man seeing to be his pleasure that he should have, took the bounty of
the King, was glad thereof, and went his way thankful for the same. Now is
this King Alexander nothing, and as it were, but an Ape in imitating that
bounteous nature of God; who giving righ gifts and benefits unto us, agreeable
to his exceeding greatness, to make us rich and blessed, shall not we freely
take that which of his exceeding bounteous nature he freely offers? but ^ooking
upon our own unworthiness, shall we resist his pleasure, and refuse his rich
bounty? Very effectually therefore is this point pressed by the doctrine of our
Church in this case of free Justification; where, in the Sermon of Doctrine of
our Church in the sermon of the Resurrection.
the Resurrection of Christ having taught, That it is not enough to have, by
the death of Christ, our sins done away; but also by his Resurrection we are
endowed with a perfect and everlasting righteousness, freely replenishing us
before God with all righteousness; presently to strengthen faith, it adds
this salve against doubting, saying, Doubt not of the truth of this matter, how
great and high soever these things be: it becomes God to do no little deeds,
how impossible soever they seem to thee Pray to God, that by faith thou may
perceive this great mystery of Justification wrought by Christ's Resurrection,
that thou may certainly believe nothing to be impossible with God. But if
thou doubtest of so great wealth and felicity wrought upon thee, O man call to
mind, that therefore thou have received into thine own possession the
everlasting verity, our Savior Jesus Christ, to confirm to thy conscience the
truth of all this matter.

The second Remedy against the fear of applying remember the sixth thing
proposed to be spoken of, in the beginning of this second part of
Justification; namely, the End, why God freely bestows upon us so great wealth
and felicity, not aiming chiefly at our glory herein, but to declare and
manifest his own glory, by magnifying upon us his free grace, and rich bounty:
and therefore we must freely take by faith, which is the hand of the soul,
this rich bounty of God; that so this glory of his free grace may be magnified
upon us, and that we may be passive instruments of his glorious doings, and
rich bounty wrought upon us by himself only and alone. For does he not
greatly manifest his own perfect justice and righteousness, in that none can
please him, but such only as are perfectly holy and righteous in his sight? and
that none can be such, except he himself, above their sense and feeling, take
in hand to make them such in his own sight freely, to the praise of the glory
of his grace? Yes verily, and therefore is it so flatly testified by the
Apostle, saying, Romans 3. 24. 25, 26. we are justified Romans 3. 24, 25, 26.
freely by his grace in his Sons blood: why? or to what end? to show (says
he) at this time his righteousness, that he might be just, and the Iustifier
of him, or the maker of him just, that is of the faith of Jesus: Which glory of
glories to be proper to God only, is notably expressed by Esaias 44. 22, 23.
the Prophet Esaias 44. 22, 23. saying, I will put away thy transgression as
darkness, and abolish thy sins as a mist; Rejoice ye heavens, for the Lord
has done it; shout ye lower parts of the earth, hurst forth into praise O
Mountains, etc. For thus has God redeemed his people, and thus will he be
glorified in Israel. Because when we take this benefit by faith, and rejoice
with this joy for the same, we give him truly, the glory of his grace, and rich
bounty.

And therefore we must mark that, which few mark; Two ways of glorifying God.
namely, that there are two ways of glorifying God, one primary and immediate
to Gods own eyes; and another that is secondary, and mediate, that is, to the
eyes of men: the first and immediate way of glorifying God, to his own eyes, is
to take by faith, and to believe him on his word, that those rich benefits
freely promised, are wrought upon us, which to reason are impossible, and for
greatness incredible; and yet embrace the same with joy. And this kind of
glorifying of God, is spoken of Romans 4. 20. where it is said, that, Abraham
doubted not of the promise of God by unbelief, Romans 4. 20.
but was strengthened in faith, and gave glory to God. The other kind of
glorifying God, which is secondary to the eyes of men, is by works testifying
our faith to the eyes of men; and is spoken of Matthew. 5. 16. saying, Let your
light (to wit of faith) so shine before men, that Matthew. 5. 1.
they may see your good works of Sanctification, and glorify your father which
is in heaven. But look how far the Sun passes the Moon, or rather a candle
for brightness; so far does our glorifying of God directly to his own eyes,
the first way, by joyful embracing the greatness of his benefits, pass the
glorifying of him; by works to the eyes of men, the second way: Because the
first is merely passive in us, suffering God to glorify himself upon us, by
working his inestimable benefits freely upon us: The second is declarative and
active in us, by which we declare the free goodness of God, freely bestowed
upon us. The first is inward, spiritual, and divine, wholly tending to the
praise of God, first creating (as it were) the glory of God in us. For whereas
it is the nature of unbelief (as Brentius well describes) to be very curious,
and inquisitive, and at the smallest appearance contrary to the promise, doubts
of God speaking it, one while making question whether the Word be the Word;
another while making question of the meaning of the Word; another while
looking to the fewness and simpleness of them that hold the Word; another
while looking at the multitude and greatness of them that hold otherwise; but
ever seeking some witty evasion, whereby it may seem to do honestly in not
believing the Word of God, as it plainly speaks: And sorobs God of the glory of
his truth and of his power; and with seeming wit makes him a liar: So on the
contrary side, faith resting upon the naked and plain word spoken, because it
seems contrary to reason, and outward sense and feeling, it flies to the
truth, and power of the Promiser, making him true in his speaking, and able to
perform it; and so gives him the glory of his Living, and Being, and true
working in us: whereby (as Luther truly speaks) faith is (as a man would say)
the Creator of a certain Divinity, not in the substance of God, but in us; and
so by putting us in possession of Gods bounteous divine benefits, does truly
make us divine people: And for this first kind of glorifying God, is Abraham
so often called in the Word, the friend of God. But the second kind of
glorifying God is outward, more fleshly, and humane, not creating and making,
but showing after a grosser manner to the eyes of worldly men, that we are made
divine persons: whereof S. Peter speaks, saying, By the exceeding great and
precious promises you are partakers of the Divine nature: But how manifested
and declared? In that (says he) ye fly the corruption that is in the world
through lust, 2 Pet. 1. 4. And this second active kind of glorifying God,
because we are Agents in it, and do it by the spirit, greatly inclines to the
glorifying of man; as S. Paul speaking of the sanctified works and holy life of
Abraham, says, What shall we say then, that Abraham our Father has found
concerning the flesh? For if Abraham were justified (that is, made righteous in
the sight God, by the holy works of his sanctification) he had wherein to
rejoice or glory (viz. before men) but not before God? But what says the
Scripture? Abraham believed that God himself took in hand to make him
righteous, by clothing him with his Sons righteousness, whereby he was made
spiritually, divinely, heavenly and perfectly righteous: not for man's account,
which counts of righteousness by halfes; but in Gods account, whose count is
perfect; and counts it not righteousness, except he himself, alone by
himself do make his creature perfectly and gloriously holy and righteous,
from all spot of sin, in his own sight freely: This Abraham believed, enjoyed
the benefit thereof, and gave glory to God; and therefore was called the friend
of God, because he glorified him in this principal glory, wherein he will be
glorified in the greatness of his benefits freely bestowed; which especially
in his Gospel, are correspondent and agreeable to his great and glorious
nature; and therefore, being above humane capacity, and to reason impossible,
is principally glorified by taking them by faith; and this faith, seeing and
discerning the greatness and glory of them, makes the true Believer to rejoice
with joy unspeakable and glorious, 1 Pet. 1. 8. 1 Pet. 1. 3.


But alas, here we may take up Luthers complaint, That this knowledge and
benefit of Christ to come, the Saints of the Old Testament rejoiced more in,
and so glorified God more for the same, than we now do, when he is so
brightly and comfortably revealed and exhibited unto us: Indeed, (says he) we
do confess that this knowledge of Christ, and of the righteousness of faith,
is an inestimable treasure; but we conceive not thereby such a full joy of
spirit, as the Prophets and Apostle did. But what is the reason hereof? Because
(says Luther in another place,) They did not consider so coldly the promises
made unto the Fathers, as we do; but did read them, and weigh them with
great diligence: But they that understand not this benefit of fee Justification
(whereof the Gospel specially entreats) and so do prize no other
righteousness, besides the righteousness of works, works, when they hear
this righteousness of faith pressed, and the excellency thereof advanced,
they are offended; objecting that it is so far from glorifying God two ways,
that it makes men secure and careless to all good works. But what (says the
Doctrine of our Church) is the cause hereof? Even this (as Luther also
testifies) Because, they understand nothing of Free Justification, or else
they understand it carnally: for their minds are occupied with other
cogitations, and fantastical imaginations of their own works; therefore things
seem unto them strange matters, and no means to glorify God, neither
passively by faith, nor actively by works; but the children of wisdom will
imitate the Prophets and Apostles, who because they conceived the great glory
thereof, and felt true joy of spirit for the same, therefore (says Luther) did
they (especially Paul) so plentifully set forth, and so diligently teach the
Article of Justification: For (says he) this is the proper office of an
Apostle, or as one may say, the essence of a Minister of the Gospel, to preach
among people the unsearchable riches of Christ, Ephesians. 3. 8. especially Ephesians.
3. 8.
the cause and fountain of all the rest, namely, Free Justification; wherewith
(as David says, Psalm. Psalm. 119. 32. Gal. 5. 1.
119. 32.) when our heart is set at liberty, Galat. 5. 1. we will run the
way of Gods Commandments.

Hence it is that the Prophet Jeremy also set out so magnificently the glory of
Free Justification, as it should be fully revealed under the time of the
Gospel, saying, I will make them clean from all their iniquities, whereby they
have sinned against me, and whereby they have rebelled against me, etc. Yea
(says he) in an other place, Ierem. 31. I will make a new covenant with Ierem.
31 33.
the house of Israel; and this shall be the Covenant, That I will so forgive
their iniquities, that I will remember their sins no more. And it shall be
to me a name, a joy, a praise, and an honor before all Nations of the earth,
which shall hear all the good that I do unto them; and they shall fear and
tremble for all the goodness, and for all the wealth that I show unto them.
Upon which words the exposition of Pelican, is very remarkable, Pelican upon
Ie^ 3^ 8. 9.
saying, Vbi praedicabitur Evangelium regni, etc. When the Gospel of the
Kingdom shall be preached, God will do such great good things unto his
faithful, ut prae magnitudine gratiae, obstupescat omnis caro, that all flesh
shall be astonished at the greatness of his Grace. And Paul expounds what
this wonderful Grace is, saying, whereas all have sinned, and so are deprived
of the glory of God, we are justified, that is, made perfectly holy and
righteous from all spot of sin in the sight of God, freely by his Grace,
through the Redemption that is in Christ Jesus, Romans 3. 24. Mark Romans 3. 24.
the word (freely) and let us thoroughly understand the meaning thereof, namely,
God respecting no worthiness in us, to deserve so glorious a benefit, nor
respecting any unworthiness in us to hinder us from taking this glory, but
giving it us freely, to heal all our unworthiness, and to make us freely
worthy of all his other blessings, both temporal and eternal: and why? or to
what end does he all this? the Apostle answers, Ephesians. 2. 7. saying, That he
may show to Ephesians. 2. 7.
the ages to come, the exceeding riches of his Grace, through his goodness
toward us in Christ Jesus: and that also to the praise of the glory of his
Grace, Ephesians. 1. 6. Whereby (says Ephesians. 1. 6.
Chrysostom,) nequit sermon comprehendi, etc. it cannot be expressed with
words, with how great benefits we are endued, and honored withal; for (says
he) they are not only riches, but abundant riches; and not only abundant
riches, but given also to show abundancy; and not the abundancie of men, but of
God: so that in all respects, they must needs be unmeasurable and wonderful
great. Shall we then by foolish fear of our unworthiness, drown the the word
[ freely,] resist (as I said before) the good pleasure of God, that would have
us freely to take it, and refuse his rich bounty, and so trample the glory of
the exceeding riches of his grace under feet? no, let us rather utterly trample
this fear of our unworthiness under f^et, because it would not only rob us of
our good; but also Christ of his glory.

The third Remedy against fear of applying to our selves so great glory of
Free Justification, Is to remember The third Remedy against the fear of
appl^^g so great g^o^y^o (...) ^^lves is. Matthew. 6. 33.
how highly it pleases God, and how precious he counts such applying of his
benefits by faith, God rewarding the same with all blessings temporal and
eternal: according to that saying of Christ, Matt. 6. 33. Seek ye first the
Kingdom of God, and his righteousness, (whereof Paul spoke saying, That I may
not be found in mine own righteousness, which is after the Law, but the
righteousness which is of God through faith:) and then (says Christ,) all
other things shall be cast upon you: But, because we shall speak further
hereof, when we come to the effects of Justification, I will only repeat (for
fear so precious a saying, worthy ever to be remembered, should be so soon
forgotten,) that Exhortation before mentioned, namely, Cast away the rags of
thy own righteousness (Philip. 3 8, 9.) And if Phil^. 8. 9.
over thou will get the blessing, wrap thy self in this garment of the
righteousness of thy elder brother, Christ: And when thy Father shall savor
the smell of thy garments, he shall bless thee, and say, Behold, the smell of
my Son is as the smell of a field, which the Lord has blessed; fear not to
be complete in him; this long white Robe needs no inching, no ceking, no
patching: Say with the holy Martyr, and live and die with it in thy mouth: only
Christ, only Christ. The reason whereof is plainly expressed by S. Paul,
saying, That they that are of faith, are blessed with faithful Abraham: But as
many as are of works, are under the curse, Gal. 3. 9. 10. Upon which words the
exposition Gal. 3. 9, 10.
of Luther, is worthy to be adjoined, and ever to be remembered, saying thus,
We must separate the believing Abraham, from the working Abraham, as far a
sunder, as there is distance betwixt heaven and earth. A man believing in
Christ is altogether a Divine Person, the child of God, the Inberitor of the
world, a Conqueror of Sin, Death, the World, and the Devil; therefore he
cannot be praised and magnified enough. Let us not suffer this faithful
Abraham, to lie hid in his grave, as he is hid from the Jews, but let us
highly extol, and magnify, and let us fill both heaven and earth, with his
name: So that in respect of this faithful Abraham, we see nothing at all in
the working Abraham: For when we speak of this faithful Abraham, we are in
heaven; but afterward doing those things, which the working Abraham did,
(which were in comparison fleshly and earthly, Romans 4. 1.) we are among men in
earth. The believing Romans 4. 1.
Abraham, therefore fills heaven and earth. So every Christian through his
faith fills heaven and earth (heaven with his faith, and earth with his
works.) And thus much for the strengthening of Faith.

CHAP. XIIII. Of the Vtility and Majesty of Free Justification.
THus having spoken of the nature and parts of Free Justification, and
strengthened faith in the same: Now it remains that I show unto the possessors
of it, what an inestimable Jewel they have of the same, in showing the
exceeding utility and majesty of it; which although I confess it passes the
ability, either of men or Angels to express according to the worth and
excellency thereof; because I acknowledge the saying of Luther, upon Paul's
reproving of Peter to his face, before the Congregation, to be most true, That
such and so great is the utilitie and majesty of Free Justification, that
whosoever rightly esteems the same, to him all other things shall seem but
vile, and nothing worth. For (says he) What is Peter? what is Paul? what is an
Angel from heaven? what are all Creatures to the Article of Justification?
Which if we know (and so esteem) then are we in the clear light; but if we
be ignorant thereof, (and so lightly regard it) then are we in most miserable
darkness. Yet notwithstanding I hold it necessary a little to point at this
excellent utility and majesty of Free Justification; and leave the full
handling thereof to others, of greater gifts than my self; and will only touch
six fruits Six effects of Free justification.
and effects, which the more any look into, marking but the nature, truth, and
excellency of them: the more they shall see the utility and majesty of free
Justification to be wonderful.

The first excellent fruit and effect hereof is this, 1 First Illumination.
That the right knowledge of free Justification does truly enlighten us, and
brings us into a wonderful light. For first it brings us to see what an
infinite horrible, Also it makes us to see the horriblenesse of sin.
soul, filthy thing the least sin is in the sight of God; in that we see by
the same, that we cannot be but most foul, loathsome, and filthy in the sight
of God, until we be made perfectly holy and righteous, from all spot of sin,
in the sight of God; which yet none can work and bring to pass, but only he
himself: which horrible foulness of the least sin, although the Law does
terribly lay it open in that definitive sentence, Cursed is every one that
continues not in all things that are written in the book of the Law, to do
them, Gal. 3. 10. Gal. 3. 10.
that is, cursed is every one that has the least sin in Gods sight; for who
sees not, that if a man do continue A description of Gods unchangeable nature
and w^l against sin.
(as God created him) in all things, he should not have the least sin in the
sight of God? but if he have the least sin in the sight of God, he does not
continue in all things, and so is certainly accursed. Yea the sentence is as
much, as if God had said, Cursed is every one that is not perfectly holy and
righteous from all spot of sin in the sight of God: And yet who marks it? or if
any do mark it, it drives them but into despair; and being loath, by self
love, to prognosticate so hard things to themselves, desire to forget it or
endeavor to put it away by vain and idle imaginations; as if it were not the
description of the loathsomenesse of sin in the sight of God, nor a description
of Gods unchangeable pure nature, against sin; but a pretended severity of the
rigor of the Law, which they hope to escape, though they be not found
fulfilling it in the sight of God: and so would make God changeable and false,
which is impossible, seeing heaven and earth may pass away, but one jot or
tittle of this definitive sentence of the Law cannot pass Math. 5. 18.
away, until it is fulfilled. And thus men dally and trifle Men dally and
trifle with th^^ fearful sentence.
with this fearful sentence, until they come to be enlightened with Free
Justification, whereby God himself takes in hand to make them perfectly holy
and righteous in his own sight freely: then they come to see willingly what an
horrible thing the least sin is in the sight of God; then they acknowledge the
truth and unchangeablenesse of that definitive sentence, Cursed is every one
that continues not in all things; then they seeing that nothing could make
them so perfectly holy and righteous, from all spot of sin, in the sight of
God, but the crucifying of the Son of God, they begin truly to crucify that,
which they now see to be the Crucifier of the Lord of glory.

Secondly, it brings us to see not only the foulness 2 The perfection of Gods
Justice.
of sin, but also the perfection of Gods justice against sin, and his
implacable displeasure and anger against the same; in that he cannot be
reconciled from this displeasure, or anger, except he see his creature
perfectly holy and righteous, from all spot of sin, in his sight. Which
although the foresaid definitive sentence of the Law seems to do, yet because
it smites terror and despair into them, it makes men to strive to forget it,
and to fly from God, and to run into more sin, until they see Gods love in
making them perfectly holy and righteous, from all spot of sin, in his own
sight freely: and then they come to acknowledge cheerfully the perfection of
his justice, and the justness of his displeasure and anger against the least
sin; because they see by the death of his Son, to make them clean from all
sin, that there is no sin little in the sight of God. Now they come to see the
truth of that saying of David: Thou art not a God that loves wickedness,
neither shall any evil dwell with thee, Psalm. 5. Psalm. 5. 4.
4. Now they come to see the truth of that saying of Habak. Thou art of pure
eyes, and can not see evil, thou can not behold wickedness, but thou must
needs destroy the sinner, or sin from him that sees, by it, his misery, by
making him perfectly holy and righteous, from all spot of sin, in thy sight
freely. And that free Justification thus declares and manifests the justice
of God, and brings people thus profitably to see the perfection of it, and
glorify it, is testified plainly by S. Paul, Romans 3. 25. 26. saying, The
righteousness of God by the faith Romans 3. 25, 26.
of Jesus Christ, is unto all, and upon all that do believe, freely justifying
them, that is, making them perfectly holy and righteous in the sight of God
freely: but to what end? To declare (says he) his righteousness (namely,
that it alone pleases him) that he might thus see himself to be just, and
the justifier of him, that is, of the faith of Jesus.

Thirdly, the right knowledge of free Justification 3 The meaning of the tenth
Commandment.
brings a man to see and understand the tenth Commandment, and thereby the
spiritual meaning of all the ten Commandments, which men, though wise, and
learned, and very religious, both in their own opinion, and judgment of
others, do not understand: as is to be seen in the Scribes and Pharisees,
whom Christ was feign in the fifth, sixth, and seventh Chapters of Matthew. in
the spiritual meaning of the Law, to chatechise like young children in all the
ten Commandments. But when a man understands free Justification rightly, then
he understands the tenth Commandment, and sees how horrible gross sins, in
the sight of God, the least breaches thereof are (which the blind world counts
nothing, and sees all his best works and holy walking to be) by reason of that
tenth Commandment, but as a menstruous cloth; and so kills him, in making him
to see, that he is a damnable 1 By the help and assistance of the spirit of God.
lost sinner in the spiritual breach of all the ten Commandments. A notable
example hereof is S. Paul who whilst he was a Pharisee, he walked diligently
and 2 God being merciful to pardon small matters.
zealously; so holily and righteously in all Gods Commandments, that in his
own opinion, and in the judgment of others, concerning the righteousness of
the Law, he was unrebukable, Phil. 3. 7. But when Phil. 3. 7.
he was once justified, and understood rightly the glory of the same; then he
understood the tenth Commandment; and then he cried out, that the Law was
spiritual, but (although his life was then most of all sanctified) yet he felt
himself carnal, and sold under sin: then he felt that in him, that is, in
his flesh, dwelt no good thing; and cried out, Oh wretched man that I am, who
shall deliver me from the body of this death? Thus did the tenth Commandment
kill him, being by the right understanding of free Justification, effectually
enlightened in the Law.

Fourthly and lastly, this right knowledge of free 4 It opens the closets of
heaven.
Justification opens unto us the very closets of heaven; whereby, as it were
with Stephen, the heavens being opened, it shows us all the admirable glory of
Christ, and all the riches of heaven: so that never did Moses, being upon the
top of Mount Pishgah, more brightly see all the beauty and glory of the land of
Promise, than we being justified by faith, do see all the riches, treasures,
and glory of the Kingdom of Christ; whereby with S. Paul, we desire to know
nothing else, save Jesus Christ, and him crucified; to purchase unto us such
unsearchable riches, Ephesians. 3. 8. Yea we begin Ephesians. 3. 8.
truly to count all things loss, for the excellent knowledge of Christ Jesus
our Lord; and to judge them to be dung, that we may win Christ, and be found
in him; not having our own righteousness, of holy walking according to the
Law, but the righteousness which is of God through faith in Jesus Christ,
Phil. 3. 8, 9. whereby we behold, in this Justification, Phil. 3 8, 9.
as it were in a looking-glass, the glory of God with open face; and are
changed into the same glory, from glory to glory, 2 Cor. 3. 18. of which
excellent 2 Cor. 3. 18.
light that thus comes by the right knowledge of free Justification; because I
have spoken further of it in the first chapter of this Treatise, I will end
with that pithy testimony of Calvin, who upon Galat. 2. 16. Calvin on Gal. 2.
16.
most truly says thus: That without the knowledge of this benefit of
Justification, we know neither our own filthiness, nor Gods righteousness:
but if we do rightly know it, with a joyful understanding of it; as it alone
makes us (as Peter says) a chosen generation, a royal Priesthood, an holy
nation, a peculiar people unto God; so it makes us to show forth the virtues
and praises of him who has called us out of darkness into his marvelous, or
wonderful light, 1 Pet. 2. 9.

The second maine point showing the majesty and 2 The second maine point
showing the majesty of free Justification.
utility of the right knowledge of free Justification is, That it not only
delivers us from the fivefold punishment belonging to the least sin, spoken of
before in the second chapter: which God by his righteous nature and revealed
law, daily executes upon one or other, in one place or other: but also it is
the only cause that brings upon us, and puts us in possession of all the
contrary, great, and glorious benefits of the Gospel: six of the principal and
chiefest whereof; although notongue of man or Angels is able to lay forth The
deep sea of God, mercy
the unsearchable riches and glory of them; yet I will briefly touch them,
leaving them to the large plummet of thy meditations, to sound the bottom of
this deep sea; which the deeper thou soundest, the more thou shall find thy
self swallowed up with the unsearchable riches of these benefits: which I will
briefly handle in order, as in an experimental feeling, and natural order
they depend one upon another, and hang together like links in a chain. The
first whereof depending upon this head-link Justification, and is (as I said)
the only cause thereof, is everywhere called in the new Testament
Reconciliation, or Reconcilement, or Atonement with God, Romans 5. 9, 10, 11.
whereby, Romans 5. 9, 10, 11
notwithstanding our manifold daily infirmities, not only all the displeasure
and anger of God for our sins, is done away, and utterly abolished from between
God and us: according to the prophecy of Esaias, to be fully exhibited under the
time of the Gospel, saying: Fear Esaias 54. 4, 5, 7, 8, 9, 10.
not, for thou shall not be ashamed, neither shall thou be confounded; for
thou shall not be put to shame: yea thou shall forget the shame of thy youth,
and shall not remember the reproach of thy widow-hood any more. For he that
made thee, is thine husband (whose name is the Lord of hosts) and thy
Redeemer, who shall be called the God of the whole world. For a little while I
have forsaken thee, but with great compassion will I gather thee: For a moment,
in mine anger, I hid my face from thee, for a little season; but with
everlasting mercy have I had compassion on thee, says the Lord thy Redeemer.
For this is unto me as the waters of Noah: For as I have sworn that the waters
of Noah shall no more go over the earth; so have I sworn, that I will not be
angry with thee, nor rebuke thee. Not only (I say) all the displeasure and
anger of God for our sins, and daily infirmities, is thus done away, (whereby
(as the Apostle says) Christ, by his death upon the Cross, has slain anger,
Ephesians. 2. 16.) Ephesians. 2. 16.
but also we are reconciled to God, and restored into his complete love,
perfect peace, and full favor again, and are truly blessed of God; whereby we
have entrance or access unto God, with boldness and confidence through faith
in Christ, Ephesians. 3. 12. This is that which was Ephesians. 3. 12.
testified by the Prophet Hosea, to be fully brought to pass under the time of
Christ, saying, I will heal their rebellion, I will love them freely, or (as
the original Hosea 14. 4.
word imports) abundantly; for mine anger is turned away from him. This is the
joyful song which the Angels of heaven sung, and testified at the birth of
Christ, saying, Glory be to God on high, in earth Peace, and good will The
Angels song.
toward men: that is, the whole glory of this reconcilement of God with men
must be given to God only, whereby perfect peace is made on earth; and not only
peace, but also good will toward men; that is, full favor, and perfect good
will is made and stablished for ever between God and men. This also is the
joyful Sermon that God the father preached from heaven at the baptizing of his
Son, saying, This is my beloved Son in whom I am well-pleased, Mat. 3. 17.
Math. 3. 17.
that is, in whom I am become, not only a loving Father, but also a
well-pleased Father; so far from all anger, so far from all displeasure,
that I abound only (...) Luther.
with perfect peace, reconciled good will, and perfect A great difference
between the delivery of the Law, and the publication of the Gospel from heaven.
favor, constant and enduring for evermore. Which voice of God from heaven,
Luther expounding, says most effectually after this manner: This sermon was
not like the sermon which he made when he gave the ten Commandments; neither
does he now appear in that form and manner, wherein he appeared, cum
Testamentum illud vetus conderet, when he framed the old Testament, and made
his Covenant with the people of Israel, by his law given by Moses upon Mount
Sinai; when the heavens were be-clouded, and darkened with thick black clouds:
when nothing was heard but thunderings and lightnings, so terribly and horribly
sounding, that the Mountain being stricken, smoked; and the earth trembled;
everywhere there was terror, everywhere fear, palenesse, quaking, horror,
and trembling: so that Moses said, I fear, and quake. Not after this manner (I
say) does God show himself here, but after a far other and contrary form
and manner; for here appears nothing but light, cleerenesse, and brightness;
here all things are pleasant and joyful: Hic nutus, vultus, aspectus Dei
amaenissimus and blandissimus; that is, here the beck, countenance, and look of
God is most pleasant, and smiling; here the heavens are opened; here all
creatures seem Heaven opened, and all creatures leap for joy.
to laugh, and to spring and leap for joy; in that the majesty of God does so
humble it self, as to descend, and come down to us, that there may appear no
disagreement between God and man: and to give himself to be beholden of us in
a form and manner, long amabilissima, blandissima, and gratissima, most
lovely, most gentle, and most favorable: By which manner of appearing, he not
only testifies, omnem suam iram sopitam and sedatam esse, that is, all his
anger and displeasure to be pacified, and assuaged; but also in ejus locum
infinita and immensa gratia, etc. in the place thereof is succeeded infinite
and unmeasurable free favor, a well-pleased father-like, and ardent affection
of love toward us; and inexhausta copiosaque misericordia, and an abundant and
bottomless mercy and peace is upon us. This is the Christian liberty spoken of
Gal. 5. 1, 2. See Luther. Gal. 5. 1, 2.


But the reason why all anger and displeasure of God Justification is the only
ground and cause of reconciliation.
is so utterly abolished from us; and why we are restored into such perfect
peace, and full favor with God again, arises and is wrought (as I said) only
by the two parts of free Justification: For first, seeing all anger and
displeasure of God arises only for sin: as the Prophet Esaias testifies,
saying, Behold the Lords hand is not shortened, that it cannot Esaias 59 1. 2.
save, neither is his ear heavy, that it cannot hear: But your iniquities
have separated between you and your God, and your sins have hid his face from
you. When Christ himself has separated our sins from us, and from all our
works, as is before showed, as far as the East is from the West, by utter
abolishing them out of his Fathers sight; Where are they then to separate
between God and us? And when Christ has by his blood, made us and all our
works clean from all sin, so that we and all that we do, are from all spot
of sin, in the sight of God, whither than snow; where is there any place then
for the displeasure and anger of God to come upon us? Whereupon the Apostle
says to the Colossians, thus, And you that were in times past (mark in times
past) Strangers and enemies to God: (And why enemies? Because your minds were
set on evil works; being most true that Augustine says, Nec inimici eramus
Deo, nisi quemadmodum justitiae inimica sunt peccata; that is, neither were we
enemies to God, otherwise than as sins are enemies to righteousness,) has he
now reconciled: that is, seeing all these make-bates are abolished, now all
displeasure, all anger, and emnity is utterly abolished from between God and
you, and you are set in the complete love, perfect peace, and full favor of
God again, and are blessed before God: Oh happy state and condition! But who
wrought this? and by what means, is so glorious a work brought to pass? The
Aposte answers: because Christ in the body of his flesh, through death, makes
you so holy, that you are unblameable, and without fault in Gods sight, Colos.
1. 21, 22. Where we see that as sin only is Colos. 1. 21, 22.
the makebate between God and man: So when by Free Justification they are made
without blame and fault in Gods sight: This, and this alone, quenches all the
displeasure, and abolisheth all the anger of God, and reconciles us to God; for
take away the fuel, and the flame utterly cease. And because none can take
away sin from before God, but Christ only, therefore, none can be our
peacemaker, but Christ only: but because he takes it away perfectly from
before his Father, Therefore is he a most perfect Peacemaker, between God and
us. Whereby we may see the truth, of that joyful saying of Luther, upon those
words pronounced by God from heaven: This is my beloved Son in whom I am well
pleased; saying, after this manner, Truly with no praises could Christ be more
glorified, nor extolled more magnificently; for by this voice he is set in a
most illustrious dignity, and high glory: for in these words, He is proclaimed
and declared the true King of peace, a true Priest, working perfect atonement,
Christ is the true King of peace.
and the Heir and Lord of all things, who alone pacifieth his Father, and
brings to pass, that he is wellpleased with us. Moreover in these words God
the Father testifies that he is of a right fatherly and well-pleased mind to
them that believe in Christ; to these he declares, and here opens himself
wholly; and leaves it witnessed unto our consciences, that he is not (as before)
offended with us, for our sins: but now is become a most loving, and (etiamsi
per imprudentiam and infirmitatem carnis cespitavimus, that is, although we
trip unawares, and by the infirmity of the flesh; yet,) a most indulgent and
so wellpleased a Father unto us; ut nec velit, nec possit nobi^ irasci, etc.
That (if we give to his Son his glory, that he does justify us, and so cleave
to him with a sound faith) he neither will, nor can be angry with us, for
his Sons sake, in whom he is at perfect peace, and thoroughly well-pleased
with us.

Again, secondly, As by the first part of Justification Second Reason.
abolishing all our sins out of Gods sight, all displeasure and anger is
abolished, and done away; so by the second part of Justification, making us
perfectly righteous in the sight of God. are we perfectly reconciled to God,
and set in perfect peace, and perfect favor with God again, and truly blessed.
And this is plainly testified by the Prophet Esaias 33. 14. saying, Who amongst
us Esaias 33 14. opened.
shall dwell with the devouring fire? who amongst us shall dwell with the
everlasting burning? The answer is, (...), He that walks in righteousnesses:
Where mark that he says not in the singular number, In Righteousness: but in
plural number, Righteousnesses: which although the plural number may be
acutely taken and understood of the two righteousnesses, the one of
Justification, by which we walk in righteousness in the sight of God; the
other of Sanctification by which we walk in righteousness in the sight of men,
whereof hypocrites there spoken of by the Prophet do neither; yet because the
Hebrew phrase uses to express the superlative degree in the plural number,
the proper meaning of the Prophet is, That none may have peace, familiarity and
friendship with God, but he will be unto them a burning and devouring fire,
except such, as walk before him in a perfect righteousness, (as it were) of
the highest degree: but when none can so come forth, then comes Christ, and
clothes us with his own perfect and everlasting righteousness; and so he
alone, by that righteousness, only sets us in perfect peace and reconcilement,
with this most just and righteous God, and to dwell with this everlasting
burnings, and devouring fire in perfect friendship, and well-pleased favor.
This also is expressed by Saint Paul, 2 Cor. 5. 19. 21. saying, God was in
Christ, 2 Cor. 5. 19. 21.
and reconciled the world to himself; not only by not imputing their sins
unto them; but also because He that knew no sin, was made sin for us, that
we being translated into him, might be made the Righteousness of God. That
is, we being, by this power of Gods imputation of his Sons righteousness unto
us, made in the sight of God, nothing else (as it were) but a perfect, pure,
and everlasting Righteousness of God, are thereby set in a perfect favor,
perfect reconcilement and love, and in a full pleasing everlasting peace with
God. To which purpose Calvin also speaks pithily, after Calv. Insti. l. 2. C.
17. 8. 2.
this manner, saying, Because God is the Fountain of all righteousness, it
must needs be, that man, so long as he is a sinner, have God his enemy:
wherefore the original or The wellspring of Gods love is righteousness.
wellspring of his love, is righteousness, such as is described by Paul: He
made him, which had done no sin, to be sin for us, that we might be made
the Righteousness of God in him: For he means (says he) that we have
attained free righteousness by the sacrifice of Christ, that so we, that were
by nature the children of wrath, and by sin estranged from God, might please
him. Hereupon it is said, Revel. 7. 14, 15. That unto the faithful, are given
Revel. 7. 14, 15. opened.
long white Robes, that is, a perfect righteousness, making them perfectly just
and righteous in the sight of God, by the blood of the Lamb; and hereby are
they in the presence of the Throne of God, that is, under his reconciled love,
and favorable protection and providence; and serve him day and night in his
Temple; that is, with continual zeal in his Church; and he that sits in
the Throne of power and glory, will dwell amongst them; that is, will declare
his favorable presence, and reconciled providence, in his gracious protection
and goodness amongst them. Thus was Abraham by Free Justification, and by his
strong faith believing it, so perfectly reconciled to God, that he is often
called the friend of God: and haec sola (says Luther) nos Dei amicos
constituit, this alone makes us the friends of God. Thus is Christ (says he)
Our true King of Peace, Christ our true Solomon.
and verus noster Solomon, id est, pacificus, qui pacem nobis cum Deo
restituit, that is, and our true Solomon, that is to say, Peacemaker, which
has restored unto us peace with God, and peace with his people. Hence also it
is that he that was called Jesus to save us from our sins, Why Christ is
called Emmanuel.
is also called Emmanuel, God with us; non modo quod Deus homo factus sit, sed
quia nunc a nobis stat, qui prius contra nos erat, and ob peccata nostra
amplius irasci non vult: that is, not only because he was made man: but
because now he is for us and on our side, who was before against us, and will
be no more angry with us, for our sins.

Hereupon, as our perfect Justification consists Two comfortable effects,
flowing from our reconciliation.
of two parts, so does our perfect reconoiliation, flowing from the same,
consist also of two parts or branches or effects, that greatly show the
excellency of the same.

First, by this reconciliation God with an especial First protection from all
evil.
care watches over us to protect and defend, and keep away from us all evil,
and all hurtful things; according to that prayer of Christ, saying, I pray not
that thou Ioh. 17. 15.
should take them out of the world, but that thou keep them from evil, John
17. 15. Secondly, procuration of all necessary good things,


And secondly, God with an especial care watches over us, to provide unto us
all necessary good things, and even the very best for us, both for our souls,
bodies, goods and name, according to the saying of the Apostle, The living God
is the Savior, that is, the upholder and preserver of all men; but especially
(mark the word, especially) of them that believe, 1 Timothy 4. 10. 1 Timothy 4. 10.
For first that God by this perfect reconciliation, watches over us, to
protect and keep away from us, all hurt and evil Is manifest, by the Father of
the faithful even Abraham, who being justified, and thereby perfectly
reconciled to God, God said unto him; Fear not Abram, for I am thy Buckler
(that is, to defend thee from all hurt and evil) and thine exceeding great
reward, so that, I will bless them that bless thee, and curse them that curse
thee, and in thee shall all Families of the earth be (thus) blessed, Genesis 12.
3. which blessed reconciliation Genesis 12. 3.
with God to be likewise brought upon us Gentiles, by Free Justification, Paul
plainly testifies, saying, That Christ was made a Curse for us: To what end?
That the blessing of Abraham might come on the Gentiles through Christ Jesus,
that we might receive the spiritual promise of Justification, and of such
perfect reconciliation through faith, Gal. 3. 13, 14. For (says the Gala. 3.
13, 14.
Apostle) The Scriptures foreseeing that God would justify the Gentiles
through faith, preached the Gospel, or joyful news, unto Abraham, saying, In
thee shall all Nations be blessed: So then they that are of faith, believing
free Justification, are blessed, with faithful Abraham, Gal. 3. 8, 9. What an
excellent perfect reconciliation is Gal. 3 8, 9. opened.
this? Hence is the whole ninety first Psalm, fully performed upon us,
containing (as it were) a new Paradise of Gods loving protection, and most
gracious A Paradise of Gods loving protection.
keeping of us from all hurt and evil, saying thus, Who so dwells in the
secret of the most High; that is (as Luther well expounds it) Under Free
Justification, which none can work upon us, but the most high God, and indeed
is the secret of secrets to the blind world, He shall abide under the shadow of
the Almighty, that is, he shall be protected and defended under the most
comfortable shade of Gods most loving providence, who is of Almighty power to
preserve and keep him. So that the faithful soul, saying unto the Lord, in
confidence of this reconciliation by Free Justification, Oh my refuge, and my
Fortress, my God, in him will I trust. Surely, he shall deliver thee from the
snare of the hunter, which is the Devil and all his instruments, and from the
noisome pestilence of their contagious practices; He will cover thee under his
wings of Fr^e Justification, and thou shall be safe under his feathers, of his
gracious providence and protection; his truth of perfect reconciliation, shall
be thy shield and buckler, etc. as it follows in the whole Psalm: For he
shall give his Angels charge over thee to keep thee in all thy ways: thou
may have some crosses and troubles, But thou shall tread upon the Lion and
Adder, the young Lion and the Dragon shall thou trample under thy feet: Why?
Because by faith of free Justification he has set his love upon me,
therefore (says God) will I deliver him; I will exalt him, because he has
known my name. He shall call upon me, and I will hear him; I will be with
him in trouble; I will deliver him and glorify him. With long life will I
satisfy him, and show him my salvation: is not this a joyful, perfect,
excellent, and blessed reconciliation? Hence likewise is the whole 121. Psalm
verified upon us, Psalm. 121.
testifying that the creatures that have mighty operation in man's body, and are
high above our reach shall, yet notwithstanding do us no harm, saying, The
Sun shall not smite thee by day, nor the Moon by night, the Lord shall preserve
thee from all evil; yea, he shall keep thy soul, the Lord shall preserve thy
going out, and thy coming in, from henceforth and forever. What would we have
more? Yea, hence are all the other comfortable and excellent protectors, spoken
of everywhere in the Word of God, verified upon us; whereupon the Prophet
says, Psalm. 5. 11, 12. Let all them that trust in Psalm. 5. 11. 12.
thee, rejoice, and triumph for ever, and cover thou them: and let them that
love thy name, rejoice in thee: why? Because thou Lord wilt bless the
righteous, (which none are before God, but by free Justification) and with
favor wilt compass him as with a shield, defending and keeping him from all
hurt, to the least hair of his head, Matthew. 10. 29. 30. can we possibly wish a
greater, Matthew. 10. 29. 30.
and perfecter, and more protecting reconciliation?

But as this first part of Justification, does thus protect and defend us from
all evil and hurt; So the second part, brings upon us by this perfect
reconciliation, all manner of good things, that are truly needful and
necessary for us: as God himself testifies, Ierem. 32. 40, 41. saying, I will
make an everlasting Ier. 32. 40. 41.
covenant with them, that I will never turn away from them to do them good:
Yea (says he) I will delight, and rejoice over them to do them good. Hence is
the whole Psalm. 23. verified upon us, namely, That the Psalm. 23.
Lord is our Shepherd, (because he is made such unto us, only and truly by free
Justification,) And therefore can we lack nothing: He will feed us in green
pastures, and lead us forth by the waters of comfort: He restores our souls,
and leads us, by Justification freely, in the paths of righteousness, for his
name sake. Therefore he concludes, Surely goodness and mercy, shall follow us
all the days of our life. Hence it is that Christ said, Take no distrustful
cark and care for your belly, what you shall eat; nor for your body, what you
shall put on: For after all these things do the Gentiles with such
doubtfulness and distrusting care seek after: But your heavenly Father knows
that you have need of all these things: But seek ye first the Kingdom of God:
If you ask how? I answer, By making your selves sure of his righteousness,
which by making you perfectly righteous in the sight of God freely, is only
able to reconcile, and set you in perfect peace with God; and then all these
things shall be cast upon you. Matthew. 6. Whereupon we see the truth of that
Matthew. 6. 33.
saying of David, Fear the Lord, ye his Saints: but how are we Saints? Two
manner of ways (as is showed before:) First by Justification, that makes us
perfect Saints to Godward, freely; and Secondly, by sanctification, that makes
us Saints to men-ward in sincerity. Well, what then? For (says he) They that
fear him lack nothing. The Lions do lack and suffer hunger, but they that
fear the Lord shall want nothing that is good, Psalm. 34. Which perfect
reconciliation with God; Psalm. 34. 10.
Jacob found so effectual, that he said boldly unto his Brother, The Lord
has had mercy on me, and therefore I have all things, Genesis 33. 11. And Luther
upon the Genesis 33. 11.
voice from heaven, saying, This is my beloved Son in whom I am well pleased,
shows that this rich mercy, and perfect reconciliation with God, by which we
have all things, was testified by God himself, at the Baptism of his Son,
to be without measure exhibited, saying thus: Nothing else was heard and seen
here, but love, Incredible sweetness.
good will, and the infinite and incredible favor of God toward us; nothing
but unmeasurable, and bottomless goodness, and placability; all the whole vast
heaven seemed not to distill drops, but to pour and rain down whole showers,
and floods of most sweet honey and sugar, and to power down mere and infinite
favor of God abundantly upon us, that we may think of, and expect nothing else
from him, but the best good things; and most rich mercy, and welpleasing
reconciliation: yea (says he again) For this one cause would God sound these
words from heaven with his own voice, that he might persuade us certainly, and
that we might infix it deeply in our minds, That in Christ, and for Christ his
beloved Son, omni nos beneficiorum genere cumulare velit, etc. That it is his
will, to lade us with all manner of benefits, and embrace us (as was signified
in receiving the prodigal child) with a true fatherlike, and well-pleased
affection of love, to cover us with the best garment, nourish us, make merry
with us, and defend and save us, and to drive away all things that go about to
deprive us hereof. Which words of Luther, although they seem for sweetness,
and fullness of honey and sugar to be incredible, yet we need not doubt
thereof; because S. Paul himself confirms the same unto us, by a strong and
invincible demonstration, saying, If God spared not his own Son, but when we
were sinners gave him to death to justify us, how much more being now
justified, will he with him give us freely all things also? Romans 8. 32. The
uses that we must make Romans 8. 32.
of this perfect reconciliation, brought upon us freely by Christ, are these
two.

First, we must soundy trust to, and set our affiance 1 Two uses of our perfect
reconciliation.
on this reconciliation, procured unto us by Christ, as Peter says, Cast your
care upon God, for he cares for you. 1 Pet. 5. 7. That is, we must yield up
our selves, as Abraham 1 Pet. 5. 7.
did, to do our vocations, and all our affairs and actions that we take in
hand faithfully, and as God would have us to do them; that is, to seek his
glory, by benefiting of men, and so we walk in the steps of the faith of our
Father Abraham, Romans 4. 11. and do Romans 4. 11.
the works of Abraham, through full assurance that his Almighty power is able,
and this loving care over us, procured by this perfect reconciliation, also
will, without any bad means of ours, both keep away from us all hurtful
things, and provide unto us, without our distrustful cark and care, all
necessary good things; saying, in strong assurance of free Justification,
making us perfectly holy and righteous in the sight of God freely, That we are
persuaded (though some crosses do cross us) that neither tribulation, nor
distress, nor persecution, nor famine, nor nakedness, nor death, nor life, nor
any creature shall separate us from the assurance of the love of God, and
perfect reconciliation that is in Christ Jesus, Romans 8. 35. Whereupon the
Author to Romans 8. 35.
the Hebrews, exhorts after this manner, saying, Let your conversation be
without covetousness, and be content with such things as you have: For he has
said, I will never leave thee, nor forsake thee: So that we may boldly say,
The Lord is my helper, and I will not fear what man can do unto me. Heb. 13.
5. 6. And so far as we do Heb. 13. 5. 6.
so, we give both to God, and to Christ their due glory; to God the glory of
power, and to Christ, the glory of his merit of reconciliation.

And secondly, In confidence of Free Justification so The second use of our
perfect reconcil^ation.
assuredly reconciling us to God, we must expect and look for at his hands,
and certainly promise to our selves all blessings temporal and eternal: as
Luther upon the voice of God from heaven, That he is wellpleased, effectually
expresses after manner: Exigit itaque a nobis, etc. God requires of us,
therefore that we expect and promise to our selves from him the best things;
and that we persuade our selves, that he is of a most loving and ready
good will, to do us all good; and therefore to pray for, and expect at Gods
hands summa and saluberrima, the principal and most profitable good things, in
a strong confidence in this perfect reconciliation, and in a fullness of faith,
nothing fearing at all any thing that goes about to make us afraid, molest,
make us sad, or to work any trouble against us. For fear not Abram (says God)
I am thy Buckler and exceeding great reward, Genesis 15. 1. Whereby we have Genesis
15. 1.
access by prayer unto God, and entrance to obtain with boldness and
confidence through faith in Christ, perfectly Justifying us, and thereby
perfectly reconciling us Ephesians. 3. 12. The fearful danger of departing from
our justification and reconciliation. Psalm. 73. 27.
to God, Ephesians. 3. 12. But if we do not thus, but follow indirect means and
bad courses to help our selves, we go a whoring from God by the dead faith,
and he will destroy us; as it is said, Psalm. 73. 27. For lo, they which
withdraw themselves from thee shall perish; thou destroyest all them that go a
whoring. But so far as we resign up our selves to assurance and affiance in
this perfect reconciliation, we with Abraham, Isaac, Iacok, Joseph, David,
Daniel, and all the rest of Gods faithful children, that have believed and
relied upon this joyful and well pleasing reconciliation, shall have, (as they
had) both the very Best for us, and at length also our very hearts desires. And
therefore, says David, As for me, it is good for me to draw near to God,
therefore I have put my trust in the Lord God, that I may declare all thy
works, Ps. 73. 28. That I may show Psalm. 73. 28.
all thy praises, in the Gates of the Daughter of Zion and may rejoice in thy
reconciliation, prote^tion and salvation, Psalm. Psalm. 9. 14.
9. 14. And thus much of the first excellent benefit of the Gospel, brought
upon us by free Justification; in which, because I have been loath (as it were)
to be drawn out of this new Paradise, purchased by the blood of Christ, I have
stayed the longer: but let the weightinesse of the point recompense the length;
because, as David truly says, this loving favor of the Lord is better than
life it self, Psalm. 63. 3. But now let Psalm. 63. 3.
us proceed forward.

CHAP. XV. Of four other excellent benefits wrought upon us by Free
Justification.
THE second excellent and glorious benefit brought upon us by Justification,
Is, that the The giving of the holy Ghost
holy Ghost is by it freely given us, to dwell in us; and our bodies and souls
are made blessed Temples of the same holy Spirit; as is evident by these
Scriptures, Be baptized (says Peter, Acts 2. 38.) every one of you in the name
of Jesus Christ, for the remission of Acts 2. 38.
sins, and you shall receive the holy Ghost: for the promise is made unto
you, and your children. Where we see that although the holy Ghost be true God,
and the only preparer of our hearts, both to see our misery by sin, as also to
see and apprehend Christ and his benefits, to free us from our misery: yet
notwithstanding he does not come to dwell in us, and to take up our bodies and
souls to be his Temples, until first he has enabled us to believe free
Justification; and prepared us, as it were, for himself by sealing it unto us
by Baptism, as most sure, that the blood of Christ has washed us clean from
all sin in the sight of God, before he do enter into us, and dwell in us. The
same also Paul testifies, Ephesians. 1. 13. saying, In whom ye also Ephesians. 1. 13.
have trusted, after ye heard the word of truth: what word of truth was that?
namely, that by the blood of Christ ye are freely made righteous, accepted and
adopted, verse. 4, 5, 6, 7. even the Gospel of joyful news of your salvation,
Verse 4, 5, 6, 7.
wherein also after (mark the word after) ye believed, First justified, and
then sealed with the spirit of Sanctification.
ye were sealed with the holy Spirit of promise: where we see again, that we
are first believers of Justification, and then after (if not tempore in time,
yet natura, in nature and order afterward) sealed with the Spirit of
Sanctification dwelling in us.

The Reasons are, first because otherwise the holy 1 First Reason.
Ghost should come to dwell in a foul hog-stie, defiled with sin; which
because he utterly abhorres, therefore first he makes clean the house, and
prepares us for himself by Justification; thus purifying our hearts first to
himself, by applying unto it Christ's righteousness, so preparing and making
us fit houses and Temples for himself to dwell in; and then comes and dwells
in us, renewing our nature.

Secondly, to our selves, and to our sense and feeling By taking his things and
showing them unto us, John 16. 14. whereby the John 16. 14.
holy Ghost by the preaching of the Gospel, showing to his elect the excellency
of Christ's righteousness, and enabling them to receive the same by faith, and
so to be spiritually and mystically clothed with it to glorify Christ in this
his righteousness, He enters in it, and by it, into all the faithful, to
dwell in them, thus glorifying the righteousness of Christ: and thereupon it
comes to pass, that look how freely the righteousness of Christ is, by the
preaching of the Gospel, bestowed upon them that feel their misery by sin, to
justify and heal them freely: so freely also is the holy Ghost bestowed upon
them to dwell in them; and therefore in the very preaching of free
Justification, whilst the Preacher is yet speaking, does God use principally
and especially to rain down the holy Ghost upon the Hearers, even whilst they
do nothing but sit still, and reverently hear Justification freely preached
unto them. Whereupon Paul convinced the Galathians by saying, Received ye the
holy Ghost by the law? that is, by hearing works, works preached? No: how then?
By hearing of faith, that is, free Justification preached, Gal. 3. 2. An
evident example Gal. 3. 2.
hereof is extant, Acts 10. 44. where we may see, that Acts 10. 44.
as Peter was preaching Christ, and free justification by him, even whilst he
was yet speaking, the holy Ghost fell on all them that heard the word. Another
notable example, besides many others in that book, is Acts 13. Acts 13.
where likewise we may see, that when Paul had very powerfully preached the
Resurrection of Christ, and eagerly pressing the maine fruit and benefit that
comes thereof, namely, free justification, saying, Be it known unto you men
and brethren, that by this man, is preached unto you, the forgiveness of
sins; and lest we should conceive Gods forgiveness to be a slight thing, not
Gods forgiveness is a most excellent and glorious forgiveness.
making the creature perfectly holy and righteous, like man's forgiveness, He
presently expounds what he means by Gods forgiveness, and shows what a
glorious thing Gods forgiveness is above man's; saying, Even from all things,
from which you could not be justified, that is, made perfectly righteous by the
law of God, by him every one that believes is justified; that is, made
perfectly holy and righteous, from all spot of sin, in the sight of God
freely. And when there were some Jews among them that marvelled, and wondered,
and murmured against it, that they that had not labored for it, should freely
have the same righteousness equal with them that had labored all day long,
in the heat of the day, to get it: to whom Paul answers, saying, Behold ye
despisers, and wonder, and vanish away: for I will work a work in your days,
which ye will not believe, though a man should declare or demonstrate it unto
you: And yet some others, both Jews and Gentiles besought Paul, that he would
preach the same words to them the next Sabbath day: which also he did: but what
was the end and effect of this vehement preaching of free Justification? namely
this; That the Disciples hearts were filled with joy, and with the holy Verse
51.
Ghost, verse. 51. And if any man here object, That these are extraordinary
examples belonging only to the Primitive Church. I grant that it is true,
concerning the outward visible raining down of the holy Ghost, for the first
miraculous stablishing of the Gospel by visible appearances of the same: but
not for the inward spiritual working of Justification, and raining down of
the holy Ghost upon Gods children, spiritually and invisibly to dwell in them:
for this is essential and perpetual to the Gospel; as S. Paul testifies, 2
Cor. 3. 7, 8, 9, 10. proving thereby 2 Cor. 3. 7, 8, 9, 10. The glory of the
Gospel above the Law.
the glory of the Gospel, above the Law, saying, That although the ministration
of death and condemnation, that is, the giving of the Law, was glorious, so
that the children of Israel could not behold the face of Moses for the glory of
his countenance, which glory was to be done away; how shall not the Gospel be
much more glorious? why? because the Law did exact at our hands, that we should
give to God a perfect righteousness: but the Gospel gives unto us a perfect
righteousness freely, and thereby is the perpetual administration of the
Spirit unto us; whereby (says he) this ministration of righteousness does
exceed in glory. So that we see, that the preaching of free Justification is
the administration or ministerial giving, both of perfect The holy Ghost
unseparable from Christ's righteousness.
righteousness, and also of the holy Ghost, unseparably ever going with the
same; for the holy Ghost will not forsake the wedding garment of Christ's
righteousness; but to glorify the same, will go in it, and with it,
whithersoever it goes; filling the heart, where they two abide, with joy, and
right zealous new obedience.

Another Reason, why the holy Ghost goes so unseparably ever with the
righteousness of Christ, is, Because the preaching of free Justification is
after a more peculiar manner, called the voice of Christ; because it is the
only and sole saving voice of Christ Justification is Christ's voice.
alone: but the voice of Christ being rightly and powerfully uttered, is not a
dead weak thing, but is mighty, and goes with a lively breath, breathing out no
less than the holy Ghost upon the attentive and reverent Hearers of free
Justification, the only soulesaving, and sole-saving voice of Christ, making
them to live a new life: according to that saying of Christ: verily, verily I
say unto you, the hour shall come, and now is, that the dead shall hear the
voice of the Son of God, and they that hear it, namely, as the voice of the
Son of God, shall live, John 5. 25. surely, they John 5. 25.
must needs live when the voice of Christ thus breathes the holy Ghost into
them, to dwell in them. But now concerning the excellency of this wonderful
gift brought upon us only by Free Justification, who is The glory of this gift
is inexplicable.
able either of men or Angels to lay forth the glory of it? For is not the holy
Ghost true, and very God, that takes up our bodies and souls, to be his blessed
Temples? Was it not this blessed Spirit, that wonderfully governed the
Patriarks? Was it not he that inspired all the Prophets? as Peter testifies
says, These holy Prophets spak as they were moved by the holy Ghost? 2 Pet. 1.
21. 2 Pet. 1. 21.
Was not his power wonderfully showed, and was he not a mighty worker, when he
formed the humane nature of our Savior Christ, to be conceived and born of a
pure Virgin? Showing that where the holy Ghost works, there nothing is
impossible? Is it not he only that regenerateth a man, and makes him a new
born creature, both toward God by Justification, and toward man by
Sanctification? Or can any man worthily lay forth the glory of a new creature,
by the holy Ghost? Are not his gifts excellent and mavelous, which he
works in whom he will, and as he will? described, 1 Cor. 12. And finally
must 1 Cor. 12.
not Justification, needs be a glorious and wonderful work that brings so
wonderful a benefit upon us? and can people hear, and read and meditate Free
Justification sufficiently, that does enrich us so heavenly? And if there were
no more Reasons, why Ministers after our misery by sin laid open, should
continually beat upon the greatness and excellency, and glory of Free
Justification, to work the joyful and violent receiving o^^^ by faith, that
brings with it unseparably and unfallibly so precious a gift as the holy Ghost,
to dwell in us, were not this sufficient? Is not the gift of the holy Ghost all
in all?

The third excellent benefit of the Gospel wrought 3 Union into Christ.
upon us by Free Justification, is our wonderful Union into Christ, whereby
we are by the power of the holy Ghost though mystically and spiritually, yet,
truly, really and substantially so ingraffed and united into Christ, that we
are made one with him, and he one with us. For first, that this wonderful
Union is not a thing in mere imagination, no, nor consisting in mere charity,
love, and affection only; but is a true, real, This union is not imaginary,
but real.
and substantial Union, Is evident, both by the express Word of God, and
unanimous consent of Gods faithful Dispensers of his Mysteryes, both ancient
and modern: For first the Word of God in that excellent prayer that Christ made
for all the faithful, Ioh. 17. Ioh. 17. 20, 21, 22, 23.
20, 21, 22, 23. says thus, I pray not for these alone, but for all them also,
which shall believe in me, through their Word: Well, what does he pray for?
That they all may be one, How one? As thou O Father art in me, and I in thee.
Can men or Angels lay open, or sufficiently conceive, either the
wonderfulnesse, or how really and substantially, Christ, as he is God, is one
with his Father? And yet, even so are we by this Union, One We by this union
are one with Christ.
with Christ, as he is Man, and our Mediator; and thereby knit into God, as
Christ says, That they may be also one in us, that the world may believe that
thou have sent me, that the greatness, and wonderfulnesse of this work, may
declare that none but the Son of God sent of his Father to effect it, could
otherwise bring it ot pass; And the glory (says he) which thou have given to
me, I have given them (that by this means also they may discern the greatness
of this Union) That they may be one, even as we are one; I in them, and thou in
me, that they may be made perfect in one, and that the world may know that
thou have sent me, and have loved them, as thou have loved me. Can possibly the
understanding of man, conceive a more absolute and perfect union with all the
circumstances of the same, than is here described? But to show yet further, how
true, real, and substantial this Union is, clear is the testimony of Paul,
Ephesians. 5. 31. saying, For we are members of his body, of his flesh, Ephesians. 5.
31.
and of his bones. Certainly nothing can be more real and substantial, than
such a Union. Whereupon learned Zanchius in that excellent Treatise upon Zanch.
upon Ephesians. 5. 30.
Ephesians. 5. 30. concerning the Union betwixt Christ and his Church, (reproving
them that hold, that our Union is no otherwise true and real, than because we
partake of the spiritual gifts and graces of Christ) sets down this Thesis or
position confirming the same, both by Scripture, and consent of the Ancient
Writers, namely, that Vnio nostricum Christo, and Christi nobiscum essentialis
ac substantialis est, vera atque realis, That is, The Union of us with Christ,
and of Christ with us, Our union with Christ is, first substantial.
is essential, and substantial, true and real. First substantial (says he)
because the substances themselves of the flesh of Christ, and of our flesh,
both of the person of Christ, and of our persons, are united together; and so
not the fruit and graces only of Christ are received, seeing they cannot be
received, but by partaking of the substance it self of Christ. Secondly, I
call it true and real, (says he) because we are not Secondly, true and real.
in bare imagination, but reipsa in very deed, united into Christ; and being
united, (although non Physico, sed spirituali and supernaturali modo, not by a
natural, but a spiritual and supernatural manner,) we grow more and more
into one body with Christ. But that we may dive more deeply into this most
excellent glory of our Union into Christ, Let us mark that the holy Ghost,
(which effectually shows the power of his Godhead, in working this benefit
upon us) to express the substantiallnesse, and reallnesse, and wonderful
closnesse of it, does use six principal similitudes in Six similitudes used to
express the realnesse of this union.
the Word of God, to show to our weak capacities the great glory of it, That
(as S. Paul speaks) passes knowledge.

The first, and furtherest off similitude, is, That the justified person, being
clothed with the righteousness of Christ; has thereby put on Christ as a man
puts on, and is clothed with his own apparel: As S. Paul speaks, Gal. 3.
27. saying, All ye that are baptized into Gal. 3. 27.
Christ, (thereby sealing up unto you your Justification) have put on Christ,
namely (as the original Word imports) as a man puts on, and is clothed with
his apparel. Whereby as old Isaac in the weakness and infirmity of his old
age took Jacob for Esau in Esaus apparel: so does God in the virtue and
strength of this our wonderful union into Christ, take us not ignorantly and
unwittingly, as Isaac, but truly and graciously for Christ, having thus truly
put on Christ himself. And this the faithful Interperters plainly testify,
saying, Cum dicit Galatas Christum induisse, intelligit Christo sic esse
insitos, ut coram Deo, and nomen and personam Christi gerant, ac in ipso magis
quam in seipsis censeantur: that is, Where as the Apostle says, that the
Galathians have put on Christ, he means that they are so ingraffed into
Christ, that before God they bear the name and person of Christ, and are
reputed and estimated rather in him, than in themselves.

The second similitude expressing more real and Husband and wi^e.
entire union than the former, is taken from the union, not only between
ordinary husband and wife; but also, that we are as substantially and really
united into Christ, as Adam and Eva, who was made of his very rib, and thereby
truly and really of his flesh, blood and bone, were one in Paradise; for which
cause Adam and Eva are both called but one Adam, Genesis 5. 2. of which Genesis 5. 2.
perfect union, Adam said thus: this is now bone of my bones, and flesh, of my
flesh, she shall be called woman, or (as the Hebrew W^rd importes) a she-man,
because she is taken out of man, Genesis 2. 23. which mystery S. Paul expounding
Gen 2. 23.
in the fifth to the Ephesians. says thus of Christ, and his Church; For we are
members of his body, of his flesh, and of his bones. For this cause shall a man
leave his Father and Mother, and shall be joined unto his Wife, and they two
shall be one flesh. This (says he) is a great mystery, for I speak
concerning Christ and his Church, Ephesians. 5. 30, 31. 32. Whereupon true and
excellent is Ephesians. 5. 30, 31, 32.
the testimony of a noble man and Martyr in France, who writing of the dignity
and excellency of a Christian man, says thus, By this spiritual bond o knot,
the Christian man is made one with Christ, flesh of his flesh, and bone of his
bone; yea, even so far that he bears Christ's name and person before God: Is
not this wonderful? And yet S. Paul not herewith content, shows that the
union betwixt Christ and every child of God, is more close and entire, than
between husband and wife; for (says he) they are not only one flesh, But also
He that is joined to the Lord Christ is one spirit, 1 Cor. 6. Calvin upon 1
C^r. 6. 17.
17. Which place Calvin expounding, says thus: Hoc ideo adjecit ut doceret
arctiorem esse conjunctionem Christi nobiscum, quam viri cum uxore, that is,
He therefore adds these words, That he might teach us, that the union
betwixt Christ and us, is closer and straighter, than betwixt husband and wife.
Which Lut^er upon Gal. 2. 20.
thing Luther also testifies, saying, Gal. 2. 20. This faith therefore that
Christ has loved me, and given himself for me to justify me, does couple
Christ and me more near together, than the husband is coupled to his wife.

The third Similitude, expressing this mavelous union, is that we are as
truly and really united, and 3 Tree and Branches.
made one with Christ, as a Tree and the branches thereof are one, This Christ
himself testifies, Ioh. 15. 5. saying, I am the Vine, ye are the branches.
As the branch cannot bear fruit of it self, except it abide in the Vine, no
more can ye, except ye abide in me. Upon which words Zanchius truly says
thus: Quid etiam hoc Zanch. upon John 15. 5.
simili clarius, quam nos vere ac realiter Christo insitos esse; that is, What
is more clear by this similitude, than that' we are truly and really ingraffed
into Christ?

The fourth Similitude, expressing this wonderful union, is, That we are as
truly, and really united and 4 Body and members.
made one with Christ, as the body and members thereof are one. And this
similitude, if it were as well understood, as it is often expressed in the
Scripture, we should abound with more joy for the same, than we do. For, how
plain is S. Paul 1 Cor. 12. 12. saying, As the 1 Cor. 12. 12.
body is one, and has many members, and yet all the members, though they be
many, make but one body; so also is Christ. For (says he) ye are the body of
Christ, and members for your part, verse 27. Again, to the same, Cor. 6 15, 17.
Verse 17. Cor. 6. 15. 17.
he says thus, Know ye not that your bodies are the members of Christ? Nay
more, But he that is joined to the Lord is one Spirit. What more perfect and
more wonderful union can there be, Than to be one spirit and one body with the
Lord? Certainly (says Zanchias) The union of the members with the head, and
with themselves is substantial, true and real: Whereby (says he) we may
further understand, that the fruit of the passion of Christ, and his gifts and
graces cannot be received, without a real participation of the very flesh of
Christ; for the members can receive neither motion, nor life, nor juice, nor
nourishment, being separated from the head. And hereupon it is, that the
ancient Dispensers of Gods mysteries do so greatly extol this our
concorporation into Christ: for thus says, Chrysostom, Homil. 60. ad populum
Antioch. Non satis fuit, homosieri, colaphis caedi, verum and semet ipsum nobis
commiscet, Chrysostom. Hom. 6.
and non fide tantum, verum et reipsa nos suum efficit corpus, that is, It was
not enough to become man, to be buffetted with fists; but also he does mix and
mingle his own self together with us; and not by faith only, but also he makes
us in very deed his own body. Which doctrine of the ancient Fathers of our
wonderful union (although the Papists go about to misapply it, and say, this
great work and union is wrought upon us, by the Sacrament of the body and blood
of Christ, in that (say they) the bread becomes transubstantiated into the body
and blood of Christ; and so we eating the same, the body of Christ is mingled
and united into one body with us:) yet it is well proved of the Learned
Protestants to be utterly false. For the Sacrament is not the bond of this so
mystical and wondersull union, after so gross, fleshly, and carnal a manner;
but it is wrought only by the holy Ghost, after a spiritual, and unsearchable
manner. Who yet notwithstanding, because he is true God, and hiic exerit, and
herein does show forth the power of his Godhead, in thus wonderfully knitting
and real and substantial uniting us into Christ: hereupon do the ancient
Fathers confess that no tongue of men or Angels is able to lay forth
sufficiently, the reallnesse, substantiallnesse, and excellency of the same,
though sealed unto us, by an outward sign and figure in the supper of the Lord.
For hence it is, that Chrysostom says again, Homil. 61. thus: Vnum Corpus
sumus, and membra ex carna ejus, and ossibus ejus, and non tantum hoc per
charitatem fiamus, Chrysostom. in Hom. 61.
verum and reipsa in illam misceamur carnem, that is, We are one body with
him, and members of his flesh, and of his bones; and we are made this, not only
by love, but we are mingled in very deed into his flesh, Christ being desirous
thus to show his uttermostlove upon us.

Again, in the same place, he says thus: Propterea semet ipsum nobis
immiscuit, and suum in nos Corpus contemperavit, ut unum quid efficiamur;
tanquam Corpus capiti coaptatum; ardenter enim amantium hoc est, That is, For
this cause, he has mingled his own self into us, and has tempered together
his own body into us, that we may be made one same thing with him, as the body
is conjoined with the head; for this is the manner of such as love ardently.
Also Calvin says thus: Non solum individuo societatis nexu nobis adhaeret, sed
mirabili quadam Communione in unum corpus nobiscu^ coalescit indies magis and
magis, donec unum penitus nobiscum fiat, That is Christ cleaves unto us, not
only by an unseparable knot of fellowship, or friendship, but by a certain
wonderful communion, he grows every day more and more into one body with us,
until at length he be made altogether one thing with us. Master Deering Master
Deering upon Heb. 2. 11.
also upon, Heb. 2. 11. testifies, As by joints and sinews our members be
really knit and made one body to the head; so really, truly, and indeed by one
Spirit are we knit into Christ, and as perfectly and substantially made one
with him, as our members are one with our head.

The fifth Similitude expressing this wonderful union 5 Grains of Co^ne one
Loaf.
into Christ, is that we are as truly, with all the children of God, united and
made one with Christ, as many grains of corn make one Loaf of Bread, and
many grapes make one Vine. And this is plainly taught by the Apostle, 1 Cor.
10. 17. saying, For we that are many, are one 1 Cor. 10, 17.
bread, and one body, because we are all partakers of one bread: and have been
all made to drink into one spirit, 1 Cor. 12. 13. Upon which place, the learned
Interpreters 1 Cor. 12. 13.
say thus: Qui ergo Christi corpus accipiunt, non multa sunt corpora, sed unum
corpus. For (says Augustine) quemadmodum panis ex multis granis unitur, etc.
As one loaf is united together of many grains, so that the grains do not
appear, and yet they are grains, but joined together with an uncertain
discerning; so are we joined one with another into Christ.

The sixth and last Similitude of this wonderful union 6 Bread and Wine in the
Lords Supper becomes one with the receiver. Ioh. 6. 56.
in to Christ, is, That we are as truly, really, and substantially united, and
made one with Christ, as the bread that we eat, and the wine that we drink, in
the Lords supper is made one with us. As Christ himself testifies, Ioh. 6. 56.
saying, He that eats my flesh, and drinks my blood, dwells in me, and I
in him. Whereupon Zanchius truly infers, saying thus, An non substantiali^er
and realiter unitur cibus and potus illi, qui edit and bibit? etc. That is, is
not the meat and drink substantially and really united to him that eats and
drinks? Yes certainly, so that of the meat eaten, and of him that eats the
meat is m^^^ but one substance; neither can the meat and drink bring life,
except they be united with him that eats and drinks it, in one substance.
And therefore he concludes, saying, Sicut realiter, etc. As therefore the bread
is truly and really united and made one with us that eat it: so also truly and
in very deed, is the flesh of Christ united and made one with us, that
spiritually eat the same. Thus we see, how really, unsearchably, miraculously
and wonderfully, we are united and made Justification is the ground and cause
of our union with Christ. Phil. 3. 8.
one with Christ. Now that it is our Free Justification that works and brings
this glorious benefit to pass, upon us, Is most evident and plain by S. Paul,
Phil. 3. 8. where the Apostle says thus: Yea doubtless, I count all things
but loss, for the excellent knowledge sake of Christ Jesus my Lord, etc. That
I may win Christ, and be found in him, That is, be sound united and ingraffed
into him: but how, or by what means is this brought to pass? he shows,
saying, By not having mine own righteousness, which is of the Law, but that
which is through the faith of Christ, even the righteousness which is of God,
by faith. Where we see evidently, that the true means to be found united into
Christ, is to be clothed in this rich robe of Christ's righteousness. Hence is
the truth of that usual speech, That in Christ we are pure and clean from
all our sins. And this also Beza witnesses, plainly in his notes upon this
place, saying thus: This is to be in Christ, to be found not in a man's own
righteousness, but clothed with the righteousness of Christ imputed unto him.

The Reason hereof ^^ because Christ will have no makes us clean from all our
sins; and then knits and unites us, as fit members, into his own self. The
order also and natural dependencie of these benefits upon one another confirm
the same: for we cannot be knit into Christ, before we have the holy Ghost
dwelling in us: the holy Ghost comes not to dwell in us, before we be
reconciled to God; and we are not reconciled to God, before we have all our
sins abolished out of Gods sight. But when all our sins are abolished, and
we made perfectly holy and righteous, from all spot of sin, in the sight of
God, freely, Then the holy Ghost comes and dwells in us, and knits us, and
unites us, as fit members, into the blessed body of Jesus Christ; then we are
by the Wedding Garment alone of Christ's righteousness made, above our sense
and feeling, fit Brides for so glorious a Bridegroom. For (says Augustine)
Such an head, must have condignum corpus a body suitable to it self; such a
Bridegroom, must have condignam uxorem, non habentem rugam aut maculam (as we
heard before) a Bride agreeable to himself not having to Godward one spot or
wrinkle, or any such thing, Ephesians. 5. 27. For (say the learned Interpreters
upon Ephesians. 5. 27. 1 John 3. 5.
1 Ioh. 3. 5.) In Christ (that is, in his body the Church) is no sin, For (say
they) Non de Christi persona hic agit, sed de toto corpo^e, that is, he speaks
not here of the person of Christ, but of his whole body; totu^ enim Christi
corpus purum esse oprtet, For it behooves, or must needs be, that the whole
body of Christ be pure: And this is the ground whereupon Luther said, That
since by his resurrection, Christ now reigns, true Divinty teaches, that
there is no sin in the Church any more, Seeing the body and members of Christ
must needs be thus pure, before they can be united and made one with Christ.

But now for the excellency of this benefit, That we are by Justification, thus
truly, substantially, and wonderfully united and made one with Christ, here I
say The inexplicable benefit of this union.
again, what tongue of men or Angels is able to lay forth the glory of the
same? does not this benefit far pass the glory of Adam in Paradise before
his fall? For there Adam might only ear of the Tree, figuring the Tree of life;
but by this benefit, we are made Branches of the true Tree of life, drawing
continual juice of grace and life from him forevermore. Again, Adam in
Paradise might and did loose that figurative Tree of life; but The continuance
is everl^sting.
he that is ingraffed and united into this true and everlasting Tree of life
(because it is grounded not upon ours, but upon Christ's righteousness,) is
sure to continue such for evermore; for Christ will not loose any of his
members, being far more easy for David to pull the prey out of the mouth of
the Bear, and Lion, than for the World, the Flesh, or the Devil himself, to
pull, rent, or ^eare away one of his members from his body. But what do I talk
of Paradise? seeing it is better to be thus wonderfully united into Christ,
than to be in heaven, because Christ is better than heaven; but that there
indeed shall be a full manifestation of this most glorious benefit. But nothing
shows the excellency of his wonderful union, more than that it is so real
and substantial, and mavelous a union into Christ, that it causes and
Church, and children of God to be entitled before God, and called Christ; as
both the Word of God teaches, and all the By this union believers, called
Christ.
best Dispensers of Gods mysteries, do testify of this union. For thus says
the word of God; As the body is one, and has many members, and all the members
being many, are but one body: so is Christ. Upon which place Chrysostom says
thus: Cum sic and Ecclesia dicere oportuisset, Chrysostom upon, Col. 12. 12.
pro Ecclesia substituit Christum, that is, When the Apostle should have said,
so is the Church, in stead of the Church he set Christ, and said, so is Christ.
Also Calvin says thus: Locus plenus eximiae consolationis, quod Ecclesiam
vocat Christum; hoc enim honor nos dignatur Christus, ut nolit tantum in se,
sed etiam in membris suis cens^ri and recognosci; that is, A place of exceeding
Cons^l^tion and (...).
consolation, that he calls the Church, Christ; for Christ vouchsafes us this
honor, that he will not be reputed, and estimated only in himself, but also
in his members. Wherein we are to observe what an exceeding consolation it is,
to them that understand this benefit, and what an honor is brought by the same
upon the Church. Whereby they that are ignorant hereof, do not only deprive
them themselves, of exceeding comfort and consolation; but also rob the Church
of her honor. Another place of Scripture confirming this is, Gal. 3. 16.
compared with verse Gal. 3. 16.
29. where the Apostle applies this wonderful union to the Galathians, after
this manner; Abraham has not many, but one seed, which is Christ; But you by
faith, are that one seed; therefore you are Christ. For (says Augustine)
concorporans nos sibi facit nos membra sua, ut in illo and nos Christi essemus;
nam omnes in illo and Christi, and Christus sumus, that is, Concorporating us
into himself, he makes us his members, that in him we also should be Christ's,
for all of us in him are both Christ's, and Christ himself. Also Origin says
thus: Fiunt perunum Christum multi Christi, transformati ad illius Imaginem,
qui est Imago Dei; unde inquit per Prophetam, ne tetegeritis Christos meos,
Psalm. 105. that is, By one Christ, there are made many Christ's, because they
are transformed into the Image of him, who is the Image of God: from whence God
said by the Prophet, touch not my Christ's, and do my Prophets no harm, Psalm.
105.

Again, Augustine as seeing and feeling the truth of Psalm. 105.
this exceeding consolation speaks likewise very pathetically after this
manner, saying, Ergo gratulemur fratres and agamus gratias, Nos non solum
Christianos esse factos sed etiam Christum: Intelligitis gratiam Dei super nos?
capitis? admiremini, gaudete; Christus facti sumus, nam si ille caput, and nos
corpus, etc. that is, Let us rejoice brethren, and give God thanks, that we are
made not only Christians, but also Christ: do you understand, Brethren, the
grace of God upon us? do ye conceive it? wonder ye, rejoice ye; we are
made Christ; for if he be the head, and we the body, the head and the body
make but one Christ. Where we see that if this union be rightly understood,
to be so close and wonderful as is here described, it works great joy in our
hearts; but if it work not this joy, we neither understand this great glory of
it, neither can be thankful for the same. And therefore that this joy may
abound in us, we must not by unbelief cast away this benefit from us, and An
Objection i^^^ the misunderstanding of Matthew. 24.
wrangle against these testimonies of the learned Dispensers of Gods mysteries,
by misunderstanding, and worse applying that saying of Christ, Matt. 24. That
if we be so united into Christ, that we also be Christ, Then that saying is
now come to pass, that in the last days shall come many Christ's; and we may
say, Lee here is Christ, and there is Christ. I answer, that in this upon them,
either the proper person, or the saving offices of Christ, and so make
themselves false Christ's; not in Christ, but out of Christ, and by themselves.
But to embrace by faith this wonderful union, is to be knit into the true
Christ, who poures himself so richly and abundantly into us, That perceiving
and understanding how gloriously we are united, and made one with him, and how
close we do adhere and cleave by his spirit unto him, and seeing how
wonderful rich we are made in him alone, freely, It is the powerful means
to make us to abhor all other false Christ's, and to cleave only to the true
Christ, who has by Justification by his blood, and by his spirit of
Sanctification, eso wonderfully knit us into his own body, That he makes us
happy and blessed only in his own self alone for ever, that we need not to
hearken after any false Christ for more happiness any other way. Why? Because
to assure us, that he does communicate both himself, and all his riches unto
us, he communicates also unto us, his very name, That as a wife (as Calvin
says) is entitled with the name of her husband; so is the Church and true
children of God, truly entitled with the name of her husband Christ. And again,
(says he) In hoc vero sita est nostra consolatio, quod sicut Christus and
pater unum sunt, ita and nos cum eo unum sumus, Vnde haec nominis communicatio
(ita and Christus) that is, Herein consists our consolation, that as Christ
and his Father are one, so we are one with him, from whence comes this
communicating of name (so is Christ.) But the sweetness and comfort of this
consolatior consists herein. That as every one is married, by his true
Justifying faith, particularly to Christ; so he must apply this union to his
own self in particular, without which it becomes unfruitful and unprofitable;
yet not swarving hereby from the former doctrine, but a making of that which is
general to all, to be thine own in particular, by applying it to thine own
self in particular. Thus did Paul, saying, I live not now: then Paul belike is
no Paul; but who lives then? Christ lives in me, that is, as Luther expounds
it, I live not in mine onw person, nor in mine own substance, but Christ lives
in me: Indeed (says he) the person lives, but not in himself; and therefore
he says, I live not now, but Christ lives in me; Is est mea forma, He is my
form, more nearly joined and united to me, than the color or witness to the
wall. Christ therefore (says Paul) thus joined and united unto me, and
abiding in me, lives this life in me, which I now live. Now Christ living in
me, I am dead to the Law, that is He abolisheth the law to me, damneth sin,
destroys death: At Christ's presence, the Law, sin and death, do vanish
away.
For it cannot be, but at his presence all these must needs vanish away; for
Christ is everlasting Righteousness, everlasting Peace, Consolation, and Life:
and to these, sin, the terror of the law, heaviness of mind, hell, and death,
must needs give place. So Christ living, and abiding in me, takes away, and
swalloweth up all evils which vex and afflict me. This union and conjunction
then is the cause, that I am separated from my self, and translated into
Christ and his kingdom, which is a kingdom of grace, righteousness, peace,
joy, life, salvation and glory; yea, by this unseparable union and conjunction,
which is through faith, Christ, and I, (mark this particularity, I) are made as
it were one body in spirit. Hence it is, for this particular application of
applying this close union to our selves in particular, did Origin say, as we
heard before, quod per unum Christum fiunt multi Christi, that by one Christ,
there are many Christ's, because they are transformed to the Image of him, who
is the Image of God. But Luther upon Paul's foresaid application, describes the
manner of this particular application with fuller demonstration, saying thus:
Quare fides pure est docenda, etc. Wherefore faith must be purely taught,
namely that thou art so entirely and nearly joined unto Christ, that he and
thou are made, as it were, one person, which cannot be severed, but is
perpetually joined together; so that thou may boldly say, Ego sum Christus, I
am Christ, that is to say, Christ's righteousness, victory, and life are mine:
And again, Christ may say, Ego sum ille peccator, I am that sinner, that is,
his sins, and his death are mine; because he is united and joined unto me,
and I unto him. For we are so united together by the spirit, that we are
become one flesh and one bone: For so says the Apople, Ephesians. 5. We are
members of the body of Christ, of his Ephesians. 5.
flesh and of his bones. So that this faith does couple Christ and me more
near together, than the husband is coupled unto his wife.

The fourth excellent benefit of Free Justification, is 4. Adoption.
our most glorious adoption; whereby we are made the true sons and daughters
of the living God. Therefore does S. John say, As many as received him,
(namely, to justify them, by his blood and death,) Ioh. ^. 1^.
To them he gave the prerogative or dignity to be the Sons of God, as verily
and truly as ever they were the Sons and Daughters of their natural Parents.
And the Apostle Paul testifies, That Christ has redeemed us from under the
Law, that we might receive the adoption of Sons; And because we are Sons,
God has sent forth the Spirit of his Son into our hearts, to cry Abba
Father, Gal. 4. 5, 9. also S. John crying out in admiration Gal, 4. 5. 6.
of this great dignity says, Behold what love the Father has showed toward
us, (that we, things of nothing, Psalm. 144. 4.) Should be called the Sons of
God! And Psalm. 144 4.
now are we the Sons of God: But it is not made manifest what we shall be,
but we know that when he (that is the Son) shall appear, we shall be like
him; 1 Ioh. 3. 1. 2. 1 Ioh 3. 1. 2.
Yea, we are so truly made the children of God that we are become also heirs
of eternal life: so says the Apostle, Tit. 3. 7. We being justified by his
free grace, Ti^. 3. 7.
are made heirs according to the hope of eternal life. and again, Romans 8. If
we be children, we are also heirs, Romans 8.
even the heirs of God, and fellow or joynt-heires with Christ. But neither is
this high benefit conferred upon us, except we be first justified, that is,
made perfectly holy and righteous by his grace: according to that saying of a
learned Dispencer of the mysteries of the Gospel, which is this, If we be
Sons, then are we justified in Gods sight, freed from sin and endued with
righteousness, and so fully reconciled unto God; seeing the Lord infinite in
Justice, would never admit any into such an high degree of favor, who were yet
polluted in their sins, and desti^ute Nemo sit h^r^s sautis ^te^nae (...)
sit^u. (...) fide Pic. in Heb. 11. 7.
of righteousness. Whereunto agreeable is also that saying of Pisca^o^, nemo
fit haeres, etc. No man is made an heir of eternal salvation, but first he is
made just and righteous by faith. Thus God by the means of Free Justification,
having delivred us from the power of darkness, and translated us into the
kingdom of his dear Son, has made us meet to be pratakers of the
inheritance Colos. ^. ^2, 13.
of the Saints in light, Coloss. 1. 12. 13. 5. The me^n^s of our glor^h. atioa,


Fifthly and lastly, this free Justification is the only immediate cause and
means of our final glorification, and of setting us in the right and
assurance of eternal lise. Therefore does the Apostle say; Whom God
justifies, them he glorifieth, Romans 8. 30. Hence it is also Romans 8. ^0. Rom 5.
18.
that he does call it the Justification of life, Romans 5. 18. Because to the
Enjoyers of it by faith, it does freely and undoubtedly bring life, and
eternal salvation: which the same Apostle again testifies, when he says,
Grace does reign, indeed: but how? By righteousness, or through righteousness
unto eternal life, through Jesus Christ our Lord, Romans 5. 21. As if he should
say, Romans 5. 11.
Grace indeed, does infallibly bring eternal life, and yet by this only means
that men of necessity be first justified, and freely made perfectly holy, and
completely righteous before God: or else grace it self reigns not unto
eternal life. Hereupon S. Chrysostom says Chrysostom. in. Romans
truly thus; For where righteousness is, there necessarily does everlasting
life go withal, and also infinite other Radix vitae Calv. ex Marlo: Sicut
^eccatum non nisi mort^m parere potest, ita donum illud Dei n^f^ra scilicet
justificat^o vitae aete^nae bea^i^^dinem nobis a ^sertivel si mavis,
quemadmodum mortis causa pcccatum est, etc.
good things, even as where there is sin, there is death; for righteousness
is more than life, seeing it is the very root of life: Herewithall agree the
modern Expositors saying thus, As sin cannot but bring forth death; so that
gift of God, namely, our Justification brings upon us all blessedness and
eternal life: or if you had rather thus; As sin is the cause of death, so
the righteousness which is freely given us by Christ, has restored unto us
eternal life. Faith therefore of Free Justification is sure of eternal life,
and so sure that it glories, and rejoices in eternal life; because Free
Justification only does make us fit, or worthy, or sufficiently meet Luther in
Gal. 1. 6.
to be partakers of the inheritance of the Saints in light, by which only God
has delivered us, out of the power of Id in cap. 1. 17.
darkness, and has translated us into the kingdom of his Colos. 1. 12. 13.
dear Son, Colos. 1. 12. 13. For thus are we translated out of sin into
righteousness, out of Gods wrath into his wellpleased favor, out of
cursednesse into blessedness, out of death into life; for when sin is taken
away, in the place thereof comes righteousness; in the place of wrath,
reconciliation, and grace, and free and well-pleased favor; in the place of
death, life; and in the place of damnation salvation.

CHAP. XVI. Of the other four fruits, or effects declaring the Vtility and
Majesty of Free Justification.
THe third maine point, showing the Majejestie The third effect is Peace and
loy in the conscience.
and Utility of Justification is, That whereas the want or the ignorance of it,
is the loss of all true peace, and joy in God; so the right knowledge and
apprehension thereof, is the lively spring of joy, and of a good conscience,
bursting forth into a joyful confession, and glorifying of God, both in heart
and tongue. See this is that sweet Song of Mary, Luke 1. 46, 47. Where she
says, My soul magnifieth the Lord, and my Spirit rejoices in God my Savior;
for seeing the imperfections of our Sanctification, are in this life so great,
That all our Righteousness is as a menstruous cloth, If we know not
assuredly that by this glory of Justification, all our sins, which simply of
themselves (as the Image of the Devil) God so cloatheth, are quite and clean
abolished from before him, and that we are perfectly holy and righteous in the
sight of God; we cannot have, but rather do disanull that Peace and great joy
unspeakable and glorious, That Justification by such perfect abolishing of all
our sins from before God, and free making as so perfectly rigteous in the
sight of God, does hereby bring unto us: For which the Gospel is expressly
called joyful news from heaven; without which joy we are not sure, that we
are delivered out of the kingdom of Satan, which is sin and death: but by
this joy the faithful soul, the true Bride of Christ, may feel it self to
be entered with Christ into the Eride-Chamber, which is the kingdom of heaven;
For the kingdom of God, is righteousness, and peace and joy in the holy
Ghost: And whosoever in these things serves Christ, are accepted unto God, and
are approved of men, Rom, 14. 17. 18. But if thou ask how Romans 14, 17,
thou may attain so great righteousness, as may bring such peace and joy?
The Apostle answers, That being justified, that is, freely made perfectly
holy and righteous by faith, we are so completely righteous, and become so
just, and saved, That having no need of any works hereunto at all, but through
faith only, obtaining true righteousness sufficiently, We have peace toward
God, through our Lord Jesus Christ, Romans 5. 1. For seeing only sins do breed
displeasure between Romans 5. 1. Sola pe, cata simult^tem pariant, ^^st, ua^ex
impi^s pe^ateribus, etc. Phil. 1 7. Incredibi'e gaudiu^, Marlo. in Romans 5. 1.
God and man; after that of ungodliness and sinners, we are made just, and
righteous, from hence it must needs be, that forthwith true peace, does
presently arise, and this peace, that is to say, quietness and tranquilli^y of
mind, and security of conscience which does pass all understanding, Phil. 4.
7. and does breed in the hearts of the faithful, incredible and wonderful joy
indeed; the Law, sin, and failing in works, terrifieth the conscience,
oppresses it with fears, and heaviness of spirit; and plucketh it from the
assurance of righteousness of life, and all goodness; Luth. Gal. 4. 2, 3.
therefore let us not suffer the Law in any case to bear rule in our
conscience; especially seeing it cost Christ so great a price to deliver the
conscience from the Schoolmaster-like slavery of the Law; let the godly learn
therefore, that the Law and Christ are Why the Law is not to bear rule in the
conscience.
two contrary things, whereof the one cannot abide the other; for when Christ
is present, the Law may in no case rule, but must depart out of the conscience,
Idem in Gal. 5, 22.
and leave the bed, which is so straight, that it cannot hold two, as Esaias
says, and give place only to Christ: Let him only reign in righteousness, in
peace, in joy and life, that the conscience may sleep and repose it selse in
Christ the Bridegroomes bosom, without any feeling of the Law, sin and death,
for the fruits of the The voice of the Bridegroom.
spirit are not only love, but also joy, etc. Gal. 5. 22. This is the voice of
the Bridegroom and of the Bride, that is to say, sweet cogitations of Christ,
wholesome exhortations, pleasant Songs and Psalms, praises and thanksgiving,
whereby the godly do instruct, stir up, and refresh themselves.

Therefore God loves not heaviness and dullness Heaviness must be abandoned,
and why?
of spirit, he hates uncomsorrable doctrine, heavy and sorrowful
cogitations, and loves cheerful hearts: for therefore has he sent his Son,
not to oppress us with heaviness and sorrow; but to cheer up our souls in
him. Mark what great joy all the Prophets do prophecy of, and even extort at
our hands, for the first coming of Christ; so do the Psalms, so does Christ,
and so do his Apostles, not only exhorting us, but even commanding us to
rejoice, Rejoice thou Daughter of Zion, be joyful thou Daughter of Jerusalem,
^ach. 5.
for behold thy King comes to thee. Again, for the fruits of his coming:
Rejoice ye heavens, for the Esaias 44. 12 23.
Lord has done it; Shout ye lower parts of the earth, burst forth into
praises, ye mountains: why what is done? and wherefore must there be such
great joy? For I have put away thy sins as darkness, and thy transgressions
as a mist: And thus has the Lord redeemed Jacob, and will be glorified in
Israel. And albeit we Luth. Se^m. in Phil. 4. 4.
fall sometimes into sins, which by nature bring sadness and sorrow with
them: yet forasmuch, as they cannot bring so much hurt, as Christ, if we
believe in him, brings power of abolishing them with profit and safety, Joy
in the Lord ought always to have the first place with us, and far to
overcome the sorrow and sadness that comes by reason of our sins. Hence
does the truly faithful soul, the Bride of Christ, burst forth into this
ecstasy, saying, I will greatly rejoice in the Lord, and my soul shall be
joyful in my God: Why? Because he has clothed me with the garments of
Salvation. What garments are those? He has covered me with the Robes of
righteousness, he has decked Esaias. 61. 10.
me, as a Bride tireth her self with her Jewels, Esaias 61. 10. And hereupon
says Luther Beholdhow for this knowledge Luth. in Gal. 3. 13.
and benefit of Christ to come, the Saints of the Old Testament rejoiced more
than we now do, when he is so comfortably revealed and exhibited unto us.
Indeed, we do acknowledge that this benefit of Christ, the righteousness of
faith, is an inestimable Treasure: But we conceive not thereby such a full joy
of spirit, as the Prophets and Apostles did. Hereof it comes that They,
especially Paul, do so plentifully set forth, and so diligently teach the
Articles of Justification; for this is the proper office of an Apostle (and of
a Minister of the Gospel) to set forth the glory and benefits The proper office
of a Minister of the Gospel.
of Christ, to the working of this joy; and therefore does S. Paul define a
Minister to be but an help to the peoples joy, 2 Cor. 1. 24. When such a
rejoicing 2 Cor, 1. 24.
faith possesses the heart, and the Gospel is so received indeed; then God
appears sweet, and altogether loving; neither feels the heart any thing,
but the favor and grace of God: it stands with a bold and strong confidence:
Luth. sermon. in Phil. 4. 4.
it fears not least any evil come unto it: it being quiet from all fear of
displeasure, is merry and glad of so incomparable grace and goodness of God,
given unto it freely, and most abundantly, in Christ.

Wherefore there must needs forthwith proceed from such a faith, love, joy,
peace, gladness, giving of thanks, praise, and a certain mavelous delight
in God, as in a most dear and favorable Father, which deals so fatherly
with us, and pours forth his gifts so plentifully, and in so great measure
upon them also which do not deserve them. Behold of such joy Paul speaks
here, which ^ruly where it is, there can be no place for sin, or fear of
death, or hell: yea nothing is there, but a joyful, quiet, and omnipotent
trust in God and in his favor; wherefore it is called joy, not in gold,
silver, delights, singing, health, knowledge, wisdom, power, glory,
friendship, favor, no nor in works, holiness, and such like, but joy in the
Lord: wherefore Paul speaks, saying, Rejoice in the Lord always: and again, I
say, rejoice, Phil. 4. 4. And Peter Phil. 4. 4.
testifies, that the faithful, by believing, did rejoice 1 Pet. 1. 8.
with joy unspeakable, and glorious. For in this righteousness, wherein I am
made passively righteous, I Luthers argument in Galat.
have no sin, no fear, no sting of conscience, no care of death: for where
Christ is truly seen indeed, there must needs be full and perfect joy in the
Lord. Wherefore if any man feel himself oppressed with Luther in Gal. 2. 20.
heaviness, and anguish of heart, he must not impute it unto Christ, although
it come under the name of Christ; but unto the Devil, who oftentimes comes
under the color of Christ, and transformeth himself into an Angel of light;
for if there be any fear, or any grief of conscience, it is a token that this
passive The cause of fear and sadness of heart.
righteousness, wherewith I am freely made perfectly holy and righteous, is
withdrawn, that grace is hidden, and Christ is darkened out of sight: wherefore
we must Luther in sermon of the lost sheep in Gal. 4. 7.
fight against sadness and heaviness of spirit, caused by the law, and give
no place to the Devil, who would, by the law, break up the bride-chamber of
Christ, and thrust himself into his place; that is, take away from the
conscience her joy and comfort, whereby he may not be able cheerfully to lift
up his heart and head before God; ever remembering, that the Kingdom of heaven,
into which we, by our effectual calling, are translated, as the Bride of
Christ into his bride-chamber, is righteousness and peace, and joy in the holy
Ghost, Romans 14. 17. Romans 14. 17. Fourth Effect. Good judgment, and right
discerning of all spirits.


The fourth effect or fruit declaring the utility of Free Justification, is
that it works a good judgment, and right discerning of all Religions, works,
and worships to the utter overthrowing of all Superstitions, Sects, and
Schisms; and does reduce people from their contentious, and dangerous
bypath, and does rectify their blind legal zeales mentioned, Romans 10. 3.
Romans 10. 3.
declining to sundry Sects, and contentious opinions; and brings them to the
pure, and sincere worship of God, in spirit and truth; that is, in one faith
only, and one Baptism, Ephesians. 4. 2. to 6. unto which they Ephesians. 4. 2. to 6.
cannot be won, but by understanding the excellency of Free Justification,
and how complete they are made by it alone before God, Colos. 2. 10. but will
be carried Colos. 2. 10.
away with self-deceiving and appearing zeales of God; as S. Paul testifies,
saying, I bear them record, they have the zeal of God: why, what is the zeal
of God which they had? that is, First for matter, not following now, as in
ancient times, their own inventions, and false worships of gross idolatry;
but now zealously following the law of righteousness, even the works of Gods
own Law, Romans 9. 31. 32. And secondly for end, Romans 9. 31, 32.
aiming at the glory of God: why, what was more to be desired? yes, but it was
not according to knowledge: why, but they wanted no knowledge, as we may see
granted by Paul himself, Romans 2. 17. to 20. and Romans Romans 2. 17. to 20. and 9.
4.
9. 4. for they knew the whole word of God, and how often any word of moment
was repeated, from the beginning of Genesis, to the end of Malachy. True, but
yet they were ignorant of one maine point, by which Justification the heart and
life of all knowledge.
they were ignorant of all: for they only knew not free Justification, which is
the form, soul, heart, and life of all the rest; because that alone gives,
both unto God and unto Christ their full glory: for so it follows in Paul:
for they being ignorant of the righteousness of God, did go about to
establish their own righteousness. For because the nature of man dares not
think The ground of the establishing of our own righteousness.
of any fellowship and communion with God, without a righteousness; therefore
they being ignorant of the righteousness of God, freely and completely wrought
upon them by God, must needs go about to establish their own righteousness;
that is, to win and retain the love and favor of God by their fervency of
good works, and zeal of Gods glory in doing his law: and when this blind
affection of false-doing Gods will does reign in men, being ignorant of the
excellency, and full, and true doing of Gods will in free Justification; then
they desire by some notorious zealous good works, to out-passe the ordinary
course and road-way of walking every man within the limits of his vocation,
doing the duties of the same comfortably and faithfully to Gods glory, in
winning and Blind and rash zeal.
profiting his neighbors; but out-starting others, will have some singular
zealous works, to win and retain the said love and favor of God toward
them: hence flow the superstitious inventions of Popery: hence comes the rash
zeal of the Brownists: hence comes the blind holiness of Familists: hence
comes the painted zeal and holiness of Anabaptists, little differing, in
truth, from Papists, they do so stablish their own righteousness of holy
duties and works; but that encroaching and returning near to Judaisme, they
keep themselves closer (as they think) to the Moral Law of performing
universal obedience to all Gods Commandments; and so likewise of all other
Sects and Religions, and of all other Ape-Saints, and Peacock-Christians (as
Luther truly calls them) whatsoever being ignorant of free Justification. But
when they come, by true faith, to see rightly into free Justification, how
utterly their sins, by the imputation of Christ's perfect righteousness, are
freely abolished out of Gods sight, and how perfectly and completely holy and
righteous they are made freely without works, and what a full entrance there is
hereby into the full favor of God, peace, and joy of conscience, and to all
the rest of the glorious benefits of the Gospel; then they begin to say, Here
are the words of eternal life, and whither shall we go? then they begin to
see, that God has placed them in their vocations, for them thereby to practice
and testify their thankfulness for those free-given benefits of the Gospel,
that do make them so complete before God; and therefore they care for nothing,
but to keep themselves within the limits of their vocations, and to do the
duties of the same faithfully and zealously to Gods glory, in benefiting their
neighbors. And thus they serve God in spirit and truth of faith, when all the
world runs awhoring after their own inventions, both of falsesupposed true
worships, and also of doing their vocations in a false manner. And therefore
does Luther truly say thus of this powerful operation, and effect Luth. in
Gal. 2. 20.
of free Justification, Wherefore I say, as I have oftentimes said, That there
is no remedy against Sects, or power to resist The only remedy against all
Sects.
them, but this only Article of Christian righteousness: if we lose this
Article, it is impossible for us to withstand any errors or Sects: As we may
see at this day in the fantastical spirits, the Anabaptists, and such like;
who being fallen away from this Article of free Justification, will never cease
to fall, err, and seduce others, until they come to the fullness of all
iniquity, except they be reduced home to rest only in free Justification.

For whiles this doctrine, pacifying and quieting Luth. in verse 16.
the conscience, remains pure and incorrupt, Christians are made judges over
all kinds of doctrine; Idem in Chap. 1. 4. The danger of workmongers.
whereby a light is opened, and a sound judgment is given unto us: so as we
may most certainly and freely judge of all kinds of life; whereby we easily
discern all such Sects, as trust, rely, and hang upon their works, to be
wicked and pernicious: whereby the glory of Gods wrath against sin, and Christ's
works and doings are not only defaced, but also utterly taken away, and our
own advanced and established.

Yea upon faith alone of Free Justification by Christ, follows a most certain
knowledge and understanding, a most joyful conscience, and a true judgment of
every Chap. 3. 28.
kind of life, and of all things else whatsoever. For they which know and
understand it, can judge of faith, they can discern a true fear, from a false
fear: they Chap. 3. 23.
can judge of all inward affections of the heart, and discern all spirits, etc.

So that if we stick to this anchor-hold of the true manner of free
Justification, both the Pope and Satan shall be put to flight; because where
this knowledge of free-Iustification is retained, and this doctrine preached,
all Heresies and Sects are easily overthrown.

Fifthly, the laying out of the excellency of free Fifth Effect. It rooteth up
Covetousnes, the root of all ^^ill.
Justification works also this powerful effect; namely, it is the only
means to eradicate, and utterly root out that inbred original corruption
called Covetousness, the root of all evil, and the love of all vain pomp,
and earthly riches; so deeply rooted, and inwardly infecting the heart, that if
the heart be not seisoned with some feeling of the worth of the heavenly
riches, the natural man, in the dead Faith, is violently carried, upon the
least occasion, for a little lucre, not only to break all laws, both of God
and man, but also to betray himself, his soul, his neighbor, King, and
country, and what not, for a little thick clay, vain pomp, and earthly pelf;
and all because he sees no greater riches proposed unto him, nor the far
passing gain that is in godliness, that is in Free Justification. But when
men are brought to see their own cursed estate, and woeful misery that by
nature they are plunged into, and then have effectually the height, depth,
length and breadth of the inestimable riches (Ephesians. 3. 8.) and glorious
treasures of Ephesians. 3. 8.
free Justification by Christ opened unto them; Then they become like the wise
Merchant in the Gospel, who having found the treasure hid in the field, for joy
thereof departs, and sells all that he has of high esteem, and buyeth
that field, Math. 13. 44. A notable example whereof, and clear pattern for any
man that is wise to look into, is Paul, who when he came in truth to taste of
these unsearchable riches of free Justification, then he began to cry out: I
count all things loss for the excellent knowledge sake of Christ Jesus my
Lord; for whom I have suffered the loss of all things, and do count them but
dung, that I may be found in Christ: How? by not having mine own
righteousness, which is of the Law, but that which is by the faith of Christ,
even the righteousness which is of God through faith, Phil. 3. 8, 9.

The sixth and maine point showing the majesty Sixth Effect is Sanctifcation,
and the true Evangelicall Repentance.
and utility of this benefit of ^ustification, is, That the true joyful
knowledge of the same is the only powerful means to regenerate, quicken, and
sanctify us, and to make us truly to love, fear, and tru^t in God, working in
us the true Evangelicall repentance; in sincerity hating sin, because it is
sin, and in truly loving all holiness, and righteousness: and thus it is Gods
holy fire that enflameth his people with right thankful zeal of Gods glory,
in careful and diligent walking in all Gods Commandments, by willing,
cheerful and ready practicing of all duties of love, both toward God and our
Neighbors; and so making it manifest, that Justification and Sanctification
are inseparable companions that go infallibly together, A true Believer is a
Saint two ways.
making every true Believer a double Saint, or rather a true Saint two manner
of ways, as is expressed in the Table following.

Every true Believer is a true Saint two manner of ways, not to be separated,
but thus to be distinguished. 1 By Justification, which serves to make him a
true Saint only in the eyes of God two ways. 1 Because Christ's blood washing
away and abolishing all his sins, he has this property of a true Saint, that
he is clean from all his sins in the sight of God, 1 John 1. 7. 2 Because being
clothed, and passively formed with Christ's righteousness, he has the second
property of a true Saint, that he is perfectly holy and righteous in the sight
of God, Romans 5. 19.
2 By Sanctification, which serves to make him a true Saint to the eyes of
men, and that also two ways. 1 By mortifying and crucifying all sin every day
more and more, as Gal. 5. 24. They that are Christ's do crucify the flesh with
the affections and lusts. 2 By walking, though not perfectly, yet sincerely and
zealously in all Gods Commandments, Psalm. 18. 22. So Zachary and Elizabeth his
wife being both just before God, by free Justification, walked in all the
Commandments of God, without reproof declaratively to man-ward.



The differences between these two are these ten.

1. Justification serves to approve us for true Saints to the eyes of God:
Sanctification serves to approve us true Saints to the eyes of men.

2. Therefore our Justification is perfect, that is, making us, to Gods eyes,
clear as the Sun, Cant. 6. 9. but Sanctification is unperfect, making us, to
the night of this world, fair as the Moon, Cant. 6. 9.

3. Our Justification is perceived by faith only; Sanctification is perceived
by sense and feeling.

4. Our Justification is heavenly, and more spiritual: our Sanctification is
fleshly, Romans 4. 1. and as a menstrous cloth, Esaias 64. 6. in comparison.

5. Justification dignifieth our Sanctification; Sanctification is dignified of
Justification, Heb. 11. 4.

6. Justification is merely passive to us, and freely given of God, and is the
sole glory of Christ: Sanctification is active, and rendered to God in way of
thankfulness, and is the glory of man, Romans 4. 2.

7. Justification is the cause of Sanctification; Sanctification is the effect
of Justification.

8. Justification is meritorious of all the favor and blessings of God:
Sanctification of it self merits nothing at all.

9. Justification is the cause enriching us with all the other benefits and
treasures of the Gospel: Sanctification shows, that we are so enriched.

10. God leaves our Sanctification so imperfect in this life, that all our
rejoicing, and joy unspeakable and glorious may be in Justification, Romans 14.
17.

For first, that Justification works in us the true First the true love of
God. Luke 7. 4^.
love of God, is plainly testified by Christ himself, Luke 7. 47. saying, to
whom a little is forgiven, he does love but a little: but to whom (being a
great debtor) much is forgiven (especially with such a forgiveness as Gods is,
wherein a greater overplus of riches is also given him to make him sully rich)
he does love much.

For no man is righteous, but he that has a true Nemo e^im jusius (...), nisi
qui, etc.
feeling of his sins; neither except he feel them with a true touch, can he
else embrace this righteousness: but whosoever has this knowledge, that his
Necesse est ut D^um dil gal, Marlot ibid.
sins through Christ are (so richly) forgiven him, it must needs be that he
love God much.

Then of this true love of God arises the true Evangelicall Se^ondly,
Evangelicall Repentance.
repentance grieving at all sin, not for fear of punishment, but through love,
becoming zealous against all sin, both in himself and in others. An example
whereof is the justified woman, who before was so great a sinner, yet being
justified and pronounced no sinner by Christ, how great was her repentance?
Quid^am s^bi vo^^nt tam profu^ae (...) quid assidua ^edumisenta?
for what meant her abundant tears? what meant the often kissing of his feet?
what meant her precious ointment? but that she acknowledged, she had been a
grievous sinner, and pressed with a great burden Nam p^^catis for Christ
^atiam abolius and novam ju^^^tiam adepta.
of damnation? And now she embraced the mercy of God so much the more ardently,
by how much she acknowledged her need thereof to be the greater; for because In
hoc uno ins^slit Chri^^us, etc.
her sins, by the grace of Christ, were abolished, and she had attained a new
righteousness. Hence did Christ insist on this one point, that although she
had Quam ut peccatrix an plius inbenda etc. Sed sa^cta and justa.
been overwhelmed with many sins; yet the mercy of God was more abundant upon
her, than that she was (as Simon thought) to be accounted a sinner any more,
but holy and righteous. But the manifest signs Manifesta au^^ signa, etc.
that she was righteous were these: That she omitted no kind of duty, whereby
she might testify her thankfulness; Insignibus offlciis.
but did witness by what means soever she could, how greatly she was indebted
unto God; for she Solicita omnibus pietatis officiis defungi sludebat.
showed by notable duties, that she was wholly enflamed with the love of
Christ, yea she endeavored to perform all duties of godliness carefully:
thus it appears by the whole similitude brought in by Ex totasimi tudine
ap^a^eat, etc. Marlor ib.
Christ, that Justification is the cause of love, and love is the effect of
Justification.

Hence through love and admiration, or through admirable love, does the Prophet
cry out, saying, Who is a God like unto thee, that take away iniquity, and
do cast all our sins into the bottom of the sea? Micah 7. 18. Micah 7. 18,
19, Nam quisque, qua^to magis sentit, etc. Matl. in Luke 7.
19. For every one, by how much the more he feels this rich forgiveness of
his sins, and apprehends the glory of Free Justification; so much the more
vehemently he loves God: and the more feeling of love we have, by so much we
shall know that we have profited in the knowledge of Justification.

By faith therefore we attain the making of us Fide justificationem
assequimur, charita^e gratias agimus, etc.
righteous: and by love we are thankful, and testify the bountifulness of
God toward us.

Thirdly, that it is the joyful knowledge of Justification Thirdly, true fear
of God. Psalm. 130. 4.
that works in us the true fear of God, and in thankful zeal of Gods glory
cheerfully to obey him, Is testified plainly by David, saying, For with Deus
non timetur ubi non creditur grataita justitia, Luther in loc.
thee there is propitiation, mercy, or forgiveness; yea and plentiful
redemption; therefore shall thou be feared, Psalm. 130. 4. Whereupon Luther
says, God is not feared, where free righteousness is not believed; for this
grace Qu^dnam est tim^re De^m, aliud quam agnoscere, quam sit nobus ^enefi^^^,
and ideo e. obeli^e?
being taken away, the Prophet pronounces, that there also the sear of God is
taken away; for what is it else to fear God, than to acknowledge how
bountiful he is toward us, and therefore to obey him? this David in another
place testifies, where he says, Knit my heart unto thee (the only bond
whereof is Free Justification) that I may fear thy name, Psalm. 86. 11. Psalm.
86. 11.
The mighty force whereof to guide and make a man to walk in the ways of
godliness, he testifies in another place by his own experience, saying, Thy
loving kindness is ever before mine eyes; therefore have I walked in thy truth.

Thus the true fear of God, the true worship of God, Sic verus timor. Dei,
verus cultus, vera r^verentia, imo agnitio, Deivera, etc.
true reverence, yea, the true knowledge of God, does rest wholly upon this
Grace, That we are confident that God by Christ's justifying us, is reconciled
and made favorable unto us: Whereupon elsewhere says he, Luth. in, Psalm. 130.
I think and teach that it is a pernicious kind of teaching by which men are
taught to repent, by beholding Id assert articu per bull. Leo condem. Tom. 2.
the punishments of sin and the rewards. By these Doctrines, indeed, men are
bridsed from the work, and they fashion to themselves a seared and constrained
conscience, or good purpose, and with a greater mischief they never understand
nor mark, that hidden and secret affection of the Law despised, and of sin
loved: Nay, rather by these endeavors of good works they hide it, and are
content that they have given some satisfaction and content to that wicked
opinion of works; to whom notwithstanding if you will leave to speak their
minds freely, they would presently confess, that they do not repent from the
heart: And, but that Hell is a Law, they had rather with full violence fulfill
their evils; especially, being tempted and provoked thereunto. How much better
were it, that they were soundly taught to acknowledge that capital, heinous
and secret affection; and that until they begin to repent for love of the Law,
they should know themselves to be hypocrites, and should have no hope of such
hypocrisy, but rather should grieve more for it, than for their sins; at the
sight whereof they have wrung out that counterfeit grief and sorrow. Indeed, I
grant that those gross and hardened wicked ones, which, as yet, have no touch
of conscience, ought with those terrors as unruly servants, to be constrained
to repentance; even as the Magistrate restrains the wicked with the sword:
But where there is a touch and feeling of conscience, there they are to be
instructed, that first they begin at Christ, that truly believing and
apprehending his rich mercy of Free Justifying them, then may change their
lives. For then does true repentance first begin it, when flows from love,
and not for love of commodity, nor for fear of punishment: But they begin to
weigh there sins in love and affection only of righteousness; which we
never do, except we first lay the groundwork of Justification by faith, in
the hearts of them which begin to feel their sins. It is a hard and
dangerous matter to teach that we are freely made righteous by faith without
works; and yet to require works withal here, (except Wisdom in the Minist^y.
the Ministers of Christ be faithful and wise Disposers of the mysteries of
^od, rightly dividing the word of truth) faith and works are by and by
confounded; both these Doctrines as well of faith as of works, must be
diligently taught and urged: Yet so that both may remain within their bounds,
As thus,

First, unto secure ones, and to the proud seeming-humble 1 Luth in Gal 3. 19.
20.
ones, that have the least opinion of their own holiness and sanctity must the
Law be brought forth, not veiled as Moses spoke it, that is, mitigated, which
makes hypocrites: but as God spoke it, that is, in the spiritual Majesty of
it, that people may feel it to be the hammer of death, the thundering of Hell,
the lightning of Gods justice and wrath, beating to powder the obstinate and
senseless hypocrites, to terrify and rend in pieces the beast; which is called
the opinion of ones own righteousness, that they may see, that that way, they
are altogether wretched, and miserable, and poor, and blind, and naked.

Then secondly, being touched and terrified in conscience, Free Iusti^ication,
without any consideration, respect or remembrance of works, but freely making
them completely righteous seen and enjoyed by faith, only apprehending this
promise. On this wise the promise of God does give freely unto us, that which
the Commandment does exact of us perforce, and does fulfill that which the Law
does straightly command. By this means therefore the soul through faith only,
without works believing in the Word of God, is justified, sanctified, pacified,
delivered, and replenished with all goodness; and is truly made the daughter
of God: For such as the Word is, as namely this, The blood of Jesus Such as the
word, is such is the believing soul.
Christ the Son of God, does make us clean from all sin, 1 Ioh. 1. 7. Such
becomes the soul, made by force of the Word: even as a fiery plate of Iron,
does glow 1 Ioh. 1. 7.
and glister like unto fire, by means of uniting the fire and the plate
together: thus is Gods Word glorified, thus is the faithful soul delivered
from all sins, made safe from death, guarded from Hell, and endowed with the
everlasting righteousness, life, and saving health of her husband, Christ: and
on this wise does Christ couple her unto himself a glorious Spouse, not having
spot, or wrinckle; making her clean with the Fountain in the Word of Life, of
Righteousness, and of salvation. Wherefore who is able to value the royalty of
this marriage accordingly? who is able to comptehend the glorious riches of
this grace? This I say must be, secondly, taught without any respect or
remembrance of works, and be thoroughly grounded and planted in the soul, and
reigning in the heart with joy; Else should faith and works not remain within
their bounds, but be confounded. Therefore does Paul prosecute this argument
Luth. in Gal. 3. ^7.
to the Gentiles very diligen^ly: For he fore saw in spirit, that this
mischief should creep into the Church, That the Word of God should be
confounded; that is to say, that the promise should be mingled with the Law,
and so the promise should be utterly lost; for when the promise is mingled with
the Law, it is now made nothing else but the very Law; for whosoever In chap.
2. 17.
do not perfectly understand the Article of Iustisication, must needs
confound, and mingle the Law and grace together.

But, where this rich and loving husband, Christ, takes unto wise this poor
and wicked Harlot, redeeming her from all evils, laying all her sins upon his
own shoulders; whereby they are swallowed up in him, as darkness is swallowed
up in the Sunbeams, Esaias 44. Esaias 4, 22.
22. For it behooves that all sin be swallowed up at the very sight of Christ,
clothing and enrobing her with his own righteousness, and garnishing her with
all his own Jewels. Whose hearts, hearing these things, will not melt for very
joy, and wax ravished for very love of Christ, having received so great
consolation? To the which love he can never possibly attain by any Laws or
works at all.

Then thirdly, will follow works of love and thankfulness, Works of love.
in a manner, of their own accord (with a little help of direction, and
exhortation) flowing from a true, right, thankful zeal of Gods glory, making
them willing and ready to grow, and cheerfully to walk in all the holy duties
of all his Commandments. Thus The mighty power of the Go^pel, to true
sancti^ication.
is Justification, making us perfectly holy and righteous freely, in the sight
of God, and works safely taught, and not confounded the one with the other, but
both in their due bounds powerfully stablished; works L^th. Sermon. i^ Tit. 3. 5.
thereby joyfully flowing forth. Yea, as soon as thou feel, by true says,
this bountisulnesse and love of God toward men, not through works of
righteousness which we have done, Tit. 3. 4. thou can not in this case be
idle; for surely that love of God and pleasure, which thou enjoyest in him,
will not suffer thee to be idle; thou shall be enslamed with a mavelous study
and desire to do what things soever thou can know will be an honor unto thy
God, so loving and bountiful unto thee, and will turn to praise, glory, and
thanksgiving unto him: thou shall pass for no precept, thou shall feel no
compulsion of the Law; having a most ready will and pleasure to do whatsoever
things thou shall know to be acceptable unto God; whether they be
contemptible The chief disposition of the believing soul.
or noble, small or great, thou shall count them a like. But first of all it
shall be thy desire, that this blessed knowledge of God, and rich benefits and
treasures by Christ may be common to all others: Whereupon by and by thy love
will show it self, and will assay all means to make this truth of Salvation
manifest unto all, rejecting and condemning whatsoever others either-teach or
say, that agrees not with this truth: whereby it will come to pass that Satan
and the World, which hear nothing so unwillingly as this truth, will rise
against thee with all their might, will by and by trouble thee: The Great,
Learned, Rich, and Mighty of the World, will condemn thee of heresy and
madness. Howbeit if thou be endued with this joyful faith, it cannot be, but
that thy heart being thereby cheered, should even, as it were, laugh and leap
for holy joy in God, being void of all care and trouble, and be made above
measure confident.

Fourthly, hence it is also manifest, that it is this 4 True trust and
confidence in God. Ephesians. 1. 13.
joyful knowledge of Justification, which works in us a sound trust, and
true confidence in God, making us to go forward in our vocations, both common
of Christianity, and particular of our places, against all the oppositions of
the whole world: doing the duties of the same with courage, boldness and
constaney, whatsoever come of it. The reason and ground of which trust and
courage is expressed by S. Paul in Romans 8. 32. saying, If when we were sinners,
God spared Romans ^. 32.
not his Son, but gave him for us all to death, to justify us; how shall he
not with him (we being now justified, that is made perfectly holy and righteous
in his sight, but) give us all things also? so that we know that all things
work together for the best unto us.

For the cause that brings all evil upon us, and keeps away good things
from us, is sin, says the Prophet Ierem. 5. 25. But if our sins be by the
blood Iere^. 5. 25.
of Christ so utterly abolished, that we are clean in his sight from all
sin, 1 Ioh. 1. 7. then what is there, 1 Ioh. ^ 7.
left to bring any evil upon us, or to hinder good things from us? Again,
seeing the only thing that separates between us and our God, and the only thing
that hides his face from us, that he will not hear, is sin, Isa. 59. 2. If
the Lamb of God have taken away our sins, and separated them away from us, as
far as the East is from the West before God, what is there to separate between
us and our God, that either his arm should be shortened that he will not
help, or his ear heavy that he will not hear? or any way to hinder his
presence from us? much more seeing not only our sins are so utterly
abolished, but also we are of foul sinners freely made perfectly holy and
righteous in his sight. This knitteth his presence with us, yet more strongly;
for the righteous Lord loves the righteous, especially, such as are not
imaginarily, but (reipsa) in very deed made righteous with so precious a
righteousness, as is his own sons righteousness; may we not then boldly
say, That God is on our side? But says the Apostle, seeing Romans ^.
God by this Justification is on our side, who can be against us? being now
made righteous, will he forsake Iusti^icatuses and d^s^ret t^? qui justificat
im^^um re^inqu^t ^ium? Aug.
thee? will he which of unrighteous, made thee righteous, now leave and forsake
thee, being righteous? Surely the righteous man (not righteous before God by
his sanctification, which out of Justification, is as a menstruous cloth, but
freely made righteous with this righteousness of Christ) what of this
righteteous man? He will not be afraid of any evil hearing or tidings, for his
heart is fired (that is Christ's blood has made him perfectly righteous) and
believes in the Lord (that he does love him and protect him, and make all
things to work together for the best unto him) Psalm. 112. 7. I might instance,
not in the examples of Abraham, Psalm, 112. 7.
or of David, so mightily delivered from Saul, nor of Daniel delivered from the
Lions, nor of the three Children of Israel cast into the hot fiery Oven, and
such like ancient examples, whereof the eleventh to the Hebrews, is a
sufficient Catologue: but I may instance in two notable Examples of our time:
As,

First, for reverence sake of Queen Elizabeth, of ever-renowned memory; who
setting forth the Article of Free Justification, to be learned of her people,
as the first and chiefest Article of their salvation, testifying thereby her
own safety, and the safety of the whole Land, and people to consist therein;
how safe was she preserved from a number of most dangerous Treasons? and how
courageously and invincibly did she stand against all her enemies round about
her? The other Example, is that notable Example raised up of God, to produce
this Doctrine into the clear light from the darkness of Popery, under which it
had a long time been hid, even Luther, who going up to the Luthers Acts and
Mo^um. in vita Latheri.
Counsel at Worms to maintain the same, when it was told him that the
multitude of his enemies would surely oppress and burn him, and therefore
counseled him not to go up: His answer was, that he was resolved The
invincible courage of Luther.
since he was sent for, to enter Worms in the name of our Lord Jesus Christ,
although he knew there were so many Devils to resist him, as there are Tiles to
cover the Houses at Worms: and so courageously Luthers enemies.
standing against all his enemies, which were almost the whole world, both of
high and low degree, he went away safely, more than Conqueror against them
all. Therefore by his own experience, thus he teaches us: A troubled
conscience feeling sin, flies from God, I uth^ inserm. loh. 14. 1.
neither can it abide to commit it self unto him: But they that are justified
by the word of Christ, of whom Christ said, Now are you clean, through the word
which I have spoken unto you, Ioh. 15. 3. yea, and clean every whit, Ioh 15. 3.
Ioh. 13. 10. do not any more contemn the Father, I^h. 13. 10.
neither fly him, as the Israelites did; but stand before him, as Moses did,
and are enlightened with Divine truth, that they may know the power of God, and
mercy of the Father: Hereupon comes trust and confidence in him, hereby we
know that we receive all things at his hands; (and that our times are in his
hands, Psalm. 31. 15.) and look for all as well spiritual, as corporal Psalm.
31. 15.
things from him. Reason (at the least contrary appearance) cannot attain unto
them; for it endeavors to obtain God by her own strength and holiness: But
that endeavor is vain: Wherefore, when it is not able to come to the
knowledge of God by its own strength; it utterly denies God, and says, that
there is no God. After when it sees uncleanness in its works, it despaireth
and is in most great distress; but when we are justified by foolish
preaching, we come to the knowledge of God the Father, before whom our hearts
hereby condemn us not, and then have we boldness toward God, 1 Ioh. 3. 21.
But ^ Ioh. 3. 21.
where this faith (that we are freely made righteous) is not, there can be
nothing but fear, trembling, horror and sadness, as often as either such
remember God, or hear him named; yea, a secret hatred and enmity of God
remains in such hearts; or else at the most, a secret, slavish flattery
toward him, as it is said in the Psalm of hypocrites, thy flatter him Psalm.
78. 36.
with their mouth. The cause whereof, is, for that the heart not seeing it
self, by Justification, made righteous, finds it self defiled with sins,
whereby it doubts not, but that it has deserved the dispeasure of God, and
that sins cannot but be hated of God, which is just: hence arises terrors,
fear, and distrust, whereby the soul is far from that rejoicing, and
joyful boldness, that is, in heart: whereby that is verified, which Solomon
says, The Prove. 28. 1.
ungodly flies when no man persueth him: but the righteous are bold as a Lion.

Wherefore sinners must first be showed how they may be delivered from their
sins, and made righteous; which when they have obtained, then they begin to
rejoice in the Lord: and being delivered from remorse of conscience, they are
full of boldness, trust and confidence; whereupon the Prophet says, Be glad
O ye righteous and rejoice in the Lord: but herein let him not begin at his
own works and righteousness, as the deceitful Papists teach, but remember
that being made righteous by faith, we have peace toward God, through our Lord
Jesus Christ: Romans 5. 1. Whereby Romans 5. ^
we commit our selves wholly to God, casting all our care upon him, and do
stand with a strong and bold confidence, feeling nothing but a joyful, quiet,
and omnipotent trust in God, and in his favor; which does so embolden the
heart of the true Believer, that trusting to have God on his side, he is not
afraid to oppose himself alone against all creatures, Being persuaded, that
neither death, nor life, nor Angels, nor Principalities, nor Powers, nor things
present, nor things to come, nor any creature, can separate him from the love
of God, which is in Christ Jesus, Romans 8. 38. 39. Thus the word of Christ by
which we are now clean, Ioh. 15. 3. Romans 8. 38, 39.
that is, which justifies us, by the righteousness of Ioh. 15. 3.
Christ is the only thing which brings us to the Luth. Sermon. in Ioh. 14.
Father.

And as the joyful knowledge of Justification does Justification enlarges the
heart toward our neighbors.
thus enlarge the heart to Godward; so does it also enlarge the heart with
true love, and willing, and ready practice, doing of all duties of love to
man-ward; not drawn thereto with the terrors of the Law, or hireling-like
with respect of our own profit, but cheerfully and freely: For when I believe
this undoubtedly, Luth. sermon. of nativity of Christ.
that Christ's blood and righteousness have freely made me perfectly holy and
righteous, so enriching me with all the riches of Christ, bestowing upon me
whatsoever he has, whereby I want nothing, I burst forth and say, If God show
unto me so great benefits and favor in his beloved Son, that he suffers
him to bestow all things upon me, I also will do the like again, and bestow
all things, whereby I may do good to my neighbors, and the members of Christ:
and so I do not mount with my body up into heaven, but I turn my eyes to men,
and go thither where my neighbor is oppressed with adversity, poverty,
sickness, sin, or error, and I help him wherein soever I True good wor^s
indeed.
am able. Thus do thou whosoever thou art, which mindest to do true good
works, as thou would have it done to thy self, if thou were troubled with
poverty; so do thou to thy neighbor being poor. Again, if thy neighbor be
a sinner, and thou see it; but thou thy self art (justified) without sin, by
having in Christ a holy Nativity, go preach unto him, whereby he also may be
delivered; but thou must do all these things freely in every respect, as
Christ has done for thee, without all works, or deserts of pure grace, love,
and mercy: such works see thou do, if thou will do good and Christian works
indeed.

But he that does not firmly trust in this divine Idem in sermon of salvation
by grace without works.
bounty, cannot but be remiss and slow to do well to his neighbor; and so
witness the faintness and weakness of faith, which is the fountain of all
duties and benefits: As contrariwise, the stronger faith, and greater insight
into the worth and excellency of Christ's benefits, that one is endued withal,
so much more dutifully, and with ready mind, he endeavors to do good unto
his neighbors. And thus in these two, faith and love, all, both doctrine and
life worthy Faith and love do comprehend all.
of Christ, do consist; whereby man is made, as it were, a mean between God
and his neighbor, that he may receive from God above, and give unto his
neighbor beneath; and be, as it were, a conduit-pipe through which the divine
goodness does continually flow unto his neighbors. And such men are like unto
God, which in Christ receive of God whatsoever he has; and do again, by
their good deeds, declare themselves, as it were, the Gods of others, and
fulfill the prophecy of the Prophet, Psalm. 82. I have Psalm. 82.
said, ye are gods, and ye all are the children of the most high. We are
children of the most high by being righteous by faith, whereby, of nothing, we
are made the heirs of God; and we are Gods by love, which Idem in Gal. 2. 3.
The right sound doctrine ^* of works.
makes us beneficial to others. Thus never any taught more sound and godly
doctrine, as touching good works, than we do at this day. For if a man feel
in his heart a sweetness in this promise of God, That the blood of Jesus
Christ, the Son of God, does make him clean from all sin, and so is
undoubtedly persuaded that he is of the company of them, whom Christ has made
to himself a glorious Church, not having spot, or wrinkle of sin, or any
such thing, he is assuredly such a^one, and Christ's spouse indeed; for as we
believe, so comes it unto us. Then will such a man by and Luther In sermon of
salvation by Christ alone.
by have regard of his neighbor, and help him as his brother, care for him,
give unto him, lend unto him, comfort him; briefly do no otherwise unto him,
than he desires to be done unto himself: and all this proceeds from hence:
for that the bountifulness and goodness of Christ has replenished his heart
with sweetness and love, that it is a pleasure and joy unto him to do good
unto his neighbor: yea, and he is The meek and loving disposition of a true
Christian.
grieved, if there be none toward whom he may be serviceable.

And besides all this, he is tractable, and lowly toward all men: he does not
esteem the temporal pleasure and pride of life, he judges no man, he
defameth no man, he interprets all things in the better part: when he sees
that the matter goes not well with his neighbor, and that he faints in
faith, waxes cold in love, and that his life is not on every Luther In sermon.
of lost sheep.
side approveable, he prays for him, and is sore grieved if any commit any
thing against God and his neighbor. In sum, the root and sap are sound; for
they are in a flourishing Vine, to wit, Christ; and therefore such fruits come
forth. But where the true and joyful knowledge of being righteous by faith is
not, there such fruits are always wanting.

Thus where the Gospel is truly in the heart, it makes Ibid.
a man to be such a one, as does not look while the Radinesse to do good.
Law comes; but is so full of joy in Christ, that he is with speed carried
unto good works, Tit. 2. 14. Tit. 2. 14.
doing well to all men, as much as he is able, and that of his own accord,
before the Law come into his mind. Moreover he bestows, both body and life,
having no regard what he must therefore suffer: and so he is full of good
works, which voluntarily flowing, as it were, out of a continual fountain,
are derived unto many.

And all this (as I said at the beginning) is effected, Justification is like
the fire, and Sancti^ication like the heat by it.
because it is the joyful knowledge of Justification that does regenerate and
sanctify us. Justification is like the fire, so that he that is not zealous in
holiness and righteousness by Sanctification, it is to be feared, that he
never had the fire in his breast of Justification; or lets the fire go out,
by forgetting, as Peter says, that he was purged from his old sins, 2 Pet.
1. 9. And that 2 Pet. 1. 9.
the knowledge of Free Justification is that which regenerateth and sanctifies
us, Is not only manifest by the doctrine taught in the first, and sixth
Chapters to the Romans but also by the example of Nicodemus, who at the first was
neither regenerate, nor knew, nor could learn what it meant; which made him to
come unto Christ by night, being ashamed to come in the day: but after that
Christ had taught him Free Justification, by the similitude of the brazen
Serpent lifted up in the wilderness, freely healing us, Then he was a new man,
enflamed with zeal to defend Christ before the faces John 7. 50, 51, 52.
of the Rulers, even at midday, John 7. 50, 51, 52.

For Christ first makes us righteous by the knowledge of himself in the holy
Gospel, and afterward he creates a new heart in us, brings forth new
motions, and gives unto us that assurance whereby we are persuaded, that we
please the father for his sake: also he gives unto us a true judgment,
whereby we prove and try those things, which before we knew not, or else
altogether disliked. So that take a kettle of A plain comparison.
cold water which we would have to be hot, it would be a foolish part to set it
beside the fire, and then charge it to be hot, and to threat it that else it
shall be spilt; but put fire under it, then will it begin to be warm; but if
it grow not hot enough, put more fire under; and if there lie a green stick or
block that keeps away the heat, yet put under more fire, and then it will
burn up the block, and make the water thoroughly hot. So our soul is this
block, our affections are like to water, as cold to God as may be: but if we
call unto people for Sanctification, zeal, and works, the fruits of the same,
only with legal terrors, not putting under the fire of Justification, we
shall either but little move them, or else, with a constrained sanctity, make
them worse hypocrites, twofold more the children of hell, than they were
before, Mat. 23. 15. but if we put under the Matthew. 23. 15.
fire of Christ's love, in freely and gloriously justifying us, this burns up
all lets, and makes us hot indeed, and zealous to good works, Tit. 2. 14. Tit.
2. 14.


Again, how inseparably Justification, as the cause, Justification and
Sanctification inseparable.
and Sanctification as the effect, go both together, may be represented by
this Similitude. Take a piece of carrion, as big as the top of ones finger,
that smells very foul, and wrap it up in a great piece of musk; the musk not
only takes away the foul sent from men's nostrills, smelling then nothing but
musk; but also causes the carrion it self, by little and little, being
overcome of the more forceable cause, to lose its own bad sent, and begin to
smell sweet of the musk: So we being wrapped, by the mighty power of Gods
imputation, in the righteousness of Christ, it does not only take away the
stink of sin, Joel 2. 20. from the I^e^ 2. 20.
no strils of God but also makes us, by little and little, to leave this
corruption, and sanctifies us more and more to all holiness of conversation.
So that our works do not purify us; but when, as before, we are pure,
justified, and saved, we work those things, which may bring profit to our
neighbor, and honor to God.

This joyful knowledge of Justification is that Freeing truth.
freeing truth, whereof Christ spoke, saying, you shall know the truth, and the
truth shall make you free, John 8. 32.
John 8. 32. Call. 5. 1.


For by the Law is the knowledge of sin; by faith is the obtaining of the grace
(of Justification) is the healing of the fault of sin: by the healing of the
soul is the freedom of will: by the freedom of the will is the love of
righteousness: by the love of righteousness is the doing of the Law. All
these things which I have knit thus together, have their testimonies in
Scripture. The Law says, thou shall not lust; faith says, heal my soul, for
I have sinned against thee: The grace of Justification says, Behold thou art
made whole, sin no more, lest a worse thing come unto thee; and thou have
healed me: freedom of will says, I will sacrifice a free will offering unto
thee: the love of righteousness says, The Law of thy mouth is dearer unto me,
than thousands of gold and Psalm. 119.
silver: the doing of the Law says, I have sworn, and am steadfastly purposed
to keep thy righteous Laws. How Iustificatus per si^lem qu m^do ^otest m^
ju^^e de^nceps operari?
can a man then, being justifed (that is, made just and righteous) by faith,
choose but work justly and righteously?

This is the liberty wherein Paul also testifies we are made free, saying,
Stand fast in the liberty wherein Christ has made us free, Gal. 5. 1. He
speaks not of Gal. 5. 1.
a civil liberty, much less of a carnal and fleshly liberty, Luther ibid.
whereby people of the world will do what The true Christian liberty.
they list; but of a spiritual and divine liberty reigning in the conscience;
there it rests, and goes no further: and it is a freedom from the Law, sin,
the dispeasure of God, death, hell, and damnation. Yea this Christian liberty
swalloweth up at once, and takes quite away the whole heap of evils, the Law,
sin, death, Gods displeasure, and briefly the serpent himself, with his head
and whose power; and in the stead thereof it places righteousness, peace,
everlasting life, and all goodness. Now since enemies are overcome, and we be
reconciled unto God by the death of his Son, it is certain, that we are
righteous before God, and whatsoever we do pleases A happy change.
him: by which means the schoolmaster-like bondage and terrors of the Law are
changed into the liberty of the conscience and consolation, or joyful news of
the Gospel, revealing the righteousness of Christ, wherewith we are both
justified and quickened. Yea this joyful knowledge of Justification is the
means whereby we put on Christ, two ways, according to Christ put on two
ways Luther in Gal. 3. 27.
the Law, and according to the Gospel: according to the Law, as it is said,
Romans 13. Put ye on the Lord Jesus Christ; that is, follow the examples and
virtues Romans 13.
of Christ, do that which he did, and suffer that which he suffered; as Peter
says, Christ has suffered for us, 1 Pet 2. 21.
leaving us an example, that we should follow his steps. But the putting on of
Christ according to the Gospel, A new creation.
consists not in imitation, but in a new birth, and a new creation. First to
Godward by putting on, by 1 toward God
faith, Christ's innocence, his righteousness, his wisdom, his power, his
saving-health, his life, and his spirit. Thus is Adams old coat cast off and
abolished before God, and we apparelled with remission of sins, righteousness,
peace, consolation, joy of the spirit, salvation and life. Then besides this
renewing by the holy Ghost to this heavenly righteousness and life, 2 to
men-ward
there arises in them also, by this new birth, to menward, a new light, and a
new flame: there arise in them new and holy affections, as the fear of God,
true says, assured hope, etc. There begins in them also a new will: And
this is to put on Christ truly, and according to the Gospel.

Now when we have first, by faith, inwardly put on Christ, as a Robe of
righteousness and salvation, then A threefold respect of a Christian.
do we put him on outwardly, as the apparel of example and imitation.

Thus must every true Christian be considered in a threefold respect: first,
what he is with God, or before God: secondly, what he is with himself, or to
his feeling: and thirdly, what he is to his neighbor. First with God, or
before God; he is the Woman clothed with the Sun, that is, shining perfectly
holy and righteous, in the sight of God; and every way full and complete,
wanting nothing, by reason of Justification. Secondly, with himself, and to
his own sense and feeling,

Again, it is the joyful knowledge of Justification, Luth. in G^^. 3. 10.
which makes a man of a co^rupt, bad Tree, to become a good ^ree; first
perfectly good to the eyes of God by Justification: and so bringing forth the
good fruit, In Gal. 2. 18.
to the eyes of men, of Sanctification. For Christians are not made righteous,
in doing righteous things: but being first freely made righteous by faith in
Christ, then they do righteous things. So that good works ought to be done,
not as the cause, but as the fruits of o^e freely made righteous: and when we
are made righteous, then we cannot but do them; for after that a man is once
justified, and possesses Christ by faith, and knows that he is
Righteousness and Life, doubtless he will not be idle, But as a good tree he
will bring forth good fruit: for the believing man, that is, the justified man,
has the holy Ghost given him (as it is showed before) to dwell in him: but
where the holy Ghost dwells, he will not suffer a man to be idle, but
stirs him up to all exercise of piety, and godliness; then I do indeed
good works, I love God, I pray and give thanks to him* I exercise charity
toward my neighbor. Therefore weighty is that saying of Christ, either make
the Tree good, and the fruit Matt. 12. ^3. The ^i^^ of the M^nist^^^.
good: or else make the Tree evil, and the fruit evil. That is, let the
Ministers chief aim be to fill the peoples hearts with joy, that they are
freely made perfectly good Trees in the sight of God by Justification; and the
people be sure that they are, first, such in the sight of God indeed, or else
they shall be sure to have but little good fruit by Sanctification: some
Homil. o^^ A^nes* de^^.
choack-peares peradventure, that may look fair without, but be all rotten
within.

Again, the joyful knowledge of Justification, is the receiving of the most
great and precious promises, by which we are made partakers of the Divine
nature. 2 Peter 1. 4. the very forgetfulness of which precious 2 Pet. 1. 4.
promise, namely, that we are purged or made clean from our old sins is (as
Peter says) the cause 8. 9.
of all idle, unfruitful, and blind professing of the Gospel of Christ, 2 Pet.
1. 8, 9. for this joyful and Justification is as the b^an^^^ of ^^e Sunn^.
glorious benefit of Justification, being the bright beams Solis justitiae, of
the Sun of righteousness, Justification i^ a^ the beams o^ the Sun.
Christ Jesus, and shining into our dark hearts, does sanctify and regenerate
us to the Image of God again: even as the Sun beams shining upon silver, or
upon a clear looking-glass, do cause the very silver or glass it self to
cast forth some glimmering beams; and this Paul testifies, saying, That the
ministration of righteousness, does so exceed in glory, that we beholding as
in a mirror, or looking-glass, This glory of God with open face, are changed
into the same Image from glory to glory, as by the spirit of the Lord.
Whereupon S. John directly says thus: My little children let no man 1 Ioh. 3.
7.
deceive you: he that does righteousness (actively) that is, does cast forth
the beams of Sanctification, is righteous (passively) that is, justified, with
Christ's righteousness, as the Sun of righteousness Christ Jesus (who
shines upon him with his beams of Justification) is righteous, 1 Ioh. 3. 7.
But if the Sun of righteousness be so clouded from us, that the beams of
Justification which exceed in glory, be by want of preaching, or receiving it
stopped, that it shines not into our dark hearts, then our souls can return
back again no beams of Sanctification.

Thus we see how this joyful knowledge of Justification, the worth and glory
of the same being discerned, seen and enjoyed with a true and right faith,
makes both Pastors and people to shine forth with bright shining beams of
great glorifying of God.

And thus also we put a difference between a counterfeit Difference between a
true and conterfeit faith.
faith, and a true faith; the counterfeit faith, is that which hears of God,
of Christ, and of all the mysteries of his incarnation, and our redemption,
which also apprehends and bears away, those things which it hears; yea,
and can talk goodly thereof: and yet there remains nothing else in them, but
ignorance of the worth and excellency of Christ's benefits; yea, none are so
blind as such, as God testifies by his Prophet, saying, Who so blind as my
servant? Esaias 42. 19. 20. whereby there remains nothing else Esaias 42. 19, 20.
in the heart, but naked opinion, and a bare sound of the Gospel, for it
neither renews or changes the heart; it makes not a new man; but leaves
him in Id. in Gal. 5. 13.
the vanity of his former opinion and conversation. And this is a very
pernicious faith; the moral Philosopher is much better than the hypocrite
having such a faith; these understand the Doctrine of faith carnally, Grace
turned into wantonness.
and draw the liberty of the spirit, into the liberty of the flesh: this may
we see in all kinds of life, as well of the high as of the low; all boast
themselves to be Professors of the Gospel, and all brag of Christian liberty,
and yet serving their own lusts, they give themselves to covetousness,
pleasures, pride, envy and such other vices; no man does his duty faithfully;
no man charitably serves the necessity of his brother: the grief hereof
makes me sometime so impatient, that many times I wish such Swine, which
tread precious pearls under their feet, were yet still People of Gomorrah not
governed by the Gospel of peace.
remaining under the tyranny of the Pope: For it is impossible that this
people of Gomorrah should be governed by the Gospel of peace. But we tell such
careless contemners, (although they believe us not, but laugh us to scorn)
that if they use their bodies and their goods after their own lusts (as indeed
they do; for they neither help the poor, nor lend to the needy, but beguile
their brethren in bargianing, snatching, and scraping unto themselves, by hook
and by crook, whatsoever they can get) we tell them I say, that they be not
free, brag they never so much of their liberty; neither are they in Mount-Zion
that Celestial Heb. 12. Romans 14. 17. Revel. 22. 15.
Jerusalem, Heb. 12. the Kingdom of heaven, Romans 14. 17. but without, Revel.
22. 15. and have lost Christ and Christian liberty, are become bondslaves of
the Devil, and are seven times worse under the name of Christian liberty, than
they were before, under the tyranny of the Pope; for the devil which was
driven out of them, has taken unto himself seven other fiends, worse than
himself, and is returned into them again: Therefore the end of these men is
worse than the beginning, because they are worse Idolaters under the name of
Christ, than they were before under but the Pope.

But to conclude, let every one of us remember that saying of S. Paul, that
Circumcision, that is, all outward form of true religion, and of the true
worship of God, (avails nothing, nor uncircumcision) that is all outward
wisdom, polity, and excellency whatsoever avails nothing before God, but
faith that makes a new creature. First new, before God by Justification.
Secondly, new to ones own self, by Sanctification. And thirdly, new to our
neighbors, by love out of a pure heart.

Thus does a Christian first fulfill and accomplish the Luth, in Gal. 5. 23.
The Law two ways fulfilled.
Law inwardly by faith (for Christ is the perfection and fulfilling of the Law
unto righteousness to all that do believe, Romans 10. 4.) and then outwardly by
works: thus is he justified in heaven and earth: the Gospel justifies him in
heaven, and the Law on earth, Romans 10. 4.
and thus is this new creature created unto the Image of God in righteousness
and true holiness, which inwardly is perfectly righteous in the sight of God,
with an heavenly righteousness by Justification, and outwardly is holy and
clean in the flesh by Sanctification: And as many as walk according to this
rule, peace shall be upon ^al, 6. 16.
them, and mercy as upon the Israel of God, Gal. 6. 16.

FINIS.
Free Justification was first enjoined to be diligently taught for the
Reformation of the Church, by King Henry the eighth, but was by King Edward the
sixth, and Queen Elizabeth, principally established by Parliament; and singled
out from all the rest of the established Articles of Religion; and reduced into
Sermons and Homilies, to be (after the Peoples sight of their lost estate, and
woeful misery by sin,) principally taught, and chiefly known, and understood
of all the Subjects and Commons of the Land, for these four causes especially.
FIrst, because it is the only immediate cause, and means of our peace with
God; For, Being justified by faith, we have peace with God, Romans 5. 1. and our
assurance of free salvation by Jesus Christ; and therefore is called the
Justification of life, Romans 5. 18. For, Whom God justifies, them he also
glorifieth, Romans 8. 30.

Secondly, because it is the ordinance of God, and cause (contrary to the
judgment of Popish and Carnal Reason) that powerfully causes people to leave
their sins, and to live a true sanctified and godly life, Titus 2. 11. to 15.
Romans 5, and 6. Chapters.

Thirdly, because it is the chiefest cause and means, to discover and
suppress the Romish Antichrist, Popery, Arminians, Brownists, Anabaptists,
Familists, and all other Superstitions, Sects, Errors, and Schisms, out of the
Land; and to establish unity, peace, and concord in matters of Religion, and of
assurance of free salvation; and makes every man to keep in a lawful
vocation, and to do it profitably in love, Galat. 5. 13.

Fourthly, to direct Ministers, (...), to go with a right foot to the truth of
the Gospel, Galat. 2. 14. in sound preaching, and pure declaring of the Word of
God, by true faith of Free Justification; Because (says the established
Doctrine of our Church) sincere Preachers ever were, and ever shall be but a
few; and their preaching of Gods Word (most sincere in the beginning) by
process of time waxes less and less pure, and after is corrupt, and last of
all, quite laid down, and left off; because Free Justification is a Doctrine
hardly learned in a Church, and soon lost again, Galat. 1. 6. and yet is the
true strength, happiness, and safety of the whole Land, Esaias 52. 1. to 6.

Hereupon the fifth part of the Sermon against disobedience, and rebellion,
established by Queen Elizabeth, teaches the Commons, that such Bishops, or
Ecclesiastical persons, as by pride, and ambitious rule, do by terms of
Error, Schism, or Heresy, hinder this maine light of Gods Word from the
people, and the chiefest Traitors in the Land; And the sixth and last part
largely teaches, that such Subjects, and Commons to whom, through ignorance of
Gods Word, this light of righteousness, and Sun of understanding does not
shine, although they may brag, as did sometimes the Jewish Clergy, and
people, that they cannot lack knowledge, yet are such, by the blind dead
faith, Traitors to God, Traitors to their King, Traitors to their own souls
and bodies, and Traitors to the whole Land and Country.

And hereupon the testimony of the learned Protestant Writers is most true:
saying, Sicut sola fide in Christum, veram Justitiam and Salutem consequrmur;
it a nihil difficilius, quam hoc, hominibus persuadetur, nihil Satan
(praesertim candidus ille Satan) aque oppugnat.

Certain fundamental Positions, or Doctrines of Religion, tending to peace,
and to the reducing of Popish Arminians, and Anabaptisticall Ministers, and
people, to the true saving faith; and to the established Protestant Doctrine of
the Church of England, by the Godly authority, and public consent of
Parliament, to be faithfully taught, and diligently observed, and kept of all
the subjects, for the quieting of their consciences, in the assurance of their
free salvation by Jesus Christ, and for the suppressing of the Romish
Antichrist in all Superstitions, Errors, Sects, and Schisms, for the beating
down of sin, and all vitio^snesse of life out of the Land (for the maintaining,
and keeping of peace and unity in the matters of Religion, by the pure
preaching of the Law, and of the Gospel) as follows in these five Points, or
Positions.
FIrst, the horrible filthiness of sin is such to Gods infinite pure and
righteous Nature, and so defiles a man before God, Mark. 7. 20. that God cannot
but abho^^e, ^urse, and de^est the creature that has any sin in his sight,
as these and such like Scriptures teach, Deuteronomy. 27. 26. 2 Pet. 2. 4. Romans 5. 12.
Hab. 1. 13. Job 15. 15. 16. And this true meaning of the Law, and right
understanding thereof, this revealing the infinite, pure, and righteous Nature
of God, and the horrible filthiness of sin, is to be diligently taught, and
continually preached of all faithful Ministers in every mixed Congregation,
Esaias 58. 1. 2.

Secondly, that the best good works of the most sanctified children of God, as
they (though moved thereunto by the holy Ghost) do them, are sin, because of
their original corruption, and by breaking the tenth Commandment in them; and
thereby they are so slain, that is, truly humbled, by feeling themselves, and
all their best works to be so shut up under sin, that they daily bewail that
they can perform no obedience, nor do any good work before God in any of all
his Commandments, as these and such like Scriptures teach, Romans 7. 9, 10, 11,
12, 13, 14, 18. 24. Galat. 3. 22. Romans 4, 5. Phil. 3. 8. 4. Esaias 64. 6.

Thirdly, that the only remedy to heal this our woeful misery by sin (thus
seen and felt to hang fast upon us in this life) this only remedy is Free
Justification, whereby God by the power of his sons perfect righteousness,
Esaias 61. 10. that all our sins being utterly abolished, not out of us, 1 John
1. 8. 10. that there may be place for faith, Heb. 11. 1. Romans 4. 18, 19, 20. to
25. but yet truly abolished form before God, or out of Gods sight, Colos. 1.
22. We and all our works are of unjust made just before God; that is, so
perfectly and righteous from all spot of sin in the sight of God freely, that
(as the express Word of God teaches, and the Protestant Writers abundantly
testify) God does not, and, by reason of his actual power, can see no sin
in his justified children, freely (I say) by faith only, without works, and
our perfect workings. And I say by faith only without works, because faith
only sees this, and faith only enjoyes this: and thus we and all our works,
both natural works, civil works, or moral works, and religious works,
are perfectly pure and clean in Gods sight, Acts 15. 8, 9. Titus 1. 15. and
do fully please, satisfy, and content God, because we are fulfillers of the
whole Law of God in his fight, for the righteousness of the Law is thus freely
fulfilled in us, Romans 8. 4. Thus by Christ's stripes we are healed, Esaias 53. 5.
thus God, forgiving all our sins, is ever well pleased, and at perfect peace
with us; for, being justified by faith, we have peace with God, Romans 5. 1. and
are freely made and adopted the sons, and the daughters of the living God, Romans
9. 26. And thus are truly blessed; Romans 4. 6. for, As many as are of faith, of
Free Justification, are blessed with faithful Abraham, Galat. 3. 8, 9. and
shall be certainly glorified; for whom God justifies, them also he
glorifieth, Romans 8. 30. And thus we see how perfectly by Christ's stripes we are
healed, Esaias 53. 5. And all this Protestant Doctrine of Free Justification, and
these two parts of the same, are clearly and abundantly taught, by these and
such like Scriptures, Esaias 43. 25. Esaias 44. 22. 23. John 1. 29. Heb. 1. 3. Heb.
9. 13. 14. 26. 1 John 1. 7. Revel. 1, 5, 6. Dan. 9. 24. Romans 3. 21, 22. Ephesians.
5. 26, 27. Romans 5. 17, 18, 19, 21. Revel. 3. 18. Colos. 1. 22, 23. Romans 8. 4.
Colos. 2. 10. Heb. 10. 14. Romans 9. 30. Esaias 61. 10. Phil. 3. 8, 9. Tit. 1. 15.
Heb. 11. 4.

Fourthly, that this true faith of Free Justification (contrary to the
judgment of Popish and carnal reason) unseparably brings the holy Ghost to
dwell in people, Galat. 3. 2. Acts 10. 44. Acts 13. 38, 39. 52. which holy
Ghost infallibly inflames our hearts with true love, Galat. 5. 6. and makes the
true believers in right zeal of Gods glory, and in true thankfulness, to
break off from sin, and to mortify, by true repentance, their former profane
life, and ungodly conversation, and brings forth a declarative obedience,
righteousness, and readiness to every good work, now made good works indeed
freely, by Free Justification; and so brings forth a sincere, and though an
unperfect, yet a free and cheerful walking in, and keeping of all Gods will
and Commandments, declaratively to manward, which is true sanctification. And
thus is the Law not destroyed by Free Justification, but established, Romans 3.
21. and written in the hearts of true believers, and they are fulfillers and
keepers of the Law, two manner of ways; first, perfectly making their hearts
perfectly righteous, freely, to the full content and satisfying of God by faith
(as it was said before) of Free Justification, as these and such like
Scriptures teach, Romans 10. 4, 5, 6, 10. Acts 15. 8, 9. Heb 8. 10. Secondly, it
is written in their hearts, and they are fulfillers and keepers of the Law
inchoatively, actively, and declaratively to manward by love and true
sanctification, as these Scriptures teach, Galat. 5. 13, 14. Romans 13. 8, 9, 10.
Yea, this true faith of Free Justification, deeply, truly, and soundly
learned, is a thing of perfect virtue, and wonderful operation, strength, and
power to bring forth all good motions inwardly, and all good works out wardly,
or else it is not the true lively justifying faith, but the blind dead faith,
that leaves men in sin, death, and double damnation; as these and such like
Scriptures teach, Romans 5. and 6. whole Chapters teach, Titus 2. 11. to 15. 1
John 3. 3. to 10. Ephesians. 2. 10. Ephesians. 4, 5, 6, whole Chapters, Romans 12, 13,
14, 15, whole Chapters, James 2. 14. 17. to 26. Matthew. 5. 16. 2 Pet. 1. 9.

5. That all such Ministers as do not diligently teach, and cause people
diligently to observe and keep this established true Protestant doctrine, but
do deny, sophisticate, and wrangle against the same, must needs be like the
false brethren amongst the Galathians, in the dead faith, doting about
questions, and making controversies about the Law and works, and cannot but
seduce the people from Christ; that is, from the simplicity of the faith that
is in Christ Jesus, to depend and hang for assurance of their salvation upon
the Law and works, and cannot but be troublers of the Church, Gal. 1. 7. and of
peoples consciences, distracting them into Popery, Arminianisme, Anabaptisme,
Familisme, Brownisme, and all manner of Sects and Schisms, about works: because
by a carnal understanding of Free justification, they cannot but rest in the
light of reason, moral virtues, and religion of nature described Romans 2. 14,
15. varnished and deceitfully gilt over with the titles of Grace, Graces, and
Regeneration, Popishly and falsely understood, and other phrases of the Gospel:
and being herein carried with a blind, legal zeal, that they must and can
keep, by their endeavors, the law of God, the blind zealous multitude do bear
them record, and give them the applause that they have the zeal of God, but it
is without knowledge; not but that they seem to have all knowledge, save only
that they want the right knowledge, and true faith of Free justification:
Because being ignorant of the righteousness of God, namely how complete it
makes us before God, wanting nothing, Colos. 2. 10. they and their applauding
Disciples cannot choose but got about to stablish and set up the Golden Calfe of
their own d^ng-righteousnesse, Phil. 3. 8, 4. and have not submitted
themselves to rest and rejoice only in the righteousness of God, Romans 10. 23.
whereby they being thus blind Leaders of the blind, both Preachers and
applauders do fall into the ditch of destruction, Matthew. 15. 14. And thus are
such Ministers the false Ministers of Satan, and teach a Satanicall
righteousness and good works, as both are described 2 Cor. 11. 13, 14, 15. and
yet transform themselves as if they were the true Ministers of Christ; and
therefore do stand accursed and damned by the Holy Ghost, and excommunicated
by Saint Paul, Gal. 1. 8, 9. until they repent of their erroneous manner of
teaching: And thus are they those grievous wolves that should stand up in the
allowed Ministry, teaching not false things, but (...), Preposterous things, or
things out of order, setting the Cart before the Horse; that is, calling for
works and a good life, before people have the right knowledge, joyful faith,
and true assurance of their full and perfect Justification, and free salvation
by Jesus Christ; whereby good words, and good works, and good life may follow,
as the good fruit of their thankful hearts for the same; and thereby do not
spare, but make havocke of the flock of Christ, Act. 20. 29, 30 Because
Popishly, and carnally, and ignorantly thinking that Free Justification is soon
and easily learned, and blasphemously conceiving that it opens the gate to all
looseness of life, they drown in silence Christ, their Free Justification,
destroy the true faith of hanging only upon the spiritual and invisible
benefits and riches of Christ, mar true sanctification, and superstitiously
carry way the blind zealous multitude of Professors in the fools Paradise of a
false, bastard, Pharisaicall, and legal sanctification, Phil. 3, 6. Act. 22.
3. and vain glory and opinion of their good works and well doings, into hell
and eternal destruction: And thus in this blind zealous dead faith are
foursold Traitors; namely, Traitors to Christ and his Gospel; Traitors to
his Church and Children; disobedient Traitors to their King and whole Country
that they live in; and lamentable Traitors to their own souls and bodies;
seeming the greatest friends to all these, and yet betraying all these with a
Judas his kiss into the wrath of God and his jealous displeasure, into most
dangerous ruin and fearful destruction, and are therefore openly to b^ (...)
the face of the whole congregation, for not going with a right face to the
truth of the Gospel, far more sharply than Peter was, Gal. 2. 11* 14. Because
such do sin against souls far more grievously. All which these and such like
Scriptures plainly teach: 2 Pet. 2. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, Ier. 23. 2 Cor. 11. 13,
14, 15. 2 Timothy 3. 1. to ^. 1 Timothy 7. Rev. 3. 1, 2, 3. Gal. 1. 6, 7 and 2. 4, 5,
11. and 5. 7, 8, 9, 10, 12. Esaias 29. 9, 14. and 42. 18, 19. Ezekiel. 14. 9, 10.

But here mark and observe for the distinguishing of these five points:
FIrst, that the third point is of highest esteem in the hearts and affections
of the truly faithful, and is most earnestly followed after of true Protestant
and right saved Christians, as it is manifest Phil. 3. 8, 9, 12, 13, 14, 15,
16. Romans 9. 30.

Secondly, That the fourth point is of highest esteem in the hearts and
affections of them that are yet in the light of reason and religion of nature,
described Romans 2. 14, 15. and thereby preposterously and most eagerly followed
after of blind zealous hypocrites and work-mongers, whereby they run into the
manifold inconveniences and dangers of the fifth point, Romans 10. 2, 3. Phil. 3.
6. Romans 4. 31, 32, 33.

Summa summae, the short and long, and upshot of all is this:
Remember that God will not be dallied or trifled withal, in the blood, death,
and dear-bought righteousness of his only Son, Ioh. 3. 16. freely and
perfectly justifying, and so freely saving us, as the wretched multitude of
Ministers and of people in the dead faith, both on the left hand and on the
right hand, Prove. 4. 27. do dally and trifle with God, contrary to those
Scriptures, Heb. 12. 25. to verse. 29. Matthew. 22 11. 12. 13. and therefore let
us search and look diligently into these five points, and keep them faithfully,
and then we are certainly saved. Pro. 4. 10, 11, 12, 13. Mar. 16. 15, 16. 2
Cor. 11. 2, 3. therefore I say again, remember Pro. 4. 25. 26. 27.

Io. Eaton.

THese four foregoing Reasons, why the Doctrine of Free Justification, is by
Parliament chiefly enjoined to be preached in this Land; as also the five
positions, were gathered by the said JOHN EATON Preacher of Wickham-Market in
Suffolk; and now faithfully set forth according to his original copy.

TO. LANCASTER.


