De Fastis Anglicis, SIVE CALENDARIUM SACRUM. THE Holy Calendar:

BEING A treble Series of EPIGRAMS upon all the Feasts observed BY THE Church
OF England.

To which is added the like Number of EPIGRAMS upon some other more especial
Days, which have either their footsteps in Scripture, or are more remarkable
in this KINGDOM.

Composed by Nathanael Eaton Doctor of Philosophy, and Medicine, and Vicar of
BishopsCastle in the County of SALOP.

LONDON, Printed by H L. and are to be sold at Kings College in Puddledock.
1661.

To the Sacred Majesty of his Dread Sovereign CHARLES the Second, by the Grace
of God King of England, Scotland, France, and Ireland, Defendor of the Faith,
etc. Nathanael Eaton Doctor of Philosophy and Medicine, and Vicar of
Bishops-Castle in the County of Salop, upon the knees of his Soul, most humbly
Dedicates himself, and these poor Fruits of his vacant hours.
Sancti ad Regem. Epig. 1.
Slain first by Pagans malice, and of late Murthred again, by the Fanatique
hate Of false-nam'd Christians: we have none to
Unto, thus twice destroyed, Great King, but the
Thou art our Earthly Savior, and alone
Must either give a Resurrection
Unto our buried names: or we must ly,
For ever dead to all Posterity.
Do it great Prince, and as three Kingdoms now
Unto thy healing Scepter justly bow;
So shall the Saints in Heaven, obliged, engage
Themselves alike unto thy Clientage.
Author ad Regem. Epig. 2.
THy Grandsires Rescew from the Powder blow;
Thy Martyred Fathers dismal overthrow:
Thine own strange Fortunes: how thou fellst, and then
Beyond all hopes regain'dst thy Throne again.
These are my Muses Theames, and unto whom
Should then Dread Liege her high flown Poems come
But to thy Sacred Self, whose House is still
The only Subject of her laboring quill.
For all sh' has writ besides, considering what
Relation now, the Saints to thee have got:
And what hereafter thou to them shall bear,
When you shall all fill up one glorious Sphere:
May in a sense, Great Prince, be said to be
Written alone upon thy House and Thee.
Author ad Regem. Epig. 3.
Well does our Church Dread Liege acknowledge thee
The great Defender of her Faith to be.
Whose pains have proved so fortunate herein,
That even seduced souls, again begin
To tread the old Paths the had wandered from, and own
Those Doctrines which before they rayl'd upon.
Thy word's now grown their Canon: and they do
Not what their Creed, but what thou guid'st them to.
The Books that want thy stamp, how pure so e're,
Are laid aside by them as not sincere:
Popish, and Damned, are the names they cast,
On all things which thy censure have not past.
But what is approved by those sweet eyes of thine,
Is entertained as Perfect and Divine.
It Is this, great King, now makes me crave thine aid,
Because I know whatever I have said
Upon this holy Subject, though it be
Such as is vouched by all Antiquity:
Yet if thy Test it do not undergo,
The partial Reader will scarce judge it so.
The Holy Calendar.
Janus ad Lectores.
COme sinful Christians look and learn of me,
To draw Religion out of Poesy.
Who knows, but what the clearer beams of day
Could not inform you, Ethnic darkness may.
My face you see a double aspect bears,
At once surveying past and future years,
The things long hence to come, my searching eyes,
And those raked up in silent dust, descryes.
Times winged self that flies all sight beside,
From me his subtle footsteps cannot hide.
Be this your rule, so shall your heedful care,
Shun future crimes, the past, your tears repair.
The Feasts of January. 2.
ON Janus first the Lord they circumcise:
The Magi's Star upon the sixth does rise;
The five and twentieth Saul converted, 's made
A tiller of that field he wast had laid;
Upon the thirtieth day the Rebel Crew,
At his own Door the Royal Martyr slew.
New years day. Epig. 1.
It Is custom Lord this day to send
A gift to every vulgar friend,
And shall I find no gift for thee,
That art the best of friends to me?
There Is nothing which my thoughts survey,
My life, my soul, the light, the day;
But they are all by gifts to me,
And shall I find no gift for thee?
Yea Lord, behold I hear conferr
My life, my soul, and whatso me're
Thy liberal hand has given to me,
Back as a New Years gift on thee.
Said I gift? ah! 't is not so,
Alas both Men and Angels know,
That all these things thy Christ has bought,
And therefore I can give thee naught.
Circumcision. Epig. 2.
It Is not a partial cleanness pleases thee,
Thou Lord requir'st a total purity,
Yet circumcision the primordive sign
And badg of this renewing grace of thine,
Notes the subjection of some sins alone,
With others it holds no proportion:
What means this Lord, it cannot be that thou
Should an imperfect righteousness allow?
That so men slay their lusts, thy zealous eyes
Will winck at all their other vanities.
Only thou would inform us that this sin
More then the rest is rooted deep within;
Runs in the veins, and cannot be withstood
With lesser grief, then we can lose our blood.
It Is a mother sin, from whose hell-gendring womb
Thousands of horrid wickednesses come.
And hence it is that thy unerring Writ
Them sinners styles, that these foul crimes commit;
As though however other men may stray,
Yet none indeed did sin but only they.
It Is the root of all sins else, kill this they die,
But nourish this, the increase and multiply.
And this is it, indeed thy wisdom meant
To note unto us by this Sacrament,
That those that have but this one sin represt,
Are in effect got free from all the rest.
Cleanse my foul heart, O Lord, from every sin,
In pledge whereof, O circumclse my skin.
De eadem ad Christum. Epig. 3.
Why circumcised they Lord thy skin?
On which there was no soil of sin.
It was we that did the crime commit,
And must thy Body smart for it?
Was ever such a Method found,
By Proxy for to cure a wound.
Was ever such a Surgeon known,
For others health, would lose his own?
'Twas thus twixt thee and us indeed,
We sinned, and thou alas did bleed,
Thou bled'st for us. O! who can hear
Thou did so, and not shed a tear?
A tear! ungrateful, could we weep
Oceans of tears, as vast and deep
As those great Seas, whose floods are roul'd
Betwixt the new found world and old:
They would not all suffice to pay
On drop of what thou bledst to day.
Epiphany. Epig. 1.
A Star this day my Savior preaches thee,
To show what lights thy Preachers ought to be
Hereafter all would shine like Stars, but oh!
How few endeavor here so bright to show?
De eadem. Epig. 2.
IN great Eclipses Stars are seen to shine,
Such an Eclipse (my God) was never as thine.
No wonder if a Star did rule the day,
The Sun disrobed of all his splendour lay.
Such shades of night his beams had overrun,
That men did need a Star to find the Sun.
De eadem. Epig. 3.
What Is this my God these Magi say,
That they have seen thy Star to day?
Have all men then their proper Stars,
On which in secret characters,
Discerned alone by skilful eyes,
Are writ all humane destinies.
Or was there some peculiar sign
Engraved upon this Star of thine?
On sight whereof these men could tell,
The birth of Judah's King so well?
Or was it a more celestial, beam,
From whence this radiant luster came?
Was it thy Spirit, and not their skill,
That did this heavenly light enstill?
Thy Spirit was present Lord we know,
But doubt whither Art concurred or no,
However if such Arts there be
That lead their followers unto thee.
And of thy Birth and Kingdom show,
Happy are they that use them so:
And happy Arts, if such there be,
That lead their followers unto thee.
Let self-wise Zealots all contemn,
And vainly fear to practice them,
Yet if I may learn thee thereby,
Lord teach me such Astrology.
St. Paul's Conversion. Epig. 1.
SEe here my soul what power thy Savior has,
He who so late destroyed, now builds the Faith.
Who would despair that this example see,
Thy God, my soul, may do as much for thee.
De eadem. Epig. 2.
GOd has forgiven thy sins, blessed Paul, we know,
Yet he with thine own rod will scourg thee though,
None did pursue the Name of Jesus more,
And for that Name, none is pursued so sore;
A fruitful soil thy rage did light upon,
Thou gav'st some death's, and suffredst many a one.
Thus God at once a pattern made in thee,
Both of his Justice, and his Clemency.
Upon the light that shone round about St. Paul, as he was traveling to
Damascus.
Act. 9. 3.
Epig. 3.
I Thought sweet Savior, thou had sent this light
Not to deprive, but to restore the sight
Of this rash Zealot, whose offense, alas!
Not malice to thy truth, but blindness was;
Yet Lord, no sooner he these beams descries,
But 'stead of being cured, he lost his eyes.
What Paradox is this my God? may then
Thy rays be looked on by no mortal men?
Must we have eyes from thee as well as light?
Else midst of day shall we be wrapped in night?
Or is it thy way of cure? unless we be
First stricken blind, can thou not make us see?
If so, our selves, Lord, at thy feet we cast,
Do what thou will, so we may see at last.
Decollatio Caroli.
Upon the Scotch Insurrection, and the black consequences thereof.
Epig. 1.
SCotos in Greek black darkness does import
With us a Scotchman; and there is reason for it,
For those black deeds that Hell would hardly own,
The Scotchmen first began to set upon.
England indeed matur'd the horrid Plot,
But the first rise thereof was from the Scot.
Upon Mat. 18. 8, 9. If thine hand or thy foot offend thee, etc.
Epig. 2.
OUr Lords mild counsels only did extend,
To the eye, and hand, and foot, that did offend.
But our new Doctors more profoundly read,
To save the Body, lopped away the Head.
Blessed Artists, may their trembling hearts be sure
At their worst throws, to meet with such a cure.
Upon the Proverb that styles the King of England, King of Devils.
Epig. 3.
DEvils I believe when they rebelled, had spite
Enought' have thrown the Eternal Godhead quite
Both from his throne and being. But their sin
Met with a Power, that curbed those suries in,
And so abridg'd their guilt. But our black brood
Found none to Heavens unfathomed counsel stood
That dur^t oppose their crimes, but cursed have done
That which those Devils but only thought upon.
And therefore their foul sin, as far exceeds
The others, as intents come short of deeds.
Februarius.
TO Princely Numa's gift my name I owe,
Who by Egeria taught, that men below
By their continued trespasses incense,
The heavenly Powers to hurl their judgments thence.
Chose this my Month to be a time, wherein
With annual purgings they might cleanse their sin.
And from those Rites which in that language carry
The name of Februa' called me February.
Christians yet style me so, but oh the shame!
The have lost the practice, though they keep the name.
The Feasts of February. 2.
MAry on Februs second's purified. guide.
The fourteenth day young Valentine does
The four and twentieth is Matthias gift,
All but Leap-years, and then the twenty-fifth.
Purification of the blessed Virgin.
Epig. 1.
Blessed Mother of the Blessedst Seed, that are
The pregnant womb of teeming flesh did bear.
What new black stains be these thy soul have died,
That thou have need now to be purified?
Art not thou she, bright Virgin, whom ere while,
The tongue of Angels full of Grace did style?
Art not thou she, who lately from above
Ore shadowed was it by that all-hallowing Dove?
Art not thou she, from whose thrice happy womb
Repleat with mercies, all our cleansings come?
And can there yet, blessed Maid, such reasons be
Why these vain Rites should be applied to thee?
I know not, Lord, what these thwart runnings mean,
Can fullness want, or grace be styled unclean?
Can other terrene brutish Pigeons do
That which thy Dove could not attain unto?
Or he that freed the guiltful world from blame,
Could he not cleanse the womb from whence he came
Far be such impious thoughts, these Rites infer
No want of power in them, nor grace in her.
They were apt springs, rich streams of grace to yield,
And she a Vessel easy to be filled.
Only th'unnurtur'd World, that could not see,
(Blind that they were) this hidden Energie.
Must be convinced by forms, we are often fain
With outward shows rash censures to restrain.
It Is to be pure that most availes indeed,
Yet to be thought so, is no more then need.
Ad Mariam. Epigr. 2.
I Cannot tell, the Substance self, being by
Why these vain shadows should be prized so high
It Is that blessed Babe, whom thy glad arms enclose,
From whence both thine, and all our cleansing flows.
This Ritual Law no other use pretends,
But to adumbrate what from him descends.
And is superfluous now, unless it be
To show how well the type and thing agree.
Or that the Worlds weak eyes were yet too dim,
Unless 'twere through a veyle to look on him.
Blessed Maid, thou no such medium's want indeed,
Whose eyes undazeled, on his beams do feed.
But we whose weakness cannot brook the Sun,
By shadows best discern his motion.
Epigr. 3.
I Apprehend, Bright Maid, no reason for it,
So God-like pure, as we believe thou were,
Why thou should these mysterious Rites apply
Thy spotless self, yet more to purify.
Unless perhaps, as some affirm, there be
A new found Acme in Divinity,
Like unto that, which in another sense,
Grammarians call the more then perfect tense:
I know not how their dreams they can assure,
But this I know, you are either more then pure,
Or these Mysterious Rites, Bright Maid, to thee,
That were so pure before, superflous be.
Valentine. a Valendo. Epig. 1.
THy name imports a Power, and justly too,
For no Power else can work, what thine can do.
Kings rule the earth, fire, sword, and torturing racks
The body with a thousand death's distracts;
But can proceed no further, only thine,
Thy power commands the soul, great Valentine.
Epigr. 2.
There Is no resisting, I must serve thee too,
Great Saint, as well as all the Creatures do.
Feirce untamed Beasts, and winged Fowls betray
A sense of Love, and feel thy power to day.
And so do I, but in a lawful fire
Whose heat, oh may it never more expire!
Epigr. 3.
NO more vain men, to Cupids Altars sue,
We have a better Saint to go unto:
A Saint that breaths chaste flames, whose hand does hold
Arrows compacted all of purest gold.
No leaden mixtures, no blew wounds that show
The venomed point from whence their rancors flow.
If then to bless your amorous hopes, you need
Some favoring Powers; let Valentine succeed
The Cyprian fondling. Pious souls may seek
The sweets of Love, without a blushing cheek.
Matthias de seipso. Epigr. 1.
Accursed Iscariots vacant room I fill,
See's make their Bishops neither good nor ill.
All are not rocks that sit in Peter's chair,
Nor Devils, that Judas his successors are.
Judas ad Romanos. Epigr. 2.
FOnd Romans, Peter's dubious chair resign,
It Is for your honor more to sit in mine.
None of the twelve themselves will not deny,
Left an Apostle in his seat, but I.
Their meaner followers, meaner titles bare,
Mine with the eleven assumed an equal chair.
If you would needs aspire, my name had bin,
Apter to have masked your vast ambition in
Then Peter's claim, of whom it is hard to know,
Whe'r ere indeed he were at Rome, or no.
But my opprobrious death is that alone,
Which your else shameless cheeks do blush to own.
As for the rest, the conscious world does see
That you recede from Cephas, more then me.
In outward show, I seemed for Jesus's sake
To quit the world, and his sharp cross to take,
But played the thief the while, and made no spare,
So I might fill the cursed bag I bare.
To rob the poor, and as if that were small,
To set to sale, even Christ himself and all.
Yet masked my treasons still with sacred guile,
And cried, hail Lord, and kissed him too the while.
And is not this your guise, I pray you tell,
Can any actions be more parallel.
Did ever any to one chair succeed,
Whose lives exactly viewed, so well agreed?
But go to, since you think it yet a shame
Though you approve my works, to own my name,
Know this, your Seat's not so ashamed of me,
As my Successor of your seat would be.
Upon Joseph surnamed Justus, that was passed by; and Matthias that was chosen
by lot into the room of Judas. Act. 1. 24, 26.
Epigr. 3.
JOseph (the Just) refused Heavens righteous doom,
Lots out Matthias unto Judas's room.
God looks not with man's eyes, the thing and name,
His wisdom often finds, not to be the same.
The Just one, could not but the Just approve:
Conformity's the surest ground of love.
But his discerning eyes, no doubt, did see
One not so styled, to be more Just then he.
March. 1.
CHange but the names, the Heathen Fables are
Our Christian Gospels; what is their God of war
But our dread Lord of Hoasts, their vestal Nun,
And great Quirinus her immortal Son,
Romes God-like Founder, by his Patriots slain,
But from the eating grave revived again,
And in his Fathers Chariot, mounted high
Above Heavens star-enamel'd canopy.
If you will note it, what does this proclaim,
But Jesus, and his Virgin-Mothers name?
Give things this sense, and you shall nothing err,
Though you this Month to Mars his name referr.
Though Rhea Syluia have her Festal day,
And Romulus his Quirinalia.
All, if you thus interpret, things will be,
Who ere gain-saies it, good Divinity.
The Feasts of March. 2.
WAles for her David, March his first does claim.
The sixteenth bears the Irish Patricks name.
Bright Gabriel on the twenty fifth does bear
Glad tidings to the Virgin-Mothers ear.
Saint David. Epigr. 1.
BRutes Sons shall never say, great Saint, that I
Have thrust thy name out of our Liturgy.
Let others doubt thy History, to me
It is enough that Cambrians honor thee.
Epigr. 2.
BIshop, or Champion, whether name be due,
Or whether both, great Saint, and thou like to
That other David, in one person bear
Prophet and Soldiers equal character.
I cannot tell, but this I am assured
Under thy auspice, Wales has long endured.
Epigr. 3.
WHen my observing thoughts revolv how long
Brutes warlike Sons have kept their name and tongue:
With what stout hands, they their own fields have held,
Maugre the rage of those feirce storms which swelled
From the rough Saxons, Danes, and Nonmans hate,
Which like the none-excepting doom of fate
Fell upon all this Isle, and rouled with
An irresisted stream from Thames to Frith.
Yet Brutes stern children kept their own, and stood
Colossi like athwart those Seas of blood
Unshaken with the tempest. When I weigh
These things, great David, I am forced to say,
That either thou their Champion do excel,
Or they no Champion need, they fight so well.
S. Patrick. Epig. 1.
VEnice sometimes chose Theodore to be
Her guardian Saint, but when she found that he
Gave no success to her designs, she laid
Him by, and called in Mark unto her aid,
Which course unless the ruined Ireland run
And change her Saint too, she is quite undone;
For either her Patrick cannot ease her needs,
Or which is worse, he cares not how she speeds.
Epig. 2.
PAtrick his prayers they say to pass did bring,
That in the Irish soil no venomed thing
May breed, no Toads, no Serpents, Spiders there,
Nor other poisonous creatures do appear:
A blessed gift! if what in them is lost,
The men have not within their breasts ingrost.
Epig. 3.
Wise Romans when they first commenced wars,
Against a Town called out her Tutelars,
And gave them worship least perhaps they might,
In favor of the place against them fight:
Which course whether England took when long ago,
Sh' assailed the Irish Kings I do not know.
But this I Am sure their Patricks hand since then
Was never lift up against the Englishmen.
Annunciation of the Blessed Virgin. Epig. 1.
HAd Adam known his wife before the fall,
The blessing doubtless had been virtual
To propagation, and her firstborn Son,
Had been conceived without corruption:
But 'twas not so, the guilt which she convei'd
To all her Issue, proves she sinned a Maid
Before coition, the Impostor knew
Too well accursed, what he had to do,
When he the fountain did infect, that all
The lower streams might suck from thence their gall,
Which yet least it might bring a blot upon
That glorious state, the Angels portion,
The lot of Spirits, the life of heaven, and we
For her crimes sake might loath virginity,
His Grace our all-wise Savior did dispense,
In such an answering method, that the offense
And cure at one same gate might enter in,
And the salvation parallel the sin:
Thus what a Maiden lost, a Maid restores,
A Virgin caused, a Virgin healed our sores.
Evah transgres'd, but you reversed may read,
In Mary's Ave both her name and deed:
Upon Luke 1. 45. Blessed is she that believed, etc. Epig. 2.
SUch news blessed maid as this bright Angel brings
Of such unheard of inconsistent things,
It Is as much wonder that thou could believe,
As it is that God could those strange works atchieve:
What hand could interweave but his alone,
A Moment and Eternity in one,
The incomprehended essence and a span,
The creature and Creator, God and Man.
Or which is less, yet hard enough to do,
Comprise in one a Maid and Mother too;
'Twas only God this work to pass could bring,
And only thou that could believe the thing.
Epig. 3.
When in our flesh thou deign'st to lodge no room,
My God would serve thee, but a Virgins womb:
But in our hearts being pleased by faith to dwell,
It is not now thy lot to speed so well;
For such, oh horrid, is our sinful state,
Thou can find none that's not adulterate.
To find Easter for ever.
THe change in Februs if there any be,
Or that which first ensues note carefully,
And the next Tuesday doubt it not all,
That does succeed Shrove Tuesday you may call.
Shrove-Tuesday past you may be bold to say,
That Sunday six weeks after' s Easter Day.
The other Moveable Feasts. 2.
TWo days Good Friday Easter does precede,
Forty from thence to Holy Thursday lead;
Ten more unto Whitsunday numbered be,
And one week after that to Trinity.
Good Friday, Passio Domini. Epig. 1.
He Is dead: Insult the Infernal Powers, the dread
Messiah, Jesus whom you feared is dead;
But stay, rejoice not neither, it is from
His death, that your great Empires fall does come.
'Twas a strange combat this, wherein to slay,
The foe you fought with, was to lose the day;
Yet thus it was, the Field had been your own,
Had you not our great Champion overthrown:
But through his sides your selves accursed you slew,
And he being ruined by you, ruined you.
Upon Luke 22. 44. And his sweat was as it were great drops of blood falling to
the ground.
SEe here my soul what weight in sin remains
When he whose shoulder all things else sustains,
Bowed underneath the load: if he that stood
In equal poize with God, sweat clods of blood,
And the Almighty groaned to undergo
The burden, what must finite creatures do?
Upon Matthew. 27. 52, 53. And the graves were opened, and many bodies of Saints
which slept arose. Epig. 3.
THe Prince of life was slain and nothing now
Remained on earth, whose greatness did not bow
To Death's all conquering power, you would have thought
The world it self would quickly have bin brought
To its last gasp, and all the creatures have
Been buried with their maker in the grave,
When lo midst all these spoils appal'd with fear,
From his own holds the enfeebled Conqueror
Flies with distracted steps, and leaves his prey,
Free and unguarded to escape away,
From their close dungeons the enfranchised dead
Are sent again the sacred streets to tread.
But wonder not, it was but time to fly,
When he beheld his Kingdom seized by
So strange a wile. Death found, alas! too late,
That he had brought a prey within his gate
That would destroy his rights; and that 'twas vain
To think to stay where Jesus was, though slain
So sure it was that he, a wondrous thing,
Who came in Captain, would go out a King.
Easter Day. Resurrectio Domini. Epig. 1.
I Know not where the greater wonder lies,
That God should die, or man from death should rise.
But this I know, the are both enough to make
The Angels faith, if not upheld, to shake.
God is immortal, and for him to die,
Were to be stripped of his Deity.
And for frail man, being dead, to rise again,
Is in effect to cease to be humane.
Neither, if you consider them alone,
Can be without a contradiction.
And when all tongues have argued what they can,
God must be God, and man can be but man.
But start not at it, it is not thus that we
Must measure this transcendent Mystery.
If you would view these Natures rightly, it is
As they concur in our Hypostasis;
And thus considered they no more oppose,
Man-God did die, God-Man from death arose.
'Twas one same Person both these mazes trod,
Yet rose he not as Man, nor died as God.
Epigr. 2.
CHrist all the Sabbath bound in Grave did ly;
The Sabbath types out vast Eternity.
And 'twas Eternal death, indeed our sin
Infinite that it was, had wrapped us in.
But he by carrying brake those bonds, and quit
Us from Eternal death, by suffering it;
Happy exchange, now though we die, yet shall
Our death not stretch to that great Festival:
Death may our Corpse indeed a while surprise,
But we on that great Sabbaths Eve shall rise.
Epigr. 3.
THe Phoenix birth no more admire, nor what
Old Bardes of her renewed age have wrote;
The Fables which of that strange Bird you read,
Are in our Jesus verified indeed;
He Is the true Phoenix, uncompell'd that flies
Into the Mountains forked tops and dies.
His Tomb like hers, with sweet perfumes is filled,
The gums whereof such fragrant smells do yield,
As Heaven it self delights to sent; and those
Blessed Spirits above rejoice therewith to close.
Dead from his Grave, as from a second Womb
Newborn, like her he back again does come
Into the astonished world, more fair to see,
And bright, then ere before he used to be.
Only in this our Phoenix comes before
The other, that once raised, he dies no more.
Ascension. Epigr. 1.
COme down blessed Savior, it is no sin to pray
Thee down; I hope upon Ascension day
So to descend, as I would have thee do,
Is not indeed to fall, but mount unto
A Zenith, which thou never before could gain
Even my proud heart which rebel lusts have taken,
And manned against thee: this my God is it
That I would have thee come and see and get;
Get this strong hold into thy hands, and make
Her high-rays'd bulwarks at thy storming shake,
And droop their heads; make my stout thoughts to fall
Prostrate before thy glorious feet, and all
The powers within me to ly low, and be
Subject henceforth unto no King but thee.
Do this, dear Lord, and my glad soul shall say
To me thou never ascendedst till to day.
Epigr. 2.
Look in what sense the Son of man was said
To be in Heaven, whilst yet on Earth he stayed.
In the same sense we grant his body, though
In Heaven, may still be said to be below.
He is ascended all agree, that same
Material flesh and blood of his that came
From the pure Virgins Womb, Heavens now retain,
And until all things be restored again,
Must still retain it; yet it is confessed,
That when the holy Elements are blessed
By the Priests powerful lips, though nothing there
To outward sense, but Bread and Wine appear;
Yet does there under those dark forms reside
The body of the Son of Man that died.
This, what bold tongue soever does deny,
Gives in effect even Christ himself the ly.
Yet this whoever too grossly does maintain,
Pulls his ascended Lord from Heaven again.
A middle course 'twixt those two rocks to steer,
Is that becomes the Christian Mariner.
So to believe the Ascension as to grant
His real Presence in the Sacrament;
Yet so his Real Presence there to own
As not to make void his Ascension.
Epig. 3.
THe grave and hell were both subdued, and naught
In those dark coasts was further to be wrought;
Heaven yet barred up her Azure gates to win
An entrance there, and bring his ransomed in,
Our Lord ascends, and with a powerful hand,
Throws open those clasped doors that did withstand
Our dear acquired admission: Happy day
Wherein we by a new and living way,
His flesh the vail have found a means into
The holy-holy place assured to go.
What shall our joys henceforth retard, when Hell
And death and heaven are all atton'd so well.
Whitsunday, Epig. 1.
LOrd I would fain thy bounteous grace admire,
Which gav'st thy Spirit this day in flames of fire,
But cannot do it if that same fire of thine,
Which filled their glowing bosoms fill not mine.
Fain I would of those cloven tongues relate
Which this day on thy dear Apostles sat,
But cannot speak, alas, as I should do,
Unless one of those tongues be given me too.
None Lord can love, nor praise thee well, but those
On whom thy self both fire and tongue bestows.
Epig. 2.
YOu that despise all humane helps whereby
Men are prepared for the Ministry,
And boast you have the Spirit enabling you,
Better then all their Books and Arts can do;
Be not deceived fond men, it is more to be
Fitted for such a work, then you can see,
Those whom the Holy Ghost does thus inspire,
He comes to them in tongues as well as fire;
Show us but them, and we will allow your call,
If not, we heed not your vain brags at all.
Epig. 3.
DIvided tongues made Babels building cease,
But now thy Zions buildings do increase.
That was a curse, the fruit of sin, but this
One of the Churches greatest blessings is:
Had not that gone before, no need had been,
To Have had this other mercy given in.
But such was now our state, that only that,
Could cure the plague, which first the plague begat.
Trinity Sunday, Epig. 1.
THree and but one, and one yet branched in three
I know not Lord, how this strange thing can be;
But it is no matter what blind worm I know,
So I can but believe that it is so.
Epig. 2.
TAke heed ye bold enquirers how ye pry
Too much into this sacred mystery,
It Is safer to beleev then search too far,
Into those truths that so transcendent are;
The eyes that gaze too long upon the Sun,
Are often stricken blind ere they have done.
Epig. 3.
TEll me ye Atheists that believe no more
Then what your reason fathoms, that vast store
Of rouling waters that does daily flow
Into the Ocean, whither does it go?
What Cisterns do those big swollen streams maintain,
That every tide are emptied in the main?
What dark instinct compels the churlish steel,
The loadstones undiscerned force to feel?
Or if you will ever vulgar things survey,
Those which you taste and handle every day:
Take me the seeds of every plant and tree,
Of every herb and flower that grows, and see
If when you have ripped them open you can find,
A reason why they bring forth such a kind,
And not another; where that virtue lies,
That such a form and taste, and smell supplies,
So proper to it self, that nothing well
The same, except it self can parallel.
Hence let your serious thoughts reflect again,
On the strange Fabric both of Beasts and men,
Their bones, their veins, their arteries and all,
The essential stamps they bear and casual,
The color of their hair, their eyes and skin,
The extent, their age, and stature's bounded in;
And tell me whether your quick-sight can read
The ground of all these wonders in the seed.
Poor Skepticks, in these common things below,
The furthest that your utmost skill can go,
Is only to discern that thus they be,
But why they are thus, alas, you cannot see:
Yet with the Almighty you are grown so bold,
That though you in his Holy Word be told;
That that one ever blessed Essence is
Distinguished into three Hypostasies.
And that those three Hypostasies abide,
Still one same Essence undiversified;
Yet is it not enough for you to know,
That thus it is, unless we further show
You why, and how it can be thus, and bring
Some proofs besides his Dixit, of the thing.
But go to you, Blasphemers, if there be*
No other way to clear this Mystery,
Unto your staggering Faith, but sense; be sure
One day (though then 'twill be too late a cure)
Your very eyes shall see, and seeing pine,
The glory of the Trin-une, Vni-trine.
April 1.
ROmans this Month to Venus did assign,
From whom their Prince Aeneas drew his line.
Her Aphrodite from those white froths they call
Which gave their Goddess his original,
And the Month April: It Is a nobler womb,
From whence our Princes high descent does come,
Nor is it from spurious froaths, but Seas that we
May draw (we think) her Etymology.
Put all together, froaths with Seas compare,
View what both Princes, what their mothers are;
And if the odds with Venus still remain,
Let her the guidance of this Month retain;
But if our Marie have a juster right,
Let her assume the place of Aphrodite.
The Feasts of April 2.
ON Aprils three and twentieth George bestrides,
His warlike steed and against the Dragon rides.
The twenty fifth to raise our wonder more,
The winged Lyon's voice is heard to roar.
Saint George, Epig. 1.
SEe here in Georges Portraiture a true
Description of what Christians ought to do;
No civil wars, no brothers blood imbrues
His righteous hands, he no such foes pursues;
The cross his Engsin is, his Faith his shield,
His sword the Scripture, his own heart the Field;
His enemy the Dragon, him alone
He thinks it worth his while to set upon;
O God that we who George our champion call,
Save such as these would fight no fights at all.
Epig. 2.
Would thou a combat undertake wherein,
Thou might be sure the victory to win,
And with it gain a Kingdom too, then fight
Saint Georges duels, let thy opposite,
Be the red Dragon, and on him be sure,
Thou both the one and the other shall procure;
For none ere fought with him but won the day,
And none ere won, but bore a Crown away.
Epig. 3.
Whether George a humane creature were indeed,
Or but an Emblem of that promised seed,
Whom God of old had set apart to tread
Upon the conquered Serpents wounded head;
Is not agreed: But this is sure, no hand,
Of men or Devils, is able to withstand
Those whom that Champion aides, let him but fight
On Englands side, and we will dare the spite
Of all the adverse world, no power can harm
Them who are guarded by so strong an arm:
Needs must his might all other force repel,
Before whose feet the Dragon conquered fell.
Saint Mark, Epig. 1.
CHrist is the Lamb so sacred Writs define,
To Mark a Lions Figure they assign;
Yet see what Miracles from grace can spring,
The Lamb is now become the Lions King.
Epig. 2.
DRead not poor sheep, this roaring Lion here,
Goes not about your trembling flesh to tear,
The World is changed, those paws that used of old
To rend the flock, do now preserve the fold
But would you know by what means this is done,
Saturn was then in Leo, now the Sun.
Upon the State of Venice, or S. Marks arrogating the dominion of the Adriatic
Sea. Epig. 3.
I Wonder not if all the Earth does fear
Venetia's power, her Patron Mark does bear
A Lions figure, whose stern voice does make
The neighboring deserts all about to shake;
Nor do I wonder when the Beast does spread
His wings abroad, if all the air do dread.
Thus far there is reason for it, the Earth and Air
Are both th'amphibious Monsters thorow-fair;
And it is not to be wondered, if he fills
Both Tracts with terror of his voice and quills.
This only I admire, upon what right,
He Lords it over the blew Amphitrite;
Why Seas should fear him, whose curled waves are free
From his proud threats, and roar as loud as he
May 1.
SUch due respects wise Romans to their grave
And hoary Elders, though but Heathens, gave,
That next their guardian Deities they set,
Their Names upon this Months fair Frontelet;
Which it keeps still unraz'd, and to this day,
From those Grand Majors is surnamed May.
Age crowned with wisdom high regards does claim
Ancient of days is Gods own glorious name:
Whose more especial stamp does seem to be
Engraved upon their snowie gravitie;
Yet such is our foul sin, oh! woe the while,
We slight the duty, though we own the style.
The Feasts in May 2.
PHilip and Jacob May the first does own
The twenty ninth Charles re-ascends his Throne.
Philip and Jacob Epigr. 1.
GReat pair of Saints, when your two names I see
Coupled together in the Epigraphie,
Of this fair Feast, I Am ready strait to cry,
That surely Sol's in love with Gemini;
Before his time the horned Bull forsakes,
And with the beauteous Twins his lodging takes;
This certainly the glorious Saints, I know
That when your lovely souls were housed below
A brighter Sun in them did fix his rays,
Not for a Month alone, but all your days:
And now (though raped from hence) he has lodged you where,
Full of himself you ever may appear.
Epigr. 2.
When I inscribed upon this day had read,
The name of Jacob, I straight fancied
Some supplantation, like to what of old,
Of the first Jacob Holy Writs have told.
But here is no such thing, our Jacob here,
Does not with holy Phillip intervere;
Here are no such contentions, neither feels,
The others hand surprising of his heels;
Here is no strife for birthright moved, nor yet
Which shall the Fathers happy blessing get.
Both are content, and both indeed obtain
That which the other Brothers sought to gain,
From one another with so much ado,
Both have the birthright, and the blessing too.
Upon the two Phillips, the Apostle, and the Evangelist. Epig. 3.
THe Macedonian Philips glorious name,
His own, and Sons great actions do proclaim;
The World yet rings thereof, and will do still,
While men shall use their tongues, or hold a quill:
Yet it is not all the Fields that Warrier won,
Can match what our two Philips power has done,
Small narrow bounds his conquests did confine,
Theirs stretch themselves on either side the line,
Even to the untrodden Poles: his power and sway
Is long ago expired and swept away
By Times rude hand, of all the sprouts that shot
From that rich stem, one sprig remains not
To shade the earth, but by a wondrous fall,
Are quite extinct, even root and branch and all.
But from our Philips verdant stock, there still
Spring such fresh boughs, as no keen frosts shall kill,
Nor pruning hooks lop down, whilst that bright pair
Of Lamps, with splendid beams shall guild the air,
Their fruit shall still increase, and day by day,
Wax still more fair, and further from decay.
So that hereafter when unerring Fame,
Shall set true value on the Philips name,
The other meaner acts she shall decline,
And to ours alone, the names of Fair assign.
Regicipium, Or the Return of Charles the second, being also his Birthday.
Epig. 1.
TWelve years black night our Royal Sun had hid
'Twas long indeed the Stygian Nadir did
From our sad coasts, his cheerful rays detain,
Whilst we poor creatures scarce e're looked again,
To see the Morning dawn, or one bright beam
Of his, through our Horizons vaults to stream.
But heavens be blessed the long-wish'd day at last
Is broke again, and those thick clouds that cast
Such dismal shades ore all this Islands frame,
Are thrust again to Hell from whence they came.
Go happy Britains, you whose eyes have done
So long a penance, greet your rising Sun
With more then Persian adorations, they
Wh'have felt such darkness, well may prize their day.
Epig. 2.
What name great Charles shall this blessed Isle assign,
To those propitious heavenly beams of thine:
Englands bright Sun shall we entitle thee,
That name indeed would best of all agree
To thine immense perfections, which suffice
Alone to glad so many kingdom eyes.
Only it would make us fear that envious night,
For all this, yet would rob us of thy sight.
And who can think of losing such a Sun,
And not even mad with startling horror run:
Shall we then call thee our bright Arctick star,
She bears it is true thy name upon her carr,
And which to us sounds best, never sets at all,
But yet alas, her beams are weak and small;
Like an obscure Rush-candle's matched with thine,
Which clearer then the mid-days Chariot shine.
What then remains, Dear Prince, but that we pray,
That since thy luster, and our wishes may
By neither of these Lamps dis-joyn'd be shown,
Their married Powers in thee may meet in one;
That thou may shine like Sol when he displayes
'Twixt Cancer's claws at noon his brightest rays;
But like the Northern Bear may never sleep,
In Thetis watery covertures, but keep
In thy full strength, thy radiant Zenith still,
And with perpetual day these Kingdoms fill.
Epig. 3.
It Is no small honor these three Realms do pay,
Of right great Prince, to this auspicious day,
Which brought thee first into the world, and gave
Us hopes of those rich fruits which now we have.
This crowned it much indeed; but it is far more
Endeared since that upon another score,
Thy glorious restitution, which was wrought
This day almost beyond all humane thought;
That was thy Birth, but this may well be sed
To be thy resurrection from the dead,
And ours indeed in thine, for all the while,
That thou were banished, death possessed this Isle,
And we lay buried in thy loss, but when
Thou once returnd'st, we all revived again
And breathed new life, for which great mercies, we
Must ever pay our thanks to it, and thee.
June 1.
YOung men this Month is yours, your Country shows,
What honor she to springing virtue owes.
When as a pledge thereof, she is proud to wear
Your name, inscribed upon her Calendar.
Goodness at any time acceptance wins,
But it is best prized when it in youth begins.
The Feasts of June 2.
THe 'leventh of June bright Barnabas obtains
The twenty fourth the newborn Baptist gains.
The nine and twentieth day apart is set,
To him that first for Christ forsook his net.
Barnabas Apostle, upon Acts 11. 22. etc. Epig. 1.
SSee what an humble soul can yield to do,
Barnabas by the Apostles sent into
An ample Province, to command and guide
The Church of Antioch, freely does divide,
His charge with Saul the convert, and is glad
To have him share in all the power he had.
Good men for Christ's behoof their interests wave,
And are content to part with all they have;
Let thy Church thrive (so they their prayers begin)
And it is no matter who does lose or win.
Upon Acts 11. 26. Epig. 2.
FRom Barnabas and Readiness advice, the Name
Of Christians first to Christ's Disciples came.
They preached not for themselves, and could not brook
To see their hearers dote upon the look
Or garb of any earthly Minister,
How great soever or polite he were.
'Twas Christ that owned the building, and 'twas fit
They thought't should bear his Name that purchased it.
Christians rejoice in your great style, to bear
This title, is more glorious then to wear
Imperial Crowns. But pay your thanks withal
For this great grace to Barnabas and Saul.
'Twas Christ indeed from whom your honor sprung
But through those golden Pipes it passed along.
Upon Acts 15. 39. Epig. 3.
WHo would have thought that there could ever fall
Such bitter strifes 'twixt Barnabas and Paul,
That they whose tongues so sweetly did accord,
In the confession of one God, one Lord,
One Spirit of grace, who one same hope enjoyed,
One Faith, one Baptism, that were both emploi'd
In one same Function, and so long had stood,
Twin-like conjoined in one Brotherhood.
That they should jarr, and jarr fo sharply too,
That they must part; oh this is sad to view,
Good Lord, how loose are men's affections tide,
Whom every trivial difference can divide;
Our comfort is when once we are knit to thee.
That bond no time shall ever canceled see.
John the Baptist. Epig. 1.
JOhn was that voice that in the Desert cried,
All Judah heard it, and was terrified;
And who will wonder if they shook with fear,
When they such shrill and dreadful sounds did hear.
All I admire's how this to pass should come,
That he should get this Crier that was dumb.
Epigr. 2.
ENoch that walked with God, and Abraham,
His chosen friend, to whom the promise came;
Moses the Steward of his house, and he
That up to heaven on fiery Steeds did flee.
These doubtless had great visions, and descried
More of their God, then all those times beside,
Yet 'twas not all those Saints, nor any one
Before or after equaliz'd our John;
Who had the honor at one time to hear
The Father speak, and see the Spirit appear;
And with his hands unworthy to baptize,
The Son that in the Fathers bosom lies.
Great John well did thy Saviors tongue proclaim
That amongst all that out of women came,
Like thee there was no Prophet who alone,
Distinctly sav'st at once the three in one.
Epigr. 3.
BEhold here! how the great high Priest does stand
To be baptized by his servants hand:
And fear oh man how thou those seals refuse,
Which Christ thy Lord himself rejoiced to use;
And whatsoever the frail dispenser be,
Remember John had sins as well as he.
Peter Apostle. Epig. 1.
PEter the rock that whilome stood so sure,
That he (unmoved) was able to endure
The blasts of Hell it self, now down is thrown
By a poor Damsels feeble breath alone:
Lord what is man? if thou withdraw thy hand,
When such firm rocks as Peter cannot stand.
Upon Luke 22. 61. Epig. 2.
Satan now thought that he had given so sore
A wound to Peter, that he never more,
Should raise again his bruised head, but lie
Weltering for ever in his blood, and die.
And who indeed that heard our Peter swear
And curse, if ere he knew who Jesus were,
Would think there could be any hope of cure,
For such a desperate deadly Calenture.
But see poor sinners what a power there lies,
In your relenting Saviors gracious eyes;
When he no sooner casts a pitying look,
On wretched Peter, whom all life forsook;
But he revives again, and with his tears
Gives proof, that yet some hope of grace appears.
Lord if thine eyes have such a power indeed,
Where-ere they look, repentant tears to breed;
Oh look on me, that I who have sinned as deep,
As Peter did, may go with him and weep.
Upon Mark 14. 72. Epig. 3.
It Was thought of old, the Cocks shril voice did make,
The Princely Lions warlike heart to shake;
But this I Am sure not all the Fiends in Hell
Conspiring, could have rung so sad a knell
In Peter's ears, as this Cocks voice did do,
When now the second time he loudly crew;
But fear not Peter, 'twas sweet Chanticleer,
No Screetch-Owl this thy troubled ears did hear;
Or rather indeed 'twas thy grieved Lord that spoke
By this Birds tongue, and cried awake, awake;
It is enough, thou'st thrice denied my name,
Peter awake, and sin no more for shame.
Return to him that loves thee so, that he
For all this yet is gone to die for thee:
Thus crow'd the Cock, thou heardst and strait did rise,
And back return'dst, poor soul, with weeping eyes;
O God, that when we hear him crow, we knew
But how to take such hints, and do so too.
July I.
FRom five this Month sometimes derived its name,
Which now great Julius does more justly claim;
'Twas he indeed new formed the year, and gave
The Months those measured portions which they have;
And 'twas but fit the Father of them all,
One child in twelve by his own name should call;
Heathens all yield, great Prince, it should be so,
Who to thy pains their perfect Aera's owe:
We Christians grant it too; who by thy aid
More punctual in our years of Christ are made.
The Feasts of July.
SAd Maudlin, July's two and twenti'th claims,
The twenty fift's assigned to greater James.
Mary Magdalene Epig. I.
MAry when I thy former state recall,
What sins, what Devils thou here were filled withal,
Yet see thee now all brightly clothed sit,
At thy beloved Saviors glorious feet.
I cannot but admire that bounteous grace,
That takes such sinners to so sweet a place;
Yet when I think what floods of tears below
From thine even almost drowned eyes did flow,
How often thou bath'dst thy Saviors feet and then
With thy torn locks did wipe them dry again;
I should have wondered if that place had bin
Too good for such a soul to have lodged in*
Tears mixed with faith such power in heaven do bear,
That they can place the greatest sinners there.
Upon John 20. 13. Epig. 2.
MAry her buried Lord (she thought) had lost,
Yet see how dear this small adventure cost
Her tender heart; mark how she wept and prayed
To know but where her breathless Christ was laid;
But thou my senseless soul: Oh dreadful word!
Can loose the presence of thy glorious Lord
Days without number; yet scarce find a tear
To witness that thou once did hold him dear.
Ah my vile heart, if thou thy Christ did prize,
As Mary did, thou would have Mary's eyes.
Upon Mark 16. 9. and John 20. 17. Epig. 3.
SEe here what links of comfort meet to crown
Her drooping head, who but even now powered down
Such streams of tears, no mortal eye must see
Their raised Lord, till first his Mary be
Blessed with the Vision, till those eyes that wept
So much for grief, as much for joy have leaped;
Nor is it enough to feast her eyes alone
With this glad sight, he will use her lips upon
A glorious Message to his Brethren, she
Shall an Apostle to the Apostles be;
Themselves he means shall see the truth ere long,
But they shall owe it first unto her tongue;
So careful is our gracious Lord that those,
That mourn for him shall not by mourning lose.
James Apostle, Upon Acts 12. 2. cum Mat. 20. 21. Epig. 1.
GReat James the first of all the twelve I think,
Thou of thy Saviors bloody cup did drink,
But grieve not at it: 'Twas the readiest way
To gain that room for which thou once did pray,
Who holds it now, let bolder tongues report,
This onel' I know, thou did bid fairly for it.
Upon James and John the two sons of Zebedee. Epig. 2.
GOod God what odds 'twixt these two brethren lies,
This first, that last of all the Apostles dies,
This an untimely bloody death abides,
That in a gentle quiet slumber glides
Out of the world (if he at all be gone
From hence, and must not rise again anon.)
Both sued indeed (moved with a like unfit
Ambition) on their Lords two hands to fit
And undertook in lieu thereof, to sup
Their parts with him of his unpleasant cup:
This had a share, but that for reasons best
Known to his Lord's reserved for longer rest:
How little is it, Lord, that we can know
Of men? by what betides them here below:
Some die for Christ, and those that do not so,
Are often as dear to him as those that do;
To will to die for him, though it do not come
To pass, in his account is Martyrdom.
Upon both the Jameses. Epigr. 2.
NEither of the Jameses ever was in Spain,
They had their tasks elsewhere, that did detain
Their pains and persons: Paul indeed we know
Had a design into those parts to go,
Which if he did not execute the blame
If any, from his troubles only came,
Which kept him back, not from his changed mind,
Which firmly still to serve them was inclined,
Yet how it comes to pass I cannot tell,
But Paul that had deserved of them so well,
Is laid aside, and James received alone
To be the Patron of that Nation;
Yea not content with this, through blinded zeal,
In points of Faith; from Paul they do appeal
To James his doctrine, as if heaven's had made
Him to be judge of what the other said:
And that his purer Comments must give light,
To those more doubtful texts that Paul did write.
But fools they one day to their cost shall know,
That one same Spirit in both their pens did flow:
And that these wretches that dishonor Paul,
Shall that day find no friend of James at all.
August 1.
AVgustus name, this Month inscribed does bear,
A name that still is sweet to every ear;
Sweet for the peace he gave the world, for though
At his first entrance, Seas of Blood did flow
Ore all the earth, he stopped the deadly spring,
And golden rest into all lands did bring;
But that which made him most unparalled
Is that his reign, the Prince of peace beheld.
The Feasts of August 2.
AVgust the twenty fourth to Bart'lemew,
The twenty ninth's the headless Baptists due.
Bartholomew Apostle, Epig. 1.
HOw is it Lord, that there is no mention made
In all thy book, of what was done or said
By this thy great Apostle? other men
Of meaner rank, and gifts, thy sacred Pen
Finds time to speak of, but of him alas!
There does not one bare word distinctly pass,
Was it to teach us, that those Tapers are
Not ever of most worth, that brightest glare,
That deep-fraught souls lie always snug and low,
Whilst empty hulks loom big, and lofty show;
Or is it enough that thou have let us see
A proof in some, of what the others be;
Men bring not all their wares to open test,
A few found right, give credit to the rest:
Lord we submit, and by the things we hear
Of Peter judge, what all his brethren were.
Upon Luke 22. 29, 30. Epig. 2.
IT is not much great Bart'lemew indeed,
That of thy works and labors we do read,
But this we from thy Lords own mouth do find
That thou a Throne and Kingdom had assigned,
As well as John and Peter had whose pains,
The holy Text so punctually explains;
And who will think that servants labors came
Short of his Mates, whose wages is the same.
Upon Acts 5. 12. Epig. 3.
INto the Temples Porch the twelve withdrew,
And thou amongst the rest great Bart'lemew;
There you all preach, and work such mighty things
As no man else dare think of equalling;
What thou distinctly do, I do not hear,
But of one stamp, it is sure your actions were
So great and glorious, as did justly strike,
A fear in all men to attempt the like;
Some souls thou winst, I doubt not too, for who
Can think such gracious words in vain did flow
From thy blessed lips; as yet indeed they be
But like the windfall's to the laden tree:
Thy work lies further off, where heavens intend,
Whole Nations to thy powerful voice shall bend.
The Circumcision's Peter's charge, but thine
God knows how many Regions shall confine.
John Baptist beheaded. Epig. 1.
YOu that for love of outward peace or gain,
From preaching all the truths of Christ refrain,
That dare not touch the times, nor lance the sore,
Of States and Courts, which ranks more and more;
That see the great ones run themselves to Hell,
And damn their souls with sins too palpable:
Yet you stand dumb the while, and will not go
And tell them to their faces what they do.
Look on our John, if he this path had trod,
He might have kept his head, but wronged his God.
Upon Mat. 14. 9. Epigr. 2.
HErod has sworn, and John must lose his head,
A poor man would be loath to have it sed,
That he had broke his Oath, but Kings must stand,
Upon their honor here at any hand;
But who, blind Tyrant, bad thee swear at all?
Wise men would weigh what mischiefs may befall,
Before they ventured on so rash a vow,
Which if it must be kept, thy children now
And Mothers throats are not secure; nor ought
So vile, but if she lists, it must be wrought;
But plead not Conscience, he that daily lies
In lustful sheets, will swallow perjuries:
Revenge the Prophet first in prison threw,
Whom now vainglory and indulgence slew.
Upon Mar. 6. 2. Epig. 3.
BAte Herod but his incest, and there is none
Will be a greater follower of John;
He hears him gladly, and observes him too,
And many things accordingly does do
But here he sticks; with this he cannot part,
Hypocrites will have something near their heart;
Some lust or other which they prize before
Their souls, and him whom all good souls adore.
What profit is it, my Savior, to have gone
Half way with Herod in Religion*
To be near heaven, as that poor Lawyer was,
If I stay there, and do no further pass;
Oh root out every sin which I possess,
Or it is but vain to think of happiness.
September 1.
NAme not this Month, but let your thoughts withal
Those old Mosaic mysteries recall,
Which in this sacred number couched lie,
And challenge from us a solemnity.
Seven in a Christians mouth should never come,
But his quick soul should run ore all the sum;
Rehearse a short couched Catalogue by rote
Of all the sevens which Holy Writ does note.
Every small hint and word suggested, brings
A godly man in mind of heavenly things.
The Feasts of September 2.
SEptember's twenty first is Matthew's right,
Great Michael does in twenty nine delight.
Matthew Apostle. Epig. 1.
You Will say Excise men seldom come to good,
Who by extortions gain their livelihood*
Yet see what Christ can do, our Matthew here
Was such a one, yet's saved I do not fear.
Let none condemn the employment, mercy can
Of such a Vermin make an honest man.
Epig. 2.
OF all the Gospels, Matthew's only writ
In the Hebrew tongue, as if he purposed it
Merely to save that Nation, whom before
With harsh exactions he had poll'd so sore.
And 'twas a large amends we grant indeed,
For Earthly chaff, to give them heavenly seed.
Epig. 3.
GOod God what change is here! our Matthew that
Erewhile at the receipt of Custom sat,
And was so vile a wretch, that none, except
The Devil himself, a worser Conscience kept;
Is now become a Saint, yea counted fit
In one of the Apostolic chaires to sit.
Nor stays he at this height, but first of men
Is chose his Saviors life and death to pen:
Which he discharged so well, that now they fear
Not to affirm an Angels hand did bear
A part in the employment, as if none
Of humane race could write such things alone;
So soon he past through both extremes, of late
Almost a Devil, and now an Angels Mate.
Michael Archangel. Epig, 1.
AT Moses Bar if sinful men were tried,
No flesh alive would ere be justified.
But him in mercy God has laid so low,
That Devils themselves his burial do not know.
They strive indeed to find it out, and feign
Would bring him from his putrid Urne again
To judge the World; if they might have their will,
Moses should live, and Christ be buried still.
But our Archangels powerful hand alone
Nulls all their search, and keeps his grave unknown
Even so, great Prince, let him still buriedly,
For if he rise, the whole wide world must die.
Epig. 2.
Ad Schismaticos, quod Michael non sit Christus.
It Is no created Angel this, you say,
But Christ the Lord, whom holy Church to day
Honors for that great combat which of old
He with the Devil 'bout Moses corpse did hold:
But tell us then what were those men the while
That say he durst not that foul fiend revile?
What is it that great Messiah durst not do,
Who made the Devils and shall condemn them too?
Or whom does God with his blessed Spirit infuse,
That such harsh words of Christ their Lord will use?
Choose which you will hold, or 'twas a Creature this,
Or what th* Apostles wrote were Blasphemies.
Epig. 3. Upon Revelat. cap. 12.
Devils have their Prince, and so have Angels too,
Monarchick power all creatures yield unto:
These fought in heaven, this with desire to tear
The woman thence, but that to keep her there:
But rest poor Creature with thy Babe secure,
The Dragon is not able to endure
Thy Michaels strength, whom God has armed to be
A Prince, and Guardian to thy seed and thee:
Rest happy Church, and though this Serpents tail
Over almost half the stars of heaven prevail
To throw them down, yet be not thou affright,
For whose defense such hosts of Angels fight.
October 1.
EIght is the Gospels number, on this day
Our buried Lord triumphing, broke away
From Death's strong holds, whom she supposed sh'had tied
There fast enough for ever to abide.
That day, till he ascended hence, he still
Met, and informed his Brethren with what skill,
They in and out before his Church should go.
That day his Spirit in streams of fire did flow
Into the Apostles bosoms, and between
Their knees, to sit like cloven tongues, was seen.
That day the Lord for all his Churches weal
To his beloved Disciple did reveal,
In Pathmos Isle, a gracious sight of all
Those changes which hereafter must befall
His wearied Spouse, till She at last do come
To* feast it with him in the wedding room.
In memory of all which things, his will
Is, that this Eight day shall be honored still
Throughout the world, till he us all remove
To keep an everlasting Eight above.
The Feasts of October 2.
OCtober's eighteenth day on Luke does wait:
Simon and Jude are pleased with twenty eight.
Luke Evangelist. Epigr. 1.
THat you may see that Galen's Pupills are
Not all such Atheists as reports declare;
Read those two books that Luke's sweet hand did pen,
In this the Acts of God, in that of men:
And tell me whether the Church ere had a man
That wrote more truths then our Physician:
To these, if you demand my Faith, I fly,
And say here is my Religio Medici.
Epigr. 2.
LVke the beloved Physitian's styled a name,
At which would God our Tribe did chiefly aim:
Let others scrape for wealth, but let us be
Deservedly beloved as well as he:
Let us still wait upon our Patients side,
Take such account of all things that betide
Their sleeps, their wakings, coolings, heats, and all
Those very nauseous excrements that fall,
Bear all their wayward moods, speak still so fair,
Give such good words, as may remove despair
From their sad thoughts, which kills as much or more
Then all their sickness; cast in still such store
Of seasonable advice, as may dispose
Them for a better life then that they lose.
Yet ever be at hand to recommend
Such congruous medicines as through Grace may tend
To their recovery, that when all is done,
We may get love, though little else be won.
Epigr. 3.
ANd why great Luke did Ancient times assign
An Oxes form to such a soul as thine;
A soul that breathes such heavenly streynes, as well
Might fit an Angell's glorious tongue to tell:
Was it because thy holy book begins
With a relation of those offerings;
Which in Abrah's course were now to be
Performed by old religious Zachary?
Or was 't because thou more then all the rest
Thy Saviors doleful Passion have expressed,
Who like an Ox was to the slaughter led,
And di'd to ransom sinners that were dead?
Or was it thy self and not thy books that were
Deciphered by this Oxes character;
The Ox we know does fitly represent
The laboring Pastor in his government;
And this apt emblem truly could not be
Referred to any better then to thee;
Thy feet trod out much corn for us indeed,
On which God grant our souls may gladly feed.
Simon and Jude Apostles. Epigr. 1.
THe name imports not much, the good and bad
Have oftentimes the self same title had.
The Sorcerer and Cephas both did bear
The name of Simon, yet was Peter nere
The worser thought of for vile Magus sake,
Nor do accursed Iscariots treasons make
Thaddeus, James his Brother, loved the less
Because they both were called Judasses.
Good names do well indeed, and yet we see
That names and things do often disagree.
Eve called her first born Cain as hoping well
He might have proved that man that was to quell
The Serpent's rage, but he alas became
His Brother's Butcher, and his Parents shame.
Lord give me that new name, the which alone
It Is sure was never given in vain to none.
Upon Simon the Canaanite, Matt. 10. 4. and Mar. 3. 18. Epigr. 2.
FRom Canaan's cursed stock some good does flow,
Even Christ himself to Rahab's loins does ow
The flesh he took, and she who begged a crum
Fallen from his board, from that vile race did come.
You need not therefore wonder at the sight
If amongst the twelve you find a Canaanite.
The gifts of Grace are free, bestowed alike
Upon the Jew, and also on the Greek:
The Spirit breathes where 't list, that none may vaunt
Of too much plenty, nor despair for want.
Upon Simon Zelotes, Epig. 3.
THe Canaanite received into the train
Of Christ, Zelotes name does quickly gain,
From that great zeal no doubt which he expressed,
Unto his new chose Masters interest:
And to say truth, it is not seldom seen
That those strange branches, which are grafted in,
Bring forth more plenteous, and more lovely fruit,
Then those which nature thrusts from the root,
It Is sad indeed it should be thus, that they
Who came into Christ's School but yesterday,
Should outstrip those, who many years before
Did put their sluggish feet within his door.
Yet thus my God, with my poor Soul it stands,
Those that but now did put their labo'ring hands
Unto thy Plough, have rid more work away
Then I that here have pingled many a day.
I grudge not, Lord, at what these Zealots do,
May they still thrive in Grace, and add unto
The fire they have for thee, all that I pray
Is that thou make me burn as well as they.
November. 1.
THe Muses here put in their claim, and cry,
That this of right is their Festivity.
That, I am bound this Month in every line
To Echo forth the honor of the Nine.
But they must pardon me, these sacred Lays
Do own no influence but Vrania's.
They know no Nines, save such as couched be
In the Thrice-great, Thrice-holy Trinity.
The are all my Muses, from their bounteous Throne
My Artless quill derives her aid alone.
November his Feasts.
ALL Saints unto Novembers first repair;
The fifth, the Powder-Plots discovered are;
The thirtieth is to that blessed Saint applied,
Whom John first to the Lamb of God did guide.
All Saints. Epigr. 1.
THe Saints deceased, which now securely rest
In Abraham's bosom of rich joys possessed.
Cry strongly yet, no doubt, to re-obtain
An union with their buried Corpse again:
And being alike convinced that they, and we
Who still below in these dark Mansions be,
Make but one Body, they as strongly pray
That we may gain those joys as well as they.
We also here on Earth, having learned that those
Blessed Spirits which now in blissful joys repose,
Are part of us, and have assumed their Throne
In our behalf, as well as in their own.
Do praise thee, Lord, for them, whom thy good grace
Has rapp'd from hence, into so sweet a place.
Thus whilst our praises, and their prayers do meet
Knit up together, at thy glorious feet.
Whilst they our wants, and we their joys partake:
And each the others state their own do make.
This is that true Communion indeed
Of Saints, that we are taught out of the Creed.
Epig. 2.
WE are not able, Lord, to comprehend
What numerous troops of glorious Saints attend
About thy blessed Throne, and yet we know
That there is not one of them to whom we owe
Not a Religious reverence, for those shares
Which we are sure we have in all their prayers.
Which due regards, lest we should happily miss
In paying to their several Memori's.
Athenian-like, but in a juster way,
To the unknown Saints we Dedicate this day.
Epigr. 3.
THe meanest of thy Saints, O God, we find
Have left such patterns of their lives behind;
And now such advantageous prayers do make
(At least in general) for their Brethren's sake,
That we can never pay thee what we owe
For what from one of these rich springs does flow.
How much more then, when all their streams unite
Into one flood, must that be infinite?
The are thus indeed, being viewed by our weak eyes,
Which make alas but poor discoveries.
Although compared to what thy Christ has done,
The are all but like a spark unto the Sun.
Gunpowder Treason. Epig. 1.
ROmes Mitred Shepherds rage like Wolves, and rend
With their fell teeth, the flocks they ought to tend.
But I admire not at it, for it is sed
Her founders with Wolves milk at first were fed.
And this approved experience daily shows,
That from the breasts men suck their nature flows.
Epig. 2.
Whose Vicar Romes High Priest's most like to be,
This days cursed fireworks teach sufficiently.
The devil no doubt first taught this murdering skill.
And the are his Impes alone that use it still.
Epig. 3.
'TWas thought that such gross heretics as we
Could scarce be saved, or Gods bright Presence see.
When lo, the tender Romanist being sorry
To have us damned, prepared a Purgatory,
A newfound blast of Sulfurous flames, wherein
Cleans'd from the gross impurities of sin:
Prince, Peers, and People, all at once might fly
(Like Manaoh's Angel) to those joys on high.
Who Will now hereafter charge the Popish rabble
Of shaveling Priests to be uncharitable,
Who would at their own charge (kind souls) convey
Their Enemies to Heaven so near a way.
Andrew Apostle. Epig. 1.
ANdrew having found the Christ, brings Peter in;
True Converts still strive others souls to win.
Nor lose they by it, for grace is such a thing,
The more men spend, the more their waters spring.
Like Christ his loaves, whereof the more do share,
The fuller still the emptied baskets are.
Or like the widows oil, which never stayed
Till she an end of pouring out had made.
A sparing hand here makes the Owner poor,
They that do dole most out, have most in store,
Upon John 1. 38, 39. Epig. 2.
ANdrew enquires where Jesus dwells, he
Answers him truly, he must come and see,
It Is not the hearing of the ear, O man,
That is enough to make a Christian.
Unless thou come to Christ, and with thine eye
Of faith, survey the place where he does lie.
Thousands have heard his own sweet mouth to tell
Where his abode, and yet are gone to Hell,
But none e're came to him that went away,
And perished in his sins another day.
Epigr. 3. Upon the Scots Arrogating Saint Andrew for their Patron.
SCotland, we grant, feels Andrews powerful hand,
But it is to punish, not to guard their land,
Their King, their God, their Souls, and all they will sell
For a few pence, and run themselves to Hell,
But this sad curse their Saint on them has laid,
That they shall still be poor, for all their Trade.
December 1.
MEthinks this Month to Sinai sadly leads,
And in our ears the ten Commandments reads,
Those ten sad words, which none e're kept, and none
E're broke, but 'twas to his own destruction.
Sad words indeed, but that this Month, before
It does expire, brings in a Savior.
One that does keep them from us, and does bear
That death himself, which our sad souls did fear.
O happy Advent! that has power to make
This yoke so easy now to undertake,
That takes all dread from these ten words away,
And turns our Serpent to a helping stay.
Which way so e're we look, this Number now
Has no more threatening wrinkles in its brow.
Look upon Christ, and this tenth Month will bring
Him clad in flesh, to be our offering.
Look on the Law, and all the thunder's gone
And it has nothing in it, but light alone.
Thus thou, my God, can make December snow
With more sweet joys, then verdant May to flow.
December his Feasts. 2*
DEcember's twenty first is Thomas Fee;
The twenty fifth is Christ's Nativity;
Stephen upon the twenty sixth they stone;
The twenty seventh's assigned to aged John;
The twenty eight by Herod's cruelty
At Bethlehem, the poor Innocents did die.
Thomas Apostle. Epig. 1.
THy faith was weak, it cannot be denied,
Such doubtings are not to be justified,
When such a cloud of Witnesses do meet
To clear a truth, then ( Thomas) not to see it
Is willful blindness, which does not admit
Of any just excuse to cover it.
But yet, blessed Saint, when by thy Lords consent
Thy hands had felt those holes the nails had rent,
And that the spear had made within his side,
Then never man with greater fervor cried,
My Lord, my God: O happy, happy tongue!
That feelingly so sweet an Anthem sung,
Thomas thy failings they were great indeed,
But thy great faith I Am sure did more exceed.
Epig. 2.
THomas had not thy failings been so sad
Our Faith had not so firm a footing had;
Thy weakness is our strength, and by thy fall
We Are now so settled, as no tempest shall
Unfix our holds, or make us doubt again:
O God, what cannot thy great power attain?
Who make thy Saints miscarriages to be
An Antidote to all Posterity.
Well may we by their graces look to win
That do become such gainers by their sin.
Epig. 3. Upon John 20. 21.
THomas it is true, thy late dead Master stands
Before thy eyes, thou feel'st his side and hands,
(Such is his grace) and now beleev'st indeed,
But it is weak faith that such strong proofs does need.
Blessed are they whom lesser means will draw,
To rest upon that Christ they never saw.
Thou do not want thy wages, but their Faith
No doubt my God, a double portion has.
Christmas Day, Epig. 1. Upon Luke 2. 7.
STruck with a new Instinct me thinks I spy
The Beasts before thy manger prostrate lie,
And strait cry out, Lord, now it is true indeed,
That which we in thy Holy Book do read,
The Ox, and the Ass their Masters crib do know,
But Israel thine own people do not so.
Epig. 2. Verse. eod. There was no room for them in the Inn.
VVHo'd think that David's heir, in David's town
With child, should find no lodging to lay down,
Her precious burden, but poor creature must
Into the stable with the Beasts be thrust.
But thus in common Inns to has always bin,
They thrust out Christ whilst Ruffians vaunt within.
Epigr. 3. Upon Luke 2. 8, 9, 10, 11.
Why did thou send thine Angel Lord to tell
Poor Shepherds first of this great Miracle,
The birth of thy Messiah which had bin
News for the stateliest Courts to have gloried in:
Was it to show that in these heavenly things,
Poor Swains often get the start of mighty Kings?
Or was it because that he whose birth was told,
Himself was the great Shepherd of the fold,
And 'twas but meet that such as Shepherds were,
The birth of the great Shepherd first should hear;
Or would thou have these Shepherds know that Lamb
Of God was now brought forth, whom it became
Them to look after, more then all their own;
A Lamb that whosome're does wait upon,
They are kept safe, by that same Lamb they keep,
The Shepherds are preserved by the Sheep;
Whether this or that induced thee Lord to show
This grace, to these poor men, I do not know.
But this I know, they have seen such things to day
As never men beheld before but they;
Go happy Shepherds, leave your flocks and hie,
To Beth'lem where your Infant Lord does lie:
And when you have viewed his sacred person well,
Spare not aloud, what you have seen to tell;
Write volums of these things, and let them bear
The title of the Shepherds Calender.
This I assure you, never shepherds knew
With all their studies, half so much as you.
Saint Stephen. Epig. 1.
THy name, great Stephen, does a Crown denote,
And thou indeed a goodly Crown has got.
The first rich Crown that ever Martyr ware,
That witness to his glorious Master bare.
Christ by his sufferings past into his Throne;
And thou the self same-way to thine art gone.
Where thou now reignest with him, O happy man!
That by one Combat, such a Kingdom wan.
Had I, great Saint, that learned Graecian's skill,
And could drop golden raptures from my quill,
I Would write whole books like his, and they should be
Pri stephnou of thy Crown and thee.
Upon Act. 7. 56. Epig. 2.
THat Christ on Gods right hand enthroned does sit,
Our Creed, and all the Scriptures witness it.
Yet thou, great Martyr, see him stand, a thing
Well worthy of our strict examining.
But I have found it. Thou being now to fight
This first pitched Combat in thy Masters right:
Christ leaves his seat, and upon tiptoe stands
To see how thou thereof would quit thy hands,
And having seen thee, with much joy to win
The prize, he opes the Heavens to take thee in.
And will sit down no more, thou happy one,
Till he have placed thee first upon thy throne:
And taken those stones, which when thou now did die
About thy head like storms of hayl did fly:
And changed to Rubies, have enameld them
About thy well-wrought glorious Diadem.
Stephen, thy way indeed was hard and rough,
But thy reward at last was sweet enough.
Upon Act. 7. 6. He fell asleep. Epig. 3.
THen when the furious stones in storms did fall
About thy head, when blood and brains and all
Spatt'red from thy dissevered skull, and those
That gave them, have bemoaned their dreadful blows,
It Is said thou fell'st asleep, O wondrous thing!
Was this a time for sleep to spread her wing
About thy peaceful temples? cou'd'st thou ly
So gently down, when such rough storms did fly?
But I admire not, thou had seen a sight
That ravished thy glad Soul with more delight
Then all those wounds could fright thee with, which were
Indeed an Exit, not a cause of fear.
Let me my God but such a vision see,
And I shall sleep in death as well as he.
John the Evangelist. Epig. 1.
'Twas not for naught, great John, that thou did rest
Thy head upon thy Masters sacred Breast,
Thence thou deriv'st those heavenly gifts that none
Of all the twelve e're had but thou alone:
They moved in narrower Spheres, one's hand did pen,
Epistles to the scattered brethren:
Another filled with a celestial light,
The story of his Saviors life did write:
But thou alone in one sweet knot did twist,
Prophet, Apostle, and Evangelist.
Epig. 2. Upon John 19. 26, 27.
THis power to all believers is conveyed,
That they are Gods adopted children made,
And it is a grace indeed, to be allied
To Christ the Lord upon the better side:
But John to thee this further honor's done
That you are adopted also Mary's son;
On both sides now unto thy Lord a kin,
His German-brother doubly grafted in;
O who can boast great Saint, as thou can do?
The Son of God, and Son of Mary too!
No mortal man had e're that favor shovvn,
To be thus truly styled, but thou alone.
Epig. 3. Upon the Effigies of an Eagle, ascribed to S. John.
It Was not unmeet blessed Saint that thou did bear
The quick-y'd Eagles specious Character,
Who could with fixed looks so freely gaze,
Upon those beams which other eyes amaze;
Who have thy Lords dread person so expressed,
As if thou dst lain, not on, but in his breast;
As though the other Writers all had seen
But his back-parts, and thou alone had been
Familiar with his face, which shone so bright,
That no man's eyes but thine could brook the sight.
The Type was apt, but short, the Eagles eye
And towering wing indeed, that soars so high,
Something present thy Genius, but not well
For she wants tongue the things she sees to tell;
Thou with Seraphick skill at once did see,
And warble out thy Saviors dignity:
Well did the Church in one sweet Book of thine,
Ascribe to thee the Title of Divine.
Thou showd'st thy self so there, and to say true
In all the rest great Saint, thou did so too.
Innocents day, Epig. 1.
Weigh but the sins, and sorrows age does bring,
And you will conclude it is a happy thing
To die betimes, and so prevent those woes
Which he that long surviveth undergoes,
This was your case, sweet Babes, you early died,
And so blessed souls the fewer evils tried
But that is not all, you died for Jesus sake,
And that is a cause indeed enough to make
The saddest sufferings glorious; never man
For his behoof the smalest hazard ran
And lo^^ ^y the adventure, so to die,
Is to live happy everlastingly.
Then weep not Rachell that thy Sons are slain,
Nor reckon that thy loss, that was their gain.
'Twas mercy that thy children died so soon,
But that they thus did die, 's a double Boon.
Epig. 2.
THe sting of death is sin, remove but that,
And death has nothing to be trembled at.
What need then these sweet Infants fear; the events
Of death, never hurt such harmless Innocents.
Lord, wash my Soul as clean as theirs, and I
When e're thou call'st, will be content to die.
Epigr. 3.
YOu died for Christ, sweet Babes, but grudge not though,
You gained a glorious Crown by doing so:
And 'twas no sorry bargain, that to lose
A moments breath, for such rich joys as those;
And yet that breath was none of yours, beside*
'Twas bought before by him, for whom you died
FINIS.

