ANOTHER DECLARATION OF THE LORDS AND COMMONS Assembled in Parliament:
Concerning Subscriptions for bringing in Money, Plate, and Horses. Together
with Additions to the former instructions for Deputy Lievtenants. With a
Declaration likewise from them, concerning the publishing of diverse
Proclamations and papers in forms of Proclamations, in his Majesty's name. As
also the Copy of a Letter sent to Master William Crofts, at the Hague, by
Master Henry Wilmot, but intercepted at Sea by one of the Ships in his
Majesty's service, and sent to the Lord Admiral, and delivered to the Commons
by the Lords, at a conference of both Houses. With the substance of two Letters
from Rotterdam, 4. July, Stilo novo, 1642. And a Letter from the Earl of
Warwick to Mr. John Pym Esquire and presented to both Houses of Parliament, July 6.
1642.

Ordered to be forthwith published and printed.

H. Elsynge, Cler. Parl. D. Com.

London, Printed for N. Allen, 7. July, 1642.

A Let^er sent from the Earl of Warwick to Mr. Pym.
Mr. Pym,
BEfore these shall come to your hand I make no doubt but Mr. Nichols of the
House of Commons has made both Houses a Relation of what has passed here
since I received His Majesty's Letters for the discharging me of the command of
the Fleet wherewith I was entrusted, how I called a Council of War, and
acqainted them with his Majesty's Letters, and likewise with the Ordinance of
Parliament, sent from the Houses for me t^ continue my charge: I confess it
was a great strait that I was put in, between two commands that have so much
power over me: but when I consider tho great care which I have ever observed in
the ^arliaments of this Kingdom for the good and safety of the King and
Kingdom, and every man's particular in them; and that they are that great
Council by whose authority the Kings of England have ever spoken to their
Subjects; and likewise that the trust of his ^leet for the d^fence of his
Majesty and the Kingdoms was committed to me by them; and knowing the
integrity of my own heart to his Majesty and Parliament, I resolved not to
desert tha^ charge committed to my trust, wherein God (blessed be his name for
it) has made me hitherto so successful, but to continue it until J shall be
revoked by that authority that has entrusted me with it; which having declared
to my Captains at the Council of War, all of them unanimously and cheerfully
took the same Resolution, excepting five, which was the Rere-Admirall,
Captain Fogge, Captain Barley, Captain Slingsby, and Captain Wake, all
which five refused to come upon my summons, as having no authority over them,
and got together round that night to make their defense against me, only
Captain Burley came in and submitted to me. Whereupon in the morning I weighed
my Anchors, and caused the rest of my Ships so to do, and came to an anchor
round about them, and besieged them, and when I had made all things ready, I
summoned them.

Sir John Men's and Captain Fogge, came in to me: but Captain Slingsby, and
Captain Wake stood out: Whereupon I let fly a Gun over them, and sent them
word, I had turned up the Glass upon them: if in that space they came not in,
they must look for me aboard them. I sent to them by my Boat, and most of the
Boats in the Fleet. Their answer was so peremptory, that my Masters and Saylors
grew so impatient on them, that although they had no Arms in their Boats at
all, yet God gave them such courage and resolution, as in a moment they entered
them, took hold on their Shrouds, and seized upon these Captains, being armed
with their Pistols and Swords, and struck their Yards and Top-masts, and
brought them both in to me. The like courage and resolution was never seen
amongst unarmed men, so as all was ended without effusion of blood, which I
must attribute to the great God of Heaven and earth only, who in the moment
that I was ready to give fire on them, put such courage into our men to act it,
and so saved much blood.

I hope the Parliament will think of some course for all our indemnities, and
especially for the Officers of the Navy, and principally for the Surveyor of
the Navy, my Vice Admiral, a very able and good man. For my self, I doubt
not but they that put me in this employment, will preserve me for serving them
faithfully.

I pray you Sir, be a means to Sir Robert Pie and Mr. Green, that some money
may be sent us, for it has been often promised, but hear not of it. The
weather continuing stormy so long together, that we spend our Masts, and top
Masts, or some detriment or other falls upon us daily, so that we are in great
extremity for want of money.

Thus, having nothing else to trouble you for the present, only that you will
be pleased to acquaint your House of Commons with our proceedings here, I bid
you farewell, and rest,

Your assured friend to serve you, Warwick.

Instructions for Deputy Lievtenants, which are Members of the House of
Commons, and other Lievtenants of several Counties, concerning the last
PROPOSITIONS. Together with the Names of the Commissaries, who are to inroll
and value the Horses and Arms according to the Propositions.
THat the Deputy Lievtenants of each County, which are Members of the House,
shall have authority to tender the Propositions to the other Deputy Lievtenants
of the same County; and take their Subscriptions, and all such Deputy
Lievtenants, or any two of them, as shall subscribe according to the
Propositions, shall have authority to assemble and call together all such
persons as they shall think fit, and to tender those Propositions to all such
Persons as shall be present, or to any persons within their Counties
respectively, and receive their Subscriptions. And the said Deputy Lievtenants,
or any two of them, shall have authority to name such, and so many Persons as
they shall think fit to assemble, and call together every person, or to
repair to their several houses, or dwellings, within their respective
Counties, and to take their Subscriptions; which subscriptions are by them to
be returned to such persons as shall be appointed Receivers in the respective
Counties, who shall from time to time certify the sums, values or
proportions of such subscriptions to the Treasurers of London.

The said Deputy Lievtenants, or the greater part of them, shall have power to
name Receivers in their Counties, and all such as shall either before or after
their subscriptions, pay or bring in any Money or Plate, shall deliver the same
to such person or persons as shall be appointed to the said Deputy Lievtenants,
or the greater part of them, under their hands to be Receivers, which the said
persons so appointed, shall cause to be delivered to the Treasurers in London,
named in the said Propositions; and shall receive Acquittances from the said
Treasurers, in the name, and to the use of the several persons from whom they
shall receive such money or plate, and shall deliver such Acquittances to the
several persons to whom they do belong: And all such as make such returns of
Money or Plate, shall receive reasonable allowance from the Treasurers for the
same, according to their discretions.

All that find Horses, shall presently send them up to London, according to
the Propositions.

In those Counties where no Commissions are issued to those that were nominated
for Deputy Lieutenants, or none have been nominated, there the same Authority
to be given to such Justices of the Peace, or other Gentlemen of those
Counties, which shall be named by the Knights and Burgesses of those Counties,
and approved by both Houses, as is to the Deputy Lieutenants in the first
instruction.

That the time of notice shall be taken, to be from the time that every man
hears the Proposition first read by the Authority aforesaid.

It is ordered that Captain Barrel, Master Lloyd, John Smith of London,
Gent', and Francis Dowsett of London, Gent', be Commissaries to Inroll and
value the Horses and Arms, to be raised according to the Propositions.

ADDITIONS.
THat any one or more, already allowed by both Houses of Parliament, to be a
Deputy Lieutenant or Deputy Lieutenants in any County, or any other two persons
or more in every County, City, or Borough, which shall be approved by both
Houses, shall have power to put the Propositions in execution, in all points
according to the former Instructions.

That the Knights, Citizens, and Burgesses of the several Counties, Cities,
and Boroughs within this Realm, be required with all speed to commend these
Propositions to their several Counties, Cities, and Boroughs respectively, to
be put in execution.

That the persons aforesaid may have power to name one or more in each County,
to take the subscriptions of those who will prepare Horses in readiness for
the ends proposed in the Propositions; and to inroll them, and appoint
Officers, and from time to time to view them, and to see they be completely
armed, and exercised in the respective Counties.

That whosoever shall bring in one or more Horses without Arms, or Money to
find them, may have his or their Horses valued, and listed by such as are
appointed in the respective Counties, the owners of those Horses engaging
themselves to bring them in for the service of the Commonwealth, when they
shall be required by any Authority to that purpose by both Houses of Parliament.

That all such Horses as are subscribed by the Members of either House, or by
the Citizens of London, may be showed and enrolled by Saturday next, the ninth
of July instant, that they may be divided into Troops, and trained.

A Declaration of the LORDS and COMMONS assembled in PARLIAMENT.
Whereas question has been made, by some persons, whether the time for
subscriptions of Horse, Money and plate, according to Propositions lately
published by the Lords and Commons in Parliament, were not limited to fourteen
days after notice given to all within the City of London, and sixty miles
distant from the said City; The Lords and Commons do declare, That they did
not prescribe any time for such subscriptions, but only desire, such as were
within the said City, or within such a distance, to hasten the bringing in
money, plate, and horses, as much conducing to that service. And they do
further declare, that whosoever shall yet bring in money plate, or horses, or
subscribe to bring in any money, plate, or Horses, according to the said
propositions, and to the ends therein mentioned, shall do an acceptable
service to the commonwealth and shall have the same consideration conditions
and protection, as is expressed in those Propositions, only it is still
desired, that it may be done with all convenient speed.

A Declaration of the Lords and Commons assembled in Parliament, Concerning the
publishing of diverse Proclamations, and Papers, in forms of Proclamations in
His Majesty's Name.
Whereas several Proclamations, Declarations, and Papers, in forms of
Proclamations, have issued out in His Majesty's Name, commanding Parsons,
Vicars, Curates, Sheriffs, Mayors, Bailiffs, and other Officers, to publish and
proclaim the same, being contrary to Law, and to dvers Orders, Ordinances, and
Declarations of both Houses of Parliament, and much to the scandal and
derogation of both the said Houses.

Be it Ordered and declared by the Lords and Commons in Parliament, That no
Sheriff, Major, Bailiff, Parson, Vicar, Curate, or other Officer, shall from
henceforth publish or proclaim, or cause to be proclaimed or published, any
such Proclamations, Declarations or Papers which are or shall be contrary to
any Oorder, Ordinance, or Declarations of the said Houses of Parliament, or
tending to the scandal or derogation of their proceedings, but shall use all
lawful ways and means to restrain and hinder the proclaiming and publishing
thereof. And all Sheriffs, Majors, Bailiffs, Parsons, Vicars, and Curates, or
other Officers that have forborne or refused, or shall forbear or refuse to
publish or proclaim any such Proclamations, Declarations, or Papers as
aforesaid, or have or shall hinder the publication thereof, shall be protected
by the power and authority of both Houses of Parliament.

Ordered by the Commons in Parliament, That this be forthwith Printed and
Published.

Hen. Elsing. Cler. Par. D. Com.

A Copy of Mr. Henry Wilmots Letter to Mr. William Crofts at the Hague,
intercepted at Sea by one of the Ships in his Majesty's service, and sent up to
the Lord Admiral, and was delivered to the Commons by the Lords at a
conference of both Houses.
AMongst other Evidences of the disposition and designs of those in credit
about the King and Queen, a Letter was intercepted at Sea by one of the Ships
now in his Majesty's service, and sent up to the Lord Admiral, was delivered
to the Commons by the Lords at a Conference of both Houses, which was dated the
two and twentieth of June, from York, written by Mr. Henry Wilmot, one of
those who were privy to the conspiracy of Mr. Iermin and others, about bringing
up the Army the last year, and directed to Mr. William Crofts a servant of the
Queens, by this Letter it appears, that they have had often conferences of
dividing the estates of the Parliament men, and that this is the use they
intend to make of the forces raised by his Majesty: And that they are grown so
bold upon his protection as to vilify and deride the Parliament, and not only
to contemn their summons, but shamefully to abuse their messenger with
violence and scorn. Which Letter follows in these words, For Mr. Crofts at
the Hague.
Dear Will,
BY these last Letters to the Queen, you will find a great alteration of
business here; the King, that very lately appeared almost abandoned by all his
Subjects, is now become the Favorite of the Kingdom; yet I believe his
enemies are not so neglected as not to be able to raise an Army to oppose him:
and indeed here lies the jest, for they will be followed just enough to
forfeit their estates, which I have heard you often say, were better bestowed
on some of us. Yesterday there came a messenger from the House, who had Order,
(and d^d raise the power of the County) to entreat Bartley, Ashburnham, and my
self, to come to speak to the House; but the King gave the messenger a short
answer, and an Officer or two gave him a short Cudgel, so he is returned to
London ((...)) with his arm in a scarf. Dear Will, (...) your good opinion,
for I assure you I am,

Your most affectionate humble servant, H. Wilmot.
(...). York, 1642. Pray if Mr. Iermin be with you, present my most humble
service to him.

Hen. Elsyng Cler. Par. D. Com.






A letter from ROTTERDAM.
Worshipful Sir;
I Wrote to you on Tuesday last, by a Merchant that had a Pass to come over
land: but lest that should not come to hand, though little has happened here
since, I cannot omit this Post. The ship Lion that brought over Ladies of
Honor, is now fitted to transport into England Prince Robert, Prince Maurice,
Lord Digby, Lord Denby, Colonel Cockeram, Captain Hyde, Oneale, Sir Lewis
Dives, with 80 or 90 Cavaliers more: they have fitted themselves with Armor of
proof, and all other accoutrements of war, they have been very merry, and have
drunk many healths to their good voya^e: and in their Cups have made dividents
of the Parliament mer^ l^nds: They are very jocund, and were all abroad
yesterday morning the wind being then fair, but held but a little space, and
now blows very hard: so that God has now stayed them. The Providence that
lies at Brill, is to take in diverse of them,: she has taken much of their
luggage, with two great G^^es, each 12. foot long, and shoot a Bullet of 44.
pounds. Also the Lion at Hel^^^rd Sluice, has taken in much luggage. There are
three Boys or (...) lying at Tassell, laden with Arms, and 38. Cases of
Armor, shipped in Richard Lyndall of Hull, bound for London, I hear they be
all Muskets, and there are in that ship 700. C^rslets. Besides this, I was told
by one, (...) in the Custom House, all these shipped here by a warrant which
they had (...) for 700 Cases, which a Merchant in this Town saw and told; he,
besides (...) of the Custom House, did confess it true.

They give out diverse reports of staying of arms, and of their declining their
voyage. But we knowing their endeavor to work with all deceivablenesse,
think them only tricks to confound our intelligence; for we see ^uch as are
laden here, are not stayed. Indeed for certain, the States General have given
out a warrant of stay for arms; But so they did when all the arms provided
against the Scots were transported; the Officers are corrupted, There is a
Boyer lying within a mile of this Town to be frauthed with horse for P.
Robert, a Merchant of this Town saw the Shippers Charter party, which is, that
he carry them to what part shall be appointed by him between Dover, and
Newcastle; The Prince undertakes his safe-convoy out, and home, and Isaac
Light a Merchant of the Company here, has bought 600. pounds worth of powder,
and much match, where it is shipped, we cannot yet hear; they work with much
privacy. Monday last, there came a Jewel from the Hage valewed at 40000.
Guilders by the Jewellers, they were offered 10000. Guilders upon it, but would
not, and so it was retuned again. We cannot hear of any further pawning of the
jewels, nor where they be. Master Webster went with Sir William Boswell to the
Queen Monday last. Tuseday last was sevenight at 12. a clock in the night
Master Piercy, Master Germin, Master W. Montague, and Davenant, came into the
Hague with the Queens Coach, and Footmen, this I was told by one Master The
Cavaleirs do boast: that having a ship of 40. pieces of Ordnance, and another
of 16 Pieces, that is the resolution of Captain Strachin, Captain of the
Providence; yesterday at Helleford Sluice arrived Gustavus Horn with the happy
entrance of the King, J hope the Captain of her, will not do as the Captain
of the Lion; This being all of any moment that we hear here, I humbly take my
leave and rest.

Yours to comman^


