THE ANSWER OF Both Houses of Parliament, Presented to His Majesty at YORK,
the ninth of May.

Concerning Sir John Hothams Refusal to give His Majesty entrance into His
Town of Hull.

With His Majesty's REPLY thereunto.

Tudor rose Scottish thistle French fleur-de-lis depiction of Irish harp

YORK: Printed by ROBERT BARKER, Printer to the Kings most Excellent Majesty:
And by the Assigns of JOHN BILL.

1642.

The most humble Answer of the Lords and Commons in Parliament, to two Messages
from His Sacred MAJESTY, Concerning Sir John Hothams Refusal to give Him
entrance into the Town of HULL.
YOur Majesty may be pleased to understand, That we, your great Council,
finding manifold Evidences of the wicked Counsels and Practices of some in near
Trust and Authority about you, to put the Kingdom into a Combustion, by drawing
your Majesty into places of Strength, remote from your Parliament, and by
exciting your People to Commotions, under pretense of serving your Majesty
against your Parliament, Lest this Malignant Party, by the advantage of the
Town and Magazine of Hull, should be enabled to go through, with their
mischievous intentions, Did (in discharge of the great Trust that lies upon us,
and by that Power, which in Cases of this Nature, recides in us) command the
Town of Hull to be secured, by a Garrison of the adjoining Train Bands, under
the government of Sir John Hotham, requiring him to keep the same for the
service of your Majesty and the Kingdom; wherein we have done nothing contrary
to your Royal Sovereignty in that Town, or Legal Propriety in the Magazine.

Upon consideration of Sir John Hothams proceedings at your Majesty's being
there, we have, upon very good grounds, adjudged, That he could not discharge
the Trust upon which, nor make good the end for which he was placed in the
Guard of that Town, and Magazine, if he had let in your Majesty, with such
Counselors and Company as then were about You.

Wherefore, upon full Resolution of both Houses, we have declared Sir John
Hotham to be clear from that odious Crime of Treason; And have Avowed, That he
has therein done nothing but in Obedience to the Commands of both Houses of
Parliament; Assuring our selves, That upon mature deliberation, your Majesty
will not interpret his Obedience to such Authority, to be an Affront to your
Majesty, or to be of that nature, as to require any Justice to be done upon
him, or satisfaction to be made to your Majesty: But that you will s^e just
cause of joining with your Parliament, in preserving and securing the Peace of
the Kingdom, suppressing this wicked and Malignant party, who by false colors
and pretensions of maintaining your Majesty's Prerogative against the
Parliament, (wherein they fully agree with the Rebels in Ireland) have been the
causes of all our Distempers and Dangers.

For prevention whereof, we know no better Remedy, then settling the Militia of
the Kingdom, according to the Bill which we have sent your Ma^estie, without
any intention of deserting or declining the validity or observance of that
Ordinance which past both Houses, upon your Majesty's former refusal, But we
still hold that Ordinance to be effectual by the Laws of this Kingdom.

And we shall be exceeding glad, If your Majesty, by approving these our Just,
Dutiful, and Necessary Proceedings, shall be pleased to entertain such
Council, as we assure our selves (by Gods blessing) will prove very
advantageous for the Honor and Greatness of your Majesty, the safety and
peace of your People, amongst which, we know none more likely to produce such
good effects, then a Declaration from your Majesty, of Your purpose to lay
aside all thoughts of going into Ireland; And to make a speedy return into
these parts, to be near your Parliament. Which, as it is our most humble
Desire, and earnest Petition, so shall it be seconded with our most dutiful
care for the safety of your Royal Person, and constant Prayers* That it may
prove Honorable and Successful in the happiness of your Majesty and all
your Kingdoms.

10. Maii. 1642.
His Majesty's Answer to the Petition of both Houses of Parliament.
Presented to Him the ninth of this Month, by the Lord Ed. Howard, Lord
Fairfax, Sir Hugh Cholmley, Sir Ph. Stapleton, and Sir H. Cholmley.
HIs Majesty was in good hope, that the Reason why you so long deferred your
Answer to His Messages concerning Hull, was, That you might the better give him
satisfaction therein, which now adds the more to His astonishment, finding this
Answer (after so long advisement) to be of that nature, which cannot but rather
increase, then diminish the present Distractions, if constantly adhered unto by
the Parliament: Was it not too much, That His Majesty's Town of Hull had a
Garrison put into it, to the great charge of the Country and inconvenience to
the poor Inhabitants, without His Majesty's consent and approbation, under
color, at that time, of foreign Invasion, and apprehensions of the Popish
party, but now the Reasons thereof must be enlarged with a scandal to His
Majesty and His faithful Servants, only to bring in the more specious
pretense for the avowing of Sir John Hothams treasonable insolency?

His Majesty has often heard of the great trust, that by God and Man's Law is
committed to the King, for the defense and safety of His People, but as yet
has never understood what trust or power is committed to either, or both
Houses of Parliament, without the King; they being summoned to counsel and
advise the King: but by what Law or Authority they possess themselves of His
Majesty's proper Right and Inheritance, he is confident, that as they have not,
so they cannot show.

His Majesty, hitherto, has not given the least interruption to public
Justice; But you, rather then suffer one of your Members to come so much as to
a legal trial for the highest crime, will make use of an Order of Parliament
to countenance Treason, by declaring him free from that guilt which all former
ages never accounted other; And that, without so much as enquiring the opinion
of the Judges; For His Majesty is confident, That you would have mentioned
their opinion, if you had asked the same.

Therefore His Majesty expects, That upon further and better consideration, of
the great and necessary consequence of the business of Hull, and seriously
weighing how much this does concern the peace and quiet of the Kingdom, you
will (without further instance from His Majesty) give him full and speedy
Justice against Sir John Hotham; and He leaves all His good People to think
what hope of Justice there is left for them, when you shall refuse or delay to
give your own Sovereign satisfaction: And, as His Majesty has already said,
Till this be done, he will intend no business whatsoever, other then that of
Ireland.

And His Majesty likewise expects, That in the way you have expressed in this
your Answer, you will not put the Militia in execution, until you can show him
by what Law you have authority to do the same without His consent, or if you
do, He is confident, that He shall find much more Obedience, according to
Law, then you against Law; and His Majesty shall esteem all those that shall
obey you therein, to be Disturbers of the Peace of the Kingdom, and in due time
call them legally to a strict account for the same.

As for Ireland, His Majesty refers you to His former Answer.

And lastly, Concerning His Return, He never heard, That the slandering of a
Kings Government, and His faithful Servants, the refusing of Him Justice in a
case of Treason, and the seeking to take away His undoubted and legal
Authority, under the pretense of putting the Kingdom into a posture of Defense,
were Arguments to induce a King to come near or hearken to His Parliament.

FINIS.

