THE ARTICLES OR CHARGE EXHIBITED IN PARLIAMENT AGAINST Sir Francis Windebanck,
Secretary of State to his Majesty, Whereunto is annexed The Letter that he sent
to the Right Honorable the Lord Chamberlain, from Callis, Ian: 11. 1640.

Printed Anno Dom. 1641.

ARTICLES OF THE HOUSE OF Commons in Parliament against Secretary WINDEBANKE.
INprimis, Seventy four Letters of grace to Recusants, within this four
years, signified with Secretary Windebankes own hand.

2. Sixty four Priests in the Gate House, within this four years discharged,
for the most part, by Secretary Windebanke. 3. Twenty nine, discharged by a
verbal Warrant of Secretary Windebankes. 4. A Warrant to protect one Muffon, a
condemned Priest, and all the houses he frequented. 5. One committed by the
Kings own hand, and discharged by Secretary Windebanke, without signification
of the Kings pleasure therein. 6. A Petition of St. Giles in the Fields, near
London, to the King, of the increase of Popery in their Parish, wherein Twenty
one persons was seduced and turned by two Priests, the which Priests was both
discharged by Secretary Windebanke.
Secretary Windebancks Letter to my Lord Chamberlain, from Callis, Ian. 11.
MY Lord, I owe my self to your Lordship, for your late favors; and therefore
much more the account of my self, though (...) debt in either respect be of
little consideration, and the calling of both may be of greater advantage to
you, then to continue the Oblig^tion.

This account had bin presented to your Lp. (...) my first arrival here with
my first dispatches, but I was so mortified with my hazardous passage in an
open shallop, and so perplexed with the thoughts of miseries, into which I sind
my self plunged, and besides, the departure of the messenger that carried
those letters, was so sudden, that it was not possible to perform this duty
to your Lordship sooner; for the which I do most humbly crave pardon. your
Lordship may now please to accept the expressions from the saddest and most
wounded soul in the whole World, who am a spectacle of misery in my self, in
my distressed Wife and children, and in my whole fortunes, who have left the
attending of my Sovereign and Master, and access to the best Prince in the
world, who am become a scorn and byword to all the world, both at home and
abroad, a wanderer, and exile from mine own Country, now in the declination
of my years, and likely to end my days in a remote Country, and far from the
comfort of all my friends. What I am guilty off, none knows so well as his
Majesty, whom I have served faithfully, diligently, painfully, and with as true
and loyal an heart, according to my poor abilities, as any other whatsoever,
and if I found my Conscience charged with any crime of baseness, corruption,
infidelity, or any thing else unworthy of a Gentleman, I should not venture to
address these Complaints to your Lordship, or to any other person of Honor,
in this disconsolate estate, being an object not altogether unworthy of your
Lordships compassion, be it for no other respect, but that I have long served
the King and Queens Majesty's. I doubt not but your Lordship, in your
generosity and goodness, will have a lively sense and feeling of my
sufferings, and vouchsafe me such relief as in your Honor you may; and if my
self, who by course of Nature cannot be now of long continuance, be not
considerable, J most humbly beseech your Lordship to have pity upon my poor
innocent wife, and children, that they receive such comfort and assistance from
you in my absence, that they may be preserved from perishing. And to that end J
most humbly crave your Lordships favor to this Bearer my Son, and to give
him the Honor of access whenever he shall make his addresses to you,
wherein you shall do a work of singular charity; And because there is an
opinion in the world, that J have much improved my fortunes by the Roman party;
And there has been some design by my ministry to introduce Popery into
England, I shall most humbly crave your Lordships patience in giving me leave
to clear those two great misunderstandings, which if they were true, were
sufficient to render me incapable of his Majesty's favors, or of the
compassion of any person of honor whatsoever; For the first, it is notorious
to all the world that having now served his Majesty in the place of a Secretary
above eight years, I have not added one foot of Land to the inheritance left
me by my Father, which in Land and Lease was not above 500 pounds per annum, a
poor and inconsiderable estate for a Secretary, and such an one as most
Secretaries have more then trebled in a short time; for my manner of living, it
has been much under the dignity of a Secretary, and if I had not been very
frugall, J could not have subsisted; where then this concealed mass of
Treasure is (I wish those that speak so liberally of it) would let me know;
for I do protest to God I am utterly to seek where to discover it, and at
this present, I am so unfurnished with moneys, that if his Majesty cause me
not to be supplied, I am unable to subsist in these parts without exposing my
family in England to the danger of starving, and yet neither my purpose nor
inclination is to live otherwise here, then in the greatest obscurity and
closeness that possible I may; I assure your Lordship that those of the Roman
party that passed my hands by his Majesty's commandment, were poor distressed
creatures, and far from being able to enrich me, and besides how little I
have attended my own private, and how freely and like a Gentleman I hope I may
speak the truth without ostentation I have done courtesies to all, I wish it
should rather appear by the testimony of such as have made use of my services,
then by mine own. My Father and J, haved served the Crown of England near
80. years together, in which time, if a greater estate had been raised it
might well have been justified, considering the great employments near the
persons of Queen Elizabeth, King James, and his Majesty that now is, we both
have had; and your Lordship may believe it (for J avow it upon the faith of a
Christian) that it is no more then I have abovementioned, and whether there
are not many from less employments have risen to be Noblemen, and made their
fortunes accordingly, J leave to the world to judge.

For the other suspicion of my being a favourer or an aduancer of Popery, I
protest before the Almighty God, and as I shall answer at the last dreadful
day, that I know no ground for the least suspicion thereof, neither am I my
self, nor is any other to my knowledge guilty of the least thought of any such
purpose; For my self I received my Baptism in the Church of England, and J
know nothing in the Church of Rome that can win me from that Church wherein I
was made a Christian; I do therefore hold this Church of England, not only a
true and Orthodox Church, but the most pure, and near the Primitive of any in
the Christian world, and this J will be ready to seal with my blood,
whenever there shall be occasion (with this further protestation) that if I
did not hold it so, I would not continue in it for any vvorldly respects
whatsoever.

For that which has passed my hands for favor of that party, it has bin
merely ministerial, as his Majesty best knows, and I must be bold to say, that
his Majesty has not bin deceived by it, but has received many greater
advantages; besides that if a Secretary of State should not hold intelligence
with the party is absolute to disable him for the service of the state, and
that has bin done always more or less, and so must always continue. Kings
and their ministers of State, have ever had, and might ever have a Latitude
according to time and occasion, and cannot be so tied according to stricknesse
of law as others are, without peril to the government, therefore when the
Roman party were practique and busy about the state, there was reason to be
more strick't, but now by the wisdom of the Queen and her good Officers, they
are better tempered, less severity has bin used, it being the prerogative of
the Prince to use moderation according to accusation, further then this J have
not had to do with the Roman party, nor thus far but in obedience to my
Masters commandment, which I hope shall not be censured a crime, this being my
condition, I most humbly submit it to your Lordships wisdom and goodness, and
seeing there is no malignity in it, nor prejudice to the state, That your
Lordship would vouchsafe me your favor and protection, and preserve me from
perishing.

Callis January 11. 1640. Your Lordships most humble and faitfull, though much
distressed Servant. FRAN: WINDEBANCK.

FINIS.

