A DECLARATION FROM BOTH HOUSES OF PARLIAMENT. With the additionall Reasons
last presented to His MAJESTY.

Sabbathi 12. Martii, 1642.

Ordered by the Lords and Commons in Parliament assembled, that the
Declaration, with the additionall Reasons last presented to his Majesty, shall
be forthwith printed and published.

Jo. Brown Cleric. Parl. H. Elsine Cleric. Parl. D. Com.

Whereunto is annexed, His Majesty's SPEECH to the Committee, the 9. of March,
1642. when they presented the Declaration of both Houses of Parliam. at
Newmarket.

Printed in the year 1642.

A DECLARATION TO HIS MAJESTY.
May it please your most excellent Majesty,
ALthough the expressions of your Majesty's Message, the second of this instant
Month, do give just cause of sorrow to Us your Majesty's faithful Subjects,
the Lords and Commons in Parliament; yet it is not without some mixture of
Confidence and Hope, considering they proceed from the Misapprehensions of our
Actions and Intentions, which having no ground of truth or reality, may, by
your Majesty's Justice and Wisdom be removed, when your Majesty shall be
fully informed, that these fears and jealousies of Ours, which your Majesty
thinks to be causeless, and without just grounds, do necessarily and
clearly arise from these dangers and distempers, into which the mischievous
and evil Counselors about you have brought this Kingdom: and that those
other fears and jealousies by which your favor, your Royal presence and
Confidence have been withdrawn from your Parliament, have no foundation or
subsistence in any Action, Intention, or Miscarriage of Ours, but are merely
grounded upon the falsehood and malice of those, who for the supporting and
fomenting their own wicked designs against the Religion and Peace of this
kingdom, do seek to deprive your Majesty of the strength and affection of
your People, them of your Grace and protection; and thereby to subject both
your Royal person and the whole Kingdom to ruin and destruction.

To satisfy your Majesty's Judgment and Conscience in both these points, We
desire to make a clear and free Declaration, of the Causes of our fears and
jealousies, which We offer to your Majesty in those particulars.

1. That the design of Altering Religion, in this, and in your other
Kingdoms, has been potently carried on by those in greatest Authority about
you, for diverse years together; and that the Queeens Agent at Rome, and the
Popes Agent at Nuncio here, are not only evidences of this design, but have
been great Actors in it.

2. That the Wars with Scotland was procured to make way for this Intention,
and chiefly incited and fomented by the papists, and others Popishly affected,
whereof we have many evidences, especially their free and general Contribution
to it.

3. That the Rebellion in Ireland was framed and contrived here in England: and
that the English Papists should have risen about the same time, We have diverse
testimonies and Advertisements from Ireland: and that it is a common speech
among the Rebels, wherewith concur other Evidences and observations of the
suspicious Meetings and Consultations: the tumultuary and seditious carriage of
those of that Religion, in diverse parts of the Kingdom, about the breaking out
of the Irish Rebellion: the Deposition of O Conneli: the Information of Mr Cole
Minister: the Letter of Prestram Whitcomb, the Deposition of Thomas Crant: and
many others, which we may produce do all agree in this.

4. The public Declaration of the Lords, Gentlemen and others of the Pale,
that they would join with the Rebels, whom they call the Irish Army, or any
other, to recover unto his Majesty his Royal Perogative, wrested from him by
the Puritan Faction in the Houses of Parliament in England; and to maintain
the same against all others, as also to maintain Episcopal jurisdiction, and
lawfulness thereof; these two being the Quarrels upon which his Majesty's
late Army in the North should have been incensed against us.

5. The great Cause we have no doubt, that the late design, styled The Queens
pious Intention, was for the Alteration of Religion in this Kingdom: for
success whereof the Popes Nuncio, and Count Rosetti enjoined Fasting and
Praying to be observed every week, by the English Papists, which appeared to Us
by one of the Original Letters directed by him to a priest in Lancashire.

6. The boldness of the Rebels in affirming They do nothing but by Authority
from the King, that they call themselves the Queens Army; that the Prey or
Boory which they take from the English, they mark with the Queens Mark. That
their purpose was to come into England, after they had done in Ireland: and
sundry other things of this kind proved by O Conneli, and diverse others;
especially the aforementioned Letter from Trestram Whitecombe the Major of
Kinsaile to his Brother Benjamin Whitecomb, wherein there is this passage, that
Many other speeches they utter about Religion, and our Court of England, which
he dares not commit to paper.

The manifold Attempts to provoke your Majesty's late Army, and the Army of the
Scots, and to raise a Faction in the City of London and other parts of the
Kingdom: that those who have been Actors in this business, have had their
Dependence, Countenance and Encouragement from the Court, witness the Treason
whereof Mr Germin and others stand accused, who were transported beyond Sea by
Warrant under your Majesty's hand, after your Majesty had given Assurance to
your Parliament that your Majesty had laid a strick command upon all your
Servants, that none of them should depart from Court; and that dangerous
Petition delivered to Captain Leg by your Majesty's own hand, accompanied
with a Direction figned with C. R.

The false and scandalous Accusation against the Lord Kymbolton, and the Five
Members of the House of Commons, tendered to the Parliament, by your Majesty's
own Command, endeavoring to be justified in the City by your own presence
and persuasion; and to be put in execution upon their Persons, by your
Majesty's demand of them in the House of Commons, in so terrible and violent a
manner, as far exceeded all former breaches of Privileges of Parliament,
acted by your Majesty, or any of your Predecessors: And what soever your own
Intentions were, diverse bloody and desperate persons, which attended your
Majesty, discovered their affections and resolutions to have massacred and
destroyed the Members of that House; if the absence of those Persons accused,
had not by Gods providence stopped the giving of that word which they expected,
for the setting them upon that barbarous and bloody design.

The Listing of so many Officers, Soldiers and others, putting them into pay,
and under Command of Colonells, keeping them at White Hall, Feaffing and
catousing them in an unusual manner, thereby maintaining them in the violent
Assaults, and other injuries, which they offered to diverse of your Subjects,
coming that way in a Lawful and peaceable manner, the carrying them out of
the town, and keeping them in so long a pay, after which they were told by the
Lord Digby, that the King removed on purpose they might not betrampled in the
dirt; and endeavoring to engage the Gentlemen of the Innes of Court in the
same course, the plotting and designing of a perpetual Guard about your
Majesty, the laboring to infuse into your Majesty's Subjects an evil opinion
of the Parliament throughout the whole Kingdom, and other symptoms of a
disposition of raising Arms, and dividing your people by a Civil War, in
which combustion, Ireland must needs be lost, and this Realm miserably wasted
and consumed, if not wholly ruined and destroyed.

That the Lord Digby should presume to counsel your Majesty to declare your
self, and to retire to a place of strength in this Kingdom, and to persuade
you that you could not be safe among your People, and yet should have such
credit with you as to be sent away by your warrant to Sir John Pennington, to
land him beyond the Sea, where he took that transcendent boldness to vent his
own traiterous conceptions in the Letter to the Queen, offering to entertain a
correspondencie with her Majesty by Ciphers, intimating some service which he
might do in those parts: for which he desired your Majesty's Instructions,
whereby in all probability he intended the procureing of some foreign forces
to strengthen your Majesty in that condition to which he would have brought:
which false and malicious counsel and advice, we have great cause to doubt,
made too deep an impression in your Majesty, considering the course you are now
pleased to take, of absenting your self from your Parliament, and carrying the
Prince with you, which seems to express a purpose in your Majesty to keep
your self in a readiness for the acting of it.

The manifold advertisements we have had from Rome, Venice, Paris, and other
parts, that they still expect that you have some great design in hand, for the
altering of Religion, the breaking neck of your Parliament, that you will yet
find means to compass that design, that the Popes Nuncio has solicited
the Kings of France and Spain, to lend your Majesty 4000. men apiece, to help
to maintain your Royalty against the Parliament, and this of foreign force
seems to be the most pernicious and malignant design of all the rest,
because no man can believe you will give up your people and your Kingdom to
be spoiled by Strangers, if you did not likewise intend both to change your
own profession in Religion, and the public profession of the Kingdom, that
so you might still be more assured of those foreign states of the popish
Religion for your future support and defense: but we hope God will direct your
Majesty to better counsels.

These are some of the grounds of our fears and jealousies, which made us so
earnestly to implore your royal Authority and Protection for our defense and
security, in all the ways of humility and submission, which being denied by
your Majesty, seduced by evil Counsels, We do with sorrow, for the great
and inavoydable misery, which is like to fall upon your own person, and your
Kingdoms, apply ourselves to the use of that Power, for the security and
defense of both, which by the fundamental Laws and Constitutions of this
Kingdom, resides in Us: Yet still resolving to keep our selves within the
bounds of Faithfulness and Allegiance to your sacred person, and your Crowns:
so as to the Second sort of jealousies and fears, of Us expressed by your
Majesty, We shall give a shorter, but as true and as faithful an Answer.

Whereas your Majesty is pleased to say that for your residing near your
Parliament, you wish it might be so safe and honorable that you had no cause
to absent your self from White Hall, this we take as the greatest breach of
the privileges of Parliament that can be offered, the heaviest misery to your
self, and injury to us, and Imputation upon us, that can be imagined, the most
mischievous effect of evil Counsels, it roots up the foundation of that safety
and honor which the Crown affords, it seems as much as may be to cast upon
the Parliament such a charge as is inconsistent with the nature of your great
Counsel being the body whereof your Majesty is the head, it strikes at the very
being both of King and Parliament, depriving your Majesty in your own
apprehension of their fidelity and them of your protection, which are the
mutual bonds of Government and subjection.

We have according to your Majesty's desire, laid our hands upon our hearts, we
have asked our selves in the strictest examination of our Consciences, we have
searched our affections, our thoughts, considered our actions, and we find none
that can give your Majesty any just occasion to absent your self from White
hall and the Parliament but that you may with more honor and safety continue
there then in any other place, your Majesty lays a general Tax upon us, if
you will be graciously pleased to let us know the particulars we shall give a
clear and satisfactory answer but what hope can we have of ever giving your
Majesty satisfaction when the particulars which you have been made believe were
true yet being produced and made known to us appeared to be false, and your
Majesty notwithstanding will neither punish nor produce the authors, but go on
to contract Jealousies and fears upon general and uncertain grounds affording
us no means or possibility of particular Answer to the clearing of our selves:
For proof whereof we beseech your Majesty to consider these Instances.

The speeches alleged to be spoken in a meeting by diverse Members of both
Houses at Kensington, concerning a purpose of restraining the Queen and Prince
which after it was denied and disavowed, yet your Majesty refused to Name the
authors though humbly desired to both Houses.

The report of Articles framed against the Queen given out by some of near
relation unto the Court, but when it was publicly and constantly disclaimed,
the Credit seemed to be with drawn from it but the Authors being kept safe will
always be in readiness for exploits of the same kind wherewith your Majesty
and the Queen will be troubled if this course be taken to cherish and secure
them in such wicked and malicious slanders.

The heavy Charge and accusation of the Lord Kimbolton and the five Members of
the House of Commons, who refuse no Trial and examination which may stand with
the Privilege of Parliament yet no Author, no witnesses produced, against whom
they may have reparation for that great injury and infamy cast upon them
notwithstanding several Petitions of both Houses, the authority of two acts of
Parliament vouched in the last of these petitions.

We beseech your Majesty to consider in what estate you are, how easy and
fair a way you have to happiness, honor, greatness, plenty and security: If
you will join with the Parliament and your faithful Subjects in defense of the
Religion and the public good of the Kingdom: This is all we expect from you
and for this we shall return to you our lives and fortunes and utmost
endeavors to support your Majesty, your just Sovereignty and power over us,
but it is not words that can secure us in those our humble desires, we cannot
but too well, and sorrowfully remember what gracious Messages we had from you
this summer, when with your privity the bringing up the Army was in agitation,
we cannot but with the like affection recall to our minds, how not two days
before you gave direction for the above mentioned accusation and your own
coming unto the Commons House, that house received a Message, that you would
always have care of their Privileges as of your own Prerogative, of the
safety of their persons as of your own Children. That which we expect from
you which will give us assurance that you have no thoghts but of peace and
Justice to your people, must be some real effect of your goodness to them in
granting those things which the present necessity of the Kingdom do enforce
us to desire, and in the first place, that your Majesty will be graciously
pleased to put from you those wicked and mischievous Counselors which have
caused all these dangers and distractions, and continue your own residence and
the Princes near London and the Parliament Which we hope will be a happy
beginning of contentment and confidence betwixt your Majesty and your People,
and be followed with many succeeding blessings of honor and greatness to your
Majesty, and of security and prosperity to them.

The Additionall Reasons.
THe Lords and Commons have commanded us to present unto your Majesty this
further addition to their former Declaration.

That your Majesty's return and continuance near the Parliament, is a matter in
their apprehension, of so great necessity and importance toward the
preservation of your Royal Person and your Kingdoms, that they cannot think
they have discharged their duties in the single expressio^ of their desire,
unless they ad some further reasons to back it with I. Your Majesty's absence
will cause men to believe, that it is out of design to discourage the
undertakers, and hinder the other provisions for raising money for defense of
Ireland.

II. It will very much hearten the Rebels there, and disaffected persons in
this Kingdom, as being an evidence, and effect of the jealousy and division
betwixt your Majesty, and your people.

III. That it will much weaken and withdraw the affection of the Subject from
your Majesty, without which a Prince is deprived of his chiefest strength and
luster, and left naked in the greatest dangers and miseries that can be
imagined.

IV. That it will invite and encourage the enemies of our Religion, and the
State of Foreign parts, to the attempting and acting of their evil designs
and intentions toward us.

V. That it causes a great interruption in the proceedings of Parl.

These considerations threaten so great danger to your Majesty's person, and to
all your Dominions, that as your Majesty's great Council, they hold it
necessary to represent to you, this their faithful advise, that so whatsoever
follows, they may be excused before God and Man.

His Majesty's Speech to the Committee, the 9. of March 1642. when they
presented the Declaration of both Houses of Parliament at New Market.
I Am confident that you expect not I should give you a speedy answer to this
strange and unexpected Declaration. And I am sorry (in the distraction of this
Kingdom) you should think this way of address to be more convenient, than
that purposed by my Message of the 20. of January last to both Houses.

As concerning the grounds of your fears and Jealousies, I will take time to
answer particularly, and doubt not, but I shall do it to the satisfaction of
the whole world. God in his good time will I hope discover the secrets of all
Plots and Treasons: and then I shall stand right in the eyes of all my People.
In the mean time, I must tell you, that I rather expected a Vindication for the
imputation laid on me in Master PYMS Speech, than that any more general
rumors and discourses should get credit with you.

For my fears and doubts, I did not think they should have been thought so
groundless or trivial, while so many seditious pamphlets and Sermons are
looked upon, and so great tumults are remembered, unpunished, uninquired into: I
still confess my fears, and call God to witness, That they are greater for
the true Protestant Profession, my people and laws, than for my own Right or
safety, though I must tell you, I conceive that none of these are free from
danger.

What would you have? Have I violated your Laws? Have I denied to pass any
one Bill for the ease and security of my Subjects? I do not ask you what you
have done for me.

Have any of my people been transport with fears and apprehensions? I have
offered as free and general a Pardon, as your selves can devise. All this
considered There is a Judgment from Heaven upon this Nation, if these
distractions continue.

God so deal with Me and Mine, as all my thoughts and intentions are upright
for the maintenance of the true Protestant Profession, and for the observation
and preservation of the laws of this Land: And I hope, God will bless and
assist those laws for My preservation.

As for the Additionall Declaration, you are to expect an answer to it, when
you shall receive the answer to the Declaration it self.

FINIS.

