All the ORDINANCES AND ORDERS OF THE LORDS and COMMONS Assembled in
PARLIAMENT, For the Indemnity Or saving harmless all those that have Acted or
done any thing by Sea or Land, by the Authority and for the Service of the
PARLIAMENT.

ORdered by the Lords Assembled in Parliament, That these Ordinances and Orders
for Indemnity, be forthwith printed and published.

Joh. Brown Cler. Parliamentorum.



Imprinted at London for John Wright at the Kings Head in the old Bayley. 1647.

Die Veneris 21 Maii, 1647. AN ORDINANCE OF THE LORDS and COMMONS Assembled in
PARLIAMENT. For the Indemnity, or saving harmless all those that have acted
or done any thing by Sea or Land by Authority of Parliament.
THe Lords and Commons taking notice, That diverse well-affected persons have
been sued, indicted, prosecuted, or molested, and others are likely to be
sued, indicted, prosecuted or molested for such acts and things which they have
acted and done by Authority of this present Parliament, or for the service and
benefit thereof, during these late Wars and Troubles, do hereby Ordain and
Declare, and be it by authority of Parliament Ordained and Declared, That no
person or persons whatsoever, who have since the beginning of this present
Parliament acted or done, or commanded to be acted or done, any act or thing
whatsoever by authority of this present Parliament, or for the service or
benefit thereof, by Sea or by Land, ought to be sued, indicted, prosecuted, or
molested, for the same; and that every such person or persons whatsoever are
and shall be hereby fully acquitted and discharged of all Actions, Suits,
Indictments, Informations, Prosecutions, Judgments, Executions, and
Molestations whatsoever, for or concerning the same; and all Judges, Justices,
Sheriffs, Mayors, Bailiffes, Jurors, Officers, and Ministers of Justice
whatsoever are hereby required to take notice thereof, and duly to observe the
same.

And for the ease of all such persons who are or shall be sued, Indicted,
Prosecuted or Molested for any such Act or thing as is aforesaid, It is hereby
Declared and Ordained, That in every Action, Suit, Indictment, Information, or
Prosecution whatsoever, wherein or whereby they shall be so sued, indicted,
prosecuted, or molested, as is aforesaid, contrary to this Ordinance, It shall
be lawful to and for all persons aforesaid, their Heirs, Executors,
Administrators and Assigns, to plead the general issue, that they are not
guilty, or any other general issue, as the case shall require, and shall and
may give in evidence to the Jury that shall try the same, That the matter in
question was an Act or thing acted or done, or commanded to be acted or done by
authority of this present Parliament, or for the service or benefit thereof,
which Evidence being proved, shall be admitted and allowed by the respective
Judges, Judge, or Justice, or Justices and Jury before whom it shall be tried,
as sufficient to maintain the said general issue: And if the Verdict shall
pass, with the Defendant or Defendants in any Action, Bill, Plaint, or Suit,
as is aforesaid, or the Plaintiff or Plaintiffs shall be nonsuit therein, or
suffer any discontinuance thereof, the respective Judges or Justices shall
award unto the said Defendant or Defendants treble costs, for which the said
Defendant or Defendants shall have the like remedy, as in the like Cases they
ought to have by the Laws of this Realm: And what any Judges, Justices,
Sheriffs, Mayors, Bayliffes, Jurors, Officers and Ministers of Justice shall
do according to this Ordinance, or in pursuance thereof, they shall be
justified and saved harmless by Authority of Parliament for and concerning
the same.

And because such persons who have acted or commanded to be acted or done any
such act or thing, as is aforesaid, may be poor, and not able to defend a Suit
at Common Law, or may find themselves agrieved in the proceedings thereof; now
for a further and certain relief of all such persons, It is hereby Ordained
and Declared by the Authority aforesaid, That any such persons so sued,
indicted, prosecuted, or molested, as is aforesaid, may at any time hereafter,
when and as often as they shall be sued, indicted, prosecuted or molested for
any such act or thing, as is aforesaid, either before or after a trial at the
Common Law, make their complaint to

ALgernon Earl of Northumberland, Henry Earl of Kent, John Earl of Rutland,
Philip Earl of Pembroke and Montgomery, Theophilus Earl of Lincoln, Charles
Earl of Nottingham, James Earl of Suffolk, William Earl of Salisbury,
Robert Earl of Warwick, Bazell Earl of Denbigh, James Earl of Middlesex,
Edward Earl of Manchester, Edmond Earl of Mulgrave, Henry Earl of Stamford,
Walter Lord Viscount Hereford, William Lord Viscount Say and Seal, Charles
Lord De-la-War, George Lord Berkley, Philip Lord Wharton, Francis Lord
Willoughby, Dudley Lord North, John Lord Hunsdon, William Lord Gray of Warke,
John Lord Robartes, Edward Lord Howard of Esc. Thomas Lord Bruce, Members of
the House of Peers.

Master Holles, Colonel Birch, Master Swynfen, Master Maynard, Master Bois,
Colonel Purefey, Colonel Harvey, Master Recorder, Master Solicitor, Sir
Philip Stapleton, Colonel Morley, Sir William Allenson, Colonel Massey,
Master Whitlocke, Sir Gilbert Gerrard, Sir William Waller, Master Edwards,
Master Challener, Lieutenant General Cromwell, Master Tate, Sir William
Massam, Sir Samuel Luke, Master Lisle, Field Marshall Skippon, Master Francis
Allen, Colonel Walton, Master Rigby, Sir John Maynard, Master Seldom, Master
Got, Sir William Brereton, Master Grimston, Master Darley, Master Dove, Sir
John Bampfield, Lord Menson, Sir Michael Livesey, Sir Thomas Widdrington, Sir
Arthur Hasilrig, Master Bainton, Master Necholas, Master Weaver, Master
Nathaniel Fiennes, Colonel Rainsborough, Major Harrison, Master Walter Long,
Master Hallowes, Master Miles Corbet, Colonel Tompson, Master Drake, Sir
Thomas Middleton, Master William Pierpoint, Members of the House of Commons, or
any five of them, who are hereby constituted a Committee of Parliament, for the
releife of all such persons, in such cases as is aforesaid. And the said
Committee, or any five of them, are hereby authorized and required, to receive,
hear, and determine such aforesaid Complaints; and to that end to examine
Witnesses upon Oath; and to commit to safe custody (if they shall see cause)
all such person or persons, who shall so sue, indict, prosecute, or molest, any
person or persons whatsoever, for acting or doing any such Act or thing, as is
aforesaid; And also to order and award to every such person or persons so sued,
indicted, prosecuted, or molested, treble so much as they shall make appear to
the said Committee, that they have been dampnified by any such Suit,
Indictment, Prosecution, or Molestation, as is aforesaid, if they have not
before recovered the same by the proceedings at Common Law, according to this
Ordinance. And that when the said Committee, or any five of them, shall have
made any Order or Award, in such aforesaid cases respectively, that the said
person or persons ought not to be sued, indicted, prosecuted, or molested, for
such Act or thing respectively, then upon showing the said Order or Award to
the Solicitors, Atturnies, or Counselors of the party or parties so suing,
indicting, prosecuting, or molesting, as is aforesaid, the said Solicitors,
Atturnies, and Counselors, shall presently forbear to prosecute, or assist,
counsel, or advise the said Party or Parties to sue, indict, or prosecute any
further, for such Act or thing respectively: And that if thereupon, they shall
not forbear so to do, the said Committee, or any five of them, are hereby
authorized and required, to commit to safe custody any such Solicitors,
Atturnies, or Counselors, so offending as is aforesaid, if they shall see
cause.

Provided always that this Ordinance, nor any thing herein contained, shall
not extend to discharge any such person or persons aforesaid, who have acted,
or done, or commanded to be acted or done, any Act or thing by Authority of
this present Parliament, or for the Service or benefit thereof, from making
their true and just Accounts to any Commissioners or Committee of Parliament,
appointed or to be appointed for that purpose, of what they have taken,
received, or had, for the Service and benefit of the Parliament, as is
aforesaid.

Joh. Brown Cler. Parliamentorum.

AN ADDITIONALL ORDINANCE OF THE LORDS and COMMONS Assembled in the PARLIAMENT
OF ENGLAND, For the more full Indemnity of the Officers and Soldiers who have
acted by Authority, and for the service of the PARLIAMENT.

And also enabling a Committee for Indemnity in the County of KENT, to put the
said Ordinances in execution.

ORdered by the Lords Assembled in Parliament, That these Ordinances be
forthwith printed and published.

Jo. Brown Cler. Parliamentorum.



Imprinted at London for John Wright at the Kings Head in the old Bayley. 1647.

Die Lunae. 7. Junii. 1647. An additionall Ordinance of the Lords and Commons
assembled in the Parliament of England, for the more full indemnity of the
Officers and Soldiers who have acted by Authority and for the service of the
Parliament.
FOrasmuch as in the times of this late War, and public distractions there
have been many injuries done to private persons and other offenses Committed by
diverse persons bearing Arms in the service of the Parliament, The Lords and
Commons in Parliament assembled taking into their Consideration, That it is
expedient that the injuries and offenses aforesaid be pardoned and put in
Oblivion rather than by pretense of prosecution against some few persons, a
great number of such who have faithfully served the Parliament be brought into
a continual vexation for such Actions as the exigencie of War has
necessitated them unto, Do therefore Ordain, and be it Ordained by the said
Lords and Commons, That all persons who have committed any offenses,
trespasses, injuries, or other misdemeanors whatsoever, during such time as
they have been employed in Arms, by or for the service of the Parliament, be,
is, and are hereby discharged and pardoned of the same, and off and from all
prosecution or damages therefore, either at the Suit of the King or the party
grieved, and may in case he or they be questioned therefore, plead the general
Issue, and give this Ordinance in evidence, which shall be allowed to all
intents and purposes as if the same were pleaded in Bar. And in case any
shall prosecute any Action or Suit contrary to the Tenor of this Ordinance,
against any person hereby discharged, after notice given that such person is
hereby discharged, the defendant or defendants so prosecuted shall recover his
and their cost against such Prosecutor.

Provided also that this Ordinance nor any thing herein contained, shall extend
to discharge any such person or persons as aforesaid from making their true and
just Accounts to any Committee or Committees of Parliament appointed or to be
appointed for that purpose, of what they have taken, received, or had, for the
service or benefit of the Parliament.

Joh. Brown Cler. Parliamentorum.

Die Sabbathi, 19 Iunii. 1647.
THe Lords and Commons in Parliament having well accepted the obedience and
readiness of those Officers and Soldiers who have complied with their Orders,
have Ordered and Ordained, and by Authority aforesaid do Order and Ordain,
That all and every the said Officers and Soldiers aforesaid, shall be freed,
exonerated, acquitted, and discharged, and are in and hereby declared and
adjudged from henceforth to be free, exonerate, acquit, and discharged of and
from all and whatsoever prosecution, judgment of life or member, pains,
penalties, and punishments whatsoever incurred, or that shall, may, or can,
might, could, should, or ought to be inflicted, prosecuted, had, or pursued
against them or any of them, for or by reason of the said pretended offense or
offenses of their departure from their said Colors, or from under the Command
of the said Sir Thomas Fairfax, or from or under the command of any Military
Officer or Officers under him whatsoever.

Joh. Brown Cler. Parliamentorum.

Die Veneris, 24 December. 1647. An Ordinance giving power to the Committee of
Indemnity, to put in Execution the Ordinances concerning Apprentices Freedoms.
BE it Ordered and Ordained by the Lords and Commons Assembled in Parliament,
That power be given to the Committee for Indemnity, to put in execution the
several Ordinances concerning Apprentices Freedoms that have served the
Parliament in this late War, and to receive all complaints made upon them,
and to give Redress to the party grieved, and to allow Costs, Charges, and
Damages, as they shall see cause, according to the power given them, in cases
of Indemnity.

Ioh. Brown Cler. Parliamentorum.

Die Iovis 20. Ianuarii 1647 An Ordinance of the Lords and Commons assembled in
Parliament, For enabling a Committee in the County of Kent to put in execution
all former Ordinances of Parliament concerning Indemnity.
THe Lords and Commons Assembled in Parliament, having by an Ordinance of
Parliament of the one and twentieth day of May, 1647. And by an Additionall
Ordinance of the seventh day of June last, provided for the saving harmless
and indempnified all such Soldiers and others, as have acted by the Authority
of Parliament, or for the service thereof. And finding by several complaints
made to them, that it is a great charge and trouble to very many poor
Soldiers and others, to whom a due relief is intended by the said Ordinances,
to make their repaires to the City of London, and to attend the Committee of
Lords and Commons appointed by the said Ordinances for the execution thereof;
The said Lords and Commons, in consideration thereof, have thought fit to Order
and Ordain; And is hereby Ordered and Ordained, That Sir John Rivers Knight
and Baronet, and Sir Edward Moyns, Sir Thomas Style, Sir Richard Harders, Sir
Thomas Pierce Baronets, Sir Anthony Welden, Sir John Honywood, Sir Nicholas
Miller Knights, Thomas Plumer, John Twesleton, Lambert Godfry, Richard Porter,
George Newman, Thomas Seylard, William James, Richard Beale, John Brown,
William Skenner, William Boothby, William Kenwrick George Hall, John Bix Esquire
John Boys of Elminton, Robert Scot, Thomas Blunt, Esquire Robert Hales Esquire Sir
Edward Masters Knight, Thomas Den, Robert Ladd, John Nutts Esquire Sir James
Oxinden Knight, Thomas Broadnex, John Holland, Thomas Boys of Wilsbourgh Esquire
George Duke Esquire Be and are hereby appointed to be a Committee for the County of
Kent, for the putting in execution the several Powers contained in the said
Ordinances. And the said persons, or any five or more of them within the County
aforesaid, are hereby authorized and appointed to take care from time to time
duly to execute and perform the Powers given by the said Ordinances, as by
the same is expressed and Ordained.

Joh. Brown Cler. Parliamentorum.

FINIS.

