Ecclesia Restaurata: A VOTIVE POEM TO THE REBUILDING OF St. Paul's Cathedral.

Illa Domus Stabulum? non est, Puer auree, non est: Illa Domus, qua tu
nasceris, est Stabulum?

Crashaw Epig. Sacr.

H B
woodcut, printer's mark, crown atop a canon

LONDON: Printed for Henry Brom, at the Gun at the West end of St. Paul's.
1677.

Ecclesia Restaurata: A Votive POEM to the Rebuilding of St. PAUL's CATHEDRAL.
I.
WHat beauteous Tumor's this, with Royal Grace,
Springs up a grateful object to our eyes,
In such a ruined and unsightly place?
As Chymiek flowers from their own ashes rise.
II.
Does time revolve back to the Saxons days,
Devotion's more than golden age? thus, thus
Were they employed when they did Temples raise,
And left -- I blush, I cannot say, to us.
III.
For a succeeding Age produced a Race
That durst assume the (then unthought of) guilt,
And with a false, but equal Zeal, deface
What the true Puritans before had built.
IV.
But now slow time repays again that debt
Which kind Antiquity of old did lend:
Fate has a Monarch raised who, good as great,
Does, like himself, our wounded Faith defend.
V.
Tell of the pious Ethelbert no more,
Nor mention peaceful Edgar's happy fame,
Since that renown they justly claimed, before,
Now drowned sinks in Charles his greater name.
VI.
Those Royal Saints rejoice where now they reign,
To see a Prince, the greatest of their Heirs,
Under his Government, restore again
The darling Peace and Piety, of theirs.
VII.
To such a King what Duty ought appear,
How much of unfeigned Reverence and Love?
Who not alone pleases all good men here,
But adds a joy to the blessed Souls above.
VIII.
He London raised, ruined, and sunk in Fire,
To her now State; and as a Crown to all
(Since higher than Heaven no Heroes can aspire)
Restores the honor of her Tutelar Paul.
IX.
Paul, a great Prince among the twelve, and our
Peculiar Doctor, after all the grief
He lately suffered from a Rebel Power,
Has found at Caesar's Judgment Seat relief.
X.
Who knew not then how they these Walls did stain,
Making a Church a loathsome Stable, thus
The Saint with Beasts encountered once again,
More barbarous than those of Ephesus.
XI.
Since, like a common house, flames did surprise
Her roof: the Church obscured in Ruins lay,
Till now, great Charles bids her a Temple rise,
And from her ten years sleep salute the day.
XII.
Mark the Gradations which this Building has;
It Is quite destroyed to rise less transitory.
Thus it is the language of the Church that says
Humility is the first step to Glory.
XIII.
Or is it rather fortune did conspire
(So great was late this Temples Profanation)
As not enough to purge the same by Fire,
To cleanse it to the very first Foundation.
XIV.
Such the Mosaic Law was heretofore, Lev. 14. 45.

To that sad House where the dire Pest did reign:
And can there be a Plague so great, and more
Deadly infectious, than to be profane?
XV.
Once more from nothing Paul's shall pierce the Sky!
So at the last and universal flame,
Man, from that earth where he dissolved did lie,
Shall spring new made, more fair, and yet the same.
XVI.
Ruin does thus the way to Beauty prove:
And if a Paradox like this can be,
The Immaterial Church in time may move
Out of Confusion to Conformity.
XVII.
Rise a good Omen to our Churches Peace,
Thou Reverend Structure; and as thy Saint, Paul,
(Whose honor did by being overcome increase)
Advance more great, and glorious from thy fall.
XVIII.
But since a Work so great must slowly rise,
And few may live to see it built outright,
To satisfy this Generations eyes,
Behold in little a prophetic sight.
XIX.
Thus, when in flames the Arabian Bird expires,
To live again in a more vigorous birth,
A little Phoenix from those Funeral Fires
Starts up the Embryo-wonder of the earth.
XX.
What Miracle of Art will grow from hence,
And challenge through the World a Parallel,
When the bare Model only for Expense,
And real Value does so far excel?
XXI.
But something more Majestic than even this
May we with solid reason well expect,
Where to the Work, a CHARLES auspicious is:
A help so great can have no small effect.
XXII.
Hereafter, how will every Generation
Bless that dear name, when from Records they know
This City's Beauty, Glory of the Nation,
To the pious greatness of his soul they owe.
XXIII.
Nor shall Posterity forget the least
Of those, who such a Monument shall raise;
For when from their surviving Work they rest,
Eternal Fame shall mention their due Praise.
XXIV.
What did I say -- only, eternal Fame?
Better Records are to such merit given;
Angels shall write with their own quills, each name
In The everlasting Registers of Heaven.
XXV.
While in the front of those deserving men,
As the Conductor of this beauteous Frame,
Stands Englands Archimedes, Learned Wren,
Who builds in Paul's a Trophy to his Name.
XXVI.
Earths Cabinet of Rarities, famed Rome,
Shall now no more alone possess what is rare;
Since British Architecture dares presume
To vie with the most celebrated there.
XXVII.
Britain, who, though perhaps, the last she be
To imitate what is great in Foreign Parts;
Yet when she that has done, we always see
The Inventors she excels in their own Arts.
XXVIII.
Ah happy Englishmen! if we could know
Our happiness, and our too active fears
Of being wretched, did not make us so!
What cause of grief, other than this appears?
XXIX.
France, and the neighboring Europe, flame in War,
Seeking by Arms each others rest to invade;
But while they burn and bleed, we only, are
Rich in an envied Peace, and Foreign Trade.
XXX.
While there, nor Church, nor Sanctuary can
Shield the rich Merchant from the armed rout,
Nor Virgin from the Lust of furious man.
Our Island one Asylum seems, throughout.
XXXI.
Sacred and Civil Structures there decrease,
And while to Arms their lofty heads submit,
We are employed in the best Works of Peace,
And erect Temples to the God of it.
L'Envoy.
RIse noblest Work, rise above Envy's eye,
Never in thy own Ruins more to lie,
Till the whole world finds but one obsequy.
Rise to that noted height, that Spain, and France,
Nay, Italy, may by their confluence
To our North Wonder, thy great Name advance.
And, what is to Protestants of better sense,
Make them confess our English Church expense,
And Beauty, equals their Magnificence.
FINIS.

