A JUST APOLOGY FOR THE CHURCH OF DUCKENFEILD IN CHESHIRE: Against certain
slanderous Reports received by Mr. Edwards his overmuch credulity of what may
tend to the reproach of those that differ from himself in judgment (though
but concerning matters merely of external order, and things of inferior Alloy
to the substantial Doctrines of Faith, and Manners) rashly and without further
examination of the truth of them, (together with an overplus of his own
Censures, and uncharitable Animadversions) divulged by himself in a late book
of his, entitled, The third part of Gangraena.

BY SAMUEL EATON, Teacher and TIMOTHY TAILOR, Pastor of the Church of God at
DUCKENFEILD.

Whereunto also is annexed a Letter of a godly Minister, Mr Henry Roots,
Pastor of the Church of Sowerbie in Yorkshire, in vindication of himself
against a sinister and dangerous (yet false and groundless) Insinuation,
contained in the Copy of a Letter out of Yorkshire, sent unto the aforesaid
Mr. Edwards, and by him published to the Kingdom.

2 Cor. 6. 8. By honor and dishonor, by evil report, and good report, as
deceivers, and yet true. Luke 21. 19. In your patience possess ye your
souls. Adeo satis Idoneus patientiae sequester Deus* Si iniuriam deposueris,
penes eum ultor est; Si damnum, restitutor, si dolorem, medicus, etc. Tertul.
LONDON; Printed by M. S. for Henry Overton, and are to be sold at his Shop in
Popes-head-Alley. 1647.

TO THE CHRISTIAN READER; Grace and Peace be multiplied.
CHRISTIAN READER;
Titus 2. 8*
THe Apostle Paul exhorts Titus, to speak sound words in Doctrine, that cannot
be condemned; and there is a proportionable equity, that all men (Ministers
especially) should write and print sound words, that cannot be condemned. If
Mr. Edwards had kept himself to this Rule, our labor at this time might have
been spared. Our work in this Narrative, is to rectify his errors. He has
led many from the truth, so far as concerns Duckenfeild Church (for saving
that there is an Epistle of our brother Roots annexed, there is nothing else
meddled with in this Apology) and our undertaking is to reduce them to the
truth. Should we suffer all to pass for truth, which he publishes concerning
us, we should betray the truth, and our own innocence.

These faults may be justly charged upon him from the way he takes of blazoning
the supposed failings of all other men, that differ from him, though but in the
most controverted, dim, and disputable points; and instances may be given (if
need require) in passages that relate to us, and our Church.

First, He has abroad in the Kingdom Factors that trade for him in the good
names, and reputations of precious men, and orderly walking Churches, (who are
not inferior to the very chiefest of his Presbyterians, whether men, or
Churches, Gangrae. p. 165.
though they be nothing) which they and he sell over to be mancipated to infamy
and disgrace, for supposed crimes falsely suggested against them by himself,
and his creatures.

Secondly, He takes reports (especially flowing (as it is Ibid.
said) from godly persons) upon trust, and without any further examination, or
inquisition after the truth of them, issues them abroad (with a great measure
of confidence) into the Kingdom, as if so be, his supposed godly persons, were
arrived at an absolute incapacitie of hearing an untruth, and when they have
heard it, reporting it for a truth.

Ibid.
Thirdly, He does not consider that that malignant spirit, that in all
preceding ages of the Church has bent men's tongues for lies, and slanders,
against the Saints of the most high God, is most industriously active at this
day to render those men odious, whose Conversation imports strictness of a
more then ordinary elevation in the ways of God. So that it is no security
against the peril of false witnesse-bearing against the people of God, to say,
Such a godly man told me so; especially when that that godly man was neither an
eye, nor eare-witnesse of the thing, nor has traced the report upward from man
to man, to the first reporter, who had need to be godly, and an eye or
eare-witnesse of the thing. Our selves can speak experimentally of the
failings of diverse Presbyterians formerly, whom we judged godly, that have
taken up things against us by hearsay, for which they have seen cause
afterward to be ashamed; which we desire rather to cover with the mantle of
Brotherly love, then like flies to fall upon their sores, and unnecessarily to
uncover their nakedness, and rake in their infirmities, as Mr. Edwards
professedly deals with us.

Fourthly, Mr. Edwards runs the more desperate adventure, to split his
reputation, and wound his Conscience upon the Innocence of traduced Saints,
because he takes not only the testimony of one engaged party against the
other, but even of the most precipitate, fiery spirits of that party, the
strength of whose fancy is enough to multiply a molehill of srailtie 3.
Gangr. page 164. and 165.
in the Saints, into a mountain of obstinary; yea, can make things that are
not, appear as though they were. And yet if the case were altered, Mr. Edwards
possibly would think the Testimonies of twenty of those whom he calls
Sectaries, incompetent to take away the good name of one godly Presbyterian.

Fistly, The irregularitie of Mr. Edwards his proceeding, is the more
inexcusable in this, That whereas there should be two or three witnesses for
the confirmation of every matter, that is not of notorious Cognizance; and
whereas the accused Act. 25. 16.
ought to come face to face before the Accusers: Mr. Edwards publishes things
of a private nature, upon the bare report of some one man, who is not in the
capacity of being a competent witness in that matter whereof he is the
relator. And so the good names of innocent, and some of them eminent persons in
the Kingdom, come to be blasted by the misprision of his supercilious, and
unhallowed pen. Instance page 167. in what is related concerning two Gentlemen,
persons of great worth and honor.

Sixthly, Add to this, that the impatience of his zeal in defaming the
servants of God, holds no correspondence with principles of common prudence.
For who but Mr. Edwards, knowing that the Deacon of Duckingfeild, page 68. was
speedily to be brought upon the Stage before the Civil power, would not have
expected the issues of his aay of Audience, rather then by an hasty
anticipation pre-judge (as in his Marginall note he does) a person not yet
heard nor condemned by the Civil State. And indeed a little patience
(comparatively to much) might have served the turn. For not long after Mr.
Thomas Smith, Bookseller of Manchester, [who (as we coneeive) was both Mr.
Edwards Intelligencer, and soon after the Deacons accuser] had a fair, and
free hearing, before the Committee against the Deacon. Yet the Committee found
not him guilty of the supposed knavery in couzening the State, the discovery
whereof was prophesied in the Letter of August 3. 1646. published by Mr.
Edwards, but dismissed him from their Board without any Censure. Would Mr.
Smith have thought it well, and if he should have approved of it, yet we could
not have avoided the regreet of our own Consciences, when he being nominated
for an Elder of Manchester, and accusation upon accusation from parts nearer
and more remote, were brought in against him, if we should have writ up to
London, that ere long Mr. Smiths knavery would be discovered, and such a one as
he, is a fit man to be an Elder in a Presbyterian Church; even then when the
Business was depending, and unproved before the Triars?

Seventhly, Nor can it well be omitted, (and as little justified) Page 167.
that from one Act (and that injuriously represented) a judgment should be made
upon a person; a Gentleman of worth must pass under the name of a great Zelot
for Independents, from the evidence of one false Instance, which is given in to
prove it. Would Mr. Edwards be well pleased to have such measure measured unto
himself again, and that because there are some slanderous reports published
in Mr. Edwards book, therefore the whole book is a book of slanders?

Eighthly and lastly, The scope and drist of Mr. Edwards is, to make the world
believe, that such as those Sectaries (so by The Marginal note. Page 68.
him called) are, whose personal failings he divulgeth, such are (or at least
in time are like to be) all that are of that Sect respectively. Now if the
Sectaries (so called) were baptized into the same uncharitable Spirit, and
would whet their style against the personal faults of Presbyterians, with a
desire to charge all upon the professors of that way, doubtless the volumes
that might be written, would be far more voluminous then a complete Decade of
Gangraena's. As for thee (Christian Reader) we hope we shall easily obtain so
much justice at thy hands, as not to be measured by Mr. Edwards reed; But such
as our Doctrine, manner of life, patience, peaceablenesse, painfulnesse, are,
(be they more or less) such let us be in the Balance of thy estimation. We
are abundantly sensible of the growth and increase of Errors and Heresies in
the Kingdom; we desire according to the measure of grace received, to pray
against them, fast against them; We labor in the course of our Ministry by
preaching against them; And as God gives us opportunity in disputation, we
labor to beat them down; And we trust God in his own time will dispel them.
The premises are sufficient for thy premonition, not to take all for truth,
that Mr. Edwards, or any other in this Calumniatory age, shall rashly and
uncharitably broach against any godly man, whether of the Classical or
Congregationall way. But first to try and trace reports, importing scandal to
the fountains of them, their first Broachers; By this means a great deal of
uncharitable misprision will be prevented, and thou will have no occasion to
mourn at the last. We remain

Thine, whilst thou art a Friend to Truth, SAMUEL EATON, TIMOTHY TAILOR.

A JUST APOLOGY FOR THE CHURCH OF DUCKENFEILD.
MAster Edwards amongst many other Letters, and Relations, which have been sent
him from all parts of the Kingdom, has received (it seems) some from the
Northern parts, from Lancashire, and Cheshire: and in some of them there are
passages that reflect upon the Church of Duckenfeild, and the Officers thereof,
with reproach and scorn, with falsehood and slander; and where any truth is, it
is with an injurious intent manifested.

We shall direct to the Pages, transcribe the substance of the words, and make
Answer thereto.

3d. Gang.
In Page ^8* are these words; Mr. Eaton, of whose activity to promote that way,
(that is, the ^ongregationall, which is the truely-so called Presbyteriall way)
I doubt not you have heard, has been the great Apostle to promote their
design in these parts.

Answ. It may be a great question whether scoffing or irrationalitie be the
(...) predominant in this invective charge* For it is without all bottom,
unless activitie (which he only mentions) he the bottom of it. And then all
the Clergy in Lancashire are great Apostles; for he calls them Page 167. An
Active Clergy, that is, in promoting the Presbyterian Design. And this is all
the reason Mr. Edwards can show, of inserting Mr. Eatons Name among the
Principal Independents and Sectaries in his Book.

But how comes it about, that Mr. Eaton is the great Apostle in this place, who
Page 164. is but a Pastor or Teacher of the Church of Duckenfeild?

If Mr. Eaton be the great Apostle, who are teh lesser? we had thought among
the Apostles there had not been greater, and lesser.

If he be the great Apostle, what, or who are they that have sent him? They
must doubtless be greater then Apostles; for greater is he that does send,
then he that is sent.

If he promote designs as an Apostle, then the designs are preaching of the
Gospel up and down, and gathering of Churches, etc.

Now Apostolical preaching of the Gospel in all places up and down the
Country, is a good design, especially at this time, when there is such want
of preaching. But this design, Mr. Eaton could not heretofore, nor can at this
day attend upon, being a prefixed Officer at Duckenfeild, as is acknowledged
Page 164. And as for the design of gathering Churches, (which is an Apostles
work) what one Church has Mr. Eaton gathered? True it is, that he, with many
others, wearied out with the long want of some of Gods Ordinances, and with
corruption in other of Gods Ordinances, did at length (for their better
spiritual accommodation) join together in fellowship, that they might enjoy
all Gods Ordinances. Yet herein he no more gathered them, with whom he joined,
then they him. But be it that he promotes these designs, yet sithence these
designs are of no worser import and contemplation then they are, neither they
that sent him, (if any such there be) nor he that is sent, have cause to be
ashamed.

But his Activitie is great. And wherein appears this his great Activitie,
unless it be in entertaining now and then one call of many, to preach a Sermon
abroad, as occasions will permit? Or unless it be that in defense of the way
he professes, he answers some of the many challenges Brethren make in
opposition against it. In which also he is rarely engaged alone, and less
active then his opponents show themselves to be.

In page 68. the extract of a Letter written from the Northern parts, speaks
thus; I shall hereafter give you a particular account of the Church of
Duckenfeild.

Answ. It had been safer for the Author of this Letter to look into his own
heart, and see what is amiss there, that he may be able to give a particular
account to God of all his ways, when he shall be called thereto; then to spend
his time in observing Duckenfeild, and meddling with account of things that
concern him not. Is not this to be (...) a busi-body in other men's matters; and
if he suffer as such a one, what glory or comfort can he have at the last?
Notwithstanding let him be sure his account be just, and it will prove no
disadvantage to Duckenfeild that he makes it.

Gangrae.
The Ruling Elder is a Sequestrator in Cheshire.

Answ. If the Ruling Elder be an honest man, and Sequestratorship an honest
employment, we hope it is no disparagement to Duckenfeild Church, that their
Ruling Elder is a Sequestrator.

Gangrae*
Their Deacon is a Sequestrator in Lancashire; The Deacon I shall speedily
being upon the Stage, and make a notable discovery of his knavery in
cou(...)ening the State.

Answ. As concerning the Deacon, we shall give a true relation of the carriage
of that matter. M. Tailor preaching at Shrewsbury the last Summer, (in the
beginning of the Month of August, as he remembers* had discourse with a
religious Gentleman (a friend of his, and of the Classical way for matter of
Judgment) concerning the different Church-ways, that are now matters of such
hot digladiation amongst many in the Kingdom. The Gentleman by way of
discourse told him, that there were some in the Church of Duckenfeild, as bad
as were to be found in the Parish Assemblies, and named Laurence Owen, a Deacon
of our Church, and referred Mr. Tailor for further satisfaction to Mr. Thomas
Smith, Bookseller in Manchester, and to Thomas Hartley, for proof of his
dishonest dealing with the State. Mr. Tailor at his return communicated this
business to the Elders of the Church, and in a short time after we both
conferred with Thomas Hartley, and received from him a report that he was not
satisfied that L. Owen had carried the matter well, and gave some Instances.
Hereupon we resolved, (so soon as possibly we could get a convenient time,) to
call Laurence Owen before us, and to require an account of him concerning his
Negotiation for the State: and to desire Mr. Smith, Thomas Hartley, and
whomsoever else might fall under our Intelligence, as a person able to witness
any thing material concerning L. Owen his proceeding, to give us the meeting.
That if it might appear that L. Owen had done any thing to the prejudice of
the State, or peace of a good conscience, we might use our best endeavors to
bring him to the sight of his sin, and repentance for it, and also to make
due satisfaction to the State.

But many importune occasions falling in, in that conjunction of time, deferred
the execution of our determinations for a short time, till a fit season was by
the good hand of providence opened unto us. But when we were fully ripened by
a universal conflux of all conce^^^ring requisites for the issuing of this
business, (which had not suffered the least delay, but that we had probable,
and promising grounds of hope, that the charges against him were founded upon
mistakes in his accusers) we resolved to bring it under examination, with a
most requisite and impartial endeavor of discovering (so far as God should
help us) the whole truth. Now in this juncture of time, Mr. Smith had drawn up
a charge, and brought it before the Committee of Lancashire, who upon a full,
and impartial hearing of the cause, did not find him guilty of the things
charged upon him, and so dismissed him from their Board, without any censure.
And this was the issue of Mr. Smiths confidence that he should speedily Page 68.
discover the Knavery of the Deacon, in his first attempt.

And though this business issuing before the Gentlemen, according to our
former (then present) apprehensions, might have given reasonable satisfaction
to us in point of the Deacons innocence; yet because we understood that Mr.
Smith was not herewithall satisfied, we resolved (as unforestalled in point of
the innocence of the accused by any thing that passed before the Gentlemen, or
fell otherwise under our observation,) to give Mr. Smith a full and fair
hearing; that so if he could make any real discovery, we might improve it to
the glory of God, the States satisfaction, and our Brothers spiritual good:
and accordingly desired Mr. Smith, when he was ripe for the purpose, to let us
understand. After some weeks past, Mr. Smith sent a Declaration to Mr. Tailor,
subscribed with his own hand, and the hands of George Jackson, and Tho:
Hartley; containing diverse charges against L. O. Upon the receipt hereof, the
Church assembled to fast and pray before God, to seek assistance of grace on
the behalf of the Brother that was afresh accused, that he might carry it
heartily, and sincerely in his Answer, as in the presence of God, and be as
ready to take shame to himself, if any thing were justly charged, as to stand
upon the defense of his innocence, in things wherein his Conscience bore
witness to the integrity of his Actions: as also that the Elders might be
enabled to conceive aright of things, and to make report of them accordingly to
the Church. The Duty being ended, the several Charges were drawn out of the
Declaration [the most material of them being the same (as we have been
informed) that were agitated formerly before the Committee] and L. O. required
to make Answers to them: which accordingly he did. After we had thus heard both
parties severally, we desired to hear them jointly, and that they might come
face to face, for which purpose, Mr. Tailor writ a Letter to Mr. Smith, and his
two friends, desiring them to give us the meeting at some convenient place, and
to bring with them such persons as might give in evidence against L. O.
concerning any thing contained in the Declaration, that might stand in need of
further proof. He also desired that Mr. Johnson of Ashton, and Mr. Angier of
Denton (two godly, and grave Ministers of the Classical way) might be present
as witnesses of what passed on both sides.

This desired meeting Mr. Smith and his two friends thought fit to decline for
these two Reasons, as they pretended.

First, That matters of fact were laid down with that distinctnesse, and
clearenesse in the Declaration, that they needed to add no more words for the
satisfaction of any ingenuous Reader.

Secondly, (and that by way of implication) that we were not authorized to
take their Examination upon Oath.

To which M. Tailor in his Letter to them answered, That our design was
(according to our duty) to endeavor to bring our Brother to the sight of his
sin, and repentance for it, in case he should prove guilty, according to the
several charges contained in the Declaration, or any of them. That this we
could not do, except we could convince him. That we could not convince him,
and upon conviction proceed against him, but by the proof of two witnesses at
the least, since he confidently denied diverse things contained in the
Declaration, and in his Answer avoided the dint, and scope of the rest. That he
desired to have his accusers come face to face, and that he might have liberty
to Answer for himself: and that this Justice neither they, (since they had
laid a charge against him, nor we (if we would carry it righteously Acts 25.
16. and 26. 1.
) could deny him. That we desired to know whether they did jointly attest all,
and every of the miscarriages charged in the Declaration, or severally. If not
all jointly, but some severally, then we desired to know which of the
particulars were attested by one only witness, and which by two or more,
since we could not proceed upon a single testimony, but must desire further
proof. That L. O. had brought a Certificate The same Certificate was since
subscribed by another godlyman*
under the hand of a man beyond exception faithful, (who spoke not by hearesay,
but as an eye and ear witness, point blank, contrary to one maine thing
charged in the Declaration, and also another man (that had great reason to know
the state of the business to which he spoke, attesting that which is contrary
to the maine thing charged by them, as we should give them fully to understand,
if they pleased to give us the meeting. That there was also one thing mentioned
in the Declaration in general terms, viz. certain sums of money received
that were not given in in his accounts, but no particulars specified, and we
desired that the particulars might be given in, and so attested by themselves,
or otherwise. That these things considered, they could not righteously deny us
the meeting, notwithstanding the distinctnesse, and clearness in matter of
fact pretended to be in their Declaration.

And as for the second, it was answered in Mr. Tailors Letter aforesaid; That
if they did not judge it unfit to give in their accusation in their
Declaration, though they did not look upon us as authorized to administer an
Oath to them; why might they not corroborate, and make out their accusation
before us (in things wherein there should be need of further light,) though we
were not in a capacity to administer an Oath unto them? These were the most
material* p ssages in Mr. Tailors Letter.

Mr. Smiths Answer in the most considerable pertinent passages was; That he
would have appeared before us, if he had believed us invested with any lawful
power by God ^ to have taken his Examination* That to comply with us in
thy(...) way, would be a remedy worse then the disease. That if L. O. desired
is accusers to come face to face, why according to his counsel had he not
brought his Accusers before the Committee? That he would not trouble himself
with (...) Certificate he (...)ve, or from whom procured, since he (...) to
make out the maine particulars of his (...)wn Accounts and Confession and by
sufficient (...)any upon Oath* That he (...) not the Declaration to one Church,
nor in any of his Letters had acknowledged Mr. Tailor a Minister. That if we
desired a meeting in a Christian way, and not in a Church Way, and pleased to
let Manchester be the place, he would meet us, and endeavor to engage his two
friends, and such other Witnesses as should be necessary. That for other
particulars in the Letter, (i. e. Whether they did attest the things charged in
the Declaration severally, or jointly, and if not all jointly, but some
severally, then which were attested by one Witness, and which by two or more)
Wherein we desired satisfaction, he conceived it would be fitter to give in
account to the Committee for Sequestration then to us. To which Mr. Tailor
replied, That whether he acknowledged the Church of Duckenfield a Church, the
Elders a Presbyteris, or himself a Minister, neither the one, nor the other,
nor himself did regard. For with them it was a small thing to be judged of
him, or of man's judgment. To their own Master they must stand or fall. That
the scope of this desired meeting (on our part) was not to steal from him an
acknowledgement of the truth of our Church, or Ministries, but an improvement
of it to this end, that our Brother might be healed in his Conscience, if he
had done any iniquity, and in his reputation (so far as in us lay) if none of
those things whereof he was accused were found in him. And forasmuch as a
meeting of them in the capacity of Christians, would be of equivolent
conducency to the attainment of our end, we should as willingly meet them
under that Notion, as in the capacity of a Presbytery.

This Answer being thus returned, we were in plenary expectation, that this
business would speedily be issued one way or other. But though we condescended
to meet Mr. Smith upon his own terms, yet in his Answer to Mr. Tailor, he
totally (contrary to his own engagement, and promise under his own hand,)
refused to meet us, and not only so, but expressed himself resolved to
forbear all further intercourse with Mr. Tailor in writing about this matter.
The reason alleged by him of his refusal to meet us, was, That he was
inhibited by the Committee of Accounts, who were resolved to take the full
examination of the business themselves, conceiving that our private debates,
would no way advantage the public, and might prejudice them in their
proceedings. Assuring us that if we would have but a little patience, things
would be discovered to our full satisfaction, out of the examination taken upon
Oath.

When we were thus deserted by Mr. Smith, and his two confederate friends,
refusing to tell us which of the charges were attested by one only witness,
and which by two or more, or to give any particulars attested where the charge
was general, refusing also to give us the meeting for the making out of his
charge, where it needed proof, viz. in such things, whereof he, and his two
friends, were only the relators, and accusers, but could not possibly be the
attestors or witnesses: When we were thus deserted, (we say) yet we left no
stone unmoved, further to inform our selves concerning this business. And
having notice that L. O. was to come to his Answer before the Committee of
Accounts for Lancashire, upon Tuesday the second of Febr. 1646. (to our best
remembrance) in Manchester: We both came thither, and sent to the Gen lemen of
that Committee, to desire liberty that we might sit by and hear what passed
that day for our further satisfaction. But this liberty was denied us by the
Gentlemen at that time. After this Mr. Tailor having intelligence of the
meeting of the Committee upon a Tuesday, came to Manchester to desire a Copy
of L. O. his charge, the better to enable them to discover the truth of this
matter. But after he had come twice or thrice to the place where usually they
sat, he was informed, that the Country people came not in, and so they would
not sit that day, and so lost his labor at that time. After this he applied
himself to one of them particularly, expressing the desire that himself, and
his Brethren had to be thoroughly possessed of the state of that business, and
that it would be a very great courtesy to us, if we might but have a Copy of
the Depositions. The Gentleman answered, that it was resolved at their Board,
that L. O. should not only be allowed Breviates, but also Copies at large of
the Depositions, and there was but only one thing undetermined, and that was,
whether since all the Examinations were not taken, he should have the
Depositions piece meal, or the whole together. Mr. Tailor went away well
satisfied in the candor, and impartialitie of the Gentlemen's proceedings in
that matter. And so we hope that in due time we shall enjoy the advantage of
those Depositions, to enable us to make a Judgment of the cause, and till then
we shall suspend our thoughts and determinations about that matter. Only this
we cannot but take notice of; That Mr. Smith after some Depositions were
taken, before L.
O* had answered for himself, (for that is not yet done) or the Gentlemen had
passed any Censure against him, (which also is not yet done) he writ up to a
Gentleman a friend of his in London; That the Deacon of Duckenfield his knavery
is proved before the Committee upon Oath, and be turned out of his place. His
Letter bore date, Jan. 30. 1646. Who reading this Letter, would not conclude,
that the Committee, after a full hearing of both sides, had found L. O.
guilty? and for his guilt (or knavery, to speak in Mr. Smiths Dialect) had
turned him out of his place? and so his friend in London took it up. Whereas
the truth is, the Examinations are not yet all taken, neither to this day of
our present writing, has L. O. a Copy of any one Deposition, nor have the
Committee of Accounts passed any Censure at all against him, much less put him
out of his place. But the Committee of the County to ease the public charge,
did diminish the number of the Agents for Sequestration, and (without any
Character of disgrace at all) did suspend him from the execution of his place;
as they did also many other persons of unspotted side litie to the State. A
Copy of which Suspension is as follows.

At the Committee, January 15. 1646.
Preston in Com: Lane.
FOr as much as by reason of the many and great Sequestrators within this
County, which have lately been suspended, and taken off, by the compositions at
Goldsmiths-Hall: this Committee do conceive it necessary to reduce the Agents
employed in the Sequestrations in the several limits, and divisions, hereafter
particularly expressed; viz. Oliver Edge in Manchester divisiou: Isaac Dehoo,
in Middleton division: Richard Bradshaw, in Bolton division: William Kindsly
and William Parr, in the Parishes of Warrington, Winwick, Wiggan and Leigh; and
Peter Ambrose, and John Case in the remainder of the hundred of Derby, William
Eccleston and Thomas Jackson, for ^^yland hundred: Charles Gregory, and John
Haworth, in Blackhurne hundred: James Smith, Richard Whitehead, and William
Audeland, in Amundernesse hundred: and Thomas Towlinson, Thomas Gardner, Adam
Sands, and John Sawry, in Lonisdale hundred. And that all other Agents employed
in the Sequestrations in this County, shall from and after the first day of
March next, suspend and forbear the execution of their places or employments
as Agents. And in the mean time they are to perfect their accounts, and
deliver the same to Mr. Okey upon such penalties as are imposed by the
Ordinance of Parliament. And the Collectors for sequestrations in Lonisdale
hundred are from hence forward to forbear the execution of their employments.
And the Agents of that hundred are to perform the same accordingly.

Vera Copia Examinat.

Per me Oliver Edge.


J. Bradshawe. John Starkie. Thomas Birche. Robert Cunliffe. William Knipe. N.
Rigbie.


And yet even since that time, that Committee that put him out, has put him in
again; which doubtless they would never have done, had they judged him
unfaithful to the State. A Copy of which order for re-execution of his place
is as follows.

At the Committee, March 4. 1646.
Wiggan in Com: Lane.
IT is ordered, that William Kindsly, William Parr, and John Hampson, shall be
employed for the Sequestration in the Parishes of Warrington, Winwicke, Leygh,
and Wiggan, and that they shall have one Collector to assist them. And that
Richard Bradshaw shall act as Agent for Sequestrations in the Parishes of
Bolton, Deane, Bury, and Ratliffe, and that he shall have one Collector for his
assistance therein; And that Isaac Dehoo, and Edward Dutton shall be agents in
the Parishes of Ashton under line, Ouldham, Middleton, and Rachdale, and one
Collector to assist them. And that Oliver Edge, and Laurence Owen, shall be
agents in the Parishes of Manchester, Eccles, Drestwich, and Flixton, and that
the parties aforenamed, shall do, execute, and perform all things pertaining
to that employment, as by Ordinance of Parliament is appointed. And that for
their care and pains to be taken therein, they shall all of them receive the
usual salarie, and pay, as has been accustomably used to have been allowed,
and paid to others of the like employment: saving that there shall be allowed
to Mr. Dutton, and Mr. Dehoo, the weekly pay of twenty-foure shillings, only
until further order.

Vera Copia Examinat.

Per me Oliver Edge.


J. Bradshawe. John Starkie. Thomas Birche. N. Rigbie. H. Eleetwood.


Far be it from us, to bring any railing accusation against Mr. Smith, but
let the tree be judged by its fruits, the man by his actions. As for Laurence
Owen, and his business, we shall leave it in the middle, and neither clear
him, nor condemn him, (further then matters of fact* reported in this
Narrative are of a tendency one way or other) till the business be issued
before the Committee of Accounts. Only hereby it does appear, that the
Church, and the Elders, have labored in some good measure to do their duty.

Now we pass to the prodigious Story of the invisible DRUM.

In page 164. there is the story of a Drum, and Mr. Edwards makes a godly
Minister of Cheshire to be the reporter of it to him, but his name is
concealed; we may not know him, yet we may ask Mr. Edwards whether the
Minister were an eye or ear witness of it? If he were not, nor yet asserted
so much to Mr. Edwards, how comes it that Mr. Edwards says in his Preface; For
other Relations (alludeing to relations of fact) I have them from such known
godly Ministers, and Christians, being ear and eye witness thereof. This will
be found a monstrous untruth in Mr. Edwards: However, because there was no such
Minister, an ear, or eyewitness of this matter, it will be found a loud lie
betwixt them, upon which of them soever it will fall.

But because there is great Enquiry made in some parts of the Kingdom about
this matter, we think it necessary for the satisfaction of all that would be
informed in the truth of it, to give a brief relation of it, as it was at
Duckenfeild, and afterward to manifest what a Bundell of untruths were knit up
together in the story, as it is represented to the Kingdom. And for the truth
of what we say, we shall appeal to many impartial Auditors, who (as they
sometimes repair to the Chapel) so they were ear and eyewitness of the
whole matter that very day. Their Testimony (they being neither Members of our
Church, nor of our opinion) we hope will currantly pass with all rational
men. Which is as follows.

Upon one Lords day, while Mr. Eaton was preaching in Duckenfeild-Chappell,
there was the noise of Rapping or Striking upon one of the Pewes or Seats in
the Chapel, and (they being made of thin Wainscoate, and standing hollow from
any wall) the sound was the greater, but continued not long. Upon the first
hearing of it, Mr. Eaton turned his ear toward the place whence he conceived
the sound came, and after he had finished the sentence he was speaking, he made
a short pause, as his manner has often been to do, and the noise immediately
ceased; and he began again to speak, and so continued to the end, both of
Prayer and Sermon, as at other times, without any further interruption. In the
place, whence the noise proceeded, there was a dog which lay under the Seat,
and it was then, and still is supposed, that the dog in Scratching of his
ear, struck upon the Wainscoate with his foot, which in so little a place as
Duckenfeild Chapel, might well cause as great a noise, as was there heard:
But before it could certainly be known what caused it, the noise was ended,
and the dog was immediately put forth from the seat upon it. In witness to
the truth of this we set to our hands.

Robert Duckenfeild. William Bardsley. George Hurst. Henry Aritage. Henry
Hurst. John Tailor. William Hampson. Thomas Ouldham. Joseph Ashton. William
Aritage. Joseph Andrew.
Having thus brought the truth to light, the untruths, that have been most
maliciously and unrighteously forged upon it, will more easily be manifest to
all men's eyes.

First, That the noise was like the beating of a March upon a Drum.

Secondly, That the noise came in at the doors, and passed up the Isle, and so
compassed about the Chapel.

Thirdly, That it interrupted Mr. Eaton, in such manner, that it caused him to
desist from preaching, and to betake himself to prayer.

Fourthly, That at length (the noise continuing so long) it caused the
dissolution of the Assembly, and forced all to flee from the Chapel. These
are four desperate malicious untruths, by whomsoever first devised, and each
untruth is more horrid and wicked then other.

Whereas Mr. Edwards does Comment upon it, and to make it the more remarkable,
would have it observed, that this was the first visible framed Independent
Church that was set up in England, and before the Apologists came from Holland,
etc.

Answ. We answer, visible it has been from the first day it was a Church, for
we have carried all things publicly in the face of the world, to prevent the
many foul aspersions which have been wont to be cast upon domestic and
clandestine meetings; that with Christ we might be able to say to all
malicious false witness bearers, we speak openly daily, in secret have we
said nothing, if therefore we have done evil, bear witness of the evil, if
not, why smile you us ca^s^esly? But whether we were visible, and framed before
the Apologists came from Holland, (seeing that it is not yet full three years
since the Constitution of our Church, and little above two years since it was
completed with Officers,) let Mr. Edwards himself (who knows the time of
their coming from Holland) more considerately compute: and finding it false,
(as we are confident he will) let him retract so bold an assertion.

The Conclusions which Mr. Edwards builds upon it, are foolish, cruel, and
absurd, as may appear from what has been presented in the Premises; And let
it be considered, whether he has not dipped his pen deeply in Blood, while he
would prophecy what should become of the Independants? and whether he has not
showed himself a Bloody man, and has already in his heart split a great deal
of innocent Blood: As for us, the prayers that we have put up day by day in
places where we preach, for peace betwixt us and our Brethren of Scotland, will
clear us that we are not the men he charge us to be: And we commit it to
God to have our innocence cleared to all men's Consciences in his time. In the
Interim, we are contented that those foul and hateful Charges, that Mr.
Edwards has made against us, may pass with the world upon such evidence, as
they are presented, and that they may be received and credited upon those
grounds upon which they are built, which are most impudent falsities, viz. For
[certainly, and assuredly,] as there was a Drum heard, beating a March in
Duckenfeild Chapel, so [undoubtedly] do the Independants delight in war.
Again, [so surely, and unquestionably] as the beating of this Drum, drove us
out from the Chapel, and brake up our meeting, so [certainly and infallibly]
shall the war which we have sought, overthrow all our opinions, and
meetings, and cast us out of England, as an abominable branch for ever: And so
[infallibly] shall some of our heads be served up by the Presbyterians, and put
into Blood, as King Cyrus his head was by Tomyris.

In page 166. and 167. there is a Letter, in which the Sectaries are charged to
have promoted a Petition for toleration, the members of Duckenfeild to have
framed it, the subscribers to be Seekers, Soule-sleepers, Anabaptists, etc. And
amongst others, one common Drunken Minister: It is styled, The Petition of the
peaceable and well-affected, who desire Liberty of Conscience, as was promised
by the House of Commons in their Declaration.

Answ. Truth it is, there was a Petition on foot, both in Cheshire, and
Lancashire: The fierceness of some Presbyterians in their Petitions in both
Counties against their Brethren (who would have lived peaceably by them) was
the cause of it. It was not for Toleration, but against violence, where
moderation and forbearing ought to be: It carried no such Title, as the Letter
imports. Some Presbyterians were at the framing of it with Independants; many
Presbyterians employed in the promoting of it. The greater part of the
Subscribers were Presbyterians; the Minister that is said to be a Common
Drunkard, and yet signed it, is one who is entertained by a very godly People
in Lancashire, who have spoken very hopefully of him to one of us. However it
prove, a Classical man he is, or was, a little after he had subscribed it, and
therefore not for the honor of the Informer, to mention him as a Drunkard. If
any young Scholar which subscribed it, said he would defend Independency with
his Blood: the speech was rash, but may admit of as favorable a construction,
as that somewhat like expression of a Presbyterian, who said, He would burn at
a Stake, before he would read the House of Commons Declaration of the 17 th of
April. But how many untruths have been written in these Informations given in
about this Petition, may be worth the observation of the considerate Reader.

In this Extract also some Gentlemen of noble Quality, are most unworthily and
falsely charged; And though they be not nominated, yet being it is notoriously
known who are intended, the injury is not the less, but the greater; for they
might vindicate themselves from such aspersions had they been nominally
mentioned.

The one of them is said to be become a great Zealot for Independants, for no
other reason, but because he is not causlesly transported, with that rage and
fury against them, as the Author of this Letter is, and many other of the Pre
byterians are in that County; That he threatened any godly Minister to make
their places too hot for denying their Pulpits to Mr. Eaton, is most
calumniously asserted against so honorable a person. The one of us was an eye
and ear witness, when this man (not a godly as it is said) but an unworthy
scandalous Minister behaved himself insolently and audaciously against this
Gentleman; and yet he bore it with remarkable patience, only told him his own
unworthy intemperate offensive carriage in his function, might ere long be
brought against him, to cast him out.

The other Gentleman is said to have encouraged Sectaries, discouraged and
borne down the Orthodox well affected Gentlemen and Ministers, that they could
never to this day, get any thing done against them.

Answ. But this is a most ungrateful accusation against so deserving a
Gentleman, who has done his Country, and the Kingdom, such noble service,
and it is full of malicious slander.

For, first; The persons that he is said to have encouraged, are known to be
as godly and as Orthodox (Independency excepted, which in point of
Oxthodoxnesse is under doubtful disputation) as any other. And what has his
encouraging been, but his entreating them to take their Turns in preaching
with others: which service also the Parliament has required from some of their
judgment.

Secondly, What Instance can be given of any one Orthodox Gentleman, or
Minister, that he has discouraged and borne down?

Thirdly, When were there ever any attempts made, and set afoote by any of the
Gentlemen or Minister against such person, and he opposed them therein, and
engaged himself for the other party? if none of these, then is he unworthily
dealt with. And let it be observed, that whereas there is an implication in his
words of a forwardness among the Gentlemen and Ministers to suppress
Independency, there is an untruth closely wrapped up in it; for no such thing
has appeared from the Gentlemen, nor generally from the Ministers.

It is also considerable, how to usher in, what (by way of defamation) he would
have the world to take notice of concerning this Gentleman, he takes upon him
to discover the state of Cheshire, and therein his own horrid apprehensions of
the Independents, (for he instanceth only in them) and he compares them (by
way of implication) to some hideous devouring Monster, and all that are taken
with them he resembles to a miserable prey; as if Independency were mortiferous
and deadly to all the imbracers of it, poisonous and destructive to men's
souls. It is of sad consideration to think unto what an unjudiciousnesse of
mind, and to what moastrous conceptions men are left, through want of charity.
And then to confirm what he had asserted of Cheshire, he strengthens it with a
notorious untruth; There are (says he) two or three Independent Churches, set
up by them already, and they are setting up two or three more; the latter part
of this relation is totally false.

3d. Gang. Page 167.
Having done with Cheshire, he proceeds to lay his defaming pen, upon some
Parliament-Members, and delivers himself in such language, as if some
abominable thing might be laid to their charge, which it would be less safe
for men to mention, then to blaspheme all the persons in the Trinity; And by
and by he adds words, which reflects upon the whole Assembly of Parliament:
His Expressions are these; The suffering of the Church of God to be rent and
torn in pieces by heresies, schisms, and divisions, the retarding relief for
poor bleeding Ireland, the grieving and sadding the hearts of our Brethren of
Scotland, etc. The words need no Comment upon them who can permit and suffer
ought, which the Parliament will inhibit, and so of the rest it may be said;
therefore the Parliament is struck at, but most unjustly; For, how they have
carried it in all these things, is abundantly evidenced to all that will open
their eyes.

There are other passages in these very Letters, and in other Letters which we
have read, which reflect upon some Independent Churches in these parts, and we
are able to contradict those things, wherewith they, and their Officers are
aspersed, and to declare the falsitie of them. And if we conceived, that
themselves would be silent, we should think our selves bound to say somewhat;
But it is probable, the sense of injuries done them, will lie upon them, as
well as upon us, and put them also upon vindication of themselves in due time.
We therefore shall rest satisfied in pleading our own innocercy, and shall
entreat the Impartial Reader, to consider with what dishonest and deceitful
stuff, both Relations and Letters are filled, which will not abide Trial. Our
request to God shall be, that he would teach them, (who think they do God
good service, in beating and baiting their Brethren,) more love, candidnesse,
and ingenuity in all their relations of others, and all those who are the
subjects of all their Exclamations and oppositions, more innocence, and
integrity in all their demeanor, that thence it may come to pass, that all
that would accuse their good conversation, may be ashamed.

The Copy of a Letter from Mr. Henry Roots, Pastor of the Church of Sowerbie
in Yorkshire, in Vindication of himself against a sinister and dangerous, yet
false and groundless insinuation, contained in the Copy of a Letter out of
Yorkshire, divulged by Mr. Edwards in the third part of Gangranna. page 69.
To his loving Brethren, Mr. Eaton or Mr. Tailor, these be presented.
Dearly beloved Brethren;
HAving received Intelligence from my Brother Tailor, of your purpose of
answering some slanders of Mr. Edwards, I desire to give you a true and
faithful account of what I delivered in that Sermon, which is touched upon in
that Letter of James Robinsons, which is Printed, and of the unchristian
dealing in that particular.

First, I exhorted all godly men to join themselves to some visible Church, if
they have opportunity. I explained my self, I say to some visible Church; not
this or that, but some, I say, if they have opportunity; for if God take away
their opportunity, they must wait Gods time: These Cautions premised: these
Motives were added; First, Whosoever joins not to some, sins, Heb. 10. 25.
Jude ver. 19. Secondly, God will punish such, Zach. 14. 17, 18, 19.

Secondly, I exhorted all godly men, being joined to some visible Church, to
strive to walk in some neernesse of Communion with that Church: as, 1. In
love; 2. Peace; 3. Watchfulness; 4. Christian toleration of Infirmities; 5.
Seeking one another welfare; 6. Defending one another from common enemies,
Genesis 14. 14. Act. 7. 24. Act. 9. 24, 25. Where you may see a mistake in the
Relator of this last Quotation; this is the real truth, as I can produce mine
own notes, and skores of Witnesses to atrest the same.

First, Observe that this relation which now is printed, was carried on the
Sabbath day to another Chapel, a mile distant, and there written down in all
have, and the next morning posted away to Manchester, and that week to York:
spread fifty miles distant in a few days: the next week I hearing of it, both
from York and Manchester, I took occasion to speak with Mr. Hollingworth
about it, who said he had seen such a Letter, and I related unto him mine own
Expressions, and sense, who said after he heard me, that I had a deal of wrong
done unto me; I desired to know the party that did write the Letter, that I
might vindicate my self; but he desired to be forborne in that; I entreated
him then to do me that Brotherly Office, as to deal with the party himself;
who promised he would, yet after all this, the Letter is sent to London, and
printed.

Secondly, The next Lords day after I heard of this, I publicly before all the
Congregation, related what I had heard was written to York and Manchester,
(the writer being present) I then desired to repeat what I had delivered, and
did so; and showed before all, my sense, that I meant it of the Common enemy of
the Kingdom, (we being at that time imbroyled in Civil war,) and I added,
That I was so far from judging it lawful, for the Congregationall men to
take up Arms against the Presbyterians, that I held it unlawful for any
private man to take up Arms, except he was backed by Public Authority. Yea,
I thought this war, now in being, could not be justified, but that it has
the Authority of the State to manage it.

Thirdly, diverse weeks after this, (learning who was the Writer of this
Letter) I dealt with him about it before one of his intimate friends, Paul
Greenwood, showing him how unchristianly he had dealt with me in it: Paul
answered, indeed he should have known my sense before he had divulged it: and
for his part, he observed the passages of that Sermon as diligently as he
could, and did not find any thing of just exception against it: and I judge
this Paul, as judicious a Christian as most about us, yet all this would not
cause the Letter to be recalled, or stayed from Printing.

Fourthly, It may clearly be discerned by this Relation, and the Circumstances
here set down, that diverse sins, diverse ways have been committed. First, by
the first Relator, who upon the Lords day leaving his own Chapel, in the
midst of the day, to go to carry a piece of a Relation, which proves the seed
of slander; if wittingly he minced the relation in the limitation, there is
Doegs sin in it, yea if he related it in that sense which the Scribe, and
Publisher in Print seem to import, (as it is very probable, by his hasty
telling of it, and the others hasty writing of it abroad) it was in that sense
then the like sin, to their's that were the false witnesses against our
Savior, Mat. 26. 60, 61. cum Joh. 2. 19. 21. But if it was rashly done,
without any sinister intention, (which is much to be doubted,) yet there was
evil in it, to relate a Passage, and to leave out principal circumstances for
the understanding of it.

Secondly, Sins committed by the Writer, and divulger were.

First, A receiving an accusation against an Elder upon one witness, without
enquiring of the Elder, whether it were so, though he might have done any day,
and then divulging of it, behind the back, and never to the face, in a
slanderous manner.

Secondly, Impenitency, and hardness of heart, for when he was showed his
sin, and could not but see it, yet to this day, he never gave any
satisfaction, or testimony of repentance to the party wronged; neither did he
suppress the divulging and printing of it, which he might easily have done,
had he timely improved his endeavors, which in godliness he ought to have
done; but it appears in this particular act, he loved evil more then good,
and slandering more then speaking righteousness, Psalm. 52. 3.

Thirdly, The sin of him that published in print these things was, his
printing slanderous Relations upon so slight Grounds, without enquiring into
the certain truth; yea having been admonished before of such dealings by Mr.
Buroughs, Mr. Saltmarsh; and Mr. John Goodwin, and found faulty in the same
kind, and yet goes on in the same trade; surely the Wise man lays a heavy
doom on such, Pro. 29. 1.

All this shows by woeful experience, that there is a spirit of malice works
in the hearts of Brethren against some of their Brethren more virulent in this
kind, then the Spirit of Episcopacy, striking not only at our peace, liberty,
and livelihood, but at our good names and reputations unjustly: which the
Bishops never could so touch: But I hope, God will in his time clear us; as in
this particular by his goodness he has done, and all the world may see it, if
they will but view this.

Brethren, thus I have given you the truth, which I will avow; if you please to
add any thing within these bounds which is defective; to blot out any thing
redundant or unnecessary, or alter any phrases which are harsh or unpolished, I
give you free liberty, nay I entreat you as Brethren to do it, and insert it
with your own, and I will acknowledge my self much obliged unto you. I salute
you both in the Lord, and desire to be remembered to all the Brethren, and so
remain

Sowerbie March 2. 1646. Your truly loving Brother in Christ, HENRY ROOT.

FINIS.

