A brief of an Act of Parliament, humbly desisired for the relief of the
distressed Protestants of IRELAND, who have lost their Estates by the present
Rebellion there, and to enlarge and explain these former Acts already passed,
for the more speedy and effectual reducing of the Rebels of IRELAND to their
due Obedience to His Majesty, and the Crown of ENGLAND.
1. THat such, and so many Commissions may issue forth as the Lords and Commons
in Parliament shall think fit, and to such Commissioners as they shall name, to
examine their losses, what they have been since the 23 of O^ctober last; these
to be returned to the Parliament, and thereupon every man's losses, to be
adjudged what they are.

2. That he that shall thus be found to have lost 1000 l, and shall pay 200 l.
more toward the maintenance of the War, may have 2000 Acres of Land, etc. to
lie in Leinster, of the Rebels Lands forfeited, at 6 d. per Acre Rent: And
paying 150 l. to have 2000 Acres in Munster at 5 d. per Acre Rent: And paying
100 l. to have 2000 Acres in Connaught at 4 d. per Acre Rent: And paying 100
Marks to have 2000 Acres in Vlster at 3 d. per Acre Rent: And to hold of His
Majesty as the under-writers in the first Propositions are to hold theirs, and
when they shall be first satisfied.

3. That all Soldiers, Officers, and others, that have, or shall be employed
in this War, and shall desire to be satisfied his pay or entertainment, or
any part of it in Lands, of the Rebels Lands: for every 20 s. that he shall
acquit of his pay, to have an Acre of Land to lie in Leinster, at 8 d. per Acre
Rent: For every 18 s. an Acre in Munster, at 6 d. per Acre: For every 16 s. an
Acre in Connaught, at 4 d. per Acre Rent: For every 15 s. an Acre in Vlster at
3 d. per Acre Rent; and this to be no prejudice to any of them for any reward
of the Rebels Lands to be given them for their good service.

4. That a better Trade and Manufacture may be introduced and brought into that
Kingdom, and to raise more money, Every one that shall adventure 10 l. or more,
to have so much Houses and Lands in any the fortified Cities, and old
Corporations of Ireland, where he shall choose to be planted, as shall be of
the value of 20 l. paying 20 d. yearly Rent to His Majesty, and so ratably for
every 10 l. to be disbursed, to have 20 l. worth in houses, paying 1 d. Rent to
His Majesty for every pound he shall disburse.

5. That any City, Corporation, Body Politic, Company, Yeuld, Fraternity,
Society, Shire, County, or other persons that shall be desirous to plant one of
them entire by themselves, to have any of them upon the same terms as before.

And for raising present moneys by the Propositions, the same shall be valued
at present by the receivers of the moneys in Guild Hall, and the persons
adventuring to be agreed betwixt them, what such Adventurers shall lay down at
present, to be afterward ascertained by Commission, and then to be clearly
settled according to this Proposition, and to have new Charters granted, with
such Privileges as shall be fit, etc.

6. That because a great part of these Cities, and old Corporations are
Chantery Lands, and given to superstitious uses, for maintenance of popish
Priests, and have been the very Nurseries and increase of Popery there;
Therefore these Messuages and Lands may be given to the King, and so made
liable to this Plantation.

7. That such as by Commission from His Majesty, or from the Lords Justices of
Ireland, or other like Power and Authority, have served the State in this
War, and raised many Companies of Horse and Foot, and paid them at their own
charges; That when hereafter it shall be examined by Commission what their
Services, and merit has been; And what Costs and Charges they have been at,
they may receive the public Faith of the Parliament, to have some considerable
atisfaction and reward out of the Rebels Lands for their Services, etc.

8. That if any shall hereafter as Volunteers, serve the State in this War at
their own costs and charges, they may be recompensed in like manner.

9. That that part of the Province of Connaught, and diverse other Baronies and
Territories of Land, to which His Majesty stands entitled upon record, and was
to have been planted, and yet continued in the possession of the Rebels until
the time of the Rebellion, That these Lands may be made as liable, and subject
to satisfy the Adventurers in the former, and these Propositions as the
Rebels Lands to be forfeited, etc.

10. That to avoid all fraudulent estates and conveyances made by the Rebels,
The former Act be enlarged to extend to all Reversions, etc. and remainders
depending upon any estate Tail in possession, for that otherwise th^re may be
some such uses limited, etc. as the former Act will scarcely meet withal.

11. That to avoid all questions about other admeasurements of these Lands to
be planted for the time to come, after the Adventurers shall become once
possessed and settled in their Lots of Lands; which thing has raised many
inconveniences, and brought much damage to Planters formerly, A Clause be
incerted to bar His Majesty, His Heirs and Successors, for making any other
more demands of Titles to the same, etc. for the time to come, and to avoid all
further admeasurements hereafter, etc.

12. Then to enlarge the time of under-writing in the former Acts of
Parliament, according to the former Propositions therein mentioned, after the
20 of July next, without limitation till the War ended.

13. That in every particular Parish thorowout the Kingdom, and Dominion of
Wales, one may be appointed by the Sheriff of the Shire or County, such as they
will answer for, to receive Subscriptions and Moneys, and for to return the
same to the said Sheriffs, and they to return them unto the Chamber of London;
And that the Parson of every Parish may at some one time after Divine Service
stir up his Parishioners to contr^bute to the work.

14. That a Clause of Denization be inserted for all such of the Dutch Nation
as shall adventure, making them capable to inherit that Land upon which they
shall thus be planted, and to make them, their Issues and Posterities as true
Subjects thereof, as any His Majesty's born Subjects in that Kingdom.

15. That the ancient British Planters in Ireland, their Heirs, and Assigns,
may have all such Lands and Tenements of their Plantations as they have
formerly granted out in Fee Farms and Leases, to such person and persons as are
now become Rebels, to hold as in their first Estates, paying to His Majesty,
His Heirs, and Successors, the yearly Fee Farm Rents, and other Rents reserved,
during all the continuance of such Leases, Estates, and Interests.

16. That such of the said British Planters as have been lately drawn, much
against their wills, to repasse their Lands upon those Commission and
Commisions set on foot for remedying of defective titles, and to alter their
Tenures from Soccage to Capite, with increase of Rents: Such of them as shall
think fit to surrender and cancel their said Letters Patents, may be admitted
to hold by their former Tenures, with increase of Rents notwithstanding, as are
now reserved in these grants last made; the rather, because His Majesty
heretofore was graciously pleased to grant the same to the Committees which
came over from the Parliament of Ireland, but have been interrupted by this
Rebellion.

17. That he which has already subscribed 600 l, as that shall subscribe
hereafter 600 l, may have a Manor in Munster if his lot falls there, the
mistake of the former Act of Parliament notwithstanding.

18. That he which has, or shall underwrite, more then 600 l, shall at his
election, either create the same into one entire Manor, or for every 600 l, he
shall adventure to have so many several Manors, at his election the former
Acts of Parliament notwithstanding.

19. That whereas by a clear computation, the two Millions and a half of Acres;
in the first Propositions, does not satisfy the Million of money designed to
be raised by 31250 l, or thereabouts, that so much more of the Rebels Lands be
allotted out for that, as should countervail the whole money.

20. That as well those who have already underwritten, as those who shall
hereafter underwrite any sums of money, according to the former Acts of
Parliament, or that is to have any of the Rebels Lands to be allotted to him,
according to this Act of Parliament, so soon as they have paid in their whole
monyes, and received their acquittance for the same by deed Indented; or by
their last Wills, and Testaments, may grant, assign, devise, or bequeath all
their demands of, and unto any part of the Rebels Lands, and their Lots, and
Shares to be had therein; And such grantee, and devisee, to have the same
demand right, and pretense, and to receive the same fruit and benefit of the
same subscription as the underwriter, or other person so interessed, and
pretending as aforesaid may or might have done, if it had continued still in
his own person.

21. That such as shall desire to be planted together, so many of them joining
or any sum that shall not exceed 10000 l, may first draw one lot to be after
subdivided and granted to them in several, as if they had subscribed singly
each man by himself, and this to extend to those which have already
underwritten, as those that shall hereafter under write in any the propositions
whatsoever.

22. That such as have underwritten, or shall underwrite in the former, or in
these propositions any sum of money, which he is to pay in time, and shall now
pay in hand, shall have his Land set out unto him, according to Irish measure,
viz. to consist of eightscore Perches or Poles, and every Perch or Pole 21.
foot; whereas by those Propositions, he is to have but sixteen foot and a half.

23. That if there shall not be sufficient of the Rebels Lands for to satisfy
all these adventures, and persons to be satisfied according to these Acts of
Parliament, they are content otherwise to receive such satisfaction as the
Parliament shall think fit.

24. That all such Merchants of London, and of other Cities and Corporations,
and elsewhere in this Kingdom, that have lost any debts in Ireland, by this
rebellion. As the distressed Protestants of Ireland, who have lost there
personal Estates, and Goods, and shall desire to adventure in the Propositions
aforesaid; concerning the planting of the foresaid Cities and Boroughes of
Ireland by this Rebellion; if before the (...) day of (...) next they shall pay
a moiety of such moneys, as is to be paid by others in that adventure, they
may have the other moiety allowed to them toward the recompense of their
losses. Viz. For every 5 l, by them so to be disbursed in ready money, to have
the value of 20 l in Houses and Lands given them, accompting 5 l more in every
such sum of x l, to be allowed toward the said losses, and the other moyty of
the whole, they are to have as those that shall adventure therein, and are not
so concerned therein as they.

25. That such person and persons, as shall at indifferent rates, furnish the
Soldiers in Ireland with cloathings of Linen, or Woollen, Victuals, Corn, or
other provisions, necessary for there subsistence; And for the better proceed
of the War to be delivered in to any of the Magizens, either here, or there,
appointed, or to be appointed for that purpose, shall have such proportions of
Lands, of the Lands of the Rebels, as the same shall amount unto, and shall
underwrite the same, as the adventurers in the first propositions, and have a
receipt thereof from those appointed to receive subscriptions in the Chamber of
London, as for moneys paid, and shall receive a like lot for the same in all
things with the adventurers, in the first propositions.

26. That for satisfaction of the adventurers in these propositions, it is
declared, That in case the War shall not be ended after the underwriting, and
expense of the said whole Million of money, and of other, the moneys to be
raised by this Act, That in such case, they shall not be enforced or compelled
by means, or reason of any engagements by their subscriptions, and adventures
aforesaid, to disburse or lay out, any more, or other sum or sums of money
for their said Lands to be so assigned, and set out unto them after the War
ended.

27. That if the Inhabitants and Parishioners of any Parish, Villadge, or
Hamblet, will adventure any sum of money for Land, shall have a lot of Land
for the same, out of the Rebels Lands, the profit whereof, to go to the use of
such Parishes, etc. for ever.

28. That to extinguish the barberous Irish names of Towns, and Villadges in
Ireland. And to assumulate them in name, as other things to the names of Towns
in England, and to divide Parishes there, now ten miles and more in circuit,
to a fit proportion; for settling of Churches in a convenient place for
convenience of the Parishioners, assembling to divine service; for providing a
competent means for a preaching Ministry, etc. The Commissioners to be
appointed by the Parliament, when the War shall be ended, may have power by
this Act amongst other things to do the same. Every particular Branch of this
Act has its several Motives, and Reasons inserted, together with its
proceedings, and the reasons of the things desired to pass. Which these
generals do comprehend.

29. That such distressed Protestants of Ireland as are Farmers of Lands or
Tenements in Ireland: and now by means of this Rebellion, are drawn away and
enforced to quit their possessions for safety of their lives, and can reap no
fruit and benefit of their Farms, that they may be freed from payment of any
Rents; so long as by means of this War, they shall be hindered to perceive
and receive the profits.

30. That these Rebels now after this their so barbarous and bloody murders
and massacres of His Majesty's Protestant Subjects of Ireland: And their
robbing and dispoiling them of all their goods, chattells, and personal
estates. The burning and demolishing their Castles, houses, the wasting their
Lands, universally almost throughout that whole Kingdom, and other their
unparalleld proceedings, to have totally subverted that Government, supplanted
the Protestant Religion; to have introduced the authority of the Sea of Rome;
and to have framed and set up a new form of Government there amongst
themselves, to the utter destruction of His Majesty, and His Posterity. After
all this, they may not be received unto protection, or to come in upon any
other terms and conditions whatsoever; then referring themselves wholly to His
Majesty's mercy, and the Law, to be dealt withal as His Majesty by the High
Court of Parliament shall be directed; which otherwise will dishearten and
abandon all the remain of His Majesty's British Subjects yet left there; to
set down and replant any more amongst them, never to be secure of their lives
or estates: And this can no more incense, or irritate them, then already by the
former Acts of Parliament, this Session made for reducing them to their
obedience; but hereby much further satisfaction will be given to His Majesty's
good Subjects therein concerned.

1. THat there is nothing in it, but does promote the War in hand, against
those Rebels, and the speedy reducing of them to their obedience, and will
raise great sums of money for that purpose.

2. That by this means a great revenue will be settled to the Crown, which will
make that Kingdom, not only afterward for to subsist of it self, and maintain
its own charge, but will become sufficiently able in a short time to return a
satisfaction to this Kingdom, of those great expenses it has already, and
shall further put this Kingdom unto, by this Rebellion.

3. That it will every way advance the peopling, planting, civillizing, and
securing that Realm, for the future, and time to come: when thus upon the
matter, All, or most part of the Protestants in all His Majesty's Dominions,
with some of those of the united States also, will be involved together in this
work; and thus engaged, to make a universal plantation of it with Religious
Protestants.

4. That by this means popery will be extinguished, and the Protestant Religion
flourish there, and this thus with His Majesty's other Kingdoms, it will be
able to assist him in whatsoever undertaking, for the maintenance and support
of His honor and greatness, and by Him, of the Protestant party throughout
all Christendom.

5. And thus thousands of distressed Protestants, escaped from the bloody hands
of those merciless Rebels, some with the loss of fathers, some of mothers,
some of husbands, some of wives, some of children, some of friends, some of
servants, and of their goods and personal estates, some of all, and of all
some, shall be relieved, and but out of those Rebels Lands, who have been so
tyrannous and cruel to them; a thing of the greatest equity.

6. And all this shall be done to those, who have already thus far merited in
the service of that Commonwealth; that besides their losses aforesaid
sustained, pleading for their relief, they have undergone, and served that
Kingdom from a total and utter ruin and destruction, in that eminency of
danger in the beginning of that Rebellion, and sithence, before supplies, and
succors were; or could be sent from hence (in which time had they not quitted
themselves like men) the whole Kingdom had been endangered, and subject to the
mercy of those merciless and bloodthirsty Tyrants.

7. It shall be done to those who are now only left, the free subjects of that
Realm to undergo and perform those Offices of Trust, and legal Rites and
performances necessarily required in the execution of the Laws of the Land, and
by which things must move to the Reformation there, both in Church and State.

8. And if that Kingdom (under correction) shall be conceived to be so far
subsistant of it self, or independent, as that the Parliament, and the Laws
there in force, shall be thought necessary, as well to attaint those Rebels,
and confiscate their Estates, as for to confirm and corroborate what is, and
shall be by the Parliament here so well begun for the future settlement
thereof, Why should not he that serves at the Altar, partake of the Offering?
and that bears the burden, receive the benefit? May it not trouble them to be
set aside, and to see others, merely strange to that Common wealth preferred
before and over them, and they offering upon the matter as valuable a
consideration (all things considered) as any other gives for those Lands? and
yet these must do their business still, though thus disinabled, without hope
ever to attain again unto that Fortune and Estate which thus they had at the
time that the Rebellion begun: And thus also they shall be enforced also to
depart with that little left (^o be restored at the ending of the War)
toward satisfying of their debts, contracted both before and since this
Rebellion begun, for mere necessaries, wherewith for to live, and to prefer
and provide for their wives, children, and families that are left, out of it,
if it may possibly suffice.

9. The Petitioners cannot imagine they should have any such of their own
Nation of Ireland, nor amongst these here, that will object against them
herein, that hereby too great a Revenue will be raised to the Crown; for surely
as such a one cannot be said to be Caesar's friend, so neither can he be true
Patriot to his Country, nor lover of his Contrymen: and if any State Policy
he has here in, it must be of his own; for it is without bottom or
understanding.

10. And if such a one shall further object, That there will not be Lands
enough to satisfy all that is thus desired by this Act, that objection is
answered by the Act it self, That in such case no more is looked for, then that
which may be had; and if there shall not be enough for to content all parties
concerned, they will rely upon the wisdom and goodness of the Parliament in
such case, for to be recompensed either with restitution of what they shall
thus disburse, or in some such other way as they shall think fit.

11. But if such a one shall further object, and say, That the Petitioners
being thus necessitated as they make themselves; there can be no expectation
that they should advance any moneys toward maintenance of the said War in
hand as they propound; and therefore without ground or reason do make these
propositions; which may receive this answer, That every one that is needy and
necessitous, is not therefore friendlesse, and without help, and it is a
greater motive to him that supplied my wants before, without hope of
retribution to do it now much more, when he shall see a possibility of
satisfaction, at least to do me that good, which will rid him of me as a
continuing burden; which otherwise in charity, he had been still subject, and
liable unto. Howsoever it will rid the Parliament from the trouble of many
Petitions in this kind, who when they shall have thus laid down a way for
every man's satisfaction, that will apply himself unto it, it shall be his own
fault, that will not or cannot lay hold of the remedy, and more from the
Parliament then this cannot be expected; and it will satisfy all reasonable
men that are thus concerned, to sit down and acquiesse in it.

12. And if yet such a one shall further prosecute his resolutions against the
proceeding of this Act, for any more reserved, and private respects, and
relations of his own; The Petitioners can conclude of him, to be no other then
such a one, who of necessity must have many of his friends now out in
Rebellion, for whom he shall thus covertly plead for pardon, in hope assuredly
of their restitution both in blond and estates, That so all things may there
once again be reduced to that their Popish Idolatrous wont of living amongst
themselves, until process of time shall gain them a like opportunity, to do
His Majesty's Protestant Subjects there a far worser mischief, if possible
the confusion both of that Church and State.

FINIS.

