A DECLARATION Of the Lords and Commons of the Parliament of ENGLAND, TO The
High and Mighty Lords, the States of the United Provinces.

LONDON, Printed by A. N. for Richard Best, October 8. 1642.

High and mighty Lords,
We are Commanded by the Lords and Commons assembled in the Parliament of
England to signify to your Lordships, that they have chosen and appointed the
bears hereof Walter Strickland Esquire, to repair to your Lordships, and to
present to you in their names, and in the name of the whole Kingdom a
Declaration, and some propositions and desires very much, importing the
maintenance of the Protestant Religion, which is the surest foundation of the
safety and prosperity of this Kingdom and your states, and the ancient
amity between us to the advantage of both, desiring your Lordships to give
ear to what shall be delivered or propounded to you by the same Master
S^^ickland. And to expedite your answer thereunto, in such manner as shall
stand with your wisdoms, and the due respects of the common good of this
S^^^e and of your selves, which is the earnest desire of.

Your affectionate friends and servants. Maud^vile Speaker pro temp^re for the
Lords house. William Lenthall Speaker of the House of Commons.


To the high and mighty Lo^ds, the States of the United Provinces.
The Declaration of the Lords and Commons of the Parliament of England, to the
high and might is Lords, the States of the United Provinces.
WE the Lords and Commons in Parliament assembled, taking into serious
consideration the means of composing the great distempers and combustions begun
in this Kingdom, which threaten the destruction and ruin of it, and of all
other Protestant Princes and States, have thought good to make this Declaration
to the high and mighty Lords, the States of the United Provinces, That we
understand by a Letter of the Lord Digby, a person fled out of this Kingdom
for high Treason: That as he often endeavored by his wicked and malicious
Counsels to make division between his Majesty and the Parliament, and has been
in great part the cause of that miserable and unnatural war which is made
against us by his Majesty, so he has labored by all means in the United
Provinces to provide Arms, powder, and Ammunition for the fomenting of that
war, and making it more dangerous to this Kingdom; And for this purpose did
address himself to the Prince of Orange by whose countenance and help (as we
are informed by the Lord Digbyes own Letters) he has made provision of great
quantities of Ordnance, powder, Arms, and diverse other sorts of warlike
provision.

And we are further informed by credible advertisement, that the Prince of
Orange in favor of the Lord Digby, and those other wicked Counselors and
incendiaries, who being joined together in these mischievous practices against
the peace of this Kingdom, has not only licenced, but the better to encourage
diverse Commanders, experienced Officers, and Soldiers to resort into this
Kingdom in aid of them against the Parliament, has promised to reserve their
places for them in their absence, and does cause other provision of the same
kind to be made and prepared to be sent over for their supply, to the great
hurt of this Kingdom, and the danger of interrupting the most necessary,
profitable, and long continued amity between the two States.

We further desire to let them know that we cannot believe that this is done by
any authority or direction from their Lordships, considering the great help
that they have received from this Kingdom, when heretofore they lay under the
heavy oppression of their Princes, and how conducible the friendship of this
Nation (concurring with the wisdom, valor and industry of their own people)
has bin to the greatness and power which they now enjoy.

Neither can we think that they will be forward to help to make us slaves who
have bin useful and assistant in making them freemen.

Or that they will forget that our troubles and dangers issue from the same
fountain with their own, and that those who are set a work to undermine
Religion and Liberty in the Kingdom are the same, which by open force did seek
to bereave them of both.

It cannot be unknown to that wise State, that it is the Jesuiticall faction
here, that has corrupted the Counsels of our King, the consciences of a great
part of our Clergy, which has plotted so many mischievous Designs, to destroy
the Parliament, and still endeavors to divide Ireland from this Kingdom, by
a most wicked and cruel Rebellion there, and to divide the King from his
Parliament and People here, and by false slanders, and imputations of things
never done nor intended by us, has incensed his Majesty so as that after many
bitter invectives published against us without any just cause given, he has
now at last resolved to set up his Royal Standard, and draw his sword for the
destruction and ruin of his most faithful and obedient people, whom by the
Laws and Constitutions of this Kingdom he is bound to preserve and protect.

The Cases and the Fortunes of both Estates being so involved and united, we
cannot expect to be hindered by them in our just defense, or that they will do
any thing, to aggravate the miseries and troubles of this Kingdom, in the
peace and happiness whereof they have found much advantage, and by such
unfriendly and unseasonable supplies of our common Enemies, make a way to their
own as well as our ruin.

We therefore desire they may betimes look into this mischief, and having
searched it into the bottom to stop the farther progress of it, That they will
not suffer more Ordnance, Armor, or any other like warlike provision to be
brought over to strengthen those, who as soon as they shall prevail against the
Parliament (according to their principles and interests by which they are
guided) will use that strength to the ruin of those from whom they have had it.

We desire they would not send over any Countrymen to further our destruction,
who were sent to them for their preservation, That they will not anticipate the
spilling of English blood in a^ unnatural Civil War, which has been so
cheerfully and plentifully hazarded and spent in that just and honorable War
by which they have been so long preserved, and to which the blood of those
persons, and many other Subjects of this Kingdom is still in a manner
dedicated, but rather that they will cashiere and discard from their employment
those that will presume to come over for that purpose.

And in satisfying these our reasonable and necessary desires, they shall
thereby not only secure us but themselves, yea, they shall most of all
advantage his Majesty, for whose service those things are pretended to be done.

The question between his Majesty and Parliament is not, whether he shall
enjoy the same prerogative and power which has belonged to our former Kings,
his Majesty's Royal Predecessors, but whether that prerogative and power
should be employed to our defense, or to our ruin.

We expect nothing from him but security and protection from those mischievous
designs which have bin so often multiplied and renewed against us, though
hitherto (through Gods providence) as often frustrated.

It cannot be denied by th^se who look indifferently on our proceedings and
affairs, but that it will be more honor and wealth, safety and greatness to
his Majesty in concurring with his Parliament, then in the course in which he
now is: But so unhappy has his Majesty and the Kingdom bin in those, who have
the greatest influence upon his Counsels, that they look more upon the
prevayling of their own party, then upon any those great advantages both to
his Crown and Royal person which he might obtain by joining with his people.
And so cunning are those Factors for popery, in prosecution of their own aims,
that they can put on a counterfeit visage of honor, peace, and greatness upon
those courses and counsels, which have no truth and reality, but of weakness,
dishonor, and miseries to his Majesty and whole Kingdom.

We have lately expressed our earnest inclinations to that National love and
amity with the United Provinces which is nourished and confirmed by so many
civil respects and mutual interests, as makes it so natural to us, that we
have this Parliament in our humble Petition to his Majesty, desired, we might
be joined with that State in a more near and strait league and union; And we
cannot but expect some returns from them of the like expressions; And that
they will be so far from blowing the fire which begins to kindle amongst us,
that they will rather endeavor to quench it by strengthening and encouraging
us, who have no other design but not to be destroyed, and preserve our
Religion, save our selves and the other reformed Churches of Christendom from
the (...) acres and extirpations with which the princ^^ of the popish Religion
do threaten us and (...) which are begun to be acted in Ireland, and (...)
hopes, endeavors and intentions of that (...) had long since been executed
upon us, if the ^^^cy, favor, and blessing of Almighty God had (...)
superabounded, and prevented the sub^^^^ and malignity of cruel wicked and
bloodthi^^^^ men.

FINIS.
A CONTINUATJON OF Special Remarkable Passages, from both Houses of
Parliament: From Monday the 3d. of October. till the 6th. of October. 1642.
Monday there came Letters to the Parliament out of Lancashire from Manchester,
intimating that there has lately been a great fight between the Town, of
Manchester and the Lord Strange, who set upon the Towte, having at least 2000.
men, but the Townsmen did so bravely acquit themselves, that they slow six
score of his men, and took fourscore Prisoners, and caused them to retreat
toward Preston, the Townsmen loosing but five men in all, three of them being
accidentally slain by their fellow Soldiers. They do earnestly desire some
speedy aid from the Parliament which was intended to have been sent unto them
by the Lord General from Worcester: Eut the Parliament having received
Information that his Majesty intends to draw all the forces he can possible
together to meet the Lord General. It was not thought convenient that his
Excellency should send any of those forces that are with him to Manchester, but
the House have taken order that a thousand Dragoniers shall forthwith be ^^sed
in London upon the Propositions and be sent thither ^^der the command of Sir
Edward Ceton for it is very (...) feared by the Town that the Lord Strange
will make ^nothet attempt against it very suddenly, and they are resolved to
try it out with him and not to yield, they having (...) 2. pieces of Ordnance
into the Town, and are casting their Bells into Ordnance, whereby they may the
better defend themselves until more aid and assistance can be sent unto them.

Letters came from the Earl of Warwick intimating that he had lately taken 2.
ships laden with store of Arms, and Ammunition, and about seven hundred
thousand pounds in Money, which was coming out of Denmark to assist the King.

A Letter came from the Earl of Essex signifying that he had sent to the
Earl of Dorset to acquaint him that he had a Petition to present to his
Majesty from both Houses of Parliament, desiring his Lo^dship to acqua^nt his
Majesty therewith, and that he might be informed of some fitting way or
means for the presenting thereof to his Majesty which for the present the
Earl of Essex could not do in regard he knew not certainly whether his
Majesty would receive it, or how it should come peaceably to him, whereupon
the Earl of Dorset sent a Letter to the Earl of Essex intimating that he had
acquainted his Majesty therewith who answered that he would always have his
ear open to any Petition that came from the Parliament but would not receive
any from the hands of Traitors or any that he had proclaimed so.

Whereupon being put to the Question it was voted to this effect. viz.

That for his Majesty to deny the receiving of any Petition by the hands of
those that he accounts to be Traitors, is in effect a flat denial of receiving
any Petition at all from them, for in proclayming the Earl of Essex a Traitor
he had proclaimed the whole Parliament Traitors so that his Majesty's refusing
to receive this petition was a great abridgment of the Privilege of
Parliament, and therefore voted; that the said Earl should advance forwards with
his forces, and that the Earl of Essex should use some means that those votes
of the h^use should be presented to his Majesty.

On Tuesday morning letters were read in the house, which came frow Yorkshire,
certifying the house, that since the taking up of Arms in that County under the
Command of the L. Fairfaxe against the Earl of Cumberland and his Cavaleers,
there was a Treaty of Peace, and certain Articles agreed upon on both sides,
whereby they agreed that Arms should be laid down on both sides, and that they
should stand a Neuters between the King and Parliam^nt, and preserve the peace
of the County against all Fo^ces that should come against them and that his
Majesty shall have libe^ty to remove all the Canons and Ammunition as he has
in that county, except such as M. Hotham brought from Hull, with diverse other
Articles very prejudicial to that county: but Mr. Hotham and many others that
were for the Parliament did utte^ly refuse to join in the said agreement, but
were gone to Doncaster there to remain with those Fo^ces they had, until they
hear what further d^rections they shall receive from the Barliament.

It was also certified by le^^ers to the house, that Sir Edward H^ron high
Sheriff of Yorkshire, which formerly has showed a good affection to the
Parliament, had a great hand in drawing on the county to agree to those
Articles.

At which agreement the house was much discontented, and after long debate
thereof, a Declaration was drawn up, showing, that none of the parties had any
authority to bind the County to any such Neutrality, it being a privilege
peculiar to the Parliament only,

Secondly, That it is very prejudicial to the whole Kingdom. Thirdly, that it
is derogatory to the power and authority of Parliament. Fourthly, That many
things in that Agreement, are very unequal, contrary to the nature o^
Neutrality, being more advantageous to one side then another, and would be a
great Impeachment to that good Agreement betwixt his Majesty and his subjects,
which both houses do e^^nestly desire.

Information was also given to the house, that although the County of Hereford
for the greatest part thereof, were heretofore against the Parliament, they are
now better informed in their Judgments, and begin to incline much toward the
Parliament being much incensed against the Cavaleers, and have sent 350. men to
Worcester to aid and assist the Parliament, under the Lord General.

There was Letters came to the house on Wednesday, that the Lord Willoughby
of Parham in the County of Lincoln, signifying that he had received instruction
from the house, for the aiding and assisting of Yorkshire against the E. of
Cumberland, and that notwithstanding the Treaty and agreement that was made
between the L. Fairfaxe and the rest of the Gentry and the Earl of Cumberland:
yet he intends to go on according to his instructions, and that on Thursday
next the whole body of Yorkshire were to meet, according to appointment at
their making of the said Agreement; at which meeting they expect to hear the
pleasure of the house, which doubtless they w^ll present for the whole west
Ryding, and a great other part of that County, were disascenting to the said
Agreement.

Letters were read in the house of Commons, intimating that the City of
Hereford being apprehensiue of the danger that they were in be reason of the
Cavaleers, which they feared would surprise that City, and so expose them to
much danger, as they had done lately at Worster, they sent to the E. of Essex,
showing that they desired to assist the Parliament, but because there was a
great Malignant party in the City, those that were well-affected did not dare
to stand upon their guard without they had some forces sent from the Parliament
which they might cleave unto. Whereupon his Excellency sent one thousand foot,
and four Troops of horse to make good that City, and to settle the Militia
there, and that a sufficient Garrison should stay there to maintain the peace
thereof.

Letters came out of Somersetshire, intimating that Sir Ralph Hopt^n with about
100 men were gone into Cornwall, but the Marquis of Hartford was in
Monmouthshire in Wales, and that the Earl of Bedford had left a strong
garrison at Mi^head and several other places, to keep the Marquis from coming
back again to any of those strong holds.

There was also upon Thursday last, being the sixth of October, a packet of
Letters brought to the House from Yarmouth, which were taken coming out of
Holland with a ship and diverse other things together with many Commanders
therein, coming from the Queen to assist his Majesty, which were taken in this
manner, viz.

On Monday night last, there was a ship driven in a Yarmouth by a contrary wind
(it being bound for Newcastle) which came out of Holland being a ship which her
Majesty bought with her own money, and had sent it before to his Majesty, the
Queen her self as his supposed being very shortly to come after, having
shipping prepared for her conduct, which ship was searched at Yarmouth, and
about 140. Commanders were in it, and twelve pieces of Ordnance, with great
store of powder, etc. which were brought up to London.

This day News was brought to the House, that Prince Robert with about ten
Troops of horse was at Bridgenorth, the Kings Majesty being for the most part
at Shrewsbury, and it was conceived that the E. of Essex with his main Army
are now upon their march toward Bridgnorth, where the King has drawn his main
forces his Excellency being now in the midway between VVorster and Bridgnorth,
having left a strong Garrison in Bewdly, which stands upon the River of Severn,
and so the two Armies being drawn so near together, it is very probable they
will have another Battle very shortly.

(...) to have bin some of the Friars Treasure, but being opened, there was
nothing in it of any great consequence.

Upon Friday there was a Conference of both ^^^ses, concerning the presenting
of the petition which the E. of Essex has to be presented to the King, (...)
ageeed that in regard his Majesty had refused to accept thereof from any that
he had proclaimed to b^^traytors, and in so doing, he had denied to receive any
petition from the Parliament. It was agreed that Hi^ Excellency should proceed
according to his Instr^ctions, and that he should use such means for the
presenting of the said petition to his Majesty, as he should think fit, and
thereupon a Post was sent away to his Excellency with Letters to that effect.

Letters was read in the house which came out of Holland from M, Strickland,
intimating that the queen had provided 4. ships to come into England with men
and ammunition to assist his Maj. and that the States of Holland had made stay
thereof, and that the united Provinces did profess much love and affection to
the Parliament, and was very vigilant that no provision of Men, Arms, or
Moneys, should come from thence to aid his Majesty in this unnatural war
against his good Subjects.

Whereupon it was agreed, that a Letter of thanks should be sent to the
States of Holland, for their faithfulness to this Kingdom.

October 8. printed for Robert Wood, 1642.


