AN EXACT COLLECTION OF ALL Orders, Votes, Debates, AND CONFERENCES IN THE
HOUSE of PEERS, AND House of Commons, Both in the Late, and Present PARLIAMENT
Relating to, and concerning THOMAS EARL OF DANBY, And the other five Lords in
the Tower.

AS ALSO, All Votes, Debates, and Conferences concerning the BISHOPS Sitting,
and Voting in Capital Cases.

Faithfully Extracted out of the Journals of both Houses, By a Careful Hand.

LONDON, Printed for Francis Smith, at the Elephant and Castle near the Royal
Exchange. 1679.

All the VOTES, ORDERS, etc. IN THE House of Commons, Both in the Late, and
Present Parliament, touching The EARL of DANBY.
Jovis, December. 19. 1678.
REsolved, That there is sufficient Matter of Impeachment against the Lord
Treasurer.

Ordered, That a Committee be appointed to draw up Articles of Impeachment
against the Lord Treasurer: And the said Committee was to receive any further
Informations, or Evidence against him.

Sabbati 21 December. 78.
Mr. Williams Reports from the Committee, That they had Agreed upon several
Articles of Impeachment against the Lord Treasurer, which were severally put to
the Question, and Agreed upon by the House. And,

Ordered, That the said Articles of Impeachment be Engrossed: And that a Clause
of saving Liberty to Exhibit any further Articles, be Inserted. And that he be
sequestered from Parliament, and Committed to safe Custody. And Sir Henry Capel
to carry up the Articles on Monday next.

Lunae 23 December. 78.
The Clause of saving Liberty, etc. was then brought in, and ordered to be
engrossed with the other Articles.

Post Meridiem, 23 December. 78.
Sir Henry Capel acquaints the House, That he had attended the Lords with the
Articles of Impeachment against the Lord Treasurer, and had delivered the same
into the hands of the Lord Chancellor.

Jovis, 20 March 71/9.
Resolved, That a Message be sent to the Lords, to put them in mind of the
Impeachment of High Treason Exhibited against Thomas Earl of Danby, in the Name
of the Commons, and to desire that he may be forthwith committed to safe
Custody.

Resolved, That it be referred to the Committee of Secrecy, to draw up further
Articles against Thomas Earl of Danby.

Sabbati, 22 March, 78/9.
Resolved, That a Message be immediately sent to re-mind the Lords of the last
Message sent them, relating to the Earl of Danby: And to demand, that he may be
forthwith Sequestered from Parliament, and committed to safe Custody.

Mr. Powle Reports from a Conference, That the Duke of Monmouth spoke at the
said Conference, as follows;

I am commanded by the Lords to acquaint you, That their Lordships having taken
into Consideration Matters relating to the Earl of Danby, together with what
His Majesty was pleased to say upon that Subject, have Ordered, That a Bill be
brought in, By which Thomas Earl of Danby may be made for ever incapable of
coming into his Majesty's Presence, and of all Offices and Employments; and of
receiving any Grants or Gifts from the Crown, and of Sitting in the House of
Peers. The Consideration of this Report adjourned till Monday next.

A Committee appointed to repair to the Lord Chancellor, and other Offices, and
enquire into the manner of suing forth the Pardon of Thomas Earl of Danby, and
make their Report to the House.

Lunae 24. March 71/9.
Sir Francis Winnington reports from the Committee appointed to enquire into
the Manner of suing forth the Earl of Danby's Pardon. And,

That they had attended the Lord Chancellor, and made Search in all Offices,
concerned in passing the Kings Letters, Patents, and had agreed upon a Report.
viz.

They went to Mr. Secretary Coventry's Office, and could find no entry of any
such Pardon there. And Mr. Secretary declared, he knew nothing of Passing the
Pardon.

They went likewise to the Lord Sunderland's Office, and Mr. Bridgman, his
Secretary, assured them there was no Entry of any such Pardon in that Office.

The Committee not being satisfied, resolved to attend the Lord Sunderland, but
he was pleased to send to the Chairman to inform the Committee, that he knew
nothing of the Pardon.

From thence they went to the Offices of Signet and Privy Seal. And had there
an Account that there was there no Entry or Memorial of any such Pardon.

From thence they went to the Lord Privy Seal, and he told them that he never
heard any word of the Pardon, until the day the King was pleased to mention it
in the house of Lords; and further said, that if any such Pardon had come to
him, he would very well have considered it, before he would have passed it.

After this the Committee attended my Lord Chancellor, who acquainted them,
that as to the Pardon, he never advised, drew, or altered one Word of it. And
that the Truth of the Fact was thus; That my Lord Treasurer delivered it to
him, and being asked by the Committee, whether the Pardon extended to
Impeachments? His Lordship answered, that it did: and had these General Words;
Of all Treasons and Crimes whatsoever. Together with the Words, Omnia and
Omnimoda Indictamenta Impetitiones. And those other words, Licet Indictatus vel
non Indictatus, Impetitus, vel non Impetitus, etc. And this was to extend to
the 27th of February last, and did bear date the first of March instant.

My Lord Chancellor further declared, That my Lord Treasurer desired to have
the Pardon passed with all the privacy in the World: and the reason he gave
was, because he did not intend to make use of it, but stand upon his Innocence,
except false Witnesses should be produced against him; and then he would make
use of it at the last extremity.

After this, my Lord Chancellor said, he writ a Letter, wherein he took notice
to his Lordship, That in the first place the Service of the King was to be
considered: And if his Lordship would take his Advice, he thought it was best
to let the Pardon pass in the Regular Course, that it might be publicly known;
that so it might answer the Ends his Lordship intended: which was to prevent
the Re-assuming the Impeachment against his Lordship.

The next day after this Letter was sent, he declared, That he met my Lord
Treasurer at the Committee of Foreign Affairs, where he gave my Lord Treasurer
the same Advice as he gave in the Letter, which was to dissuade his Lordship.

Thereupon my Lord Treasurer said, that he had acquainted the King with the
Contents of his Letter. And that his Majesty did declare, That He was resolved
to have it done: which was, to pass the Pardon with all privacy. Suddenly after
this, the King commanded my Lord Chancellor to bring the Seal to White Hall:
which he did to his own Lodgings. And being there, he laid it on the Table,
thereupon his Majesty commanded the Seal to be taken out of the Bag, which his
Lordship was obliged to submit unto, it not being in his Power to hinder it:
And the King writ his Name on the top of the Parchment. And then directed to
have it sealed. Whereupon the Person that usually carried the Purse, offered to
seal it, my Lord Chancellor said, that at the very time of affixing the Seal to
the Parchment, he did not look upon himself to have the Custody of the Seal.
And concluded that he took upon himself to know, that there was no Memorial in
any Office whatsoever of this Pardon, from the Secretaries Office, until it
came to his Lordship: But that it was a stamped Pardon by Creation.

Resolved, That a Message be sent unto the Lords, to demand Justice in the Name
of the Commons of England, against Thomas Earl of Danby: And that he may be
immediately Sequestered from Parliament, and committed to Safe Custody.

Resolved, That an humble Address be made to his Majesty, representing the
Irregularity and Illegality of the Pardon mentioned by his Majesty, to be
granted to the Earl of Danby, and the dangerous Consequence of granting Pardons
to any Persons that lie under an Impeachment of the Commons of England.

And it is referred to a Committee, to prepare and draw up the same.

The Lords sent a Message. viz.
Mr. Speaker,
WE are commanded by the Lords, to let the House of Commons know, That the
Lords taking into Consideration the Message received from the House of Commons
on Saturday, that the Earl of Danby might be sequestered from Parliament, and
put into safe Custody, did this morning upon Debate order, That the Gentleman
Usher of the black Rod, do forthwith take the said Earl into Custody, and him
safely keep till be bring him to the Bar of their House to morrow morning, And
their Lordships thought fit to acquaint the House of Commons, That this was
done before they received their last Message to that Purpose.


25 March 79.
A Message sent from the Lords. viz.
Mr. Speaker, We are commanded by the Lords to acquaint the House that they
sent to apprehend Thomas Earl of Danby, both to his House here in Town, and to
his house at Wimbleton, And that the Gentleman usher of the Black Rod had
returned their Lordships Answer that he could not be found.


Ordered, That a Bill be brought in to summon Thomas Earl of Danby to render
himself to Justice by a Day, to be therein limited, or in Default thereof to
attaint him, and a Committee is appointed to draw up the same.

26 March 79.
A Bill to Summon Thomas Earl of Danby, to render himself to Justice by a
certain Day, or in Default thereof to be attainted, Was read the first time.

27 March 79.
A Message from the Lords. viz.
Mr. Speaker, The Lords have past a Bill, entitled an Act for banishing and
disabling Thomas Earl of Danby, to which they desire the Concurrence of this
House.


A Bill to Summon Thomas Earl of Danby to render himself to Justice, or in
default thereof to Attaint him, was read the first time.

Resolved, That the said Bill be committed, and the Committee to bring in a
Clause for discovery of all Trusts relating to the Earl of Danby; and that he
may be made incapable of receiving any Pardon, but by Act of Parliament,
wherein he shall be particularly named.

An engrossed Bill sent from the Lords, entitled an Act for banishing and
disabling Thomas Earl of Danby, was read the second time.

Resolved, That the Bill be rejected.

April 79.
A Bill for summoning Thomas Earl of Danby, to render himself to Justice by a
certain Day, or in default thereof, to attaint him of High Treason. Was read
the third time,

Resolved, That the Bill do pass, and Sir Robert Peyton to carry up the Bill to
the Lords for their Concurrence.

April 4. 79.
The Lords desire a Present Conference concerning the Bill sent up against
Thomas Earl of Danby.

Sir Francis Winnington Reports from the Conference, That the Lord Privy Seal
said at the said Conference to this Effect, That the Lords chose to deliver
back this Bill by Conference, rather than by Message, to preserve a good
Understanding, and prevent Debate or Controversy between the two Houses.

The Lords observe that the great Affairs of this Nation, are at a Stand at a
time of the greatest Danger and Difficulty that this Kingdom ever labored
under.

That the King has always in his Reign, inclined to Mercy and Clemency to all
his Subjects; Therefore to a King so merciful and compassionate, the first
Interruption of his Clemency they did desire should not proceed from the two
Houses, pressing the King to an Act of the greatest Security. Therefore have
passed the Bill with some Amendments which he delivered.

Resolved, That an humble Address be made to his Majesty to Issue out his Royal
Proclamation for the apprehending of Thomas Earl of Danby, with the usual
Penalties upon such as shall Conceal him. And that his Majesty would be further
pleased to give order to the Officers of his Majesty's Household that they take
care that the said Earl of Danby be not permitted to reside within any of his
Majesty's Palaces of Whitehal, Somerset House, or St. James's. And a Committee
is ordered to draw up the same.

Apr. 7. 79.
The House considered of the Amendments made by the Lords to the Bill of
Attainder of Thomas Earl of Danby.

The Second, Third and Fifth Amendments were agreed to.

The First, Fourth, Sixth, Seventh, Disagreed to.

And a Conference thereupon ordered with the Lords.

Apr. 8. 79.
Mr. Powle Reports the Reasons why the Commons disagreed to the Lords
Amendments, which are as follows.

The Addition to the Title does show that the Amendments made by your Lordships
to the Bill, do wholly alter the Nature of it, and from a Bill of Attainder
have converted it into a Bill of Banishment, which the Commons cannot consent
to for these Reason,

1. That Banishment is not the Legal Judgment in case of high Treason. And the
Earl of Danby being Impeacht by the Commons of high Treason, and fled from
Justice, has thereby confessed the Charge, and therefore ought to have the
Judgment of high Treason for his Punishment.

2. That Banishment being not the Punishment the Law inflicts upon those
Crimes; The Earl of Danby might make use of this Remission of his Sentence, as
an Argument, That either the Commons were distrustful of their Proofs against
him, or else that the Crimes are not in themselves of so high a Nature as
Treason.

3. That the Example of this would be an Encouragement to all Persons that
should be hereafter Impeached by the Commons, to withdraw themselves from
Justice, which they would always be ready to do if not prevented by a
Commitment upon their Impeachment, and thereby hope to obtain a more favorable
Sentence in a Legislative way, than your Lordships would be obliged to pass
upon them in your judicial Capacity.

The Amendments being all in order to those alterations, the Commons do not
agree to them for the former Reasons.

A Conferrence desired of the Lords upon the Amendments made by them to the
Bill of Attainder of the Earl of Danby.

8. Apr. Post Meridiem,
The Lords desire a Conference concerning matters in the Bill concerning the
Earl of Danby, which was agreed to.

Sr. Francis Winnington Reports from the said Conference, that the Lord
Huntingdon managed the said Conference which was to the Effect following.

The Lords have desired this Conference with the House of Commons, not so much
to argue and dispute as to mitigate and reconcile.

They have already observed that the Debates of this Bill have given too long
and too great an obstrution to public Business, and therefore they desire you
to believe that that is the Reason which has chiefly prevailed with their
Lordships, in a matter of this Nature.

And upon this it is, that if a way may be found to satisfy and secure the
public Fears, by doing less then the Bill you have proposed, the Lords do not
think it advisable to insist upon the utmost and the most vigorous satisfaction
to public Justice which might be demanded.

To induce you to this Compliance, the Lords do acknowledge that Banishment is
so far from being the Legal Judgment in case of high Treason, that it is not
the Legal Judgment in any case whatsoever, since it can never be inflicted but
by the Legislative Authority.

But they see no reason why the Legislative Authority should always be bound to
act to the utmost extent of its Power, for there may be a prudential necessity
sometimes of making abatements, and might be of a fatal consequence if it
should not be so.

And the Lords to remove all Jealousies of the Presidents of this kind, do
declare that nothing which has been done in the Earl of Danby's case shall
ever be drawn into Consequence for the time to come, and will so enter it upon
their Journal.

And thereupon their Lordships insist upon their Amendments, so far as to
exclude all Attainders, and do promise themselves the Commons will in this
Point comply with their Lordships, who do again assure them that their
Resolutions are grounded only upon their Tenderness and Consideration of the
Public.

Apr. 9. 79.
Sr. Francis Winnington Reported the Conference had with the Lords touching the
Amendments made by the Lords to the Bill, for the Attainder of Thomas Earl of
Danby, to which Amendments the Commons did not agree.

The Commons sent a Message to the Lords, to desire a free Conference upon the
subject matter of the last Conference.

10. Apr. 79.
A free Conference was had accordingly, and the Members that managed the same,
are ordered to draw up such Matters as are fit to be entered, that passed at the
said free Conference.

Post Meridiem, The Lords desire a present free Conference upon the subject
Matter of the last free Conference.

Sr. Francis Winnington Reports the matters of the said free Conference.

12 Apr. 79.
Sir Francis Winnington acquaints the House, that in pursuance of their Order,
he had drawn up the substance of the matter that was delivered at the last free
Conference with the Lords as follows.

At a free Conference with the Lords, the Lord Privy Seal said, that the
Commons might see by the present quick free Conference which the Lords desired,
that their Lordships did show their willingness by using all means possible to
Reconcile both Houses, and to come to such an understanding, as to pass the
Bill with all expedition.

He declared, that the Reasons of the Commons for passing the Bill, as they
Proposed, were unanswerable; and therefore the Lords were content to make the
Bill absolute, without giving the Earl of Danby any day to Appear, and the
Penalties to continue.

He observed, that the Lord Impeached, would not only by the Passing of the
Bill, be ruined, together with his Family; but likewise those Acquisitions
which he got by the Marriage into a Noble Family, would be lost.

And he Intimated, that if the House of Commons would have any other Penalties
added to the Bill, their Lordships would leave it to the Commons, so that they
run not to the absolute Obstruction of the Lord Impeacht: And the Lord Privy
Seal took notice, that all the Reason and Justice were of the Common's side,
yet in a Legislative Capacity they were to consider Circumstances in Relation
to the Good of the Public. Upon this his Lordship said, that in the
Transaction of this Affair, there were too great Points gained by this House of
Commons.

The first was, that Impeachments made by the Commons in one Parliament,
continued from Session to Session, and Parliament to Parliament,
notwithstanding Prorogations or Dissolutions.

The other point was, that in Cases of Impeachment upon special matter shown;
if the Modesty of the Party Impeached directs him not to withdraw, the Lords
admit that of Right they ought to order him to withdraw, and that afterward he
must be Committed.

His Lordship observed, that a Member of the House of Commons mentioned the
Earl of Clarendon's Case, but in regard that Case was general and not special
matters shown, it was not like this; and therefore he did not understand the
Lords intended to extend the point of Withdrawing and Commitment to general
Impeachments without special matter alleged; for if it should be otherwise,
the Lords did not know how many of their Lordships might be picked out of their
House of a sudden.

The Earl of Shaftsbury said, that they were as willing to be rid of the Earl
of Danby as the Commons, and in the first place, as to the Right of the
Commons, That upon Impeachments, the Lord Accused ought to Withdraw, and then
be Committed; He said their Lordships did agree it was their Right, and well
warranted by Precedents of former Ages: And as to the distinction the Lord
Privy Seal made, where the Impeachments were General, and when special matter
was alleged; He said the Lords gave no Order to make any such Distinction, for
that General Impeachments were not in the Case.

And the Duke of Monmouth and the Lord Falconbridge affirmed the same, and that
the Earl of Shaftsbury was in the right, and delivered the true sense of the
Lords.

He also said, that the Expression which was sent with Reasons from the Lords
the other day, viz.

That the Lords would not draw into Example the Proceedings of the Earl of
Danby, but would vacat them, They intended that to extend only to the point of
Not-Withdrawing and Not-Committing.

He likewise declared, that the way now proposed, he thought, would be a means
to have the Bill pass; for the Commons might have other Penalties if they
would, as Confiscation of Estate: And although they had no particular Order to
mention Honors, yet by the general words he thought Honors were included; and
if they were insisted on by the Commons, he knew not but that they might be
Agreed to be inserted in the Bill.

He desired the Commons would consider, that there were weighty Reasons which
were better understood than expressed, that prove it necessary for the Good of
the Public, that this Bill should speedily pass.

The Commons replied, that they hoped their Lordships did not think the Commons
did take it, as if they had now gained any point; for that the Points that
their Lordships mentioned as gained, were nothing but what was agreeable to the
Ancient Course and Methods of Parliaments.

12 Apr. 79. Post Meridiem.
A free Conference desired by the Commons upon the subject matter of the last
free Conference.

Sir Thomas Meers Reports, that they had Attended the said free Conference, and
left the Bill with the Amendments with the Lords.

14 Apr. 79. Post Meridiem.
The Lords desire a free Conference upon the subject matter of the last free
Conference.

Sir Francis Winnington Reports from the free Conference with the Lords, that
the same was Managed by my Lord Privy Seal, (viz.) That the Lords hoped that
this Conference would be a Concluding Conference, and had agreed to the Bill
without any further Amendments, to which they desired the Concurrence of the
Commons.

The Commons Agreed to the Amendments made by the Lords, and Sir Francis
Winnington went up with a Message to Acquaint their Lordships thereof.

16 Apr. 79.
A Message from the Lords.
Mr. Speaker, We are Commanded by the Lords to Acquaint this House, that the
Earl of Danby last Night Rendered himself to the Gentleman Usher of the Black
Rod, who brought him this day to the Bar of their House: Their Lordships have
sent him to the Tower.


17 Apr. 79. A Committee appointed to prepare and draw up Evidence against
Thomas Earl of Danby, and to draw up further Articles against the said Earl as
they shall see cause, and they are to sit de die in diem.

25 Apr. 79. A Message from the Lords.
To Acquaint the House, that Thomas Earl of Danby has this day appeared in
Person at the Bar of their House, and has put in his Plea to the Articles of
Impeachment, which the Lords have sent to this House.

Resolved, that it be referred to the Committee of Secrecy, to Examine the
Matter of the Plea of the Earl of Danby, and to enquire how Presidents stand in
Relation to the Pardon, and in what manner and by what (...) the same was
obtained*

Apr. 79.
Sr. Francis Winnington Reports from the Committee of Secrecy,

That they find no President that ever any Pardon was Granted to any Person
Impeacht by the Commons of High Treason and depending the Impeachment.

Ordered. That a Message be sent to the Lords to desire their Lordships to
demand of the Earl of Danby whether he will rely upon and abide by the Plea of
his Pardon or not.

May 8. 79. Post Meridiem A Message from the Lords.
To Acquaint the House that they had demanded of the Earl of Danby whether he
would Rely upon and Abide by the Plea of his Pardon. And the Earl Answered by
word of Mouth only as follows.

The Plea which I have put in, was put in by the Advice of my Council. And my
Council tells me that my Pardon is a very good Pardon in Law, and Advised me to
insist upon my Plea put in, which I now do, And desire that my Council may be
Heard to make out the validity of my Pardon.

May 5. 79.
Resolved. That it is the Opinion of this House, that the Pardon pleaded by the
Earl of Danby is illegal and void; and ought not to be allowed in bar of the
Impeachment of the Commons of England.

Resolved. That the whole House will go up to the Lords Bar, And demand their
Judgment against the Earl of Danby, for that the Pardon by him pleaded is
illegal and invalid and ought not to bar or preclude the Commons from having
Justice upon their Impeachment.

Accordingly Mr. Speaker with the whole House went up to the Bar of the Lords
House and spoke as follows.

My Lords. The Knights, Citizens, and Burgesses in Parliament Assembled, Are
come up to demand Judgment in their own Names, and in the Names of all the
Commons of England against Thomas Earl of Danby; who stands Impeacht by them
before your Lordships of high Treason and diverse high Crimes and Misdemeanors.
To which he has pleaded a Pardon, which Pardon the Commons conceive to be
Illegal and Void. And therefore they do demand Judgment of your Lordships
accordingly.

May 7. 79.
A Message sent from the Lords, to acquaint this House with an Order, yesterday
made, concerning the Earl of Danby, (viz.)

It is ordered by the Lords Spiritual and Temporal in Parliament Assembled,
that Saturday next be appointed for hearing of the Earl of Danby, to make good
his Plea of his Pardon.

May 10. 79.
The Lords desire a Conference with this House, to communicate the Contents of
a Petition from the Earl of Danby.

Sr. John Trevor Reports from the said Conference. That their Lordships had
received a Petition from the Earl of Danby, who was ordered to attend their
Lordships this Day, which his Lordship read. Whereby the Earl of Danby sets
forth that he had received Informations severally from his Council, that they
durst not Appear to Argue the Validity of his Pardon, by reason of a Vote of
the House of Commons. And their Lordships desired to know whether there were
any such Vote as was alleged in the Petition.

All the VOTES, ORDERS, etc. in the House of COMMONS, in the Late and Present
PARLIAMENT, touching the Five LORDS in the Tower.
Impeachments of the House.
THe House passed five Resolves for the Impeaching of Henry Lord Arundel of of
Wardour, William Earl of Powis, John Lord Bellasis, William Viscount Stafford,
William Lord Petre,

Of Treason and other high Crimes and Misdemeanors.

The same day the five several Impeachments were accordingly carried up to the
Lords.

The same day,

Resolved, That whereas the said Peers are already under Commitment; therefore
this House will not desire the Lords that they may be Sequestered from
Parliament, and Committed to safe Custody, as is usual in Cases of the like
Nature.

The same day a Committee Appointed to draw up Articles of Impeachment against
the said Five Lords.

Sabbati 28 December. 1678.
The Committee appointed to draw up Articles against the Lords, are to inspect
the Journals, and consider Presidents touching Impeachments.

Jovis 20 March 1678/9.
A Committee of Secrecy is appointed to take Informations and prepare Evidence,
and draw up Articles against the Lords Impeached, and now in the Tower, etc.

The same day, A Committee Appointed to inspect the Journals of the Lords, and
see what Resolutions have been there taken in matters of Impeachment.

March 24,
Resolved, that an humble Address be made to his Majesty, to desire his Majesty
that all the Papers and Writings relating to the discovery of the Plot, and
particularly such Papers and Examinations as have been taken since the
Prorogation of the last Parliament; may be delivered to the Committee of
Secrecy, Appointed to draw up Articles against the Lords in the Tower.

March 27. 79.
Sir Thomas Chichly Acquaints the House, that his Majesty had been attended
with the Address of this House, and his Majesty returned Answer, that those
Papers and Examinations were delivered to the Committee of Lords, and so soon
as they were dispatched there, they should be sent to the Committee of Secrecy
appointed by this House.

Apr. 3. 79.
Mr. Cerebe Reports from the Secret Committee, the Articles of Impeachment
against the Five Lords.

Resolved, that the said Articles be Engrossed.

Apr. 7. 79.
The Engrossed Articles of Impeachment of High Treason, etc. against the Five
Lords in the Tower, were read.

Ordered, That the Lord Russel do carry up the said Articles to the Lords.

Apr. 15. 79.
Sir Thomas Stringer Reports from the Committee, Appointed to inspect the
Journal of the House of Lords; and see what Entries have been made there,
touching the giving Copies to the Lords in the Tower of the Evidence against
them; that the Committee had prepared a Report which he read as follows.

That they find that on Wednesday the ninth of April Instant, it is entered in
the Lords Journal Book as follows.

The Lord Chancellor, let their Lordships know, that the House had ordered that
the several Inditements found against them by the Grand Jury, should be brought
into the Lords House by Certiorari, and that their Lordships may take Copies of
the Articles of Impeachment against them.

And that they shall have liberty to search and take out Copies of the Records
and Journals in Order to their defense.

Ordered that the Debate hereupon be Adjourned till this day seven Night.

Apr. 16. 79.
A Message from the Lords.
Mr. Speaker, The Lords have commanded us to acquaint this House. That the five
Lords lately committed to the Tower, have all in Person brought their Answer to
the Articles of Impeachment exhibited against them by this House (except my
Lord Bellasis) which were read to their Lordships. And their Lordships have
sent the Original to this House, to the intent this House may consider of them,
and return the same Original with all convenient speed.


A Debate Arising, whether the Lord Bellasis is Actually and Legally Arraigned,
having not in person delivered his Answer at the Bar at the House of Lords, to
the Impeachment exhibited aganst him by this House;

Resolved, That the said Debate be adjourned till to morrow Morning.

Ordered that a Committee be appointed to inspect the Journal of the House of
Lords, and see what Entries are there made touching the Appearances and
Arraignments of the five Lords, now in the Tower and to report, etc.

Apr. 17. 79.
Mr. Hampden Reports from the committee appointed to inspect the Lords journal
and found there entered as follows, viz.

Apr. 8. 79.
The Earl of Shaftsbury reported from the Lords committee for Privileges to
whom it was referred to consider of the method and progress of the proceedings
to be had upon the Trials of the Lords, now Prisoners in the Tower upon the
Impeachments brought up against them, from the house of Commons.

That their Lordships are of opinion, That the Lords now Prisoners in the Tower
ought to be brought to the Bar together, and kneel and there stand up and hear
the Articles of the Charge against them read.

Other Opinions concerning Council, persons to access have a Lord high Steward.
etc.

The Report agreed to and this Order follows.
Whereas William Earl of Powis, William Viscount Stafford, William Lord Petre,
Henry Lord Arundel, of Wardour, and John Lord Bellasis now Prisoners in the
Tower of London, are Impeached of high Treason, etc. By the Commons in
Parliament Assembled, who brought into the House particular Articles against
them. It is this Day ordered by the Lords Spiritual and Temporal in Parliament
Assembled, That the Lieutenant of the said Tower be and is hereby required to
bring the said Earl of Powis etc. In safe Custody to the Bar of this House, to
morrow at ten of the Clock in the fore-Noon, to hear the said Articles
wherewith they stand charged, and for so doing, this shall be his sufficient
Warrant.


April 9. 1679.
They find that the Lord Powis, Lord Stafford, Lord Petre, and Lord Arundel
were brought to the Bar, and kneeled till the Lord Chancellor bid them stand
up; and then the Articles were read to them, and the Lord Chancellor asked
them what they had to say for themselves, letting them know, that his Majesty
would appoint a Lord High Steward for their Trials. Then the Lords made several
Requests, in order to their defense, upon their Trials, and then they withdrew:
And the House having taken their Requests into consideration, they were called
to the Bar again, and the Lord Chancellor let them know, that the House had
ordered, that the several Indictments found against the five Lords by the Grand
Jury, should be brought into that Court by Writ of Certiorari: And that their
Lordships may have Copies of the said Articles of Impeachment, and have time
given them, to the fifteenth instant, to send in their respective Answers
thereunto, with further time to answer to any new Articles that should be
brought up, and liberty to take out Copies of Records and Journals, etc.

At the end of which Order, they find it thus entered.

Then notice being taken by the House, that the Lord Bellasis had not appeared
at the Bar, Thomas Plessington, and Robert Dent, being sworn at the Bar,
attested, that the Lord Bellasis is at this present so ill, that he is not able
to stir out of his Bed; which reasonable Excuse the House allowing, the said
Thomas Plessington, on behalf of the Lord Bellasis, desired that his Lordship
might have a Copy of the Articles, and that Council might be assigned to him;
which with the other Requests made by the Lords who appeared, were equally
condescended to, for the Lord Bellasis, as for the other four Lords.

Then ensues an Order for those five Lords to stand committed to the Tower, in
order to their Trials, and the same access of Persons to them, as before this
day.

John Lord Bellasis has order for Sir Thomas Skipwith and Mr. Sanders to be
his Council.

April 15. 1679.
This day being appointed for the Lords, Prisoners in the Tower, to put in
their Answers to the Articles of Impeachment against them; which being called
for, and not come,

It is ordered, etc. That the Lord of Powis, Lord Petre, Lord Stafford, and
Lord Arundel of Wardour, be brought to the Bar of this House, to morrow at
Eleven of the Clock, by the Lieutenant of the Tower, to put in their respective
Answers to the said Articles; and this shall be sufficient Warrant on that
behalf.

It was moved, That the Lord Bellasis his Answer might be received now, in
regard of his present Sickness; which the House received, and read.

Ordered, That it be referred to the Committee of Secrecy to look into the
Answers of the five Lords in the Tower; and they are to consider of the Methods
of Proceedings upon Impeachments, and report their Opinions to the House.

April 23. 1679.
Mr. Treby Reports from the Committee of Secrecy, that the Committee is of
Opinion, that the Lord Bellasis being Impeached of High Treason by the Commons,
cannot make any Answer but in Person.

That the several writings put in by the other three Lords, which they call
their several Pleas and Answers, are not Pleas or Answers, but Argumentative
and Evasive, to which the Commons neither can, nor ought to Reply.

That if the Answers of the said Lord Powis, Lord Arundel, and Lord Stafford,
as well as that of the Lord Petre were sufficient, yet there ought not to be
any Proceedings against them, until the Lord Bellasis put in a sufficient
Answer in Person.

That the Commons do demand of the Lords, that their Lordships would forthwith
order and require the said Lord Powis, Lord Stafford, Lord Arundel, and Lord
Bellasis, to put in their perfect Answers, or in default thereof, that the
Commons may have Justice against them.

April 24. 1679.
Ordered, That a Conference be desired with the Lords, touching the Answers of
the five Lords in the Tower.

Ordered, That the Managers do acquaint the Lords in the Conference, that this
House will make use of no other Evidence against the five Lords, than for
matter done within seven years last past, and desire their Lordships to appoint
a short day for the said five Lords to put in their Effectual Pleas and Answers
to the Articles of Impeachment.

April 25. 1679.
A Message from the Lords. To acquaint the House, that John Lord Bellasis has
this day appeared in Person at the Bar of the House, and put in his Answer to
the Articles of Impeachment, which the Lords have sent to this House.

April 26. 1779.
A Message from the Lords. To acquaint the House, that the Lord Powis, Lord
Stafford, and Lord Arundel, have this day appeared at their Bar, and have
retracted their former Pleas, and have put in their Answers, which the Lords
have sent to this House.

Post Meridiem. The said Answers were read, and referred to the Secret
Committee.

April 29. 1679.
Sir John Trevor Reports, that he had delivered to the Lords the several
Answers of the Lords; and that the Lord Chancellor demanded of him, whether
the Commons were ready to join Issue.

Whereupon he told his Lordship, that he had nothing of that kind in Command
from this House.

May 6. 1679.
A Message sent to the Lords, to acquaint them, that this House was ready to
make good their Charge against the five Lords.

May 7. 1679.
A Message from the Lords, to acquaint this House of the following Order.

Resolved, By the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, assembled in Parliament, That
the five Lords in the Tower shall be brought to their Trials, upon the
Impeachments against them, on this day Seven-night.

We are likewise commanded to acquaint you, that the Lords have appointed an
Address to be presented to his Majesty for the naming a Lord High Steward, as
well in the Case of the Earl of Danby, as of the other five Lords; and that the
same shall be in Westminster Hall.

May 8. 1679.
Reported from the Committee appointed to search Presidents relating to the
Message sent from the Lords, That they find, on the like occasion, the House of
Commons have appointed a Select Committee to join with a Committee of the
Lords, to consider of the Methods and Circumstances to be observed in the Trial.

A Message sent to the Lords, to desire a Conference upon the subject matter of
the last Message, relating to the Trial of the Lords in the Tower.

Mr. Powle Reports the Reasons to be delivered at that Conference.

The Commons suppose your Lordships do intend in all your proceedings upon the
Impeachments now depending before your Lordships, to follow the usual Course
and Methods of Parliament; and the Commons cannot apprehend, what should induce
your Lordships to address to his Majesty for a Lord High Steward, in order to
the determining the validity of the Pardon which has been pleaded by the Earl
of Danby to the Impeachment of the Commons; as also for the Trial of the other
five Lords; because we conceive, that the Constituting of a High Steward is not
necessary, but that Judgment may be given in Parliament upon Impeachments
without a High Steward.

There being several other matters contained in your Lordships Message,
touching the Trials of the Lords impeacht, which if not settled, may occasion
several interruptions and delays in the Proceedings.

The House of Commons do therefore propose to your Lordships, that a Committee
of both Houses may be appointed to consider of the most proper ways and Methods
of proceedings upon Impeachments of the House of Commons, according to the
usage of Parliament, that thereby those inconveniences may be avoided.

Post Meridiem.
May 8. 1679.

A Conference is desired with the Lords, upon the subject matter of the last
Conference, relating to the Trial of the Lords; at which Conference the said
Reasons were delivered.

May 9. 1679.
A Message from the Lords, to desire a Conference upon the subject matter of
the last Conference, concerning the Trials.

Sir Thomas Meers Reports from the Conference, that the Lords do not agree to a
Committee of both Houses, because they do not think it conformable to the Rules
and Orders of Proceedings of this Court, which is, and ever must be tender, in
matters relating to their Judicature.

Post Meridiem.
Resolved, That no Commoner whatsoever shall presume to maintain the validity
of the Pardon pleaded by the Earl of Danby, without the consent of this House
first had; and that the person so doing, shall be accounted a Betrayer of the
Liberty of the Commons of England.

Resolved, That the Answer delivered by the Lords this day at the last
Conference, tends to the interruption of the good Correspondency between the
two Houses.

Ordered, That a Conference be desired with the Lords upon the subject matter
of the last Conference.

May 10. 1679.
Mr. Hampden Reports the Reasons to be offered at the Conference.

The Commons may tend to prevent all interruptions of a good Correspondency
between the two Houses, which as the Commons desire at all times on their parts
to preserve, so it is especially necessary in this conjuncture, when the most
heinous Delinquents are to be brought to Justice, that the Enemies both of King
and Kingdom may have no hopes left them to see this obstructed by any
difficulties arising in the way of proceedings: Therefore for Answer to the
last Conference, the Commons have commanded me to say this to your Lordships,
That your Lordships do not offer any Answer or satisfaction to the Commons in
their necessary Proposals, amicably offered by way of supposition, that they
might have been confirmed therein by Answer from your Lordships: That your
Lordships do intend in all your proceedings upon the Impeachments now depending
before your Lordships, to follow the usual Course and Methods of Parliament.

And further, that your Lordships have not given the least Answer or
satisfaction to the Commons, concerning your Lordships addressing to the King
for a Lord High Steward, though the Commons proposed their desire of
satisfaction, in as cautious terms as could be, on purpose to avoid all
disputes about Judicature.

The Commons, to avoid all interruptions and delays in the proceedings against
the Lords Impeacht, and the inconveniency that may arise thereby, having
proposed to your Lordships, that a Committee of both Houses may be nominated,
to consider of the most proper means and methods of proceedings upon
Impeachments, your Lordships without any reason assigned (save only that you
say, you do not think it conformable to the Rules and Orders of the proceedings
of this Court) have refused to agree with the House of Commons in appointing
such a Committee, though not heretofore denied, when asked upon the like
occasion; and at this time desired, purposely to avoid disputes and delays.

Therefore the House of Commons have commanded us to acquaint your Lordships,
that things standing thus upon your Answer, they cannot proceed in the Trial of
the Lords, before the method of proceedings be adjusted between the two Houses.

May 11. 1679.
The Lords desire a free Conference on the subject matter of the late
Conference.

Sir Thomas Meers Reports the matter of the free Conference.

Resolved, That a free Conference be desired with the Lords upon the subject
matter of the last free Conference.

Sir Will. Coventry Reports the matter of the free Conference.

The Lords by Message acquaint this House, that they have appointed a Committee
of the House of Commons to meet at Nine of the Clock to morrow morning, at the
Inner Court of Wards, to consider of Propositions and Circumstances, in
reference to the Trial of the Lords in the Tower.

Resolved, That a Committee of twenty four be appointed to join with the
Committee of the Lords, and to meet at the time and place appointed.

May 15. 1679.
Sir John Trevor Reports from the Committee appointed to join with the
Committee of Lords, etc.

The Committee had made two Propositions: First, to see the Commission of the
Lord High Steward, and other former Commissions.

Secondly, They desired to know what Resolutions had been taken, touching the
Lords Spiritual, being present or absent.

As to the first, the Lords acquainted them of an Order made in the House.

May 12. 1679.
It is ordered by the Lords Spiritual and Temporal in Parliament assembled,
that the Office of a High Steward, upon Trial of Peers upon Impeachment, is not
necessary to the House of Peers; but that the Lords may proceed upon such
Trials if a High Steward be not appointed.

Their Lordships further declared, that a Lord High Steward was made hac vice
only; that notwithstanding the making of a Lord High Steward, the Court
remained the same, and was not thereby altered, but still remained the Court of
Peers in Parliament.

That the Lord High Steward was but a Speaker, or Chairman, for the more
orderly proceedings at the Trials.

The Commons took Exception at the words in the Commission of the Lord High
Steward for the Trial of the Earl of Danby; Ac pro eo quod Officium Senescalli
Angliae (cujus presentia in hac part requiritur) ut accepimus jam vacat, and
desired that they might be left out; as implying, that the continuing of a Lord
High Steward was necessary; and thereupon proposed these words to be inserted
(viz.)

Ac pro eo quod Proceres and Magnates in Parliamento nostro Assemblat. Nobis
humiliter supplicaverunt ut senescallum Angliae hac vice Constituere
digneremus.

To which amendments the Lords did agree: And it was further agreed, that a
Commission under Seal for constituting a Lord High Steward for the Trial of the
Earl of Danby should be recalled, and a new Commission, according to the said
amendment, to be issued, and to bear date after the said Resolution; and that
the like Commission should be issued for the Trial of the other five Lords.

As to the second Proposition, the Lords did communicate the Resolution of the
House of Peers, in haec verba.

May 13. 1679.
Resolved by the Lords Spiritual and Temporal in Parliament assembled, That the
Lords Spiritual have a Right to stay in Court in Capital Cases, till such time
as Judgment of Death comes to be pronounced.

May 15. 1679.
The Lords explain the said Resolution, that the Lords Spiritual have a Right
to stay and sit in Court, till the Court proceeds to the Vote of Guilty, or not
Guilty.

Resolved, That the Committee of this House insist, That the Lords Spiritual
ought not to have any Vote in any proceedings upon the Impeachments against the
Lords in the Tower.

May 17. 1679.
Sir John Trevor Reports the following Resolution:

Resolved by the Lords Spiritual and Temporal in Parliament assembled, that
Thursday next be appointed to begin the Trial of the five Lords in the Tower.

After which Resolution past, the Lords Spiritual asked the leave of the House,
that they might withdraw themselves from the Trials of the said Lords, with the
liberty of entering their usual Protestation.

Resolved, That it be given as an Instruction to the Committee of this House,
to insist upon the former Vote of this House: That the Lords Spiritual ought
not to have any Vote in any proceedings against the Lords in the Tower; and
when that matter shall be settled, and the methods of proceedings adjusted, this
House shall then be ready to proceed upon the Trial of the Earl of Danby,
against whom the House has already demanded Judgment, and afterward to the
Trial of the other five Lords in the Tower.

An Abstract of all Proceedings in the House of Peers, in the Case of the Earl
of Danby, and the other Five Lords in the Tower; and also their Debates, in
relation to the Bishops.
MArch 1679.
Lords Committee appointed to receive all Informations, tending to the
discovery of the late horrid Conspiracy, to consider in what Estate the
Impeachments brought up in the last Parliament now stand, and to make Report to
this House.

March 12. 1679.
The Earl of Shaftsbury Reports from the Committee appointed to consider the
State of the Parliament: That

December. 5. 1678.
The Impeachments against the five Lords were brought from the House of
Commons, which consisted of a General Charge of Treason, and other high Crimes,
the House of Commons declaring, they would in convenient time exhibit the
Articles of their Charge against them. Quare neglect.

That an Impeachment of High Treason, and other high Crimes, against Thomas
Earl of Danby, Lord Treasurer, was brought from the House of Commons December.
23. 1678. particular Articles then exhibited, and the Commons desired that he
might be sequestered from his place in Parliament, and be committed to safe
custody.

That the Lord Treasurer desired Copies of all Papers and Proceedings; and it
was then resolved, that the Lord Treasurer should not then withdraw.

December. 26. 1673.
The Lord Treasurer moved the House for a Copy of his Charge, and that he might
not lie long under it; whereupon it was moved, that the House would consider of
the desire of the House of Commons concerning his confinement.

December. 27. 1678.
It was resolved, That he should not now be confined; and ordered, that he
should have a Copy of the Articles, to which he was appointed to bring in his
Answer before the third of January; and that he should have Council to assist
him.

It is also referred to the said Lords Committees for Privileges, to consider
of the state of the Impeachments of the late horrid Conspiracy, and all the
incidents relating thereunto, and to report thereunto.

December. 17.
The same Order renewed after the Prorogation.

March 18.
The Committee reports their Opinion, that the dissolution of the last
Parliament does not alter the state of Impeachments brought up by the Commons
the last Parliament.

March 19. 1678/9
The House agrees with the Committee in that Report.

March 20. 1678/9.
Ordered, that the Earl of Danby put in his Answer in writing to the Articles
of Impeachment brought up against the Earl of Danby, and to desire he may be
forthwith sequestered from Parliament, and committed to safe custody.

March 22. 1678/9.
After his Majesty's Sp^ech to both Houses, the Lords appointed a Bill to be
brought in, that the Earl of Danby be made for ever incapable of coming into
his Majesty's presence, and of all Offices and Employments, and of receiving
any Grants or Gifts from the Crown, and of sitting in the House of Peers; and
resolved to communicate their Resolutions to the House of Commons at a
Conference.

A Message from the House of Commons, to remind them, that they would
immediately proceed upon the Impeachments against the Earl of Danby, and cause
him to be forthwith sequestered from Parliament, and committed to safe custody.

March 24.
The Bill for disabling the Earl of Danby was received; then ordered, that the
Earl of Danby be taken into custody of the Black Rod, and brought to the Bar
the next morning.

A Message was sent from the House of Commons, That they had by a Question,
Nemine Contradicente, ordered to demand justice of the Lords, that the Earl of
Danby may be sequestered from Parliament, and to be committed to safe custody.

The Lords by a Message to the Commons acquainted them, That upon their first
Message to this purpose they had ordered the black Rod to take him into
custody, and that they thought fit to acquaint the house that they had done
this before their last Message to that purpose.

March 25. 1679.
The Lords agree with the Commons in the Vote concerning the Plot carried on by
the Papists.

March 25. 1679.
Privy Seal's Reasons for his protestations against the Bill for banishing of
the Earl of Danby.

April the 1st.
The Bill of Attainder of the Earl of Danby brought up and read the first time.

April the 2d.
Read the second time.

April the 3d.
Reported from the Committee, and the house agreed with the amendments.

April the 4th.
The Bill read the third time, now entitled, An Act for the Attainder of
Thomas Earl of Danby of High Treasons, in case he shall return into, or be
found in any of the King's Dominions.

This Bill was delivered, with Reasons of the Amendments, at a Conference: vide
Journals house of Commons.

Barkley. Hatton. Le Ware. Northampton. Arundel Alesbury. Byron. Lindsey.
Dissentientibus.
April. 7. 1679.
Articles of Impeachment against the five Lords were brought; hereupon it was
ordered by the Lords Spiritual and Temporal in Parliament assembled, That the
Lords Committees for Privileges do consider of the Methods and Progress of the
Proceedings to be had upon the Trials of the Lords upon the Impeachments
brought up against them.

April 8. 1679.
The Lords Committees report, That the Lords, now Prisoners in the Tower, are
to be brought to the Bar together, and kneel there, and then stand up and hear
the Articles of the Charge against them read.

That the said Lords may have Council to plead for them in matters of Law, but
not in matters of Fact.

That such Council as the Lords shall name to the House shall have free liberty
of access to their Lordships, in order to their Trials.

This Report was read and agreed to; and the Lieutenant of the Tower ordered to
bring the said Lords to the Bar of the house the next Morning.

A Conference desired by the Commons upon the Amendments of the said Bill: vide
Journals of the Commons.

A second Conference held the same day by the desire of the Lords: vide Commons
Journals.

April 19. 1679.
Lord Powis, Lord Stafford, Lord Peter's, Lord Arundel, brought to the Bar, and
the Articles of Impeachment read to them; and being asked what they had to say
for themselves, they made several requests in order to their answering their
charge, and making their defense.

The House considered their Request, and Ordered that the several Indictments
found against them, and my Lord Bellasis, should be brought in by Certiorari.
And that they may have Copies of the Articles of Impeachment, and time given to
Answer the Impeachment to the 15th. and farther time to answer to new Articles;
and liberty to search and take out Copies of Records and Journals, and to send
for Witnesses; and the Council assigned them that they have named, and the same
Order made for my Lord Bellasis, who upon Oath was reported sick; and could not
come.

A Certiorari Ordered to bring in their Indictments.

An Order whereby Council is assigned to the five Lords severally in order to
their Defense upon their Trial, upon the Impeachment of the House of Commons,
whereby they are charged with High Treason. And that the said Council have free
access from time to time for that purpose.

An Order reciting it is the duty of the whole Body of Peers to attend the
Trials; that therefore the Lord Chancellor to write to every Peer to attend,
etc.

April 10. Afternoon.
A free Conference desired upon the Matter of the last Conference.

Mr Edward Vaughan opens the free Conference, urging and reinforcing the
Reasons which they had offered at a former Conference, and which the Lords at
the last Conference had waved the answering of.

Taking notice that the Reason and Justice being for the Bill as they sent it,
they could not yet doubt their Lordships Concurrence in it, these being their
only Motives to the passing of the Law; which being occasioned by the parties
flight from Justice, and in affront of this highest Court; They hoped their
Lordships, who are Judges for the Kingdom; and not only for themselves will
follow the example of their Ancestors, and proceed by Rules of Law, which are
to guide in passing of Acts of Parliament, as well as in the ordinary course of
Judicature.

Sir Francis Wennington spoke next, and urged Presidents. Vide Journal Lords.

April 10. 1679.
A free Conference had at the desire of the Commons upon the Amendments of the
Bill of the Earl of Danby.

April 10. 1679.
Ordered, That an Entry be made of the Journal of this day. The Vote of this
House of the 23d. of December. 1678. concerning the Earl of Danbys not
withdrawing after he had been heard in his place upon the Articles of
Impeachment brought up against him from the House of Commons. And the Votes of
the 27 of December. 1678. concerning his Lordships not being committed, shall not
be drawn into President for the future.

The Opinion of the Judges; That no Prisoners indicted for any Capital Crime,
shall have a Copy of the Indictment without Order of the Court. That such a
Prisoner cannot of right demand Copies of Information of Witness against them
(note that Oats and Bedlows Informations were entered into the Journal.)

April 12.
Another free Conference concerning the Earl of Danbys Bill, alleging the
Lords Commissions.

April 15.
The Lords Ordered to come to the Bar to put in their Answers next morning!

The Lord Bellasis Answer received the same day.

April 16.
My Lord Danby was brought to the Bar, and put in his Answer; and having
excused himself for withdrawing, and hoping to clear his Innocence, made
several Requests in order to his answering the Charge in making his Defense.

The Lords granted him a Copy of his Articles, and gave him time to put in his
Answer, and promised him farther time to answer any new Articles; and assigned
him Council, and gave him leave to name other Council, and liberty to explain
himself at his Trial after any words by him then spoken, which he apprehended
might be to his prejudice, and then he was committed to the Tower.

April 16. 1679.
The other came to the Bar, and put in their Answer.

April 21. 1679.
A farther time given the Earl of Danby to put in his Answer to the 25th.
Instant.

April 24. 1679.
A Conference desired by the Commons containing Objections concerning the Pleas
and Answers of the four Lords, and requiring my Lord Bellasis to appear
personally.

April 25. 1679.
My Lord Danbys Plea was put in.

The same day the Lord Bellasis put in an Answer in Person.

April 26. 1679.
Lord Powis, Lord Stafford, Lord Arundell, put in their further Answers.

April 28. 1679.
The Commons desired the Earl of Danby may be sent for to the Bar, to know
whether he will rely upon, and abide by the Plea of his Pardon.

April 29. 1679.
The Earl of Danby being brought to the Bar, said, the Question was new to him,
and of great importance, and he knew not how to answer at present, and desired
further time to answer, which was granted till Saturday following.

The same day the Indictments found by the Grand Jury against the five Lords
were brought into the House.

May 2. 1679.
It is Ordered, That on Monday following the House will take into consideration
whether the Lords Spiritual ought to Vote in Judicature, in Cases of Blood, and
Bills of Attainder.

May 3. 1679.
The Earl of Danby put in his Answer of abiding by his Plea of his Pardon.

The Plea I have put in, was put in by the advice of my Council, who tell me
that my Pardon is good in Law, and advise me to insist upon my Plea put in,
which I now do; and desire that my Council may be heard to make out the
validity of my Pardon.

Ordered Sergeant Barrel, and Mr. Polluxfein may be added to the Earl of Danby
his Council.

May 5. 1679.
The House of Commons sent up to demand Judgment against the Earl of Danby.

Post Meridiem.
Ordered, That the House will take into consideration whether the Lords
Spiritual are to give their Votes in Judicature of Blood, and Bills of
Attainder as a Preliminary to the consideration of the Demand of the Speaker of
the House of Commons concerning the Earl of Danby.

May 6. 1679.
The Commons send up their Message that they will, and are ready to make good
their Articles in Charge against the five Lords, upon which they were ordered
to be brought to their Trial that day seven-night.

Ordered, That Saturday following be appointed for hearing the Earl of Danby to
make good his Plea.

May 8. 1679.
Upon Reading the Petition of Thomas Earl of Danby, praying that the Order of
this House of the sixth Instant made in his Case, which he suggested to be
defective as to the assistance of his Council in defense of his Plea, may be
explained. It is Ordered by the Lords Spiritual and Temporal in Parliament
assembled, That the Council of the said Earl of Danby are to attend with him,
and be heard in his Defense.

Post Meridiem.
A Conference desired for a Committee of both Houses concerning the Trial of
the five Lords, and the Earl of Danby; Vide Journal House of Commons.

To adjust the Proceedings in Order to the Trials of the Lords.

May 9. 1679.
An Answer to the Conference. Vide Journals House of Commons.

Several Orders touching the Order of the Lords going to Westminster Hall, and
bringing the Earl of Danby to the Bar, and for keeping distinct Seals for the
Members of the House of Commons.

May 10. 1679.
Upon Reading the Petition of the Earl of Danby, showing that he is now
attending according to their Lordships Order; and expecting to have met his
Council assigned by their Lordships for the Defense of his Plea.

That he has received a Message from every one of them, that they dare not
appear to argue for him by reason of a Vote of the House of Commons passed
yesterday, whereby the Petitioner is destitute of all Council, and is thereby
totally disabled of making his legal Defense; therefore prays relief and
directions therein.

Ordered, That the Petition be communicated to the House of Commons at a
Conference, to know of them whether they have made any such Vote.

Another Conference desired by the Commons upon the Subject matter of the last
Conference. Vide Journal of the House of Commons.

After which, the Question being put whether a Committee of that (...) should
be appointed to meet with a Committee of the House of Commons, to confer about
(...) ^^ods and Forms of proceedings in Order to the trial of the Lords. It was
resolved in the (...) ^ssentientibus fifty.

May 10. 1679.
An Order, that there shall be a free Conference had (...) the Commons,
concerning the Forms and Methods of proceedings to be had at the Trial of
the(...) in the Tower.

Ordered, that the Managers of the free Conference are not to enter ^^o any
dispute about Judicature.

May 11. 1679.
The Report from that free Conference was, that the Lords asked the Commons
what those Forms and Methods were in reference to the trials of the Lords in
the Tower, which they desire to confer about. At which the Commons say, they
were not instructed to discourse, because they expected this free Conference
was concerning a Committee of both Houses, touching which their Lordships had
given them yet no denial. Therefore the Commons said, they must resort to their
House for directions herein.

Another free Conference desired by the Commons, whereupon it was ordered that
a Committee of that House, be appointed to meet with a Committee of the House
of Commons to consider of Propsitions and Circumstances in reference to the
trial of the Lords in the Tower.

May 12. 1679.
From the Committee of both Houses, the Lord President Reports, that the
Commons propose, that the Lords would consider of a longer time for the Trial
of the Lords in the Tower. This Proposition is agreed to be the last thing
considered.

The Report concerning the Lord High Steward omitted.

It is Reported further, That the Commons pray of, and desire to know what
Resolution the Lords have taken concerning the Bishops being, or not being at
the Trials of those Lords.

The Commons say, That in the Earl of Strafford's Case, the Lords acquainted
the Commons, that the Bishops intended not to be at the Trial.

The Commons think it necessary to know, Whether the Lords intend any new Forms
in Trials upon Impeachments.

They conceive all Trials upon Impeachments in Parliament, have been by
Temporal Lords only.

Hereupon it is Ordered by the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, That the Trial of
the Five Lords, which were appointed to begin the next morning, be put off by
further Order; and that timely Notice shall be given to the said Lords, of such
further day as shall be appointed for that purpose.

May 13. 1679.
It is Reported, That the Commons propose, that they might be satisfied in what
they proposed yesterday, concerning the Bishops being present at the Trial of
the Lords Impeached.

To which the Lords making Answer, That it belongs not to the Commons to be
concerned in the Constituting parts of the Court upon such Trials, but that the
judgment of this Matter belongs entirely to the Lords; and when they have
judged it, the Commons cannot alter it, and therefore should not debate it.
Upon which the Commons acknowledge, that Judgment after Trial is in the Lords,
but their Lordships are not to give Judgment, unless the Commons demand it. And
the Commons desire to know, Whether the Lords will proceed in these Trials, as
their Lordships did anciently? For if the Bishops should sit upon these Trials,
and the Commons should not demand Judgment, as being dissatisfied with their
being there, it may be the Commons may proceed by Bill.

To which the Lords made Answer, That after the Evidence is fully heard, they
are bound to give Judgment of Condemnation, or Acquittal; but this being matter
of Judicature, the Lords declared, That they would impose Silence upon
themselves, and debate no further.

The Commons farther desire to know, Whether the Bishops shall be allowed to
Vote the Validity of the Pardon of the Earl of Danby? For they account that no
Preliminary, but the very Essence of the Trial.

Upon Debate of that part of the Report which relates to the Lords the Bishops,
the Question was proposed, Whether the Lords Spiritual had a Right to stay in
Court in Captital Cases, till such time as Judgment of Death comes to be
pronounced; and was Resolved in the Affirmative.

May 14. 1679.
Upon the Lord Presidents Report from the Committee of both Houses, That the
Lords had communicated to the Commons yesterdays Vote, concerning the Bishops
sitting in Court in Capital Cases, and that the Commons objected, that the Lord
High Stewards pronouncing the Judgment of the Court, is in time after all the
Lords in the Court have Voted particularly, and consequently the Lords
Spiritual may Vote.

The Resolution passed yesterday was explained, That the Lords Spiritual have a
Right to stay and sit in Court, till the Court proceeds to the Vote of Guilty,
or not Guilty.

May 15. 1679.
The Lord President Reports from the Committee of both Houses, That they had
communicated the Explanation of the Vote concerning the Bishops; to which the
Commons urged, That if the Pardon of the Earl of Danby infer Life and Death, it
is the same with Guilty, and not Guilty; and being desirous to reduce the
Business to a particular, asked, Whether it were intended by that Vote, that
the Lords Spiritual should Vote upon the Pardon of the Earl of Danby? To which
the Lords replied, They had no Instructions to that Point, but would acquaint
the House with it.

May 16. 1679.
The Lord President Reports from the Committee of both Houses, That the Commons
communicated to their Lordships, that yesterday they Reported to their House,
the Resolution of the Peers, with the Explanation of them concerning the Lords
Spiritual; upon consideration whereof, their House gave them as an Instruction
to insist on, That the Lords Spiritual ought not to give any Vote in any of the
Proceedings upon the Impeachments against the Lords in the Tower. And the
Committee declared further, That they know not how to proceed in Capital
Matters before a new Court. To which the Lords answered, That they had no
Instructions, Power nor Allowance from the House, to debate concerning this
matter; desired that if they had any other Proposals to make, they would do it,
and that the Lords were ready to debate them. To this the Commons answered,
That they think it most proper, that the Propositions already made should be
determined, before they make any new ones. And then the Question was put,
Whether Thursday following should be appointed to begin the Trial of the Five
Lords? And it was Resolved in the Affirmative.

After which Resolutions, the Lords Spiritual asked the Leave of the House,
that they might withdraw themselves from the Trial of the said Lords, with
liberty of Entering their usual Protestation.

Ordered, that this Resolution of the House, and Desire of the Lords Spiritual,
be communicated to the Committee of the House of Commons to morrow morning.

May 17. 1679.
The Lord President Reports, That the Lords had communicated this Resolution
and Desire of the Bishops to the Commons, and that the Commons answered, That
the Vote of the House of Commons which they acquainted the Lords with yesterday
concerning the Bishops, extended as well to the Earl of Danby, as the said Five
Lords, whereas the Lords Vote relates only to the Five Lords, and therefore
they desire to know what Answer the Lords give as to the Earl of Danby.

They further Objected, That they conceived that their Vote was to the Right of
the thing, and that the Bishops had no Right to be at any one Vote in any
Capital Case, and they conceived the Earl of Danby's Case to be a Capital Case,
as well as the Cases of the other Five Lords; and that if the Bishops may have
leave to withdraw, it implies a Right, which if they have it, is a new Court,
which the Commons cannot admit of.

The Lords did then let them know that there is no day yet appointed for the
trial of the Earl of Danby, and that the Lords spiritual will be absent at all
the parts of the trials of the five Lords, and that the Protestation they now
desire to enter, will be the same as in the Earl of Staffords case.

Then the Commons said they could not proceed to treat of any other proposal
till such time as the business about the Court be settled.

Ordered by the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, That the Committee for
Privileges search for, and consider Presidents and Ways of Proceedings on the
Trials in Judicature of the Peers, and advise of Directions and Methods fit to
be observed therein for the preservation of Order and Regularity in the Trials
of the Lords now appointed, and all circumstances usually arising in such
Trials.

May 19. 1679.
The said President Reports, That the Commons insist on their former Votes,
that the Bishops ought not to have any Votes, etc. And when that shall be
settled, and the methods of Proceedings adjusted, the House will be ready to
proceed upon the Trial of the Pardon of the Earl of Danby, against whom they
have demanded Judgment, and then to the Trial of the other Five Lords; upon
which the Lords told them, they had no Authority to debate this matter.

The Commons said, the Lords Resolution was no Answer to their Proposition,
which comprehended the Earl of Danby, as well as the Five Lords. R. The Lords
Answer was doubtful. The Bishops asked Leave to be absent, but it appears not
that it was granted; if they may ask Leave, and it be not granted, then they
may sit in Court at the Trials. The Bishops absenting by way of Leave, is a
strong implication of a Right asserted; there is the same Reason for the
Bishops being absent upon the Trial of the Pardon, as of the other five Lords,
the naming of a day for the Trial of the five Lords, before the Trial of the
Pardon of the Earl of Danby, against whom they have already demanded Judgment,
is putting that last, which they desire should be first.

The Lords said, They had no power to debate that. The Commons reply, They are
ready to go on, that for want of these Trials, all Public Business stands
still; but the Lords seem to lay the stop at the Commons door, by naming a day
which they conceive ought not to have been appointed, before the methods be
considered; for the Lords have not answered the Commons in matters of Right,
which is necessary first to be adjusted, and they desire your Resolution as to
that matter, for they conceive they have no Right; and the Lords may as well
make the Judges part of their Court, as the Bishops in this Point. The Commons
will give no disturbance to the ancient Judicature, for they own that to be
Sacred, and they conceive they have a Right to know before what Court they
shall appear.

May 20. 1679.
The House adjourned into a Committee, to consider yesterdays Report; whereupon
the House being Resumed, it was Ordered by the Lords Spiritual and Temporal,
That Tuesday next be appointed for the Trial of the Five Lords in the Tower.

May 21. 1676.
Upon reading Reports from the Committee, concerning the Methods of
Proceedings, it is Ordered, That an Abstract of so much of the Journal be made,
as is necessary to be communicated to the House of Commons, the rest to be for
the use of the Chancellor.

Ordered by the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, etc. that Mr. Poluxfein be added
to my Lord Stafford's Council, in order to his Defense upon his Trial.

May 22. 1679.
A report from the Committee of privileges to be communicated at the Committee
of both Houses touching proceedings at the trials.

There is an order that the Prisoners be brought to the Bar on Tuesday next.

May 13. 1679.
The Question put, Whether the Lords Spiritual have a Right to stay in Court in
Capital Cases, till such time as Judgment of Death comes to be pronounced,
which was Resolved in the Affirmative.

Dissentientibus, Darby, Winchester, Shaftsbury, Huntington, Essex, Clare,
Herbert, Stanford, Manchester, Kent, Delamer, Mulgrave, Lovelace, Wharton,
Howard, Rockingham, Strafford, Salisbury, North, and Gray de Gray, Hallifax.

FINIS.

