A DECLARATION OF THE Lords and Commons Assembled in Parliament, Concerning his
Majesty's advancing with his Army toward London. With direction, that all the
Trained bands and Volunteers be put into a readiness.

Also, how Sir John Hinderson urged one David Alexander a Scotchman, to kill
Sir John Hotham, and blow up the Parliaments Magazine; to whom His Majesty gave
money, and he received it.

Together with the Depositions of the said David Alexander and Sir John
Hinderson.

Whereunto is added, Several Votes of the Lords and Commons. Corrected and
amended by the house of Commons to prevent false Copies.

Sabbati 15. October. 1642.

ORdered by the Lords and Commons in Parliament, That this Declaration,
Depositions, and Votes, thus amended, be forthwith printed and published.

H. Elsyng, Cler. Parl. D. Com.

LONDON, Printed for Edw Husbands, and I. Frank. October. 18. 1642.

A DECLARATION OF THE Lords and Commons Assembled in Parliament.
THe Lords and Commons in Parliament, considering with much tenderness and
compassion, the miserable condition of this Kingdom, distracted, and
distempered with many present evils, and imminent dangers, and brought now to
such an height of extremity of misery, that two English Armies are near
together, even ready to join in a dreadful and bloody encounter, through the
violent and wicked counsel of those who have captivated both the Person and
the Power of the King to their own impious and traiterous designs, do
thereupon think good to publish and declare the same to the Kingdom; together
with some directions and provisions which may prevent that utter desolation and
ruin both of religion and liberty, already overwhelmd and suppressed in the
intention and hope of those rebels and traitors about the King; To which
purpose, it is desired by both Houses, that all well affected subjects may take
notice of these particulars, that the King by the help and assistance of the
papists, the prelatical and corrupt part of the Clergy, the delinquent
Nobility, and Gentry, and by the confluence of some notable traitors from
beyond the seas, the Lord Digby, Oneale, and others, and of many desperate
mercenary and ill affected persons from all parts of the Kingdom, has raised
an Army, armed, clothed, and fed, for the most part with the spoils of his
subjects, giving them liberty to plunder and rob all sorts of people, to exact
money and plate from Corporations, by threatening fire and sword if they should
refuse it.

That this wicked Council does not only hinder his Majesty from exercising the
justice and protection of a King toward his people; but even that honor which
is observed betwixt enemies; for by a confident instrument of his Majesty, Sir
John Hinderson a papist (as we are credibly informed) one David Alexander was
urged to kill Sir J. Hotham, telling him it would be a good service both to God
and the King, which he refused to do, saying, it was the work of a Butcher, and
not of a Soldier; this Alexander being a Scotchman of a very poor fortune,
and of a mind fit for desperate attempts* the King sent for him twice, while he
was at Beverley, and when he came to his presence, he spoke to him publicly in
the field, and appointed a sum of money to be given him* which he received.

After which another proposition was made to him by the same Sir J. Hinderson,
that he would put fire to the Magazine of the Army raised by the Parliament,
and to gain the better opportunity to effect it, that he should labor to get
some employment in the train of Artilery, which he accordingly undertook, and
endeavored to obtain; But before he could effect mischievous intention, he was
discovered, apprehended, and examined, and thereupon confessed the practice, and
undertaking, the particulars whereof are referred to the examinations thereupon
taken. That the King does send out Letters to borrow great sums, professing
that those who will not lend him money, do give him just cause to suspect their
duty to his person, and the peace of the Kingdom. And this will be a
sufficient reason to make them liable to be plundered and spoiled of all they
have; but such is the violence of the Kings army, that their friends are in
little better case then they who oppose them, and those who escape best must
yet feed, and billet the soldiers for nothing.

In those places where the Trained bands are willing to go forth to serve in
his Majesty's army, yet for the most part their arms are taken from them, and
put upon those who are more mercenary, and less intrested in the Commonwealth,
and so likely to be fitter instruments of rapine and spoil.

By these great violences, and oppressions, they have so exhausted those parts,
that His Majesty cannot stay long about Shrewsbury, and it is the earnest
desire of the Cavaleers, that he would march forward toward London, those rich
and fruitful Countries in the way being like to yield them a supply of their
necessities, and the wealth of London a full satisfaction of their hope, where
they likewise think to f^^de a party, which upon his Majesty's approach may
make some disturbance, and facilitate their designs upon the City.

That if the Kings army prevail, the good Subjects can expect nothing, but
that their lives and fortunes will be exposed to the malice and rapine of those
ravenous soldiers, who often talk of cutting the throats of honest and
religious men, and have long expected their goods and estates, as the rewards
of their service; the Kingdom will again fall under the government of those
mischievous Councels, who before this Parliament had even brought both religion
and liberty to ruin; and we shall have no hope left of any more Parliaments,
but such as shall be concurrent and subservient to these ends.

The means of curing and preventing these evils and dangers we conceive to be
these.
That good provision be made by lone and contribution for the Army raised by
the Parliament under the Lord General the Earl of Essex, which is no whit
inferior in Horse and Foot to the Kings Army, better armed, full paid,
restrained from disorder and rapine as much as may be, well provided of all
outward necessaries, but above all, well encouraged and instructed in the
goodness of the cause by the labor of many godly and painful Divines.

That this Army be always ready to attend the removes of the Kings army,
either in one body, or divided, as there shall be occasion, according to the
wise conduct and direction of the General, that so no opportunity of fighting
upon advantage be lost, nor the greedy soldiers of the Kings army suffered to
range and spoil the Country at their pleasure.

That the Countries through which the Kings Army is to pass, do associate
themselves, and draw all their Forces togather for the mutual defense of their
persons, and goods, from oppression and spoil.

That those Counties be required to send in all their horses fit for carriage,
and for dragoons, as well for the assistance of the Lord General; For which in
convenient time they shall receive satisfaction; As likewise that by such
means those Horses may be kept from being employed by the Kings Army.

That command and direction be given, to all Lieutenants of Counties and deputy
Lieutenants, that all the Trainedbands and all Volunteeres be put into'a
readiness, to be brought to such randezvous, and to be obedient to such
commanders in chief, as shall be appointed by the Committee for the safty of
the Kingdom, or by the Lord General, that so the Kings Army may find
opposition in every place as they pass; And the inhabitants may have at hand a
sufficient protection and defense; And the Lord General may strengthen his
own Army, with these Forces, as he shall see cause.

That Powder, Munition, and Ordnance, with all other necessaries, be prepared
for these Forces, That so without any trouble, or confusion, they may be
brought together, and fitted for service, upon all sudden occurrents.

That all those who in the City of London or any other place, shall wear any
colors or other marks of division, whereby they may be distinguished from
others, and known to be of the malignant party, shall be examined, searched,
and disarmed; As likewise all others, who being able, shall not lend or
contribute toward the public safty of the Kingdom in this time of sogreat
and imminent danger.

That it be commended to the serious consideration of those in the Kings Army,
and of all other that intend to assist and succor his Majesty, in this impious
and unnatural War (amongst whom it may be hoped there are some honest men and
Protestants) what it is that moves them in this quarrel.

Is it for fear of some innovations and alterations of Religion, or Church
Government? Let such as are possessed with this vain and causeless
apprehension, know, that nothing is Intended, or desired, but to take away the
government by Bishops, which has been so constantly, evidently, mischeivous,
and dangerous, to the Church and State, and such other things as shall be found
to be justy offensive, And nothing to be settled, and introduced, but by
authority of Parliament after consultation first had with an assembly of
learned and reverent Divines.

Is it to uphold the authority prerogative and honor of the King, and to
preserve the safty of his royal Person? Surely the Parliament is, and ever
has been ready to do any thing that belongs to them to secure all these,
which they have often testified by many humble petitions to his Majesty.

If there be no cause for any of these respects to seek the destruction of the
Parliament, and the blood and ruin of their kindred, friends, and
acquaintance, what remains then to be the matter of the quarrel, and the
motives of such great combustions, and the effects and consequences of their
victory if they should prevail? That Priests Jesuits and the Popes Nuncioes
may domineere and govern in the Kings Counsel, as heretofore; That the
Archbishops of Canterbury and York and their suffragans, may suppress
diligent, and powerful preaching, and banish and oppress all the most pious
and best affected Subjects of the Kingdom, and introduce the popish Religion,
under a Protestant profession, till they have strength and boldness to cast
off the disguise, and openly appear that which indeed they are, and would not
seem to be.

That the Earl of Bristoll, and his son the Lord Digby, Mr. Jermin, and
other such Traitors may possess the great places, and government of this
Kingdom, and be the arbiters of the affairs of State and distributers of
preferments, and disgraces, to such as shall further or oppose their designs.

That the delinquents, oppressors, and destroyers of the Kingdom, may not only
escape the justice of the Parliament, but triumph in the spoils of all honest
men, good Patriots; And that through our troubles, and divisions, the Rebels
in Ireland may prevail; That we may cease to be a free Nation, and become the
Object of cruelty, and oppression at home, and of scorn and infamy abroad.

And if there can be no other fruit of their hazard and endeavors on that
side, let them then consider whether by adhering to the Parliament they may not
expect effects more suitable to the desires of honest men, The glory of God in
the preservation of his truth, The peace of the Church, by securing it against
the pride, avarice, and ambition of the Clergy, The honor greatness and
security of the King, by freeing him from false and Traiterous Counsels, and
establishing him in the hearts and affections of his people, the prosperity of
the whole Kingdom by the blessing of good Laws and a righteous government.

The examination of David Alexander, taken October. 6. 1642.
HE says, when the King went toward the north, at Newmarket he came to the
Court, and followed the King to York, and stayed at York when the King first
went to Kingstone upon Hull, and came back to York, and after the Kings
return Sir John Hinderson told him it was a good service to God and the King
to kill Sir John Hotham, and he refused to do it; and that he said he would
rather venture upon an Army, and then the King went to Beverly, and the
Postmasters boy brought him word from Sir James Hamilton, he should come to
Beverley, and should be made Corporal of the field, which he slighted, and
said he was an old man man, and could not ride, and then Sir James Hamilton
sent to him to meet him at the Posthouse, which he did, and Sir James told him
if he came not the next day, he would lose his place; he told him he had no
money, and he gave him ten shillings, and with that he hired Horse and went
thither, and that he came to the L. Lindsey General, which said he was
welcome, and bid him go to the King, and told him the King had sent twice for
him, and the next day (which was the day where in the Earl of Holland, etc.
had his audience) the King being in the field spoke to him and bid him go to
my L. General who gave order to Sir J. Culpeper to give him ten pounds, which
he received, and my Lord General told him Master Slingsby and an other Knight
were about a Mine which failed, and the siege raised, and afterward he went to
Nottingham, and there Sir John Hinderson said to him, he should do good service
if he would set the Magazin a fire, and that he undertook to do, and he told
him it would be well if he could get a service in the Train of Artillary, and
often speech with him upon that action, and said he should be highly
recompensed: And thereupon he came to London on Tuesday was five or six weeks,
and he was with Sir William Balfore, and made means to go into Ireland, and
that he confessed to Sir Balthazar Gerbier upon Monday last all the passages
betwixt him and Sir John Hinderson, and to no body else, but he spoke to Sir
Jo. Mildram to get him a place in the Irish wars, and Sir John promised to
speak with the Irish Committee for him; He said Sir John Hinderson told him
the King was acquainted with this proposition of firing the Magazine diverse
times: And this examinant told him that he had spoken to Sir Balthazar Gerbier
to tell the King that he could not perform it, and he denied that ever he had
labored for any place in this Army.

David Alexander.
The Examination of Sir Balthazar Gerbier taken the 8th of October. 1642.
HE says, he knows one David Alexander a Scotchman, and has known him long,
and has had discourse lately with him.

He says, the said David Alexander said he had a proposition made to him to
kill some body, but none named to this examinant, he answered, that to kill a
man was fit for a hangman; but any gsnerous act befitting a Soldier he would
do.

The said Alexander, said that Colonel Hinderson made this proposition at the
Court, he says that Act was proposed; That another proposition was made by the
same person, that he should get a place in the Train of Artillery, and getting
knowledge where the Magazine was, to do his best to fire it, and this he
entertained and was received, and had money given him; and besides Colonel
Hinderson, and Master Endymeon Porter spoke also concerning the sam: business
to him.

This Examinant says, he knows not whether Alexander, Hinderson, and Mr. Endym
on Porter spoke of the same at the same time, nor did he tell him what sum of
Money he received, nor did he speak of any other Promises; Upon the third of
this instant at nine of the clock this discourse was, which he noted in his
Table Book. Then desiring to look in his Table Book, the Examinant further
related, That he having occasion to use some man's service to the Court, with
the Venetian Ambassador, according to his place, he sent to this David
Alexander, to know if he would go along with him; the said David told him he
could not go, the Examinant wondered at it, knowing his poverty, and asked the
reason, thereupon he said he had some service to do, and the Examinant being
his old friend, he would deal plainly with him, and tell him, and said it was
of that nature, that it was as much worth as his life to discover, the
Examinant wondered at it, and made some difficulty to know it; but he answered
that in the Lord Buckinghams time he had bin his friend, and therefore to him
he would tell it, and put his life into his hands: The Examinant said, why will thou put thy life into such danger, then he said he was dispacht and had
received money for it to apply himself to the Army, and to endeavor to get a
place about the Artillety, to the end to take a time to fire the Magazine;
which he said you know I can do by an instrument made like a watch, which
having gone for so many hours then strikes fire, he said he had applied
himself to Sir William Balfore to be recommended by him, but was put off, only
had offered to him 14. s. per diem for a Sergeant Majors place of Dragooners,
or some service for Ireland; but he refused it, as not fit for him, saying,
that he was more proper for fire works and artillery, etc. He said further,
that meeting with Dulbier, he told him, how now David thou do not come
hither for the service against those from when^e you come, he said no; and then
resolved to apply himself to Sir John Meldram, by whom he was to be presented
to the house the third of this instant: he desired this Examinant to take this
relation from him and to acquaint the King with it, to whom it would be
acceptable to know what was become of him, and he could not write it himself,
and therefore wished this Examinant to write it in his table book: This
Examinant said he would put it into his table book, and said how should I
venture to tell this to the King, or know it to be true; and he said the King
would soon know that, and it will be an honor to you to be so trusted, so he
concluded his discourse with presenting a Scotchman to this Examinant in his
journey, the Scotchman was his companion, and a Solicitor here for one Gordon
the Kings Agent at Hamburgh; but this Examinant took only his name, and liking
not his aspect, promised to send to him some other time.

Balthazar Gerbier.

THe same Examinant, upon the seventh day of October, does confirm all the
particulars aforementioned* And further faith, That the reason why he told Sir
Balthazar Gerbier of this business, was to desire him to tell the King that he
could not as yet perform it; and he thinks that the King and Sir John
Hinderson, do believe that he is in my Lord of Essex Army; and that he does
intend to perform his promise.

Taken the 10 of October. David Alexander.

THis Examinant told Sir Balthazar Gerbier the third of October last, I cannot
go with you, because I have undertaken to fire the Ammunition in the Army of
Parliament, and tell the King of Sir John Hinderson I have not effected it; but
I am going to Sir John Meldram at 9 of the clock this morning, to bring me to
the Parliament, to get employment in the Artillery belonging to the Parliament;
and that I might have had fourteen shillings a day to be a Major in a Regiment
of Dragooners with the Parliament, and refused it; which he desired the King
might know.

David Alexander.
October. 10. 1642.

THe said David Alexander further acknowledgeeth, That he offered to tell Sir
Balth. Gerbier what the great business was which did hinder him from going
with him, and what he had said was as much as his life was worth to discover:
That Sir Balthazar Gerbier did refuse to hear it; but this Examinant did very
earnestly press to hear what it was.

David Alexander.

Die Sabbati, 15 October. 1642.
Resolved upon the Question by the Lords and Commons assembled in Parliament,

THat such persons as shall not contribute to the charge of the Commonwealth in
this time of imminent necessity shall be held fit to be Secured.

Resolved upon the Question by both Houses of Parliament,

That such persons as shall not contribute to the charge of the Commonwealth
in this time of imminent necessity, shall be held fit to be Disarmed.

ORdered by the Lords and Commons in Parliament assembled, That the Lord Mayor
and Sheriffs of the City of London shall forthwith search the houses, and seize
the Arms belonging unto M. Nathaniel Jefferson, M. Austin, M. John Bedle, M.
John Batty, M. Ralph Long, and M. Robert Lewis, all of Bredstreet ward* M. Jo:
Blunt of Lymestreet ward, M. Ald. Wright of Colemanstreet Ward, M. Roger Drake,
and M. John Walter of Farringdon without, For that as it appears by the report
from the Committee, they have not contributed as they ought, to the charge of
the Commonwealth in this time of imminent necessity.

Resolved upon the question by both Houses of Parliament,

That the fines, rents, and profits of Archbishops, Bishops, Deans, Deans and
Chapters, and of such notorious Delinquents who have taken up Arms against the
Parliament, or have been active in the Commission of Array, shall be sequestered
for the use and service of the Commonwealth.

Resolved upon the question by both Houses of Parliament,

That the Kings Revenue arising out of rents, fines in Courts of Justice,
compositions for Wards, and the like, and all other His Majesty's Revenue,
shall be brought into the several Courts, and other places where they ought to
be paid in, and not issued forth, or paid out, until further Order shall be
taken by both Houses of Parliament.

The manner of Sequestration is referred to a Committee.

FINIS.

