Baptismes IN their Verity: OR, The Baptism of John, and the Baptism of
Christ, What they are in truth, as they are described in the Scriptures of
TRUTH. And of what necessity they are unto Salvation. In a plain and brief
manner herein declared. By one of the most unworthy servants of CHRIST, J. E.

1 Cor 3.13. Every man's work shall be made manifest, the day shall declare it,
because it shall be revealed by fire, and the fire shall try every man's work
of what sort it is.

Printed by M. Simmons. 1648.

BAPTISMES In their Verity: OR, The Baptism of John, and the Baptism of
CHRIST, What they are in truth, as they are described in the Scriptures of
Truth; and of what necessity they are unto salvation.
In a plain and brief manner herein declared.
THat the Baptism of John, and the Baptism of Christ, are two distinct
Baptismes, it is a truth not to be questioned.

But that the Baptism of John was his washing the body only with the Element
of water, as some men think and teach; this is a manifest untruth.

The Evangelist Mark does distinguish and make a plain difference between John's
baptizing with the water of the River, and his baptism in truth, saying, John
did baptize in the Wilderness, and preach the Baptism of repentance for the
remission of sins, Mark 1.4.

(...) baptizing with the water of the River, was not of necessity for
remission of him, that it should follow the same. But the Baptism which he
preached was.

And this very thing does John himself declare unto the people (after he had
preached that Baptism unto them, and he seeing Christ coming to him, who was
to take away their sins, saying, Behold the Lamb of God which takes away the
sins of the world. This is he of whom I told you, After me comes a man which
is preferred before me, for he was before me. And I knew him not but that he
should be made manifest to Israel, therefore am I come baptizing with water,
John 1.29, 30.

Where John means by his Baptizing with water, not that on the body with the
water of Jordan, which neither did nor could make ready a people prepared for
the Lord, that he might and should be made manifest unto them, take away their
sins, purify their hearts by faith, through the baptism of the holy Ghost,
as John had said, Matthew. 3.11, 12. Luke 3.16. Nay, but the repentance which he
in the spirit and power of Elias preached, and with many tears and
lamentations cried out unto the people for, saying, Repent ye, for the kingdom
of heaven is at hand, Matthew. 3.2.3.

And which took effect with many of the people of Israel in those days, (...)
did so repent, were so baptized with (...) proceeding from their humble (...)
^^ntrite hearts, confessing their sins unto God.

This is the water that John speaks of and means, caused by the same Spirit
and power, from above, which he had received.

And this was the thing performed by the people in Samuels days, as he says,
And they gathered together to Miz^eh, and drew water, and powered it out before
the Lord, and fasted on that day, and said there, we have sinned against the
Lord, 1 Samuel 7.6.

And which the Prophet Joel also required of the people of his time, if they
would escape the wrath of the great and terrible day to come, saying, Therefore
also now says the Lord, Turn ye even to me with all your heart, and with
fasting, and with weeping, and with mourning. Rent your hearts and not your
garments, and turn unto the Lord your God, for he is gracious, etc. Joel 2.10,
11, 12, 13.

And so David exhorting the people upon good grounds, says, O come, let us
worship and bow down, let us kneel before the Lord our maker. For he is the
Lord our God, and we are the people of his pasture, and the sheep of his hands.
To day if ye will hear his voice, harden not your hearts, as in the
provocation, etc. Psalm. 95 6, 7, 8.

For no man can hear the voice of God, thatt is, believe the promise of
entering into his rest, that does not first unharden his heart, that is to say,
repent.

And so does Christ himself set forth the baptism of John, by mourning,
lamenting, and weeping (in reproof of those that despised the counsel of God
concerning themselves, and were not baptized by him) saying, We have mourned
unto you, and ye have not lamented, for John came, etc. Matthew. 11.17, 18. Luke
7.32, 33.

And so in the most places, if not in all, where John is said to baptize with
water, is meant this kind of water, as Matthew. 3.11. Mark 1.8. Luke 3.26, 31.
John 1.26, 31. Acts 1.5.

And where he testifying again of Christ, and his baptism, says, And I knew
him not: But he that sent me to baptize with water, the same said unto me, Upon
whom thou shall see the Spirit descending, and remaining on him, the same is he
which baptizeth with the holy Ghost, etc. Ioh. 1.33.

For although John did baptize, or wash the body with the element of water, yet
was not that his baptism, of which he says, He that sent me to baptize with
water, said, etc. but only a sign or similitude thereof, as the little child
which Christ set in the midst of his Disciples, was of those returned ones,
whose the kingdom of heaven is, and with whom God will dwell for ever, as he
has said, Mat. 5.3. Mat. 18.2, 3, 4. Mat, 19, 14. according to Esaias 57.15.
Esaias 66.2.

John was no more sent to baptize with such water in comparison of that
effected in the hearts of the people by his preaching, than Paul was in
comparison of his preaching the Gospel of peace, who says, Christ sent me not
to baptize, but to preach the Gospel, though he had as good authority to do
it, as any of the other Apostles had, and did so baptize, as there it
appears, 1 Cor. 1.14, 16, 17.

When Christ (in answer to those Priests that asked him by what authority he
did those things which he did) said, I will also ask you one thing, which if ye
answer me, then will I tell you by what authority I do these things, The
baptism of John, whence was it, from heaven or of men? Matthew. 21.24, 25.

Christ does not mean here by the baptism of John, his baptizing with the
water of the River, that low thing which any man that was not a Prophet, could
have done; but the same only which he in the spirit and power of Elias
preached, and which was indeed from heaven, and wrought so great effect in the
hearts of the people, that all men held John to be a Prophet indeed.

And all this the Priests knew, and yet would not say it was from heaven, but
(left Christ should say, why then didye not believe him, and fearing the
people) answered, they could not tell.

Neither does Christ say John's Baptismes whence are they, as if John had two
baptismes, or more: but John's baptism whence was it? declaring plainly, that
John had but one baptism in truth, whereof that with water of the River, was
no part.

Neither was John's baptism of the Law, or caused by it, as some conceive and
teach, who therefore call it the Spirit of Bondage. Nay but it is of the
Gospel, yea the beginning and first principle thereof, and of the foundation,
as the Scriptures declare, Mark 1.1, 2, 3, 4. Heb. 6.1.

And where Christ says, Thus it is written, and thus it behoved Christ to
suffer, and to rise from the dead the third day, and that repentance and
remission of sins should be preached in his name among all nations, beginning
at Jerusalem, Luke 24.46.

And that it was always to be preached and effected in the hearts of the
people before remission of sins, and so before the faith which purifieth the
heart, and baptism of the holy Ghost, it is very manifest by sundry other
Scriptures, as Acts 10.36. Acts 13.23. Acts 20.21.

And when Paul meeting at Ephesus with certain Disciples, asked them, if they
had received the holy Ghost since they believed, and they answered, they had
not heard that there was a holy Ghost. And he asked, Whereunto then they were
baptized; and they answered, unto John's baptism. And that Paul hereupon said,
John verily baptized with the baptism of repentance, saying to the people,
that they should believe in him that should come after him, that is, in Christ
Jesus. And when they heard this, the Text says, they were baptized in the name
of the Lord Jesus, Acts 19.1, 2, 3, 4, 5.

Where first, by John's baptism of repenpentance, is to be understood that
effected by his preaching, and by their being baptized in the name of the Lord
Jesus, the purifying of their hearts by faith in Christ, through the operation
of the holy Ghost upon the hearing of Paul explaining the words of John, which
are, He shall baptize you with the holy Ghost, and with fire, Matthew. 3.11. it
being as much as to say, they should believe in him. And then Paul approving
them, laid his hands on them, and they received a further gift to speak with
tongues, and prophesied, according as Christ had prom^ied, saying, He that
believes in me, as the Scripture has said, out of his belly shall flow Rivers
of the water of life, John 7.38, 39.

And in this manner did Peter begin, at first to preach, saying, repent and be
baptized every one of you, in the name of Jesus Christ, for the remission of
sins, and ye shall receive the gist of the holy Ghost. Acts 2.

As much as to say, repent and believe in the Lord Jesus Christ, etc.

For remission cannot be attained by washing the body with the element of
water, but by faith only.

So after Christ had appeared to Paul in his way to Damascus, and he having
fasted three days, and mourned no doubt for his sins, when Ananias being come
to him, said, Arise and be baptized, and wash away thy sins, calling on the
name of the Lord, Act, 22.16.

This must needs be understood by faith in Christ, as in the former places; for
sins cannot be washed away by any water of fountains or Rivers, howsoever
used, but by the blood of Jesus Christ only, through believing in him; for he
it is that washes away our sins in his blood, as the Apostle John winesseth,
saying, Unto him that has loved us, and washed us from our sins in his
blood, and has made us Kings and Priests unto God and his Father, to him be
glory and dominion for ever and ever. Amen.

And of all this, both concerning the baptism of John, and the baptism of
Christ, had the Prophet Esaias prophesied before, as where he says, The voice of
him that cries in the Wilderness, prepare ye the way of the Lord, etc. Esaias
40.3. And where he says, Cast ye up, cast ye up, prepare the way, take up
the stumbling block out of the way of my people: For thus faith the high and
lofty one, that inhabiteth eternity, whose Name is Holy, I dwell in the High
and Holy place, with him also that is of an humble and contrite Spirit, to
revive the Spirit of the humble, and to revive the heart of the contrite ones,
Esaias 57.14, 15.

So again, where he prophesied of Christ, saying, The Spirit of the LORD GOD is
upon me, because he has anointed me to preach good tidings to the poor, to
bind up the broken hearted, etc. Esaias 61.1 2, 3.

These excellent promises, and special ministrations of good tidings, to bind
up, to dwell with, to revive, to comfort, etc. are not made nor appointed so to
be preached and performed unto all the world, to every sinner in the same, as
some would have it. Neither is Christ said throughout all the Scriptures, to be
anointed of God the Father, to such a universal purpose and end; but only as
it is here declared, to the humble and meek, the poor, the contrite hearted,
the mournful repentant sinners, so prepared by a speciciall power from above,
as before is expressed.

And so according to this did Christ the anointed of God, preach to such
people, when he opened the book, and read the same place unto them, and said,
This day is this Scripture fulfilled in your ears. Whereupon all bare him
witness, and wondered at the gracious words which proceeded out of his mouth,
Luke 4.18, 19, 20, 21, 22.

And as himself testified by the answer he returned unto John, by the two
Disciples, saying, Go and show John those things which you do hear and see,
that the blind recieve their sight, the lame walk, the lepers are cleansed, the
deaf hear, the dead are raised up, and the poor have the Gospel preached
unto them, or receive the Gospel, for the words do intend and imply both,
Matthew, 11.2, 3, 4, 5. Luke 7 19, 20, 21, 22.

For though it be true, that in a general consideration, the Gospel was, and
is to be preached to all the world, to every man, as Christ declares in that
parable, Matthew. 13, 3, 4, 5. and by the words the spoke at last to his
Disciples, Mark 16.15. Luke 24.46, 47, 48. and other places. And that all men
might always, and may now so hear it, and be enlightened to believe and know
the things to be excellent and true: And further than this, may partake of
some gifts of the holy Ghost, have a taste of the good Word of God, and powers
of the world to come, have a foul Spirit cast out of him, be in kind
sanctified by the blood of Christ, and yet notwithstanding all this, fall away,
turn like the Dog to his vomit, and like the Sow that is washed, to wallow in
the mire again, the foul Spirit returning with seven worse than it self,
possesses him, and his end is worse than his beginning.

Although these things be true, as plainly appears by sundry Scriptures they
are, as Hebr. 6.4, 5, 6, 7, 8. Hebr. 10.26, 27, 28. 2 Pet. 2.22. Matthew. 12.43,
44, 45. Luke 11.24. and other places; yet in that special manner before
declared, it never was preached to any but the contrite hearted repentant
sinners: they have a special particular word of promise made unto them in
particular, whereon to ground their Faith, which no sinner else has, and they
fall not away, they are built upon the sure Rock.

And their faith therefore is of another kind, differing from that which is
common to all, grounded on the general publication or History of the Word,
called therefore by some, (and that rightly, Historical Faith, or the Faith of
knowledge) and is distinguished from it, and from that also called Miraculous,
by several distinct names given it in Scripture, as, The Faith of Abraham, The
Faith which works by love, The Faith of Christ, The Faith of Jesus Christ,
The Faith of the Son of God, The Faith of Gods elect, their precious Faith,
their most holy Faith, and such like.

Which Faith, being defined what it is in the true nature of it, It is a full
persuasion or assurance wrought in the heart of a Repentant sinner, by the
special grace and Spirit of God, of forgiveness of sins, of peace, of love,
of reconciliation with God in Jesus Christ, according to that which Paul
speaks, Romans 8.35, 36, 37, 38, 39. and Heb. 10.22, 23.

And as this Faith of Gods elect is distinguished in Scripture from Faith of
other kinds: So is that gift of the Spirit (whereby it is wrought, and the
love of God sealed in their contrite heart) distinguished from other common
gifts of the Spirit, by several excellent distinct names, as, the Spirit of
Christ, The Spirit of Life which is in Christ Jesus, The Spirit of his Son,
crying Abba Father, The Spirit of Adoption, The Spirit of Truth, etc.

And this is that seed which remains in the heart of every one that receives
it, that holy Spirit whereby they are sealed unto the day of redemption. And
they are those branches in the vine, and that good ground which bring forth
good fruit, thirty, sixty, an hundred fold.

And of such as these does the Church of Christ consist, against which the
gates of hell shall not prevail. These are those lively stoues built on the
chief comer stone Jesus Christ, that spiritual house and holy Priesthood,
which offer up spiritual Sacrifices acceptable unto God by him; and which God
has decreed and concluded in Scripture, to be his Tabernacle and Sanctuary,
wherein he will dwell for evermore.

Now though a man should know all these things to be true, and all that the
Scriptures have spoken, yet if he have not his part in them, if he be not
baptized with the Baptism of Repentance, and the Baptism of the holy Ghost
before spoken of, and so born (...) above of Water and of the Spirit, he cannot
enter into the Kingdom of GOD: For so has the eternal Word, Jesus Christ the
Son of God, unrevocably concluded, saying to Nicodemus, and so to every man,
Verily, verily, I say unto thee, except a man be born of Water and of the
Spirit, he cannot enter into the Kingdom of God, John 3.11.

And therefore it was that he gave that great power and charge unto the
Apostles, when he was to depart from them, saying, Go ye and teach all
Nations, baptizing them in the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the
holy Ghost, etc. Matthew. 28.18, 19, 20. and Mark 16. Go ye into all the world,
and preach the Gospel to every creature, verse. 15. according to that in Luke
24.46, 47, 48, 49. and saying, He that believes and is baptized, shall be
saved; but he that believes ^ot, shall be condemned, Mark 16.16.

What this baptism is, and what the belief is that goes before it, and what
the not believing is in the last place, are the things chiefly to be considered
here.

The Baptism can be no other than the same before spoken of, consisting of
Repentance toward God, and Faith in the Lord Jesus Christ, with the special
gift of the Spirit, being the parts of the new birth from above, described by
the names of Water, and of the Spirit; such a Baptism, as whosoever is
baptized therewith, shall be saved. Not the doing away the filth of the flesh,
the washing with the element of Water, as they of Rome would have it, and do
so take it in both places, using the form of words in Matthew. 28. [concluding
that by the same action they are regenerate, and that except the act be
performed, they cannot be saved.] But it is and must needs be that which the
Apostles (to whom the charge was first given) performed.

As first, when Peter preached, saying, Repent and be baptized every one of you
in the name of Jesus Christ for the remission of sins, and ye shall receive the
gift of the holy Ghost, Acts 2. and Paul, Acts 19.4, 5, 6.

In both which places the baptism of Repentance toward God, and of Faith in
the Lord JESUS CHRIST, and of the holy Ghost, are expressly named, according to
the order and meaning of the words, Matthew. 28.

And to the same purpose also Paul sp^^^ Acts 20. where he says That he kept
nothing back that was profitable, but testified both to the Jews; and also to
the Greeks Repentance toward GOD, and Faith toward our Lord Jesus Christ,
verse 21. which to the H^brewes he calls, the Doctrine of baptism, Heb. 6.

This is the Baptism of which he faith to the Christians at Rome, Know ye not
that so many of us as were baptized into JESUS CHRIST, were baptized into his
death: Therefore we are buried with him by Baptism into death, that like as
Christ was raised up from the dead by the glory of the Father, so we should
walk in newness of life, Romans 6.34*

And to them of Galatia: For ye are all the children of God by faith; for as
many of you as have been baptized into Christ, have put on Christ Gal. 3.26, 27.

And to them of Coloss^^, Ye are complete in him who is the head of all
Principalities and powers, in whom also ye are circumcised with the
circumcision made without hands, in putting off the body of the sins of the
flesh, by the circumcision of Christ, buried with him in Baptism, wherein also
ye are risen with him through the Faith of the operation of God, who has
raised him up from the dead, Col. 2.10, 11, 12.

These excellent effects and fruies of being dead to sin, and to the body
thereof, and to the world; of walking in holiness, and newness of life; so
rising as Christ is risen, and putting on Christ, and being clothed with him,
of being dead and buried, and risen with him, as it is declared in these
several places, cannot be understood as caused by any outward baptizing with
water of springs or rivers, but only by a power and operation of God from
above.

For as circumcision in the flesh is not circumcision, but that of the heart,
as Paul says, Romans 2. So it is concerning baptism, and therefore he counts
circumcision made without hands, all one with baptism in truth.

And therefore he says further, If then ye be risen with Christ, seek those
things which are above, where Christ sits at the right hand of God. Set your
affections on those things above, and not on things on the earth. For ye are
dead, and your life is hid with Christ in God; and when Christ who is our life,
shall appear, then shall ye also appear with him in glory, Col. 3.1, 2, 3.

This is that first resurrection spoken of, Rev. 20.5. wherein whosoever has
part, the second death shall have no power on him.

This baptism then which the Apostles thus preached, and describes, and
causes these spiritual and heavenly effects, must needs be that given them in
charge by Christ, Mat. 28. Mark 16. the same which Peter says saves us, 1
Pet. 3.21. according to the words of Christ, He that believes and is baptized,
shall be saved.

This baptism is of necessity to life and salvation, which that with water of
springs and rivers is not; this may be where it is not, and it where this shall
never be.

And concerning the Belief that goes before this Baptism, it is that common
Belief which any man may have upon the general publication of the Gospel, as
it is said, Go ye into all the world, and preach the Gospel to every creature.

And is the same kind of Belief that Judas and those Disciples had (who when
Christ told them, that except they did eat his flesh, and drink his blood,
they had no life in them, were offended, and walked no more with him) of whom he
said, there are some of you that believe not, though they did believe in that
common kind.

And this kind of belief every one most have in some measure, before he can
repent and believe unto remission of sins and salvation, before he can eat
the flesh of Christ, and drink his blood by believing in him.

But he that believes not, that is to say, he that rejects the word after he
has heard it, and been convinced by it, despising the counsel of God
concerning himself, as many of the Jews, and also of the Gentiles did, and
do at this day, he shall be condemned, as Christ says, Mark 16. John 12.45.
And so some men's sins go before hand to judgment, as it is written.

And whereas Paul faith, There is one Spirit, one Faith, one Baptism, Ephesians.
4.4, 5, 6. he speaks distinctly of those three special graces mentioned by
Peter, Acts 2.38. (and by himself, Acts 19.4. 5, 6. before observed) whereof
the birth from above, and Baptism spoken of, John 3. Matthew. 28. Mark 16.
consists, and calls the baptism of Repentance by the name of one baptism,
as distinguishing it by that name, from that one Spirit, and one Faith which he
does also distinctly name, as being all three special things peculiar to Gods
elect, agreeing in one.

So Ephesians. 6. he counts them as principal parts of the Armor of God, and
calls the baptism of repentance, The preparation of the Gospel of peace,
verse. 15.

And these are the three spoken of by John, where he says, And there are three
that bear witness in earth, the Spirit, and the Water, and the Blood, and
these three agree in one, 1 John 5.8.

Meaning by the Spirit, the Spirit of Adoption; and by the Water, the tears of
repentance, proceeding from an humble and contrite heart; and by the blood, the
mercy and love of God shed forth in the same heart by the Spirit, and so
enjoyed assuredly, through Faith in Christ, which is the garment dipped in the
blood of the Lamb. And so they agree in one, bearing witness to the truth.

And these three were in all the holy Fathers and Prophets from the beginning,
bearing witness with them to the truth And in that woman which washed Christ's
feet with her tears, and with such spiritual affections of love, kissed them,
and anointed them with oil, of all which Christ himself gives testimony, and
proves by her much love, that she had much forgiven her.

Whose example is recorded unto us all to this day to read and consider.

For although the sacrifice of the Body and Blood of Christ, was not then
offered, yet it was in account with God as the price wherewith they all of his
chosen, were bought, and those graces purchased for them.

And therefore it being now accomplished, the Disciple whom Jesus loved,
testifying of him, and bearing witness also of the truth, having those three
witnesses in himself, says, This is he that came by Water and Blood (even
Jesus Christ) not by Water only, but by Water and Blood, and it is the Spirit
that bears witness, and the Spirit is Truth, 1 John 5.6.

For so had John seen it, as he says. But one of the Soldiers with a Spear
pierced his fide, and forthwith came there out Blood and Water. And he that saw
it, bare record, and his record is true, and he knows that he says truth,
that ye might believe, John 19.34, 35.

And so it is true indeed as John said, That Christ came not by Water only,
but by Water and Blood; for both came forth of his fide with the spear.

He came by Water to purchase the Baptism of Repentance for us in respect of
our sins; and by Blood, that we might be washed therewith from our sins, and by
it and his resurrection, jus^^^ied, and by his life saved, according as
himself declared to his Disciples after he was risen from the dead, Luke
24.46, 47. and as Paul says, Romans 5.10.

Unto him therefore who is the faithful witnesses, and the first begotten of
the dead, and the Prince of the Kings of the earth, to him that has so loved
us, and purchased these great things for us, washed us from our sins in his
own blood, made us Kings and Priests unto God and his Father, was dead and is
alive, and shall never die more, to him be glory and dominion for ever and ever.

Amen.
NOw, if all these things be so, and that no man can be saved except he be born
of water and of the Spirit; and that this birth is not from below, but from
above, of God, and not by the will of the flesh, nor of man, as the Scriture
says, Joh. 1.13. Joh. 3.

Then no man can by his own will or power attain thereunto, as some men teach
and persuade (who say that Adam with all in his loins) was restored by the
promise of the seed, which is Christ, to all that he lost by eating the
forbidden fruit, and that there is therefore no original sin to be supposed,
and that all children are conceived and born without any sin, holy and good, as
Adam was in his first estate, and that every child which dies before it commit
actual sin, is saved.

This kind of general Redemption which some teach, is not only contrary to
the Scriptures, and so deceiving to the people, but they do hereby also make
God to deal very unreasonably and unjustly in putting Adam and all in him
(after this) out of Paradise from taking of the Tree of life, and in cursing
the ground for his sake, and laying such a burden of labor and toil upon
him, and pain of travail upon the woman, that in sorrow she should bring
forth her children.

Especially considering that the promise was made in Paradise while they were
in it, and before the curse was pronounced, except only against the Serpent, as
by Genesis 3. appears.

And then (if it were that Adam was so restored, and all children ever since,
so conceived and born) I ask the reason, Why they did not from that day wherein
the promise was made, keep themselves in that estate of blessedness, by
depending on the promise, with their good and holy wills, rather then fall so
soon to commit actual sin, and lose all again, which they might more possibly
have done, then they can now recover and be restored a second time, seeing
there is but one sacrifice for sin, as it is written, Heb. 10.

And if their case be not much worse now then it was before the promise was
made, And every child that dies before it commit actual sin, far more
happy than any of them.

If they answer and say (as they use to teach and publish) that the same
sacrifice of Christ being included in the promise) extended and does still
(since Christ actually suffered) to all sin and sinners in the world, of what
kind soever.

Which they would seem to prove by the words and example of Paul, 1 Timothy 2.15.
This is a faithful saying, and worthy of all acceptance, that Christ Jesus
came into the world to save sinners, of whom I am chief. And so argue and say,
If Paul were the chief sinner in the world, and was received to mercy, then so
may any other how great a sinner soever. But Paul was chief of sinners, as he
says, and was received to mercy. Therefore so may any other.

Ans. Here this free will teacher propounds a very false position at the first,
in saying, That the Sacrifice of Christ extends to all sin and sinners in the
world of what kind soever. And in the next place he wrongs the Apostle
exceedingly, in charging him upon his own words, to be the greatest or chief
of all sinners.

For although it be true, that Christ came into the world to save sinners, and
that he died for the ungodly, and justifies the ungodly and the sinner, as it
is written, Romans 4.5. and 5.6. 8. And as Christ says, Ali sin and blasphemy
shall be forgiven unto men, Matthew. 12.31. And that the Sacrifice of Christ's
death did and does extend so far, and that Paul was such a chief sinner and
blasphemer, injurious, etc. and caused others to blaspheme, as he says, yet
was he not the greatest or chief sinner in the world, neither was his sin
and blasphemy the greatest, neither does he so speak, or mean.

But there was and is a greater sin and blasphemy then his, which Christ
names, The blasphemy against the Spirit, and says, that it shall not be
forgiven in this world, nor in the world to come, Matthew. 12.31, 32. And the
Apostle John says, that it is not to be prayed for, 1 John 5.16.

And Christ came not into the world for to save any of these kind of sinners,
neither dyed he for these, nor does his Sacrifice extend to any of them,
neither was Paul such a one.

But, as he says, I was received to mercy, for I did it ignorantly in
unbelief.

Implying plainly, that if he had known so much as they (who set him aworke to
persecute) knew, he could not have been received to mercy.

They knew what they did, as Cain that slew his brother, because his own works
were evil and his brothers good, and as Judas, that knew he betrayed innocent
blood.

And therefore Christ (when they crucified him) prayed only for those that
knew not what they did, Luke 23.34.

And so it is true, that Paul was chief of those sinners whom Christ came into
the world to save, and that he prayed, and died for, but not of the other.

If the free will teacher shall say, that Peter had knowledge of Christ when he
denied him, and cursed, and swear that he knew him not, and yet was forgiven,
though Christ had said, Whosoever shall deny me before men, him will I deny
before my Father which is in heaven.

This is true: But there are two things to be considered in the unpardonable
sin, (which we all ought to understand) that is, willingness of the heart
as well as knowledge, which was not in Peter, he did it of weakness through,
fear, very unwillingly in his heart, and was forgiven.

And Paul, he sinned wllingly, and with his heart, but very ignorantly, and was
received to mercy.

And therefore (in describing that great sin unto death) he says (by way of
exhortation) For if we sin willingly after we have received the knowledge of
the truth, there remains no more sacrifice for sins, but a certain fearful
looking for of judgment and fiery indignation which shall devour the
adversaries, Heb. 10.26, 27.

So that where willingness of the heart, and knowledge of the truth are both
together in persecuting or denying of Christ, or his truth, that man's sin
cannot be forgiven, and Christ will deny him before his Father which is in
heaven.

Such a one was Cain, and Esau also, that despised his birthright (wherein the
promise lay) who afterward could find no place for repentance; and Judas who
therefore hanged himself. And such were those Scribes and Pharisees unto whom
Christ spoke and said, Fill ye up the measure of your Fathers, ye Serpents ye
generation of vipers, how can ye escape the damnation of hell? Matthew. 23. And
those who though they knew of the great works which he did, and how he had
raised Lazarus from the dead, yet sought to kill him and Lazarus also, and did
soon after crucify him, and many more such have been and are.

So that then there is no such generally Redemption as the free-willer
teaches, nor is original sin cut off by the promise, nor by Christ's actual
sufferings, nor by the new birth from above. But Adam remained wholly polluted
by his sin (in respect of nature) soul and body, and all his posterity are
deeply stained therewith unto this day. And although children do not presently,
so soon as they are born, act the evil, yet the seed is in them, which soon
sprouts up, and brings forth fruit, even in the holiest regenerate men's
children, as experience has long proved, and are under the law of sin and
death; else why should God destroy so many thousand thousands of them by the
flood, and all the children in Sodom, of which place he says, If ten righteous
be found there, I will not destroy it for^ten^ sake. Every child therefore must
be regenerate from above, or it cannot be saved.

It is true ( Adam having eaten of the tree of knowledge of good and evil,
which he was forbidden upon pain of death to eat of, or touch, and he lying
bound to death by that his sin, and by the justice of the law of God, which
now he knew, and that stood up as a fiery two-edged sword turning every way
against him convincing him more and more of sin and of death, he being not
able possibly to do the works thereof) that from the very first hour after
the promise was made, he and all in his loins were set out of that
unrecoverable estate wherein they lay bound without any remedy, and a way
prescribed and set before them, in and through the same promise, whereby to
live again, so gracious and fair, as could not be more, That whosoever would
but confess his sins unto God, and ask mercy like the similitude of the lost
Son, he should have his sins forgiven and be saved.

Such a general Redemption as this was from that hour, and so gracious and
fair a way was set before all mankind in general, no one excepted. And what
son in the world could, or can desire more of his father against whom he had
so rebelliously sinned; yet no man by his own will or power in nature, would or
could do this, and live again.

(It is true that Adam, and Abell, and all the children of the promise, did
attain thereunto, but not by their own wills or power.)

And though oftentimes since the promise was made, God renewed the same his
covenant of mercy, and called upon man saying, Whosoever is athirst, let him
come; and whosoever will, let him come and take of the water of life freely.
Yet where is the man that of himself so thirsts, that of himself so
wills, and comes, and takes of the water of Life, or was there ever such a
man? No doubtless not one.

But on the clean contrary, such is the hardness and stoutnesse of man's heart
since he is become so wise by eating the forbidden fruit, that rather then he
will stoop so low as to mourn and weep for his sins, and confess them unto
God with tears from a truly sorrowful broken heart, and defire mercy and
forgiveness, he will do any thing else, take up and submit to any form of
religion, though never so strict and painful, entertain any opinion or
doctrine that shall come to his ears, in pretense of truth, though never so
erroneous, perform any outward work of the Law, or of the Gospel, so far as
Cain and Judas went, or as a Pharisee and hypocrite can go, some way to quiet
his guilty conscience, and to shun that straight way of the Lord, it is so
disagreeing to his lofty and prudent mind, stubborn and hard heart, so
naturally given to pride and carnal pleasure, as we may see by the experience
of the many Sects of religious, and sorts of opinions, that are amongst us at
this day, as well as by the superstitions and idolatries that have been and are
in the world, that so his mind being quieted, he may pleasantly pass his
time without repentance, and without that faith of Christ which purifieth the
heart, the birth of water and of the Spirit.

So that if God should not by his special power from heaven (like the
husbandman that breaks up his fallow ground and then sows his seed) so turn
the heart of man from his sinful pleasures, and fulfilling his own will, and
doing his own works, take away his hard and stony heart, and give him a heart
of flesh* a soft and tender heart, and write in the same (by his Spirit) his
covenant of mercy and love; (as he did unto Adam his first lost son, and
Abell whose sacrifice therefore he accepted) Adam and all his posterity would
have perished for ever.

But God (foreseeing all things) and having (before the foundation of the
world) chosen of the foreseen fallen lump of mankind, a certain complete
number to save and glorify, did destinate them to be conformed to the image of
his Son Jesus Christ, his first borne: and whom he so predestined them he
in his due times called, giving them repentance: and whom he so called, them
he justified through faith, and whom he justified them he glorified, as it is
written, Romans 8.28, 29.

And as God did thus call and justify his chosen to Paul's time, so has he
done ever since, and will do to the end of the world, that his number may be
filled,

And they that are so predestined and born of God, shall certainly be saved,
and none else, as Christ has absolutely affirmed, Ioh. 3.

What then? Shall we therefore say that God did predestinate the other to do
wickedly, and so to perish? Nay, that follows not, neither did he so, any
more then he did decree the fall and sin of Adam, and so man's destruction;
for then God must be the author and cause thereof, as he is of grace and
salvation, which may not once be thought.

Neither have we any more reason to charge God with unmercifulness, in not
saving all men by the new birth from above, in and through Christ; then we have
for his not keeping Adam from falling, and saving all that way.

It is true, and it must be acknowledged, that God could have done so, and that
he could also have kept those Angels which fell, if it had been the good
pleasure of his will, as it was not shall we therefore charge God with
unmercifulness, because he did not keep them, and so have saved all, both men
and Angels. Or shall we make his not keeping them the cause of their fall,
sin and destruction? Who dares do so, or have such a thought?

Nay, Satan himself knows it to be otherwise, and that their fall and
destruction is of themselves, and man's also of themselves thorough his eavie
against them, his malice and lies.

Neither did God ever harden the heart of any man, that he should not repent
and believe the Gospel, and be saved, or bind their wills or power therefrom,
by any decree or work of his at any time: nay, let all men fear to think such
a thing, and know that it is his own hardness of heart, and evilnesse of will
that hinders him.

But this is true, that God does give some men up to their own hardness of
heart, such as having known God, and tasted of his bountifulness and goodness
which led them to repentance, and reject the same, as they whom the Apostle
Paul speaks of, Romans 1.19, 20. to verse 32.

And so is God said to harden the heart of Pharaoh, in giving him up to hisown
hardness of heart (he having seen and known so much of the power and goodness
of God, and rejecting the same, and still oppressing his people, to fill up the
measure of his wickedness, that God might declare his power, as Paul says,
Romans 9.

And according to this are the words of Christ to those Scribes and Pharisees
of the Jews, (the generation of them that killed the Prophets, Matthew. 23. Fill
ye up the measure of your Fathers, ye Serpents, ye generation of Vipers, etc.

Now what is there in any thing of all this, that may give occasion for any man
justly to say or think, that God the Father, or the Lord Jesus Christ, should
bind any man's legs, and then command them to go and to do this or that, as
the Free Will teacher would infer.

But I wish that he would tell us plainly the cause why some men do repent and
believe, and are saved, and not all.

If he shall say as some do, that it is because some men will, and some will
not; Then I ask him the reason or cause of this great difference of will in
man, that one should have a will to will unto life eternal, and another to
will unto death eternal.

If he say, it is by Gods work of creation in the womb, or in Adam, then he
makes God to be the author of the evil as well as of the good, which he would
seem by his Doctrine to avoid.

If he say it is by the operation of the Heavens, Sun, Moon, or Stars,
(which Mathematickes say cause several dispositions in men, some to evil and
some to good;) Then he makes those creatures the cause; which were very
heathenish.

Neither can they cause such a difference in men's wills as to life and death
eternal, nay then may those people be excused, who adore them as Gods.

Therefore we say there is no such difference of will: but all men's hearts are
by Nature (since the first fall of Adam, and because thereof) hard, and their
wills stubborn, and bent to ill, whose fruit is death.

And it is by the special operation of God from heaven, that any man's heart
and will is brought to repent and believe unto life eternal, to be so born of
water and of the Spirit, without which no man can be saved, no, nor child, how
young soever.

And it is true, God does not effect or bring this to pass in every man,
neither did he so determine, any more then he did to keep those Angls that
fell, or Adam from falling; for then must all have been saved. And where had
been then the glory of the power of God in respect of his justice, and the
riches of his mercies whereof Paul speaks, Romans 9.22, 23. and which sundry
other Scriptures do so often make mention of and declare, to the glory of God,
and comfort of his chosen.

And it is also true, that as God did not decree or will to save all men: so
neither did he decree or will the destruction of all, nor of any man, but upon
those just grounds and causes in themselves, before declared, which he foresaw:
And so men are said to be ordained of old to condemnation, and Esau to he hated
before he had done good or evil, yet did he not ordain sin, nor make death,
nor did he ever break the bruised Reed, nor quench the smoking Flax; nor will
or desire the death of a sinner; but rather that he should return and live, as
it is written.

And so it is true and clear, that the salvation of man is merely and freely
of GOD through Jesus Christ, and his destruction is of himself.

And this shill all men and Angels know assuredly, in that day when God shall
judge the secrets of all men by him, even Jesus Christ, and shall justify God
in all things, both in respect of his justice on them that perish, and in
respect of his mercies on them that are saved.

And every thing in the estate of that world, (it being the end for which all
things were created) shall be so much to the praise and glory of God, and to the
joy and rejoicing of his chosen, as nothing that can be thought of, or wished,
could be more.

And as comcerning the Free-willers doctrine of falling away from all graces
and gifts of the Spirit, regeneration, and whatsoever, which they would seem to
ground on those Scriptures which speak of some excellent gifts that men may be
made partakers of, and fall away from them, and perish, as Mat. 12.43, 44, 45.
Heb. 3.12. 14. Heb. 6.5. 6. Heb. 10.26, 27, 28. 2 Pet. 2.20, 21, 22. Ezekiel. 8.
and other places.

Herein also they are much deceived, and err exceedingly, not discerning
things that differ, nor knowing to distinguish between those gifts of the
Spirit which are common to all men, and those that are more special and
peculiar only to a few.

Which is one main cause of their erring so much in every thing.

And doubtless the cause of the same cause, is hardness of heart and
unbelief (the contraries to the baptism or birth of water, and of the Spirit,
without which no man can have the faith of Abraham, nor know the mysteries of
the kingdom of heaven. And was the case of him unto whom Christ spoke, and
said, Joh. 3. Art thou a Master of Israel, and know not these things?

For although it be true, that men may be made partakers of those common gifts
in the places mentioned, and fall away from all, as there it says, yet it
follows not, neither is it true, that any of those that are born of water,
and of the Spirit, who have that faith in Christ whereby they eat his flesh,
and drink his blood, that have their sins washed away therewith, and their heart
sanctified, ever did, or can fall away and perish.

And the reason is, because they are kept (not by their own wills, but by the
will and power of God, and of Christ, as Christ himself, says, Joh. 6. And
this is the Fathers will which has sent me, that of all which he has given me,
I should lose nothing, but should raise it upagain at the last day, v. 39.40.

And again, My sheep hear my voice, and I know them, and they follow me, and I
give unto them eternal life, and they shall never perish, neither shall any
man pluck them out of my hand. My Father which gave them me, is greater then
all, and no man is able to pluck them out of my Fathers hand, Joh. 10.

They are kept by the will and power of God, as Peter also says of such
faithful ones, Blessed be the God, and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, which
according to his abundant mercy has begotten us again unto a lively hope by
the resurrection of Jesus Christ from the dead, or an inheritance incorrupible
and undefiled, and that fades not not away, reserved in heaven for us, who are
kept by the power of God through faith unto salvation, etc. 1 Pet. 1.2, 3, 4, 5.

And John says, whosoever is born of God, does not commit sin, for his seed
remains in him, and he cannot sin, because he is born of God, 1 John, 3.9.

Meaning not willingly in his mind, for he had said before, If we say that we
have no sin, we deceive our selves, and the truth is not in us, 1 John 1.8.

He may through temptation be led captive to sin, as Peter was, but he never,
in his mind, becomes a servant to sin more, he therein serves the Law of
God, and so it is no more he that sins, but sin that dwells in him, that
is in his flesh, as Paul says, Romans 7.

So then it is clear and certain, that whosoever is born of God, are kept by
the power of God and of Christ, his seed, the Spirit of Christ remains in
them, and they shall never perish.

And this is the true estate of every child of God that is born of him, which
if they (who teach the contrary doctrine) could attain, they should discern the
things that so truly differ, and be able to distinguish truly between the
special peculiar graces which they only that are born of God partake of, and
those that are common to all.

Could they annoint their eyes with that eye salve of which Christ speaks,
Rev. 3.18, 19. Draw such water (as they in Samuels days did) and power it out
before the Lord (the tears of true repentance from an humble and contrite
heart) and confess their sins unto him, and desire mercy, they should then
be baptized with that one Spirit, and believe in their hearts with that one
faith, and have that one hope of the Saints, and see and know the mysteries of
the Kingdom of heaven: for unto such only does God reveal them, as it is
written, Psalm. 25. Math. 11.25. Matthew. 13.11.

They would not then reject that first principle of Christ, the baptism of
repentance, as a needless thing to go before in the heart of a sinner, to
prepare the way to the Faith of Christ, which justifies such sinners from
their sins, and call it a coming in by the back door. Nor judge such poor,
heavy, laden, weary souls, to be at the farthest distance from Christ of
any sinners in the world, as some have done.

But would know, that they are the bruised Reeds, and broken hearted, whom
(Christ was anointed to preach the good tidings unto, and to bind up those lost
sheep who^ he came into the world to seek out, and to save, let them therefore
confider of these things and repent. And let every one unto whom God has given
eyes to see, ears to hear, and a heart to understand, beware of these false
teachers and their doctrine.

And also and more especially of those who turn all Scriptures into Allegories,
Parables, and conceited fancies; which they our of their deep Philosophy have
found out and teach, as the great mystery of truth contained in them.

Their chief Author being one Henry Nicholas, or H. N. as it stands in his
books.

The main points of their doctrine being these following,

That CHRIST is now at this present come from the Right Hand of GOD, and
fitteth in his throne of judgment, judging the quick and the dead.

2. That they which sleep in Christ, are raised from the dead, the sting of
death taken away, and death swallowed up in victory.

3. That all the promises of God, and whatsoever is written in Scripture
concerning the everlasting kingdom of Christ with all his Saints, becomes now
in this present last day (as they call it) fulfilled.

3. That the seat of judgment is in the comminalty of the Family of Love.

4. That Christ is a mystical thing, which they call Holiness, and the
Antichrist Sin.

5. That there is no other resurrection of the body than what is now in present
brought to pass, and in fulfilling mystically by the voice of H. N.

6. That the Soul or Spirit when the body dies, goes into the Being of God,
and the Body to the earth, the principle from whence it came, there to remain
for ever, and so both Soul and Body to be as they were before they knew they
had a Being.

You shall see here some of his very words, as in his Book entitled, A joyful
Message of the Kingdom.

He inviteth all people in the world to entertain his message. As first in his
Preface he has these words following:

Confider on the time, O all ye people which love the truth of Jesu Christ:
Presently in this day of the love and of the appearing of the coming of our
Lord Jesu Christ in the resurrection of the dead, wherein the Law, the
Prophets, and all what is written of Christ, becomes fulfilled.

And in Chap. 1. thus it stands, H. N. through the grace and mercy of God, and
through the Holy Spirit of the love of Jesu Christ, raised up by the higest God
from the dead, according to the providence of God, and his promises, anointed
with the holy Ghost in the old age of the holy understanding of Jesu Christ,
Godded with God in the Spirit of his love, etc. His quotations Esaias 65. 1 Cor.
15. And Sent. 9. of the same Chapter.

For behold in this present day the glorious coming of the Lord Jesus Christ,
with the many thousands of his Saints, becomes manifested, which has set
himself upon the seat of his Majesty, for to judge in this same day the whole
world, etc. quot. Mat 24. Mat. 25. Jude 1. And Chap. 35. Sent. 8.

Behold in this present day, according to the Scriptures, the resurrection of
the Lords dead comes to pass presently in this same day, through the
appearing of the coming of Christ in his Majesty, etc. In which resurrection of
the dead, God shows unto us, that the time is now fulfilled, that the dead
which are fallen asleep in the Lord, rise up in this day of judgment, and
appear unto us in godly glory, etc. His quot. Dan. 12.4. Esd. 7. 1 These. 4. 1.
Cor. 15 And Chap. 38. Sent. 2.

Wherefore awake now all, lift up your heads here, and see the wonderful acts
of God, and have regard unto the sound of the last Trumpet, etc. His quot. Mat.
24. Luke 21. 1 Cor. 15. 1 Thessalonians. 4.

These and a thousand more such like sayings to the same purpose, has H. N. in
his writings, only these I thought fit here to relate, to the end that you
unto whom God gives eyes to see, and a heart to understand, may perceive upon
what foundation those many Ministers and people that have fallen from one
opinion and form of religion to another, do ground their new spiritual way
called Familisme. And that ye may beware of giving care thereunto, it being a
very cunning mystery of deceit, much taught by Ministers and others publicly
and privately, and much spreading in this City of London and in all parts of
this kingdom now at this day.

And know ye, that although it be true, that Christ by his Spirit is now with
his faithful, now in this present time, during their pilgrimage here, as he
promised; and that by the same Spirit of truth the wicked world is convinced of
sin, of righteousness and of judgment, as he said, and that they are in the
spirit of their mind and affection risen with Christ, and have by faith an
entrance into the rest of God, and everlasting kingdom of the Lord Jesus
Christ, as it is also written.

Yet is not Christ therefore come in his glory to judge the quick and the dead,
to fit in the throne of his glory, and reign in his kingdom with all his
Saints, nor they raised up, according to those Scriptures which H. N. quoteth
for his purpose. Neither does the last Trumpet yet sound, spoken of, Matthew. 24.
1 Cor. 15. 1 Thessalonians. 4. Rev. 11.15.

Nay, but Christ shall come, and will come, and that speedily, and shall fit in
the Throne of his glory visibly and truly, the dead shall be all raised truly
in respect of their body, and every man shall be judged according to his
works, the last Trumpet shall sound at his coming, according to those
Scriptures, and his Kingdom and reign with all his Saints, shall be truly
manifested to all.

His Dominion shall be from Sea to Sea, and from the River to the ends of the
Earth, they that dwell in the wilderness shall bow before him, and the enemy
shall lick the dust.

All Kings shall fall down before him, and all Nations shall serve him, as it
is written, Psalm. 72.

God shall give unto him the Throne of his Father David, and he shall reign
over the House of Jacob for ever, and of his Kingdom there shall be no end, as
it is also written, 1 Chro. 17.11, 12, 13, 14. Psalm. 89. Dan. 7. Luke 1.

And whereas there be some that would have ye look for new Apostles to teach
you, and plant new Churches: And others for another Elias to come and restore
all things; hearken ye not unto them, but consider and know, that as Christ
said, In those days ye have Moses and the Prophets, so have we; yea more, we
have the Apostles, we have Christ and the Elias also that was to come; insomuch
as we have their word and testimony. And if we shall refuse to hear them, then
will we not believe the Prophets and Apostles themselves in person, if they
should come.

And besides, let us know for a certainty, that we hive their word, and that
Christ prays for those that shall believe in him through their word, John
17.20.

And know also, that as the Ministry and Baptism of Christ remains to this
day; so does the Ministry and Baptism of John, (who is that very Elias that
was to come before the great and terrible day of the Lord.) And that his voice
cries out unto us all for repentance, that we may have our sins purged away
by the Baptism of Christ, and so become born from above, of Water and of the
Spirit; without which, what form of Religion or opinion soever we have, we
shall certainly perish for ever. Let us therefore hearken to their voice, and
the Lord give us hearts, will and power so to do, that we may repent and
believe in the Lord Jesus Christ, and be saved from his wrath in that day, and
so live and reign with him in his kingdom for evermore. Amen.

FINIS.
June 16. Imprimatur, John Downame.


