An Extract of some Proceedings in Parliament,Relating to (...) Old East India
Company.
Sabbati 6. die Februarii 1691.
Resolved, Hast-India Company, according to His Power reserved in their
Charter, and to constitute another East India Company, for the better
preserving the East India Trade to this Kingdom, in such manner as His Majesty
in His Royal Wisdom shall think fit.

Resolved, That the said Address be presented by the whole House.

Jovis, 11. die Februarii 1691.
Mr. Speaker reported to the House, That he did yesterday present to His
Majesty their Humble Address touching the East India Company, and that His
Majesty was pleased to express himself to this Effect.

That it was a Matter of very great Importance to the Trade of this Kingdom,
and that it could not be expected that He should give a present Answer to it,
but that He would take time to consider of it, and in a short time give them
His positive Answer.

Whereupon the next Session, viz. Lunae 14. die Novembris. 1692.
Sir Edward Seymour acquaints the House that he had a Message from His Majesty
in Answer to the Address of this House the last Session, in relation to the
East India Company, the which he delivered in Writing at the Table, where the
same was read -- in these Words, viz.

THE House of Commons having presented an Address to the King, to Dissolve the
present East India Company, according to the Power reserved in their Charter,
and to Constitute a New One, His Majesty took into Consideration the proper
Methods of complying with their Desires, and of securing effectually this
Advantageous Trade to the Nation.

But His Majesty upon Examination of the Charter, and consulting His Judges and
Learned Council, found that he could not Legally Dissolve the Company, but upon
Three Years warning; and that during the Three Years after warning, the Company
must subsist, and might continue to Trade; and that though the King might
constitute a New Company, yet He could not empower such New Company to Trade,
till after Three Years: the Crown having expressly Covenanted, not to Grant any
such Liberties.

Hereupon His Majesty, was very apprehensive of the ill consequences of giving
warning to the Company, because they would be then less solicitous of promoting
the true Interest and Advantage of the Trade, whereof they could not long reap
the Fruits: And that no New Company could be immediately admitted to it: So
that this very beneficial Trade, which is already so much impaired, might be in
danger of being entirely lost to the Nation.

His Majesty being very desirous to prevent so great a mischief, and to
gratify the House of Commons in the end, since he could not do it without
great hazard in the manner they proposed, required the East India Company to
answer directly, whether they would submit to such Regulations as His Majesty
should judge proper, and most likely to advance the Trade: And the Company
having fully agreed to it, and declared their Resolution in Writing, His
Majesty commanded a Committee of His Privy Council to prepare Regulations;
which they did, and offered them to the Company: But the Company,
notwithstanding their Declaration of Submission, rejected almost all the
Material Particulars.

So that His Majesty finding, That what possibly the House of Commons might
have expected, and Indeed was necessary to preserve this Grade, could not be
perfected by his own Authority alone; and that the Company could not be induced
to consent to any such Regulations, as might have answered the Intentions of
the House of Commons; and That the Concurrence of the Parliament is requisite
to make a complete and useful Settlement of this Trade, has directed all the
Proceedings in this matter to be laid before them, and recommends to them the
preparing of such a Bill, in order to pass into an Act of Parliament, as may
Establish this Trade on such Foundations as are most likely to preserve and
advance it.

Upon this Message, the Honorable House of Commons took into Consideration the
Settlement of the said Trade, but finding the same Obstructed by the then
Companies great Opposition, toward the End of the Session, Viz.

Sabbati, 25 die Februarii, 1692.
Resolved, Majesty, That he will Dissolve the East India Company upon Three
Years warning to the said Company, according to the Power reserved in their
Charter.

Resolved,

Veneris 3. die Martis, 1692.
Mr. Speaker Reported to the House, That he did yesterday Present to His
Majesty their Address touching the East India Company, and that His Majesty was
pleased to Express Himself to this Effect, viz.

Gentlemen, I will always do all the Good in My Power for this Kingdom, and I
will Consider your Address.

However, the Company by their Industrious Application, procured A NEW CHARTER,
which passed under the Great Seal the Seventh day of October, 1693.
Notwithstanding which, The very next Sessions of Parliament after the passing
of the said Charter, viz. the 19. Jan. 1693. The House of Commons Voted, That
all the Subjects of England have equal Right to Trade to the East Indies,
unless Prohibited by Act of Parliament.


