A DECLARATION Of the LORDS and COMMONS Assembled in PARLIAMENT: That no Ships,
Barques, or other Vessels shall from hence forward make any Voyage to New Castle
for the fetching of Coals, or any other Commodity, until that Town shall be
reduced into such hands, as shall declare themselves for King and Parliament

Die Sabbathi, 14 Ian. 1642.
ORdered by the Lords and Commons Assembled in Parliament, that this
Declaration shall be forthwith Printed and Published.

John Brown, Cler. Parliament

Ian. 16. Printed for John Wright in the Old-Bailey. 1642.

A DECLARATION Of the LORDS and COMMONS Assembled in PARLIAMENT.
Die Sabbathi, 14. Ian. 1642.
THe Lords and Commons assembled in PARLIAMENT, taking into their consideration
the number of Ships, and quantity of Money, that is every year employed from
London, and other Parts and places of this Kingdom, for the fetching of Coals
and Salt from Newcastle, Sunderland, and Blyth; And finding that since the
beginning of the present Troubles, that Town of Newcastle, being possessed by
Forces raised against the King, and Parliament, has been, and is the
principal Inlet of Foreign Aid, Forces, and Ammunition, for the
strengthening of that Force that intends Destruction to the Parliament, and
thereby to the Religion, Laws, and Liberties of this Kingdom; And taking into
Consideration, that sufficient Coals be supplied from other Parts, for the use
of this Kingdom, do Declare, That they are enforced for the safety of the
Kingdom, and for the better hindering of the supporting of the said Forces,
and of the reducing of the Town of Newcastle, and the Parts Adjacent, to yield
obedience, and submission, to the Commands of the two Houses of Parliament, Are
constreined for the present, to hinder the repairing of Ships to Newcastle,
Sunderland, and Blyth, lest those Ships and Money which are intended to procure
Fuel, for the supportation of the Kingdom, be improved to give Vigor and
mainteinance to the War, raised to the Destruction thereof; For prevention
whereof, we the Lords and Commons do Ordain, That no Ship, Ships, or
Barques, shall from henceforwards, make any Voyage for the fetching of Coals,
or Salt, from Newcastle, Sunderland, or Blyth, or carrying of Corn, or other
Provision of Victual, Until that Town of Newcastle shall be freed of, and
from the Forces there now raised, or maintained against the Parliament, and the
Town be reduced into such hands, and condition, as shall declare themselves
for King and Parliament; And the Masters, Owners, and Saylors of Ships, and
Barques, are hereby required, not to presume to go that Voyage contrary to
this Ordinance; And it is further Ordained, and Ordered, that if any Ship,
Vessel, or Barque, shall at any time after the first day of February next
coming Import, or bring into any Port or Place of this Kingdom, any Coals or
Salt Laden from Newcastle, Sunderland, and Blyth, or any of them, until
further Order be taken by both Houses of Parliament, that every such Ship,
Vessel, and Barque, and the Master and Saylors in the same, shall be seized
upon, and stayed in such Port and Place where they come in, Until the two
Houses of Parliament being thereof Informed, shall take further Order and
Direction therein.

FINIS.

