THE DECLARATION Of the LORDS and COMMONS Assembled in the Parliament of
England, sent to His Majesty's Privy Council of Scotland.

WITH HIS MAJESTY'S MESSAGE to His Majesty's said Council there, upon that
occasion.

AND HIS MAJESTY'S OTHER LETTER to His said Council of the 29. of December.

Edinburgh, 10. January, 1643.
THe Lords of His Majesty's Privy Council of Scotland, do in obedience of
His Majesty's pleasure expressed in His Royal Letter direct to them of the 29.
of December last, Ordain the Declaration sent from both Houses of the
Parliament of England of the 7. of November, with His Majesty's Letter to the
Council in answer thereof. And the Letter above-written of the 29. of
December, to be forthwith printed. And that these be Warrant to His Majesty's
Printer for that effect.



EDINBURGH, Printed by Evan Tyler, Printer to the Kings most excellent
Majesty. 1643.

THE DECLARATION Of the LORDS and COMMONS assembled in the Parliament of
England, to the Subjects of Scotland, etc.
WE the Lords and Commons assembled in the Parliament of England, considering
with what wisdom and public affection our Brethren of the Kingdom of
Scotland did concur with the endeavors of this Parliament, and the desires
of the whole Kingdom, in procuring and establishing a firm peace and amity
between the two Nations; and how lovingly they have since invited us to a
nearer and higher degree of union, in matters concerning Religion and Church
government, which we have most willingly and affectionately embraced, and
intend to pursue; Cannot doubt but they will with as much forwardnes and
affection concur with us in settling peace in this Kingdom, and preserving it
in their own; that so we may mutually reap the benefit of that amity and
alliance, so happily made and strongly confirmed betwixt the two Nations.
Wherefore as we did about a year since, in the first appearance of trouble then
beginning amongst them, actually declare; That in our sense and apprehension of
the National alliance betwixt us, we were thereby bound to apply the authority
of Parliament, and power of this kingdom to the preservation and maintenance
of their peace. And seeing now that the troubles of this Kingdom are grown to
a greater height, and the subtle practice of the Common Enemy of the Religion
and Liberty of both Nations, do appear with more Evidence, strength and danger
then they did at that time, we hold it necessary to declare, that in our
judgment the same obligation lies upon our Brethren by the aforementioned Act,
with the power and force of that Kingdom to assist us in repressing those
amongst us, who are now in arms, and make War not only without consent of
Parliament, but even against the Parliament, and for the destruction thereof.

Wherefore we have thought good to make known to our Brethren, that His
Majesty has given Commissions to diverse eminent and known Papists, to raise
forces, and to compose an Army in the North, and other parts of this Kingdom,
which is to join with diverse foreign forces intended to be transported from
beyond the Seas, for the destruction of this Parliament, and of the Religion
and Liberty of the Kingdom: And that the Prelaticall part of the Clergy and
their Adherents have likewise incited His Majesty to raise another Army, which
in His own Person he does conduct against the Parliament, and the City of
London, plundring and robbing sundry well-affected Towns within their power.
And that in prosecution of their malice, they are so presumptuous and
predominant of His Majesty's resolutions, that they forbear not those outrages
in places, to which His Majesty has given His Royal word and protection. A
great cause and incentive of which malice, proceeds from the design they have
to hinder the Reformation of Ecclesiastical government in this Kingdom, so
much longed for by all the true lovers of the Protestant Religion. And hereupon
we further desire our Brethren of the Nation of Scotland, to raise such forces
as they shall judge sufficient for the securing the peace of their own borders,
against the ill-affected persons there, as likewise to assist us in suppressing
the Army of Papists and Forrainers, which, as we expect, will shortly be on
foot here, and if they be not timely prevented, may prove as mischievous and
destructive to that Kingdom, as to our selves.

And though we seek nothing from His Majesty that may diminish either His just
Authority or Honor, and have by many humble Petitions endeavored to put an
end to this dangerous and unnatural War and combustion in the Kingdom; and
to procure His Majesty's protection and security for our Religion, Liberty and
persons, (according to that great trust which His Majesty is bound to by the
Laws of the Land;) and shall still continue to renew our Petitions in that
kind. Yet to our great grief we see the Papisticall, and malignant Counsel so
prevalent with His Majesty, and His person so engaged to their power, that we
have little hope of any better success of our Petitions then We formerly had,
and are thereby necessitated to stand upon our just defense; and to seek the
speedy and powerful assistance of our Brethren of Scotland, according to the
Act agreed upon in the Parliaments of both Kingdoms, the Common duty of
Christianity, and the particular interest of their own Kingdom.

To which we hope God will give such a blessing, that it may produce the
preservation of Religion, the Honor, Safety and peace of His Majesty and all
His Subjects; and a more strict conjunction of the Counsels, designs and
endeavors of both Nations, for the comfort and relief of the reformed Churches
beyond Sea.

7. November. 1642. Hen. Elsing, Cler. Parl. D. Com. John Brown. Cler. Parliam.


HIS MAJESTY'S Message to the Lords of His Privy Council of Scotland, upon
the aforesaid occasion.
RIght Trusty and Right Welbeloved Cousins, and Right Trusty and Welbeloved
Counselors, We greet you well.
We have lately seen a paper presented to Us by the Earl of Lyndsey, as a
Declaration of the Lords and Commons Assembled in Parliament of England of the
7. of Novem. to Our Subjects of Our Kingdom of Scotland; which after many high
taxes of Us and Our Government, very earnestly invites, and in a manner
challenges assistance, from that Our Native Kingdom, of Men and Arms for
making War against Us, making a claim to that assistance, by virtue of the
late Act of pacification, to the which (out of Our desire to make a perpetual
union between Our two Kingdoms, for the happiness of both, and by it the more
firmly to establish Our own greatness and just power,) We cheerfully
consented.

As We are at Our soul afflicted, that it has been in the power of any
factious, ambitious, and malicious persons, so far to possess the hearts of
many of Our Subjects of England, as to raise this miserable distemper and
distraction in this Kingdom, against all Our real actions and endeavors to
the contrary, so We are glad, that this rage and fury has so far transported
them, that they apply themselves in so gross a manner to Our Subjects of
Scotland, whose experience of Our Religion, Justice, and love of Our People
will not suffer them to believe those horrid scandals laid upon Us; and their
affection, loyalty, and jealousy of Our Honor, will disdain to be made
instruments to oppress their native Sovereign, by assisting an odious
Rebellion. We have from time to time acquainted Our Subjects of that Kingdom
with the accidents and circumstances which have disquieted this: how (after all
the acts of justice, grace, and favor performed on Our part, which were or
could be desired to make a people completely happy) We were driven by the force
and violence of rude, and tumultuous assemblies, from Our City of London, and
Our two Houses of Parliament; How attempts have been made to impose laws upon
Our subjects without Our consent, contrary to the foundation and constitution
of this Kingdom; How Our Forts, Goods and Navy were seized and taken from Us
by force, and employed against Us; Our Revenue and ordinary subsistence wrested
from Us; How We have been pursued with scandalous and reproachful language;
bold, false, and seditious Pasquils and Libels, publicly allowed against Us,
and been told that We might, without want of modesty and duty, be deposed; How
after all this (before any Force raised by Us) an Army was raised, and a
General appointed to lead that Army against Us, with a Commission to kill,
slay, and destroy all such who should be faithful to Us; That when We had bin
by these means compelled with the assistance of Our good Subjects, to raise an
Army for Our necessary defense, We sent diverse gracious Messages, earnestly
desiring that the calamities of a civil war might be prevented by a Treaty,
and so We might know the grounds of this misunderstanding; How We were
absolutely refused to be treated with: and how at last the Army (raised, as was
pretended, for the defense of Our Person) was brought into the field against
Us, gave Us battle, and (though it pleased God to give Us the victory)
destroyed many of Our good subjects, with as imminent danger to Our own Person
and Our children, as the skill and malice of desperate Rebels could contrive: of
all which, and the other indignities which have bin offered Us, We doubt not
the duty and affection of Our Scottish Subjects will have so just a resentment,
that they will express to the world the sense they have of Our sufferings. And
our good subjects of Scotland are not, We hope, so great strangers to the
affairs of this Kingdom, to believe that this misfortune and distraction is
begot and brought upon Us by Our two Houses of Parliament: (though in truth no
unwarrantable action against the law can be justified even by that authority.
They well know how the Members of both houses have bin driven thence, insomuch
that of above 500. Members of the House of Commons, there are not now above 80.
and of above 100. of the house of Peers, not above 15. or 16. All which are so
awed by the multitude of Anabaptists, Brownists, and other persons, desperate
and decayed in their Fortunes, in and about the City of London, that in truth
their consultations have not the freedom and privilege which belong to
Parliaments. Concerning any Commissions granted by Us to Papists to raise
Forces, We must refer Our good Subjects to a Declaration lately set forth by
Us upon the occasion of that scandal, which We send together with this: and for
Our own true and zealous affection to the Protestant Religion, (the advancement
whereof Our soul desires) We can give no other instances, then Our constant
practice, on which malice it self can lay no blemish, and those many
protestations We have made in the sight of Almighty God, to whom We know We
shall be dearly accomptable, if We fail in the observation. For that scandalous
imputation of our intention of bringing in foreign forces, as the same is
raised without the least color or shadow of reason, and solemnly disavowed by
Us in many of Our Declarations; so there cannot be a clearer argument to Our
subjects of Scotland that We have no such thought, then that We have hitherto
forborne to require the assistance of that Our native Kingdom, from whose
obedience, duty and affection We should confidently expect it, if We thought
Our own strength here too weak to preserve Us, and of whose courage and loyalty
We shall look to make use, before We shall think of any foreign aid to succor
Us. And We know no reasonable or understanding man can suppose Our good
subjects of Scotland are obliged, or enabled by the late Act of Parliament in
both Kingdoms, to obey the invitation which is made to them by this pretended
Declaration; when it is so evidently provided for by that Act, That as the
Kingdom of England shall not make war against the Kingdom of Scotland, without
consent of the Parliament of England, so the Kingdom of Scotland shall not
make war against the Kingdom of England, without the consent of the Parliament
of Scotland: and when they have always declared themselves so careful of Our
Honor, safety, and just Rights, which now undergo so great violation.

This We have thought fit to say upon occasion of this late Declaration, and do
commend it to you the Lords of Our privy Council of Our Kingdom of Scotland,
to be communicated and published to all Our loving Subjects there; and if the
grave Counsel and Advice, which you derived hither by your Act of the 22. of
April last, had been followed here, in a tender Care of Our Royal person, and
of Our Princely Greatness and Authority, then would not this face of Confusion
have appeared, which now threatens this Kingdom: And therefore We require you
to use your utmost Endeavors to inform Our Subjects of that our Kingdom, of
the truth of Our Condition, and that you suffer not the scandalls and
imputations laid on Us, by the malice and Treason of some men, to make any
Impression in the minds of Our people, to the lessening or corrupting their
Affection and Loyalty to Us, but that you assure them the hardness We now
undergo, and the Arms We have been compelled to take up, are for the defense
of Our person, and safety of Our life, for the maintenance of the true
Protestant Religion, for the preservation of the Laws, Liberties, and
Constitution of this Kingdom, and for the just privileges of Parliament: and
look no longer for the blessing of Heaven, then We endeavor the defense and
advancement of all these: and We doubt not a dutiful concurrence in Our
Subjects of Scotland, in the care of Our Honor and just Rights will draw down
a blessing upon that Nation too.

Given at Our Court at Oxford, the 6. day of December.
CHARLES R.

RIght trusty, and right welbeloved Cousins and Counselors, and right
trusty and welbeloved Counselors, We greet you well.
Having been informed that (according to Our commands expressed to you by Our
Secretary the Earl of Lanerick) you have given order for printing Our Letter
to you of the filth of December, which occasionally We wrote in answer to a
Declaration sent you by Our Houses of Parliament of England, being unwilling to
be silent, and suffer Our Scottish Subjects to swallow any Information so
destructive, and contrary to Our pious Intentions, as if We either intended to
invite a Forrainer to, or encourage Popery in any of Our Kingdoms; both of
which have been so far from Our thoughts, that necessity it self could never
force Us to either. For though the eminent abilities, and moderate disposition
of some few of that Profession, has moved Us in this great extremity to make
use of their fidelities, yet We have ever been so far from countenancing their
Religion, that it has and ever shall be Our special care to suppress it, by
putting in execution those good and wholesome Laws already in force against
them. And as for any assistance of Foreign Forces, it is a fear so absolutely
groundless, that We are confident, it is offered for no other end, then (by
such subtle insinuations) to infuse an apprehension in the breasts of Our
Scottish Subjects, of a danger can be no otherwise expressed, then under such a
general notion, not being able really to make it appear, either in intention
or fact. But We are so clear from either of these, that We conceive nothing can
be more for Our advantage, then that the malice of these calumnies may be made
known to all Our good Subjects; the authors whereof (We are confident) God
will never suffer to escape the hand of Justice. And We hope none will believe
that hereby We mean Our Houses of Parliament (whom in none of Our Declarations
We have ever accused) but only such factious and seditious members of either
Houses, as We have named, and are ready to proceed against legally. Therefore
We have thought fit to require you to give order for printing the foresaid
Declaration to you of the seventh of November last, and likewise to take the
best course of causing publish it, With Our Letters to you in answer thereof,
through all the several Parishes of Our Kingdom of Scotland, whereby Our
Subjects there will perceive the subtle ways which are used to corrupt their
fidelities, and allegiance; which otherwise being at so great a distance they
cannot possibly be informed of. So expecting your obedience herein, We bid you
very heartily farewell.

From Our Court at Oxford the 29. of December, 1642.
FINIS.

