THE DECLARATION OF THE Lords and Commons Assembled at Westminster; PRESENTED
TO THEIR HIGHNESSES THE Prince and Princess of ORANGE,
At White Hall the 13th. of February, 1688/9,
WHEREAS the late King James the Second, by the assistance of diverse Evil
Counselors, Judges, and Ministers Employed by him, did endeavor to Subvert
and Extirpate the Protestant Religion, and the Laws and Liberties of this
Kingdom,

By Assuming and Exercising a Power of Dispensing with, and Suspending of Laws,
and the Execution of Laws without Consent of Parliament.

By Committing and prosecuting diverse worthy Prelates for humbly petitioning to
be excused from concurring to the said assumed power.

By issuing and causing to be executed a Commission under the Great Seal for
Erecting a Court called the Court of Commissioners for Ecclesiastical Causes.

By Levying Money for and to the use of the Crown, by pretense of prerogative,
for other time and in other manner than the same was granted by Parliament.

By raising and keeping a standing Army within this Kingdom in time of peace,
without consent of Parliament, and Quartering Soldiers contrary to Law.

By causing several good Subjects being Protestants, to be disarmed, at the
same time when Papists were both Armed and Employed contrary to Law.

By Violating the freedom of Election of Members to serve in Parliament.

By prosecutions in the Court of King's Bench for Matters and Causes Cognizable
only in Parliament, and by diverse other Arbitrary and Illegal Courses.

And whereas of late years Partial, Corrupt, and Unqualified Persons have been
returned and served on Juries in Trials, and particularly diverse Jurors in
Trials for High Treason which were not Freeholders.

And excessive Bail has been required of persons committed in Criminal Cases,
to elude the benefit of the Laws made for the Liberty of the Subject.

And excessive Fines has been imposed, and Illegal and Cruel punishments
inflicted.

And several Grants and Promises made of Fines and Forfeitures before any
Conviction or Judgment against the Persons upon whom the same were to be Levied.

All which are utterly and directly contrary to the known Laws and Statutes and
Freedom of this Realm. And whereas the said late King James the Second having
abdicated the Government, and the Throne being thereby vacant.

His Highness the Prince of Orange (whom it has pleased Almighty God to make
the Glorious Instrument of delivering this Kingdom from Popery and Arbitary
Power) did by the Advice of the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and diverse
Principal persons of the Commons, cause Letters to be written to the Lords
Spiritual and Temporal being Protestants, and other Letters to the several
Counties, Cities, Universities, Boroughs and Cinque Ports, for the choosing of
such persons to represent them as were of right to be sent to Parliament, to
Meet and Sit at Westminster upon the 22d. day of January in this year 1688, in
Order to such an Establishment, as that their Religion, Laws and Liberties
might not again be in danger of being Subverted.

Upon which Letters, Elections have been accordingly made.

And thereupon the said Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and the Commons pursuant
to their respective Letters and Elections, being now Assembled in a full and
free Representative of this Nation, taking into their most serious
Consideration the best means for attaining the ends aforesaid,

Do in the first place, as their Ancestors in like Cases have usually done, for
the vindicating and asserting their Ancient Rights and Liberties, declare,

That the pretended Power of suspending of Laws, or the Execution of Laws by
Regal Authority, without Consent of Parliament, is Illegal.

That the pretended Power of dispensing with Laws, or the Execution of Laws by
Regal Authority, as it has been assumed and exercised of late, is Illegal.

That the Commission for Erecting the late Court of Commissioners, for
Ecclesiastical Causes, and all other Commissions and Courts of like nature are
Illegal and Pernicious.

That Levying of Money for, or to the use of the Crown, by pretense of
Prerogative, without Grant of Parliament, or for longer time, or in other
manner than the same is, or shall be Granted, is Illegal.

That it is the Right of the Subject to Petition the King; and all Commitments
and Prosecutions for such Petitioning, are Illegal.

That the Raising or Keeping a Standing Army within the Kingdom in time of
Peace, unless it be with Consent of Parliament, is against Law.

That the Subjects which are Protestants, may have Arms for their Defense
suitable to their Condition, and as allowed by Law.

That Election of Members of Parliament ought to be free.

That the Freedom of Speech and Debates, or Proceedings in Parliament, ought
not to be Impeached or Questioned in any Court or place out of Parliament.

That Excessive Bail ought not to be required, or excessive Fines Imposed, nor
cruel and unusual Punishments inflicted.

That Jurors ought to be duly Imparmelled and Returned, and Jurors which pass
upon Men in Trials for High Treason, ought to be Freeholders.

That all Grants and Promises of Fines and Forfeitures of particular Persons
before Conviction, are illegal and void.

And that for Redress of all Grievances, and for the amending, strengthening and
preserving of the Laws, Parliaments ought to be held frequently.

And they do Claim, Demand, and Insist upon all and singular, the Premises as
their undoubted Right and Liberty. And that no Declarations, Judgments, Doings,
or Proceedings to the prejudice of the People in any of the said Premises ought
in any wise to be drawn hereafter into consequence or example.

To which Demand of their Rights, they are particularly encouraged by the
Declaration of his Highness the Prince of Orange as being the only means for
obtaining a full Redress and Remedy therein.

Having therefore an entire Confidence that his said Highness the P. of O. will
perfect the Deliverance so far advanced by him, and will still preserve them
from the violation of their Rights which they have here asserted, and from all
other Attempts upon their Religion, Laws, and Liberties,

The said Lords Spiritual and Temporal and Commons Assembled at Westminster, Do
Resolve,

That William and Mary Prince and Princess of Orange be, and be Declared King
and Queen of England, France, and Ireland, and the Dominions thereto belonging.
To hold the Crown and Royal Dignity of the said Kingdoms and Dominions, to them
the said Prince and Princess during their Lives, and the Life of the Survivor
of them. And that the sole and full Exercise of the Regal Power, be only in and
Exercised by him the said Prince of Orange, in the names of the said Prince and
Princess during their joint Lives. And after their Deceases, the said Crown and
Royal Dignity of the said Kingdoms and Dominions, to be to the Heirs of the
Body of the said Princess. And for default of such Issue, to the Princess Anne
of Denmark, and the Heirs of her Body. And for default of such Issue, to the
Heirs of the Body of the said Prince of Orange.

And they do pray the said Prince and Princess of Orange, do accept the same
accordingly.

And that the Oaths hereafter mentioned, be taken by all Persons of whom the
Oaths of Allegiance and Supremacy might be required by Law, instead of them,
and that the said Oaths of Allegiance and Supremacy may be abrogated.

I A. B. Do sincerely and Swear, that I will be Faithful and bear true
Allegiance to their Majesty's King William and Queen Mary. So help me God, etc.

I A. B. Do Swear, That I do from my Heart Abhor, Detest and Abjure, as
Impious, and Heretical, this Damnable Doctrine and Position, That Princes
Excommunicated or Deprived by the Pope or any Authority of the Sea of Rome, may
be Deposed or Murdered by the Subjects or any other whatsoever. And I do
Declare, that no Foreign Prince, Person, Prelate, State or Potentate, has or
ought to have any Jurisdiction, Power, Superiority, Pre-eminence, or Authority
Ecclesiastical or Spiritual within this Realm. So help me God, etc.

It is Ordered by the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and Commons now Assembled
at Westminster, That this Declaration be Engrossed in Parchment, Enrolled among
the Rolls of Parliament, and Recorded in Chancery.

Printed in the Year 1689.


