FLANDERS: OR, THE Spanish Netherlands, Most Accurately described:

SHOWING

The several Provinces, their Bounds, Dimensions, Rivers, Riches, Strength,
Traffic, Religion, Languages, Archbishopricks, Bishoprics, Universities; And
a large and exact Description of the Cities, and who they are at present
Subject to.

With a large and useful INDEX of all the Cities, Towns, Ports, Forts, Castles,
Rivers, etc. in such a manner as may serve for a Geographical Dictionary for
these Parts.

Extraordinary Necessary for the Right Understanding of these Parts, the
present Wars and Encampments of the Confederate and French Armies.

Price Bound 1 s.

London: Printed for Tho. Salurbury at the Sign of the Temple near Temple Bar
in Fleetstreet. 1691.

THE PREFACE To the READER.
THE Design of this small Tract is to give an easy and clear Account of these
Parts, which are now the Seats of Noble and Heroic Actions; in which every
Thing is so well Contrived, and set in such good Order and Method, as I believe
will give due Satisfaction to all such as are Curious and Inquisitive after the
Affairs of these Times.

All the Towns of Note are here mentioned, and their Situation so well
designed, that they may very easily and quickly be found in any good Map; but
especially by the help of the Index, where their Longitude and Latitude is also
set down, (according to F. de Wits Maps, the first Meridian beginning at
Tenneriff) which is a great help toward the easy finding of a Place.

Those Towns that are of greatest Note, and those that are Frontiers, and
probably may be places of Action, are here very exactly and particularly
described; more largely and better than are in the vulgar Geographies: And such
Descriptions as these are both Pleasant and Profitable, and very much needed in
these Times.

In short, Reader, here is scarce any thing wanting that may be reasonably
expected from such a Volumne; and if it should afford you any Profit, or one or
two hours Divertisement, is all that I Desire; and shall think my time not ill
bestowed if it shall deserve your Perusal.

Vale.
FLANDERS, OR, The Spanish-Netherlands Accurately Described.
Of FLANDERS in General.
THE Spanish Netherlands, Bounds.
or the Catholic Provinces, commonly called by the general Name of Flanders,
(the Principal of these Provinces) are bounded on the East, with Germany; on
the West, or rather North-West, with the German Ocean, which parts 'em from
England; on the North, with Holland, or the United Provinces; and on the South
and South-West, with France.

The whole is of a kind of a Triangular From; Dimensions.
being in length from the most Eastern parts of Luxemburg, to the most Western
parts of Artois, about 192 Miles; and in breadth, from the most North parts of
Brabant, to the most South parts of Luxemburg, about 155 Miles; the whole
Circumference being scarce 600 Miles: containing, according to Sellers Account,
7197000 of Acres.

The Principal Rivers in these Provinces, Rivers.
are, 1. Maes, which (besides its course in France) passes through Namur, Liege
and Gelderland, washing the Towns of Charlemont, Dinant, Namur, Liege,
Maestricht, Ruremond, Venlo, Grave and Dort, below which it falls into the Sea.
2. Scheld, or Escaut, passing through Cambray, Hainault and Flanders; washing
the Towns of Cambray, Valenciennes, Tournay; Ghent, and Antwerp, a little below
which it falls into the Sea. 3. Lys, passing through Artois and Flanders; and
washing the Towns of Air and Courtray, and at Ghent falls into the River
Scheld. Those of less Note shall be spoken of afterward.

This is but a small spot of Land, Riches and Strength.
but exceeding populous, full of excellent Towns and Villages, and most
plentifully endowed with all things necessary either for Pleasure or Profit. So
very rich, that at once the King of Spain's Revenues from thence (when he had
all) was greater than any Prince in Christendom, the King of France excepted;
but at present the charge of keeping is much greater than the Revenues. The
Strength of these parts are very great, and were it not for the vast increase
of the French Power, and the decay of the Spanish, it would be thought much
greater: But for a long time the Spaniards have not been able to keep those
they have still, without great help from others.

The Traffic in these parts have been always very great; Traffic*
but now nothing so much as formerly, by reason of the prodigious increase of
the United Provinces in these late years. It chiefly consists of several sorts
of Manufactures, as rich Tapestries, fine Camlets, Serges, colored Says,
Mock-Velvets, great Quantities of fine Linen, Damasks, Cambricks, Taffaties,
and stripped Stuffs for Beds, which sell well in many Countries; all sorts of
Ribbons, Bastard Sattins, and many other things of this Nature, made at the
Cities of Mons, Gaunt, Brusselles, Ypres, Lille, Bruges, Valenciennes, etc.

The Inhabitants of these parts consist of Flemmings, Inhahitants.
Walloons, Spaniards, with some intermixture (more especially at present) of
French, Dutch, and English. The Religion among them may be said to be various,
according to their several Nations; but howsoever that of the Roman Church is
only publicly allowed. The Protestants (which are of no small Number in many
of the chief Cities) are rather suffered out of Policy. The Archbishopricks and
Bishoprics are all Roman Catholic.

The Languages most generally used in these parts are the Walloon and Flemmish;
Languages.
the Walloon is a corrupt French, spoken in Artois, Hainault, Namur, Luxemburg,
French Flanders, some of Brabant, and the Bishopric of Liege. The Flemmish or
Low Dutch, is a Dialect of the German, spoken in the Marquisate, Mechlin, the
rest of Brabant, Flanders, and the Bishopric of Liege. The Spanish is also
much in use among the King of Spain's Subjects, and the French among the better
sort. English and Latin is here well understood by many.

In these Provinces are two Archbishopricks, Remarks
viz. Cambray and Mechlin; and eleven Bishoprics, viz. Antwerp, Boisleduc,
Bruges, Ghent, Ruremond and Ypres, under Mechlin; Namur, Arras, St. Omers, and
Tournay, under Cambray; and Liege under Cologne in Germany. Here are also 155
Cities or Walled Towns, (besides those in Cambray and part of Gelderland) and
6867 Villages, besides the Castles, Forts, and Noble Men's Houses, which are
almost innumerable. The chief City of the whole is Antwerp; but Brussels being
the Seat of the Spanish Governor, and the Heart of the Country, I shall reckon
the distances from that. The chief City of the French is Mons; of the
Hollanders, is Boisleduc, or Maestricht; and of the Bishop of Liege, Liege.

The Provinces are in Number 10; Provinces.
viz. 1. Flanders, 2. Artois, 3. Hainault, 4. Namur, 5. Brabant, 6. Marquisate
of the Empire, 7. Mechlin, 8. Bishopric of Liege, 9. Limburg, and 10.
Luxemburg; to these may be added that part of Gelderland that is under the
Spaniards, and the Duchy of Cambray. Of these, Flanders borders on the Sea;
Brabant, on the United Provinces; (as likewise does Flanders;) Artois and
Hainault, on France, (with the Duchy of Cambray) Bishopric of Liege, Limburg,
and part of Gelderland, on Germany; Luxemburg, on France and Germany: Namur,
the Marquisate and Mechlin are Midland Provinces.

The Government of these Provinces should be all under the Spaniards;
Government.
but at present they have only Namur, the Marquisate, nigh three quarters of
Brabant, nigh half of Limburg and Flanders, and a quarter of Hainault, with
some of Gelderland. The French have Artois, Luxemburg, Cambray, three quarters
of Hainault, a third part of Flanders, and a quarter of the Bishopric of
Liege. The Hollanders have above half of Limburg, above a quarter of Brabant, a
sixth part of Flanders, and a small part of the Bishopric of Liege. The Bishop
of Liege has nigh three quarters of that Provice.

1. Earldom of FLANDERS.
FLanders has on the East, Bounds,
Brabant, on the West or North-west, the Ocean; on the North, Zealand; and on
the South and South-East, Artois and Hainault. It is in length about 90 miles,
and in breadth 60.

It is a very fine and rich Country, Quality.
and accounted the Noblest Earldom in all Christendom, and is in most places
exceeding fertile, and withal so populous, that the whole may be reckoned but
as one City. It has in it 35 Cities or Walled Towns, and 1178 Villages. The
chief City of the whole is Ghent.

The chief Rivers are 1. Scheld, Rivers.
which here washes Tournay, Oudenard, Ghent, and Antwerp, and soon after falls
into the Sea. 2. Lys, which here washes Armentiers, and Courtray, and falls
into the Scheld at Ghent. 3. Dender, which washes Geersberg, Nienove, and
Aelst, falls into the Scheld at Dendermond. 4. Scharp, which washes Doway, and
St. Amand, and falls into the Scheld.

The Towns in this Province are thus situated, Situation of the Towns.
viz. 1. Hulst, the most N. Western Town of Note nigh Brabant. 2. Axel, five
miles West of Hu^st. 3. Sas van Ghent, six miles nigh West of Axel. 4.
Ysendick, nine miles N. West of the Sas. 5. Ardenburg, seven miles S. West of
Ysendick. 6. Sluys, four miles nigh West of Ardenburg. These are all under the
Hollanders. 7. Bruges, 10 miles South West of Sluys. 8. Ostend, on the Sea, 11
miles West of Bruges. 9. Nieuport or Newport, by the Sea nine miles S. West of
Ostend. 10. Dixmude, nine miles S. East of Nieuport. 11. Ghent, the Metropolis,
34 miles East of Dixmude, (on the Scheld) and 28 N. West of Brussels. 12.
Dendermond, 12 miles East of Ghent (on the Scheld.) 13. Aelst or Alost, six
miles South of Dendermond, nigh Brabant. 14. Nienove, six miles South of Aelst.
15. Geersberg, four miles S. West of Nienove. 16. Oudenard, 11 miles West of
Geersberg, (on the Scheld.) 17. Courtray or Cortryck, 17 miles West of
Oudenard. These are all under the Spaniards. 18. Ypres, 15 miles West of
Courtray. 19. Dunkirk, 23 miles nigh West of Ypres on the Sea. 20. Graveling,
10 miles S. West of Dunkirk, nigh France and the Sea. 21. Wynoxberg, 12 miles
East of Graveling. 22. Cassel, 10 miles S. East of Wynoxberg. 23. Armentiers,
18 miles nigh East of Cassel (on the Leye.) 24. Lille or Rissell, six miles
nigh East of Armentiers. 25. Tournay or Dornick, 14 miles East of Lille (on the
Scheld) 26. St. Amand, 11 miles South of Tournay (on the Scharp.) 27. Doway, 15
miles S. West of St. Amand (on the Scharp.) These are all under the French.

Ghent.
GHent, Description of the chief Towns.
or Gaunt, the chief City of this Province, commodiously seated on the Banks of
the Rivers Scheld and Leye, which run through it, and divide it into 26 Islands
which are joined together with 98 Bridges. It is accounted one of the largest
Cities in the Low-Countrys, being seven miles in Compass within the Walls, but
now rather decays than increases. It is well Walled and Trenched about; and the
private Buildings are for the most part fair and stately, and the Streets
handsome and clean kept. It has seven Churches, and 55 Religious Houses. The
Cathedral is a most stately Structure; and the Tower Bellefort is above 400
Steps high. The Castle, which is the Princes Palace, contains three hundred
Chambers. The Citadel consists of four Bastions, which are but little, and
look on one side upon the City; and on the other toward the Fields; and though
this Fortress be of a regular form, yet it is not so convenient as many others
in these parts. The Trade of this place consists (besides Corn) in Cloths,
Stuffs and Silks, of which there are so great quantity made, that among the
Fifty Companies of Tradesmen, those relating to Commodities of this nature make
one third.

Bruges.
BRuges or Brugge, the Second City in Flanders, so called from the multitude of
Bridges. It is situated in a large Plain, about Eight miles from Sea, and the
Walls on the inside are somewhat above four miles in Compass; the City being of
a round form, and well Walled and Fortified with Works of Earth and deep
Ditches. The River Rey runs through it with a muddy and heavy stream. The City
it self is exceeding neat, tolerably populous, and very well built, many of the
Houses being four or five, and some six Stories high. It is one of the most
considerable places that the Spaniards have left; and notwithstanding it comes
vastly short of its former Trade, it may well challenge place among the Cities
of the Second rate in Europe. The Market place has a Commodious and Pleasant
Situation, being the Center where six of the principal Streets, running from as
many of the chief Gates of the City, are terminated.

Here are Seven Parish Churches, (that of St. John's is Cathedral) 60 Religious
Houses, and three Colleges of Canons, and also a fine College for the Jesuits.
The Chief Trade of this place is now in Spanish-Wool. It stands 24 miles nigh
West of Ghent.

Doway.
DOway or Dovay, is a remarkable place under the French, on the Borders of
Artois and Hainault. It is situated upon the River Scharpe, and is of
considerable Strength, and has a fine Magazine very well furnished. It is
likewise considerable for its extent, ancient Buildings, September Fair, and
Traffic upon the Scheld; but more especially for being an University, and a
Seminary for the English Roman Catholics. The Fort stands about a Cannon-shot
below the Town upon the Scharpe, and judged by its situation among Marshes, by
means of its Sluices, whereby it can drown all the Country about, to be
impregnable. The chief Trade of this Place consists in fine Woolen-Camlets,
sent into many Parts. It stands 56 miles almost South of Ghent, and 34 West of
Mons.

The next places here discribed, are, the Five Ports, Five Ports of Flanders.
viz. Dunkirk, Ostend, Nieuport, Sluys, and Graveling.

Dunkirk.
DVnkirk, or Duynskerke, is a very considerable Place of the French, seated on
the Sea, and judged to be about the bigness of Cambridge. Beyond the Old Town,
there have been, since it came into the Hands of the French, great Works drawn,
which augment the Town above one half. There is a New Trench cut for a Mile
together through the Splinter-Sands, which will, upon the Head of the Tide,
receive 150 Vessels of 70 Guns apiece; and on the West Side of this Harbor is
raised a vast pil'd and plank'd Work, to intercept and lodge the Sands. It is a
Place of very great Strength, but much added by the late Fortifications, which
are very large, and the Bastion toward the North is most stately. It is well
built and populous, and particularly commended for the Neatness and Regularity
of the Streets. Here is an English Nunnery, and Franciscans have a Cloister for
Persons of both Sexes. At the Mouth of the Haven stands a strong Castle, on
which are planted 200 Pieces of Cannon. It stands 54 Miles West of Ghent.

Ostend.
OStend stands on the Seashore in the midst of a Moorish Ground, and among
diverse Channels; but is chiefly environed almost on all sides by two of the
greatest of them, by which the Sea enters into the Land, and grows so high when
at full Tide, that the Town seems rather to be buried, than situated in the
Sea. It has been moreover so exactly and regularly fortified, that it is taken
to be one of the strongest Towns in the Low Countries; having also a safe and
capacious Harbor, (which it is said can never be blocked up) well defended,
and deep enough to receive Ships of the greatest Burden. The Buildings of the
Town are not very tall, but they are handsome and uniform; the Streets being
regular, well paved, exactly level and strait; this Regularity is to be
attributed to its being built altogether. This Town stands 35 Miles almost West
of Ghent.

Nieuport.
NIeuport, or Newport, between Dunkirk and Ostend, a small distance from the
Seashore, a little River running on the one side of it, which though but a mean
Channel, yet where it falls into the Sea, makes a considerable long and secure
Haven, especially at high Tides; and yet the same (though provided of a good Key)
is hardly capable of Ships of any great Burden. The Town it self is a place of
good Strength, having broad and strait Streets; but the Houses are generally
but low built, and those for the most part of Timber. It has also a strong
Castle. The Inhabitants of this Town maintain themselves chiefly by the Fishing
Trade. This Town stands about 40 Miles West of Ghent.

Sluys.
SLuys, or Sluice, stands some distance from the Sea shore, and is not above one
of their Miles in compass, nor is all that place thoroughly Inhabited, though its
Situation and Fortification be such as render it one of the strongest Places
that belong to the Confederate States in this Province, being much stronger by
reason of the Isle Cadsand nigh adjoining. It was in former Ages an exceeding
wealthy Place, enjoying that Trade which afterward removed from hence to
Bruges, and from thence to Antwerp, and has still the largest Haven in all
Flanders, the same being capable of Five Hundred good Ships. This Town stands
22 Miles North West of Ghent.

Graveling.
GRaveling stands nigh the Sea, upon the Mouth of the River Aa, which parts
France from Flanders, and being a Frontier Town, upon the approach of Strangers
toward the Gate, notice is given of their numbers by a Toll of a Bell for
every Horse. It stands in a low and plashy level, and is environed with so many
Outworks, and Ditches of Water, (having five strong Bulwarks, and a Citadel)
that it seems strange that it should be in so short time delivered up to the
English and French in the year 1658. As for the Town it self, it is neither
large nor well built, and being moreover not many years ago but thinly
Inhabited. This Town stands about 64 Miles West of Ghent.

The next Places here described are the six Frontier Towns; Six Frontier Towns.
the three first of the French, the rest of the Spaniards: They are Lille,
Ypres, Tournay, Courtray, Oudenard, and Dixmude.

Lille.
LIlle, l'Isle, or Ryssel; the Chief Town in that part of Flanders which is
called Galligant, or Walloon. It is Situated among Pools, Ponds, and Marshes,
but dried up, and firm Land, by the Earl Baldwin de Barbu. It is a great strong
and populous Place* It was some years ago accounted the third Place of Traffic
in the Low Countries next Amsterdam and Antwerp: The Invention of laying on
Colors with Oil, making of Worsted Says, and many other Stuffs being imputed
to this City. The Inhabitants have of late employed themselves in Weaving of
Silks, which has much Enriched them; insomuch the French have called this Place
la petit Paris for its Beauty. Here is a good Castle, and the Ruins of an old
one called Buck This Town stands 36 Miles South West of Ghent.

YPres.
YPres, Ypren, or Ipres, stands in a fruitful Plain, upon a River of the same
Name. It is very strong, said to be almost impregnably Situated, and has a new
Citradel. It is a well built place, though Wooden Fronts take something away
from the Beauty of the place; which are Universally so well served with Water
conveyed to them in leaden Pipes, that the Foundations are usually said to be
of that Metal. Its Marketplace is one of the fairest and largest in all these
Countries; and here stands their Hall or Repositary for Wool, which, though
old, is nevertheless a handsome piece of Building. Here are several Convents in
this Town, and among the Churches, the Cathedral of St. Martin has the
Pre-eminence. It is very Rich, driving a good Trade (especially in the Annual
Lent-Fair) with its Says, and half Silks, and the like Commodities. This Town
stands 35 Miles nigh South West of Ghent.

Tournay.
TOurnay, or Dornick, is on all sides surrounded with Fruitful and Pleasant
Fields, and thorough the midst of it, under diverse Bridges, runs the River
Schelde, which in this place begins to be Navigable. It is a very strong place,
and has a Noble Castle. It is a place of great Note, as well for its Antiquity,
as for its being furnished with People, Traffic, and handsome Buildings; among
which are several stately Churches and Religious Houses, and also Honored with
an Episcopal See; taken by the French in the year 1667. This Town stands 30
Miles nigh South of Ghent, and 24 North West of Mons.

Courtray.
COurtray, or Cortryck, is Seated upon the River Lys, and comes in the next
rank to the Capital Places in these Provinces, and is reckoned one of the
ancientest Towns in all these Parts. It is a Place well built, and of great
Strength both by Art and Nature, and is reckoned of great Importance, having a
strong Citadel built by the French when it was Subject to them. The
Inhabitants of this City are accounted excellent Artists at Diapering of
Linen. This Town stands Twenty six Miles South West of Ghent.

Oudenard.
OVdenard is a Frontier Town of the Spaniards, (as was Courtray) Situated upon
the River Schelde nigh the Borders of Hainault. It is accounted one of the
fairest Towns in these Parts, both for Situation, Traffic, and number of
Inhabitants. It is strengthened by a Castle called Pamele, which is joined to
the Town by a fair Bridge; but its being commanded by a very high Hill toward
the North East, takes away very much from its Strength. This Town stands
sixteen Miles South of Ghent.

Dixmude.
DIxmude, or Dixmuyde, is another of the Frontier Towns of the Spaniards
against the French; Situated upon the Confluence of the River Ypres, and
another Nameless Stream. It is not very large, but is reckoned a place of great
Strength and Importance to the Spaniards, though it has been often in the
Possession of the French. This Town stands between Ghent and Dunkirk, Thirty
four Miles from the former, and Twenty from the latter.

2. Earldom of ARTOIS.
ARtois has on the East, Bounds.
Hainault, Cambray, and part of Flanders; on the West and South, Picardy, in
France; and on the North and North-East, Flanders. It is in length about 70
Miles, and in breadth 40.

It is exceeding fruitful in all sorts of Corn, Quality.
but more particularly of Wheat, which it produces in such a Measure, that this
Province serves as a Granary to a great part of Flanders and Brabant. It has in
it 12 Cities, or Walled Town, and 754 Villages. Chief City of the whole is
Arras.

The chief Rivers are, Rivers.
1. Scharpe, which here washes Arras, and runs into Flanders nigh Doway. 2.
Lys, which here washes Air and St. Venand, and runs into Flanders. 3. Aa,
which here washes* Reutly and St. Omars, and runs into Flanders. 4. Canche,
washing Hesden, and runs into France.

The Towns in this Province are thus situated; Situation of the Towns.
viz. 1. Liques, the most Northern place of Note, nigh the Borders of France.
2. St. Omars, 8 Miles nigh East of Liques, (on the Aa.) 3. Reutly, 12 Miles
nigh South-West of St. Omars, (on the Aa.) 4. Dire, or Drien, 12 Miles East of
Reutly, (on the Lys.) 5. St. Venant, five Miles East of Dire, (on the Lys) and
Borders of Flanders. 6. Bethune, eight Miles South of Venant. 7. Pernes, seven
Miles West of Bethune. 8. Hesdin, 15 Miles South-West of Pernes, (on the
Cauche.) 9. Lens, 25 Miles East of Hesdin. 10. Arras, the Metropolis, nine
Miles South of Lens, (on the Scharpe) and 70 Miles South-West of Brussels. 11.
Pas, 13 South-West of Arras, on the Borders of France. 12. Bapaume, 15 Miles
East of Pas, on the Borders of France. These are all under the French.

Arras.
ARras, or Atrecht, Description of the chief Towns.
is the chief City in this Province, seated on the River Scharpe, and is a
place of large Circumference, and well peopled. It consists of two distinct
Towns, (formerly parted by a Wall, but now demolished) called by the Names of
La Citte and La Ville, the former in a special manner subject to the Bishop,
the later to the Secular Prince. Both are very strongly fortified with good
Bulwarks, deep and broad (though dry) Ditches. The Streets are broad and fair,
adorned with a spacious Marketplace. The Citizens Houses are very commodiously
built, having deep and large Rooms under Ground, intended at first as places of
Retreat in time War. Here is a beautiful Cathedral, a very wealthy Abbey, and a
strong Castle. The Chief Trade of this Place consists in making of vast
quantities of Rich Tapestries, and Arras Hangings, Says, and many such like
Commodities.

St. Omars.
ST. Omars, or St. Omer, is the second City in this Province, situated upon the
River Aa, by the Borders of Flanders. It is well Fortified with Walls,
Bastions, Half-Moons, Ditches, Marshes, and Lakes; in the latter are certain
little floating Islands, affording good Pasture for Cattle, and shelter for
Fish, which in great numbers seek Covert under them in the extremity of Heat
and Cold. The Riches of the Inhabitants, the Canal for Commerce, called the New
Fosse, the Abbey of St. Bertin, and more especially the English Seminary of
Jesuits, have rendered it a place of public Note. and of no common Fame
throughout the World. It stands 36 Miles North West of Arras.

Air.
Air or Arien, is situated upon the River Lys, and is a very strong Place,
being environed on three sides by a moorish level, and Fortified with good
Ditches, Bastions, Half-Moons, Redoubts, Hornworks, and Counterscarps. It can
be closely Besieged but on one side, and there it is defended by a strong
Forress called Fort St. James, having five Bastions, two Half-Moons, and a deep
Trench. This Place was taken last by the French Anno 1676, and stands 28 Miles
North West of Arras.

Hesdin.
HEsdin, or Hesdin-fert, situated upon the River Canchee; It was built by
Charles the Fifth. in the year 1554, nigh the place where old Hesdin stood, but
enjoys a far better Situation, and is now a very regular Hexagon, so well
contrived and Fortified, that it is esteemed one of the strongest Holds in all
the Countries; yet was it taken by the French in the space of six Weeks. This
Town stands nigh the Borders of France, 26 Miles nigh West of Arras.

3. Earldom of HAINAULT.
HAinault, Bounds.
or Henegow, has on the East, Namur, and the Bishopric of Liege; on the West,
Flanders and Artois; on the North, Flanders and Brabant; and on the South,
France, and the Archbishopric of Cambray. It is in length about 70 Miles, and
in breadth 65.

It abounds in most Places with fresh Meadows, Quality.
and sweet Pastures, good Fruits, and profitable Trees, and especially with
great plenty of Corn. It has 24 Cities or Walled Towns, 950 Villages, four
Principalities, three Marquisates, and 15 Counts. The chief City is Mons.

Chief Rivers are; Rivers.
1. Sambre, which here washes Landrechies, Armiers, and Maubeuge, runs into
Namur. 2. Scheld, which here washes Bouchain and Valenciennes, runs into
Flanders. 3. Hais^e, which washes Binch and Mons, falls into the Scheld nigh
Conde. 4. Dender, which here washes Leuse, Ath, and Lessines, and runs into
Flanders.

The Towns in this Province are thus situated, Situation of the Towns.
1. Lessines, the most Northern Town of Note nigh Flanders, (on the Dender.) 2.
Ath, four Miles South of Lessines, (on the Dender.) 3. Enghien, ten Miles East
of Ath. 4. Halle, nigh Brabant, Eight Miles East of Enghien, (on the Senne.) 5.
Brain le Comte, seven Miles nigh South of Halle. 6. Seignes, three Miles South
West of Brain le Comte, (on the Senne.) 7. Roecles, five Miles South of
Soignes. 8. Fontane, twelve Miles South East of Roecles: These are all under
the Spaniards. 9. Binch, seven Miles West of Fontane. 10. Mons, the Metropolis,
eight Miles West of Binch, (on the Haisne and Trulle) and Twenty seven South
West of Brussels. 11. Conde, thirteen Miles West of Mons, (on the Scheld.) 12.
Valenciennes, six Miles nigh South West of Conde, (on the Scheld.) 13.
Bouchain, ten Miles South West of Valenciennes, (on the same River.) 14.
Quesnoy, fifteen Miles East of Bouchain. 15. Bavay, ten Miles almost North East
of Quesnoy. 16. Maubeuge, seven Miles nigh East of Bavay, (on the Sambre.) 17.
Beaumont, nine Miles East of Maubeuge. 18. Ameries, fifteen Miles South West of
Beaumont, (on the Sambre.) 19. Landrechies, seven Miles South West of Ameries,
(on the same River.) 20. Avesnes, seven Miles East of Landrechies. 21. Lyesses,
six Miles East of Avesnes. 22. Chimay, ten Miles East of Lyesses. 23.
Marienburg, ten Miles nigh East of Chimay. 24. Phillipville, seven Miles North
of Marienhurg: These are all under the French.

Mons.
MOns, Description of the Chief Towns.
Monts, or Berghen, is the Chief City in this Province, and one of the
principal throughout the Low Countries. It stands upon a higher Ground, but
with a gentle Ascent, except one corner of it, which is very high, upon which
lies a spacious Plain, (a place used for Games and Pastimes) affording a most
delicate prospect This place is wonderfully strong by its very Situation, the
Country round about being easily overflown for a great space by the Waters of
the Haisne and Trulle, nigh the confluence of which two Rivers, the City
stands, the latter of these two cutting it through on the lower side. It is
surrounded by a very good Stone Wall, with a threefold broad Ditch, and is
defended by a strong Castle. The Buildings of the Town are both Stately and
Beautiful, the Streets being large, and the Marketplace spacious; and scarce
any place is better provided of Conduits, which continually supply the
Inhabitants with Water. Here is a famous College of Cannonesses, who have free
leave to depart, and Marry when they shall think fit. This is also a place of
good Trade, which consists in diverse Commodities and Manufactures, especially
in Says, Grograms, and such like.

Ualenciennes.
VAlenciennes is a French Frontier, the second in this Province; It stands on
the River Scheld, (over which are Ten Bridges, upon them stand Stately and
Commodious Houses) encompassed and divided by so many interspersed Channels,
that the place is rendered exceeding Defensible, by Reason of the great
quantity of Water which can soon drown the Country round about. Besides this,
it is Fortified strongly with excellent Walls and Rampires encompassed with
extraordinary broad and deep Ditches; and by Reason of the great difference of
Situation in several parts of the City, it cannot well be Besieged with less
than three Armies at once. Here are several fine Buildings in it, as the great
Church of our Lady, the large Convent of the Franciscans, and another for the
Dominicans; the Town House with many Building for Public Use. This Place has
the Staple of French Wines; and here is also made fine Linen Cloth, equalling
that of Cambray, with Water-Tabbies, and such like Commodities. This Town
stands seventeen Miles almost West of Mons.

Marienburg.
MArienburg, Built by Mary Queen of Hungary, Sister to Charles the Fifth, in
the year 1542. It is a French Frontier, situated on the River Blanch. It was
(besides the Situation so advantageous) so excellently well Fortified at first
with a very strong Wall, and four good Bulwarks, that it was looked upon as
impregnable, if provided of a sufficent Garrison of Courageous Men, the loss of
it (to the incredible prejudice of these Countries) being imputed to the base
and unworthy Behavior of the Defendents. This Town stands Twenty eight Miles
South East of Mons, and (as I take it) is now Dismantled.

Phillipville.
PHillipville, is another French Frontier Town, Bordring on Liege, built by
Phillip the Second, King of Spain, for a Bulwark against the French, and
Honored with his own Name. It is but a small place, but is a very strong
Fortress, strengthened with five Royal Bastions, besides Walls and other good
Works fit for Defense. This Town stands about Twenty eight Miles South East of
Mons.

4. Earldom of NAMUR.
NAmur has on the East, Bounds.
the Bishopric of Liege; on the West, Hainault; on the North, Brabant; and on
the South, part of Luxemburg, and the Bishopric of Liege. It is in length
about 34 Miles, and in breadth 30.

It is plentifully stored with all Commodities, Quality.
the Hills clothed with Woods full of Fowl and Venison, and the Valleys full
of Corn; rich in Mines and Quarries of Marble of all sorts. It has in it Four
Cities or Walled Towns, and 184 Villages. The Chief City is Namur.

The Chief Rivers are, Rivers.
1. Maes, which runs through the midst of this Province into the Bishopric of
Liege, and washes Charlemont, Dinant, Bovines and Namur. 2. Sambre, which here
washes Charleroy, and falls into the M^es at Namur.

The Towns in this Province are thus situated: Situation of the Town.
1. Charleroy, the most Western Town (on the Sambre) by the Borders of
Hainault. 2. Namur, the Metropolis, 17 Miles East of Charleroy, (on the Maes
and Sambre) and 30 nigh South-East of Brussels. 3. Bovines or Bovigne, 12 Miles
South of Namur, (on the Maes) by the Borders of Liege. 4. Charlemont, seven
Miles South of Bovines, (on the Maes) by the Borders of Liege and Luxemburg. In
this Province is also that remarkable Village of Flerus, six Miles North-East
of Charleroy, standing on the Borders of Brabant, 22 Miles nigh South of
Brussels. These Towns are all under the Spaniards.

Namur.
NAmur is the Chief City of this Province, Description of the Chief Towns.
situated in a flat Bottom between two Hills, upon the Confluence of the Maes
and Sambre, which divides the Town into two unequal parts, the passage over
both of them being by two Stone-Bridges, which make the place both more
commodious and more beautiful. The City is adorned with a fair Marketplace, a
Guild Hall, diverse Churches, and a great Number of very good Stone-Buildings.
Here is also a stately and strong Castle, standing upon a very high Hill, the
Situation of which renders it very defensible, and much conduces to the
strength of the Town. Here are several Religious Houses, of which that of the
Franciscans is Chief. This City is rich, and inhabited for the most part by
Nobility, well trained, and of a Martial Discipline, having but few Merchants
and Artificers among them.

Charleroy.
CHarleroy is a Frontier Town in this this Province, which was built by the
Spaniards in the year 1666. (in Honor of the present King of Spain) seated
upon a rising Ground in the exterior and Western Angle, made by the meeting of
the Rivers Pieton and Sambre. Soon after it was built it was quitted by the
Spaniards; and by the French soon after so fortified, that it became one of the
most considerable Holds in all these Countries, as it is still. It was restored
to the Spaniards in the year 1679. This Town stands 14 Miles West of Namur, and
21 East of Mons.

Charlemont.
CHarlemont is also a Frontier Town of the Spaniards in the Bounds of this
Province, which was built in the year 1555. by Charles the Fifth, (from whom it
took its Name.) It is very conveniently seated upon a Hill, near the left Bank
of the River Maes, (which affords it a good Trade) and is a very strong
Fortress, (though but a small Town) and of very exact and regular
Fortification. This Town stands 20 Miles South of Namur.

Bovines.
BOvines, or Bovigne, is another Frontier Town, (but whether of the French or
Spaniards I am a little uncertain) situated on the West-Bank of the Maes,
scarce two Miles from Dinant on the other side of the River. It is but a small
Town, and of no very great Strenght, but is chiefly considerable for its being
a Pass between Namur and Luxemburg, and for That it deserves here to be taken
Notice of. It stands 11 Miles South of Namur.

5. Dukedom of BRABANT.
BRabant has on the East the Bishopric of Liege, Bounds.
and part of Gelderland; on the West, Zealand (in the United Provinces) and
Flanders; on the North, Holland and Gelderland; and the South and South-West,
Namur and Hainault. It is in length 90 Miles, and in breadth 72.

The Air is generally wholesome and good; Quality.
the Soil naturally very fruitful, except some of the Northern parts, which are
somewhat sandy and barren, but those are managed to the best advantage. It has
in it 26 Cities or Walled Towns, and 100 Villages. The Chief City (setting
aside Antwerp) is Brussels.

Chief Rivers are, Rivers.
1. Demer, which washes Die, Sichen, A^rschot, runs through Mec^lin and falls
into the Scheld. 2. Dommel, which washes Eyndoven and Boisleduc, and falls into
the Maes, 3. Senne, which here washes Brussels and Vilvorden, falls in the
Demer, and so to the Scheld. 4. Aa, which washes Helmont, and falls into the
Dommel at Boisleduc. 5. Dyle, washing Lovain. And, 6. Gias, washing Tienen,
both falling into the Demer.

The Town in this Province are thus situated. Situation of the Towns.
1. Grave, the most Northern Town (on the Maes) by Gelderland. 2. Helmont, 18
Miles South of Grave, (on the Aa.) 3. Eyndoven, nine Miles West of Helmont, (on
the Dommel.) 4. Boisleduc, 16 Miles nigh North of Eyndoven, (on the Dommel and
Aa.) 5. Breda, 20 Miles West of Boisleduc. 6. Bergen-op-Zome, 18 Mile nigh West
of Breda; These are all under the Hollanders. 7. Herentals, 30 Miles South-East
of Bergen-op-Zome. 8. Liere, 11 Miles South-West of Herentals. 9. Sichen, 14
Miles nigh East of Liere. 10. Die, three Miles South-East of Sichen. 11.
Halen, four Miles South-East of Die. 12. Leeuwe, six Miles South of Halen.
13. Tienen, seven Miles West of Leeuwe, (on the Gias.) 14. Lovain or Loeven, 10
Miles nigh West of Tienen, (on the Dyle.) 15. Vilvorden, 10 Miles West of
Lovain, (on the Senne.) 16. Brussels or Bruxels, the Metropolis, seven Miles
South of Vilvorden, (on the Senne.) 17. Niville* 12 Miles South of Brussels,
nigh Hainault. 18. Gemblours, 15 Miles East of Niville, nigh Namur. 19.
Judoigne, 11 Miles North-East of Gemblours. 20. Hannuye, nine Miles East of
Judoigne. These are all under the Spaniards.

Brussels.
BRussels, Description of the Chief Towns.
or Bruxels, the Chief City of this Province, and the Seat of the Spanish
Governor for these Countries; a very large City, sweetly seated on the River
Senne. It is compassed with a double and high Wall, and very large Ditches; in
the Circuit thereof were formerly 74 Towers, many of which have been since
ruined. It is well built, and has large, handsome, and convenient Streets. The
King's Palace is a most Magnificent and Stately Building, having Room enough to
lodge several Kings at once, to which belongs many excellent Gardens, Grotto's,
Ponds, Waterworks, Walks, etc. The Senate House is a Noble Pile of Building.
Here are also many other Magnificent Palaces, a great Number of Religious
Houses, and Hospitals, too many to mention here. Here are seven Public
Fountains, seven Principal Streets, about which are seven stately Houses rented
by the Public; seven Parish Churches, seven Noble Families, seven Licensed
Midwives, and seven Gates of Dorick Work. The Artificers and Tradesmen make
Fifty Two Companies: All which Constitute nine larger Bodies, among which the
Cutlers and Armour-makers are chief.

Lovain.
LOvain, Louvain, or Loeven, is reckoned the Second City in this Province, the
head of a Quarter or Tetrarchy, most pleasently seated on the River Dyle, and
is one of the largest places in the Low Country, being three Rod more in
Circuit than Ghent within the Walls, in which are many delightful Fields,
pleasant Orchards, and fine Gardens. It is encompassed with large deep Ditches,
cut in many places through a Flinty Rock, or very hard Gravel. The Walls are
strongly built, being raised from the very bottom of the Ditch, so that scarce
a third part of the Work comes at a distance into view; and in the Circuit of
these Walls are 53 Towers, and no less than 16 Draw-Bridges, placed
conveniently for the better securing of the Gates, which are in number 11,
built all of curious white Stone. The Buildings of the Town, in general, are
neither well built, nor well kept, but the Stadt-house is a stately Structure.
Here is a famous University, which has 43 Colleges. The Orders of the
Dominicans, Franciscans, and Carthusians, have each of them a Convent: The
Jesuits have also their proper College. This Town stands 15 Miles East of
Brussels.

Boisleduc.
BOisleduc, or Hertogen Bosche, the Head of a Quarter or Tetrarchy, a Frontier
of the Hollanders; Situated upon the Confluence of the Dommel and Aa. It is of
a Triangular Form, seated on a Hill in the midst of a Fenny level of great
extent, so that the Avenues to the Town are upon Artificial Causays, made
turning and winding, to be commanded in all Places by one or other of the six
Scounces or Forts, at some distance without the Town. It is encompassed with a
strong Wall, and a deep and broad Ditch, seconded by good Bulwarks and
Ramparts, and all other such Works as may render a Town so commodiously
Situated, little less than impregnable. Several Canals (some bearing large
Vessels) run through this City; over which lie Fifty one Stone Bridges, and
Thirty eight Wooden ones. The Market place is spacious enough, and is
remarkable for the fair Building wherewith it is Surrounded. It has a great
Trade in Needles and Knives of better Metal, besides great quantities of
Woollen and Linen Cloth. It stands Sixty two Miles North East of Brussels.

Breda.
BReda, a Frontier of the Hollanders, in Boisleduc Quarter, a place pleasantly
seated, and is considerable for its bigness; and is both well built and
populous; and also a place of great Strength, being encompassed with very thick
Walls, and Mounts of Earth, and two Trenches always full of Water, one whereof
is very broad and deep: The Town is handsomely built, and has a strong and
beautiful Castle, and fair Palace for the Prince of Orange, (our King,) to whom
the whole Town do more properly belong. Here is commonly a good Garrison; and
ever since the surprise of the Town by the Turf Boat, it is the custom to
search all laden Boats by stabbing them with a Spit. This Town stands Forty
eight Miles North of Brussels.

Bergen op Zome.
BErgen op Zome, is another Frontier of the Hollanders, of singular importance
by Reason of its Situation between Brabant, Flanders, Holland, and Zealand; and
the greatest part of the Country about it lies very low, and is Habitable only
by Banks. It is certainly at present a place of exceeding Strength; for besides
its Wall and Trench, it is provided of Half Moons, Hornworks, and other
Structures of Defense, contrived by such as are most Skilful in the Art of
Fortification. The Buildings of the Town are very fair and handsome; and its
three Market Places are large and capacious. Amongst the Edifices, the Church
of St. Lambert, and the Marquesses Palace deserves Observation. This Town
stands Forty two Miles North of Brussels, and Eighteen of Antwerp.

Gemblours.
GEmblours, a Frontier Town of the Spaniards on the Borders of Namur, situated
upon the steep of an Hill; being environed by Precipices and deep Valleys on
all sides but toward the East, which it is overtop'd by the highest point of
the said Hill, at the Foot whereof runs the small River Lorn. This Town is but
small, and is most remarkable for the famous Abbey of St. Benedict, the Abbot
whereof is Temporal as well as Spiritual Lord of the Town. This Town stands 20
Miles South-West of Brussels.

Niville.
NIville, another Spanish Frontier on the Borders of Hainault. It is but a
small place, but well fortified, and enjoys several ample Privileges. It is
most remarkable for the famous Nunnery, and the great Quantities of fine Linen
Cloth, said to equal that of Cambray. This Town stands 13 Miles South of
Brussels.

6. The MARQUISATE.
THe Marquisate of the Holy Emperor, Bounds.
is a very small Province, accounted one of the Four Quarters or Tetrarchies of
Brabant, bounded on the West with Flanders, from which separated by the River
Scheld, and on all other sides by Brabant. It is much smaller than it was
formerly, not being above seven Miles long, and four broad; yet it is reckoned
a distinct Province from the rest of the Netherlands.

The Chief Rivers are, Rivers*
1. Scheld, which washes Antwerp, and divides this Province from Flanders, and
then Brabant from Flanders. 2. Schynt, which also runs by Antwerp, and there
falls into the Scheld.

The chief and only place of Note in this Province is Antwerp, Situation of the
Town.
the Metropolis of all these Provinces. It stands on the River Scheld on the
Borders of Flanders, 22 Miles North of Brussels, and 75 South of Amsterdam. it
is now under the subjection of the Spaniards. I find no Villages in this
Province.

Antwerp.
ANtwerp was formerly one of the most famous places in Europe, Description of
the Town.
and still a Noble City, deservedly counted the chief of these Provinces. It is
nigh eight Miles in Circuit, and is compared to a Bow, the string of which is
represented by the River Scheld, on which it stands. It is encompassed with
vast strong and beautiful Walls, being 110 Foot broad on the top, upon which
are four or five Rows of Linden Trees regularly planted; the Walls themselves
being excellently faced with Stone, having eight strong Bulwarks contrived with
great Art for mutual Defense, and 13 fine Gates for entrance. The Streets are
straight and large, and the Buildings more Stately and Magnificent, for Beauty
equalling, if not surpassing, any in all Europe. On the South side of the City
stands the Citadel, an incomparable Work, about a Mile in Compass: It is a
Pentagon composed of five Royal Bastions, the best contrived of all Modern
Fortifications, commanding both City and Country. To describe all the Churches,
public Buildings, etc. would take a Volume. For matter of Trade it once
surpassed any place in the World, but now much declined, though still of vast
resort, by reason of the excellent River which bears Ships of the greatest
Burden close up to the very shore.

7. Seigneury of MECHLIN.
MEchlin, Bounds.
or Malines, is another very small Province, bounded on every side with
Brabant, and is nigh the middle of it, though not far off the Borders of
Flanders. It is in length about eight Miles, and in breadth six.

It is a distinct Province from the rest, and Residence for the Parliament for
these Countries, but has not those Privileges that Brabant has; for that
Reason the Women here when they are ready to Lie-in, go into Brabant to be
brought to Bed, that their Children may enjoy their Privileges.

In the compass of this Province lies one City, Situation of the Town.
or Walled Town, and nine Villages. The City is called Mechlin, on the River
Demer, fourteen Miles almost North East of Brussels, and as many South East of
Antwerp, and under the Spaniards.

Chief Rivers are, 1. Demer, Rivers,
which runs through the middle, and washes Mechlin, and then into Brabant, and
falls into the Scheld. 2. Senne, which here falls into the Demer.

To this Province is usually joined (by Geographers) the Dukedom of Aerschot,
Duke of Aerschot.
lying Eastward of Mechlin, about thirteen Miles long, and four broad. The
Chief Place is Aerschot, thirteen Miles East of Mechlin, (on the Demer) under
the Spaniards.

Mechlin.
MEchlin, Desoription of the Towns.
or Malines, is very commodiously seated on the River Demer, which runs through
the midst of it, dividing the City into diverse Islands, which are united in
several Places by a great number of Bridges. It is a place of considerable
Strength, being Fortified with good Walls, but much more defenseable by Reason
of its own level Situation, and the flatness of the adjoining Country, which
upon every little occasion, may be laid under Water. The Houses are very neatly
built, and considerable both for Beauty and largeness of Structure. It is
divided into seven Parishes, each of which have a Magnisicent and Stately
Church; that of St. Rumbald being Chief, having a very lofty Tower. The Chief
Trade of this Place consists in Tanning, making of Linen Cloth, and casting
great Artillery and Bells.

8. Bishopric of LIEGE.
LIege, Bounds.
has on the East, Limburg and Juliers in Germany; on the West and North,
Hainault, Namur and Brabant; and on the South, Luxembourg. It is part of the
Westphalian Circle in Germany, though annexed to these Provinces, and is in
length about 74 Miles, and in breadth 35.

The Soil is very fruitful, Quality.
producing great plenty of Fowl and Venison, Mines of Lead and Iron, with large
Quarries of Marble of all sorts, and Alablasters, which very much enriches this
Country. It has in it 24 Cities or Walled Towns, and 1800 Villages. The Chief
City is Liege.

Chief Rivers are, 1. Maes, Rivers.
which here washes Dinant, Hoey, Liege, Maestricht, Stochem and Maeseyck, and
runs into Gelderland. 2. Demer, which here washing Bilsen and Huffelt, runs
into Brabant. 3. Jecker, which washes Tongres, and falls into the Maes at
Maestricht. 4. Wesdret, which washes Viviers, and falls into the Maes at Liege.

The Towns in this Province are thus situated: Situation of the Towns.
1. Hamont, the most North Town. 2. Peer, nine Miles South-West of Hamont. 3.
Brey, seven Miles East of Peer. 4. Maeseyck, 11 Miles East of Brey, (on the
Maes) bordering on Juliers. 5. Stochem, five Miles South of Maeseck, (on the
Maes*) 6. Herk, 25 Miles nigh West of Stochem, (on the Herk) 7. Haffelt, five
Miles East of Herk, (on the Demer.) 8. St. Truyen. eight Miles South-West of
Haffelt. 9. Tongeren, 10 Miles East of St. Truyen. 10. Bilsen, five Miles
North-East of Tongeren. 11. Maestricht, six Miles East of Bilsen, (on the
Maes,) by Limburg. This is under the Hollanders. 12. Liege or Luyck, the
Metropolis, 13 Miles South of Maestricht, (on the Maes.) 13. Hoey, on the same
River, 14 Miles South-West of Liege. 14. Chiney, 17 Miles nigh South-West of
Hoey. These are all (except Maestricht) under the Bishop of Liege. 15. Dinant,
10 Miles South-West of Chiney, (on the Maes.) 16. Florennes, 10 Miles West of
Dinant. 17. Walcourt, or Valencourt, seven Miles West of Florennes. 18. Thuin,
10 Miles nigh West of Walcourt. These are all under the French.

Liege.
LIege, or Luyck, Description of the Chief Towns.
is the Principal City in this Province, situated in a pleasant Valley
environed with Hills; the River Maes entering it in two Branches accompanied
with lesser Streams, which make many delightful Islands. It is above four Miles
in Circuit, but inferior to several others in these parts for Beauty or
Riches, the Houses being for the most part built of Timber, some of them being
covered with Boards, and some with Slates; and the Streets are neither broad,
nor cleanly kept. On the Brow of a Hill which hangs over it, stands the Citadel
or Castle of great strength, built to Command the Town, without which it would
be but of small Consequence. It is a famous University, Endowed with large
Ecclesiastical Revenues. Here are eight Collegiate, and 32 Parochial Churches;
of these most are fair and stately. The whole Town is made up of Thirty Two
Companies of Freemen, among whom the Goldsmiths have the Pre-eminence.

Maestricht.
MAestricht is the second City in this Province, subject to the Hollanders. It
is situated upon the River Maes, by which it is cut through, not in the midst,
but on one side by the said River, and the lesser part which lies toward
Germany is called the Wick. It is fortified with good Works, besides a strong
Wall and Trench, and the Wick is said to be stronger than the Town. Toward the
South-East lies a Hill, which rises gently, and overlooks part of the Town,
under which is one of the Noblest Quarries of Stone in the World: To prevent
this Disadvantage, the Bastion answering to it is built very high. One
Advantage to the Besieger is the Nature of the Earth, which is very Minable,
and Commodious for Intrenching. The private Houses are generally covered with
black Slate, otherwise not very beautiful. The Townhouse is a very fair
Structure; and the Stone Bridge, which joins both parts of the City, has nine
Arches, and is ve-beautiful. Here are nigh Twenty Monasteries, and three Dutch
Churches; and one common to the English and French.

Dinant.
DInant, is a Frontier Town of the French in this Province, on the Borders of
Namur. It stands on the East-Bank of the River Maes, (scarce two Miles from
Bovines on the other side) over which it has a Stone Bridge. It is but a small
place, but yet of account; and was formerly of vast Trade, but it has been so
often destroyed, that the Trade have been extremely hindered; but however the
Inhabitants have a considerable Revenue from Black Marble, Iron and Brass. This
Town stands 38 Miles South-West of Liege, and 14 South of Namur.

9. Dukedom of LIMBURG.
LImburg has on the East, Bounds.
Juliers in Germany; on the West, the Bishopric of Liege; and the North, part
of Liege and Juliers; and on the South Luxemburgh. This is also accounted a
part of the Circle of Westphalia in Germany, being in length about Thirty eight
Miles, and in breadth Thirty.

This Province produces all necessary Commodities, Quality.
except Wine, which defect is Recompensed with excellent Wheat, great store of
Fuel, and plenty of the best Iron Mines in all these Countries. It has in it
five Cities or Walled Towns, and 123 Villages. The Chief City in Limburg.

Chief Rivers are, Rivers.
1. Maes, which runs but through a little part of this Province. 2. Geul, which
washes Valkenburg, and falls into the Maes 3. Wesdret, which waters Limburg,
and runs into Liege. 4. Bervine, which washes Dalem, and falls into the Maes.

The Towns of these Province are thus Situated. 1. Remborch, the most North
Eastern Town on the Borders of Juliers. 2. Rolduck, four Miles South ot
Remborch, on the Borders of Juliers. 3. Falkenburg, or Fauquemont, thirteen
Miles West of Rolduck, (on the Geul.) 4. Dalem, ten Miles nigh South West of
Valkenburg, (on the Bermine) these are all under the Hollanders. 5. Limburg,
the Metropolis, 15 Miles nigh South East of Dalem, (on the Wesdret) and 70 nigh
East of Brussels. This is under the Spaniards, and is the only place of Note
that they now have here.

Limburg.
LImburg is the Chief City in this Province, Description of the Chief Towns.
which is Situated upon a Rock, which overlooks all the Country round about; at
the bottom thereof runs the River Wesdrit, almost round it among several shady
Woods. It is but a small City, for it chiefly consists of one broad short
Street; neither is it considerable for its Beauty, for the Building are for the
most part of Wood, but it is of no small Consideration for its Strength, for it
is encompassed with a strong Wall and a Trench, and the access to it, which is
on the North side, is extremely difficult, lying all along upon the edge of the
Rock; from one side thereof to the other the Gate of the Town (over which are
the Governors Lodgings) spreeds it self, and quite Locks up and Commands the
whole Passage.

Ualkenburg.
VAlkenburg, or Vauquemont, is reckoned the Second City in Limburg, said to
belong to the Bishop of Liege, though now under the Hollanders. It is situated
upon the River Geul, and is large, and indifferent neatly Built, as well as
tollerably Fortified; but the Castle, which stands above it, upon a steep Rock,
is a place of more than ordinary Strength, being inaccessible, and impregnable
to an Enemy that brings not Cannon along with him: In it are said to be certain
Caves of so prodigious a Bigness, that a whole Army may be well hid in them.
Yet in the year 1672, upon the News of the French coming, it was immediately
quitted. It stands 20 Miles North of Limburg.

10. Dukedom of LUXEMBURG.
LVxemburg, or Lutzenburg, has on the East, Bounds.
the Archbishopric of Triers in Germany; on the West, some of the Bishopric
of Liege, and Champagne in France; on the North, Liege and Limburg; and on the
South Lorrain in France. It is in length about Eighty two Miles, and in breadth
Seventy two.

It is for the most part fruitful of Corn, Quality.
yielding also some Wines, some Mines, and many excellent Quarries of goodly
Stone. The Western parts are somewhat barren of Corn, but very plentiful in
Fowl and Venison. It has in it Twenty three Cities or Walled Towns, and 1169
Villages. The Chief City of the whole is Luxemburg.

Chief Rivers are, Rivers.
1. Moselle, which here washes Maisiers, Thionville, Remich, and Wasserbillich,
runs into Germany. 2. Ourt, which here washes Hofalize, La Roche, and Durbuy,
runs into Liege. 3. Semoy, which here washes Chiney and Buillon, runs a little
into France, and falls into the Maes. 4. Sour, which washes Dietkick and
Ethternack, falls into the Moselle.

The Towns of this Province are thus situated: Situation of the Towns.
1. Durbuy, the most Northern Town of Note, (on the Ourt.) 2. Bastoigne, 21
Miles nigh South of Durbuy. 3. Viander, 19 Miles East of Bastoigne, (on the
Vra.) 4. Dietkirk, six Miles nigh South of Vianden, (on the S^ur.) 5. Arlon, 17
Miles South-West of Dietkirk. 6. Luxembourg, the Metropolis, 13 Miles nigh East
of Arlon, (on the Alsitz,) and above 100 nigh South-East of Brussels. 7. Rode
Macheren, 10 Miles nigh South-East of Luxemburg, (nigh the Moselle.) 8.
Thionville, six Miles South-West of Rode Macheren, (on the Moselle.) 9. Esche,
nigh 10 Miles North-West of Thionville. 10. Virton, 15 West of Esche. 11.
Yvoix, or Ivoix, 17 Miles West of Virton. 12. Montmedy, 12 South-East of Yvoix.
13. Stenay, or Altenay, eight Miles nigh West of Montmedy, (on the Maes.) 14.
Dampvillers, 12 Miles South-East of Stenay. 15. Masiers, 32 Miles East of
Dampvillers, (on the Moselle) bordering on Lorrain. These are all under the
French.

In the Bounds of this Province lies the Dukedom of Buillon, and Territory of
St. Hubart, (both belonging to the Bishop of Liege) though at present under the
French. The Chief Places are, 1. St. Hubart, 13 Miles West of Bastoigne. 2.
Buillon, or Bovillon, 19 Miles nigh South-VVest of St. Hubart.

Luxemburg.
LVxemburg, or Lutzenburg, Description of the chief Towns.
is the Principal City of this Province, and is commodiously seated in respect
of Strength, upon the little River Alstitz, which divides it into two equal
parts; the best part of it stands on the top of a Hill, and is surrounded with
very good and defensible Walls, and other proper Fortifications thereto
belonging. It is of great compass, and is indifferently stored with good
Stone-Buildings, but by reason of the many Hazards of War it has gone through,
many of the Houses were not only neglected, but deserted by the Owners. The Old
Town, which in former times was a large and well built City, is now but only
the Suburbs to the New. Here is a Cloister of Franciscans, said to be founded
in the Lifetime of St. Francis. It has been under the French ever since the
year 1684. who since their late possession have much added to its
Fortifications.

Thionville.
THionville is the second City in this Province, commodiously seated upon the
Western Bank of the River Moselle. It is a place of very great Strength,
encompassed with a Brick and Stone Wall, having six Bulwarks, and strengthened
with four large Hornworks; the broad and deep Ditch which surrounds it not
being destitute of Water even in the greatest Drought in Summer. The outward
sloping Curtain is all along thick set with strong Stakes or Pallisadoes; and
before the Gate that opens toward Luxemburg, is moreover raised a vast
Hornwork. This Town stands 14 Miles South of Luxemburg.

Montmedy.
MOntmedy, deserves to be mentioned here, though it is a place of no great
bigness, yet it is always reckoned a place of great strength. It is very
conveniently situated upon the top of an high Hill, the foot whereof is watered
by the River Chier. It has been oftentimes taken by the French in the Wars of
these later Ages, which was generally imputed to its want of Provisions, and a
sufficient Garrison.

GELDERLAND.
GElderland, Bounds.
(I mean only that part which is subject to the Spaniards) or the Quarter of
Ruermond, has on the East, and North, Cleves in Germany; on the West, Brabant;
and on the South, Juliers in Germany. It lies some distance from the rest of
Gelderland, being 36 Miles long, and 28 broad.

The Soil is Fruitful, Quality.
and bears all sorts of Grains; abounding moreover with rich Pasture Grounds,
which Fattens great droves of Cattle, which are sent from many far places.

Chief Rivers are, 1. Maes, which runs through the midst of this part, Rivers.
washing Ruermond and Venlo, and so passes on, dividing Brabant from the rest
of Gelderland. 2. Niers, which washes Gelders, and runs into Cleves.

The Cities or Walled Towns are only three, Situation of the Towns.
and are thus situated. 1. Gelders, the Metropolis nigh the Borders of Cleves,
(on the Niers) about Eighty four Miles North East of Brussels. 2. Venlo, ten
Miles South West of Gelders, (on the Maes) nigh the Borders of Juliers. 3.
Ruermond, or Roermond, eleven Miles South of Venlo, (on the Maes) likewise by
the Borders of Juliers. These are all Subject to the Spaniards.

Gelders.
GElders, Description of the Chief Towns.
the Chief City in this part, and gives Name to the whole Province; It is a
place of no very great bigness, seated in a very convenient place, and receives
the little River Niers into its Trenches. It has a Castle of great Antiquity,
the ancient Seat of those who were Governors of this Province, under several
Titles; which together with the City it self, is strongly Fortified by the
Marshes that encompass them both; but whether it may be imputed to this, or to
the firm Loyalty of the Inhabitants, that it was never yet brought under the
Jurisdiction of the United Provinces, I shall not presume to determine. This
Town stands 26 Miles nigh South East of Nimigen, the Chief of the Province.

Ruermond.
RVermond, or Roermond, which gives Name to this Quarter or Part, is situated
on the River Maes, where it receives the Roer, very convenient for Defense. It
is a rich and well Peopled City, and is remarkable both for the Strength of its
Walls, and the neatness of its Buildings. It is a Bishops See, and is Cathedral
Church, is dedicated to the Holy Ghost; here is also an ample and wealthy
Monastery of the Carthusians, so much commended by Travelers. This Town stands
21 Miles South of Gelders.

Archbishopric of CAMBRAY.
CAmbray, or Cambreses, was some times reckoned a part of Hainault, Bounds.
but distinct, bounded on the North and East with Hainault; on the West with
Artois; and on the South, Picardy in France. It is length 32 Miles, and in
breadth 18.

The Soil of this Province is extraordinary Fruitful, Quality.
producing great quantities of Corn, Grains, and several Fruits, but is not
altogether so good for Wines. The Archbishop of this Province was sometimes
reckoned a Prince of the Empire.

The Chief Rivers are, Rivers.
1. Scheld, which here washes Crevecoer and Cambray, and then runs into
Hainault and Flanders. 2 Selle, which here washes Chateau Cambreses, and runs
into Hainault. 3. Sambre, which go through a little part of this Province, and
runs into Hainalt.

The Cities or Walled Towns are here but three in Number, and are thus
situated: 1. Cambray, 58 Miles South-East of Brussels, (on the Scheld*) 2.
Crevecoer, five Miles South of Cambray, (on the Scheld.) 3. Chateau Cambreses,
12 Miles East of Crevecoer, (on the Selle.) These are all under the French.

Cambray.
CAmbray, Description of the Town.
or Camerick, is the Chief City in this Province, by the Borders of Hainault.
It is situated upon the River Scheld, which runs through it, and fills all its
Ditches. It is said to be of greater Importance than almost any other in the
Low Countries; being regularly fortified with Ramparts, Bastions, Half-Moons,
and two good Forts; and is commanded by a Citadel of Square Figure; and is
moreover placed in a most advantageous Situation; having on the Westside, and
in a low bottom, exceeding large Suburbs, with delicate Meadows and Gardens
lying all along the River. The private Buildings are very fair, and the public
much fairer. It contains nine Parishes, and has three Abbeys, with a great
Number of Religious Houses, besides Hospitals and other public Buildings. Here
are many Rich Merchants, and the principal Trade consists in making that fine
Linen called Cambrick. It stands 32 Miles South-West of Mons, and 94 North of
Paris.

BEcause Calais is a Frontier Town, and a place of great Importance, I think it
will be convenient to give a Description of it, though it be in no part of
Flanders.

Calais.
CAlais, or Calis, a very strong Town in the Province of Picardy in France,
once belonging to the English, and held by them 210 years; but regained by the
French in the Reign of Queen Mary; the loss of which grieved her so much, as it
was thought the cause of her death. It is very advantagiously situated for
Defense nigh the Sea; now very strongly fortified after the Modern Fashion,
with an impenitrable Wall and Bastions of Earth, a deep Trench full of Water to
the Landward, and a large Citadel. The Wall and Citadel were built about 65
years since. The old Stone-Wall and Ditch are still remaining, but enclosed
with the new. The Town is somewhat bigger than Dover in England, from which it
stands opposite, and is very populous, and well frequented, by reason of its
being the immediate Port from England, and for that Reason called the Key of
France. It has a large square Piazza or Marketplace, wherein are two great
Markets weekly kept, the one on Tuesdays, the other on Saturdays. The
Government is by a Mayor and four Eschevins, chosen annually by the Burgesses
or Freemen.

An INDEX of all the Provinces, Cities, Towns, Forts, Rivers, etc. in Flanders,
or the Spanish Netherlands. Showing (the Cities, Forts, etc.) in what Province
they are, to what Prince they are subject, the Page and Figure that refer to
them in the Book, their Longitude and Latitude, (according to T. de Wets Maps,
the first Meridian beginning at Teneriff.) And also all the several ways of
spelling of them, to avoid mistakes. Designed for the speedy finding of any
place, and may serve for a Geographical Dictionary for these Parts.
A.
AA, a River in the Province of Brabant, mentioned Page 39. Fig. 4. Aa, another
River in the Provinces of Artois and Flanders, mentioned page 22. and fig. 3.
Aalst, or Alost. See Aelst. Aath. See Ath. Aelst, Aalst, or Alost, a Town in
the Province of Flanders, belonging to the Spaniards, mentioned page 18. fig.
13. Lon. 23. 19. Lat. 51. 1. Aerdenburg. See Ardenburg. Aerschot, or Aschot, a
Town in the Province of Brabant, (here joined to Mechlin) under the Spaniards,
mentioned page 51. Lon. 24. 10. Lat. 51. 4. Air, or Arien, a Town in the
Province of Artois, subject to the French, mentioned page 23. fig. 4. and
described page 25. Lon. 21. 30. Lat. 50. 43. Alost, or Aalst. See Aelst. St.
Amand, a Town in the Province of Flanders, belonging to the French, mentioned
page 9. fig. 26. Lon. 22. 38. Lat. 50. 29. Antwerpe, Antwerpen, or Anvers, the
Metropolis of the Marquisate, and of all these Provinces under the Spaniards,
mentioned and described page 48. Lon. 23. 36. Lat. 51. 16. Ardenburg, or
Aerdenburg, a Town in the Province of Flanders, under the Hollanders, mentioned
page 8. fig. 5. Lon. 22. 36. Lat. 51. 22. Arleux, a Town in the Province of
Hainault under the French, not here mentioned, Lon. 22. 32. Lat. 50. 20. Arien.
See Air. Arlon, a Town in the Province of Luxemburg, under the French,
mentioned page 64. fig. 5. Lon. 25. 12. Lat. 49. 45. Armentiers, a Town in the
Province of Flanders, belonging to the French, mentioned page 9. fig. 23. Lon.
22. 6. Lat. 50. 46. Armiers, a Town in the Province of Hainault, under the
French, mentioned page 28. fig. 18. Lon. 23. 6. Lat. 50. 15. Atras, or Atrecht,
the Metropolis of Artois, a B. under the French, mentioned page 23. fig. 10.
Lon. 21. 58. Lat. 50. 19. described page 23. and 24. ARTOIS, one of the Ten
Provinces under the French, described page 22. etc. Ascot. See Aerschot.
Astenay. See Stenay. Ath, or Aath, a Town in the Province of Hainault,
belonging to the Spaniards, mentioned page 27. Fig. 2. Lon. 23. 3. Lat. 50. 47.
Atrecht. See Arras. Avesnes, a Town in Hainault under the French, mentioned
page 28. fig. 20. Lon. 23. 12. Lat. 50. 10. Axel, a Town in the Province of
Flanders, belonging to the Hollanders, mentioned page 8. fig. 2. Lon. 23. 6.
Lat. 51. 21.
B.
BApaume, a Town in the Province of Artois, under the French, mentioned page
23. fig. 12. Lon. 22. 5. Lat. 50. 8. Bastoigne, or Bastonach, a Town in the
Province of Luxemburg, mentioned page 64. fig. 2. Lon. 25. 12. Lat. 50. 5.
Bavay, a Town in the Province of Hainault, under the French, mentioned page 28.
fig. 15. Lon. 34. 4. Lat. 50. 24. Beaumont, a Town in the Province of Hainault,
subject to the French, mentioned page 28. fig. 17. Lon. 23. 28. Lat. 50. 17.
Beer, or Peer, a Town in the Bishopric of Liege, under that Bishop, mentioned
page 54. fig. 2. Lon. 24. 42, Lat. 51. 12. Bergen. See Mons. Bergen op Zome, a
Town on Province of Brabant, under the Hollanders, mentioned page 39. fig. 6.
Lon. 23. 32. Lat. 51. 32. Bervine, a River in the Province of Limburg,
mentioned page 60. Bethune, a Town in the Province of Artois, under the French,
mentioned page 23. fig. 6. Lon. 21. 42. Lat. 50. 37. Bilsen, a Town in the
Bishopric of Liege, subject to that Bishop, mentioned page 54. fig. 10. Lon.
24. 41. Lat. 50. 54. Binch, a Town in the Province of Hainault, under the
French, mentioned page 28. fig. 9. Lon. 23. 26. Lat. 50. 27. Boilleduc, Bolduc,
Bosch, St. Hertogen Bosch, or Shertogen Bosch; a Town in the Province of
Brabant, under the Hollanders; mentioned page 39. fig. 4. and described page
43. Lon. 24. 29. Lat. 51. 42. Bouchain, a Town in the Province of Hainault,
under the French; mentioned page 28. fig. 13. Lon. 22. 33. Lat. 50. 23.
Bovillon. See Buillon. Bovines, or Bovigne, a Town in the Province of Namur;
mentioned page 34. fig. 3. and described page 37. Lon. 24. 11. Lat. 50. 19.
Bourbourg, a Town in the Province of Flanders, under the French, not here
mentioned, Lon. 21. 22. Lat. 51. 4. BRABANT, one of the 10 Provinces, under the
Spaniards and Hollanders, described page 38. Brain le Comte, a Town in the
Province of Hainault, under the Spaniards, mentioned page 27. fig. 5. Lon. 23.
28. Lat. 50. 44. Breda, a Town in the Province of Brabant, under the
Hollanders; mentioned page 39. fig. 5. Lon. 23. 58. Lat. 51. 37. Brey, a Town
in the Bishopric of Liege, under that Bishop; mentioned page 54. fig. 3. Lon.
24. 55. Lat. 51. 10. Bruges, or Brugge, a Town in the Province of Flanders,
under the Spaniards; mentioned page 8. fig. 7. and described page 10. Lon. 22.
26. Lat. 51. 57. Brussels, or Bruxels, the Metropolis of the Province of
Brabant, under the Spaniards; mentioned page 40. fig. 16. and described page
40. Lon. 23. 36. Lat. 50. 54. Buillon, or Bovillon, a Town in the Province of
Luxemburg, subject to the French; mentioned page 65. Lon. 24. 32. Lat. 49. 50.
C.
CAlais, a Town in the Province of Picardy in France; described Page the last,
Lon. 21. 4. Lat. 51. 2. Cambray, or Camerick, the Metropolis of the
Archbishopric of Cambray; subject to the French; mentioned Page 73. Fig. 1.
described likewise, Lon. 22. 23. Lat. 50. 14. Canche, a River in the Province
of Artois, mentioned Page 22. Cassel, a Town in the Province of Flanders, under
the French; mentioned Page 9. Fig. 22. Lon. 21. 39. Lat. 50. 57. Charlemont, a
Town in the Province of Namur, under the Spaniards; mentioned Page 34. Fig. 4.
described Page 36. Lon. 24. 10. Lat. 50. 12. Charleroy, another Town in the
same Province, under the Spaniards; mentioned Page 34. Fig. 1. described Page
35. Lon. 23. 46. Lat. 50. 28. Chateau Cambreses, a Town and Castle in the
Archbishopric of Cambray, under the French; mentioned Page 73. Fig. 3. Lon.
22. 23. Lat. 50. 14. Chimay, a Town in the Province of Hainault, under the
French; mentioned page 28. fig. 22. Lon. 23. 19. Lat. 50. 7. Cheiney, a Town in
the Bishopric of Liege, subject to that Bishop; mentioned page 54. fig. 14.
Lon. 24. 26. Lat. 50. 23. Conde, a Town in the Province of Hainault, subject to
the French; mentioned page 28. fig. 11. Lon. 22. 52. Lat. 50. 27. Cortryck. See
Courtray. Courtray, or Cortrick, a Town in the Province of Flanders, under the
Spaniards; mentioned page 8. fig. 17. described page 20. Lon. 22. 28. Lat. 50.
53. Crevecoer, a Town in the Archbishopric of Cambray, under the French;
mentioned page 73. fig. 2. Lon. 22. 23. Lat. 50. 9.
D.
DAlem, a Town in the Province of Limburg, under the Hollanders; mentioned page
60. fig. 4. Lon. 25. 8. Lat. 50. 46. Dampvillers, a Town in the Province of
Luxemburg, under the French; mentioned page 65. fig. 14. Lon. 24. 42. Lat. 49.
24. Demer, a River in the Provinces of Liege and Brabant; mentioned p. 38.
Dender, a River in the Provinces of Flanders and Hainault; mentioned page 7.
Dendermond, or Tenremond, a Town in the Province of Flanders, subject to the
Spaniards; mentioned page 8. fig. 9. 12. Lon. 23. 21. Lat. 51. 6. Dias, a River
in the Province of Brabant, mentioned page 39. Die, a Town in the Province of
Brabant, under the Spaniards; mentioned page 39. fig. 10. Lon. 24. 22. Lat. 51.
3. Dietkirk, a Town in the Province of Luxemburg, subject to the French;
mentioned page 64. fig. 4. Lon. 25. 33. Lat. 49. 58. Dinant, a Town in the
Bishopric of Liege, under the French; mentioned page 55. fig. 15. described
page 58. Lon. 24. 12. Lat. 50. 16. Dixmude, or Dixmuyde, a Town in the Province
of Flanders, under the Spaniards; mentioned page 8. fig. 10. described page 21.
Lon. 22. 8. Lat. 51 6. Dommel, a River in the Province of Brabant, mentioned
page 38. Donquerque, or Duynskirk. See Dunkirk. Dornick, or Doornick. See
Tournay. Doway, or Dovay, a Town in the Province of Flanders, under the French;
mentioned page 9. fig. 27. described page 12. Lon. 22. 11. Lat. 50. 24.
Dunkirk, Donquerque, or Duynskirk, a Town in the Province of Flanders, under
the French; mentioned page 8. fig. 19. described page 13. Lon. 21. 30. Lat. 51.
6. Durbuy, a Town in the Province of Luxemburg, under the French; mentioned
page 64. fig. 1. Lon. 24. 56. Lat. 50. 24. Duynskirk, or Donquerque. See
Dunkirk. Dyle, a River in the Province of Brabant, mentioned page 39.
E.
EIndoven. See Eyndoven. Enghien, a Town in the Province of Hainault, belonging
to the Spaniards; mentioned page 27. fig. 3. Lon. 23. 18. Lat. 50. 46. Escaut.
See Scheld. Esche, a Town in the Province of Luxemburg, under the French;
mentioned page 64. fig. 9. Lon. 25. 25. Lat. 49. 32. Escluse, or Sluice. See
Sluys. E'Evesque. See Fontane. Eyndoven, or Eindoven, a Town in the Province of
Brabant, under the Hollanders; mentioned page 39. fig. 3. Lon. 24. 34. Lat. 51.
30.
F.
FAuquement. See Valkenburg. FLANDERS, or Vlandren, one of the ten Provinces,
under the Spaniards, French and Hollanders. Feurne, a Town in the Province of
Flanders, under the French, not here mentioned, Lon. 21. 50. Lat. 51. 9.
Flerus, a Village in the Province of Namur; mentioned page 34. Lon. 23. 55.
Lat. 50. 32. Florennes, a Town in the Bishopric of Liege, under the French;
mentioned page 55. Fig. 16. Lon. 24. 00. Lat. 50. 10. Fontane, or l'Evesque, a
Town in the Province of Hainault, under the Spaniards; mentioned page 28. fig.
8. Lon. 23. 41. Lat. 50. 30.
G.
GAnd, Gaunt, or Gent. See Ghent. Geersberg, Gerardmont, or Gramont, a Town in
the Province of Flanders; under the Spaniards; mentioned page 8. fig. 15. Lon.
23. 10. Lat. 50. 53. Geldenaken. See Judoigne. GELDERLAND, that part of the
Province of Gelderland that is under the Spaniards; described page 69. Gelders,
the Metropolis of this part of Gelderland; described page 70. Lon. 25. 45. Lat.
51. 32. Gemblours, a Town in the Province of Brabant, under the Spaniards;
mentioned page 40. fig. 18. Lon. 24. 00. Lat. 50. 37. Genap, a Town in the
Province of Brabant, under the Spaniards, not here mentioned, Lon. 23. 42. Lat.
50. 42. Gent, Gand, or Gaunt. See Ghent. Gerardmont, or Gramont. See Geersberg.
Geul, a River in the Province of Lemburg, described page 59. Ghent, Gand,
Gaunt, or Gent, the Metropolis of the Province of Flanders, under the
Spaniards; mentioned page 8. fig. 11. described page 9. Lon. 22. 58. Lat. 51.
7. Gramont, or Gerardmont. See Geersberg. Grave, a Town in the Province of
Brabant, under the Hollanders; mentioned page 39. fig. 1. Lon. 25. 00. Lat. 50.
28. Graveling, or Greveling, a Town in the Province of Flanders, subject to the
French; mentioned page 9. described page 16. Lon. 21. 18. Lat. 51. 4.
H.
HAINAVT, or Henegow, one of the ten Provinces under the French and Spaniards,
described, page 26. Haaesne, a River in the Province of Hainault, mentioned
page 27. Halle, a Town in the Province of Hainault, under the Spaniards,
mentioned, page 27. Fig. 4. Long. 23. 32. Lat. 50. 48. Hamont, a Town in the
Bishopric of Liege, under that Bishop, mentioned page, 54. fig. 1. Long. 24.
50. Lat. 51. 18. Hannuye, a Town in the Province of Brabant, under the
Spaniards, mentioned page 40. fig. 20. Long. 24, 25. Lat. 50. 44. Helmont, a
Town in the Province of Brabant, under the Hollanders, mentioned page 39. fig.
2. Long. 24. 42. Lat. 51. 32. Henegor, see Hainault. Hereutals, a Town under
the Province of Brabant, under the Spaniards, mentioned, page 39. fig. 7. Lon.
24. 4. Lat. 51. 15. St. Hertogen Bosoh, Shertogen Bosch, or Bolduc; see
Boisliduc. Herk, a Town in the Bishopric of Liege, under that Bishopric,
mentioned page 54. fig. 6. Lon. 24. 34. Lat. 50. 56. Heldin, or Hesdinfort, a
Town in the Province of Artois, under the French, mentioned page 23. fig. 8.
described page 26. Lon. 21. 20. Lat. 50. 27. Hoey, a Town in the Bishopric of
Liege, under that Bishopric, mentioned page 54. figur. 13. Lon. 24. 35. Lon.
50. 37. Saint Hubart, a Town in the Province Luxemburg, under the French,
mentioned page 65. Lon. 24. 51. Lat. 50. 8. Hulst, a Town in the Province of
Flanders, under the Hollanders, mentioned page 8. fig. 1. Lon. 23. 14. Lat. 51.
20.
I.
JEcher, a River in the Bishopric of Liege, described p. 54. Ipres, see Ypres.
Isendick, see Ysendick. L'Isle, Rissel, or Ryssel, see Lille. Judoigne, a Town
in the Province of Brabant, under the Spaniards, mentioned page 40. figur. 19.
Lon. 24. 16. Lat. 50. 46. Ivoix. See Yvoix.
L.
LAudrecies, or Landrechies, a Town in the Province of Hainault, under the
French, mentioned page 28. fig. 19. Lon. 23. 2. Lat. 50. 9. Leeuwe, a Town in
the Province of Brabant, under the Spaniards, mentioned page 39. fig. 14. Lon.
24. 26. Lat. 50. 53. Lens, a Town in the Province of Artois, under the French,
mentioned peg. 23. figur. 9. Lon. 21. 57. Lat. 50. 28. Lessines, a Town in the
Province of Hainault, under the Spaniards, mentioned page 27. fig. 1. Long. 23.
8. Lat. 50. 50. Leuwe, see Leeuwe. Ley, see Lys. Bishopric of LIEGE, one of
the ten Provinces, under its own Bishop and the French, described page 53.
Liege, or Luyche, an University and Bishopric, the Metropolis of the Province
under its own Bishop; mentioned page 54. figur. 12. described page 55. Long.
25. 00. Lat. 50. 43. Liere, a Town in the Province of Brabant, under the
Spaniard; mentioned page 39. fig. 8. Lon, 23. 42. Lat. 51. 11. Liesses, see
Lyesses. Little, l' Isse, Rissel, or Ryssel, a Town in the Province of Flanders
under the French; mentioned p. 9. fig. 24. described page 17. Lon. 22. 10. Lat.
50. 43. LIMBURG, one of the ten Provinces, under the Hollanders and Spaniards,
described page 59. Limburg, the Metropolis of this Province, under the
Spaniards; mentioned page 60. fig. 5. described page 61. Lon. 25. 27. Lat. 50.
37. Liques, a Town in the Province of Artois, under the French; mentioned page
23. fig. 1. Lon. 21. 12. Lat. 50. 53. Lovain, Loeven, or Louvain, a Town in the
Province of Brabant, an University under the Spaniards; mentioned page 39. fig.
14. described page 41. Lon. 23. 58. Lat. 50. 57. LUXEMBURG, one of the ten
Provinces, under the French, described page 63. Luxemburg, or Lutzenburg, the
Metropolis of this Province, mentioned page 64. fig 6. described page 66. Lon.
25, 33. Lat. 49. 42. Luyck, or Luick. See Liege. Lyesses, a Town in Hainault,
subject to the French; mentioned page 28. fig. 21. Lon. 23. 17. Lat. 50. 8.
Lys, or Ley, a River in the Provinces of Artois and Flanders, described page 2.
M.
MAes. See Meuse. Maeseck, or Maeseych, a Town in the Bishopric of Liege,
under that Bishop; mentioned page 54. fig. 4. Lon. 25. 18. Lat. 51. 8.
Maestricht, or Mastricht, a Town in the Bishopric of Liege, under the
Hollanders; mentioned page 54. fig. 11. described page 50. Lon. 25. 00. Lat.
50. 53. Malines. See Mechlin. Mardick, a Fort, in the Province of Flanders,
nigh Dunkirk, under the French, not here mentioned, Lon. 21. 24. Lat, 51. 6.
Marienburg, a Town in the Province of Hainault, under the French; mentioned
page 28. fig. 23. described page 31. Lon. 23. 44. Lat. 50. 10. MARQUISATE of
the Holy Empire, one of the ten Provinces in Brabant, under the Spaniards;
described page 47. Maseyck. See Maeseyck. Masiers, a Town in the Province of
Luxemburg, under the French; mentioned page 65. fig. 15. Lon. 25. 38. Lat. 49.
17. Mastricht. See Maestricht. Maubeuge, a Town in the Province of Hainault,
subject to the French; mentioned page 28. fig. 16. Lon. 23. 16. Lat. 50. 22.
MECHLIN, one of the ten Provinces under the Spaniards in Brabant; described
page 50. Mechlin, or Malines, the Metropolis of this Province; described page
51. Lon. 23. 47. Lat. 51. 6. Meuse, or Maes, a River in the Province of Namur,
Liege, and Gelderland; described page 2. and in other places. Mons, Monts, or
Bergen, the Metropolis of the Province of Hainault, under the French; mentioned
page 28. fig. 10. described page 29. Lon. 23. 12. Lat. 50. 28. Montmedy, a Town
in the Province of Luxemburg, under the French; mentioned page 65. fig. 12.
described page 68. Lon. 24. 40. Lat. 49. 37. Moselle, a River part in
Luxemburg, mentioned page 64.
N.
NAMVR, one of the Ten Provinces under of the Spaniards; mentioned page 32.
Nemur, the Metropolis of this Province; described page 34. Lon. 24. 12. Lat.
50. 32. Newport, See Nieuport. Nienove, a Town in the Province of Franders,
under the Spaniards; mentioned page 8. fig. 14. Lon. 23. 14. Lat. 50. 56. Nier,
a River in the Province of Gelderland; mentioned page 69. Nieuport, or Newport,
a Town in the Province of Flanders, under the Spaniards; mentioned page 8. fig.
9. described page 15. Ninove, See Nienove. Nivelle, a Town in the Province of
Brabant, under the Spaniards; mentioned page 40. fig. 17. Lon. 23* 37. Lat. 50.
45.
O.
St. Omers, or St. Omer, a Town in the Province of Artois, under the French;
mentioned page 23. fig. 2. described page 24. Lon. 21. 22. Lat. 50. 52.
Orchies, or Orties, a Town in the Province of Flanders, under the French; not
here mentioned, Lon. 22. 26. Lat. 50. 34. Ostend, a Town in the Province of
Flanders, under the Spaniards; mentioned page 8. fig. 8. described page 14.
Lon. 22. 8. Lat. 51. 18. Oudenard, a Town in the Province of Flanders, under
the Spaniards; mentioned page 8. fig. 16. described page 20. Lon. 22. 48. Lat.
50. 54. Ourt, a River in the Bishopric of Liege, described page 64.
P.
PAs, a Town in the Province of Artois, under the French; mentioned page 23.
fig. 11. Lon. 21. 42. Lat. 50. 10. Peer. See Beer. Pernes, a Town in the
Province of Artois; under the French; mentioned page 23. fig. 7. Lon. 21. 33.
Lat. 50. 34. Philipville, a Town in the Province of Hainault, under the French;
mentioned page 28. fig. 24. described page 32. Lon. 23. 52. Lat. 50. 14.
Q.
QVesnoy, a Town in the Province of Hainault, subject to the French. mentioned
page 28. fig. 14. Lon. 22. 53. Lat. 50. 18.
R.
REmborch, a Town in the Province of Limburg, under the Hollanders; mentioned
page 60. fig. 1. Lon. 25. 32. Lat. 50. 57. Rentby, a Town in the Province of
Artois, under the French; mentioned page 23. fig. 3. Lon. 21. 10. Lat. 50. 43.
La Reux. See Roecles. Rissel, or Ryssel. See Lille. Rode Maacheran, a Town in
the Province of Luxemburg, subject to the French; mentioned page 64. fig. 7.
Lon. 25. 38. Lat 49. 34. Roecles, or la Reux, a Town in the Province of
Hainault, under the Spaniards; mentioned page 27. fig. 7. Lon. 23. 27. Lat. 50.
37. Roermond. See Ruermond. Rolduc, a Town in the Province of Limburg, under
the Hollanders; mentioned page 60. fig. 2. Lon. 25. 34. Lat. 50. 54. Ruermond,
or Roermond, a Town in the Province of Gelderland, under the Spaniards;
mentioned page 70. fig. 3. described page 71. Lon. 25. 22. Lat. 51. 16. Ryssel,
or Rissel. See Lille.
S.
SAmbre, a Riven in the Provinces of Cambray, Hainault, and Namur; described
page 27. and other places. Sas van Ghent, a Town in the Province of Flanders,
under the Hollanders; mentioned page 8. fig. 3. Lon. 23. 00. Lat. 51. 20.
Scharp, a River in the Provinces of Flanders and Artois, described page 7.
Scheld, or Escaut, a River in the Provinces of Cambray, Hainault, and Flanders;
described page 2. and 7. Semoy, a River in the Province of Luxemburg; described
page 64. Selle, a River in the Provinces of Cambray and Hainault; described
page 72. Senne, a River in Brabant and Mechlin; described page 39.
Shertergenbosch, St. Hertogen Bosch, or Bolduc. See Boisleduc. Sichen, a Town
in the Province of Brabant, under the Spaniards; mentioned page 39. fig. 9.
Lon. 24. 15. Lat. 51. 2. Sluys, or Sluice, a Town in the Province of Flanders,
under the Hollanders; mentioned page 8. fig. 6. described page 15. Lon. 22. 34.
Lat. 51. 24. Soignes, a Town in the Province of Hainault, under the Spaniards;
mentioned page 27. fig. 6. Lon. 23. 28. Lat. 50. 42. Stenay, or Astenay, a Town
in the Province of Luxemburg, under the French; mentioned page 65. fig. 13.
Lon. 24. 32. Lat. 49. 34. Stochem, a Town in the Bishopric of Liege, under
that Bishop; mentioned page 54. fig. 5. Lon. 25. 11. Lat. 51. 6.
T.
TEnremond. See Dendermond. Thionville, a Town in the Province of Luxemburg,
under the French; mentioned page 64. fig. 8. described page 67. Lon. 25. 33.
Lat. 49. 29. Tienen, or Tilmont, a Town in the Province of Flanders, under the
Spaniards, mentioned page 39. fig. 13. Lon. 24. 18. Lat. 50. 52. Tongeren, a
Town in the Bishopric of Liege, under that Bishop; mentioned page 54. fig. 9.
Lon. 24. 39. Lat. 50. 53. Tournay, or Dornick, a Town in the Province of
Flanders, under the French, mentioned page 9. fig. 25. described page 19. Lon.
22. 36. Lat. 50. 43. St. Truyen, a Town in the Bishopric of Liege, under that
Bishop; mentioned page 54. fig. 8. Lon* 24. 31. Lat. 50. 52.
V.
VAenciennes, or Valenchienne; a Town in the Province of Hainault, under the
French; mentioned page 28. fig. 12. described page 30. Lon. 22. 44. Lat. 50.
24. Ualencourt. See Walcourt. Ualkenburg, or Fauquemont, a Town in the Province
of Limburg, under the Hollanders; mentioned page 60. fig. 3. described page 62.
Lon* 25. 18. Lat. 50. 53. St. Venant, a Town in the Province of Artois, under
the French; mentioned page 23. fig. 5. Lon. 21. 39. Lat. 50. 44. Venlo, a Town
in the Province of Gelderland, under the Spaniards; mentioned page 70. sig. 2.
Lon. 25. 24. Lat. 51. 27. Vianden, a Town in the Province of Luxemburg, under
the French; mentioned page 64. fig. 3. Lon. 25. 38. Lat. 50. 3. Vilvorden, a
Town in the Province of Brabant, under the Spaniards; mentioned page 40. fig.
15. Lon. 23. 39. Lat. 51. 00. Vinoxberge. See Winoxberge. Vlandren. See
Flanders. Virton, a Town in the Province of Luxemburg, under the French;
mentioned page 64. fig. 10. Lon. 25. 5. Lat. 49. 38.
W.
WA^court, or Valencourt, a Town in the Bishopric of Liege; subject to the
French; mentioned page 55. fig. 17. Lon. 23. 42. Lat. 50. 18. Wesdret, a River
in the Provinces of Limburg and Liege, described page 54. Wynoxberge, or
Vinoxberge, a Town in the Province of Flanders, under the French; mentioned
page 9. fig. 21. Lon. 21. 37. Lat. 51. 2.
Y.
YPres, Ypren, or Ipres, a Town in the Province of Flanders, under the French;
mentioned page 8. fig. 18. described page 18. Lon. 22. 3. Lat. 50. 57.
Ysendick, or Isendick, a Town in the Province of Flanders, under the
Hollanders; mentioned page 8. fig. 4. Lon. 22. 42. Lat. 51. 24. Yvoix, or
Ivoix, a Town in the Province of Luxemburg, under the French; mentioned page
64. fig. 10. Lon. 24. 32. Lat. 49. 43.
FINIS.
Books lately Printed, and Sold by Tho. Salusbury, at the Sign of the Temple,
near Temple Bar in Fleetstreet.
AN Exact Description of Ireland: Chorographically Surveying all its Provinces
and Counties after a more Accurate, Plain, and Easy Manner than any before
done in this kind. Showing the Exact State of that Kingdom, and all the
Principal Things that are necessary to be krown. And Five Maps relating
thereto, with a Geographical Dictionary for Ireland. Very Useful for the Right
Understanding the present Affairs of that Kingdom. Done according to the latest
Surveys, and agreeing with all the New Maps. By Laurence Eachard of
Christ-College in Cambridge. Twelves. Price 1 s. 6 d. Wisdom's Dictates: Or,
Rules Physical and Moral, for preserving the Health of the Body, and the Peace
of the Mind, fit to be regarded and practiced by all that would enjoy the
Blessings of the present World. To which is added, a Bill of Fare of 75 Noble
Dishes of Excellent Food, far exceeding those made of Fish or Flesh. By Tho.
Tryon, Student in Physic. Twelves. Price 1 s. Arithmetical Rules, digested and
contracted for the Help and Benefit of Memory; very Necessary and Useful, as
well for Gentlemen and Tradesmen, as for Youth and Apprentices, in Mercantile
Affairs; With Examples Illustrated upon the Rules. By Arthur Lead-better,
Schoolmaster, in Bury St. Edmonds in Suffolk. Twelves. Price 1 s. A New Art of
Making Wines, Brandy, and other Spirits, Compliant to the late Act of
Parliament, concerning Distillation. Illustrated by the Doctrine of
Fermentation; by various Examples on the Growths and Products of this Island.
Recommended to all that desire to improve and advance those Liquors which are
made from the English Growths. By W. Y. Spagirick Physician in both Medicines,
and Philosopher by Fire. Twelves. Price 1 s. 6 d. A New Art of Brewing, Beer,
Ale, and other Sorts of Liquors; So as to render them more Healthful to the
Body, and Agreeable to Nature; and to keep them longer from Souring, with less
Trouble and Charge than generally Practiced, which will be a means to prevent
those Torturing Distempers of the Stone, Gravel, Gout, and Dropsy. To which is
added, The Art of Making Malt, etc. And Several Useful and Profitable Things
relating to Country Affairs. Recommended to all Brewers, Gentlemen, and others,
that Brew their own Drink. The Third Edition, with many large Additions never
before Printed. By Tho. Tryon, Student in Physic. Price 1 s. The Safety of
France to Monsieur the Dauphin; or the Secret History of the French King;
proving to his Son, That there is no other way to secure France from
approaching Ruin, but by Deposing his Father for a Tyrant and Destroyer of his
People. Done into English from the Second Edition of the French Original
Printed in Holland. The Second Edition. Twelves. Price 1 s. Pythagoras* His
Mystic Philosophy Revived; Or, the Mystery of Dreams unfolded; wherein the
Causes, Natures, and Uses, of Nocturnal Representations, and the Communications
both of Good and Evil Angles, and also departed Souls, to Mankind, are
Theosophically unfolded; that is, according to the Word of GOD, and the Harmony
of Created Beings. To which is added, a Discourse of the Causes, Natures, and
Cure of Frenzy, Madness, or Distraction. By Tho. Tryon, Student in Physic,
and Author of The Way to long Life, Health, and Happiness. Octavo. Price 1 s. 6
d. Remarks upon the Dream of the late Abdicated Queen of England, and upon that
of Madam the Duchess of La Valiere, late Mistress to the French King, and now
Nun of the Order of Barefooted Carmelites at Paris. By Monsieur Gurue's Author
of the Harmony of Prophesies, etc. Being the Paper the Publisher whereof was
Condemned last Month to be Broken alive upon the Wheel, by the Parliament of
Roan. Done from the French Copy Printed at Amsterdam. Quarto. Price 6 d. The
Bragadocio: Or, The Bawd turned Puritan: A New Comedy. By a Person of Quality.
Quarto. Price 1 s. A Collection of many Wonderful Prophecies, relating to the
English Nation, etc. Quarto. Price 6 d. The History of the late Great
Revolution in England and Scotland: With the Causes and Means by which it was
Accomplished. Together with a particular Account of the Extraordinary
Occurrences which happened thereupon. As likewise the Settlement of both the
Kingdoms under Their most Serone Majesty's King William and Queen Mary. Price 5
s. A Ireatise of Civil Bonds and Contracts, with Cautions against Suretiship By
R. A. Gent. Price 1 s. 6 d. The Duke of Savoy's Dominions most accurately
Described, with some adjacent Parts; Showing the Bounds, Dimensions, Rivers,
Fertility* Riches, Commodities, Strength, Revenues, Religions there practiced,
Languages there Spoke, Archbishops, Bishoprics and Universities: Also
describing the Provinces, in which are shown their Bounds, Dimensions. Qualit
and Fertility, Situation of the Inferior. Part or Provinces, in respect of
East, West, North and South; As likewise the Situation of all the Principal
Towns, showing their Distances from each other, the Rivers they stand on, and
who they are Subject to, with a large Description of some of the Chief.
Extraordinary necessary for the right understanding of these Wars, the like
being never before this time Publissed. Price 3 d. (...): A Law-Dictionary,
Interpreting such Difficult and Obscure Words and Terms, as are found either in
our Common or Statute, Ancient or Modern Laws. With References to the several
Statutes, Records, Registers, Law Books, Charters, Ancient Deeds, and
Manuscripts, wherein the Words are used: And Etymologies where they properly
Occur. The Second Edition, with some Corrections, and the Addition of above 600
Words. By Tho. Blount, late of the Inner Temple, Esquire Price 10 s.

