An EXACT DESCRIPTION OF IRELAND: Chorographically Surveying all its Provinces
and Counties After a more Accurate, Plain, Easy, and Particular Manner than
any before done in this kind. Showing the Exact STATE of that Kingdom, and all
the Principal Things that are Necessary to be known. And 5 Maps relating
thereto. With an INDEX of all the Provinces, Counties, Baronies, Cities, Towns,
Forts, Castles, Rivers, Lakes, Havens, Bays, Mountains, Promontories, etc. In
such a manner as may serve for a Geographical DICTIONARY for IRELAND. Very
Useful for the Right Understanding the p^esent Affairs of that Kingdom. Done
according to the latest Surveys, and agreeing with all the New MAPS. By
LAURENCE EACHARD of Christ-College in Cambridge.

London: Printed for Tho. Salusbury at the Sign of the Temple near T^mple-Bar
in Fleetstreet. 1691.

THE Preface.
IRELAND is at present a Place of very Considerable Action, and of so nigh
Concern to this Nation, that I thought a short Description of it could not be
very unacceptable in so Curious an Age, though offered by One who has so lately
troubl^d the Public with something of this Nature. Since it is usual for
Authors to give some Account of their Works in their Preface, I shall do so of
this; and that as briefly as I can.

In making of it, I have observed as good a Method as I could, and have been
also as particular, not leaving out any thing that ought to be known, or was
necessary to make it Complete; not only observing those Things that were purely
Chorographical and Modern, but also such as were Historical and Ancient.

In the Provinces and Counties, I have also been very Methodical, agreeing with
each other (even to the equal Number of Paragraphs) so exactly, that what is in
one, may be found in all; and have given them all the true Dimensions according
to the latest Survey.

The Towns I have Describ^d as largely as I could from any A^thor I could
procure, (though perhaps not so largely as some may expect) m^ntioning m^re than
I can find in any other Book, always beginning with the most Northern Town in
the County, (as nigh as I could) and going on in such Order, (showing their
Distances all the way in English M^les, the 60th part of a Degree) as may be
most easily found in the Maps. I have shown the Distance of the chief Town in
each County from Dublin, the chief of the Kingdom.

The Index I am sure must be of good use to all such as desire to understand
the History and Affairs of this Country: And for the speed^er finding of those
Places there mentioned, I have set the Longitude and Latitude of all the Towns
and Castles, (according to P. Lea's and H. Moll's Map.) That this Index might
be of greater and more general Use, I have named many more Places than are in
the Book; though perhaps there be not enough to satisfy every One's Curiosity,
yet I have left out none that deserved any thing of Observation.

I must desire the Reader to take Notice, That I have mentioned very little of
these late Wars, (those no ways belonging to my Design) but have (as I have
hinted elsewhere) taken care as much as I could, to rep^esent all things as
they were (or ought to have been) before these Troubles began: But howsoever, I
have taken particular Notice of all such Places as have been any thing Notable
in these Times; and have often given some small Hints for Distinction sake.

Perhaps it may also be expected, that I should give a List of the Governors,
and several Officers, with an Account of the Number, Condition, etc. of the
Soldiers, with other Things concerning the Present State of this Kingdom. But
these Things, by reason of the many Alterations every Day, are extremely
difficult to do, and are quite from my Design; therefore I shall leave 'em to
such as have more Convenience and better Intelligence than my self; reckoning
(notwithstanding their Omission) that this Book fully answers the Title Page.

By reason of the little time I have had to write this Book, possibly I may
have committed some small Faults, (perhaps in the exact Number of the Parishes,
Boroughs, Castles, etc. which were very difficult to get) if there be any such,
I hope the Impartial Reader will not take Notice of them to my Disadvantage. If
there be found any fault in the Description of the Wild Irish, it must be
attributed to my Authors, who were not altogether so Modern as I could have
wished. The Business of these Times, and the present want of such a
Description, has made me somewhat more hasty than I would have been: But
however, I have endeavored to do every thing as well and exact as the time
would permit.

THe Five Maps herein contained, are one General Map of the whole Kingdom,
divided into Provinces; the other Four are the Provinces divided into Counties.

BOOKS lately Printed for, and sold by Tho. Salusbury at the Sign of the Temple
in Fleetstreet, viz.
The History of the late great Revolution in England and Scotland, with the
Causes an^ Means by which it was Accomplished. Together with a particular
Account of the Extraordinary Occurrences which happened thereupon. As likewise
the Settlement of both the Kingdoms under their most Serene Majesty's King
William and Que^n Mary. Octavo. Price 5 s.

Wisdom's Dictates: Or, Rules Physical and Moral, for preserving the Health of
the Body, and the Peace of the Mind: Fit to be regarded and practiced by all
that would enjoy the Blessings of the present and future World. To which is
added, A Bill of Fare of seventy five Noble Dishes of Food, far exceeding those
made of Fish or Flesh. By Tho. Tryon, Student in Physic. Price 1 s.

Arithmetical Rules, digested and contracted for the Help and Benefit of
Memory; very necessary and useful, as well for Gentlemen and Tradesmen, as for
Youth and Apprentices, in Mercantile Affairs. With Examples Illustrated upon
the Rules. By Arthur Leadbetter, Schoolmaster in the Whiting-street in Bury St.
Edmonds in Suffolk. Price 1 s.

Bragadocia, a Comedy. Price 1 S.

A TABLE Of the Provinces and Counties of Ireland.
ANtrim -- Page 43 Armagh -- 52 Catherlagh -- 88 Cavan -- 50 Connaught -- 58
Cork -- 101 Down -- 54 Dublin -- 80 Dunnagal -- 46 East-Meath -- 77 Fermanagh
-- 49 Gallway -- 67 Kerry -- 100 Kildare -- 83 Kilkenny -- 86 K^ngs-County --
84 Leinster -- 70 Letrim -- Page 62 Limrick -- 99 Londonderry -- 46 Longford --
74 Louth -- 55 Mayo -- 64 Monoghan -- 51 Munster -- 91 Queens-County -- 85
Roscommon -- 66 Slego -- 63 Tipperary -- 99 Thomond -- 69 Tyrone -- 41 Ulster
-- 38 Waterford -- 97 West-Meath -- 77 Wexford -- 89 Wicklow -- 81
A General Mapp of the Kingdom of IRELAND. By Francis Lamb.
map of Ireland

A Chorographical Description OF IRELAND, etc.
Of IRELAND in General. CHAP. I.
^f its Name, Bounds, Situation, Clime, Form, Dimensions, Distances, Air, Soil,
Products, Commodities, Rivers, Lakes, Bays, Mountains, Capes, etc.

IRELAND is called by the Latins, Name.
Hibernia; by Orpheus, Aristotle, Strabo, Stephanus and Claudian, Ierna; by
Pomponius Me^ Iuvenal and Solinus, Iuverna; by Pto^omy, Iuernia, and sometimes
Britannia Minor; by Martian of Heraclia, Ioyepnia; by Diodorus Siculus, Irim;
by Eusta^hus, Oyernia or Overnia, and Vernia; by some called Bernia; Plutarch
called it by the Name of Ogygia. The Irish Bards or Poets have mentioned the
Names of Tivolas, Totdanan, and Banno, as the most ancient Names. In later
times it went by the Name of Scotia, and Scotia Min^r, to distinguish it from
the other Scotland. It is now called by the Inhabitants Eryn, and sometimes
Gwydhill; by the Welsh, Yverdon and Ywerdhou; by the Germans, Irlandi; by the
Italians, Irlanda^; and by the French, Irlande.

It is environed on all sides with the Ocean; bounded on the East with a Bounds.
violent and unruly Sea, called the Irish Sea, or St. George's Channel, which
separates it from England and Wales, and on the North-East from Scotland; on
the West with that vast Ocean called the Western or Atlantic Ocean, which
parts it from the main Continent of America; on the North with the Northern
Ocean, called the Ducalidonian Ocean; and on the South and South-West with that
which is called the Vergirian Ocean.

If we consider it in respect of Heavenly Situation.
Bodies, it is situated between the 5th Degree and 58th Minute, and the 10th
Degree and 45th Minute of Longitude that is from London; but reckoning from
Tenneriffe, it lies between the 8th and the 12th Degree, and 55 Minutes of
Longitude, equal with the greatest part of Gallicia and Asturia in Spain: And
between the 51st Degree and 15th Minute, and the 55th Degree and 15th Minute of
Northern Latitude, equal with Wales, and the greatest part of England.

By this account we may see that it lies wholly under the Ninth and Clim.
Tenth Climes, with a little of the Eighth; so that the longest Day on the most
Southern parts is 16 Hours, and about 25 Minutes, and the longest Day on the
most Northern parts is 17 Hours, and about 12 Minutes, that is almost an Hour
longer. It lies in one of the temperate Zones toward the Northern parts of it,
about five Degrees from the middle; so that for its Situation it cannot be very
intemperate either in Summer or Winter.

As for the Form and Shape of this Form.
Island, it is oblong (nigh as long again as broad) somewhat (though but little
indeed) resembling an Egg, to which form many have likened it to. Speed
compares it rather to the shape of the Fore-Leg of a Bear, which is as
difficult to imagine as the other; and if we consider all the variety of
Windings and Turnings, scarce any thing can be imagined to have a more
irregular Form.

It is for bigness an Island of the third Rank, reckoned to be about Dimentions.
half as big as England: In length, from Fairhead, the Northern Point of Antrim
in Ulster, to Missen-Head, the South Point of Cork in Munster, about 285 Miles:
In breadth, in the widest place, that is, from the East-parts of Down in
Ulster, to the West-parts of Mayo in Connaught, 160 Miles: From the East of
Wexford in Leinster, to the West of Kerry in Munster, 152 Miles: But in the
middle, from the East of Dublin, to the West of Galloway, 146 Miles. The whole
Circuit (reckoning all the Windings and Turnings) is above 1400 Miles.

It lies distant from Scotland, North-East Distances.
and South-West, (from Cape Red-boy in Antrim, to the South-parts of Cantire)
15 Miles: From England, East and West, (from the East-parts of Down, to St.
Bees-Head in Cumberland) 84 Miles: From Wales East and West, (from the
East-parts of Wexford to St. David's) 45 Miles: From France, North-West and
South-East, 220 Miles: From Spain, North and South, 440 Miles: And from
New-France the nighest part of America, (from which it lies exactly West) about
1440 Miles.

The Air is most mild and temperate in respect of Hot and Cold; so Air.
that it is cooler in Summer and warmer in Winter than in England, but nothing
so clear and subtle as here, therefore not so good in Summer for ripening of
Corn and Fruits: In the Winter it is more subject to Wind, Clouds and Rain,
than Frost and Snow. It is so excessive moist, that many there are sore
troubled with Loosenesses and Rheumes, more especially Strangers, who seldom
escape those Distempers; for the staying of which they have a Liquor called
Usque-bah, or an Aqua: Vitae, which is esteemed of as stronger and better than
ours.

As for its Soil, it is of it self abundantly Soil.
fruitful, but naturally rather fitter for Grass and Pasturage. In some places
the rankness of the Soil is so great, the Grass so long, and withal so sweet,
that the Cattle in those places would soon graze to a surfeit, if they were not
sometimes hindered. This Country, in many places, is encumbered with vast Bogs,
and unwholesome Marshes, being full of great Lakes and Sands, and is also
overgrown with many large Woods: But of late Years these Inconveniences have
been very much corrected by drying and draining up many of the Marshes, and by
cutting down several of the Woods.

It produces a vast number of goodly Flocks of Sheep, which they share Products.
twice a year. Here are likewise excellent good Horses, (which we call Hobies)
which have not the same pace with others, but a soft and round Amble, setting
one Leg before another very finely. As for Cattle, here are infinite numbers,
being indeed the principal Wealth of the Inhabitants; (it is said, they will
give no Milk if their Calves be not by them, or their Skins stuffed with Straw
or Hay.) For Bees, they have such Numbers, that they are found not only in
Hives, but also in the Bodies of Trees, and holes of the Earth. It is very much
troubled with Wolves, but has no Snake, or Venomous Creature whatsoever,
neither will any live here. It has variety of all sorts of wild and tame Fowls;
and vast quantities of Fish, especially Salmons and Herrings. All living
Creatures, besides Men, Women and Greyhounds, are smaller than ours in England.

The Principal Riches and Commodities Commodities.
of this Kingdom are Cattle, Hides, Tallow, Suet, great Store of Butter and
Cheese, Wood, Salt, Honey, Wax, Furs, Hemp, Linen Cloth, Pipe Staves, great
quantities of Wool, of which they make Cloth and Freezes, with those course
Rugs, or shag Mantles, which are vented into Foreign Countries: Variety of Fish
and Fowl, and also several Metals, as Lead, Tin and Iron; in a word, there is
nothing wanting either for Pleasure and Profit, every thing being extraordinary
cheap and plentiful; and of late times the Industry of the Inhabitants have not
been so much wanting, and by reason of the great Converse with the English are
more Civilized then formerly both Trade and Learning flourishing i^ such a
measure, that were it not for these unhappy Broils, it well might have been
counted as Beautiful an^ Sweet a Country as any under Heaven.

The Principal Rivers of this Country Rivers.
are; 1. Shannon, or Shennon, which arises in the County of Letrim in
Connaught: It divides for the most part of the way, Connaught from Leinster and
Munster, and makes many Lakes, (particularly Lough-Ree, and Lough-Derg) passing
by the Towns of Letrim, James Town, Lanesburrough, Athlone, Clonefert, Killalow
and Limrick, after a Course of 200 Miles, (of which 60 Navigable) falls into
the Western Ocean with a Mouth above seven Miles wide. Others are, 2. Swift
Awiduff, or Blackwater. 3. Baleful-Shure. 4. Woody-Barrow. 5. Rolling-Liffe. 6.
Pleasant-Boyne. 7. Spreeding Lee, etc, These shall be all more particularly
Treated of in the Provincss. The Havens are many and Commodious, those of chief
Note are, 1. Waterford, at the Mouth of the River Shure. 2. Cork, at the Mouth
of the River Lee. 3. Youghill, at the Mouth of the River Awiduff, or Blackwater.

The principal Lakes of this Kingdom Lakes.
are; 1. Lough-Erne, in the County of Fermanack in Ulster, nigh 30 Miles long,
and 10 broad, bordering about with shady Woods, and full of inhabited Islands,
some containing 2 or 300 Acres of Land, having vast store of Trouts, Pikes, and
Salmons. 2. Lough-Neagh, or Sidney, between the Counties of Antrim and Tyrone,
20 Miles long, and 12 broad, beset and shadowed along with thick Woods, and
unpassable Bogs, yet extremely Pleasant. 3. Lough-Ree, made by the River
Shannon, between the Counties of Roscommon, Longford, and West-Meath, 15 Miles
long, and five broad. Louth-Derg, another made by the Shannon, between
Tipperary, Thomond and Gallway, 18 Miles long; and four broad. 5. Lough-Corrib
in the County of Gallway, having in it several Isles abounding with Pine Trees.
6. Lough-Conn in the County of Mayo. 7. Lough-Cara, etc. 8. Lough-Cilly in the
County of Slego. 9. Lough-Allyn in the County of Letrim. 10. L^gh-Dercuereagh.
11. Lough-Hannel in West-Meath, with several others.

The most considerable Bays of this Bays.
Country may be reckoned, 1. The Bay of Gallway, a very large and safe Harbor,
capable of a vast Fleet of Ships, and defended on the West, with the South
Isles of Arran: It lies between the Counties of Gallway and Thomond. 2.
Dingle-Bay, a large and spacious Harbor in the County of Kerry in M^nster. 3.
Bantry-Bay in the County of Cork in Munster, full of small Islands. 4.
Dunnagal-Bay, between the Counties of Dunnagal, Slego and Letrim, at the
entrance of Lough-Earne. 5. Bay of Londonderry, a kind of a Lake between the
Cou^ ties of Dunnagal and Londonderry; called also by the Name of Lough-Foyle.
6. Ca^rickfergus-Bay, between the Counties of A^trim and D^wn. 7.
Carlingford-Bay, between the Counties of Down and Louth. 8. Bay of Dublin in
the County of Dublin. 9. Wexford-Bay in the County of Wexford. 10. Kin^sale-Bay
in the County of Cork, with many other of less Note.

Mountains of chiefest Note are (...) (...).
reckoned, 1. Kn^ck-Patrick, or St. Patrick's Hill, in the West parts of the
County of Limrick, mounted up a mighty height, and yielding a pleasent prospect
into the Sea, beholding a far off, the River Shannon, falling with a vast Mouth
in the Ocean. 2. Sliew-Bloemy in Queen's County, with their rising tops mounted
up a wonderful height from whence arise the Rivers Shure, Nuer and Barrow. 3.
The Mountains of Evagh and Moourne, a ridge of Hills not far off the Sea in the
County of Down. 4. Sliew-Gallen, certain Hills in the County of Tyrone,
dividing it into two parts. 5. Curlew-Hills in the County of R^scommon in
Connaught. 6. The Gualty Mountains in the County of Tipperary, nigh the
Counties of Limrick and Cork.

The most considerable Capes or Promontories are, 1. Fair-head in the Capes.
County of Antrim, the mok Northern Point in this Kingdom, about 17 Miles off
Scotland. 2. St. John's Point in the County of Down, about 8 Miles South of
Down. 3. Old-head in the County of Cork, about seven Miles South of Kingsale.
4. Missenhead in Cork. the most Southern Point in this Country. 5. Lean, a
very long Point in the County of Thomond, at the Mouth of the River Shannon. 6.
St. John's Cape, in the County of Dunnagal, about 13 Miles West of Dunnagal. 7.
North Cape in the Northern parts of the same County. 8. Dog-head, in the
Western parts of the County of Gallway. I could here mention several of the
Bogs, as Allin, Red-Boy, etc. but these will be of no great use.

In the Province of Ulster and County of Dunnagal, upon an Island in a little
St. Patricks Purgatory.
Lake, called Derg, there is an old little Monastery, in which is a very narrow
Vault within the Ground, so small that a Man can scarce stand up right in it,
not containing above 6 or 7 Persons at once: This they call St. Patrick's
Purgatory, very much talked of by the Ignorant for walking Spirits, and
dreadful Apparitions; which they say was occasioned by St. Patrick's earnest
Prayers to God, that the Torments which the wicked are to suffer after this
life might be presented to the Eye, that he might the more easily Root out the
Sins of his Country Men. They Foolishly imagine, that this Cave was dug
first by Ulisses, when he went to Parlee with those in Hell. This place was
very much resorted to by Pilgrims, till the later end of King James the First
Reign, this hole was laid open, and the Friars caused to depart.

There are seven places in Ireland, Remarks.
which are more properly called by the Name of Cities, viz. Dublin, Waterford,
Gallway, Limrick, Cork, Londonderry, and Kilkenny, to which we may add,
Athlone, Kingsale and Drogheda; four Archbishopricks, viz. Armagh, Dublin,
Cashell, and Tuam; 19 Bishoprics, and one University, viz. Dublin. Here are
also about 39 Market Towns; 119 Places that return Parliament Men, which
commonly go by the Name of Buroughs; 93 Towns of Commerce and Trade; 222
Castles of old Erection, besides several new Fortresses built in the later
times; and 1586 Parishes. The chief City of the whole Kingdom, is, Dublin, the
Viceroys Seat.

CHAP. II.
Of the Inhabitants and famous Men, particularly of the Wild Irish, showing
their Language, Names, Diet, Attire, Manner of Living, Customs, Religion,
Superstitions, Whimseys, Marriages, Burials and Wars.

THE Inhabitants descend originally from the Britains, according Inhabitants.
to the best Authors: since then intermixed with Danes, Swedes, and Normans;
but at present they are both English and Irish. As for the English; I shall
need to say nothing of, nor the more civilized sort of Irish, who are very
conformable to the Customs and Laws of our Nation. But the Kernes, Rapperies,
etc. (those mere Irish, who as yet have not been thoroughly conquered or
civilized) are those that I do intend particularly to treat of; therefore I
would not have our Irish Scholars take it amiss, or think ill of that
Character which no ways belongs to them; but before I go any further I shall
here (as the most fit place) mention some of the most eminent Persons this
Nation has produced.

The most Famous Men of this Country Famous Men.
may be reckoned 1. St. Patrick, a Person of eminent Piety, who converted this
Nation to Christianity between the fourth and fifth Centurys. 2. Palladius,
another Person who helped to convert this Kingdom about the same time. 3.
Columbus a Religious Monk some few ages after, who would by: no preferments be
induced to leave his Country. 4. Richard Fitz-Rase, a Learned Bishop of Armagh,
who flourished Anno 1350. a declared Enemy to the Errors and Corruptions of the
Romish Church. In later times were 5. James Usher, Archbishop of Armagh, so
eminent for his Piety and Learning. 6. Jeremiah Tailor, the Eloquent Bishop of
Down and Connor; with several others in our times.

Now to give a Character of the natural Wild Irish; they are of a middle The
Wild Irish.
Stature, strong of body, of an hotter and moister nature than many other
Nations of wonderful soft Skins, and by reason of the tenderness of their
Muscles, they excel in nimbleness and flexibility of all parts of the body;
they are reckoned of a quick Wit, (though besotted to many follies) prodigal and
careless of their Lives, enduring Travel, Cold, and Hunger; given to fleshly
lusts, light of belief, kind and courteous to strangers, constant in Love,
impatient of abuse and injury, in enmity implacable, and in all affections most
vehement and passionate. They are very much delighted with Music, but
especially with the Harp and Bagpipe, at the first many of them are very
Skilful.

The Language, that they commonly speak is Originally British, or at least
Language.
a Dialect of it, but now very much degenerated from it, by reason of the
Intermixture with Norwegians, Danes, Easterlings or Oos^-mans and English
Saxons; so that at present it has but very little affinity with our Modern
Welsh, which is the same with the old British. But the names of Waters, Isles,
Mountains and places are said to be merely British. This Tongue is also spoken
in the Western parts of Scotland, and the Isles of Hebraides, as Camden says.
The English Tongue is very frequently used among 'em, and in some places
(particularly in the County of Wexford) they make use of a mungrel sort of
speech between English and Irish.

They are vulgarly called by the Names.
names of Teague and Dear-Ioy. The greatest men have often the Letter [O] put
before their names, as O Neal, O-Rock, O-Donel, etc. some of the better sort
also carry the name of Mac, (which signifies Son) as Mac-Decan, Mac-Cannon,
Mac-Carty, etc. When they are babtized, they commonly add some profane name
taken from some event, or else some color as White, Black, Red; else from a
disease or Scab, or peeldness; or from some one Vice or other as Thief, Proud,
etc. They never give the name the Parent or any of the kindred then Living, for
they are persuaded that their death is hastened thereby; but when the Father is
dead the Son commonly assumeth his name, lest it should be lost.

As for their Diet, they feed very much upon Herbs especially Watercresses;
Diet.
upon Mushromes, Shamroots and Roots: They delight also in Butter tempered with
Oatmeal; also in Milk, Whey, Beef-Broth, and Flesh oft-times without any Bread
at all. As for their Corn, they lay it up for their Horses, for whom they are
very careful, when they are Hungerbitten in time of dearth, they disdain not to
Eat raw flesh, after they have pressed out the blood thereof: and for to
concoct it, they will drink down very large quantities of Usquebah or
Aqua-Vitae, draught after draught. They also let their Kine blood, which when
is grown to a Jelly, and strewed over with Butter, they eat with a very good
appetite.

As for their Attire, they commonly wear little Jackets of Woollen, and Attire.
those very short; Breeches most plain and close to their Thighs; over these
they commonly wear a Mantle or shag Rugg deeply fringed, and well set out with
many colors, within which they often lap themselves, and sleep on the very
ground. They go for the most part bare headed, unless it be when they put on an
headpiece. They wear their Hair long, and count it the greatest ornament. The
Women also make a great esteem of their Hair, especially if it be golden color
and long withal, for they lay it out in a full length plated in a bravery: They
rather load then adorn their heads with great quantities of fine Linen, rolled
up in Wreaths.

Their way of Living is after a Way of Living.
very odd sort, having no great employments; for they are given to idleness
above measure, and count it the greatest riches to take no pains, and the most
pleasure to enjoy their Liberty. Their Cows, and Cattle are the chiefest Wealth
they have, and in greatest esteem. They count it no shame or infamy to commit
Robberries, which they very frequently use with great cruelty; when they go to
rob they make prayers to God that they may meet with a booty; and they suppose
it was sent them from God as a Gift. They also suppose that Violence and Murder
are no ways displeasing to God, for if it were a sin, he would not present them
with that opportunity; and they count it a sin not to make use of a fair
opportunity: further they say that this sort of Life was left to them, and that
they only walk in their Fathers steps, that it would be a disgrace to their
Nobility to forbear such Facts and get their living by Labor.

When they go out in a Morning to do any business, they mark him they Customs.
met first; if they be prosperous they endeavor to meet him often, if not they
are as careful to avoid them. Before they sow their Corn, the good Wife or
Mistress of the house, sends Salt to the said Field. In the Towns, when any
Magistrate enters first upon his Office, the Wives and Daughters along the
Streets, and ou^ of the Windows bestrew them and their followers with Wheat and
Salt. At every third word it is ordinary with them to rap out an Oath, as by
the Trinity, by Christ, by St. Patrick, by St. Brigid, by their Baptism, by
their Godfathers hand and such like. When they take never so solemn Oaths they
will be forsworn upon every occasion, but if they swear by any great Man and be
forsworn, they forfeit a great Sum of Money or Cattle to that same person whose
name they used.

In matters of Religion they are Roman Catholics, in some things Religion.
very devout, mortifying and keeping under their Bodies, very much, watching
and praying, fasting every Wednesday and Saturday: some of 'em fast on St.
Catharine's Day, and also on Christmas Day, though they be never so sick. In
Matters of Divine Service they are very slovenly, the Vestments ^re so foul and
nasty, that they would make one cast up his Stomach: The Altar portable, and by
some abuse or other polluted; the Mass Book all ^orn, the Chalice of Lead
without a Cover to it, and the small Vessels for Wine made of Horn. The Priests
themselves are very poor, and mind nothing but gathering of Goods, and getting
of Children. They make a great show of the Canon Law, but have never a jot of
Learning. They commonly have their Children succeed them in their Churches, for
whose Illegitimation they are dispensed withal.

When they first see the Moon after Superstitions.
the Change, commonly they bow the Knee, and say the Lord's Prayer, and then
speak to the Moon with a loud Voice, Leave us as whole and as sound as thou
have found us. They use to look through the Shoulder-Blade-Bone of a Sheep,
when the Flesh is clean taken from it; if they see any dark or duskish spot in
it, when they look through, they say that some Course shall shortly be carried
out of the House. They pray for Wolves, and wish them well, and then they are
not afraid to be hurt by them. They count it unlawful to rub down, o^ curry
their Horses, or to gather Grass for their Meat on Saturdays. When a^ Horse is
dead, they hang up his Fee^ and Legs in the House; yea, the very Hoofs are
esteemed as a hallowed and sacred Relick. They count her a wicked Woman or a
Witch that comes to fetch Fire from 'em on May Day; neither will they give any
Fire then, but unto a Sick Body, and that also with a Curse.

They are of Opinion, that if their Whimsies.
Butter be Stolen, 'twill soon after be restored again; if they take away any
of the Thatch that hang over the Door, and cast it into the Fire. They believe,
that the Kite will not take away their Chickens, if they hang up the the
Egg-shels, out of which they were Hatched in some place of the Rough of the
House. If any praise an Horse, or any other of their Beasts, before they have
said, God Save him, or have Spit upon them; if any harm befall that Beast within
three days after, they ^eek out him that praised him, and then mumble the Lords
Prayer in his right Ear. They fully believe, that to set a Green Bough of a
Tree before their House on May Day, will cause them to have abundance of Milk
all Summer long. They have besides these, many other Follies, which for
^hortness sake, I shall now forbear to mention.

Those that dwell in Towns seldom Marriages.
make any Contract of Marriage with them in the Country; they pass their
Promise, not for the present, but for the future time; or else give assent
without Deliberation, so that for a very little falling out, they part asunder,
the Husband to another Woman, and the Wife to another Husband: Often it is not
known whether the Contract was true or false, till the last Gasp: Hence grow
Robberies, Depredations, Murders, and deadly Hatred. They are very much given
to Incest, and nothing is so common as Divorces under pretense of Conscience.
It is grown a common Custom after the Husbands's Death, for the Wife to have a
third part of the Goods, the rest is divided by even Portions among the
Children; but when they come to Possession, he that is mightiest commonly go
away with the best share; sometimes an Uncle, or Nephew, if he be a great Man,,
will seize upon the Inheritance, and shut the Children out of all.

When any one lies a Dying, Women hired on purpose stand in Cross-ways, Burials.
calling upon him with great out-Crys, and abundance of rediculous
Expostulations, why he should depart from so many Advantages. After he is Dead,
they keep a Mourning with loud Howlings, and clapping of Hands together. When
the Corpse go forth they follow it with such a Peal of out-Crys, that a Man
would think the quick, as well as the Dead, were past all Recovery. Neither do
they Mourn less for those that are Slain in Battle, or by Robbing, though they
affirm such to have an easier Death; yet they will Rail on their Enemies with
Spiteful Words, and continue for a long time a deadly Hatred against all of
that Kindred. They suppose that the Souls of the Deceased go into the Company
of certain Men, famous in those Places, of whom they still retain strange
Fables and Songs, as of Giants of great Renown, which they say they oft-times
see by Illusion.

Their Warefare consists of Horsemen, Wars.
of Soldiers set in the Rereguard, whom they call Galloglasses, who fight with
sharp Hatchets; and of lightarmed Footmen called Kernes, whose service is with
Darts and Skeanes. To give a shout to every Man going out of a Gate, and
counted fortunate. They commonly use the Bagpipe in stead of a Trumpet: They
carry a^out them Amulets: They recite certain Prayers, and in joining Battle,
they cry as loud as they can Pharroh, with this persuasion, that he who cries
not so loud as the rest, shall suddenly be taken from the Ground, and carried
along the Air, into certain desert Valleys, where he eats Grass, ^appeth
Water, has some use of Reason, but not of Speech: But at last ^y the help of
Hounds and Hunters, shall be brought home again.

CHAP. III.
Of its Antiquity and old Inhabitants A short History, showing the sever^
Conquests and Rebellions; Government Laws, Strength, Arms, Archbishoprick^ and
Bishoprics, and the Old and Ne^ Division.

IReland is of very great Antiquity, (...) we may believe the Irish Writers,
wh^ Antiquity.
say it was inhabited by one Caesari^ Noah's Neice, before the Flood: About 300
Years after the Flood, Bartholan^ a Scythian came hither, and fough^ many
famous Battles with Giants. Many Years after, Nemetheus, a Scythia^ also,
arrived here, and was soon ca^ out by the Giants. After this, Del^ with some
Grecians, seized on this Isle^ and soon after Gaothel and Scota hi^ Wife
(Daughter to Pharaoh King o^ Egypt) landed here, and called this Island Scotia,
after his Wives Name This was about the time of the Israelites departure out of
Egypt. Some few Ages after, Hiberus and Hermion, Sons of Milesius King of
Spain, by the permission of Gurguntius King of the Britains, planted Colonies
here, after ^t had been dispeopled by Pestilence. These are mere Fables of the
Irish's own making, without any Grounds.

The ancient Inhabitants were the Old I^habitants.
^ish, being Originally Britains according to the best Authors, distinguished
then into several lesser People and Names, as shall be afterward spoken of.
These were a rude and barba^ous People, of whose Actions we know but little of;
this Country not being so happy as ever to be Conquered by the Romans, those
great Masters of Learning and Civility. Toward the wain of the Roman Empire,
we find them called by the Name of Scots, (the reason thereof is uncertain) and
this Country Scotland, they subdued the Hebraides, or Western Isles, and the
Neighboring Picts and Calidonians, and gave the Name of Scotland to the
Northern parts of the Bri^ish Continent: Besides this, we hear but little of
them except that of Pal^adius and St. Patrick's Converting them to the
Christian Faith. Not long after they left the Name of Scots, and returned to
their first and more wo^ed Name of Irish, then being under the Government of
several small Princes.

The first Conquest, or rather Invasion, First Conquest.
of this Country, (setting aside Egfrid King of Northumberland's destroying
several places with Fire and Sword, Anno 694.) was by some of the Saxon
Monarchs of England, (particularly by King Edgar) who made themselves Masters
of Dublin, and several other considerable Places; but being in a short time so
encumbered with Danes at home, that they were well satisfied to leave all that
they had gained here, being scarce able to defend their own from that Nation:
So that these soon recovered their former Liberty, that is, under the
Government of their own Princes.

The next Conquest was made by Second Conquest.
the Northern Nations, as Danes, Swedes and Normans, going by the general Name
of Norwegians, who first scowred along the Coasts by way of Pyracy; but
afterward, (finding the weakness of this Isle, (by reason of its several
Divisions) they made an absolute Conquest of it under one Turge^ius, whom they
elected for their King. They were not Masters of it long before the King of
Mead (the only Irish Prince in favor with Turgetius) found out a Stratagem,
by the help of his Daughter Omlag^liben, (whom this Tyrant loved) and slew him,
and with him all the Norwegians that were his Attendence; and by this means
they soon routed the rest, so that the Petty Princes once more enjoyed their
former Dominions.

The last Conquest was by King Third Conquest.
Henry the Secend of England, Anno 1172. who was called in for the Assistance
of the King of Leinster, who was driven out of his Kingdom by the King of
Mead: He restored him, and made a Conquest of these Petty Princes, who
submitted themselves to him, and gave him all their Power which was confirmed
to him by Pope Hadrian; and ever since this Country has (for the most part,
though with diverse Alterations) remained subject to England. The Kings of
England had only the Title of Lords of Ireland, (though Kings in Effect and
Power) till Anno 1542. Henry the Eighth, in an Irish Parliament, was declared
King of Ireland, as a Name more Sacred and Repleat with Majesty, which was
confirmed to Mary his Daughter by Pope Paul IV. Anno 1555.

The Irish have always looked upon Rebelli^ns.
our Conquests as such wrong and injustice done to 'em, (though indeed nothing
could be more to their Advantage) that they would never let slip any
Opportunity of Rebellions. The first Rebellion was in the Reign of 1.
Edward the First, (...) when that Prince was engaged against the Scots, one
Dovenald O Neal rose up and styled himself King of Ulster, and in Right of
Inheritance the undoubted Heir of all Ireland, but he was soon quelled again.
The second Rebellion was in the Reign of King Henry the Eighth, 2.
Anno 1537. by the Earl of Kildare, who also added the Pretense of Religion:
This was soon suppressed, the Earl taken and beheaded with his five Uncles.

The third Rebellion was by O Neal, Third R^bellion.
in the Reign of Queen Elizabeth, Anno 1563. (notwithstanding he was pardoned
for the beginning of one before) He burnt the Cathedral of Armagh, and besieged
Dundalk, but without any success. After two Years Sir Henry Sidney, Lord
Lieutenant, went against ^im; in fight broke his Forces, so that ^leeing to the
Scots, (whom he had ^ikewise injured) he was assassinated ^n cold Blood, and
soon after attainted ^n Parliament, and the Title O Neal quite abolished.

The fourth Rebellion in this Coun^ry Fourth Rebellion.
was not above 14 Years after, in Anno 1579. about the middle of Queen
Elizabeth. It was begun by the Earl of Desmond, who (not being of sufficient
power himself) called in the Spaniards, who began to possess themselves of
several Places: But how soever this was of no such ill consequence as some
others were, for about a Year after, the Spaniards were all driven out, (Sir
Oem being a considerable Agent against them) and the Earl himself was taken and
executed Anno 1583.

The fifth Rebellion was in the same Reign, Anno 1595. made by Sir Oem, Fifth
Rebellion.
(who before had done great Service against the Earl of Desmond.) This was more
dangerous than any before, he being a good Soldier. Anno 1598. he defeated the
English nigh Black-Water, In 1599. brought the Earl of Essex to condescend to a
Treaty with him. In 1601. he brought the Spaniards over to his Assistance, who
took and Garisoned Kinsale. This War lasted eight Years, till Anno 1603.
Kinsale was retaken, and the Spaniards totally driven out; whereupon Sir Oem
submitted, and was brought over by the Lord Lieutenant to King James the First.

The sixth Rebellion was the most Sixth Rebellion.
terrible of all, made by a general Insurrection of all the Irish, Anno 1641,
in the beginning of our Troubles in England, who assassinated an incredible
number of the English, after such a barbarous sort as no Age nor Nation could
ever parallel. Our Nation could lend them no Assistance till Anno 1649. and 50.
Oliver Cromwell, with Ireton and others, gave them a most bloody Chastisement,
erecting many a dreadful Trophie of the Divine Vengeance against all such
perfidious Traitors; so that if Mercy had not been shown in time, they might
with a little more Expense of Time and Treasure, utterly extirpated the Irish
Name and Nation.

As for these present Troubles, I shall say nothing of, having been treated of
by so many good Pens already; and in my Description of the Provinces, Counties,
Towns, Castles, etc. I shall say but little of these Wars; and knowing by
reason of them there have been many Alterations, (which I shall take but little
Notice of,) I shall give a Description of every place as they were before the
Wars begun. Yet perhaps I may be a little more particular in those Towns which
have been most famous in these Wars.

The Government of this Country is Government.
by a Viceroy, (though he has not that Name) first called Keepers or Wardens
of Ireland, afterward Justices of Ireland, and now Lord Lieutenant and Deputy
of Ireland. Their Authority is Large, Ample and Royal; having Power to make
War, to conclude Peace, to bestow all Magistracies and Offices, except a very
few; to pardon all Crimes, unless they be some of High Treason; to dub Knights,
etc. And truly there is not in all Christendom any other Vice Roy that tomes
nigher the Majesty of a King for his Jurisdiction, Authority, Train, Furniture,
and Provision. There are assistant to him in Council the Lord Chancellor of the
Realm, the Treasurer of the Kingdom, and others of the Earls, Bishops, Barons
and Judges, which are of the Privy Council.

When any one enters upon the Honorable Place of Government, first the
Letters Patents are publicly read; after that he takes a solemn Oath in a set
Form of Words before the Chancellor; then the Sword is delivered to him, which
is to be born before him; and then he is placed in a Chair of State, having
standing by him the Chancellor of the Realm; those of the Privy Council, the
Peers and Nobles of the Kingdom, with a King of Arms, a Sergeant of Arms, and
other Officers of State.

Besides the Lord Lieutenant himself, in more remote Provinces, are Inferior
Governors.
several Inferior Governors to administer Justice, as a Principal
Commissioner in Connaught; and a President in the Province of Munster, who have
to assist them certain Gentlemen and Lawyers who are directed by the Lord
Lieutenant. As for the several Degrees of States, this Country has the very
same as in England, as Earls, Barons, Knights, Esquires, etc.

Here are also the same Courts as in Courts and Laws.
England; as the Parliament, (which at the King of England's Pleasure is called
by the Deputy, and by him dissolved) the Star Chamber, the Chancery, the
King's Bench, the Common Pleas, and the Exchequer; likewise four Terms in a
Year. Here are also Juces of Assizes, of Nisi Prius, and of Oyer and Terminer,
and Justices Peace in every County. Also the King has his Sergeant at Law, his
Solicitor, etc. As for the Common Laws, Ireland is Governed by the same with
England.

The Strength of this Nation consists Strength.
partly in the Situation, being begirt about with difficult and dangerous Seas;
and partly in the several Fortif^ations and Castles built by the English since
they became Masters of it. Their Forces have never been reckoned very numerous
till of late, and then they have either been so ill Disciplined, or of such
Cowardly Dispositions, (especially in their own Country) that an Enemy of no
very great Power (were it not for their strong Places) might easily tame 'em.

The Arms of this Kingdom, are Azure, an Harp Or, stringed Argent, Arms.
which Arms, King James the First (to show himself absolute King of Ireland)
caused to be Marshalled with the Royal Arms of Great Britain, and have ever
since been set upon our Coyns. I should speak of the Revenues, Coyns, Weights,
Measures, and such like of this Kingdom; as for the first, I can have no
perfect account of, so that I dare not say any thing of it; as for the rest,
they are mostly the same as in England.

The Ecclesiastical Government is Archbishopricks, etc.
under four Archbishopricks, viz. Armagh, Dublin, Cashell and Tuam, under these
were at once a great number of Bishoprics, and those but poor ones, (as they
are generally now) but since the Reformation, have been reckoned only 19, and
of some of those I am a little uncertain. Six are under Armagh; (the
Metropolitan) viz. Londonderry, Connor, Dromore, Clogher, Kilmore and Dundalk;
three under Dublin, viz. Kilkenny, Kildare and Fearnes; five under Cashell,
viz. Waterford, Limrick, Cork, Ardfeart and Emly; and fi^ under Tuam, viz.
Gallway, ^lone, Killala, Clonefert and Killalow.

This Island was anciently divided The old Division.
into many several Peoples and Provinces, as the Robognii, Darnii, Volontii,
Vennionii, and Erdinii in the North parts now Ulster; the Auteri, Ganganii, and
Nagnata in Connaught; the Menapii, Cauci, Blanii, and Brigantes in Leinster;
and the Luceni, Velabri, Ulterni, Vodii, and Coriondi in Munster. Afterward it
came to be divided into five Parts, which were so many Kingdoms, viz. Ulster,
Connaught, Mead, Leinster and Munster.

Since then the Kingdom of Mead have been joined to that of Leinster, New
Division.
the rest remaining as before, so that is divided at present into four distinct
Provinces, viz. 1. Ulster, 2. Connaught, 3. Leinster, and 4. Munster. The first
of these lie on the North, the second on the West, the third on the East, and
the fourth on the South. These Provinces are divided into 32 Counties, and
those subdivided into 253 Baronies or Hundreds, and those have in them 1586
Parishes. These shall be every one treated of in their Order.

CHAP. IV.
Of Ulster, showing its Name, Bounds, Dimensions, Riv^s, Products, Remarks,
etc. and describing all its Counties, Towns and Castles.

THE Province of Ulster, is called by the Latins, Ultoni^, and sometimes Name.
Ulidia; by the Irish, Cui Guilly, or Province of Guilly; by the Welsh, Ultw^;
and by the English Ulster.

It is Bounded on the East with St. George's Channel; on the West with Bounds.
the main Atlantic, or W^stern Ocean; on the North, with the Ducalidonian, or
Northern Ocean; on the South with the Province of Leinster; and on the
South-West, with the Province of Connaught: So it is encompassed on 3 sides
with Sea, being almost of a round Form.

It is in length, from the most West Dimensi^ns.
Point in the County of Dunnagal, to the East parts of the County of Down,
about 116 Miles: In breadth, from Fair-head, the most North Point in Antrim, to
the Borders of Longford in ULSTER PROVINCE
map of Ulster the Province of Leinster, nigh 100 Miles. The whole Circuit
(counting all the Windings and Turnings) is about 460 Miles.

The chief Rivers of this Province R^vers.
are; 1. B^nne, rising in the County of Down, in Armagh; it receives the River
Tanwagee, and then passes through the great Lake Neagh, then divides the County
of Antrim from that of Londonderry, and falls into the Ducalidonian Ocean, a
little below Colerain. 2. Lough-Foyle, which washes St. John's Town and
Londonderry, then falls into the Ducalidonian Ocean, making a great Bay, or
Lake of the same Name. 3. Swilly, in the County of Dunnaga^, falling into the
Ducalidonian Ocean, with a kind of a Lake. 4. Lagen-Water in Down, washing
Dromore, Lisburn, and Belfast, falls into the Bay of Carrickfergus. 5.
Newry-Water, parting Down from Armag^, and falls into Ca^ngford-Bay. 6. Main in
Antrim, etc.

This Country abounds with large Products.
Lakes, shaded with many and thick Woods; the Soil is fruitful in Corn and
Grass, but in some places a little Barren; howbeit, fresh and Green to see in
every place; well furnished with Horses, Sheep and Oxen; and it affords great
plenty of Timber, and Fruit Trees. The Waters are deep, and fit for Vessels,
very well replenished with Fish; and as for Salmons, here are more in some
Rivers of this Country, than in any other River in Europe.

In this Province is one Archbishopric, viz. Armagh; Six Bishoprics, Remarks.
(besides Raphoe, united to Londonderry) viz. Londonderry, Connor, Dromore,
Clogher, Kilmore and Dundalk; Ten Market Towns, viz. Athordee, Armagh,
Carrickfergus, Carlingford, Drogheda, Dundalk, Dunnagal, Londonderry, Louth and
Newry; 14 Towns of Commerce and Trade; 34 places that return Parliament Men, or
Boroughs; 30 Castles for the Defense of the Country; and 214 Parishes in the
whole. The chief City of all is Londonderry.

The Boroughs are are as following, Boroughs.
viz. four in Antrim; Antrim, Belfast, Carrickfergus and Lisburn: Three in
Londonderry; Colerain, Lamnevaddy and Londonderry: Six in Dunnagal;
Ballishannon, Dunnagal, St. John's Town, Kilberg, Lifford and Raphoe: Four in
Tyrone; Agher, Dungannon, Omagh and Strabane: One in Fermenagh, viz.
Eniskilling: Two in Cavan; Belturbet and Cavan: One in Monoghan, viz. Monoghan:
Two in Armagh; Armagh, and Charlemont: Six in Down; Bangor, Down, Hilsburrough,
Killileagh, Newry and New-Town: And Four in Louth; Atherdee, Carlingford,
Drogheda and Dundalk.

The Religious Places in this Province, Religious Places.
were once the Abbey of Dunnagal; the Monastery of Derry; the Monastery near
the River Liffer; that famous one at the Bay of Carrickfergus; also Millifont
Abbey; and lastly, the most Renowned Monastery at Armagh, out of which many
others were propagated in Britain and Ireland. These Places, when standing,
were very much frequented by Pilgrims.

This Province, before the English History.
Conquered it, was a Kingdom of it self, under its own Kings: First Conquered
by John Curcy, a valiant Englishman, in the Reign of King Henry the Second:
Soon after it was so neglected by the English, that it was causioned into many
Estates and Principalities by the Natural Irish. In this Estate it continued
(the Kings of England having but little Profit of it) till Tir-Oens Rebellion;
the Conquest of whom, brought this Province in full Subjection to the Kings of
England, and has ever since continued so, but not without some considerable
Disturbances.

It was Anciently divided among the Old Division.
Erdini, in and about Fermanagh; the Venicnii, in part of Dunnagal; the
Robognii, in Londonderry, Antrim^, and part of Tyrone; the Volontii about
Armagh; and the Darni about Down and the Western parts. Afterward by the
English divided into three Counties, viz. Down, Louth and Antrim.

It stands now divided into Ten New Division.
Counties, viz. 1. Antrim, 2. Londonderry, 3. Dunnagal, 4. Tyrone, 5.
Fermanagh, 6. Cavan, 7. Monoghan, 8. Armagh, 9. Down, and 10. Louth, of these,
Five Borders on the Sea, viz. Louth, Down, Antrim, Londonderry, and Dunnagal:
Tyrone, Armagh, Fermanagh, Monoghan and Cavan^, are Midland Counties. These
Counties are Subdivided into 60 Barronies.

1. Antrim.
ANtrim is the most Northern County in Ireland; it has on the East Bounds.
St. George's Channel; on the West, Londonderry, from which parted by the River
Banne; on the North the Ducalidonian Ocean; and on the South, or rather South
East Down: It is in length, 46 Miles, and in breadth 27; a County of it self
sufficiently Fruitful.

It is divided into nine Barronies, Division.
viz. Bally Carry, Dunluce, Kilconway, Tome, Antrim, Glenarm, Carickfergus,
Belfast, and Killultagh: In which is one Market Town and four Boroughs. The
chief Town is Carrickfergus.

Principal places are, 1. Dunluce Towns.
Castle, on the North parts upon the Ocean; a very strong Pile, seated on a
Rock hanging over the Sea, and parted from the Land by a Ditch. 2. Connor, 28
Miles South East of Dunluce, a small Bishopric united to Down, not else of
Note. 3. Antrim, five Miles South of Connor, nigh the Lake Neagh: It is a
Borough, but a very ordinary one, though it gives Name to thi^ County. 4.
Carick fergus, or Knoc^ fergus, 12 Miles East of Antrim on (...) Bay of the
same Name: It is a Bo^rough and Market Town, a very ric^ and populous place,
the chief of the County; it has an excellent goo^ Harbor, and is well
strengthened wit^ a Castle, but is at present somewha^ decaying: This place
stands 90 Mile^ North of Dublin. 5. Belfast, 8 Mile^ almost South of Carrick
fergus, on the Mouth of Lagen-Water by Carrick fergus Bay. It is a Borough, and
(...) thriving Town, every day increasing. 6. Lisborn, or Lisnagarve, (...)
Miles South West of Belfast, on the River Lagen-Water, by the Border^ of Down,
remarkable for nothing bu^ for sometime quartering our Army.

2. Londonderry.
LOndonderry, or the County of Col^rain, sometimes Krine, has on the East
Bounds.
Antrim, from which parted by the River Banne; on the West Dunnagal; on the
North the Ducalidonian Ocean; with some of Dunnagal; and on the South, or South
West Tyrone. It is in ^ngth 36 Miles, and in breadth 30. (...) Country somewhat
Champion, yet ^ery fruitful.

It is divided into sive Baronies, viz. Division.
^olerain, Loghinsholm, Kenoght, Tyrekeri, and the Liberties of Londonderry: In
which is one Market Town, and three ^oroughs. The chief Town is Lon^onderry.

Principal Places are; 1. Colerain, Towns.
^n the River Banne, by the Borders ^f Antrim, four Miles of Sea, and six ^outh
of Dunluce Castle: It is a Bo^ough, and a considerable Place, once ^iving Name
to this County. 2. Lam^evaddy, a little Borough, 10 Miles ^lmost West of
Colerain, on the River Roe-Water, nigh Lough-Foyle. 3. Londonderry, sometimes
Derry, and Dory, 14 Miles almost South West of Lam^evaddy, on the River
Lough-Foyle, nigh ^he Borders of Dunnagal: It is a Market Borough and
Bishopric, made a London Colony, Anno 1612. a place of no great bigness, but
of singular strength and notable Fame, for other noble Resistances, as well as
for the last Siege. It is now the most considerable City in the Province of
Ulster, and has a very convenient Haven. It stands 108 miles almost North-west
of Dublin. 4. Cumber a small Town about 8 miles South-East of Londonderry, by
the borders of Tyr^ne. 5. Tome Castle, a Fortress 26 miles almost East of
Cumber on Lough-Neagh.

3. Dunnagal.
DUnnagall or Tir Connel, and sometimes Connallea, has on the East Bo^nds.
Londonderry and Tyrone, on the West the main Western Ocean; on the North the
Ducalidonian Ocean; and on the South Fermanagh and the Bay of Dunnagall. It is
in length 64 miles, and in breadth 35. a Country in a manner Champion and full
of Havens.

It is divided into five Barronies, viz. Enish Owen, Killmakrena, Raphoe
Division.
or Lagen, Boylagh and Bannogh, and Tyrehugh. In which is one Market Town and
five Borough; the chief Town is Dunnagall.

Principal places are 1. St. Iohns-Towns, a little Borough Town on the Towns.
River Lough Foil by the borders of Ty^one, nigh 6 miles South West of
Londonderry. 2 Raphoe, 8 miles South West of St. John's Town, a poor forsaken
place, once a City and a Bishopric, since joined to Londonderry. 3, Lifford, a
small Borough Town 5 miles South East of Raphoe, on the River Lough Foil by
the borders of Tyrone. 4. Dunnagall, 35 miles South-West of Lifford, on a large
Bay of the same name nigh the Mouth of the River Eask. It is a Borough and a
Market Town, the Chief of the County, and stands 100 miles North West of
Dublin. 5. Kilbeg or Calebeg, 12 miles West of Dunnagall, a Borough-Town
affording an Haven and a Commodious Harbor for Sailers. 6. Ballishannon or
Bellishann^n, 12 miles South East of Kilbeg, and 8 South of Dunnagall, having a
good Haven and stands nigh the borders of Fermanagh, nigh the Sea.

4. Tyrone.
TYrone or Tir-Oen, sometimes Tir-Eogain, Bounds.
has on the East Lough-Neagh and Armagh; on the West Dunnagall, on the North or
North East Londonderry; and on the South and South West Monaghan and Fermanagh*
It is in length 47 miles, and in breadth 33. A County though rough and rugged,
yet sufficiently fruitful.

It is divided into four Barronies, viz* Strabane, Omagh, Clogher, and
Dungannon. Division.
In which are four Boroughs but never a Market Town; the chief Town that I find
here is Dungannon.

Chief Places are 1. Strabane, a Borough Town and Castle, nigh the River. Lough
Foil, by the borders of Towns.
Dunnagall, 12 miles South of Londonderry. 2. Omagh or Drummaragh, a Borough
Town on the River Poe Water, about 15 miles almost South of Strabane. 3.
Monjoy, a strong Fort 24 miles East of Omagh, on the Lough Neagh. 4. Dungannon,
above 6 miles South West of Monjoy. a Borough-Town esteemed the head of the
County, a place of some strength, standing on a Hill 4 miles from Charlemont in
Armagh. It lies 72 miles almost North of Dublin. 5. Binburb, a little Town on
the borders of Armagh, 6 miles South of Dungannon. 6. Agher, a small Borough 15
miles West of Binburb, and 9 almost South of Omagh. 7. Clogher, nigh 3 miles
South of Agher, a ^ishops See, but a very slender one.

5. Fermanagh.
FErmanagh or Farmanagh, has on the Bounds.
East Monoghan; on the North West Dunnagall; on the North and North East
Tyrone, on the South Cavan, and on the South West Letrim in Con^aught. It is in
length 38 miles, and (...) breadth 24. a County full of Woods and Boggs, being
a third part filled ^ith the Lough-Earne.

It is divided into Eight Baronies, Division.
^iz. Lurge, Maghereboy, Terekenedy, ^ionawly, Maghere, Klonekelly, Knock^inie,
and Cool. In which is never a Market Town, and but one Borough, ^he Chief Town
is Eniskilling.

Principal Places are 1. Tarmon, a Towns.
Castle of considerable Note on the North parts of the great Lake, on ^he
borders of Dunnagall. 2. Balleck, (...) Town 10 miles almost West of Tar^on, by
the Mouth of the Lake, by ^he bordars of Dunnagall, 3 miles East ^f
Ballishannon. 3. Tully Castle, 9 ^iles almost East of Balleck by the borders of
the Lake. 4. Eniskilli^ or Inskilling, 7 miles South East (...) Tully Castle,
and 42 South of London derry. It is a Borough, the only pla^ of Note in this
County, but small, ye^ of notable strength and fame in the^ Wars; It Is
situated on a little Islan^ in the middle of the Lake or rathe^ between two
Lakes, having too Forts^ the one called the old Fort, the other the New Fort.
It stands 78 mile^ North West of Dublin. 5. Crom Castle^ on the Lake 12 miles
South East o^ Eniskilling.

6. Cavan.
CAvan or Cavon, sometimes East Braeny, has on the North East Monoghan, Bounds.
on the West Letrim in Connaught^ on the South Longford, West Meath^ and East
Mead in Leinster. It is i^ length 47 miles, and in breadth 22; a^ County whose
Inhabitants live in Piles^ and Forts rather than Towns.

Ir is divided into seven Barronies, Division.
viz. Tullagha, Tullahonoho, Cavan, Tullagarvy, Clonchy, Castle Raghen, and
Clonomoghan. In which are two Boroughs, but never a Market Town. The ^hief Town
is Cavan.

Principal Places are; 1. Belturbet, a Towns.
^ttle Borough Town on the end of ^ough Earne, nigh the Borders of Fer^anagh,
above 16 Miles South East of ^niskilling. 2. Cavan, 7 Miles South ^f Belturbet,
a Borough Town of no ^ote, but for being the head of this County: It stands 55
Miles North West of Dublin. 3. Kilmore, a little ^own, about three Miles South
West ^f Cavan: It is a Bishops See, but a ^ery poor one. 4. Castle Raghen, a
^astle which gives Name to a Barony ^3 Miles South East of Kilmore and ^avan,
nigh the Borders of East-Meath (...) Leinster.

7. Monoghan.
MOnoghan, has on the East Armagh; on the West Fermanagh; on the Bounds.
North Tyrone; on the South Cavan; and on the South East Louth, with ^art of
East- Mead in Leinster: It is in ^ength 34 Miles, and in breadth 20. (...)
Country mounting aloft with Hills, and well covered with Woods.

It is divided into five Baronies, viz^ Trough, Monoghan, Dartree, Cremorne^
Division.
and Farny Donaghmaine: It has bu^ one Borough, and never a Marke^ Town. The
chief Town is Monogha^ the rest are scarce worth Naming.

Chief Places are; 1. Glashlogh, (...) small Town, not far off the Borders o^
Towns.
Armagh and Tyrone. 2. Monoghan* five Miles South of Glaslogh, and fou^ from
the Borders of Armagh: It is (...) Borough Town, and the chief o^ the County,
but not else worth the^ Observation. It stands 60 Miles almost North West of
Dublin. For Methods sake. I shall mention, 3^ Clonish, a little place twelve
Mile^ South West of Monoghan, on the Borders of Fermanagh. 4. Lislea (...) a
Castle four Miles South East o^ Clonish, not far off the Borders o^ Cavan.

8. Armagh.
ARmagh, or Ardmagh, has on the^ East, Down, partly separated by Bounds.
the River Newry; on the West Tyron^ and Monoghan; on the North, the^
Lough-Neagh; and on the South Louth: ^t is in length 32 Miles, and in breadth
^7. A County for rich and fertile Soil, is said to surpass any in Ire^and.

It is divided into five Baronies, viz. Division.
Onealan, Towrany, Armagh, Fewes, and Orior. In which is one Market Town, and
two Boroughs. The chief Town ^s now Charlemont.

Principal Places are; 1. Charle^ont, Towns,
a Borough and strong For^ress, now the chief of the County, ^emarkable for the
last Siege. It ^tands on a River called Blackwater, ^n the Borders of Tyrone,
four Miles South East of Dungannon. 2. Ar^agh or Ardmagh, about seven Miles
South of Charlemont, once a very famous City, now a poor place, scarce any
thing remaining but a few small wasted Cottages, with the ruinous Walls of the
Monastery, Priors, and Primates Palace; yet it is still an Archbishops See, and
the Metropolitan of all Ireland, and keeps the Name of a Borough, and Market
Town. 3. Tyan, a small place seven Miles almost West of Armagh, on the Borders
of Tyrone and Monoghan. 4. Mayre-Castle, 19 Miles South East of Armag^ on the
Borders of Louth, nigh five Mil^ North of Dundalk.

9. Down.
DOwn, has on the East St. George Channel; on the West Armag^ Bounds.
partly separated by the River Neury* on the North, or rather North We^ Antrim;
and on the South Carling ford Bay, (which parts it from Louth and the Ocean. It
is in length 4^ Miles, and in breadth 30. A Count^ very fertile, though in some
places i^cumbred with Woods and Bogs.

It is divided into eight Baronies* viz. Ards, Castlereagh, Dufferin, Lek^
Division.
ale, Kinalearty, Lower Evagh, Upp^ Evagh, and Moourne. In which is on^ Market
Town and six Boroughs. The chief Town is Down.

Chief Places are; 1. Bangor, (...) Borough Town on Carickfergus Bay Towns.
seven Miles South East of that place 2. Newtown, four Miles nigh Sout^ of
Bangor, a Borough Town o^ the North of the Louth of Strangford. 3.
Hillsburrough, a Boroug^ Town, 16 Miles South West of ^ewtown, and three from
Lisburn in ^ntrim. 4. Dromore, four Miles nigh ^outh of Hillsburrough, a small
Bi^oprick. 5. Kilileagh, a little Bo^ough, 17 Miles East of Dromore, ^n the
Louth of Strangford. 6. ^trangford, six Miles South East of Killileagh, a
little Town on the Mouth ^f a Lough of the same Name. 7. ^own, or Down Patrick,
a Borough, and head of this County, six Miles ^igh West of Strangford: It is a
^ishoprick united to Connor in An^im, and is one of the most ancient ^owns in
Ireland, famous for the ^ones of St. Patrick, St. Bridget, and St. Columbus: It
stands 65 Miles ^llmost North East of Dublin. 8. ^eury, 25 Miles South West of
Down, (...) Borough and Market Town, on the ^iver Neury, by the Borders of
Ar^agh.

10. Louth.
LOuth, anciently Luva and Luda, in Bounds.
Irish Iriel, has on the East St. George's Channel; on the West Monoghan and
East- Mead and Leinster on the North Armagh and Carlingford Bay, which parts
it from Down and on the South East Mead, from which parted by the River Boyne
It is but 25 Miles long, and 13 broad* A County full of Forage, and
sufficiently Fruitful.

It is divided into four Baronies viz. Dundalk, Louth, Atherdee, an^ Division.
Ferrard; in which little compass ar^ five Market Towns, and four Baronie^ The
chief Town is Drogheda.

Chief Places are; 1. Carlingford nigh the Borders of Down, a Boroug^ and
Market Town, a considerabl^ Towns.
Place of good Resort, standing on (...) commodious Bay of the same Name 2.
Dundalk, eight Miles South Wes^ of Carlingford, a Borough, Marke^ Town, and
Bishopric: It was formerly Walled, but now Dismantled it has a very commodious
Haven, an^ is remarkable for the quartering ou^ Forces. 3. Louth, seven Miles
Sout^ West of Dundalk, a small Marke^ Town, not now remarkable for an^ thing,
but giving Name to the County 4. Atherdee, or Ardee, a Borough an^ Market Town,
six Miles South o^ Louth. 5. Drogheda, or Tredagh, 12 Miles South West of
Atherdee, a Borough and Market Town, the chief of this County, a very fine
strong and well inhabited Place, and has an excellent Haven. It stands on the
River Boyne, on the Borders of Leinster, about 24 Miles North of Dublin.

Thus much for ULSTER.
CHAP. V.
Of Connaught showing its Name, Bounds, Dimensions, Rivers, Products, Remarks,
etc. and describing all its Counties, Towns and Castles.

THe Province of Connaught, or Conaught, sometimes Connagh, by Name.
the Latins Conacia, and sometimes Conachtia, by the Irish Connaughty and
Connaughly, and sometimes called the County of Clare.

It is bounded on the East with the Bounds.
Province of Leinster, from which separated by the River Shannon; on the West,
with the Main Western Ocean; on the North and North-East, with some part of the
Ocean; and the Province of Ulster; and on the South and South-East, with the
Province of Munster, from which parted by the River Shannon. The Form of it is
long, and toward the North and South ends narrow.

It is in length from the North parts of the County of Letrim, to Cape
Dimensions.
Lean, the most South Point in Thomond CONNAUGHT PROVINCE
map of Connaught County, about 130 Miles: In breadth, from the East parts of
Letrim, ^o Black-Harbour in the West parts of Mayo, about 84 Miles: The
Circuit, (reckoning all the little Windings and Turnings) may be about 500
Miles.

As for the Rivers, here are few of Rivers.
considerable Note besides that great one of Shannon, spoken of before. The
chief are, 1. Moy, in the County of Mayo, which for a little way divides that
County from Slego, and falls into ^he Ocean by Mayo and Killala. (...). Suck,
which divides the County of Roscommon from Gallway, and falls into ^he River
Shannon, not far off Clonefert. (...). Droses, a little River in the Coun^y of
Thomond, which falls into the ^hannon, a little East of Clare. 4. Gyll, (...)
small River in the County of Gall^ay, which falls into the Bay of Gall^ay.

This Province abounds with many Products.
^onvenient Bays and Creeks fit for Navigation: In some places it is fresh ^d
fruitful, in some places dangerous, (...) reason of the many Bogs, and thick
(...) with Woods, (though of late much ^eared of both) the Air not so clear as
(...) some places, by reason of the vapourous and foggy Mists. The Soi^
sufficiently fruitful, were not the Inhabitants so much wanting, producing
abundance of Cattle, good store o^ Deer and Hawks, and plenty of Honey. It is
the meanest of the fou^ Provinces in general.

In this Province is one Archbishopric, viz. Tuam; five Bishoprics Remarks.
besides Angchony and Mayo united t^ Tuam, and Achonry united to Elphin* viz.
Gallway, Atblone, Killala, Clonefert and Killalow; seven Market Towns viz.
Athlone, Clare, Gallway, Kingstown Roscommon and Slego; eight Place^ of
Commerce and Trade; 12 Place^ that return Parliament Men, or Boroughs; 24
Castles of old Erection besides Fortresses raised in later Troubles; and 366
Parishes. The principal Town of the whole is Gallway.

Those that go by the Name of Boroughs, are as follow; viz. two i^ ^oroughs.
Letrim, Iames-town and Carrickdrumrush: One in Slego, viz. Slego: On^ in Mayo,
viz. Castlebar: Four in Roscommon; Elphin, Tulsk, Athlone an^ Roscommon: Three
in Gallway; Athenry, Gallway and Tuam: And one i^ Thomond, viz. Enistown.

The Religious Places of this Province Religious Places.
were once the Monastery of Colman (a devout Saint) at Inisleath; the Monastery
of Mayo, built by thirty Men of the English Nation; a famous Abbey in the Barony
of Boil, under Curlew Hills, together with the Abbey of Beatitude. These Places
are now become the Ruins of Time.

This Province was, before the English History.
Conquest of it, a Kingdom of it self. First Conquered by several English
Adventurers in the Reign of King Henry the Second; not long after, so neglected
by the English, that it was cantoned again among the Irish and degenerate
English till Tir Oen's Rebellion, by whose Conquest the Province was also
reduced to the English Government, but never so thoroughly Conquered as the
rest; Governed by a principal Commissioner under the Lord Lieutenant. It is now
the only Province that remains unreduced.

It was anciently divided (that is, in Old Di vision.
Ptolemy's time) among the Gangani, said to dwell about the Counties of Thomond
and Gallway; the Auteri, in and about the County of Mayo; and the Nagnati in
Roscommon, and the North-Eastern parts. After it became one Province, here is
to be noted that Thomond was for a long time counted a part of Munster.

It is at present divided into six Counties, New Di^ision.
viz. 1. Letrim, 2. Slego, 3. Mayo, 4. Roscommon, 5. Gallway, and 6. Thomond,
or Clare County. Of these, four border on the Sea, (besides Letrim) viz. Slego,
Mayo, Gallway and Thomond. Roscommon is a Midland County, so may also Letrim be
counted so. These Counties are subdivided into 51 Baronies.

1. Letrim.
LEtrim, the most Northern Eastern ^ounds.
County, has on the East and North-East Cavan and Fermanagh in Ulster; on the
West and South-West Slego and Roscommon; on the North (where it is very small)
the Ocean, with a little of Dunnagal in Ulster; and on the South-East and South
Longford in Leinster. It is in length 44 Miles, and in breadth 18. A County
mounted with Hills full of rank Grass, feeding an infinite Number of Cattle.

It is divided into five Baronies, viz. Division.
Rosclogher, Drumhaire, Carrigallen, Letrim, and Mohil. In which are two
Boroughs, but never a Market Town. The chief Town is Letrim.

Principal Places are, 1. Letrim, standing Towns.
not far off the River Shannon. It gives Name, and is reckoned the chief of the
County, but not else of Note at present. It stands 75 Miles almost North-West
of Dublin. 2. Carrick-drumrush, a small Borough-Town, nigh three Miles
South-West of Letrim, standing on the River Shannon by the Borders of
Roscommon. 3. Iames-town, another Borough, nigh four Miles South-East of
Carrickdrum, on the same River, by the Borders of Roscommon.

2. Slego.
SLego, has on the East, Letrim; on Bounds.
the West, part of the County of Mayo; on the North, or North-West, the Western
Ocean; and on the South and South-West, Roscommon and Mayo. It is in length 36
Miles, and in breadth 34. A very plentiful County for feeding and raising of
Cattle.

It is divided into six Baronies, viz. Carbuy, Tiraghril, Corran, Coolavan,
Leney, Division.
and Tyreragh: In which is one Market Town, and but one Borough, the chief Town
is Slego.

Chief Places are, 1. Slego, five Miles off the Borders of Letrim, on a Bay
Towns.
of the same Name, having a very commodious Harbor, and a strong Castle: It is
the chief and only Town of Note in this County, and is a Borough and
Market Town. It stands 95 Miles almost North-East of Dublin. 2. Achonry, 17
Miles almost South of Slego, once a City and Bishopric, now quite ^ined; and
the Bishopric united to Elphin in Roscommon. 3. Castel-Connor, 17 Miles nigh
West of Achonry on the River Moy, by the Borders of Mayo.

3. Mayo.
MAyo, or Majo, has on the East and North-East Roscommon and Slego; Bounds.
on the West the Main Western Ocean; on the North with the same Ocean; and on
the South with the Country of Gallway. It is in length 58 Miles, and in breadth
44. A fertile County, abundantly rich in Cattle, Deer, Hawks, and plenty of
Honey.

It is divided into nine Baronies, Division.
viz. Tyrawly, Erris, Burithoole, Gallen, Costello, Clonemorris, Killmain,
Corrah, and Morrisk; in which there is but one Borough, and never a Market
Town. The chief Town is reckoned Mayo.

Principal Places are; 1. Killala, or Towns.
Killaloo, a small Town, which is a Bishops See, standing by the Sea side, or
rather by a large Bay. 2. Mayo, or Moy, about three Miles South East of
Killala, reckoned the chief Town of the County, but now much decayed: It was
once a Bishopric, now joined to Tuam, and the Jurisdiction to Killala; it
stands on the Mouth of the River Moy, on the Borders of Slego, about 115 Miles
almost West of Dublin. 3. Castlebar, 22 Miles South of Mayo, a small Borough
Town, standing on a little River, which falls into the Lough Conn. 4. Shroule,
a little Town in the Borders of Gallway, 23 Miles South of Castle-Bar.

4. Roscommon.
ROscommon has on the East Longford, Bounds.
East-Meath, and part of Kings-County in Leinster, with part of Letrim, from
which parted by the River Shannon; on the West Mayo and Gallway; on the North
and North-East Slego and Letrim; and on the South and South-East Gallway and
Kings-County: It is in length 54 miles, and in breadth 28: A County plain and
fruitful, and with mean Husbandry yields plenty of Corn.

It is divided into Six Baronies, viz. Division.
Boil, Ballintuber-West, Roscommon, Ballimoe, Athlone, and Moyearne: In which
are two Market Towns, and four Boroughs; the principal Town is Athlone.

Chief Places are, 1. Boil. a little Place by the Lake Key, nigh the Borders
Towns.
of Slego, of some Note in these Wars, and remarkable for an old Abbey. 2.
Elphin, a Bishop's See, 10 miles South of Boil, but of no great Note. 3.
Tulsk, a small Borough Town, nigh three miles South-West of Elphin. 4.
Roscommon, 13 miles South of Tulsk, a Borough and Market Town, which gives Name
to this County, but is but a poor place, all the Houses being mean and
thatched. 5. Athlone, a Borough, Market Town, and a Bishop's See, about 15
miles South-East of Roscommon: It is a place of considerable strength, and the
Key of all Connaught, and the chief of these parts: It stands on the River
Shannon, on the Confines of West-Meath in Leinster nigh Lough Ree; and has a
Castle, and a very beautiful Bridge of hewn Stone: It stands 60 miles West of
Dublin. 6. Ballinasloe, a little Town 12 miles South-West of Athlone, on the
River Suck, by Gallway.

5. Gallway.
GAllway has on the East part of Bounds.
Kings-County and Tipperary (from which parted by the River Shannon) and some
of Roscommon; on the West, the main Ocean; on the North and North-East the
Counties of Mayo and Roscommon; and on the South Thomond: It is in length 82
miles, and in breadth 48: A County very fruitful to the Husbandman, and no less
profitable to the Shepherd.

It is divided into 17 Baronies, viz. Division.
Ballinananen, Rosse, Moycullin, Clare, Donamore, Ballimore, Kellehane,
Tiaquin, Killconnell, Clon-Mac-Owen, Loughreagh, Kiltartan, and the Isles of
Arran. In which are two Market Towns, and three Boroughs: The chief Town is
Gallway.

Chief Places are, 1. Tuam or Toam Towns.
an Archbishop's See, 7 miles off the Borders of Mayo, once a famous City, but
now reduced to a mere Village. 2. Gallway or Gallive, a Bishop's See, Market
and Borough, 17 miles South of Tuam, a very strong, neat, and rich City, the
third (by some counted the second,) in all Ireland: It is built almost round,
and in a manner Towerlike, of entire Stone: It is situated by the fall of the
Lake Corbes into the Sea, and by a large, safe, and dilicate Harbor, called
the Bay of Gallway, capable of a vast Fleet of Ships, so well seated for
Merchandise, that it has been looked upon as the greatest place of Trade in all
Ireland: It stands 102 miles West of Dublin. 3. Athenree or Aterith, a Borough
Town 9 miles East of Gallway, enclosed with a Wall of great Circuit, but
slenderly inhabited. 4. Clonefart, a decaying Town 25 miles East of Athenree,
and 2 from the Shannon: It still keeps the Title of a Bishop's See. 6.
Portumny, a small place 8 miles almost South of Clonefart upon the River
Shannon nigh Lough-Derg.

6. Thomond.
THomond or Clare County, sometimes Twomond and Twowoun, or North-Munster (then
part of Munster,) has on Bounds.
the East and South the River Shannon, which parts it from Tipperary, Limrick,
and Kerry in Munster; on the West the Ocean; and on the North Gallway: It is in
length 55 miles, and in breadth 38: A County of a very fruitful Soil, and
commodious for Navigation.

It is divided into eight Baronies, viz. Division.
Burrin, Inchiquin, Tullagh, Bunratty, Islands, Ibrickan, Clanderlay, and
Moysarta. In which are two Market Towns, and but one Borough: The chief Town is
Killalow.

Principal Places are, 1. Killalow or Labu, a Market Town and a Bishop's Towns.
See, once a very considerable place, but now decaying, though still counted
the chief of the County: It stands on the River Shannon, on the Borders of
Tipperary, 10 miles almost North of Limrick, and about 90 miles almost
South-West of Dublin. 2. Enis Town, a Borough about 20 miles West of Killalow.
3. Clare, nigh three miles South of Enes Town, a Market Town, which gives Name
to this County, therefore by some reckoned the head thereof: It stands nigh a
Lake made by the River Shannon. 4. Bunrotty, 11 miles South-East of Clare, a
little Town standing by the River Shannon, and fortified with a Castle.

Thus much for CONNAUGHT.
LEINSTER PROVINCE
map of Leinster
CHAP. VI.
Of Leinster, showing its Name, Bounds, Dimentions, Rivers, Products, Remarks,
etc. and describing all its Counties, Towns, and Castles.

THE Province of Leinster, sometimes Name.
called Lemster, by the Latins Lagenia, and in more Ancient Times Lagen; it is
called by the natural Irish Leighnigh and Leighingh; and by the Welsh Lein.

It is bounded on the East with the Bounds.
^rish Ocean or St. George's Channel; ^n the West with the Province of
^onnaught, from which separated by ^he River Shannon; on the North with ^he
Province of Ulster; on the South ^ith the Ocean; and on the South-West with the
Province of Munster, a little way parted by the River Shure: In form it may be
said somewhat to resemble a Triangle.

It is in length from the most North parts of the County of East- Mead, to
Hooke-Tower, the Southern Point in the County of Wexford, about 112 Miles; in
breadth from the Town of Wicklow, to the most West part of King's County, about
70 Miles. The Circuit (reckoning the Windings and Turnings) may be about 360
Miles.

The chief Rivers are; 1. Barrow, which arises in Queen's County, running
Rivers.
East, and then South, washes Caterlagh and Lughlin, then takes the Shure nigh
Waterford, and together with it falls into the Ocean. 2. Boyne, which arises in
King's County, and run toward the North East, washes Trim, Navan, Slain, and
Drogheda, and immediately after looses it self in the Ocean. 3. Liffe, or
Leffy, arising in the County of Wicklow, about 15 Miles from its fall into the
Sea, and takes a large compass, and falls into the Sea at Dublin. 4. Nuer,
beginning in Queen's County, washes Kilkenny and Thomas-Town, and falls into
the River Barrow, a little above Ross. 5. Urrin, or Slane, beginning in
Wicklow, washes Ballinglass and Inishcorthy, and falls into the Sea at Wexford.
6. Inny in Kings-County, falling into the Shannon at Lough-Ree.

This Province is very fertile and Products.
fruitful in Corn and Pasture-Ground, and well watered with Rivers; the Air
clear and gentle, mixed with a temperate Disposition, yielding neither ex^remity
of Heat nor Cold. It is plentiful both in Fish and Flesh, and in other
Victuals, as Butter, Cheese, and Milk. The Commodities chiefly consists in
Cattle, Sea-Fowl and Fish, and breeds excellent good Horses. The Inhabitants
come nearest the Civil Disposition of the English, from whom they are for the
most part descended; so that I look upon this to be the most considerable
Province in Ireland.

In this Province is one Archbishopric, Remarks.
viz. Dublin; three Bishoprics, (besides Loughlin united to Fearnes, and
Glenelach united to Dublin,) viz. Fearnes, Kildare and Kilkenny: 16
Market Towns, viz. Athboy, Arcklo, Ardragh, Carbre, Dublin, Kildare, Kilkenny,
Longford, Loughlin, Mariburrough, Molingar, Philips-town, Ross, Trim, Wexford
and Wicklow: 47 Places of Commerce, and as many that return Par^iament-Men, or
Boroughs: 102 Castles well fortified by the English, and 926 Parishes. The
chief place i^ Dublin, also chief of the Kingdom.

The Boroughs are; Three in Longford; Boroughs
St. Iohns-Town, Lanesburroug^ and Longford: Three in West-Meath* Foore,
Killbegan and Molingar: Six i^ East-Meath; Athboy, Duleck, Kells, Navan,
Ratooth and Trim: Three in Dublin; Dublin, Newcastle and Swords. Four in
Wicklow; Arcklo, Ballinglass Blessen and Wicklow: Three in Kildare; Arthy,
Kildare and Naas: Thre^ in Kings-County; Bir, Bunalin an^ Philips-town: Three
in Queens-County Ballinekill, Mariburrough and Port-Arlington: Eight in
Kilkenny; Callen, St* Canice, Gowran, Inis-teige, Kells, Kilkenny, Knocktopher
and Thomas-Town. Two in Catherlagh; Catherlagh an^ Loughlin: And eight in
Wexfor^; Bannae, Clamine, Clonegeen, Feathard, Iniscorthy, Rosse, Taghmon and
Wexford.

The Religious Places of this Province Religious Places.
were once the Monastery of S^ Mary of Oustmanby; the Magnificen^ Abbey called
St. Thomas-Court at Dubli^ built by King Henry the Second o^ England: Likewise
Tintern Monastery, that notable Abbey founded b^ William Marshall Earl of
Pembrook, who called it de Voto, because of a Vow that he made. These Places
have now little remaining.

This Province was, before the English Conquest of it, divided into two History.
Kingdoms, viz. Leinster and Mead, both under their own Kings; till a falling
out happened between the King of Mead and he of Leinster, which caused King
Henry the Second of England to make a Conquest of it. Leinster has been
inseparably annexed to England ever since, but Mead was granted in Fee-Farm to
Hugh Lacy, a Noble Englishman. Since which it came wholly under the King of
England, and now the Province of Mead is united to Leinster.

It was anciently divided among the Old Division.
Brigantes, inhabiting Kilkenny, Caterlagh, Kings and Queens Counties; the
Menapii, in and about Wexford; the Cauci, in and about Wicklow; and the Blanii
or Elbanii in Dublin, East-Meath and West-Meath. Afterward divided into Mead
and Leinster, (as before was said;) Mead contained the Counties of East-Meath,
West-Meath, and Longford.

It is now divided into 11 Countie^ New Division.
viz. 1. Longford, 2. West-Meath, 3. Eas^ Mead, 4. Dublin, 5. Wicklow, 6. Ki^
dare, 7. Kings-County, 8. Queens-Count^ 9. Kilkenny, 10. Catherlagh, and 11.
Wexford. Of these, four borders on the Sea, viz. East-Meath, Dublin, Wicklo^
and Wexford; the seven others ar^ Midland Counties. These Countie^ are again
divided into 90 Baronies.

1. Longford.
LOngford (by some made in Connaught) is the most North-Western Bounds.
County, and has on the East and South, West-Meath; on the North and
North-East, Letrim in Connaught, and Cavan in Ulster; and on the West, the
River Shannon, which parts it from Roscommon in Connaught. It is in lengt^ 27
Miles, and in breadth 16. A small* but a rich and pleasant County.

It is divided into six Baronies, viz. Division.
Longford, Granard, Ardagh, Moydoe, Rathlin and Shrowle: In which are two
Market Towns and three Boroughs; the chief Town is Longford.

Principal Places are, 1. St. Iohns-Town, Towns.
or Ballanalie, a Borough-Town on the River Camlin, in almost the ^iddle of the
County. 2. Longford, (...) the same River, five Miles almost ^est of St.
Iohns-Town, a Market-^own and a Borough, the chief of the ^ounty, but of no
great Note. It ^ands about 58 Miles almost West of ^ublin. 3. Ardagh, six Miles
South-^ast of Longford, a little decayed Mar^et-Town. 4. Lanesburrough, almost
^2 Miles West of Ardagh, a Borough-^own standing on the River Shannon, which
has a Bridge over it into Ros^ommon.

2. West-Meath.
WEst-Meath, has on the East, East-Meath; Bounds.
on the West the River ^hannon, (which parts it from Roscom^on in Connaught)
and Longford; on ^he North, Cavan in Ulster; and on the South, Kings-County. It
is in length ^0 Miles, and in breadth 20. A Coun^y which gives place to none in
Ferti^ity and Populousness.

It is divided into 11 Baronies, viz. Division.
Foore, Delyn, Moygoish, Corkery, Molingar, Fabill, Furtullagh, Moycashell,
Rathconrath, Kilkenny and Clunlona: In which is one Market Town, and three
Boroughs; the chief Town is Molingar.

Principal Places are, 1. Foore, a Borough-Town, Towns.
two Miles off the Borders of East-Meath, of little Note 2. Molingar or
Mullenger, 13 Miles South of Foore, a Market and Borough-Town, of considerable
Note and Strength, not only the chief of this County, but of the whole Province
of Mead. It stands 40 Miles nigh^ West of Dublin. 3. Ballimore, 13 Miles West
of Molingar; a small Town nigh^ the South-parts of Longford. 4. Killbegan, 10
Miles South-East of Ballimore; a little Borough-Town on the River Brasmagh, by
the Borders o^ Kings-County.

3. East-Meath
EAst-Meath, has on the East, the Bounds.
Ocean and Dublin; on the North and North-East, Cavan and Louth in Ulster; on
the West, West-Meath; and on the South, Kildare. It is in length 38 Miles, and
in breadth as many. A County very rich, pleasant and populous.

It is divided into 11 Baronies; viz Division.
Moyrgallon, Slane, Duleck, Skreene, Navan, Kells, Lune, Moysenragh, Deece,
Rato^h, and Dunboyne. In which are two Market Towns, and six Boroughs; the
chief Town is Trim.

Chief Places are, 1. Kells, a little Towns.
Borough on a small River called Black-Water, which falls into the Boyne nigh
Navan. 2. Slane, a little Town on the Boyne, 12 Miles East of Kells, and seven
West of Drogheda. 3. Duleck, a Borough seven Miles nigh East of Slane, and four
South of Drogheda, on the River Nenny. 4. Navan, a small Borough on the River
Boyne, 10 Miles West of Duleck, and seven almost South-East of Kells. 5.
Athboy, or Aboy, eight Miles South-West of Navan, a Borough and Market Town,
well inhabited, and of good resort. 6. Trim, six Miles almost South-East of
Athboy, on the River Boyne, a Borough and Market Town of good Trade, reckoned
the chief in the County. It stands 23 Miles almost North-West of Dublin. 7.
Ratooth, a little Borough-Town 12 Miles East of Trim, and as many North-West of
Dublin.

4. Dublin.
DUblin, or Divelin, has on the East Bounds.
the Irish Ocean, or St. George's Channel; on the West and North-West, Kildare
and East-Meath; and on the South, Wicklow. It is a small County but 28 Miles
long, and 16 broad. A County very rich and fertile in Corn and Grass, but
destitute of Woods, so that they have a kind of a fat Turff or Coal.

It is divided into six Baronies, viz. Division.
Ballrudery, Cross, Cooleck, Castleknock, Newcastle and Rathdowne. In which is
one Market Town and three Boroughs; the chief is Dublin.

Chief Places are, 1. Swords, a little Towns.
Borough-Town nigh the Sea, eight Miles North of Dublin. 2. Dublin, or
Balacleigh, an Archbishopric, a Market and Borough, the Metropolis of the
Kingdom, the Seat of the Viceroy, and an University. It is a very Noble City,
(surpassing any in England except London) adorned with many Glorious Buildings,
seated on a delectable and wholesome place, (first built on Piles of Wood) on the
River Liffe, which affords it an excellent Haven: To the South are Hills,
Westward an open Champion Ground, on ^he East the Sea at Hand in sight. It ^as
a very strong Wall of rough ^uilding Stone, toward the South for^ified with
Rampires. It opens at ^ix Gates, from whence there run forth Suburbs of great
length: Toward ^he East stands the Kings Castle on ^igh, most strongly fenced
with Dit^hes and Towers: Just over against ^t is a beautiful College, richly
En^owed and Consecrated unto the Name of the Holy Trinity. Here ^re also many
other fine Buildings, as ^he Cathedral, the Archbishops Pa^ace, the Collegiate
Church, the Town Hall, etc. 3. Newcastle, a Bo^ough-Town eight Miles almost
West ^f Dublin. Here also stood the City ^f Glendelach, a Bishop's See; now
^uined, and the Bishopric united to Dublin.

3. Wicklow.
WIcklow, (sometimes a part of the Bounds.
County of Dublin) has on the East St. George's Channel; on the West, Kildare
and Catherlagh; on the North, Dublin; and on the South, Wexford. It is in
length 36 Miles, and in breadth 28. A County sufficiently fruitful.

It is divided into six Baronies, viz. Division.
Rathdown, (part in Dublin) Newcastle* Talbotstone, Ballinecur, Arcklow and
Shel* Aly. In which are two Market-Town^ and four Boroughs; the principa^ Town
is Wicklow.

Chief Places are, 1. Blessinto, a smal^ Borough-Town on the River Liffe^ Towns.
bordering on Kildare. 2. Baltinglasse* another Borough, 13 Miles South o^
Blessinto, on the River Urrin or Slane* by the Borders of Catherlagh. 3.
Wicklow, a Market Town and Borough, 2^ Miles East of Baltinglasse. It is the
chief of the County standing on the Sea, and has a narrow Haven at the Mouth of
the River Letrim, ov^ which stands a Rock in stead of a Castle, enclosed with a
strong Wall: I^ stands 24 Miles nigh South of Dublin 4. Arcklow, a Market Town
and a Borough, 12 Miles South of Wicklow. I^ stands by the Sea, and once gave
Name to a County, and now a Title to the Duke of Ormond, who is Baron of this
place.

6. Kildare.
KIldare, has on the East, Dublin and Bounds.
Wicklow; on the West, Kings-County and Queens County; on the North,
E^st-Meath; and on the South, Catherlagh. It is in length 38 Miles, and in
breadth 23. A County most rich and plentiful in all things.

It is divided into eight Baronies, Division.
viz. Carburny, Ikeathy, Salt, Naas, Connel, Ophally, Noragh and Reban, Kileah
and Moan. In which are two Market Towns and three Boroughs; the chief Town is
Kildare.

Principal places are, 1. Carbury or Towns.
Carbre, toward the North-West part a Market Town, but much decayed. 2. Naas,
a Borough-Town 13 Miles South-East of Carbury, nigh the River Liffe. 3. Kildare
or Kildar, 11 Miles almost West of Naas; it is a considerable place, the chief
of the County, a Market Town, a Borough and a Bishop's See, formerly much
celebrated for the Holy Virgin Briged. It stands 27 Miles South-West of Dublin.
4. Arthy, a Borough-Town 12 Miles South of Kildare, on the River Barrow, not
far off of the Borders of Queens-County.

7. Kings-County.
KIngs-County, formerly called Offaly, Bounds.
has on the East, Kildare; on the West, the River Shannon, (which parts it from
Gallway in Connaught) and part of Tipperary in Munster; on the North,
West-Meath; and on the South and South-East, Tipperary and Queens-County. It is
in length 48 Miles, and in breadth 14. A County not so rich as some others.

It is divided into 11 Baronies, viz. Division.
Warrenstown, Coolestown, Philipstown, Geshill, Kilcoursi, Ballicowen,
Balliboy, Carri-Castle, Eglish, Ballibrit and Clonlisk. In which is one
Market Town and three Boroughs; the chief Town is Phillipstown.

Principal Places are, 1. Phillipstown or Kingstown, toward the North parts,
Towns.
three Miles off the Borders of West-Meath, a Market Town and Borough, not
remarkable for any thing but for being the Head of the County. It stands 38
Miles West of Dublin. 2. Bunalin or Bannahet, a small Borough-Town, 25 Miles
almost South-West of Phillipstown, standing on the River Shannon, on the
Borders of Gallway in Connaught. 3. Bir, another little Borough-Town six Miles
South of Bunalin, standing on the Borders of Tipperary in Munster, on a River
that runs into the Shannon.

8. Queens-County.
QUeens-County, in Irish Lease, has on Bounds.
the East, Kildare; on the North and West, Kings-County with Tipperary in
Munster; and on the South, Kilkenny. It is in length 35 Miles, and in breadth
32. A County full of Woods and Bogs.

It is divided into seven Baronies, Division.
viz. Portneh inch, Stradbally, Balliadam, Slewmargie, Cullinagh, Mariburow and
Upper Ossery. In which is one Market Town and three Boroughs; the chief Town is
Mariburow.

Chief Places are, 1. Port-Arlinton, Towns.
a small Borough-Town in the North parts of this County on the River Barrow, on
the Borders of Kings-County. 2. Mariburow or Queenstown, 10 Miles South of
Port-Arlinton: It is a Borough and a Market Town, but no^ otherwise remarkable
than for being the Head of the County. It stand^ 72 Miles almost South-West of
Dubli^ 3. Ballinekill, another Borough-Tow^ eight Miles South of Mariburow, an^
about a Mile from the Borders of Kilkenny.

9. Kilkenny.
KIlkenny, has on the East, Catherlag^ Bounds.
and Wexford; on the West, Tipperary in Munster; on the North, Queens-County;
and on the South; Waterford i^ Muster, from which parted by the River Shure. It
is in length 40 Miles and in breadth 22. A County wit^ Towns and Castles on
every side makes a fine show, and in plenty o^ all things gives place to none.

It is divided into 11 Baronies, viz. Fassadinig, Galmoy, Cranagh, Kilkenn^
Division.
lib. Shellilogher, Gow^an, Kells, Knock^ pher, Ida, Ibercon and Iverk. In
which is one Market Town, and 8 Boroughs; the chief Town is Kilkenny.

Chief Places are, 1. Kilkenny, a Market, a Borough, and a Bishopric, in Towns.
the middle of the County on the River Nuer. It is a large and strong City, the
most populous, Rich, and well Traded Inland Town in Ireland: It consists of two
parts, the Irish Town, in which is the Cathedral; and the English, which was
built since, and is now the principal, the former being only a Suburb to it. It
stands 56 Miles South West of Dublin. 2. Gowran, a Borough, 8 Miles East of
Kilkenny, nigh the Borders of Catherlagh. 3. Callen, a Borough 15 Miles almost
South West of Gowran, on the River Callen, the third Town of the County. 4.
Kells, a Borough Town on the same River, six Miles West of Callen. 5.
Thomas-Town, a Borough four Miles West of Kells, on the Kiver Nuer: It is a
Walled Town, the Second in the County. 6. Inishteige, a Borough on the same
River, four Miles South East of Thomas-Town, and the Fourth in the County. 7.
Knocktopher, another Borough seven Miles West of Inisteige: Here is a little
Borough called St. Canice, three Miles-West of Kilkenny.

10. Catherlagh.
CAthelagh, Caterlagh, or Carlogh, Bounds.
has on the East Wicklow and Wexford; on the West Kilkenny, and part of Queen's
County; on the North Kildare; and on the South and South East Wexford: It is in
length 28 Miles, and in breadth 18. A County of a fertile Soil, and well shaded
with Woods.

It is divided into five Baronies, viz. Division.
Ravilly, Catherlagh, Forth, Idr^ne, and St. Mullin. In which is one
Market Town and two Boroughs. The chief Town is Catherlagh.

Principal Places are; 1. Catherlagh, or Caterlogh, standing on the River Towns.
Barrow, on the Borders of Queens County. It is a Market Town, and a Borough,
the chief of the County, and is fortified with a Castle: It stands 38 Miles
almost South West of Dublin. 2. Loughlen, Laghlin, or old Loughlin, eight Miles
almost South West of Catherlagh, a Borough Town of no Note. 3. Loughlin, or
Laghlin, three Miles East of the other, on the River Barrow, once a
considerable City, and a Bishopric, now reduced to a Village, and the
Bishopric anited to Fearnes in Wexford.

II. UUexford.
WExford, or Weesford, by the Irish Bounds.
Loghhagarm, has on the East the Ocean; on the West Catherlagh and Kilkenny; on
the North Wicklow; and on the South and South West the Ocean, and some of
Waterford in Munster, from which parted by Waterford Haven: It is in length 47
Miles, and in breadth 27. A County fruitful in Corn and Grass.

It is divided into eight Baronies, viz. Division.
Gory, Scarewalsh, Bantry, Ballageen, Shelmaliere, Sheilbourne, Bargie, and
Fourth. In which are two Market Towns and eight Boroughs. The Principal Town is
Wexford.

Chief Places are; 1. Fearnes, or Towns.
Ferns, toward the Northern Parts, a Town of no Note but for being a Bishops
Sec. 2. Inishcorthy, a Borough Town, eight Miles nigh South of Fearnes, on the
River Urrin or Slany. 3. Ross, a Borough and Market Town, on the River Barrow,
15 Miles South West of Inishcorthy, on the Borders of Kilkenny, once a famous
City now almost ruined. 4. Wexford, or Weesford, 17 Miles East of Ross, a
Market Town and Borough. It was once reckoned the chief City in all Ireland,
and was the first Colony of the English, still a fair and large Town, which has
a very commodious Haven at the Mouth of the River Urrin or Slany: It stands
about 62 Miles South o^ Dublin. 5. Taghmon, a little Borough Town seven Miles
nigh West of Wexford. Clamine, a Borough five Mile^ South West of Taghmon. 7.
Banne another four Miles South of Clamine by a convenient Bay of the sam^ Name.
8. Duncannon, nigh five Mile^ West of Banne, a considerable Castl^ on Waterford
Haven, so that no Ship^ can go to Waterford or Ross without leave. 9. Featherd,
a little Boroug^ two Miles from Duncannon.

Thus much for LEINSTER.
MUNSTER PROVINCE
map of Munster
CHAP. VII.
Of Munster, showing its Name, Bounds, Dimensions, Rivers, Products, Remarks,
etc. and describing all its Counties, Towns and Castles.

THE Province of Munster, many Name.
times called Mounster; it is called by the Latins Momonia, and by the natural
Irish Mown, and in common construction of Speech Wown.

I is bounded on the East and South-East with the Province of Leinster Bounds.
(from which partly separated by the River Shure,) and the Ocean; on the West
with the Atlantic or Western Ocean; on the North with the Province of
Connaught, from which separated by the River Shannon; and on the South and
South-West with the Virgivian Ocean: The form thereof is a kind of a long
Square.

It is in length from Waterford Haven Dimensions.
to the Western-point in the County of Kerry, not far off Dingle, about 135
miles; in breadth, from the North parts of Tipperary to Baltimore, in Cork,
120 miles; but from Baltimore to the North parts of Kerry, (which is more
natural,) is but 68 miles. The circuit, (by reason of the great Windings and
Turnings,) is above 600 miles.

The chief Rivers of this Province Rivers.
are, 1. Shure, Sewer, or Shower, which begins in Tipperary, runs South, and
washes Thurles, and passes by Cashell, then runs East and washes Clonmell,
Carick, and Waterford, then it takes in the Barrow, with which it falls into
the Ocean. 2. Black Water, Awiduffe or Avenmore, which begins in Kerry, runs
East, and washes Mallo and Lismore, then runs South, and falls into the Sea at
Youghill. 3. Lee, in the County of Cork, runs East and washes Cork, and soon
after falls into the Sea, making several small Isles. 4. Band, likewise in
Cork, runs East, and washes Bandon-Bridge, and falls into the Sea at Kingsale.
5. Lean, in Kerry, runs West, and falls into Dingle-Bay. 6. Cashen, in Kerry,
which falls into Shannonmouth.

This Province abounds with many Products.
e^cellent Bays and Havens, with many rich Towns; the Air mild and temperate,
neither too hot nor too cold; the Sol in some places is hilly, looking aloft
with woody wild and solitary Mountains; yet the Valleys below are garnished
with Corn Fields, all both pleasant for Sight and fertile for Soil. The most
general Commodities of this Province are Corn, Cattle, Wood, Wool, and Fish,
the last whereof it affords abundance of all sorts, especially Herrings.

In this Province is one Archbishopric, Remarks.
viz. Cashell; Five Bishoprics (besides Ross and Cloyne united to Cork, and
Lismore united to Waterford,) viz. Waterford, Limerick, Cork, Ardfeart, and
Emly: Seven Market Towns, viz. Carrick, Clonmell, Cork, Dingle, Kingsale,
Limrick, and Waterford: Twenty Five places that return Parliament Men, called
Boroughs; Sixty Six Castles of old Erection, and (according to Morden,) 80
Parishes in the whole. Chief City of the whole is commonly reckoned Waterford,
but Limerick at present deserves the Pre-eminence.

The Boroughs are as following, viz. Boroughs
Five in Tipperary; Cashell, Clonmell, Fetherd, Tipperary and Thurles: Four in
Waterford; Dungarvan, Lismore, Tallagh and Waterford: Three in Limrick;
Askeaton, Kilmalock, and Limrick: Three in Kerry; Ardfeart, Dingle, and Trally:
And 10 in Cork; Baltimore, Bandon-Bridge, Caraby, Charleville, Clone, Cork,
Kingsale, Cloyne, Mallo and Younghill.

The Religious Places in this Province Religious Places.
were once the two Abbeys a^ Youghill, one called North-Abby, an^ the other
South-Abby: The two Abbeys at Limerick, St. Francis-Abby, an^ Dominick-Abby:
The two Abbeys a^ Cork, St. Francis-Abby, and the Abb^ of the Isles. And
lastly, that famou^ Abbey of the Holy-Cross in Tipperary* These are now quite
ruined, and wholly out of use.

This Province, before the Englis^ Conquest of it, was a Kingdom of i^ History.
self, and ruled by its own King. I^ then contained some part of Connaugh^
(that is, the County of Thomond;) sinc^ the English became Masters of it, i^
has been kept close to that Crown* only the Spaniards at one time became
Masters of a little of it, bu^ were soon driven out. It is now Governed by a
Lord President, who ha^ one Assistant, two Learned Lawyers and a Secretary to
keep it in Obe^ience.

It was anciently divided among the Old Division.
^lterni in Tipperary; the Coriandi, in ^imerick, Waterford, and part of
Tip^erary and Cork; the Luceni in Kerry; ^he Velibori in Desmond in Cork; and
^he Vodii in some part of Cork. Afterward divided into Deswown, Hierwown,
Meanwown, and Urwown. Of later ^imes it was divided into two parts, viz.
West-Mounster, and South-Mun^ter.

It stands at present divided into five Counties, (by some into six,) viz. New
Division.
1. Tipperary, 2. Waterford, 3. Cork, to which is joined the County of
Desmond, 4. Limerick, and 5. Kerry. Of these, three border on the Sea, viz.
Waterford, Cork and Kerry; Tipperary and Limerick are Midland Counties. These
Counties are again divided into 52 Baronies.

1. Tipperary.
TIpperary, or Holy-Cross, by the Irish Thobruidearum Cuntae, has on the Bounds.
East, Queens-County and Kilkenny in Leinster; on the West, Limerick and the
River Shannon, which parts it from Gallway and Thomond in Connaught on the
North or North-East, Kings County in Leinster; and on the South Waterford. It
is in length 58 Miles and in breadth 36. The South-part^ are exceeding fertile,
and well furnished with good Buildings.

It is divided into 14 Baronies, viz. Division.
Lower Ormond, Ormond, Arra, Owny, Ikerin, Ileagh, Eliogurty, Kilnalong,
Kilnamama, Clonwilliam, Middlethird, Slewwardagh, Comsey, and Iffa and Ossa. I^
which are two Market Towns, an^ five Boroughs; the chief Town is Clonmell.

Chief Places are, 1. Thurles, a Borough-Town, Towns.
on the River Shure, si^ Miles from the Borders of Kilkenny 2. Cashell or
Cassel, 12 Miles South o^ Thurles. nigh the River Shure, a Borough and an
Archbishopric, but no^ else of Note. 3. Fethard, a little Borough-Town, eight
Miles almost Eas^ of Cashell. 4. Tipperary or Holy-Cr^ a Borough-Town 17 Miles
West (...) Fethard. It gives Name to this Cou^ty, and was once a very famous
pla^ 5. Emly or Awn, above seven Mil^ West of Tipperary, nigh the Borde^ (...)
Limerick: It is a Bishop's See, once famous City, but now much decay^. 6.
Clonmell, a Market Town and ^orough 26 Miles nigh East of Emly: (...) is now
the chief of the County, a ^ch Place of great strength, and stands (...) the
River Shure, on the Borders of Waterford, about 82 Miles South-West ^f Dublin.
7. Carick, or Carick-Mac-Griffen, a Market Town on the same River, 10 Miles
East of Clonmell. It ^s situated on a Rock between the Li^its of Waterford and
Kilkenny.

2. Waterford.
WAterford, has on the East, Waterford-Haven, Bounds.
which parts it from Wexford in Leinster; on the West, Cork; on the North, the
River Shure, which parts it from Tipperary, and Kilkenny in Leinster; and on
the South, the Ocean. It is in length 46 Miles, and in breadth 24. A fine
County as well for Pleasure as Riches.

It is divided into six Baronies, viz. Division.
Glanehery, Upperthird, Middlethird, Desees, Coshmore, and Cosbrid. In which is
one Market Town, and four Boroughs; the chief Town is Waterford.

Chief Places are, 1. Waterford, (...) the Irish Phurtargie, a Market, (...)
Towns.
rough, and Bishops See, standing (...) the River Shure on the Borders of
K^kenny. It is a very Wealthy, we^ traded, and populous City, the seco^ for
bigness in this Kingdom, endow^ with many ample Privileges: T^ Streets are
narrow, thrust close, an^ pent together: It stands in an unhealthful Air, but
for Trade as conveniently seated as any Port in the World, having a most
excellent Haven, though a good distance from the Sea, yet Ships of the greatest
Burden may easily ride at the Key. It stands 75 Miles nigh South of Dublin. 2.
Dungarvan, 20 Miles almost South-West of Waterford: It is a Borough-Town seated
on the Sea, well fortified with a Castle, and has a very commodious Road for
Ships. 3. Lismore, a Borough-Town, 13 Miles West of Dungarvan, on the River
Blackwater, once a Bishops Sea, but now united to Waterford, and is in a
decaying condition. 4. Tallagh, a Borough-Town, above five Miles South of
Lismore, by the Borders of Cork.

3. Limerick.
LImrick or Limerick, has on the East, Bounds.
Tipperary; on the West, Kerry; ^n the North, the River Shannon, which parts it
from Thomond in Con^ught) with a little of Tipperary; and ^n the South with
Cork. It is in length 48 Miles, and in breadth 27. A fertile County, and well
inhabited, but able to show few good Towns: The West parts are Mountainous, and
the rest plain.

It is divided into nine Baronies, viz. Division.
Clonello, Kenry, Limerick, Ownyheg, Connagh, Clanwilliam, Small County,
Coshma, and Coshled: In which is one Market Town, and three Boroughs. Principal
Place is Limerick.

Chief Places are, 1. Limerick, or Towns.
Lough-Meagh, a Market, a Borough, and a Bishop's See, now the Metropolis of
Munster. It is an eligent, rich and populous City, and of singular Strength,
situated partly on an Island ^n the River Shannon. It is counted two Towns, the
Upper, wherein stands the Castle, and the Cathedral Church, has two Gates
opened into it, and each of them a fair Bridge o^ Stone into it, with Bulwarks,
an^ little Draw-Bridges, the one leading unto the West, the other unto the
East: Unto which the Lower Town joyneth, fenced with a Wall, and a Castle also
thereto, and a Fore-gate at the Entrance into it. The Bridges and Castles are
very beautiful. It stands 60 Miles off of Sea, yet Ships of Burden can come up
to the Walls. It stands about 95 Miles almost West of Dublin. 2. Askeaton, a
little Borough nigh the Shannon, 13 Miles almost West of Limerick. 3. Athdora,
a small Town eight Miles South-East of Askeaton, and nine South-West of
Limerick, of old time fortified. 4. Killmallock, 16 Miles South of Limerick, a
Borough-Town both rich and populous, and enclosed with a Wall.

4. Kerry.
KErry (reckoned a County Palatine) has on the East, Limerick and Bounds.
Cork; on the West, the Atlantic Ocean; on the North, the River Shannon, which
separates it from Thomond i^ Connaught; and on the South, Desmond in Cork, with
part of the Ocean. It is in length 60 Miles, and in breadth 47. A County full
of Woody Mountains, and in many places good Cornfieldsd.

It is divided into eight Baronies, Division.
viz. Iraghticoner, Klanmoris, Corkaguinie, Trughenackmy, Magunihie,
Glanaroghty, Dunkeron, and Iveragh: In which is one Market Town and three
Boroughs; the chief Town is Dingle.

Principal Places are, 1. Ardfeart, a Towns.
Borough-Town nigh the Sea, which is also a Bishop's Sea, but a very poor one.
2. Trally, a little Borough-Town about five Miles South-East of Ardfeart, and
four from Sea, a place of no Note. 3. Dingle, a Borough and a Market Town 23
Miles almost West of Trally. It is the chief Town of this County, and the most
Western of Note in all Ireland. It stands very commodious for Navigation, upon
a very large Bay of the same Name. It stands 164 Miles almost South-West of
Dublin.

5. Cork.
COrk, or Coreach, has on the East, Waterford, Bounds.
with a little of Tipperary; on the West, Kerry, with some of the Sea; on the
North, Limerick; and on the South and South-East, the Virgeria^ Ocean. It is
(taking in Desmond, which is 30 Miles long and 8 broad) the largest County in
Ireland, being in length 86 Miles, and in breadth 50. A County said to be wild
and woody, yet has many good Towns.

It is divided into 15 Baronies, viz. Dunhallo, Orrery and Kilmore, Armory or
Division.
Earmoy, Condon or Clongibbon, Kilnatalloon, Imokilly, Barrimore, Barrets,
Cork, lib. Kinalea, Kineatmeaky, Muskery, and Carbury: Desmond contains the
other two, viz. Bantry and Bear. In these are two Market Towns and 10 Boroughs;
the chief place is Cork.

Chief Places are, 1. Charleville, the Towns.
most North-Town, a Borough on the Borders of Limerick. 2. Mallo, a little
Borough on the River Blackwater, 14 Miles South of Charleville. 3. Youghill, a
Borough on the Mouth of the River Blackwater, by the Borders of Waterford, 30
Miles South-West of Mallo. It is a rich and populous Town, well Walled round,
in form somewhat long, and has a very commodious Haven, and a well fenced Key.
4. Cloyne, 8 Miles nigh West of Youghill, a little Borough and Bishopric, said
to be united (...) Cork. 5. Ballicora, a small Borough 4 Miles almost West of
Cloyne. 6. Cork, ^3 Miles West of Ballicora, a Market, Borough, and Bishop's
See, the chief of ^his County. It is a neat, wealthy and ^opulous City,
inhabited most by Eng^ish, standing on the River Lee, where it ^as a commodious
Haven. It is of good ^trength, enclosed within a Circuit of Walls in form of an
Egg, with the River flowing round about it, and running between, not passable
through but by Bridges, lying out in length as it were in one direct broad
Street, and the fame having a Bridge over it. It stands 124 Miles South-West of
Dublin. 7. Kingsale, 12 Miles South of Cork, a Borough and Market Town, nigh
the Mouth of the River Banne. It is a populous and well traded Town, the second
in the County. It has an excellent Haven for Ships, and is fortified with old
Walls. 8. Bandon-bridge, a Borough on the same River 8 Miles almost West of
Kingsale. 9. Rosse, 16 Miles South-West of Bandonbridge, on the Sea, and a City
and a Bis^oprick now united to Cork, and is a mere Village. 10. Baltimore, a
Borough, and Commodious Port 14 Miles nigh South-West of Rosse.

An INDEX Of all the Provinces, Counties, Baronies, Cities, Towns, Forts,
Castles, Rivers, Lakes, Havens, Bays, Mountains, Promontories, etc. in such a
manner as may serve for a Geographical Dictionary for Ireland. The Longitude of
the Towns is reckoned from London. P. stands for Province, C. for County, and
B. for Barony.
A.
ABoy. See Athboy. Achill Islands, by the P. of Connaught, and C. of Mayo.
Achonry, a Town in the P. of Connaught, C. of Slego, and B. of Leney; Lon. 9.
12. Lat. 53. 58. Agher, a Town in the P. of Ulster, C. of Tyrone, and B. of
Clogher; Lon. 7. 44. Lat. 54. 25. Allin, a Bog in the P. of Leinster, and C. of
Kildare. Allyn, a Lake in the P. of Connaught, and C. of Letrim. Annagh, a Town
in the P. of Ulster, C. of Cavan, and B. Tullagarvy; Lon. 7. 46. Lat. 54. 5.
Annagh, a Town in the P. of Ulster, C. of Down, and B. of Upper Evagh; Lon. 6.
46. Lat. 54. 19. Antrim, a County in the P. of Ulster. Antrim, a Barony, and
Town, in the County of Antrim; Lon. 6. 46. Lat. 54. 45. Archdale, a Castle in
the P. of Ulster, C. of Eermenagh, and B. of Lurge; Lon. 8. 14. Lat. 54. 28.
Arcklow, a Barony and Town in the P. of Leinster, and C. of Wicklow; Lon. 6.
35. Lar, 52. 41. Ardagh, a Barony and Town in the P. of Leinster, and C. of
Longford; Lon. 8. 8. Lat. 53. 34. Ardagh, a Town in the P. of Connaught, C. and
B. of Letrim; Lon. 8. 22. Lat. 53. 56. Ardagh, a Town in the P. of Leinster, C.
of East-Meath, and B. of Slane; Lon. 7. 14. Lat. 53. 54. Ardagh, a Town in the
P. of Leinster, C. of Cork, and B. of Carbury; Lon. 9. 16. Lat. 51. 32.
Ardbracan, a Town in the P. Munster, C. of East-Meath, and B. of Navan; Lon. 7.
14. Lat. 53. 38. Ardee. See Atherdee. Ardfeart, a Town in the P. of Munster, C.
of Kerry, and B. of Klanmore; Lon. 10. 54. Lat. 52. 9. Ardmagh. See Armagh.
Ards, a Bar. in the P. of Ulster, and C. of Down. Armagh, or Ardmagh, a County
in the P. of Ulster. Armagh, a Barony, and Town in the C. of Armagh; Lon. 7 12.
Lat. 54. 20. Armoy, or Earmoy, a Barony in the P. of Munster, and C. of Cork.
Arra, a Barony in the P. of Munster, and C. of Tipperary. Arran, a Barony, and
Isles, in the P. of Connaught, and C. of Gallway. Arthy, a Town in the P. of
Leinster, C. of Kildare, and B. of Noragh and Reban; Lon. 7. 28. Lat 52. 55.
Askeaton, a Town in the P. of Munster, C. of Limrick and B. of Clonello, Lon.
9. 20. Lat. 52. 26. Athboy, or Aboy, a Town in the P. of Leinster, C. of
East-Meath, and B. of Lune; Lon. 7. 24. Lat. 53. 36. Athdora, a Town in the P.
of Munster, C. of Limrick and B. of Coshma; Lon. 9. 7. Lat. 52. 24. Athenree,
or Aterith, a Barony and Town in the P. of Connaught, and C. of Gallway; Lon.
9. ^4. Lat. 53. 50. Atherdee, or Ardee, a Barony and Town in the P. of
Connaught and C. of Roscommon, Lon ^ 3. Lat. 53. 50. Athlone, a Barony and Town
in the P. of Connau^ht, and C. of Roscommon; Lon. 8. 25. Lat. 53. 21. A^erith.
See Athenree. Avenmore. See Black-water. Awiduduff. See Black-water. Awn, a
Town in Munster. See Emly.
B.
BAllageen, a Barony in the P. of Leinster, and C. of Wexford. Ballanalie, in
Longford. See St. Iohnstown. Balleck, a Town in the P. of Ulster, C. of
Fermanagh, and B. of Lurge, Lon. 8 39. Lat. 54. 24. Balliadem, a Barony in the
P. of Leinster, and Queen's County. Balliboy, a Barony in the P. of Leinster,
and King's County. Ballibrit, a Barony and Town in the P. of Leinster, and
King's County, Lon. 8. 13. Lat. 52. 55. Ballicora, a Town in the P. of Munster,
and C. of Cork, and B. of Imokilly, Lon. 8. 25. Lat. 51. 47. Ballicowen, a
Barony in the P. of Leinster, and King's County. Ballimore, a Barony in the P.
of Connaught, and C. of Roscommon. Ballimore, a Barony in the P. of Connaught,
and C. of Gallway. Ballimore, a Town in the P. of Leinster, C. of West- Mead,
and B. of Rathconrath, Lon. 8. 10. Lat. 53. 25. Ballinananen. a Barony in the
P. of Connaught, and C. of Gallway. Ballinasloe, a Town in the P. of Connaught,
C. of Roscommon, and B. of Moycarne, Lon. 8. 42. Lat. 53. 14. Ballinekill, a
Town in the P. of Leinster, Queen's County, and B. of Cullinagh, Lon. 7. 42.
Lat. 52. 48. Ballinetur, a Barony in the P. of Leinster, and C. of Wicklow.
Ballintaber, a B^rony in the P. of Connaught, and C. of Roscommon.
Ballishannon, or Bellishannon, a Town in the P. of Ulster, C. of Dunnagal, and
B. of Tyrebugh, Lon. 8. 44. Lat, 54. 23. Ballrudery, a Barony in the P. of
Leinster, and C. of Dublin. Balltinglass, a Town in the P. of Leinster, C. of
Wicklow, and B. of Talbotstown, Lon. 7. 6. Lat. 52. 53. Baltimore, a Town in
the P. of Munster, C. of Cork, and B. of Carbury, Lon. 9. 32. Lat. 51. 17.
Band, a River in the P. of Munster, and C. of Cork. Bandonbridge, a Town in
the P. of Munster, C. of Cork, and B. of Kineameaky, Lon. 8. 56. Lat. 51. 36.
Bangor, a Town in the P. of Ulster, C. of Down, and B. of Ards, Lon. 6. 13.
Lat. 54. 44. Bankaule, a Castle on the P. of Connaught, C. of Thomond, and B.
of Banrathy, Lon. 9. 00. Lat. 52. 35. Bannaher, a Town in the P. of Leinster,
King's County, and B. of Garri-Castle, Lon. 8. 24. Lat. 53. 5. Bannae, a Town
in the P. of Leinster, C. of Wexford, and B. of Sheilbourne, Lon. 7. 5. Lat.
59. 9. Bannae, a River in the P. of Ulster. Bantry, a Barony, Bay, and Town in
the P. of Munster, C. of Cork and Desmond, Lon. 9. 40. Lat. 51. 31. Bantry, a
Barony in the P. of Leinster, and C. of Wexford. Bargie, another Barony in the
same County. Barretz, a Barony in the P. of Munster, and C. of Cork.
Barrimore, another in the same County. Barrow, a River in the P. of Leinster.
Bear, a Barony, Town, and Isle on the P. of Munster, C. of Cork and Desmond,
the Town stands, Lon. 10. 4. Lat. 51. 20. Belfast, a Barony and Town in the P.
of Ulster, and C. of Antrim, Lon. 6. 28. Lat. 54. 38. Ballishannon, see
Ballishannon. Belturbet, a Town in the P. of Ulster, C. of Cavan, and B. of
Loughte, Lon. 7. 54. Lat. 54. 6. Binburg, a Town in the P. of Ulster, C. of
Tyrone, and B. of Dungannon, Lon. 7. 27. Lat. 54. 23. Bir, a Town in the P. of
Leinster, King's C. and B. of Eglish, Lon. 8. 22. Lat. 53. 00. Blackwater,
Awiduffe, or Avenmore, a River in the P. of Munster. Blackwater, a River in the
P. of Ulster, and C. of Tyrone. Blackwater, a River in the P. of Leinster, in
the C. of East-Meath. Blany-Castle, in the P. of Ulster, C. of Monoghan, and B.
of Cremorne, Lon. 7. 13. Lat. 54. 7. Blessinto, a Town in the P. of Leinster,
C. of Wicklow, and B. of Talbotstone, Lat. 7. 2. Lat. 53. 8. Bloemy, or Slew
(...), a Mountain in the (...). of Leinster, and Queen's County. Boil, see
Boil. Boylalagh and B^agh, a Barony in the P. of ^lster, and C. of Dunnagal.
Boil, or Boil, a Barony and Tow^ in the (...)* of Connaught, and C. of
Roscommon, Lon. 8. 6. Lat. 53. 54. Boyne, a River in the P. of Leinster.
Burdale, a River in the P. of Ulster, and C. ^f Dunnagal. Burithoole, a Barony
in the P. of Connaught, and C. of Mayo. Burrin, a Barony in the P. of
Connaught, and (...). of Thomond.
C.
CAlebeg, see Kilbeg. Callen, a Town in the P. of Leinster, and C. of Kilkenny,
Lon. 7. 46. Lat. 52. 25. Cam-Owen, a River in the P. of Ulster, and C. of
Tyrone. St. Canice, a Town in the P. of Leinster, and C. of Kilkenny, Lon. 7,
42. Lat. 52. 36. Cara, a Lake in the P. of Connaught, and C. of Slego. Carbury,
or Carbree, a Barony, and Town in the P. of Leinster, and C. of Kildare, Lon. 7
20. Lat. 53. 22. Carbury, a Barony in the P. of Munster, and C. of Cork.
Carbuy, a Barony in the P. of Connaught, and C. of Slego. Carichdrumrusk, a
Town in the P. of Connaught, and C. and B. of Letrim, Lon. 8. 36. Lat. 53. 52.
Carrickfergus, or Knockfergus, a Barony, and Town on the P. of Ulster, and C.
of Antrim, Lon. 6. 24. Lat. 54. 57. Carick Mac-Griffin, a Town in the P. of
Munster, C. of Tipperary, and B. of Iffa and Ossa, Lon. 7. 44. Lat. 52. 15.
Carlingford, a Town in the P. of Ulster, C. of Louth, and B. of Dundalk, Lon.
6. 43. Lat. 54. 4^ Carne-Castle in the P. of Ulster, C. of Antri^ and B. of
Glenarm. Lon. 6. 30. Lat. 54. 57. Carrigallen, a Barony in the P. of Connaught,
and C. of Letrim. Cari-Castle, a Barony in the P. of Leinster, and King's
County. Cashell, or Cassels, a Town in the P. of Munster, C. of Tipperary, and
B. of Middletherd, Lon. 8. 13. Lat. 52. 23. Cashen, a River in the P. of
Munster, and C. of Kerry. Cassels, see Cashell. Castel-Connor, in the P. of
Connaught, C. of Slego, and B. of Tyreragh, Lon. 9. 38. Lat. 54. 3. Castello, a
Barony in the P. of Connaught, and C. of Mayo. Castlebar, a Town in the P. of
Connaught, C. of Mayo, and B. of Corrah, Lon. 9. 47. Lat. 53. 46. Castlehaven,
a Town in the P. of Munster, C. of Cork, and B. of Carbury, Lon. 9. 22. Lat.
51. 22. Castleknock, a Barony in the P. of Leinster, and C. of Dublin.
Castlemain, an Harbor in the P. of Munster, and C. of Kerry. Castle-Raghen, a
Barony, and Town in the P. of Ulster, and C. of Cavan, Lon. 7. 42. Lat. 53. 48.
Castlereagh, a Barony in the P. of Ulster, and C. of Down. Catherlagh, or
Caterlagh, a County in the P. of Leinster. Catherlagh, a Barony, and Town in
the C. of Catherlagh, Lon. 7. 18. Lat. 52. 46 Cavan, or Cavon, a County in the
P. of Ulster. Cavan, a Town in the C. of Cavan, and B. of Loughte, Lon. 7. 52.
Lat. 53. 58. Charlemont, a Town in the P. of Ulster, C. of Armagh, and B. of
Onealan, Lon. 7. 14. Lat. 54. 26. Charleville, a Town in the P. of Munster, C.
of Cork, and B. of. Ossery, Lon. 9. 2. Lat. 52. 13. Cilly, a Lake in the P. of
Connaught. and C. of Slego. Clamine, a Town in the P. of Leinster, C. of
Wexford, and B. of Sheilbourne, Lon. 7. 5. Lat. 52. 13. Clanderlag, a Barony in
the P. of Connaught, and C. of Thomond. Clanvilliam, a Barony in the P. of
Munster, and C. of Limrick. Clare County, see Thomond. Clare, a Town in
Thomond, in the B. of Islands, Lon. 9. 22. Lat. 52. 42. Clare, a Barony in the
P. of Connaught, and C. of Gallway. Clogher, a Barony and Town in the P. of
Ulster, and the C. of Tyrone, Lon. 7. 44. Lat. 54. 23. Clonawly, a Barony in
the P. of Ulster, and C. of Fermanagh. Clonchy, a Bar. in the P. of Ulster, and
C. of Cavan. Clonefeart, a Town in the P. of Connaught, C. of Gallway, and B.
of Longford, Lon. 8. 32. Lat. 53. 15. Clonello, a Barony in the P. of Munster,
and C. of Limrick. Clonemorris, a Barony in the P. of Connaught, and C. of
Mayo. Clonish, a Town in the P. of Ulster, C. of Monoghan, and B. of Dartree,
Lon. 7. 45. Lat. 54. 18. Clonlisk, a Barony in the P. of Leinster, and King's
County. Clon Mac Owen, a Barony in the P. of Connaught, and C. of Gallway.
Clonmell, or Clommell, a Town in the P. of Munster, C. of Tipperary, and B. of
Iffa and Ossa, Lon. 8. 00. Lat. 52. 15. Clonomoghan, a Barony in the P. of
Ulster, and C. of Cavan. Clonwilliam, a Barony in the P. of Munster, and C. of
Tipperary. Clorne, a Town in the P. of Connaught, C. of Letrim, and B. of
Mohill, Lon. 8. 18. Lat. 53. 46. Cloyne, a Town in the P. of Munster, C. of
Cork, and B. of Imokilly, Lon. 8. 19. Lat. 51. 43. Clunlona, a Barony in the P.
of Leinster, and C. of West Mead. Colerain, a Barony, and Town in the P. of
Ulster, and C. of Londonderry, Lon. 7. 17. Lat. 55. 7. Comsey, a Barony in the
P. of Munster, and C. of Tipperary. Condon, or Clongibbon, a Barony in the P.
of Munster, and County of Cork. Conn, a Lake in the P. of Connaught, and C. of
Mayo. Connagh, a Barony in the P. of Munster, and C. of Limrick. CONNAUGHT, one
of the Four Provinces in Ireland. Connel, a Barony in the P. of Leinster, and
C. of Kildare. Connor, a Town in the P. of Ulster in the C. and B. of Antrim,
Lon. 6. 47. Lat. 54. 48. Coolavan, a Barony in the P. of Connaught and C. of
Slego. Cool, a Barony in the P. of Ulster and C. of Fermanagh. Cooleck, a
Barony in the P. of Leinster and C. of Dublin. Cooles-town, a Barony in the P.
of Leinster, and Kings-County. Cockagvinie, a Barony in the P. of Munster, and
C. of Kerry. Cork, a County on the P. of Munster. Cork, a Town in the County
of Cork, Lon. 8. 48. Lat. 51. 44. Corkery, a Barony in the P. of Leinster, and
C. of West-Meath. Corrah, a Barony in the P. of Connaught, and C. of Mayo.
Corrau, a Barony in the P. of Connaught, and C. of Slego. Corrib, a Lake in the
P. of Connaught, and C^ of Gallway. Cosbrid, a Barony in the P. of Munstea and
C. of Waterford. Coshmas and Coshlea, a Barony in the P. of Munster, and C. of
Limerick. Coshmore, a Barony in the P. Munster, and C. of Waterford. Cranagh, a
Barony in the P. of Leinster, and C. of Kilkenny. Cremorne, a Barony in the P.
of Ulster, and C. of Monoghan. Crom-castle in the P. of Ulster, C. of
Fermanagh, and B. of Cool, Lon. 7. 56. Lat. 54. 20. Cullinagh, a Barony in P.
of Leinster, and Queens County. Culmor-Fort by Londonderry. Cumber, a Town in
the P. of Ulster, C. of Londonderry, and B. of Tyrekeri, Lon. 7. 47. Lat. 54.
52. Curlew-Hills in the P. of Connaught, and C. of Roscommon.
D.
DArtree, a Barony in the P. of Ulster, and C. of Monoghan. Deece, a Barony in
the P. of Leinster, and C. of East-Meath. Delyn, a Barony in the P. of
Leinster, and C. of West-Meath. Decureagh, a Lake in the same County. Derg, a
Lake made by Shannon, between the C. of Gallway, Tipperary and Thomond. Derg, a
Lake in the P. of Ulster in the C. of Dunnagall, from whence comes a River
called Derg, in Tyrone. Deseese, a Barony in the P. of Munster, and C. of
Waterford. Desmond, a County in the P. of Munster, and C. of Cork. Disnie, a
River in the P. of Leinster, and C. of Kilkenny. Dingle, a Town in the P. of
Munster, C. of Kerry, and B. of Corkagvinie, Lon. 10. 35. Lat. 51. 59. Doghead,
a Cape in the P. of Connaught, and C. of Gallway. Doonkillin, a Barony in the
P. of Connaught, and C. of Gallway. Door, a River in the P. of Ulster, and C.
of Dunnagall. Down, a County in the P. of Ulster. Down, a Town in the same
County in the B. of Lekeale, Lon. 6. 14. Lat. 54. 24. Downamore, a Barony in
the P. of Connaught, and C. of Gallway. Drogheda, or Tredah, a Town in the P.
of Ulster, C. of Louth, and B. of Ferrard, Lon. 6. 52. Lat. 53. 42. Dromore, a
Town in the P. of Ulster, C. of Down and Low-Evagh, Lon. 6. 42. Lat. 54. 27.
D^ss, a River in the P. of Connaught, and O^ Thomond. ^n, a Town in the P. of
Ulster, C. of D^n and B. of Castlereagh, Lon. 6. 28. Lat. 54. 36. Drum, a Town
in the P. of Connaught, in the C. of Roscommon, and B. of Athlone, Lon. 8. 30.
Lat. 53. 17. Drumhaire, a Barony in the P. of Connaught, and C. of Letrim.
Drummeragh. See Omagh. Dublin, a County in the P. of Leinster. Dublin, a Town
in the same County, in the B. of Newcastle, Lon. 6. 43. Lat. 53. 20. Duffe, a
River in the P. of Connaught, and C. of Letrim. Dufferin, a Barony in the P. of
Leinster, and C. of Down. Duleck, a Barony and Town in the P. of Leinster, and
County of East-Meath, Lon. 6. 51. Lat. 53. 38. Duncannon. See Dung-cannon.
Dundalk, a Barony and Town in the P. of Ulster, and C. of Louth, Lon. 6. 55.
Lat. 54. 2. Dundrum, a Town and Bay in the P. of Ulster, C. of Down, and B. of
Kilnelearty, Lon. 6. 22. Lat. 54. 20. Dungannon, a Barony and Town in the P. of
Ulster, and C. of Tyrone, Lon. 7. 18. Lat. 54. 28. Dungarvan, a Town in the P.
of Munster, C. of Waterford, and B. of Desees, Lon. 7. 51. Lat. 51. 58.
Dungcannon, or Duncannon, a Fort in the P. of Leinster, C. of Wexford, and B.
of Sheilbourne, Lat. 7. 13. Lat. 52. 8. Dunhallo, a Barony in the P. of
Munster, and C. of Cork. Dunkeron, a Barony in the P. of Munster, and C. of
Kerry. Dunluce, a Barony and Castle in the P. of Ulster, and C. of Antrim, Lon.
7. 16. Lat. 55. 12. Dunmanus-Bay in the P. of Munster, and C. of Co^ke.
Dunnagall, or Tirconnel, a County in the B. of Ulster. Dunnagall, a Town in the
same County, in the B. of Tyrebugh, Lon. 8. 38. Lat. 54. 33.
E.
EAst-Meath, a County in the P. of Leinster. Eglish, a Barony and Town in the
P. of Leinster, and Kings-County, Lon. 8. 18. Lat. 53. 4. Eliogarthy, a Barony
in the P. of Munster, and C. of Tipperary. Elphin, a Town in the P. of
Connaught, and C. and B. of Roscommon, Lon. 8. 40. Lat. 53. 45. Emly, or Awn, a
Town in the P. of M^nster, C. of Tipperary, and B. of Clonwilliam, Lon. 8. 42.
Lat. 52. 20. Enishlaveg, a Lake in the P. of Ulster, and C. of Londonderry.
Enishowen, a Barony in the P. of Ulster, and C. of Dunnagall. Eniskilling, or
Inskilling, a Town in the P. of Ulster, C. of Fermanagh, and B. of Terekenedy,
Lon. 8. 13. Lat. 54. 17. Enish-town, a Town in the P. of Connaught, C. of
Thomond, and B. of Islands, Lon. 9. 24. Lat. 52. 43. Earne, a Lake in the P. of
Ulster, and C. of Fermanagh. Erris, a Barony in the P. of Connaught, and C. of
Mayo. Evagh, Upper and Lower, two Baronies in the P. of Ulster, and C. of Down.
Evagh, Mountains in the B. of Upper Evagh in the C. of Down.
F.
FAbill, a Barony in the P. of Leinster, and C. of West-Meath. Fairhead, a Cape
in the P. of Ulster, and C. of Antrim. Farmanagh. See Fermanagh. Farny
Donagh^n, a Barony in the P. of Ulster, and C. or M^nagh* Fartin, a River in
the P. of Munster, and C. of Kerry. Fassadinig, a Barony in the P. of Leinster,
and C. of Kilkenny. Fearnes, a Town in the P. of Leinster, C. of Wexford, and
B. of Scarewalsh, Lon. 16. 46. Lat. 52. 35. Fermanagh. or Farmanagh, a C. in
the P. of Ulster. Ferns. See Fearnes. Ferrard, a Barony in the P. of Ulster,
and C. of Louth. Fethard, a Town in the P. of Leinster, C. of Wexford, and B.
of Sheilbourne, Lon. 7. 10. Lat. 52. 8. Fethard, a Town in the P. of Ulster, C.
of Tipperary, and B. of Middlethird, Lon. 8. 2. Lat. 52. 22. Fewes, a Barony in
the P. of Ulster, and C. of Armagh. Fini, a Lake and River in the P. of Ulster,
and C. of Dunnagal. Foore, a Barony in the P. of Leinster, and C. of
West-Meath. Fourth, a Barony in the P. of Leinster, and C. of Wexford. Foil, a
Lake and River in the P. of Ulster, and C. of Londonderry. Freath, a Castle in
the P. of Connaught, C. of Thomond and B. of Ibrickan, Lon. 9. 51. Lat. 52. 43.
Furtullagh, a Barony in the P. of Leinster, and C. of West-Meath.
G.
GAlleacliff, a Castle in the P. of Connaught, in the C. of Slego, and B. of
Carbuy, Lon. 8. 58. Lat. 54. 16. Gallen, a Barony in the P. of Connaught, and
C. of Mayo. Gallen, or Slew-Gallen Hills, in the P. of Ulster, and C. of
Tyrone. Gallway, a County in the P. of Connaught. Gallway, a Town in the same
County, the B. of Doonkillin, Lon. 9. 29. Lat. 53. 10. Gally, a River in the P.
of Munster, and C. of Kerry. Gallmoy, a Barony in the P. of Leinster, and C. of
Kilkenny. Guard, a Lake in the P. of Connaught, and C. of Slego. Geshill, a
Barony in the P. of Leinster, and Kings-County. Glanaraghty, a Barony in the P.
of Munster, and C. of Kerry. Glandagh, a River in the P. of Ulster, and C. of
Dunnagal. Glaneherg, a Barony in the P. of Munster, and C. of Waterford.
Glaslogh, a Town in the P. of Ulster, C. of Monoghan, and B. of Trough, Lon. 7.
26. Lat. 54. 18. Glenarm, a Barony and Town in the P. of Ulster, and C. of
Antrim, Lon. 6. 36. Lat. 55. 3. Gory, a Barony in the P. of Leinster, and C. of
Wexford. Gowran, a Barony and Town in the P. of Leinster, and C. of Kilkenny,
Lon. 7. 22. Lat. 52. 34. Granard, a Barony in the P. of Leinster, and C. of
Long ford. Grean-Lake, or Bay in the P. of Munster, and C. of Kerry. Gualty
Mountains, in the P. of Munster, and C. of Tipperary. Gyll, a River in the P.
of Connaught, and C. of Gallway.
H.
HAnnel, a Lake in the P. of Leinster, and C. of West-Meath. Hillsburough, a
Town in the P. of Ulster, C. of Down, and B. of Castlereagh, Lon. 6. 53. Lat.
54. 42. Holywood, a Town in the same County, and Barony, Lon. 6. 23. Lat. 54.
42. Horrib, a Lake in the P. of Connaught, and C. of Gallway. Hoyle, a Lake in
the P. of Leinster, and C. of West-Meath. Humes, a Castle in the P. of Ulster,
C. of Fermanagh, and B. of Magherboy, Lon. 8. 17. Lat. 54. 18*
I.
IAmes-Town in the P. of Connaught, and C. and B. of Letrim. Lon. 8. 31. Lat.
53. 50. Ibe^con, a Barony in the P. of Leinster, an^ C. of Kilkenny. Ibrickan,
a Barony in the P. of Connaught, and C. of (...). Ida, a Barony in the P. of
Leinster, and C. of Kilkenny. I^ne, a Barony in the P. of Leinster, and C. of
Catherlagh. Iffa and Ossa. a Barony in the P. of Munster, and C. of Tipperary.
Ikeathy, a Barony in the P. of Leinster, and C. of Ki^dare. Ikerin, a Barony in
the P. of Munster, and C. of Tipperary. Ileagh, a Barony in the same County.
Imo^killy, a Barony in the P. of Mu^ster, and C. of Cork^. (...), an Isle in
the P. of Ulster, and C. o^ Dunnagal in the Lou^-Swilly. Inchiquin, a Barony in
the P. of Connaught* and C. of (...). Inishcorthy, a Town in the P. of
Leinster, C. of Wexford, and B. of Scarewalsh, Lon. 6. 52. Lat. 52. 27.
Inishteige, a Town in the P. of Leinster C. of Kilkenny, and B. of Gowran, Lon.
7. 19. Lat. 52. 24. Iniskilling, or Inskilling. See Eniskilling. Inny, a River
in the P. of Leinster, and C. of West-Meath. Inny, a River in the P. of
Munster, and C. of Kerry. Inskilling, or Iniskilling. See Eniskilling. St.
John's Cape in the P. of Ulster, and C. of Dunnagal. St. John's Point, a Cape in
the P. of Ulster, and C. of Down. St. John's Town, or Ballanalie, a Town in the
P. of Leinster, C. of Longford, and B. of Granard, Lon. 8. 9. Lat. 53. 41. St.
John's Town, or Tabone, a Town in the P. of Ulster, C. of Dunnagal, and B. of
Enish-Owen, Lon. 8. 5. Lat. 54. 53. Iraghticco^or, a Barony in the P. of
Munster, and C. of Kerry. Iveragh, a Barony in the same County. Iverk, a Barony
in the P. of Leinster, and C. of Kilkenny.
K.
KElls, a Barony and Town in the P. of Leinster, and C. of East-Meath, Lon. 7.
2^. Lat. 53. 42. Kells, a Barony and Town in the P. of Leinster, and C. of
Kilkenny, Lon. 3. 6. Lat. 52. 27. Kells, a Town in the P. of Ulster, C. and B.
of Antrim, Lon. 6. 52. Lat. 54. 49. Kelly, a Town in the P. of Munster, C. of
Cork, and B. of Carbury, Lon. 9. 5. Lat. 51. 56. Kenoght, a Barony in the P.
of Ulster, and C. of Londonderry. Kenry, a Barony in the P. of Muuster, and C.
of Limrick. Kerry, a County in the P. of Munster. Key, a Lake in the P. of
Connaught, and C. of Roscommon. Kilbeg, or Calebeg, a Town and Bay in the P. of
Ulster, C. of Dunnagal, and B. of Boylagh, and Bannogh, Lon. 8. 58. Lat. 54.
33. Kilbegs, a Town in the P. of Leinster, C. of East-Meath, and B. of Kells,
Lon. 7. 20. Lat. 53. 46. Kilcours, a Barony in the P. of Leinster, and
Kings-County. Kiloare, a County in the P. of Leinster. Kildare, a Town in the
C. of Kildare, and B. of Ophally, Lon. 7. 24. Lat. 53. 8. Kileagh. a Barony in
the P. of Leinster, and C. of Kildare. Kilkenny, a County in the P. of
Leinster. Kilkenny, a Barony and Town in the same County, Lon. 8. 18. Lat. 53.
24. Killala, or Killalow, a Town in the P. of Connaught, C. of Mayo, and B. of
Tyrawly, Lon. 9. 44. Lat. 54. 7. Killalow, or Labu, a Town in the P. of
Connaught, C. of Thomond, and B. of Tullagh, Lon. 8. 51. Lat. 52. 32.
Killbegan, a Town in the P. of Leinster, C. of West-Meath, and B. of Moycashel,
Lon. 71 57. Lat. 53. 18. Kilconnell, and Killehare, Baronies in the P. of
Connaught, and C. of Gallway. Killglass, a Town in the P. of Connanght, C. of
Slego, and B. of Tyreragh, Lon. 2. 33. Lat. 54. 8. Killileagh, a Town in the P.
of Ulster, C. of Down, and B. of Dufferin, Lon. 6. 13. Lat. 54. 27.
Killmackrena, a Barony and Town in the C. of Dunnagal, Lon. 8. 22. Lat. 54. 56.
Killmain, a Barony in the P. of Connaught; and C. of Mayo. Killmallock, a Town
in the P. of Munster, and C. of Limrick, Lon. 8. 53. Lat. 52. 15. Killonway,
and Killultagh, Baronies in the P. of Ulster, and C. of Antrim. Killmare, a Bay
and River in the P. of Munster, and C. of Kerry. Kilmore, a Town in the P. of
Ulster, C. of Cavan, and B. of Loughte, Lon. 7. 55. Lat. 53. 56. Kilmore, a
Town in the P. of Leinster, C. of East-Meath, and B. of Deece, Lon. 7. 10. Lat.
52. 27. Killnaloug, and Kilnamama, Baronies in the P. of Munster, and C. of
Tipperary. Kilnatalloon, a Barony in the P. of Munster, and C. of Cork.
Kiltarton, a Barony in the P. of Connaught, and C. of Gallway. Kinalea, a
Barony in the P. of Munster, and C. of Cork. Kinalearty, a Barony in the P. of
Ulster, and C. of Down. Kineleatmeatry, a Barony in the P. of Munster, and C.
of Cork. Kingsale, a Town in the P. of Munster, C. of Cork, and B. of
Carbury, Lon. 8. 44. Lat. 51. 33. Kings Coun^, a County in the P. of Leinster.
Kings-Town. See Philips-Town. Klanm^rris, a Barony in the P. of Ulster, and C.
of Kerry. Klonekelly, a Barony in the P. of Ulster, and C. of Fermanagh. Knock
fergus. See Carick fergus. Knockninie, a Barony in the P. of Ulster, and C. of
Fermanagh. Knocktopher, a Barony and Town in the P. of Leinster, and C. of
Kilkenny, Lon. 7 36. Lat. 52. 24.
L.
LAgen-Water, a Kiver iu the P. of Ulster, and C. of D^wn. Lag^lit. See
Loughlin. Lamnevaddy, a Town in the P. of Ulster, C. of Londonderry, and B. of
Kenoght, Lon. 7. 3^. Lon. 55. 3 Lanesburough, a Town in the P. of Leinster, C.
of Longford, and B. of Rathliu, Lon. 8. 28. Lat. 53. 34. Lean, a Lake and
River in the P. of Munster, and C. of Kerry. Lean, a Cape in the P. of
Connaught, and C. of Thomond. Lee, a River in the P. of Munster. LEINSTER, or
Lemster, one of the four Provinces in Ireland. Lekeale, a Barony in the P. of
Ulster, and (...) of Down. Lemster. See Leinster. Leney, a Barony in the P. of
Connaught, a^ C of Slege. Letrim, a County in the P. of Connaught. Letrim, a
Barony and Town in Letrim Lon. 8. 34. Lat. 53. 54. Letrim, a Barony and Town in
the P. of (...), and C. of Gallway, Lon. 8. 5^. La^. (...)* Letrim, a River in
the P. of Leinster, and C. of Wicklow. Liffe, a River in the P. of Leinster.
Lifford, a Town in the P. of Ulster, C. of Du^nagal, and B. of Raphoe, Lon. 8.
5. Lat. 54. 47. Limrick, Limerick, or Lymrick, a County in the P. of Munster.
Limrick, a Barony and Town in Limrick, Lon. 8. 58. Lat. 52. 32. Lisborn, or
Lisnagarve, a Town in the P. of Ulster, C. of Down, and B. of Killultagh, Lon.
6. 36. Lat. 54. 33. Lislea, a Castle in the P. of Ulster, C. of Mo^ghan and B.
of Dartree, Lon. 7. 39. Lat. 54. 7. Lismore, a Town in the P. of Munster, C. of
Waterford, and B. of C^more, Lon. 8. 13. Lat. 52. 1. Lismore, a Town in the P.
of Ulster, C. of C^van and B. of (...), Lon. 7. 5^ Lat. 53. 55. Lisnagarve, or
Lisnagrave. See Lisborn. Leg^ll, a Town in the P. of Ulster, C. of Armagh, and
B. of Onealan, Lon. 7. 11. Lat. 54. 25. Leghinsh^lm, a Barony in the P. of
Ulster, and C. of Lond^nderry. Londond^rry, or Colerain, a County in the P. of
Ulster. Londonderry, a Town in the same County, and B. of Tyrekeri, Lon. 7 55.
Lat. 54. 57. Longford, a County in the P. of Leinster. Longford, a Barony and
Town in the same County, Lon. 8. 17. Lat. 53. 39. Longford, a Barony in the P.
of Connaught and C. of Gallway. Longford Fort in the P. of Munster, C. of
Tipperary, and B. of Slewverdagh Compsrey, Lon. 8. 00. Lat. 52. 35. Loughlin,
or Laglin, two Towns in the P. of Leinster, C. of Catherlagly, and B. of
Idrone; one Lon. 7. 24. Lat. 52. 40. the other Lon. 7. 18. Lat. 52. 38. Louth,
or Lough, a County in the P. of Ulster. Louth, a Barony and Town in the same
County, Lon. 7. 5. Lat. 53. 57. Lune, a Barony in the P. of Leinster, and C. of
East-Meath. Lymrick or Limerick. See Limrick.
M.
M^keen, a Lake in the P. of Ulster, and C. of Ferman^gh. Maghere, and
Magherel^y, Baronies in the P. of Ulster, and C. of Fermanagh. Mag^hie, a
Barony in the P. of Munster, and C. of (...). M^ine, a River in the P. of
Ulster, and C. of (...). Majo. See Mayo. (...), a Lake in the P. of Connaught,
and C. of Mayo. Mallo, a Town in the P. of Munster, C. of Cork, and B. of
Mallo, Lon. 8. 54. Lat. 51. 58. Mayo, or Majo, a County in the P. of Connaught.
Mayo, or Moy, a Town in the C. of Mayo, and B. of Trawly, Lon. 9. 40. Lat. 54.
7. Ma^iburrough, or Queens-Town, a Town in the P. of Leinster, and
Queens-County, Lon. 7. 43. Lat. 52. 57. Mayre-Castle in the P. of Ulster, C. of
Armagh, and B. of a Orior, Lon. 6. 51. Lat. 54. 5. Mead, a Province now joined
to Leinster. Melvie, a Lake in the P. of Ulster, and C. of Fermanagh.
Middleihird, two Baronies in the P. of Munster, one in Tipperar^, the other in
Waterford. Missenhead, a Cape in the P. of Munster, and C. of Cork. Mihill, a
Barony in the P. of Connaught, and C. of Letrim. Molingar, or M^llengar, a
Barony and Town in the P. of Leinster, and C. of West-Meath, Lon. 7. 50. Lat.
53. 27. M^ety, a Bog in the P. of Munster, and C. of Tipperary. Monjoy, or
Munjoy, a Fort in the P. of Ulster, C. of Tyrone, and B. of Danga^non, Lon. 7.
11. Lat. 54. 33. Monoghan, a County in the P. of Ulster. Monoghan, a Barony and
Town in the same County, Lon. 7. 27, Lat. 54. 14. Moourne, a Barony and
Mountain in the P. of Ulster, and C. of Down. Morgith, a Barony in the P. of
Leinster, and C. of West-Meath. Mounster. See Munster. Moy, a River in the P.
of Connaught, and C. of Mayo; for the Town of Mayo, see Mayo. Moycashell, a
Barony in the P. of Leinster, and C. of West-Meath. Moyearne, a Barony in the
P. of Connaught, and C. of Roscommon. Moycullen, a Barony in the P. of
Connaught, and C. of Gallway. Moydoe, a Barony in the P. of Leinster, and C. of
Longford. Moyr-Gallen, a Barony in the P. of Leinster, and C. of East-Meath.
Motsarta, a Barony in the P. of Connaught, and C. of Thomond. Moysenragh, a
Barony in the P. of Leinster, and C. of East-Meath. Mullengar. See Molingar.
Mullin, a Barony in the P. of Leinster, and C. of Catherlagh. MUNSTER, or
Mounster, one of the four Provinces in Ireland. Muskery, a Barony in the P. of
Munster, and C. of Cork^.
N.
NAas, a Barony and Town in the P. of Leinster, and C. of Kildare, Lon. 7. 9.
Lat. 53. 12. Navan, a Barony and Town in the P. of Leinster, and C. of
East-Meath, Lon. 7. 11. Lat. 53. 37. Neagh, a Lake in the P. of Ulster. Neury,
a Town in the P. of Ulster, C. of Down, and B. of Upper Evagh, Lon. 8. 50. Lat.
54. 12. Neury, a Water, a River in Down and Armagh. New Castle, a Barony and
Town in the P. of Leinster, and C. of Dublin, Lon. 6. 59. Lat. 53. 17. Newer.
See Nuer. New-Town, a Town in the P. of Ulster, C. of Down, and B. of Ards,
Lon. 6. 15. Lat. 54. 38. Noragh and Reban, a Barony in the P. of Leinster, and
C. of Kildare. Nuer, or Newer, a River in the P. of Leinster. North-Cape in the
P. of Ulster, C. of Dunnagal.
O.
Old-Fleet, an Harbor in the P. of Ulster' and C. of Antrim. Oldhead, a Cape
in the P. of Munster, and C. of Cork. Omagh, or Drummaragh, a Town and Barony
in the P. of Ulster, and C. of Tyrone, Lon. 7, 49. Lat. 54. 33. Onealan, a
Barony in Armagh, in the P. of Ulster. Ophally, a Barony in the P. of Leinster,
and C. of Kildare. Orior, a Barony in the P. of Ulster, and C. of Armagh.
Ormond Upper and Lower, Baronies in the P. of Munster, and C. of Tipperary.
Orrery and Kilmore, a Barony in the P. of Munster, and C. of Cork. Ossery, a
Barony in the P. of Leinster, and Queens-County. Owen-Nassa a River in the same
County. Owny, a Barony in the P. of Munster, and C. of Tipperary. O^nheg, a
Barony in the P. of Munster, and C. of Limrick.
B.
PAtrick, or Knock Patrick, a Mountain in the P. of Munster, and C. of Eimrick.
St. Patrick's Purgatory in the P. of Ulster, C. of Dunnagal, and B. of Tyre^gh.
Phillipston, or Kings-Town, a Town and Barony in the P. of Leinster, and
Kings-County, Lon. 7. 45. Lat. 53. 15. Philipston, a Town in the P. of Ulster,
C. of Louth, and B. of Dundalk Lon. 7. 5. Lat. 54. 3^ Poe Water, a River in the
P. of Ulster, and C. of Tyrone. Port-Arlinton, a Town in the P. of Leinster,
Queens County, and B. of Portneh Inch, Lon. 7. 39. Lat. 53. 7. Portneh Inch, a
Barony in the P. of Leinster, and Queens County. Portumny, a Town in the P. of
Connaught, C. of Gallway, and B. of Letrim, Lon. 8. 3^. Lat. 52. 59.
Q.
QUeens County, a County in the P. o^ Leinster. Queens-Town, or Mariburrough, a
Town in the same County, Lon. 7. 43. Lat. 52. 57.
R.
RAphoe, a Barony and Town in the P. of Leinster, and County of Dunnagal ^on.
8. 13. Lat. 54. ^8. Rathconrath, a Barony in the P. of Leinster, and C. of
West-Meath. Rathdown, a Barony and Town in the P. of Leinster, and C. of
Wickl^w and Dublin, Lon. 6. 35. Lat. 53. 9. Rachbin, a Barony in the P. of
Leinster, and C. of Longford. Ratooth, a Barony and Town in the P. of Leinster,
and C. of East-Meath, Lon. 6. 54. Lat. 53. 28. Ravilly, a Barony in the P. of
Leinster, and C. of Catherlagh. Redboy, a Castle in the P. of Ulster, C. of
Antrim, and B. of Glenarm, Lon. 6. 45. Lat. 55. 7. Ree, a Lake made by the
Shannon, between Connaught and Leinster. Rinbane, a Castle in the P. of Ulster,
C. of Antrim, and B. of Ballycarie, Lon. 7. 00. Lat. 55. 15. Roe, a Castle in
the P. of Ulster, C. of Londonderry, and B. of Colerain, Lon. 7. 14. Lat. 55.
2. Roo-Water, a River in the same County. Rosologher, a Barony in the P. of
Connaught, and C. of Letrim. Roscommon, a County in the P. of Connaught.
Roscommon, a Barony and Town in that County, Lon. 8. 42. Lat. 53. 32. Rosse, a
Barony in the P. of Connaught, and C. of Gallway. Rosse, or New Rosse, a Town,
in the P^ of Leinster, C. of Wexford, and B. of Bantry, Lon. 7. 16. Lat. 52.
18. Rosse, a Town en the P. of Munster, C. of Cork, and B. of Carbury, Lon. 9.
13. Lat. 51. 24. Rosse, a Town in the P. of Connaught, C. of Slego, and B. of
Carbury, Lon. 9. 5. Lat. 54. 14. Rosse, a Town in the P. of Connaught, C. of
Mayo, and B. of Corrah, Lon. 9. 38. Lat. 53. 38.
S.
SAlt, a Barony in the P. of Leinster, and C. of Kildare. Scarewalth, a Barony
in the P. of Leinster, and C. of Wexford. Sewer, or Shower. See Shure. Shannon,
a great River between Connaught, Munster, and Leinster. Sheilbourne, a Barony
in the P. of Leinster, and C. of Wexford. Shel Aby, a Barony in the P. of
Leinster, and C. of Wicklow. Shellilogher, a Barony in the P. of Leinster, and
C. of Kilkenny. Shelmaleire, a Barony in the P. of Leinster, and C. of Wexford.
Shower, or Sewer. See Shure. Shrowle, a Barony in the P. of Leinster, and C. of
Longford. Shure, Sower, or Shower, a River in the P. of Munster. Sillin, a Lake
in the P. of Leinster, and C. of West-Meath. Skreene, a Barony and Town in the
P. of Leinster, and C. of East-Meath, Lon. 7. 7. Lat. 53. 34. Slane. See Urren.
Slane, a Barony and Town in the P. of Leinster, and C. of East-Meath, Lon. 7.
4. Lat. 53. 42. Slego, a County in the P. of Connaught. Slego, a Town in that
County, and B. of Carbuy, Lon. 8. 58. Lat. 54. 13. Slew Margie, a B. in the P.
of Leinster, and Queens-County. Slewwardagh, a Barony in the P. of Munster and
C. of Tipperary. Smale-County, a Barony in the P. of Munster, and C. of
Limerick. Strabane, a Barony and Town in the P. of Ulster, and C. of Tyrone,
Lon. 8. 4. Lat. 54. 46. Stradbally, a Barony in the P. of Leinster, and
Queens-County. Strandmore-Bay in the P. of Munster, and C. of Waterford.
Strangford, a Town in the P. of Ulster, C. of Down, and B. of Lekeale, Lon. 6.
14. Lat. 54. 24. Streamston, a Town in the P. of Leinster, C. of West-Meath,
and B. of Moycashell, Lon. 8. 2. Lat. 53. 22. Suck a River in Connaught,
between Gallway and Roscommon. Swilly, a River and Bay in the P. of Ulster, and
C. of Dunnagal. Swinzado, a Castle in the same County, and B. of Boylagh and
Bannogh, Lon. 8. 56. Lat. 54. 52. Swords, a Town in the P. of Leinster C. of
Dublin, and B. of Cross, Lon. 6. 43. Lat. 53. 28.
T.
TAbone. See St. Iohnstown in Dunnagal. Taghmon, a Town in the P. of Leinster,
C. of Wexford, and B. of Shelmaliere, Lon. 6. 58. Lat. 52. 17. Talbotston, a
Barony and Town in the P. of Leinster, and C. of Wicklow, Lon. 6. 59. Lat. 52.
54. Tallagh, a Town in the P. of Munster, C. of Waterford, and B. of Cosbrid,
Lon. 8. 16. Lat. 51. 56. Tanragoes, a River in the P. of Ulster, and C. of
Armagh. Tarmon, a Castle in the P. of Ulster, C. of Fermanagh, and B. of Lurge,
Lon. 8. 21. Lat. 54. 27. Temoleague, a Town and Haven in the P. of Munster, C.
of Cork, and B. of Carbury, Lon. 8. 57. Lat. 51. 27. Terconnel. See Dunnagal.
Terdkenedy, a Barony in the P. of Ulster, and C. of Fermanagh. Thomastown, a
Town in the P. of Leinster, C, of Kilkenny, and B. of Gowran, Lon. 7. 28. Lat.
52. 26. Thomond, or Clare, a County in the P. of Connaught. Thurles, a Town in
the P. of Munster, C. of Tipperary, and B. of Eliogurty, Lon. 8. 9. Lat. 52.
55. Tiaquin, a Barony in the P. of Connaught, and C. of G^llway. Tipperary, a
Counry in the P. of Munster. Tiraghill, a Barony in the P. of Connaught, and C.
of Sligo. Tirconnel, or Terconnel. See Dunnagal, Tir-Oen. See Tyrone. T^am. See
Tuam. Tome, a Barony and Town in the P. of Ulster, and C. of Antrim, Lon. 7. 3.
Lat. 54. 45. Towrany, a Barony in the P. of Ulster, and C. of Armagh. Trally, a
Town in the P. of Munster, C. of Kerry, and B. of Trughenackmy, Lon. 9. 58.
Lat. 52. 7. Tredagh. See Drogheda. Trim, a Town in the P. of Leinster, C. of
East-Meath, and B. of Navan, Lon. 7. 14. Lat. 53. 33. Trough, a Barony in the
P. of Ulster, and C. of Monoghan. Trughenackmy, a Barony in the P. of Munster,
and C. of Kerry. Tuam, or Toam, a Town in the P. of Connaught, C. of Gallway,
rnd B. of Downamore, Lon. 9. 18. Lat. 53. 24. Tullagarvy, and Tullagha,
Baronies in the P. of Ulster, and C. of Cavan. Tullagh, a Barony in the P. of
Connaught, and C. of Thomond. Tullahonoho, a Barony in the P. of Ulster, and C.
of Cavan. Tully-Castle in the P. of Ulster, C. of Fermanagh. and B. of
Maghereboy, Lon. 8. 21. Lat 54. 22. Tullymor, a Town in the P. of Ulster, C. of
Down, and B. of Upper Evagh, Lon. 6. 52. Lat. 54. 18. Tulsk, a Town in the P.
of Connaught, and C. and B. of Roscommon, Lon. 8. 42. Lat. 53. 44. Tyan, a
Barony in the P. of Ulster, and C. of Armagh. Tyrawly, a Barony in the P. of
Connaught, and C. of Mayo. Tyrehugh, a Barony in the P. of Ulster, and C. of
Dunnagal. Tyrekeri, a Barony in the P. of Ulster, and C. of Londonderry.
Tyreragh, a Barony in the P. of Connaught, and the C. of Slego. Tyrone, or
Tir-Oen, a County in the P. of Ulster.
U.
ULSTER, one of the four Provinces in Ireland. Upperthird, a Barony in the P.
of Munster, and C. of Waterfore. Urrin, or Slane, a River in the P. of
Leinster.
W.
WArrenston, a Barony in the P. of Leinster, and Kings-County. Waterford, a
County in the P. of Munster. Waterford, a Town in the same County, Lon. 7. 27.
Lat. 52. 10. West-Meath, a County in the P. of Leinster. Wexford, or Weesford,
a County in the P. of Leinster. Wexford, a Town in the same County, and B. of
Shelmalcire, Lon. 6. 46. Lat. 52. 19. Wicklow, a County in the P. of Leinster.
Wicklow, a Town in the same County, and B. of Arklow, Lon. 6. 30. Lat. 52. 57.
Y.
YOughill, a Town in the P. of Munster, C. of Cork, and B. of Imokilly, Lon.
8. 7. Lat. 51. 48. Youghill, a Town in the P. of Munster, C. of Tipperary, and
B. of Arra, Lon. 8. 44. Lat. 52. 47.
FINIS.

