XIIII ORDERS Voted by the High Court of PARLIAMENT With his Majesty's Message
to the House, about the Jesuits that were condemned. And the Parliaments Answer
to the same. Also, a petition from the Queen to the Parliament, for the
release of Father Philips, and the Heads of five other petitions for other
Greevances, by diverse Subjects. Whereunto is added a Declaration of the Offense
taken by the PARLIAMENT against the Justices of Middlesex, for affronting of
the Citizens of London in the bringing in of their Petition, for which Justice
Long was Committed to the Tower, December: 13. 1641.

Printed for Samuel Horten, 1641.

ORDERS Voted by the High Court of PARLIAMENT.
1. THat the House of Commons have voted, that Oneale is guilty of High
Treason. 2. After great debate about Mr. Benson, Burgess of Knasbrough, who
was formerly expelled the House for making sale of Protections: he desiring
that his Son might sit in his room, but it was voted against, for he had a
sale in them with his father. 3. That every Parliamentees own person should be
still protected, and his bill to continue for 18. months, and no longer. 4.
That Mr. Palmer should be again admitted to the House. 5. That the Parliament
will not admit of any toleration of the Popish Religion in Ireland. 6. That all
such who had taken Illegal Customs should make restitution out of their lands
and estates. 7. That Commissary Wilmot, Colonel Ashbornham, and Captain
Pollor. were Voted guilty of m^s-prisi^n of Treason, extending to their
estates, and Liber^ies, and that they should be expeld the house, and disabled
for ever being Parliament men. 8. That a writ should s^eedily issue ^o^^h for
choosing of other Parliament men in the room of those that were removed 9.
That no Lord Pee^e or other, should send any letter to any City or Borough, as
a means to pro^u^e the electing o^ any Parliament men: And that if any such
letters should be sent to be returned to the Parliament. 10. Upon the r^sings
of the Constables and watchmen in Westminste^; It was voted that to set a guard
about the Parliament was a breach of privilege, and an offense of an high
nature. 11. That the said watchmen should be dispatched. 12. That warrants
should be granted for the bringing in of the said Justices of Middlesex before
the house. 13. It was Voted that Justice Long should be sent to the Tower, for
stopping of the Citizens of London from petitioning to the house against
Bishops and other Greevances to be redressed, 14. That the Justices about
Wisbich in Lincolnshire, and other adacent Counties should view a dangerous
Bank of the Sea, in those parts and to make a report thereof to the House
that Order may be taken for it to preserve those parts in safety.
His Majesty's Message to the High Court of Parliament.
THat the French Ambassadors had begged a pardon of the King, for 7. Jesuits
condemned this last week at the Sessions in the Old-bayly, and that he had
referred the same to the Parliament to determine.

3. The Kings Majesty sent a Message to require the Answer of the House,
concerning the same.

The Parliaments Answer.
That four of the Jesuits who were taken since the last Proclamation, for
their banishment should be executed according to the Law, ^^d the other three
having bee^e long in prisons to be referred to the Kings mercy.

Petitions t^ the High Court of Parliament.
1 FRom the Queen, that the Parliament would admit Father Philips to come
again to the Court, great debate was had about it in the Lords house, who sent
a Message to the house of Commons, but it would not be granted. 2, From Mr.
Palmer, a Parliament man in the Tower, wherein he submitted himself to the
house, desiring his inlargment, which after great debare was granted. 3. From
Ireland, by the Lord Dillon for toleration of the papists in Ireland, who came
over without notice to the privy Council, 4. The Iustic^s in Middlesex
desired to be excused for their faults, in sending Constables and watchmen. 5.
A Petition from the parish of Wisbich in Lincolnshire, against a bank made
near sea, which will be the cause of drowning many Towns, if it be not
suddenly prevented, 6. A Petition brought to the House from the City of London,
by diverse Aldermen, and men of great worth, with many thousand hands to it;
desiring Answer of their former Petitions against Bishops, and executing the
Laws against Delinquents, and for redress of other grievances, which petition
the House received with many thanks, giving great respect to them that brought
it, and caused them to be brought into the House before them, and promised they
should have an Answer of all their petitions, with as much convenience as may
be.
A Declaration of ^he Offense taken by the House, against the Justices of
Middlesex for affronting the Citizensi
That on Friday there were 3. or 400. men, and Constables set about the
Parliament, upon which the House sent for 3 or 4 of the Constables, and
demanded the cause of their coming with so many men, who made answer, that it
was by virtue of a warrant from the Justices of Middlesex: whereby every
Constable was commanded to bring 100. men presently to guard the Parliament.
Further enquiry being made thereof, it appeared that the ground of their
coming was by virtue of a warrant from the Lord Keeper to the Justices of
Middlesex, that if in case any riot, or tumult at the Parliament, or any other
place should be, they should speedily command the aid of Constables and
watchmen, according to the Statute. That the Justices of Middlesex upon the
intelligence that the Citizens of London intended to come in a great multitude
to pre^er a petition to the Parliament against Bishops: caused Constables to
come down with men to suppress them.

After the Justices of Middlesex were brought and severally examined, most of
them pretended, that they knew not, but that the Warrants came from the
Parliament, for the speedy sending of men for the house, But Justice Long upon
his examination, said, that the cause of their coming was to suppress the
Citizens tumultuous coming with their Petitions to the Parliament, from which
the house took great offense at them, that they should go about to hinder the
bringing of petitions to the Parliament upon any occasion.

FINIS.

