THE HUMBLE PETITION OF THE LORDS and COMMONS in PARLIAMENT Assembled.
For a Pacification between His Majesty and both Houses. As it was delivered by
the Lord of Holland to His Majesty at Beverly, on Saturday, July 16. 1642.
May it please your Majesty,
ALthough we Your Majesty's most humble and faithful Subjects, the Lords and
Commons in Parliament Assembled, have been very unhappy in many former
Petitions and Supplications to Your Majesty, wherein we have represented our
most dutiful Affections, in advising and desiring those things which we held
most necessary for the preservation of Gods true Religion, Your Majesty's
safety and Honor, and the peace of the Kingdom; And with much sorrow do
perceive, That Your Majesty, incensed by many false Calumnies and Slanders,
does continue to raise forces against us, and Your other peaceable and loyal
Subjects, and to make great preparations for War, both in the Kingdom, and from
beyond the Seas; and by Arms and violence to overruled the Judgment and Advice
of Your great Council, and by force to determine the Questions there
depending, concerning the Government and Liberty of the Kingdom yet such is
our earnest desire of discharging our duty to Your Majesty and the Kingdom, to
preserve the peace thereof, and to prevent the miseries of Civil War amongst
your Subjects: That notwithstanding we hold our selves bound to use all the
means and power, which by the Laws and Constitutions of this Kingdom we are
trusted with, for defense and protection thereof, and of the Subjects from
force and violence; We do in this our humble and loyal Petition prostrate our
selves at Your Majesty's feet, beseeching your Majesty, That you will be
pleased to forbear, and remove all Preparations and Actions of War,
particularly the forces from about Hull, from Newcastle, Tynmouth, Lincoln, and
Lincolnshire, and all other places; And that Your Majesty will recall the
Commissions of Array, which are illegal; Dismiss Troops, and extraordi-Guards
by you raised; That Your Majesty will come nearer to your Parliament, and
hearken to their faithful Advice, and humble Petitions, which shall only tend
to the defense and advancement of Religion, Your own Royal Honor and safety,
the preservation of our Laws and Liberties; And we have been, and shall ever
be careful to prevent and punish al Tumults, and seditious Actions, Speeches,
and Writings, which may give Your Majesty just cause of distaste or
apprehension of danger. That Your Majesty will leave delinquents to the due
course of Justice; And that nothing done or spoken in Parliament, or by any
Person in pursuance of the Commands and Directions of both Houses of
Parliament, be questioned any where, but in Parliament.

And we, for our Parts, shall be ready to lay down all those preparations,
which we have been forced to make for our defense. And for the Town of Hull,
and the Ordinance concerning the Militia, as we have in both these particulars,
only sought the preservation of the Peace of the Kingdom, and the defense of
the Parliament, from force and violence. So we shall most willingly leave the
Town of Hull in the state it was before Sir John Hotham drew any forces into
it, delivering Your Majesty's Magazine into Your Tower of London, and
suppressing whatsoever has been disposed by us for the service of the Kingdom.
We shall be ready to settle the Militia by a Bill, in such a way, as shall be
Honorable and safe for Your Majesty, most agreeable to the Duty of Parliament,
and effectual for the good of the Kingdom; That the strength thereof be not
employed against it self; and that which ought to be for our security, applied
to our destruction: And that the Parliament, and those who profess and desire
still to preserve the Protestant Religion, both in this Realm and in Ireland,
may not be left naked, and indefensible, to the mischevous designs, and cruel
attempts of those, who are the professed and confederate enemies thereof, in Your
Majesty's Dominions, and other Neighbor Nations. To which, if Your Majesty's
Courses and Councels shall from henceforth concur, We doubt not but we shall
quickly make it appear to the World, by the most eminent effects of Love and
Dury, That Your Majesty's personal safety, Your Royal Honor and Greatness
are match deerer to us then our own Lives and Fortunes, which we do most
heartily Dedicate, and shall most willingly employ for the support and
maintenance thereof.

Veneris Julii 15. 1642.
Ordered by the Lords in Parliament, That this Petition be forthwith Printed
and Published.

Jo. Brown, Cler. Parl.


