MORE ORDINANCES AND ORDERS OF THE LORDS and COMMONS Assembled in PARLIAMENT:
Concerning Sequestring Of the Estates of Delinquents, Papists and
Intelligencers.

ORdered by the Lords assembled in Parliament, That these Ordinances and Orders
be forthwith printed and published.

Joh. Brown Cler. Parliamentorum.



London printed for John Wright at the Kings Head in the old Bayley. 1646.

Die Martis 26. September. 1643.
An Order of the Lords and Commons Assembled in Parliament: For publishing the
Ordinance of Sequestration of the King, Queen, and Princes Revenue.

WHereas the Lords and Commons assembled in Parliament, upon the 21 day of this
instant month of September, passed an Ordinance for the seizing and receiving
of his Majesty's, the Queens, and Princes Revenue, for the service of the King
and Parliament, together with all Arrears thereof, and other Debts any way due
to his Majesty, the Queen, or Prince. It is therefore this day Ordered by the
said Lords and Commons, That the said Ordinance shall be forthwith published in
the several Counties, and all the Market Towns within the Realm of England,
Dominion of Wales, and Port and Town of Berwick, to the intent that all
Farmers, Fee-Farmers, Tenants, Debtors, Receivers, and all the Officers and
Persons whom it shall concern, may take notice thereof, and conform
themselves thereunto, and pay their Moneys respectively to such Persons and
Receivers as are or shall be appointed by virtue and according to the direction
of the said Ordinance, and not to any other person whatsoever, as they will
answer the contrary at their peril. And it is further Ordered, That the
Deputy Lieutenants, and Committees of Parliament, or any one of the said
Deputy Lieutenants, or Committees in each several County, City, or place
within this Realm of England, Dominion of Wales, and Port or Town of Berwick,
are hereby authorized and required to cause the same to be published
accordingly.

Joh. Brown Cler. Parliamentorum.

Die Sabbathi 30. September. 1643.
WHereas the Companies of London have been rated by an Act of Common Council,
toward the raising of Moneys advanced by the City for the public Service;
for the repayment whereof, the City is secured by Ordinance of Parliament. And
whereas there are diverse Companies that are behind in the payment of the Rates
so assessed upon them; It is this day Ordered by the Lords and Commons, That
the said Companies so in Arreare do forthwith pay their Rates assessed upon
them. Or otherwise that the Lands and Revenues of the said Companies shall be
sequestered in the like manner, as the Estates and Revenues of Delinquents by
the Ordinance of Sequestrations are and ought to be Sequestered.

Joh. Brown Cler. Parliamentorum.

Die Mercurii 18. October. 1643.
An Order of the Lords and Commons For the Restraint of Passage from Oxford, or
any other part of the Kings Army to London, or to the parts adjacent, or any
part of the Army under Command of the Earl of Essex, both by Land and Water,
upon the penalty expressed.

ORdered by the Lords and Commons in Parliament assembled, That whatsoever
person shall come from Oxford, or any part of the Kings Army to London, or the
parts adjacent, or to any part of the Army under the command of the Earl of
Essex, or to any Fort or Court of Guard kept by the Authority of both Houses of
Parliament, without the Warrant of both Houses of Parliament, or the Lord
General the Earl of Essex, shall be apprehended as Spies and Intelligencers,
and be proceeded against according to the Rules and Grounds of War. And it is
further Ordered, That the like care be taken by Water, for the apprehending of
the persons aforesaid: And all Captains of Guards, and Officers, and all other
persons, are required to be very diligent in apprehending the said persons: And
it is further Ordered, That this Order be printed and published, and sent to
the several Courts of Guard, both by Water and Land.

Joh. Brown Cler. Parliamentorum.

Die Sabbathi 14. September. 1644.
ORdered by the Lords and Commons assembled in Parliament, That no Trees or
Underwood be felled, or cut in Birch-wood, Cranborn-Chace, or in any other of
the Parks, Forests, Chaces, or Woods of the Kings, under the power of the
Parliament, by virtue or color of the Ordinance of Parliament for felling of
Woods for the City, without the knowledge, consent, and allowance of the
Committee of the Kings Revenue: And that whatsoever Timber, or other Wood is
already felled and cut in any of these places, That none of it shall be carried
away, without the consent and allowance of the said Committee. And that those
who have felled any Trees, or received or bought any of the Trees in any of the
Forests, Parkes, or Woods, be brought to an account by the Committee of the
Revenue.

Joh. Brown Cler. Parliamentorum.

Die Veneris 18. Julii 1645.
ORdered by the Commons assembled in Parliament, That all the Fee-Farm-Rents,
other Rents and Revenues whatsoever payable to the Crown out of any Lands
thorowout the Kingdom, and the Arrears thereof, shall be paid in to the
respective Receivers thereof in the several Counties by those in whose hands
they are; And are not to be accounted for part of the Sequestrations, or to be
detained by any Sequestrators by color of any Ordinances or Orders for
Sequestrations whatsoever.

H. Elsynge Cler. Parl. D. Com.

Die Martis 12 Martii. 1643.
IT is this day Ordered by the Lords and Commons assembled in Parliament, That
the Lord Mayor of London and Court of Aldermen, do presently seize and
sequester into their hands the Houses, Rents, Revenues, Books, Deeds,
Evidences, and all Writings belonging to the Deane, Deane and Chapter, or other
Prebendaries, Officers, or Ministers belonging to the Cathedral Church of
Paul's London in right of the said Church; As likewise all Moneys, Goods, and
Materials, bought, or given, and brought into any place or person, for
Repayring or furnishing of the said Church, or otherwise appertaining
thereunto, in whose hands soever the same remains. And that out of the said
Revenues, they pay unto Dr. Burges one hundred pounds at the end of every
quarter of the year, The first Payment to begin at the next Lady day, and
thence to continue, according to the true intention of a former Order of both
Houses of Parliament. And moreover, That they set out and deliver unto him a
good and convenient house for his dwelling, well repaired and fitted for his
use. And for better execution of this Order, They are to constitute and appoint
such Assistants, Deputies, and Officers as they shall find requisite. And to
send for, and examine all persons concerned in the premises as Parties or
Witnesses: All which shall be done, and the charge thereof allowed out of the
said sequestered Estates; any Order, or Ordinance to the contrary in any wise
notwithstanding.

Joh. Brown Cler. Parl.

Die Mercurii, 23 April. 1645.
An Ordinance of the Lords and Commons Assembled in Parliament, for the settling
of Mr. Philip Goodwyn in the Vicaridge of Watford, and of Dr. Burges, in the
public, Lecture of the Church of Paul's LONDON.

WHereas the Lords and Commons in Parliament assembled, did by an Ordet of the
sixteenth of December 1643. appoint and constitute Dr. Cornelius Burges Vicar
of Watford in the County of Hertford, to be public Lecturer in the Church of
Paul's London; and for his encouragement therein did further Order, That four
hundred pounds per annum should be paid unto him quarterly out of the
sequestered Estates of the Deane, and Deane and Chapter of the said Church. And
whereas by another Order of both House^ of Parliament of the twelfth of March
164^ the Lord Major of London, and Court of Aldermen there, are appointed and
Authorized to seize and Sequester into their hands, the Houses, Rents and
Revenues of the said Deane, Deane and Chapter, and other Prebendaries,
Officers, and Ministers, belonging to the said Cathedral Church in right of
the said Church. And that out of the said Revenues, they should pay to the said
Doctor Burges one hundred pounds at the end of every quarter of the year, the
first Payment to begin at the then next Lady day, and thence to continue. And
moreover that they should set out and deliver unto him, a good and convenient
house for his dwelling, well Repaired and fitted for his use, which is done
accordingly (as by the said Orders among other things appears) It is now
Ordered, and Ordained, and be it Ordered and Ordained by the said Lords and
Commons, that the said Church of Watford shall be void, and quit of the said
Doctor Burges; And that Philip Goodwyn shall be from henceforth Vicar of
Watford, and officiate the said Cure as Vicar thereof; and shall have, and
receive to himself, all Tithes, Oblations, Pensions, Annuities, Houses,
Duties, Profits, and Commodities whatsoever thereto belonging, from the 25. day
of December, one thousand six hundred forty three, (he discharging the Cure,
and paying all payments and duties issuing thence from the time aforesaid) for
and during his natural life, in as ample manner, to all intents and purposes
as the said Doctor Burges, or any other Vicar heretofore enjoyed the same,
without any further Presentation, Admission, or Induction. And it is also
Ordained, and be it Ordained by the said Lords and Commons in Parliament, That
the said yearly allowance of four hundred pounds, shall be well and
constantly paid out of the said Revenues of the said Church, to the said Doctor
Burges quarterly as aforesaid, by the said Lord Major and Court of Aldermen,
for, and during his natural life, he performing the Lectures in the said
Church, as by the said Lords and Commons he is Ordered to do. And it is
likewise Ordained, That the said Doctor Burges, shall have and enjoy the House
set out by the said Lord Major and Court of Aldermen for his dwelling, Situate
and being in, or near Pauls-Church yard, and late in the possession and use of
Doctor Steward Deane of Paul's; Together with all Outlets, Easements,
Commodities, Gardens, and Appurtenances thereto belonging, in as ample manner
as the said Doctor Steward, or any other before him enjoyed the same, for and
during the natural life of him the said Dr. Burges. And for the more certain
payment of the said Annual sum of four hundred pounds, to the said Doctor
Burges as aforesaid, Be it further Ordained by the said Lords and Commons in
Parliament, and by the Authority of the same, That all and every Farmer,
Tenant, Leasee, and every other person and persons, within the Kingdom of
England, and Dominion of Wales, who do, or shall owe, or ought to pay any
Rents, Issues, Fines, Heriots, Profits, sum, or sums of Money, or ought
else reserved upon any Lease, Covenant, or Agreement to the said Deane, Deane
and Chapter, or other Prebendaries, Officers, or Ministers of the said
Cathedral Church, in right thereof (except for the House and premises granted
to the said Doctor Burges as aforesaid) shall from time to time pay the same,
and all Arrerages thereof unto the said Lord Major and Aldermen, or to their
Sub-Committee, Assistants, or other person or persons by them Authorized to
receive the same, as it is or shall grow due, and to no other person or persons
whatsoever; And that the Acquittance of such Receiver thereof under his hand,
shall be a sufficient discharge to every person so paying the same against all
other persons whatsoever, any Reservation, Covenant, Proviso, or other thing to
the contrary notwithstanding: And that the said Lord Major and Court of
Aldermen, their Sub-Committee, or Assistants, or any four or more of them,
shall hereby have, and use the same and the like power, authority, and
assistance, for, and in the discovery, seizing, and getting into their hands,
all and every the premises (except before excepted) as they are and shall
become due, And all Arrearages thereof, as is granted by any Ordinance of
Parliament, or Explanation thereof, to any other Sequestrators or Committee for
Sequestrations, of the Estates of Papists and other Delinquents, as if the said
Lord Major, Aldermen, their Assistants, Sub-Committees, and Receivers, and
every of them, had been particularly named in such Ordinance, or Explanation:
And that out of the said Rents, Issues, Revenues, and Profits, so from time to
time received, the Receiver or Treasurer thereof for the time being, shall at
the end of every quarter of the year, pay the full sum of one hundred
pounds lawful Money, to the said Doctor Burges constantly, during his natural
life, without further, or other Order or warrant from any person or persons
whatsoever, before the said Treasurer Issue or pay out any other sum or
sums of Money out of the premised Rents or Revenues, to any other person or
persons for any other matter, cause, or thing whatsoever; And that all and
every person and persons, that has done, or shall do any thing in pursuance
of, or obedience to the said former Order of the twelfth of March, 1643. (Which
Order is hereby Ordained also to be still in force, and to be fully obeyed by
all whom it may concern) or that shall do anything in pursuance and obedience
of this present Ordinance, shall therein be esteemed to do an acceptable
Service to the Kingdom, and have the protection of both Houses of Parliament
for their Indempnitie. And if the said Sequestered Estates and Revenues, or any
part thereof, shall hereafter be put into any other hands then now they be, or
otherwise Aliened, Sold, or disposed of, It is yet further Ordained, by the
Authority aforesaid, That good and sufficient Provision shall be made in the
passing and disposal thereof, whereby the said Doctor Burges may, and shall by
all the time aforesaid, well and truly, by quarterly payments receive the
aforesaid yearly allowance of four hundred pounds out of the said Sequestered
Estates and Revenues, and enjoy the House abovesaid, and all other the premises
according to the true Intention of this present Ordinance, any Order, Act, or
Ordinance, made or to be made to the contrary hereof, in any wise
notwithstanding. And to the end this Ordinance may be better known and obeyed,
It is Ordered, that this Ordinance be Printed and Published.

Jo. Brown Cleric. Parliamentor. H. Elsynge Cler. Parl. D.Com.


FINIS.

