AN ORDINANCE MADE And agreed by the LORDS and COMMONS of Parliament the 28th
day of August 1641.

For the speedy disarming of Popish Recusants, And other dangerous persons.

LONDON: Printed by ROBERT BARKER, Printer to the Kings most Excellent
Majesty: And by the Assigns of JOHN BILL. MDCXLI.

An Ordinance made and agreed by the Lords and Commons of Parliament the 28th
day of August 1641.
For the speedy disarming of Popish Recusans, and other dangerous persons.
(...) (...) (...) (...)

For the City and County of the City of York, The Lord Major for the time
being, Sir Thomas Widrington, and Sir William Allinson.

For the County of Sussex, Sir Thomas Pelham, Master Shelley, Master William
Hay.

For the Ports in Sussex, William Hay, Herbert Morley Esquires.

For the County of Buck. Sir William Andrews Bar. Sir Alexander Denton
Knight, Sir John Parsons.

For the County of Berk Sir George Stonehouse, Master John Parker, Sir John
Backhouse, Roger Knight.

For the County of Cornwall, Sir Richard Carey Barronet, Alexander Carey,
Esquires, Sir Richard Buller Knight.

For the County of Cumberland, Richard Barwise Esquire, and William Penington
of Seaton Esquire.

For the County of Cambridge, Sir Dudley North, Sir John Cutts, Thomas
Chicesley, Thomas Symonds, Thomas Wendy Esquires.

For the County of Devon, Sir Samuel Roll, Sir John Bampfield Barronet.

For the City of Exceter, the Major for the time being.

For the County of Dorsett, Sir Walter Earl, Sir Thomas Trenchard Knights.

For the County of Essex, Sir Harbottle Grimston, Sir Richard Everard, Sir
Thomas Bendish, Sir Robert Kemp.

For the County of Gloucester, Henry Brett Esquire, Sir Robert Cook, Edward
Stevens, Thomas Hodges Esquires.

For the City and County of the City of Gloucester, The Major of the City
of Gloucester, and the two ancient Aldermen.

For the County of Huntington, Sir Sydney Mountague, Aunslow Winch Esquire,
Torrell Joslin Esquire, Henry Cromwell Esquire.

For the County of Hartford, Edward Chester, Edward Wingate Esquires, John
Butler.

For the County of Hereford, Walter Kirle Esquire, Sir William Crofts Knight,
John Scudamore of Kenchurch, James Kirle, Edward Broughton Esquires.

For the County of Kent, Sir Edward Boys, Sir Thomas Walsingham, Sir Edward
Partridge Knights, Richard Lee Esquire.

And for the City and County of the City of Canterbury, Sir Edward Masters
Knight.

And for the Ports in Kent, and their Members, Sir Edward Boys Knight.

For the County of Leicester, Sir Arthur Haslrigge, Thomas Lord Gray.

For the County of Middlesex, Sir John Davers, Sir William Roberts, Sir Henry
Roe, Sir Gilbert Gerrard, Sir John Francklin.

For the City of Westminster, Sir Robert Pie, William Wheeler Esquire, John
Glyn Esquire.

For the City of London, the Lord Major, Thomas Soame, Isaac Penington
Aldermen, Samuel Vassal, and Captain John Ven Merchants, Members of the House
of Commons.

For the County of Northhampton, Edward Mountague Esquire, Sir John Draydon,
Sir Christopher Yelverton, Zouch Tate Esquire.

For the County of Norfolk, Sir John Pots, Sir Tho Woodhouse, Sir Edmund
Moundford.

For the City of Norwich, and County of the same, the Major for the time being.

For the County of Northumberland, Sir John Fennick, Henry Ogle, Thomas
Middleton, William Shafto of Babington Esquires.

For the Town of Newcastle, the Major for the time being, Master Ledyard.

For the Town of Barwick, Sir Robert Jackson, Master John Sleigh Gentleman,
William Fenwick Gentleman.

For the County of Oxon, James Fynes,, Sir William Cobb, Sir Thomas Penniston,
John Doyly Esquire.

For the County of Rutland, Sir Guy Palms, Sir Edward Harrington, Robert
Horseman junior Esquire.

For the County of Surrey, Sir John Evelin, Sir Ambrose Brown Barronet.

For the County of Salop, Sir Richard Newport, Master Rich. Moore, Charles
Baldwin Esquires.

For the County of Southhampton, Richard Whitehead Esquire, Sir William Lewis.

For the Town of Southhampton, the Major for the time being.

For the County of Suffolk, Sir Roger North, Sir Robert Crane, Robert Reynolds
Esquire, Sir William Platers, William Cage Esquire.

For Somersetshire, Sir John Horner, Sir John Paulet Knights, John Pyne Esquire.

For the City of Bristoll, the Major for the time being, John Guning, John
Tomlinson.

For the County of Westmerland, Sir Philip Musgrave Knight and Barronet, Sir
Henry Bellingham, Gawin Braithwait Esquire.

For the County of Wilts, Sir Nevill Poole, Anthony Hungerford Esquire.

For the County of Worcester, Humphrey Salloway Esquire, Edward Dingley, Edward
Pit, Thomas Rowse Esquires.

For the City of Worcester, the Major for the time being.

For the County of Warwick, Sir Richard Skeffington, William Coombes Esquire,
John Hales, Richard Shugborough Esquires.

For the City and County of Coventry, the Major for the time being, Alderman
Million, John Barker.

For the City of Litchfield, the Bailifses for the time being.

For the County of Anglesey, Thomas Buckley Esquire, Owen Wood Esquire.

For the County of Brecnock, Henry Williams, Thomas Groyn, William Morgan
Esquires.

For the County of Carnarvon, Thomas Glynn of Nautley, William Thomas, Owen
Wynn, Thomas Madrin Esquires.

For the County of Denbigh, Thomas Middleton, John Lloyd, William Wynn Esquires.

For the County of Flint, Sir Thomas Mostin, Humphrey Dymocke, John Eaton, John
Salisbury junior, Esquires.

For the County of Glamorgan, William Herbert, Sir Thomas Line, Miles Button
Esquires.

For the County of Merioneth, William Salisbury Esquire, Sir James Price Knight.

For the County of Pembroke, Sir Richard Phillips Barronet, Sir Hugh Owin
Knight and Barronet.

For the County of Mountgomery, Arthur Price Esquire, Richard Griffith, Edward
Vaughan Esquires.

For Radnor, Thomas Jews, Robert Williams, Richard Jones Esquires.

For the County Palatine of Durham, Sir Lyonell Maddison, Sir Alexander Hall,
George Lilburne, Clement Fulthrop.

For the County of Cardigan, Walter Lloyd, James Jews Esquires.

For the County of Carmarthen, Richard Earl of Carbury, Francis Lloyd Esquires.

For the County of Monmouth, Sir William Morgan, Thomas Morgan, William Herbert
of Colbrooke, William Baker of Aburgany, Sir Robert Cook, Sir Charles
Williams, James Kirk Esquires:

Which said persons, so appointed and nominated, or any one, or more of them,
together with the Justices of the Peace of every Shire, County, or Riding
respectively, or any one, or more of them, or the Major, Bailiffes, Justice of
the Peace, Iurats, or other head Officers within any City, or Town Corporate,
or other privileged Place, or any one, or more of them respectively, shall
have power, and are hereby authorized, and required to do and perform all and
every such thing, and things, as shall be necessary for the due execution of
this present Ordinance, according to the Instructions herewith annexed: Which
said Instructions are hereby Ordered, and Commanded to be duly Observed, and
Executed, by all and every person, and persons whom it shall, or may appertain,
as they will answer the contrary at their perils.

This Ordinance to continue no longer then till the end of this present Session
of Parliament.

INSTRUCTIONS Appointed by Ordinance of PARLIAMENT to the persons thereby
authorized for the disarming of Popish Recusants, and other dangerous persons.
1.
SUch Members of the house of Commons, and other persons as in and by the said
Ordinances are particularly named and appointed, or any one or more of them,
and the Justices of the Peace of each several County, Shire, or Riding within
England or Wales, as also the Majors, Bayliffes, Justices of the Peace,
Iurates, or other head Officers, of, or within any City, Town-Corporate, or
Privileged place respectively, or any one or more of them together, with some,
or one of the persons nominated in the said Ordinance, are to see the same
forthwith put in execution, and shall have power to call the high Sheriff of
each County, and his Ministers, all Constables, and Tything-men, and other
Officers, or any of them, when and as often as they shall think fit, to be aiding
and assisting to them from time to time within their several limits and
Jurisdictions, in the due performance of this Service, and to do, and execute
all, and every such thing or things as shall be requisite and necessary in that
behalf, and the said Members of the said House of Commons are especially
required to see the said Ordinance forthwith put in execution.

2.
The said persons authorized are to inform themselves by all convenient ways
and means, of all such Arms, Gunpowder, and Munition, of what kind soever, as
any Popish Recusant convict, or person whatsoever, either of the Nobility, or
other, which is or shall be indicted for Popish Recusants, and such
indictments, either removed by Certiorari, or being not removed, shall not by
Appearance and Traverse, or otherwise be legally discharged, or which shall not
have reparied to Church more then once in every month, or shall not have
received the holy Communion, according to the Rites of the Church of England,
within one whole year next before the making of the said Ordinance, or which
shall refuse to take the Oaths of Supremacy or Allegiance upon lawful tender
thereof made, or whose Children, or Grandchildren, or any of them, being at
their dispose, or in house with them, are bred up in the Popish Religion, or
have not repaired to the Church within one whole year next before the making of
the said Ordinance, according to the Laws and Statutes of the Realm, or whose
household servants, or any number of them are of the Popish Religion, has, or
have in his or her house or houses, or elsewhere, or in the hands or possession
of any other to his or her use, or at his or her disposition; And are to search
all such places where any such Arms, Gunpowder, or Munition of any such Popish
Recusant, or other person, whose Arms by the said Ordinance is to be taken
away, is placed or deposited, or supposed to be placed or deposited.

3.
They are to take and seize all such Arms, Gunpowder, and Munition, as
aforesaid, in whose hands or custody, or in what place soever the same shall be
(other then such weapons as shall be by the said persons so authorized, thought
fit to remain, and be allowed to the said Recusants, or other Popish persons,
as aforesaid, for the defense of his or her person or houses; and shall cause
the same to be placed in some City, or Town-Corporate, or other convenient
Town of the same County, and there safely kept, at the costs and charges of
the owner thereof, and the Armourer to be admitted to dress and amend the same
so often as need shall require.

4.
And if any such Popish Recusant, or other person as aforesaid, or any other
person or persons, which have, or has, or shall have any such Arms,
Gunpowder, or Munition in his or their hands or possession, to the use of such
Recusant or other person, as aforesaid, or by his, her, or their appointment,
shall conceal the said Arms, Gunpowder, and Munition, or any part thereof, or
shall refuse to discover the same to the said persons authorized, or otherwise
wilfully oppose, hinder, or disobey the said persons authorized, or any of them
in the execution of the said Ordinance, that then every such Popish Recusant,
and other person so offending, shall be held a contemptuous person, and be
liable to such further punishment as by the Parliament, upon Certificate
thereof made, shall be thought fit, and the persons authorized are to certify
their names accordingly: They are to make Certificate to the Parliament of all
such Arms, Gunpowder, and Munition as they shall take or seize by force, or
virtue of the said Ordinance; As also of the person and persons whose the same
were, and from whom they are so taken, and in what place or places the same are
found or taken, and where and in what City, Town or place, and in whose custody
the same shall be left or deposited, and what order they shall take concerning
the same, and shall likewise certify what Arms or Munition they shall leave
to such Recusants or persons as aforesaid, for the defense of his or her person
or house.

5.
They are to enquire what Popish Recusants have lately had any Arms or
Munition taken away, by whom and by what means, and where or in whose hands the
same remains, and to take care that the same may be safely placed, and kept in
such manner as aforesaid, and to make Certificate thereof to the Parliament.

6.
To take care that the said Arms and Munition so to be seized and taken away by
force of the said Ordinance, may so be placed and disposed of, as there may not
be too great a quantity thereof at the same time in one and the same City, Town
or place, but that it may be distributed and placed in several Towns and
places, in such manner and proportion as shall be most convenient for the use
and safety of the Kingdom.

FINIS.
LONDON, Printed by Robert Barker Printer to the Kings most Excellent Majesty:
And by the Assigns of John Bill. 1641.


