Many Remarkable PASSAGES from both Houses of PARLIAMENT.

From the 12. of May till this present, Concerning the great affairs of the
whole Kingdom.

With many more Passages of great Consequence concerning Sir Edward Deering and
diverse other Kentish-men, and concerning a Charge to be drawn up against them
for their speedy Trial.

WITH The Examination of Mistress Sanders, living at Ratcliffe, Sister to
Oneale, before the House of Commons, the 12. of May, 1642.

Also another Examination by the Honorable House of Commons, Concerning Sir
Nicholas Cole, and the Inhabitants of Newcastle.

May 13. 1642.

Together with an Order of both Houses of Parliament, Concerning the
continuance of the Term at Westminster.

John Brown Cleric Parliament.

Likewise his Majesty's Letter to the Gentry of Yorkshire, May, 16. 1642.

London, Printed for T. Ryder.. 1642.

Many Remarkable Passages from both Houses of Parliament, from the 12. of May,
till this present, concerning the great affairs of the whole Kingdom.
UPon the 9. day of this present month of May, there was a Committee of the
House of Commons sat concerning the differences between Sir Nicholas Cole
(Major) and the Townsmen of Newcastle; where witnesses were examined in that
cause, and an Order issued to be sent to Newcastle forthwith to Mason Castle
for the bringing up of more witnesses.

Upon this present day there was also then given up at the Court gate a Command
from His Majesty by Sir Nicholas Hand for the speedy repair of all his
Majesty's Servants in Ordnary to YORK, upon pain of his Majesty's
displeasure, the House of Commons falling into consultation of the malignant
party of the Kingdom, and among others, of Sir Edward Deering, and the residue
that were instructers in the late scandalous Petitions delivered from Kent and
having prepared a charge against them, at a desi^ed conference it was then
moved for their speedy trial.

Upon the 12. day of this instant Month, one Mrs. Sanders of Ratcliffe, Sister
to Oneale, was brought to the house of Commons upon report made that they
furnished Oneale with con^eniencies for his escape, who being examined
thereupon before a Committee appointed, and denying thereof, was committed to
Custody, till convenient time for her examination.

Diverse Committees of this house of Commons, were appointed to meet on
Wednesday last in the afternoon, for Sr. Cornelious Vermud^^s Bill, for the
Fines of Recusants and other delinquents.

But the Body of the house met and sat in a Committee, for the nomination of
the time and place, for the Sinod to meet, which occasioned much conferring,

The Lords assembled in this present Parliament, received a Complaint against
one Captain Jackso^, who had formerly had Command in the I Will of Providence,
before the rising of the Spaniard, by a Soldier for aff^onts under him that
Voyage, and concerning some pretended oppressions and trains laid to take away
h^s life (by the said Captain) after some debate thereof it was referred to a
Committee for Examination.

Upon the 13. day of this present month, 1642. The House of Commons taking
into consideration His Majesty's date Message, and the danger the Committees of
each House underwent residing at York, then after some debate they Voted, that
whosoever he were that should attach or imprison either the said Members, or
any other of each House, employed on their service, should be accounted as an
enemy to the State and Commonwealth, etc. Which being acquainted the Lords at
a Conference, it were assented too, and a joint Order issued for the printing
of the said Votes.

And likewise Order issued to the Sheriff of Yorkshire, for the sending up of
those Delinquents in their County* formerly sent for, but not yet appeared.

Die Martis, 17 Maii, 1642.
WHereas the Lords in Parliament, have this day been Informed, That the King
is Resolved to adjourn the next Term from Westminster to York; Upon which,
The Lords sent a Committee to the Lord Keeper of the great Seal of England, to
know of him, whether he had received my command touching the same, who
acquainted the said Committee, That he had received command from His Majesty,
to issue Proclamations and Writs, to that purpose.

Whereupon, This House taking the said matter into consideration, has Voted:
That the Kings removal of the Term to York, from Westminster, during sitting
of this Parliament, is Illegal.

And has further ordered, That the said Lord Keeper shall not issue out any
Writs, or Seal any Proclamation, for adjourning the said next Term from
Westminster to York, as aforesaid.

Joh. Brown, Cleric. Parl.

His Majestes Letter to the Gentry of Yorkshire, May, the sixteenth, 1642.
To our right trusty and well beloved the Gentry of York, and others of this
our County of York, whom it does or may concern.
WE have with great contentment considered your merciful and affectionate
Answer to our Proposition concerning the unsufferable affront which we received
at Hull, We have not bin deceived in that confidence we had in your affection,
wherefore we desire you to assure the rest of your Countrymen, who through
negligence were omitted to be sum^oned: that We shall never abuse your love by
any power wherewith God shall enable us to the least violation of the least of
your Liberties, or the diminution of those Immunities which we have granted you
this Parliament, though they be beyond the Acts of most (if not all) Our
Predecessors; being resolved with a constant and firm Resolution to have the
Law of this Land duly observed, and shall endeavor only so 10 preserve Our
just Royal Rights, as may enable us to protect our Kingdom and people,
according to the ancient H^^ors of the Kings or England, and according to the
trust which by the Law of God and this Land is put into the Crown, being
sufficiently warned by the late affront at Hull, not to transfer the same o^^
of our power concerning which Affront we will take some time to Advisse, which
way we may usefully employ your Affections, in the mean time we shall take it
well from all such as shall personally attend us, so followed and provided, as
they shall think fit for the better safety of our person, because We know not
what sudden violence, or affront may be offered unto us, having lately
received such an actual testimony of rebellious intentions as Sir- John Hotham
have expressed at Hull: Being thus secured by your affections and assistance we
promise you our Protection against any contrary power whatsoever, And that you
shall not be molested for your humble and modest Petition, as of late have been
threatened.

Given at Our Court at York, May the 16. 1642.
FINIS.

