A REVIVING WORD FROM THE Quick and the Dead, to the Scattered Dust of SION:
OR, A Breathing of the Spirit of Life, in a Few Dry Bones, that begin to Rise
and Rattle, In and about this City of LONDON; BY A Solemn DECLARATION, FOR An
IMMEDIATE UNITING of ALL SAINTS into ONE BODY, upon the Growing Principles of
Grace, and Kingdom of our Lord Jesus, in every Administration thereof.

SHOWING The Grounds of it, Progress in it, Proposalls for it, Motives to it,
And our yearning Invitation throughout the three Nations, about this
Pacificatory Primitive-like Enterprise.

To put us ALL (as one Man) into a Posture meet to Meet our Lord Jesus at his
second coming, in All the DEGREES and SERVICES thereof.

Hosea 6. 2, 3. After two Days he will revive us, in the third Day he will
raise us up, and We shall live in his sight. Then shall we know if we follow on
to know the Lord; his going forth is prepared as Morning, and he shall come to
us, as the rain, as the latter and as the former Rain.

2 Chronicles. 30. 12. Also in Judah the hand of God was to give them One Heart.

2 Chronicles. 11. 16. And after them, out of All the Tribes, such as set their
hearts to seek the Lord, came to Jerusalem

LONDON: Printed for Giles Calvert, at the Black-spread-Eagle, near the West
end of Paul's. 1657.

A DECLARATION FOR UNITING-WORK.
OR Several Judgments of the People of God, that are agreed with one heart
(and as one man) in the KINGDOME-WORK, and Witness of our Lord Jesus,
patiently (and piously) waiting for the full Redemption of Sion, and coming of
Christ in the Exercise of his KINGLY GOVERNMENT.
AFTER diverse years Patience and Expectation, (with continued cries to the MOST
HIGH for help and light) we are made deeply (and to our very souls) sensible
of the great Reproach upon Religion, the Dispersion and scattering of Saints
(of all Forms as well as out) up and down in their holes and corners in these
Nations, and of the great disorder thereby amongst them: as well as of the
great Advantage which the Enemies of Christ, and of his Kingdom, have had by
the weaknesses, distances, diversity of tongues, and divisions of the People of
God, at this day, (who notwithstanding are of one heart, faith, and spirit, in
the maine.) And this chiefly, in an undue lifting up of persons, principles, or
judgments; in a magnifying of Forms, and Apprehensions, one against another,
(and not in a consistency together;) and in a management of the things of
Christ partially, (or by parties and Factions, and not jointly) to the great
offense of good men, prejudice and reproach of the Principles, Cause, and Name
of Christ, and his Kingdom.

Wherefore (after Solemn seeking of the face of God, crying and inquiring into
his mind (by Christ) to know what Israel has to do) lamenting and resenting
the sad estate of Sion, with the present condition of hundreds (in and about
this City) of of the dust of Sion, hurried and huffed about with diverse winds
of doctrines, judgments, and temptations, to their great endangering, and
decaying of the power of Godliness, and Brotherly love. We have been (we hope,
by a sweet and Fatherly hand of grace, or clear Sanctuary-light, at last, and
as a Return of the word of God and prayers) lead into this knowledge and
practice, now incumbing; and lead up into some serious Resolution or full
purpose of heart for an Uniting together (who are scattered ones) in and about
this City of London, in a Religious or Christian body, in imitation of the
primitive spirit, Act. 1. 14. (to cleave unto the Lord, and one to another
these dividing and back sliding times, Acts 11. 23.) in the matters of our
Faith, worship of our God, Kingdom and Cause of our Lord and Savior Jesus
Christ.

Nor are we (as we think) without weighty (moving) Arguments, or pressing
grounds, (as in our own souls arising from the Cross of Christ, who in his
own flesh has abolished the enmity, even the Law of Commandments, contained in
Ordinances. Ephesians. 2. 14, 15, 16. that he might reconcile all, Jew and Gentile,
in one body, having slain the enmity) so in the sight of all other sound
Christians indulging us in, and inducing them and all of us to this Primitive
Gospel-practice, or blessed work of Uniting and Consolidating throughout these
Nations. Some of which are as follow.

1. Ground, the Parallel of our Present Scattering the last three years, with
the Disciples the three days of Christ's sufferings, calls for the same Practice
from us.
1. The parallel of our present Condition (these last three years, with the
dispersed Disciples in the three days, of Christ's sufferings, Mark 14. 50.
John 20. 10) Now what they did for the preservation of the Gospel and Religion,
in the Power, purity, and Spirituality thereof, are we to do: But they United
(or gathered together into one body) out of their diverse places and homes
(which the persecution had scattered them into) for the preservation of the
Gospel, Luke 24. 33. John 20. 19. Acts 1. 4. (that they did so is evident to
all at the third day, or time of the end:) That we must do so, is as clear a
consequent, whether it be the time of the end or no; for this is a RULE to us
in ordinary cases, that which Saints have before done, and the holy Spirit has
commended, are we to do, that follow after, in the like case: besides, Psalm.
102 13, 14. the Favoring of Sion begins by the gathering up of her Scattered
and despised stones, (a poor scattered, peeled people) Isa. 51. 3. Saying, This
is ZION, whom no man seeks after, Jer. 30. 17.

2. Ground, is the Great Promise of the Spirit, at hand, for which Christ put
his Disciples into this Posture or way of Uniting.
2. The GREAT PROMISE of the Father, Luke 24. 49. Acts 1. 4. John 15. 26. Or,
The pouring out of the Spirit, Joel 2. 28. which we wait for. Now look in what
Posture Christ put his Disciples for the pouring out of the holy Ghost (in the
first fruits,) are we his Disciples to wait in for the holy Ghost (the latter
fruits, or the latter rain.) But in this way of Uniting, Gathering and
imbodying, did he bid them wait for the First Fruits, Mat. 28. 10, 16. Luke
24. 49. Acts 1. 4. (which accordingly they did, Acts 1. 14, 15. and 2. 1, 2.
and so do we.) Besides, Ezekiel. 37. 7, 8. the word of prophecy must FIRST
gather and unite the dry bones (bone to bone) before they rise, (and this with
substance, sinews, and nourishment) then (to them in that posture) comes the
great Promise of the Spirit, Ezekiel. 37. 9. and life to set them on their feet,
v. 10. so v. 14. 17. and not before: For should the Great Promise The Reason of
it.
come before, every one would desire it for himself, and for the magnifying of
his own FORM, particular body, Judgment, or Division; more then for the
Public work of Christ, and of all sorts, or then for maintaining the power of
godliness, and Unity of the Spirit in the bond of peace, amongst all men.

3. The opening of the Tabernacle of the Testimony.
3. The Great and constant expectations which we have of the opening of the
Temple of the Tabernacle of the Testimony, Rev. 15. 5. (which has been so long
shut up) in the purity, power, Spirit, life, and Excellency of worship, and of
Ordinances, (as Hezekiah opened the doors of the Temple, 2 Chronicles. 29. 4, 7. and
as it was in the Primitive times) by this blessed Way and Work, at least (and
at first) in some little degree, more then it has been known since the Rise of
the BEAST, Rev. 11. 1, 2, 6. Or since the Gentiles have trod the holy City
under The Typical Tabernacle of many in one: so is this.
foot, and the wildernessing of the woman, Rev. 12. 6. For, as the Tabernacle
made of many united, looped and tacked together in one, Exodus 26. 6, 11. (as
Judge. 21. 11. it is said, They were knit together as one man, having respect to
the Tabernacleunion, called the Tabernacle of the witness, Acts 7. 44. and the
Temple, 1 Samuel 1. 9. and 3. 3. Psalm. 27. 4. and 138. 2.) was a type of this,
(which is therefore called the Tabernacle of the Wherein is hid the Ark, the
Manna.
Testimony.) So herein also (as it was there in the Figure) is hid the ARK,
Rev. 11. 19* and the heavenly Manna, Rev. 2. 17. from the sight of men, till
the time come for the holy Camp (Rev. 11. 2.) to set forward; and then is taken
away And it comes to be opened, or the Covering-Veile to be taken off, when the
Holy Camp arises.
the Covering-veile, or the shutting up of the Tabernacle, as Exodus 40. 3. and
26. 14. which (upon moving forward to the land of Promise) was opened and
uncovered, Numb. 4. 5. So must this Tabernacle of Saints (so united and knit as
one man be opened) and the covering (or veil) spread over hitherto, Isa. 25.
7. be taken off, as they move to the things promised, in The Inner-Court
opened, for the open Worship.
the last days. And as the inner Court, Ezekiel. 46. 1. was shut up the six days,
but when the evening of the sixth day came and the SABBATH approached, it was
to be set open, for the open and Public worship, and Ordinances: So do we
(with grounded persuasions) expect the opening of THIS inner-Court, Rev. 11. 1.
hitherto shut up in this evening of the great SABBATHISME or REST, approaching
in the New Jerusalem, Rev. 20. 21.

4. Parity of Circumstances in the Witnesses death, Rise, and Ascending with
our Lords; implies a Parity of Duty on us.
4. The Parity of the Order, and circumstances of the Witnesses sufferings
(Rev. 11.) Rising, and Ascending; with our Lords suffering, Rise, and
Ascension: signifies to us, a Parity of duty upon the Disciples of Christ at
this day with those of that day. The Witnesses bodies are said to lie in the
street of that City, where our Lord was crucified; implying the parity, viz.
slain by the highest sort of Professors (who say they are Jews and are not,
Rev. 2.) extant in the world, so was our Lord; Their bodies not put in graves,
nor was our Lords in the earth, (but in a stone, a new tomb cut out of a Rock
where never any man lay before,) of him it is said, After three days I will
rise again, Mat. 27. 63. and of the Witnesses, Rev. 11. 11. All his lying dead
were the Disciples dispersed (complaining) and scattered; so All the time of
the witnesses, and many are now complaining* as Luke 24. 21. At his rising fear
and terror fell on them that saw it, Mat. 28* 4. so at the witnesses, Rev. 11.
11. At his Resurrection (at the very first) Few saw it or would belive it, Luke
24. 37. (but rather were affrighted at it, Luke 24. 11, 41. being ignorant of
the manner of his Rise, Joh. 20. 9. And so are we at the Witnesses Rise, Rev.
11. 13. which is (as we think) obvious to Few at the first step thereof.) But
from that instant of time as the Disciples work was uniting and embodying,
(before Jesus ascended in a cloud:) So do we from the parity apprehend it the
Duty of the Disciples now, every where (that have been dispersed) before we
shall see the witnesses ascended up in a cloud, i. e. more visibly to All, for
then their enemies beheld them, Rev. 11. 12, 13. and the Earthquake came, and
the REMNANT were affrighted and gave Glory to God.

5. The Executing the judgment must be this way.
5. The Executing the vengeance upon BABYLON. The pouring out of the
Vial-worke, or THIRD WOE, is out of this Temple of the Tabernacle of the
Testimony, Rev. 15. 5, 8. and 16. 1. and not out of any One Form, Judgment,
or sort of men whatsoever: Hence, when the Judgment comes, All sorts of Gods
people are called to rejoice in it, whether Apostles, or Prophets, (as in the
vengeance of them all,) Rev. 18. 20. though under different Administrations.

6. The Constitution of the Primitive Church State being but one Body of many
Forms, etc.
6. The Constitution of the Primitive Church State (which was not in this or
that Form, but in the Power of godliness* and Christian Principles, making up
one Body under different and many Gifts, Measures, Judgments, and
Administrations, 1 Cor. 12. 4, 5, 11, 12, 13. 1 Cor. 10. 17. Romans 14. 4, 5.
without Names and Distinctions, as now are) calls upon us to this practice* And
for that in the Primitive times we read but of Then one Church in a City.
one Church in a City (were it ever so large) as at Jerusalem, Antioch, Rome,
Colosse, Phillippi, etc. which was of great conduce to Love and Unity; so
Titus. 1. 5. And ordain Elders in every City, as I had appointed. For although
at Jerusalem were many thousands, Acts 2. 41. and 4 4. (it is probable as many,
as in all the particular Churches of London) yet they were not many Churches
(as in this City, that occasion much the Divisions and breaches of Sion) but
One; Not that we bind up our communion so strictly, for that is explained in
answer to the second query; only we do humbly judge it would be better ONE in
a City, then many, as now are.

7. The present Apostasy and Adulterating of Churches.
7. The Consideration of the present Deflouring, Defilement, and Defection of
many (if not most) of the Particular Congregations; for we see them (with
sorrow of heart) so far corrupted from their first purity, deviated from their
first principles, (of separating from all that is unclean, 2 Cor. 6. 17, 18.
and of uniting upon their formerly professed, or INDEPENDENT, Principles) that
in most parts round the Nation, they are become rather DEPENDENT upon them in
power, Participant with them in Apostasy, and Communicant (or consociate) with
them in Sin, and with those very things persons, and principles, which they
were once separated from, (as Their Teachers. Viz. Answer to 2d query. Their
Members.
inconsistent with the Churches of Christ.) The TEACHERS of several of them,
falling in with Parishes, Tithes, Parish-Clergy, and Parish-worship. And the
Members of them with the uncleanness, evils, and abominations of the times;
oftending, persecuting or casting out them that keep constant to their first
principles and purity; being not only tainted, mixed, and infected, but Many
of them so notoriously degenerated in the Essence, viz. Matter, Form, End,
Rule, or Congregationall Spoiled in their Essentialls.
Principles, that we cannot (with comfort) walk with them, or keep our garments
clean amongst them; The matter of some of them being Goalers, Persecutors,
Opposers of the Truth, Notorious time-servers, or such as hold places, take
profits from the sins of the times, that strengthen the hands of the wicked,
that make the hearts of the righteous sad, self-seekers, covetous, Boasters,
Hypocrites, Apostates, and such as we are bid to turn away from, 1 Timothy 4. and
to have no Fellowship with, Ephesians. 5. 11. 2 Chronicles. 11. 16. Hos. 4. 15.

8. The Woeful Shipwreck to the Drowning of Many, and Danger of All, that yet
will keep upon their Planks or Pieces.
8. The Fearful shipwreck of Faith and a good Conscience, 1 Timothy 1. 19. that
has been made amongst Professors at this day; wherein since the SHIP has
been broken into pieces and Fitters, so Many have sunk, and been drowned in
sins, and pleasures, and worldly lusts; and those that do as yet remain alive
(are in very desperate danger of the like destiny) upon their several planks
and pieces, (whether they be Presbiterian, Independent, Baptized, or others.)
And therefore according to Acts 2. 40 Save your selves from this untoward
Generation: to save our selves (as much as in us lies) from this great peril,
wherein so many are fallen before our eyes; we rather get off from the several
pieces (or our particular Forms) since this shipwreck, (wherein every one is
Scrambling to get most for himself, and Few for the the public good of all,)
and do go aboard upon this bottom, or ONE WAY of Christ, and Calls us to get
aboard the one Ship.
SHIP, wherein is contained all the particular Forms, and Judgments, the
Safety and Liberty of them All. Knowing that if we be all united to save the
SHIP (every ones Cabin will be safe,) and in the preservation of the whole (or
the power of Godliness amongst all) is contained the good and safety of every
individual and particular.

9. The Great Divisions in the Churches, and Forms, rents and Factions*
9. The present Divisions, Factions and Distractions, in particular
Congregations, and Forms, (keeping up their rigidity as a partition wall
between Saints and Saints) do call aloud for this Vniting-work and way of
Christ, (for the building up again of all these wast places, and breaches of
Syon, Isa. 49. 17.) till which the things of Christ, are (and will be) carried
on by Parties, Hurries and Factions, Schisms, and confusions of tongues, (too
much of Babylon;) some crying up Paul, and some Apollo, some Cephas, stopping
the progress of the Gospel, setting up particular Interests, (for the
Public) lifting Controversies and Oppositions.
up other Names for Gods Name; hindering the sweetness of Saints Communion; and
darkning the Excellency, and derogating from the Majesty and power of the
truths of Christ, and his Kingdom; eating out the power of Godliness with
controversies, and keeping under the growth thereof, with oppositions, and
enmity (as it was of old) between Jew and Gentile, Circumcision and
Uncircumcision; which Enmity now appears Envy and Enmity to one another
expressed.
among Professors (of different opinions) in their unkind carriages one to
another, bitter speeches, and invective censures, nicknames, and provocations,
ready to cast out one another, threatening, sl^ghting, betraying wronging, and
devouring of one another, Which their Teachers have not discovered, so as to
turn away their Captivity, Lam. 2. 14. But because this Jewish rigidity and
enmity (heightened and reared up in Ordinances, Forms and Commandments) is so
far abolished by the death of Christ, Ephesians. 2. 15, 16. that both Jew and Gentile
(though ever so different in Judgment) must make up one body, (and did BOTH
continue in one, and the same Church in Primitive times) 1 Cor. 12. 13. in the
free Exercise of their own Reason why we dare not keep up such Enunity and
divisions.
Faith and Light, Romans 14. 4, 5. We dare not deny the death of Christ, and the
benefit of his Cross in this matter* by keeping up the enmity, grudging, or
division amongst them that differ in their Judgments, or Forms of worship;
but rather (from the power and effect of it, in our own hearts) which has
slain not only the enmity against God, but (we hope of one against another)
that our Love to one another may be the Love of God that dwells in us, 1 John
4. We do UNITE, as made ONE (by the Cross) fellow-Citizens together, with all
Saints, upon the Foundation of the Apostles and Prophets, fitly framed and
growing up together, Ephesians. 2. 19, 20, 21. through the Spirit, that every one may
be fully persuaded in his own mind, Romans 14. 5. pressing after one and the same
perfection, and whereto he has already attained so to walk, Phil. 3. 15, 16.
to keep in his own path, (without justling one another) Joel 2. 8. eating of
his own bread, Isa. 4. 1. and sitting under his own vine, with quiet, comfort*
and safety, Micah 4. 4. 5.

10. The Combination of Enemies of All sorts.
10. The CONFEDERACY or Conspiracy of the Enemies of Christ and his people,
which is very strong and twisted at this day, The Scales of Leviathan, are shut
together as with a close SEAL; and if they be at variance amongst themselves,
we see the present way of making them ONE, is by a Cross and crafty
complication of Interests (or joynt-opposition of Christ and his Kingdom.)
HEROD and PILATE made Friends against Christ, Ephraim and Manasseth against
Judah, REZIN and PEKAH, and Ephraim too, against Jerusalem; yea Gebal, Ammon,
Amaleeke, and the Philistines, with them that dwell at Tire, Prove. 1. 14. Come
say they, cast in thy lot among us, and let us have ONE purse. And if they
agree in opposing, it is time for us to agree in exposing, All we have and are
for Christ and his People, Acts 4. 27. For of a truth, against thy holy child
Jesus whom thou have anointed, both Herod and Pontius Pilate, with the Gentiles
and people of Israel were gathered together'd together; then verse 32 The
MVLTITVDE of them that believed were of ONE HEART and of ONE SOVLE, neither
said any of them that ought th things which he posessed was his own.

11. They must be Distinct and Conjunct above any others.
11. For that as they must be a Particular and a Distinct People from others,
Numb. 23. 9. Prove. 14. 7. So a Peculiar and Conjunct People (with themselves)
that are after the first pattern, and fit for Christ's Kingdom service: Like
Nehemiah 9. 2. The seed of Israel who separated themselves from all strangers,
and stood and confessed their sins, Nehem. 10. 28. and then ver. 29. they CLAVE
to one another. So Chap. 13. 3. and Acts 19. 9. Persuading the things
concerning the Kingdom of God, but when diverse were hardened and spoke evil of
that WAY, he departed from them and SEPARATED the Disciples. A visible and pure
segregation and aggregation going hand in hand to make up the Form of this
COLLECTIVE Every one in in his proper place.
Body; every particular, member, judgment, and measure, being put into its
proper place, seat, and Joint, in the body, 1 Cor. 12. 11, 12, 14, 20. for
service.

12. Every particular Church, must bear the Image of the Whole, which consists
of all sorts in ONE.
12. For that every particular Church is to bear (by institution) the IMAGE
(and parts) of the whole Church of Christ (and therein has all the privileges
of it.) Now the whole Church consists not of this or that sort, or size of
Saints, or of those of this or that Form, this or that judgment, but of all
sorts of Saints, of all judgments, and under all Administrations; this is
called the Church of the Firstborn, Heb. 12. 23. (the Mount Sion) ver. 22.
Which the Hebrews were come up unto in their Communion; not in any one Form
or Judgment (whither Presbiterian, Independent, Baptist, etc.) for they are
the Churches of the Latter-horne rather. But the Firstborn comprehends
Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, Prophets, Apostles, and Saints in All Ages, of all
Judgments, Principles, Forms and Practices. Whereof are the Patriarchs, and
All the holy Men of old; [Peter, Paul, James, John, Policarpe, Ignatius, Justin
Martyr, Chrysostom, Wickliffe, Waldus, Luther and Zuinglius, Calvin,
Oecolampadius and Corolostadius, Beza, Bullinger and Pareus, Tindall, Lambert,
Frith and Bilney, Bradford, Hooper, Ridley, Rogers, Latimer, Philpot and Alice
Driver, Hawks and Tailor, Baines and Glover, Brightman, Cartwright, Ames and
Ainsworth, Preston, Perkins, Brown and Sibs, with Fenner, Hooker, Cotton,
Archer, Buroughs, Bolton,] and myriads more of Saints besides, of all their
several Sorts of Judgments, making up the Church of the Firstborn. Whereof
we would bear an Image as near as may be, (as the Daughter that is like the
Mother, Zech. 9. 9. O Daughter of Jerusalem, Zeph. 3. 14. Mica 4. 8. Gal. 4.
26) Now this Church shuts out none of the Saints (though differing) but sets
them in, in their proper places; and that after the first Institution, which is
not of members of one (or two) kind or Form only, but of MANY, as 1 Cor. 10*
17. The Blood of the New Testament was shed for MANY, as his one Collective
body. And thus Ephesians. 4. 4, 5. There is ONE BODY one Spirit, one Hope, etc.

Besides the Promise of restoring the Foundation of Many Generations, Isa. 58.
12. is not upon this or that Form, but the New-Jerusalem-Foundation, Rev. 21.
14, 19 20. Ephesians. 2, 20, 21, whereon All are built, whether Patriarchs, Prophets,
Apostles, or Christians (of all sorts) making up the Whole Church. And after
this Constitution are we in this Body and Vniting-worke, large enough to
receive, not only all Sorts of Saints alive, but dead (of all ages) were they
now alive: as Heb. 12. 22, 23. But ye are come to the Spirits of just men made
perfect; yea the Holy Angels too, as our Sweet Associates (in the Spirit of our
Communion) or rather Assistants and Ministering Spirits, Heb. 1. 14. and 12. 22.
But ye are come unto Mount Sion, and to an innumerable Company of Angels. As
EZRA wrote long since of the Last days, saying, Unto whom, I will give for
Leaders, Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, Amos, Hosea, Micab, Joel, Obadiah, Nahum,
Habakkah, Zephany, Haggai, Zachary, and Malachy; Which if true, agrees with
Rev. 11. 11. The SPIRIT of LIFE at the Rise of the two Witnesses, which shall
set them and Us upon the Foundation of the Prophets and Apostles, and so into
the same Spirit.

13. Greater Grouth of Grace and Spiritual Nourishment.
13. For a Greater Increase and Grouth of Grace, Ephesians. 2. 21. (which is much
killed and cooled by these Divisions) to strengthen the Things that remain and
are ready to die, Rev. 3. and more mutually to discharge our obligations each
to other, and to All Saints, in this City compact, Psalm. 122. 1, 2. of
Watching, Admonishing, Prophesying, and Assisting one another, Mat. 18. 15. 1
These. 5. 14. and 4. 18. 2 These. 3. 15. etc. Seeing the Sweetest, best, and
Spiritualest Nourishment comes in at the JOINTS of the Body, so as the VINE
(John 15.) is nourished by the joints too, and the best Flowers do grow out of
joints: Hence if any be OUT OF JOINT, ye which are Spiriturall RESTORE (or put
into joint again) Gal. 6. 2. and Ephesians. 4. 16. Col. 2. 19. From whence all the
BODY by JOINTS and bands, having nourishment ministered and knit together,
increases with the Increase of God,) and in this sense, was it, Acts 4. 33.
That great GRACE was upon them All. For this we are deeply sensible of, in
these Dividing times (and Party Professions and Religions now up) that we are
apter to set a work each others Corruption and private spirit, then grace or
the Public Spirit. Wherefore as the laboring Bees, do bring all into ONE
HIVE; we hope it shall appear that the Manifestation of the Spirit is given to
EVERY ONE (of us, of what judgment soever) TO PROFIT withal, in this one
Body; that is, to bring every one into one Bank or Stock of Grace, for the
Public and common grouth or Good of All. 1 Cor. 12. 7. 2 Pet. 3. 18. Ephesians. 4.
7. Therefore to every one of us is given GRACE according to the measure of the
gift of Christ.

14. For more Love, Concord and indearednesse.
14. For a more Primitivelike-Love, Concord and Indearednesse one to another*
then what we see amongst Professors, as Acts 1. 14. and 4. 32. 1 These 4. 9.
And that to All Saints, Col. 1. 4. Not only ready to lay down our Lives with
the Brethren, but for the Brethren, after the Will of God, and Witness of
Jesus, 1 John 3. 16. 1 Pet. 1. 22. O it is Admirable* to read (but more to
receive) that Love which was among the Primitive Saints (without respect to
Judgments or Persons) how often they ventured their Lives one for Another;
Like EPAPHRODITVS, Phil. 2. 30. Who for the WORK of Christ was nigh UNTO DEATH,
not REGARDING HIS LIFE to supply YOUR LACK. So Col. 1. 24. In my Sufferings FOR
YOU. And Phil. 1. 7, 14. yea Romans 16. 6. Who have for MY LIFE laid down their
OWN NECKS. Gal. 4. 15. Ye would have plucked out your own eyes and have given
them me. Yea how would they run to the Racks and Theaters, and worst of
Tortures, if they heard but of any Brother engaged for his Life. Owning one
another, Justifying, Visiting, Rejoicing in, and embracing one Another, in the
midst of the most horrid and exquisite Sufferings, to the Admiration of
HEATHENS! Amazement of TIRANTS! and mutual encouragement of ONE ANOTHER;
Insomuch as those that saw them, would wonder! and say, Ah, see how Dearly they
Love one another! as the Jews said of Christ, John 11. 36. Behold how he loved
him! Nothing being able to quench such Love, not Famine, Plague, nor Sword, to
keep them asunder, (as the Histories show:) Much like our English-woman-Martir
in Q Mary's days, that rejoyet at her heart to have her Foot in the same Hole
of the Stocks where PHILPOT was before her. Now until this UNITING be, we must
look for Little of this Love, but grieving, discontent, biting, beating of one
another, and devouring rather! One Party opposing, Appearing against, nick
naming, exasperating, and exploding the other! And thus it will, and must be,
unless by this Blessed Work there be an END put (through the Cross of Christ
and his power) to the Enmity, and Discord, which causes this. Wherefore Phil.
2. 1, 2. Let nothing be done through Strife, or Vainglory.

15. For a more collective Beauty of Sion.
15. That more Amiablenesse and Beuty may appear in the Saints in Zion; and in
the Principles of the Kingdom (by a Collective Body of Beauty) then now does
among the Dispersed DVST and STONES, among them that are not fully separate
from the mixture, them that lie in HOLES, or in HEAPS among the Dirt, (for so
her Beauty lies in the Dust) Lam. 2. 14, 15. but the Promise is of making her
the Praise and BEAUTY of the Whole earth, Isa. 62. 7. Psalm. 50. 2. and 48. 2.
of giving her BEAUTY for Ashes, Isa. 52. 1. and 61. 3. and of making her Renown
to go forth among the Heathen or Nations, Zeph. 3. 19, ^0. Such a Beauty and
Renown as appeared in the Primitive times, when they were thus United and
Embodyed; as Acts 2. 47. Praising God, and having Favor with all People; yea
Acts 5. 13. and the People Magnifyed, or honored them. But now as the MAN OF
SIN rose up, and the Woman's flight into the Wilderness, viz. by Divisions, and
Dispersions, they lost it again, and so their How this beauty came to be lost.
BEAUTY has lay in the Dust (cut into very shreds) to this day (wherein we do
so abound with diversities, and perversities, that by reason thereof we are not
able to express, what a Wound has been given to the very name of Christ, and
Religion, what persecutions occasioned to the truth? O how the IGNORANT have
been hardened! the Impudent heightend! and Apostasy headed! Jew, Turk and
Papist, and Atheist confirmed! the poor Friends of Zion confounded, and
several fallen into delusions, and become a scorn to all our Enemies at home
and abroad! So how FEW have been Converted to the Faith! wherein they see so
little loveliness, unity, order, or harmony, amongst Professors, to invite
them into it! but when United (Numb. 24. 5.) Oh how goodly are thy Tents O
Jacob, and thy Tabernacles O Israel! so Psalm. 84. 1. And as Cant. 6. 9, 10. My
Dove my undefiled is one, the only ONE, the And how it is to be restored.
choice one, (Saints united) and then follows, The Daughters saw her and
blessed her (all sorts spoke well of her) yea the Queens and Concubines
(Churches true and false, Sarahs and Hagars) all praise her, saying, Who is
this that looks forth as the morning, (after a Dark night, being about to
rise again into Public, that all may see and praise her) Fair as the Moon,
clear as the Sun, terrible as an army with banners? Then they all begin to see
and admire her beauty, but not before; for then they see variety in unity, viz.
the beauty of different Saints, all sorts of Circumstances, Excellencies,
Ordinances, Graces, Opinions, and many bright and shining lights (rightly
placed in the body) making up one beauty and glory in Zion! And then the
Gentiles shall come to thy light, and Kings to the brightness of thy rising,
Isa. 60. 3. when we shall see the Woeman thus clothed with the Sun, and
crowned with her twelve stars, again Rev. 12. 1.

16. For a clearer and more exquisite and inspired Knowledge of Christ, and the
times and of the things that are to be don, about which we are now at so great
a loss.
16. For a clearer and more certain Knowledge of the things of Christ, and his
Kingdom (then now we have,) and this will be by a Collective body of all the
dispersed fragments or various lights into ONE, till which we are in a Maze,
and at a loss, and know not one step forward, or which way to go, or what
will be, or when the Witnesses rise, or the END comes, or the ANCIENT OF DAYS
fits, and the like: About which we are at so great a Loss, and Maze, (which is
like not only to continue but increase) until we come to this Primitive work
of Uniting and embodying, as they did. For till then, Luke 24. 11. the reports
of Christ risen, seemed but idle tales to the Apostles themselves, and though
they had heard, yet they understood not how he must rise, John 20. 9. and till
then their eyes were held that they should not know him if they saw him, Luke
24. 16. and some of them began to stagger and faint too about the time, for all
it was come, and they knew it not, but were astonished, v. 22. (that is, as
much as to say, we know not what to do, nor what to believe, nor what to say,
we are at such a loss,) and Peter himself was in a Maze about it, Luke 24.
12. (so long as they continued Scattered, John 20. 10) and poor Mary that
sought him with tears, turned from him, and could not believe this could be HE,
John 20. 15, 16. whom she sought, (but the Gardner;) and Thomas was so
pitifully plunged (by his absence from them, when they first began to Gather
into ONE, John 20 24, 25) that he resolved he would not believe (let them say
what they would) without he saw the visible signs to his senses (in the way
which he proposed to himself) and so was almost quite lost, v. 29. This
pitiful confusion were they in, until they fell upon this blessed work;
which our Lord first put them upon (before he show himself risen amongst them,
or came at them, Mat. 20. 10, 16. John 20. 18, 19.) and yet some doubted! Mat.
28. 17. some were affrighted! Luke 24. 37. some gazed! and were stupefied! some
fainted! some opposed! and all were confused! troubled! and in the dark! what
to think of it! Luke 24. 38. until they were IN THIS WAY, and THEN the Matter
became clear, the Lord appeared to be risen amongst them, and opened their
understandings, Luke 24. 45. in the things of Christ, his Kingdom, and about
the time of the end; which they were so confused, and mistaken about, before.

17. For that Another as a more Apostlelike and Primitive Ministry (in the
power of the holy Ghost,) is to be sent abroad in these last Days.
17. For the sending out another manner of Ministry, into the world (with the
seed of the Kingdom, as they come to be endued with power from on high) then
what they now have (of or after the manner of the Nations) viz. more
Comprehensive, holy, Spiritual, Faithful, feeling, enlarged, enlightened,
Locomotive, and quickened with the power and authority of the Lord, for
Conversion, Conviction, Confirmation, and all the purposes of Christ, and his
Kingdom (as they were sent out at First, or after the first pattern, John 20.
22. Acts 1. 4. and 13. 2. 2 Cor. 8. 18, 23.) 1 These. 3. 1, 2. A more Noble,
blessed, courageous, and Apostle-like Ministry; or like them in the Ephesians
4. 11, 12. for IN-JOYNTING of the Saints: Therefore, Rev. 14. 1, 2. we read of
this mustring, rallying, or Uniting upon Mount Sion FIRST; and then John saw
the Everlasting Gospel FLY, v. 6. or spread abroad; that is, according to the
first Commission, which was to every Nation, in Rev. 14. 6. (as it was in Mat.
28. 19. to all Nations) and Mark 16. 15. Preach the Gospel to every Creature.
So Mat. 24. 4. This Gospel of the Kingdom shall be preached in all the world
for a witness. So Acts 1. 8. But you shall receive power after the Holy Ghost
is come upon you, and ye shall be WITNESSES, John 15. 27. Now as in the
First Fruits, Acts 2. 3, 4. the way might seem strange (and too much like
Babylon) or confusion of tongues, (as Genesis 11. 19. and from thence did the Lord
scatter them abroad:) So now upon the revivall of this work, (and in the
latter-fruits) some may think (it is like) as strange a confusion of tongues
(or Judgments, and several Forms) as Babylon, and yet (as Acts 2. 1.) All be
with one accord in one place: but they shall see (we hope) it is not confusion
of tongues (as Babell was, Genesis 11. 1.) but a diversity of tongues in one body
(as Jerusalem was) Acts 2 Not that they Difference betwixt the Confusion of
Tongues at Babylon and the Diversity of Tongues at Jerusalem.
may not understand one another (as Genesis 11. which confusion (or Babylon) is
kept up hy the Divisions about Forms, and Judgments, wherein one cannot
understand another at this day) but wherein every one may be edified, and
understood in his own language, Acts 2. 6. (whether Jews, or Gentiles,
Elamites, Medes, Parthians, etc. verse. 9. 10. 11.) to his astonishment, verse.
8. 12. every one in his own tongue, so every one in his own way* Judgment, and
Administration, wherein one can well understand another in this Unity, besides
at Babell, Genesis 11. the confusion of tongues hindered the Building, but at
Jerusalem, Acts 2. the Diversity of tongues helped it (like Joshuahs entrance
into many Nations at once, Josh. 10. 11. 20. 23.) in dispersing the Gospel of
the Kingdom at once into all Nations in their own languages; and so now (by
this UNITING) into all Saints (or sorts of the people of God) in their own
Forms, and Judgments at once; this body consisting of all sorts of members,
in their own joints, and places. So that though there be Diversities yet but
one spirit, and differences of Administration, yet the same Lord, 1 Cor. 12. 4.
5. to the 15. and every one, in his gifts, places, and opperation, to profit
withal. This is the Ministry that we wait for, which will speak to every one
in his own language, and understanding, by the power of the holy Ghost, Acts.
15. 36. Let us go again and visit our brethren in every City, where we have
preached the word of the Lord, and see how they do.

18. For the Exercise of Righteous* and Justice.
18. For the exercise of Justice, and Righteousness, Laws, and Government
amongst our selves (in outward matters) according to the word, spirit, and
teaching of God; and the power and laws left by Christ to his Church and
people, 1 Cor. 6. 1. 2. Dare any of you, having a matter against another, go
to law before the unjust? and not before the Saints? Do ye not know the
Saints shall judge the world? etc. Now seeing we find so little Conscience, or
Justice, from men of the world, it concerns us to be the more careful. For,
Psalm. 122. 3, 4, 5. In Jerusalem are the THRONES and thither the Tribes go up.

19. For better providing, and caring one for Another in all Cases.
19. That we may be in a better way of Sympathizing, and participating with one
another, in distresses and persecutions; to comfort and communicate one to
another freely, 1 Cor. 12. 26. Romans 12. 15. Heb. 13. 3. Joh. 3. 17, 18. Heb.
13. 16. and that there be no lack to any one member, or Fellow Citizen of this
Zion; and that this be more like to the first pattern (in the like cases) then
yet appears amongst professors, Acts 4. 34. Neither was there any amongst
them that lacked; for as many as were possessours of Lands, sold them, and
brought the prices of the things that were sold.

20 For that the great Increa e and flowing in of others, is into this Way.
20. For that the Great increase, Growing and Flowing in of the latter days,
is into such a WAY, and state of Zion; (wherein all Saints are united) Jer. 50.
4. 5. Come let us JOIN our selves. Isa. 2. 2. and 54. 2. Enlarge the place of
thy tents; and 49. 17. Make have, lift up thine eyes round about, and behold
how All GATHER together (or unite) or come to thee, verse. 20, 21. The place is
too strait for me, give me place that I may dwell; who has begotten me all
these? and Isa. 60. 7. The flocks of Kedar shall be gathered together unto thee
(then verse. 8.) Who are these that fly as a cloud, and as doves to the
windows. Thus was it at the first pattern. Acts 2. 41. 47. and 4. 4. and 5.
14, 15. And believers were the more added to the Till then look not for any
Considerable Conversion of Jews, or Gentiles.
Lord, multitudes both of men and women. But so long as Religion is rent into
such parties, Factions, and confusion, we can expect but little conversion to
the Faith, encouragement, or coming in, either of Jews, or Gentiles, to these
disorders, and Divisions, on judging, censuring, excommunicating, another, (for
their different Measures of faith:) At which Abomination both Jews, Turks and
Gentiles, have been amazed and astonished, for they have been far more serious,
unanimous and devout in their superstitions and Idolatry, yea less injurious,
and more charitable, one to another.

21. Sincerity, and Singleness of heart*
21. That there may be found amongst us more sincerity, simplicity and
singleness of heart one to another about the things of Christ. Whereas now in
these Divisions and breaches, one Brother betraies another, denies and delivers
up another; and, as the Prophet says, Micah 7. 5. Trust ye not in a friend,
put ye not confidence in a guide; but in this UNITING, As Acts 2. 46. They
dedicate their bread with gladness and SINGLENES OF HEART.

22. That we may be more joint in all the things of God.
22. That our motions, sufferings, actings, and contendings for Christ, may be
joint and with one consent! Our joynt-groanings for the name of God, making (as
it were) but one sound! Our conjunct tears but one stream, conjunct desires but
one prayer, conjunct complaints but one Theme, conjunct praising but one
Melody, conjunct gifts but one Ministry! And thus we hope to have more
joynt-prayers amongst the Saints, (whereas now one is praying up, and Another
down) Joynt*praising, Joint witnessing, and joynt-feeling, or bearing the lot
of the whole! Hebr. 10. 23, 32, 33, 34. Jude 3. (whereas now, as some take off,
others lay on load upon the suffering ones) Joynt*holding up, and maintaining
the truth; Joynt-refusing of Subjection (with all Gospell*opposition) to
persons and things (under what names soever) that are against the Lord Jesus
and his Kingdom! Yea a Joynt-standing up for, and justifying of the Name,
Interest, and Cause of Christ, and his People, from Calumnies and injuries,
with Joynt-acting and engaging (as the Lord shall call us to it) for the Truth,
Liberty and Privileges! purchased for us by the blood of Christ, Gal. 5. 1.
Zeph. 3. 9. That they may all call upon the name of the Lord, and serve him
with one consent; keeping up the most PUBLIC SPIRIT for Christ and his
Kingdom, in ONE and ALL, Canticles 7. 1. The JOINTS of thy thyghes are like
JEWELS, the work of the hands of a cunning workman.

23. For a Right Understanding round the Nation.
23. Till then we neither understand one another at home, nor are we understood
abroad; nor indeed do we well understand our selves. Now it is necessary (as
it was the Primitive practice) for a Right understanding to be made and
maintained in the WHOLE BODY, and throughout the Nation amongst the Saints of
the same Faith, Hope, Sufferings, and Expectations with us. And therefore in
order to such a clear intelligence and correspondence with all the Saints, and
People of God in these Nations, (by Messengers, Letters, and such like ways
allowed in the word of God, unto which we do hereby Solemnly invite our
Friends and Brethren from all parts for mutual good,) we are in this Way.
Being very sensible of the great inconveniences, and injuries, which arise to
the people of God* and public Cause of Christ; the manifest stumblings,
offenses, and prejudices, in the hearts of many precious ones; the various
subtleties and ways of Satan, and of his Instruments to keep us unknown to,
and un-owned by each other, and the Great advantages which he has to increase
Divisions, and foment Jealousies; with the Reports which are made, and
Reproaches which are cast upon us and the Principles of Christ's Kingdom; the
temptations, and faintness, of some of our dear Friends; the backwardness of
persons, and yet forwardness of Parties ready to spring up, (and cause a
farther suffering to the Name of God and Christ;) and all these in the absence,
and (much) through the Defect of this Primitive Practice of Loving
INTELLIGENCE, mutual quickening, and unanimous understanding, undertaking, and
moving (as ONE MAN) in the matters of Christ and his Kingdom, (that concern
all alike*) And for want of a due knowledge of, and faithful inquiry after,
the welfare, growth, establishment, and estate, of one another, round the
Nations, were it as far as from Jerusalem round about unto Illyricum, Romans 15.
19. For (after the first pattern) we should be continually sending out or
receiving in, 2 Cor. 8. 23. They are the MESSENGERS of the Churches, ver. 19.
Chosen to travel with us, Phil. 2. 25, 30. My Brother and companion in
labors, and fellow Soldier, but your Messenger, Acts 15. 26. To send unto you
men that have hazarded their lives for the name of our Lord Jesus. Verse 41.
And he went through Syria and Silicia, confirming the Churches. Acts 16 5. And
so were the Churches established in the Faith, and increased in number daily.

24. For the Glorifying that God whose Name has Suffered so.
24. And as the ultimate; the very deep sense (which is as a dagger in our very
hearts!) to hear how the Lord is dishonored, Christ contemned, his Kingdom
rejected, his Spirit wounded and blasphemed, and Sion crumbled into Dust, and
much more suffering (then we say) in the highest and weightiest matters of
Religion, since the vast breaches of Sion, has put us (after earnest crying
and inquiring) upon this practice of Uniting (though we be poor unworthy
creatures.) For that the name of our God is dear unto us (the Lord knows) and
we would feign be (at least) in a way that might more glorify the Lord and his
Christ, then we can be, or do by these sad Divisions and confusions: Not
forgetting the honor which his Name has had formerly (when the Saints were
United, and in all Ages) when united in sufferings (as under the Heathen and
Popish powers) when united in Testimony; As the Separates and Puritans, against
the Prelates and their Hierarchy, when united in Service and Actings (as in the
late Wars) without so much as the Least stumbling or offending one another
about their Different Forms or Judgments; O how sweetly United were they in
the Work of Christ, and of his People at that Day! then might be said, Behold!
how good and Pleasant it is for brethren to dwell together and Unity! Psalm.
133. 1. What a Beauty and Glory was then upon the Name of God! yea, how was he
glorified in the eyes of All the Nations! and of All the Enemies of his People!
(as Romans 15. 6. That ye may with one Mind and one Mouth Glorify God!) So,
Psalm. 50. 2. Out of SION, the Perfection of Beauty, God has shined! So, Isa.
60. 1, 2. Arise! Shine! for thy Light is come! and the Glory of the Lord is
risen upon thee! that is, upon the Saints so United: Whereas whiles Divided,
the Name of God is Divided, rent, and torn apieces, diverse ways, and in
sundry Manners; to the Exceeding great Reproach of Religion, Injury of Christ,
Decay of Grace, and Dishonor of that most Holy Name.

These are some of those GROUNDS which we go Upon, and are Moved by (with a
Holy Fear as before the Lord) to make a Deliberate and Sober Progress, into so
Serious, Public, and Necessary a Work as this is. Now as we humbly think this
is no longer to be Delayed, so not rashly to be Undertaken, (by Any, that have
a True Sense of Many, Most, or of All the aforesaid Incentives;) Nor can we do
the one or the other without Sin or Guilt: In the Sense whereof we do so
heartily Commend it (in the Name and Spirit of the Living God) to the Christian
Concurrence, Love, Care* Practice and Encouragement of the most Cordial Saints
(that are sincere) Friends of Sion, or our Dearly Beloved Brethren Scattered
abroad in the Several Cities and Counties of the three Nations, that we All
(alike) Deny our selves, and so Move with a Sweet, Large, Indulging,
Comprehensive Spirit of Grace, of Love, and of a Sound Mind, in the Kingdom of
our Lord Jesus, for the keeping in the quickening spirit, the Growing Light, the
Christian correspondence, and Primitive practices (with the Power of
Godliness, and of Religion, pure and undefiled) amongst the people of God, of
their several Fo mes and Differing Apprehensions; Wherefore in a trembling
awe, and sense before God of their sins, that have offended him by delaying;
Denying, Excusing, and putting of a Present Duty (and that Public) on the ONE
HAND. Luke 14. 18. 24. Hag. 1. 2. 4. 2 King. 12. 6 7. (a great sin of this day,
Mat. 24. 48. 2 Pet. 3. 3.) So on the other hand of them, (and that especially)
that have provoked him, by sudden, rash and imprepared falling upon it, Eccles.
5. 1. (as at Perez*Vzzah. 1 Chronicles. 13. 10, 12, and Beth*shemech, 1 Samuel 6. 19.
etc.) do we Go Softly (as it is said, 1 King. 21. 27.) and fairly! Waiting
(before we are fully fixed) to hear what any one has to say against This; or
what better EXPEDIENT Then this (that we may close with) may be found for the
UNITITING of All Saints (as ONE MAN) for the Countenancing, Encouraging, and
Carrying on the Interest and Cause of our Christ, in his KINGLY GOVERNMENT
amongst us. Now conceiving it is the Saints work to fetch home THIS ARK into
its placed prepared of God, i. e. the Temple opened, (Rev. 11. 19. And there
was seen in his Temple the ARK of his Testament, etc.) in order unto it, they
must be prepared, gathered, United, Sanctified, and put in order, that go
about it, (1 Chr. 15. 1, 2, 3, 12, 13. Sanctify your selves, ye and your
Brethren, that ye bring up the Ark of the Lord God unto the place that I have
prepared for it;) which we hope to see as a Fruit of the third, of the seventh,
in solemnity set apart; And (as 2 Chronicles. 30. 18, 19. The good Lord pardon every
one that prepares his heart to seek the Lord God of his Fathers, though he be
not cleansed according to the Purification of the Sanctuary.

But that we may hide nothing from them that inquire after our Progress in
this Matter, that say as Cant. 1. 7. For why should I be as one that turns
aside by the Flecks of thy Companies, and as Cant. 6. 1. That we may seek him
with thee, (as Nehemiah, Chap. 2. 18. said, Then I told them of the hand of my
God which was good, so Ezra. 7. 9. and 8. 18.) We shall inform them of the
Proposalls, Assented to by this Particular Body, not being bound up to the
letter of them, but in the sense, waiting upon Jehovah-Elohim (the Lord our
Light) for more Light and enlargement, from his holy Influences upon us (and
others) as the Effect of this hopeful Essay, which we (in this way) are in a
Capacity to drink up as greedily as the Earth drinks in the Rain.

The Proposalls for Propagating the great Work of Uniting (in and about this
City of London) which we are stirred up unto, by the Word and Spirit of God, by
the Call of Christ, and of his Servants; by many most pregnant and special
Grounds to it; Reasons for it; and Benefits by it, (both unto the Lord our
Jesus, to our selves, and others) as unto the Present Work, and Duty Incumbent
upon us; being so convinced in our Faith and Consciences.

1. That the Scattered ones be gathered into ONE BODY.
1. THAT the SCATTERED ONES (the Disciples of Christ, who keep their garments
Clean, Rev. 3. 4. and Close, Rev. 16. 15. from defiling at this day, who wait
with us for the Kingdom and second coming of our Lord Jesus, and are of the
same Faith, and hope with us, Ephesians. 4. 4. Satisfied in each other upon the
account of Godliness, and in Close walking with God; though now dispersed in
and about this City) be all UNITED and Gathered together into ONE BODY.

2. Gathered and Governed as a Religious Body, after the first Pattern (for
the Rule of it)
2 That this ONE BODY be knit together as a Religious Body upon Principles of
Grace, and of the Kingdom of Christ; Gathered and Governed in a Gospel (or
Christian) Order, after the pattern in Acts 1. 14, 15 the Primitive
Constitution, Titus 1. 5.) and the Promise of Restitution, Acts 15. 15. Rev.
15. 5. Isa. 58. 12. and 60. 15. etc. (and of opening of the TABERNACLE of the
Testimony into the Primitive purity of Worship) Waiting for the pouring out of
the Spirit, and Contending together for the truth with ONE ACCORD, as one man,
Jude 3.

3. Kingdome-Saints of All Judgments (for Matter.)
3. That this Body for MATTER consists of such (as we can judge faithful
followers of the Lamb, Rev. 14. 1. and 17. 15.) Called and Chosen; Cleaving to
the Cause of Christ, and Controversy now up against the BEAST and his
Followers (though otherwise they be of different Forms, Judgments, and
Apprehensions) 1 Cor. 12. 4, 5. and 12 13, 14. Romans 14. 2. Phil. 3. 16. Weak
and strong, bond and free, more or less honorable, Ver. 22, 23, 24. Holding
fast the bond of peace in the unity of the SPIRIT, without any Schism, rent,
or divisions in this Body, Ephesians. 4. 4. 1 Cor. 12. 13. 25.

4. Upon the Principles. wherein ALL are ONE (for Form.)
4. That this Body (not sat down or Consolidated in any One Form, or
Judgment what ever (wherein one Saint may (or do) differ from another) do
sit down and knit together iu the POWER OF GODLINESS, 1 Timothy 6. 3. (or life,
grace, and light of all Forms, and Judgments) upon the account of the
New-Creature-onenesse in Christ Jesus, Gal. 6. 15. 2. Cor. 5. 17. and upon such
Principles wherein we all Agree as ONE MAN and of one Mind, for Christ, his
Kingdome-worke, in every Administration of his Kingdom, and for the Leavening
of the whole Lump, 1 Pet. 3. 8. 2 Cor. 13. 11. Romans 15. 5.

5. With free and equal Exercise of their several and different Judgments, in
their several and different Meetings (for Order) Distributively.
5. That the Members and Particular branches of this ONE BODY, have the Free,
Full, and Entire Exercise, of their different Judgments, and practices in
their own particular, and different Congregations (or Meetings) of those
Judgments* with as great Freedom of their Ordinances (wherein one differs
from another) as any particular Church now has, (only holding together as
Branches of this one Body, or PHILADELPHIAN CHURCH of Christ, in All Ordinances
wherein All Agree) keeping their places without the Least molesting or
offending one another, or the Peace and Unity of the Church about different
matters; meddling with those things (in the maine Body) as are without
Controversy, to the edifying of the whole, and according to the Principles and
Points wherein we are all Agreed as ONE MAN, Acts 2. 46, 47. Romans 14. 1. 1 Cor.
1. 10. and 11. 17, 18. 2. Tim. 2. 16. 17. 1 Timothy 6. 5. Titus 3. 9. Ephesians. 4. 29.
And if any PARTICULAR CHURCHES (or Members of them, as such) upon those
Principles and Points, do join with us that we ho^d our Communion with them,
without the least intrenchment upon or injury to them in their Privileges or
Power, which they Exercise (as Churches) in their own Bodies, in Any or all the
Ordinances of Christ, or Affairs of their own Bodies. Isa. 65 10. Zech. 2. 11.
Acts 15. 32. and 6. 5. Gal. 1. 2. 1 Cor. 16. 11. Rev. 1. 4. 11. 20. and 22. 16.

6. A WEEKLY Meeting of the WHOLE (for Edifying) Collectively.
6. That there be a Weekly Church-meeting of this whole UNITED BODY, for
praying, Prophesying, preparing and provoking one another, waiting for the
coming down of the holy Spirit, the great things that shall shortly come to
pass, and the second Appearance of our Lord Jesus, with all the things that
concern the day of Christ upon us, Heb. 10. 24, 25 Acts 14. 27. Mat. 3. 16. And
for the Edifying of All (in the things we are united upon.) Gathering in of
Sinners and dispersed ones, (or the DVST OF ZION,) Psalm. 102. 13, 14.
Maintaining a Correspondencie, and Clear Intelligence, with the Kingdome-Saints
in the Nations, Isa. 14. 32. (as they did in Primitive times by Letters and
Messengers, Acts 15 22. Phil. 2. 19. 25. 1 Cor. 16. 3. and all the like ways
that we can agree in) to carry on the KINGDOM-WORK and Government of Christ
amongst us.

7. The New Commandment of Brotherly Love, and indeareduesse in this Body (for
Law, as the Lambs People.)
7. That there be a most Indeared and Affectionate Love to one another, (like
that which Christ bare to his Church) Joh. 13. 34, 35, and 15. 12. Ephesians. 5. 2. 1
These. 4. 9 1 John 2. and 4. 21. Romans 12. 10. and 13. 8. called Love unfeigned, 1
Pet 1. 22. and without dissimulation, Romans 12. 9. Avoiding diligently all
Causes and Causers of Division in this body, Romans 16. 17, 18. Mat. 24 23. Acts
20. 29, 30, 31. Rev. 2. 14, 15, 16. and keeping carefully and constantly this
BLESSED UNITY and LOVE, both in the PARTICULAR and in the GENERAL, Phil. 2. 1,
2, 3. Romans 14. 19. 1 Cor. 6. 5. Acts 4. 32. Mutually and Tenderly bearing with
each others Failings and Infirmities; with meekness, patience, pity, piety,
and sweet brotherly Assistance; not upbraiding, censuring, nor provoking of one
another, Ep. 4. 32. To. 14. 13* and 15. 1. Gal. 6. 1. Col. 3. 12, 13, 14. 1 John 3. 16.

8. A Joynt-contending, and standing up with the Lamb; (for Testimony a^ a
Res^lved People.)
8. An earnest JOYNT-STRIVING and Joynt-Contending in all Lawful and just
ways (by doing or suffering) for the Truth, Faith, Purity, Power of
Godliness, Light, Life, Liberty, Privileges, and Kingdom of Christ Jesus,
Jude 3. Heb. 12. 3, 4. Gal. 5. 1. 1 Cor. 7. 23. 1 Pet. 3. 15. Every one
cheerfully and unanimously undergoing the LOT OF THIS BODY, in Adversity, and
Prosperity, Heb. 10. 23. to the end, Acts 12. 5. 7. Mat. 13. 20, 21. And a
Tender Sympathizing or participiating one with another in all estates, trials,
and conditions, (except sin,) and not to DRAW BACK upon any Occasion or
Temptation whatsoever* (the Lord helping us,) 1 John 2. 19, 20. 2 Timothy 4 10. 16
1 Cor 19. 26. Romans 12. 15. Gal. 6. 2. Acts 20. 35. Heb. 13. 3.

9. To Give our Selves (and All) up to the Lord, and one Another in Christ's and
his Kingdoms Service, for (Readiness as a Willing People)
9. In the AFFAIRS of Christ, his Kingdom, this Body (his People and the
Nations) freely to give up our selves to the Lord, and his Christ, and one to
another, (according to Gods word, the FATHERS will, and the SONS work, and the
HOLY SPIRITS working, quickening and Inabling of us) Freely and Cheerfully to
Communicate in things Spiritual and Temporal, 1 John 3. 17, 18. 1 Cor. 16. 1,
2. 2 Cor. 9. 5, 6. Romans 12. 13. Heb. 13. 16. 1 Timothy 6. 17. Gal. 6 10. Jude 20. 1
Cor. 12. 9. and condescending to the meanest service, we may be called to, or
put upon, (agreeing with our Faith, Light, and Consciences, for the Use of
Christ, and this whole Body, James 2 1, 2, 3. Mat. 20. 26. Romans 12. 16. John
13. 12, 13, 14, 15, 16.

10. An Exact Life and Conversation amongst all (for example as an Holy People.)
10. An Exact and Exemplary Conversation, in all MANNER OF HOLINESS, Humility,
and Grace, to the powerful Conviction of them WITHOUT, as well as profit and
comfort of them WITHIN, Psalm. 24. 3. Mat. 5. 16. 2 Cor. 7. 1. Tit. 2. 11, 12.
Ephesians. 4. 21, 22, 23, 24. 1 Pet. 2. 12. with vigilant Care over one another, Heb.
3. 12, 13 and 12. 15, 17. Col. 4. 6. Mat. 18. 15, 16, 17. 1 These. 5. 14. Romans 5
15. until we be APPARENTLY a People dwelling ALONE, not wicked nor mixed among
the Nations, Numb. 23. 9. John 15. 19. 2 Cor. 6. 14, 15 Ephesians* 5. 11. Hos. 4. 15
Rev. 14. 7. etc.

Note, that the 5 Prop: nor any other be interpreted as making this one Body
many, but ONE particular Church, having many Meetings upon different matters
and occasions, and at allowed times, for accomodating themselves, and holding
Communion with the Philadelphian Churches And besides all that has been said
(set in our hearts!) to promote this so Blessed and Necessary a Work of Uniting
among Christians, whether in this (or any other way) that will answer the End
thereof, upon the Kingly account of Christ! We cannot but acquaint you with
some of our and your present MOTIVES unto it, desiring the Lord to make them as
irresistible and powerful by his Spirit on your hearts, as they are on ours.

1 Motive to this Uniting, is that it ever began the great Work of God.
1. THat the greatest Advance which the Scriptures mention of the Name or
Kingdom of God in the world has ever been begun by this WORK OF UNITING
first; (and this that is to be, in the last days, is not only foretold to
begin so, in the express and plain Letter, or Prophecy both of the old and
New Testament, but of the type, as of Egypt and Babylon.) The First Work which
Moses set afoot (after his leaving Tharoahs Court) was this of UNITING, Acts 7.
25, 26. For he supposed his Brethren would have understood how that In Egypt.
God by his hand would deliver them, but they understood not. And the next day
he showed himself unto them, as they strove, and would have set them at ONE
again! saying, Sirs! ye are Brethren! And this before the plagues came upon
Egypt. So before the VIALS be poured out upon mystical Egypt, Rev. 11. 8. we
must be UNITED, and Brethren forbear striving! This was the First work upon
proclaiming Liberty from Babylon, In Babylon.
for those who were of one heart, Ezra 2. Zerubbabell and the Remnant, so Hag.
1. 14 The Lord stirred up the spirit of Zerubbabell, and the spirit of Joshua,
and the spirit of all the Remnant together, and they came and did work, as
Zech. 3. 8. Hear now! O Joshua! thou and thy Fellows, and then follows, I will
bring forth my Servant the BRANCH: This was the FIRST WORK (viz UNITING and
gatherin into ONE) And in Jeruselem, in the Apostles Days.
that our Lord Jesus and his Apostles put the first planting of the Gospel upon,
Acts 1. 4. 8. 14, 15. whence arose that SEED that has since sowed the whole
Christian world, (so called) and so must it be before the flying Gospel, Rev.
14. 8. or Gospel of the Kingdom be preached throughout the habitable world,
Mat. 24. 14. And so it is foretold to be the great and First work that the
Spirit of Eliah (which goes before the great and notable day of the Lord, or
coming of Christ!) does put us upon, viz. UNITING, Mal. 4. 6. And he shall
turn the hearts of the Fathers to the Children, and the hearts of the Children
to And in the last Days by the Spirit of Eliah.
their Fathers! and then RESTORING of all things as at First follows, Mat. 17.
11. Elias truly shall First come to restore all things. Wherefore if Moses,
Zerubbabell, Christ and his Apostles, or the Spirit of Eliah, if they be may
heard (and their Examples had in esteem) amongst us, this is an undeniable duty
now upon us; the First work, and the first step that we can take to purpose
out of Egyt, Babylon, and the earthly Jerusalem, into the real Advance of the
great work of God, name, and Kingdom of Christ on earth.

2 Motive, the Call of Christ from the Grave.
2. Besides consider hereto, the Call of Christ, (as it was to his Dispersed
ones at his Resurrection) of a Risen Christ! behold he is risen! though you see
him not! it is the Lord, said John to Peter, Job. 21. 7. and he leapt into the
Sea to him. Isa. 60. 1. The Light is come, and the glory of the Lord is RISEN,
(after a death, and a sore one) after the three days! of a CHRIST who dyed for
the Collective body! and is Risen to the Collective Body! (the blood of the New
Testament shed for MANY, not for this or that Form, or sort only) but for the
MANY (united into one Body) calls aloud to this Practice and kind of Communion!
So that if there be any consolation in Christ! any Bowels! any mercies! any
true sense of that Love which was (in him to us) stronger then Death! and which
many waters could not quench! and raised him from the Grave! Let us hear him
(as Risen from the Dead! whose First word from thence, is, Go quickly! and
tell them I AM RISSEN! And bid them (that is together) come and meet me, Mat.
28. and there they shall see me! Oh then! what say thou? can thou hear him
call so! and not come? Does he not now say? (as Cant. 2. 10, 13.) Rise up! (my
Love) my fair one and come away! again verse. 14. and yet again verse. 13. Ob
let me see thee! verse. 10. and Cant. 4. 8. Come with me from Lebanon, (my
sister my spouse) with me from Lebanon! etc. And can we find in our hard hearts
to stay behind, or not to stir now! God forbid.

3 Motive is the Consent and Vote of all Saints alive and Dead, in this they
all Unite.
3. Add hereto the consent and concurrence of all Saints in all ages, who have
lived and and dyed in the Faith and hope of this! that All Saints should be
gathered INTO ONE in the Dispensation of the fullness of times, Ephesians* 1. 10. and
of the new Jerusalem and Kingdom state, (that consists of such a Collective
Body) Rev. 21. Should Paul, Peter, James, John, Apostles, Prophets or Saints,
from Abraham to this day, Arise from the dead, the whole Classes of them would
call us into this UNITING, wherein they all hold as one Communion of Saints,
under diversities of gifts! administrations! and operations, 1 Cor. 12. 4, 5.
and Ephesians. 4. 14. CHRIST gave Apostles, Prophets, Evangelists, Pastors, Teachers,
and all for this Work, for the IN-JOYNTING OF THE SAINTS! the work of the
Ministry, and the Edifying of the WHOLE BODY* So that this IN JOYNTING-WORK
must needs be the VOTE and NOTE of them All.

4 Motive, it is Christ's Gathering-time that is upon us.
4. Consider also, That the Last Time is Christ's GATHERING-TIME, the gathering
and making up his Jewels, Mal. 3. 17. Psalm. 50. 5. Gather my Saints together
unto me! those that have made a COVENANT with me by Sacrifice! Christ's
harvest-time too! Mat. 13. 30, 39. is his gathering-time! and so John 12. 52.
But that ye also should gather together INTO ONE the children of God, which are
scattered abroad. This is the work of Christ: Now not to fall in with this Work
of Christ when it is a foot, is most dangerous, and lamentable; as our Savior
says, Luke 13. 34. O Jerusalem! Jerusalem! how often would I have gathered you
together, as a HEN does GATHER her Chickens (i. e. into one brood) and ye would
not? And then follows ver. 35. Behold your house is left unto you desolate! (or
forsaken after this!) so Mat. 12. 30. He that GATHERS NOT with mescattereth
(i. e. does mischief, and keeps up Divisions!) and is against me.

5 Motive, it is his Visiting time too.
5. Besides it is Christ's VISITING time too; The dayspring from on high has
visited us, Luke 1. 7, 8. 1. 28. Psalm 65* 9. Cant. 6. 11. then when UNITED,
verse. 9. follows verse. 11. I went down into the Garden of Nuts, to see the
fruits of the valleys, and to see whether the vines flourished, and the
Pomegranates budded! So that when Christ comes to visit, he expects young and
old, the tender Grapes, and Green Figs; Cant. 2 13. as well the grown ones;
the budding ones, as well as others; ALTOGETHER. Fathers, young men, and
children! I John 2. So Zach. 8 3, 4. Old men with their staves, boys and girls
in the streets. All inhabitants together, this Visiting time; Which is after a
long Absence of this spirit, and power from on high! and according to his
solemn promise; and engagements; knocking at every ones door; inquiring into
every ones state; examining, proving, and trying every ones principle;
profession, and Form at this day. As if he should say, Abraham where art thou?
Isaac where art thou? ah Lord, say they! not in the Presbyterian Form, nor in
the Independent, nor of the Baptized, etc. but in the UNITY OF The Communion of
Saints is, not in this or that Form; but such a Communion as holds in heaven,
and in earth, as to the Spirit of it.
THE SPIRIT, in the Communion of all SAINTS; in the assembly of the First
borne; in the UNITY, Psalm. 133. 1. 2. Wherein it is so good to see Brethren
dwell together; and from whence indeed springs the pure anointing (whereof
Aarons was a type!) that will reach to the very out skirt, and where the Lords
blessing rests, and the dewes fall, (in the greatest drowth upon poor hearts
scattered into their several forms and ways) there are WE; there are the
SPIRITS of all the righteous and holy men of old, in that COMMUNION may the
Saints on earth find us the Saints in Heaven also, but if their Communion be in
this or that form only, then we who were not of this or that FORM with them
are shut out, and kept out from their Communion, and this is not the COMMUNION
OF SAINTS which Christ has promised to appear most with (at his visiting
time, which is now upon us,) and therefore most dangerous to omit this DVTY, as
Luke 19 44. They shall not leave thee one stone upon another, because thou
knew not the time of thy VISITATION, 1 Peter 2. 12. Glorify God in the day
of VISITATION.

6. Mot, is the Deepes and Sea of knowledge, etc. by this means.
6. By this means the SAINTS will live and Lanch into the DEEPS, that have
hitherto been trifling in the Shallowes, and empty things: In the deeps of
grace! in the Deeps of love! Faith, hope! Ephesians. 3. 18. in the deeps of
knowledge, and heavenly-wisdome, Romans 11. 33. When the earth shall be filled
with the knowledge of the Lord as the waters cover the Sea, Hab. 2. 14. now
this is by a CONJVNCTION, Collection, and an inflowing of all waters into ONE
(as Genesis 1. 9.) this makes the OCEAN, whereas hitherto we have been but in The
benefit of the Deeps above the Shallowes.
little Rivelets and Shallowes, like the Disciples Luke 5. 2. mending their
nets; but when Christ came, he said, verse 4. Lanch out into the DEEPS, Simon,
and then let down your nets, which when they did, they caught a Multitude at
once, whereas before they were toyling and moyling, (night, and day,) and
caught nothing; Now our Savior told Peter, he would make him a Fisher of men;
and signified by this that he must get out of the Little waters, and Lanch into
the DEEPS! which when he did, (at Jerusalem in this Vniting-worke, Acts 1.) we
find Acts 2. 41. he let down the Net (of the Gospel) and caught 3000 at one
draught; now so long as he was upon the Shallowes he caught nothing, for until
they were in this way we read not of many Converts, (nor shall we find it in
the Shallowes of our Forms, or diversities kept up!) but in the DEEPS, where
all run into ONE, one Faith, one Hope, one The Promise of the Deeps.
Life, one Light, etc. For there the glorious Lord will be unto us a place of
broad Rivers, and deep streams, Isa. 33. 21. In this way, we shall have (of
any other) the upper springs, and the nether springs, Joshua 15. 19. Psalm. 87.
7. As the springs of water to a thirsty Land, Isa. 35. 7. and 49. 10. and the
DEEP THINGS of God, 1 Cor. 2. 10.

7 Motive, to be All called by One Name, and yet every one in his own PATH.
7. Hereby we come (like the Primitive Saints and Churches!) to be All called
by ONE NAME and not by many names, (as of Lollards, Hugonites* Brownists,
Separates, Presbyterians, Independents, Anabaptists, and such like nicknames)
which the Primitive-times never heard of, Nor, by the Names of their Teachers,
or forms, or persons, as they are now called, but all by the NAME OF CHRIST,
and him ONLY, Acts 11. 26. Isa. 4. 1: In that day seven women shall take hold
of ONE MAN, saying we will eat our OWN bread and wear our OWN apparel, only
let us be called by THY NAME to take away our REPROACH! (Then) In that DAY,
shall the BRANCH be GLORIOUS. This will take away the Reproach that is upon us,
of Formality, Pride, Barrenness, rigidity, Selfe-seeking, and indeed diverse
ways. So Zech. 8. 23. Ten men of all Languages shall take hold of the skirts
of him that is a JEW. Romans 2. 21. Saying, we will go with you, for we have
heard that God is with you.

8 Motive, in this Way there is a NECESSARY USE of diverse and Different
Members and B anches. How this Body differs from others in the order of it.
8. Besides it is the WAY wherein there is a NECESSARY USE and PLACE of all
sorts of Saints, to exercise their genuine Gifts, in their proper joints, 1
Cor. 12. 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11. as in Hosea 10. 11. Ephraim shall ride; Judah
shall plow; and Jacob shall break the clods. Every one has his several
Employment; and his several Place of what Judgment so ever; As it was in
JACOBS LADDER, some up, and some down; So that, That which disagrees with other
kinds of bodies, best agrees with this; For we see a Necessity, a harmony, and
a serviceablenesse too, of All sorts of Saints, and of all the differencies of
Administrations, 1 Cor. 12. 5. in this Body, so as that we could be no more
without the Presbyterian Saint (in order) then without the Independent, nor the
Independent, then without the Seekers (in order and unity) nor without the
seeking, and (inward) waiting Saint, then without the Baptized, etc. Knowing
that ALL SORTS have their Places or JOINTS in the body, and are Necessary to
some work, or other, and unto the perfection of this ONE BODY.

9 Motive, the most excellent and Useful matter, (whether we ever see it or
no! and as unworthy as we are) must be found in this WAY at last.
9. Consider the most EXCELLENT MATTER of the Latter house of the Lord (whose
glory is to exceed the former!) Hag. 2. 9. is reserved for this Way, or state
of the Church in the latter days, Mal. 3. 17. I will make up my JEWELS, Cant.
7. 1. Thy JOINTS are JEWELS, Isa. 54. 7. With great mercyes will I GATHER thee,
(as Ezekiel. 34. 22, 23) Oh thou afflicted! tossed with tempests, verse. 11, 12. I
will lay thy STONES with fair colors! thy foundations with Saphires! I will
make thy windows of Aggats, thy gates of CARBVVNCLES; and all thy borders of
pleasant STONES, etc. Thus Rev. 21. 17. made of the most precious stones, in
the Breastplate, Exodus 28. 15. full of hidden virtues, and varieties in
harmony.

10 Motive, The most Excellent Ministry (that is, to be till the second coming
of Christ,) must arise this Way.
10. So the Running, Locomotive and more Apostle-like MINISTRY, or the flying
Gospel, that is, coming forth, must (as we conceive) arise in this manner, viz.
from Saints so United, and rallyed upon Mount-Zion, Rev. 14. 1. and then ver.
6. I saw an Angel FLY in the midst of heaven having the everlasting Gospel, to
preach to EVERY NATION, Tongue and Kindred i. e. with a Commission, like to
that given to the Apostles, Mark 16. 15. Mat. 28. 19. Then and thence, the The
flying Gospel.
seven THUNDERS sealed up to the time of the end, will begin there, Oracles to
rattle and break open (with the little The seven Thunders.
stone; or Thunder bolt; (Rev. 10. 4. 7. as appears in the 17 Gr: Yea, then
and thence will the TRUMPET blow, which is made of ONE PIECE, and of the WHOLE
PIECE The Trumpet of one piece.
too, (as Numb. 10. 2.) before which the Camp cannot move; (the Cherubims are
also of one piece.) When the Disciples were in this Way, (Acts 1. 15. The
number of whose names were about 120.) how quickly did the number of Laborers
increase! Yea upon Luthers resolute promotion of Reformation (when the good
people United!) how many Seeds men of a sudden rose, and supplied the rooms of
them that were Sacrificed in the Flames! Yea when the Puritans united! And do
we think that the Lord will not now arise! in a rouzing Ministry! and Harvest
men, at this Day! and raise some up in the room of them that have apostatized.

11 Motive, is the Danger of Jacob, to be utterly destroyed in this Nation.
11. Consider, the Infinite Danger and Damage of Jacob through these Divisions
and Crumblings of Sion! for Jer. 10. 25. They have eaten up Jacob, and devoured
him, and made his habitation Desolate! Eaten him up by Violence! Zeph. 3. 3.
Dan. 7. 19. Breaking their very bones! Jer. 10. 17. Micah 3. 3. Who eat up the
flesh of my People, and break their bones, and chop them in pieces for the POT.
So also, they have eaten him up by cankring! and corrupting of Professors! by
Temptations! How Eaten up.
Preferments! or Time-serving Doctrines! 2 Timothy 2. 17. Their word does eat as
does a Gangrene. O how is the praying wrestling, and prevailing Spirit eaten
up! the power and life of Godliness eaten up! the excellency and sweetness of
Jacob eaten up! through Divisions! Animosities! and Devourings of One Another!
Jer. 50. 7. All that found them, have Devoured them. Therefore Amos 7. 2. By
whom shall Jacob arise! for he is small! small indeed! and weak indeed! Now as
the Ivy is so weak of its self, that it is ready to lay hold upon any thing
that it can run up by, or that comes next! are those that seek more the
Magnifying of their own Particular Form or External Observation, then Union
with Christ! Communion with all Saints! or Interest of the Faith and Public
Cause, by this Uniting.

12. All Saints must to it at last.
12. Furthermore, we may consider, that as All Saints do in a Manner own it,
so All Saints must for the Matter fall to it at last, before Great be the day
of Jezreel! Hos. 1. 11. Ephesians. 1. 10. and if so be we cannot be won to it, we
must be whipped to it, as Ridley and Hooper were! as one said, why we shall meet
where Luther and Zuinglius are well agreed, and if we cannot be entreated, we
may be necessitated to it at last. Gal. 2. 7. 9 so Jer. 50. 4. In those days
the Children of Israel shall come, they and the children of Judah together,
going weeping: They shall ask the Way to Sion with their faces thitherward,
saying, Come, let us JOIN our selves! etc. and this must be before the Ruin of
Babylon, v. 9, 10. Joseph and his Brethren must together again, and then we
shall see a better day.

13. This will abide when other ways sale.
13. Another Motive might be the Stability and Duration of this State
(whatsoever become of this Body, or our persons!) This Foundation (in Christ)
will stand, until his coming down in the Glory of his Father! of himself! and
of his holy Angels! Isa. 33. 20. Thine eyes shall see Jerusalem a quiet
Habitation, a Tabernacle that shall not be TAKEN DOWN, not one of the stakes
thereof shall ever be removed, Isa. 60. 15. with 58. 12. Called the Foundation
of Many Generations, which no other Foundation can be (whether of the
Presbyterian, Indep: Baptist, or any other Form) but this, whereon Jew and
Greek, Bond, and Free, are all one in Christ, Gal. 3. 28. And this the People
of God have built upon in All Ages and Generations, 1 Cor. 3. 11. Ephesians. 2. 20.
Christ himself being the Chiefe-Corner-stone, (which Cornerstone is to Unite
those that stand like Two walls, at a distance) in whom All the Building fitly
framed grows up. Yea upon this Foundation must the New Jerusalem stand, viz.
the Foundation of the Ap stles and Prophets, Rev. 21. 14, 19. and there are the
twelve gates to let in Saints of all sides. Wherefore, let us consider now from
this Day and upward, even from the Day that the Foundation of the Lords Temple
is laid! Consider it; Hag. 2. 18.

14 Motive, Least the Anathema Maranatha our highest Curse (which is the Curse
of his second coming) be upon the Disobedient.
14. Lastly, Let us seriously perpend the Nearness and Approach of Christ
second coming, which being so hard by will render our Disobedience (at this
day!) the more unexcusable and culpable, yea liable and open to the Anathema
Maranatha, or CURSE of his second coming, 2 These. 1. 8. Mal. 4. 6. which (we
conceive) as far transcends the CURSE of his first Coming upon the Disobedient
Jews (who would not be gathered or United, though he clockt for them as a Hen
for Chickens!) as that CURSE did the Curse of Disobedience to Moses and his
Law, Heb. 10. 29. and 2. 3. (our great Law being Love to all Saints!) Besides,
to this End does our Lord come again that he may perfect this kind of
Communion, John 14. 3. Epi. 1. 10. 2 These. 2. 1. That those who have wept and
watched, prayed and walked together in Life and Grace, may sing, triumph, rejoice
and reign together in Life and Glory! Those that have kept together in the
Danger! may continue together in the Deliverance! but unto the Scribes and
Pharisees, Luke 13. ^8 There shall be weeping and gnashing of teeth; when ye
shall see Abraham, Isaac and Jacob, and all the Prophets in the Kingdom, (i.
e. that Kingdom which comprehends all Saints!) and you your selves THRVST OVT:
for v. 29. They shall come from the East, West, North and South, and shall sit
down in this Kingdom. Wherefore up O ye WISE VIRGINS (all at once!) that wait
for the Coming of the Bridegroom! get up! and be ready! trim your Lamps! fill
your Vessels! hear the dismal cry of Midnight! he comes! he comes! hasts!
hasts! like a Roe ore these Mountains of Bether! or Division! to Gather All
into ONE out of their Wildernesse-holes! and Differences, occasioned by
external observations and Forms! Wherefore, up! AWAKE! Awake! Awake! and put
on Strength O Sion! in these Three Nations! for the Day does break! and the
shadows flee! and the Primitive Community is coming forth to be reduced! and
revived! Therefore up O Wise ones, Mat. 25. 7. (whiles the Foolish are gone to
buy in mercenary ways!) that we may be (All in one) ready to enter into the
Marriage! v. 10. even so AMEN! Thus far for Motives.

In the Next place, (to leave out nothing that we know of, that may carry
Conviction or Light to our Friends in the Nation) we shall Answer the Most
Considerable Queries and Objections that we can meet with.

1 Query.
1. Query. WHat do ye mean by Gospel Order, or Templestate, after the first
pattern?

Answ. We have before expressed that in the Grounds, but to be more particular,
both in the Negative and Positive, we answer;

Ansn: 1. Not a mixture, but a thorough Separation.
1. Not a known Mixture, but a more thorough Separation from all false ways,
worships, persons and things that pollute, 2 Cor. 6. 16, 17. Ephesians. 5. 11. Acts
2. 40. Save your selves from this untoward Generation! The Work of Cleansing
the SANCTUARY being a Work of Degrees, Ezekiel. 43. 20, 23. and 44. 7, 8, 9, 10,
11. Dan. 8. 14. Zech. 14. 21.

2. Not an overly Fellowship, but a close and cleaving Aggregation, upon
Kingdom Principles.
2. Not an idle, careless, overly Communion, no more then an uncomfortable
distance or disjunction one from another, but a most accurate, close
aggregating, Uniting and Cleaving of those so Separated (and of the Dispersed
ones) to the Lord! and one to another! upon the Principles of Grace, and
Kingdom of our Lord Jesus, in All the ADMINISTRATIONS and Parts thereof, with
a full and constant Purpose of heart, and participation of Ordinances, Romans 14.
4, 5. 1 Cor. 12. 4, 5, 6. 7, 13, 27. Ephesians. 2. 21, 22. Acts 9. 26 and 11. 23.

3. Not a Narrow rigid, but a Large Comprehensive Spirit.
3. Not a narrow censuring, rigid, beggarly, but a large Loving, growing, and
comprehensive Spirit of Christ and his Kingdom, to actuate us from him alone
(as our Head) expatiating and putting forth its self (after the first Pattern)
both to Jew and Gentile, Bond and Free, Rich and Poor, Strong and Weak, yea to
Saints, and to All men, and to All creatures in their kind, and proportion, 1
Cor. 10. 32, 33. and 9. 19, 20, 21, 22. I am made ALL THINGS to ALL MEN that I
might by ALL MEANS save some.

4. Not a stating it in any one Form, but in the Power of Faith and Godliness
4. Not a magnifying, Imposing or stating the Church in any ONE FORM, opinion,
or observation* but a faithful keeping to, and constant crying up of, the
power of godliness, grace, and Oneness of Christ Jesus, with Religion pure
and undefiled with brotherly love and the principles of the Kingdom, amongst
Saints of all Forms, and Judgments, 1 Cor. 7. 19. Gal. 5. 6. Col. 3. 11. Romans
14 5, 6, 7.

5. Not a disordering, or displaceing but a due ordering and well placeing of
different Saints in their proper Joyntts.
5. Not a disordering, keeping or putting out of Different Saints, or members,
but such a Communion of Saints as keeps up a Due Order, wise, and well-location
and use of all Sorts of members in the Body, and in their proper joints, and
places, for service and Employment, 1 Cor. 12. 21, 22. 17. For if the whole
(were of one form) were an eye, where were the hearing? Or were an ear, where
were the smelling? etc. Ephesians. 4. 16. from whom the body fitly JOINED together.

6. Not a party growing but an Increase of of the WHOLE together.
6. Not a Party-growing, but a comely, and kindly increase (with the increases
of God!) of the WHOLE together; and a daily fetching in of sweet, Suitable
nourishment to the WHOLE BODY by the Joints, Col. 2. 19. Ephesians. 4. 16. this we
mean by Gospel Order after the 1. Pattern.

Qu: 2. Whether do ye think that the Gospel or Temple-state 2 Query.
has not yet been found amongst us? If NOT, we must declare against the best of
the Churches (doctrinally and practically) but if SO, then; how can this bear
away the name, after the 1 pattern?

Answ. 1. We think it has been; and we do own them that retain it in Purity.
Answ: 1 Although we need not reflect to what has been but to what IS obvious,
yet we dare not deny but that we heartily honor, and own those separate
Churches, that retain their first PRINCIPLES in purity, grace, power, and
holiness, that are in the Unity, Love, sound Doctrine, Discipline, and
communion of the Saints; Yet

2. Yet not perfect but rising.
2. We never thought them to be Perfect, but growing up to Perfection, and so a
getting out of the Wilderness by Degrees, now this is one Degree and growth,
further (as we suppose) and so more up unto the primitive State, viz. uniting,
and orderly placeing of all sorts of Saints, in one Body, So That,

3. We do not call for a separation, from such Churches 3. And are for
Communion with them. Union of All, and Embodying of scatte red ones.
as retain the purity of their matter, Form, and Principles of Communion, but
rather for a COMMUNION and an ASSOCIATION with them in the several Cities and
Counties of these NATIONS and for an UNITING (or embodying) of the scattered,
persecuted, and dispersed, or disjoined ones in and about this CITY; in a word,
to chaste Churches for communion and growth up into a purer state! To Choice
Members for union and growth into a more excellent public spirit! To scattered
ones for embodying out of the present evils, and into the approaching GOOD, so
that UNITY in things Necessary! LIBERTY in thing Unnecessary! CHARITY,
Godliness, and Sincerity, in things Different and Indifferent we desire to see.

4. Yet we see them not so acording to the Primitive pattern.
4. For all this, and albeit we deny not but the Gospel and Temple has been
found amongst us in more purity and light then in other places; yet we must
profess we cannot see it, So according to the primitive pattern (or Church of
the firstborn!) to state a Church in any one single form; opinion! or
Judgment whatsoever (whether Indep: Presb: Bapt: or any other!) as in the
comprehensive, power of faith, and New Testament, godliness in all their
Forms, knowing that Saints of all these, and several other Forms, may be
(and are) true members of the Church of Christ!

5. We deny not but they may be called the Temple also.
5. As a Particular member (by it self considered) may be and is called the
Temple of the holy Ghost, 1 Cor. 6. 15. 19. without the injury to the Body
whereof he is a part, which in another sense (or collectively) is called the
TEMPLE, 2 Cor. 6. 16. 1 Cor. 3. 16. So may a particular body sat down in this,
or that Judgment, and yet in another sense, and (we humbly think) with much
more sutablenesse does this particular Church or Collective body, (stated, as
before expressed) bear the name of the Temple too, Rev. 11. 1, 2. Cor. 6. 16,
17. or Gospel Order, after the first pattern, 1 Cor. 12. 13. 17. Phil. 3. 15.
Romans 14. 14, 5. and 12. 45. Now the reason of this Analogy is, because this
holds a most excellent consistency, Symmetry, Harmony, need and Usefulness of
every particular body of this or that form; as well as a particular Church,
does (or ought to do) with every particular member (of that body) whether of
this, or that Judgment, keeping up a necessary serviceablenesse to the Lord
and one another in All! (and in every one) in their proper joints and places;
which is most like to the Primitive state; and is a Constitution more after the
Institution of the Gospel, then a sitting down in any one Form. This is no
other then the House of God! (said Jacob) Genesis 28. 17. which is that? why where
he saw the Ladder, and some go up and some go down, and some one way and some
another! and the Lord a top of all, at the Head of all! and all serving him th
ir several ways; as 1 Cor. 12. 5. There be Differences of administrations,
and yet but One Lord: In this heavenly harmony and melody (if we might but find
it) of different members and motions, O how sweet would be the Vision!

6. We dare not but deny Communion with the Apostate Churches and with no
others.
6. Lastly, but as for those particular Churches (so called) that are
corrupted, have lost their Form and Matter! that are let loose, and do let
their members range in the World and the Lusts thereof! that persecute or
oppose the Truth! Cast out or kill the life and Grace of the sound Members!
(not admitting Communion with Different Saints, nor keeping up of Brotherly
love!) that are thus gangrened both in Substance and Circumstances! so defiled!
so deformed and degenerated! we do not! we dare not hold Communion with! or
own them for the Faithful Spouse after the first pattern. Now these are they,
and no other, that we do (doctrinally and practically) declare against, and
withdraw from.

So that by this Time (we trust) every one can answer himself in the second
part of the QUERY, viz. How this does bear the Name from the Rest, (viz. that
are Apostatized.) Answ. How this does bear the Name from them.
1. In the Truth of that which they have but the Name and Title of. 2. In the
Spirit and Life of that, which they keep up but the Form and Letter of. 3. In
the Harmony of the diffring Members and Meetings in their own joints and
places; (in that New-Jerusalem-like Order of Communion with all Saints, which
they have either rejected, or else were never well acquainted with) For as we
believe All were not rightly constituted Churches, that were called so, or went
by that Name; So we deny not but this or that particular Church (or some) that
once we might have owned, may foulely Fall, Fade, Decay and die, as we durst
not hold Communion with; and yet we not question but a true Temple-state may be
found amongst us too, growing up toward perfection. Besides, in the End and
Rule, we may be said to bear that NAME from them, without reflecting upon those
Churches that maintain the Purity of Matter, and Form, Rule and End, Extent
and Privileges of the Kingdom of Christ, whom we (with all our hearts) do
own and are ONE with in Spirit and Communion.

Qu: 3. But can any be said, to be ONE CHVRCH (or Gospel-Body) and yet more
then One! or how can any be members of two Bodies? and does not this way you
are in look too like an VNIVERSAL-CHVRCH? and smell of that strain? for you
have many meetings and so many Bodies.

Answ. Here be many Queries in one, which in order we answer; Answer 1. We say
not so, nor are we so.


1. We do not say (nor can any) that we are more then ONE, though ONE that
has many Members (and so meetings as occasion requires) 1 Cor. 12. 13. 27. but
more fully to that presently.

2* One may be of two bodies.
2. One may be a member of two Bodies in a two sold consideration very well; as
a member of a Natural Body may be also a member of a Politicall-Body; and of a
Polit: may be also of a Religious Body; yea, and so of two Religious Bodies, in
a twofold consideration, as a member of a Particular Church, (is also member of
the universal) and may also be a member of a BODY, united upon
Kingdome-Principles, and services, or on other matters; But,

3. Of two lodies, or Churches* one by way of Admission as a proper Member, and
the other by way of Communion.
3. This was very frequent, and in Constant practice in the Primitive times, to
be of One Church, (as a member) by union, and of another by Communion; and so
Paul, had communion with all Churches and at Corinth, 1 Cor. 5* 4, 5. and yet a
member admitted of the Church at Jerusalem, Thus may members of other Churches,
be also members of this Body, and walk with this in Communion, and yet hold
their places too, in their own particular bodies; As a member of a man's body,
holds its place there, and yet as a member of all mankind, has a Public
motion too, as well as a Particular.

4. The formal Consideration consists with a particular Body.
4. That there be no mistake in the FORMAL PART of this Vniting-Worke! we have
declared our selves to be but one Particular Body, after the 1 Pattern at
Jerusalem, and holding a Communion with all Saints (in order) Jew or Gentile,
bond, or free, of this or that opinion, that understandingly desire it.

1 Object.
Object: 1. But visible Saint ship, and visible Church State are not All one!
and many may be Saints or memberrs of Christ's mystical body, that are not
joined to any visible Church! Acts 5. 13, 14.

1 True Church has a place for all Saints.
Answ. 1. We grant they are not one in state, and yet the true Chu^ch-state is
the C^mmunion of Saints, and (according to the institution!) has joints and
places, for all sorts of Saints received, Romans 14. whole Chapt: and 12. 4, 5. 1
Cor. 12.

2. And are not to be put by that they do desire it.
2. We confess also that some may be Saints that are not of any Particular
Church, nor desire it; but the Query is, whether any Saints enlightened, of good
life, and seeking Communion with us are to be put by.

3. But have a spiritual Intelligence with all.
3. We are to be such a Body as holds a Communion and good intelligence, even
with them also, in the Spirit, yea, and in some cases, (so far, as can be
consistent with the power of godliness, and wherein we agree, etc.) more
visibly too, Luke 10. 1. Acts 5. 13, 14. for the public good; Yea,

4. In an invisible Way of communion also.
4. Our Communion (spiritually) is to be so large, as Comprehends Saints in an
Invisible Way and in the Power, as well as in a Visible Way and in the Form,
being all Members of the mystery of Godliness, which is, without controversy.

2. Object.
Object: 2. But the mystical Church (consisting of the elect in Christ, Angels
and men, alive and dead, borne, and unborne, etc.) cannot be properly ^alled
Church State, instituted by Christ, in the Gospel; being constituted from
Eternity, in Gods Decree! etc.

^ Answer. The Church Communion of Gospel-institution, admits all Sa^nts,
Prophets, Apostles, Martyrs, and ^ow?
Answ. Yet the visible Church, in Communion with them! with Angels! and Spirits
of just men made perfect (i. e. in a most sweet, secret, and invisible way!)
is of Gospel institution. Heb. 12. 22, 23. Ephesians, 2. 19, 20, 21. and this is
all that we affirm, that our Communion must be of such a Nature and
comprehensivenesse of Spirit, as should not only admit an Oneness with them
in Spirit, but a walking with them on earth (were they all alive amongst us!)
under their diverse Administrations, forms gifts, and apprehensions.

3 Object.
Object: 3. Some hold that the Church at Jerusalem was made up of many
particular Churches, and this you make your pattern.

^ Answer. Not our pattern as an universal but particular visible Church.
Answ. Not in that sense, nor do we hold so; but we hold the Church at
Jerusalem, was but one particular Church; having diverse sorts of Members and
Meetings (at some times) and so it is our pattern, and not as an universal
visible Church, for that we deny, (the universal Church being partly visible,
and partly invisible, comprehending all times, places, and sorts! in heaven and
earth.)

Answ: 2. It is a great mistake to think the particular meetings of this Body
are particular Churches; for any one Church 2 A great mistake to think
particular meetings are particular Churches.
may have at some times, several meetings, about several matters, as Acts 12.
5. 12. 17. and 20. 20. Gal. 2. 2, 3. and yet be but one particular Church: So
it is here. Notwithstanding, in another consideration it seems (to some) with
as good Analogy, and Property of speech, consonancy, and consistency of truth,
and Rule, as now any Particular Church what ever may be called One (and yet the
members in particular, or the families be many) may the meetings too be many!
and it be said, The Church that is at their house, Romans 16. 5. 1 Cor. 16. 19
Col. 4. 15. and the Church which is (which meets) at his house So Phile. 2. So
those of Caesar's household; (yet in this sense that we speak, they were but
members of the Church! So those that met in Mary's house, Act. 12. 5. 12. yet
were but members of the Church at Jerusalem. Now the reason is because two or
three together in Christ's name! or the faithful of some one Family! or a
meeting of brethren may be called a Church in one respect, and not Yet in what
sense some will so interpret.
(as they stand related) in another! Phil. 4. 22. and thus may we be said, to be
but ONE COLLECTIVELY, and yet MORE THEN One, (if every meeting must be so
interpreted) DISTRIBUTIVELY, wherein one may differ (and be in his joint) from
Another, Though for our parts we cannot Understand it so, as of many, but of
one BODY, as 1 Cor. 12. 25. but now are they MANY, (and many sort of) members
yet but ONE BODY! As SION may have many Gates, How they may be said to be Many,
and yet but ONE.
wherein might be several Assemblies as of one sort that sat in one gate, and
another sort in Another!) and yet be but ONE SION Psalm. 84. 2. As the BODY has
many joints, members Arteries, Sinews Veins, (wherein every one Member (from
joint to joint) may be looked upon as distinct, and yet as conjunct, or a member
of the WHOLE,) yet makes but one BODY! Romans 12. 4. As a CITY Psalm. 122. 3, 4.
and 46. 4. has As Sion, as a Body, as a City, as an Army,
many houses, Trades, Streets, Corporations, and Societies (wherein every one
in it is own bounds may be called (in a sense) a Body; yet makes but one City
compact. As an Army with as a Kingdom.
Banners, Cant 6. 4. 10. (wherein every Company Regiment, as a Heaven.
Color, Brigade, and Wing, is as it were an Army by it self,) yet makes but
one in all; as a Kingdom, Joh 18. 36. Heb. 12. as a New Jerusalem.
28. Mat. 21. 43. may have many Families, Cities, Villages, Shires, Countries,
etc. wherein every one (by it is self) may be said to be a little Kingdom, and
yet are all but one Kingdom. And as Heaven, Mal. 13. 11. 24. 31. wherein every
firmament, Element, Planet, Star, and Constellation, make up but one Heaven, So
is it with a true Church of Christ, which is called a Body, a City, an Army, a
Kingdom, and a Heaven (in Scripture!) So the new Jerusalem. Rev. 21. 14. may
be said to have twelve Foundations, and in them the name of the twelve
Apostles, and the Lamb (every particular member of different Sat, verse. 19,
20. as the Jasper, and Sapphire, and Calcedony, etc. to be upon his own, and
proper Foundation, wherein one differ from another, as Paul from Peter, etc.)
and yet in another sense, All have but one foundation, 1 Gor. 3. 11. For other
foundation can none lay then that which is, Jesus Christ. So that if any do
understand us distributively, as of MANY, (because of our several meetings,
members or branches) yet they must conclude us (collectively) All to be but ONE
BODY or Church, at last.

4 Object.
Object: 4. But then; you are like an Universal visible Church.

1 Answer. No more like an universal Church.
Answ: 1. No; no more then every particular Church was in the Primitive times,
who had their many meetings and different members, as well as we.

2. Then every particular in primitive times.
2. There is no such Church as we know of, as universal VISIBLE; But

3. That there is an universal Church we believe; and that every particular
Church of Christ should be as like to the Universal 3. The nearer to it, and
to the Nature of it the better.
in Integrals and Parts, as the Child is like the Parent, or the Daughter the
Mother, we also believe; and therefore the nearer and liker we are to the
universal Church: (or mother of us All; (Gal. 4. 26.) in Spirit; grace, and
communion with All Saints, visible and invisible, the more thank^full are we to
the Lord, whose workmanship we are in Christ Jesus: And yet we are but a poor
despised Dust! a particular visible Church (that would feign look like the
choice one of her Mother* Cant. 6. 9.) far short* yet pressing after a more
Likeness indeed to the Universal! (consisting of All Saints, Jew and Gentile,
past, present, and to come!) and more of the Nature and Spirit Others that must
succeed must exceed upon this Principle.
of the New Jerusalem! But we believe, that others are to follow after us, and
(in this Principle too!) preferred before us, whose shoes we are not worthy to
untie! We know not what Influences and Tendencies this may have thereto.

5 Object.
Obj. 5. But we fear you have no pattern from the Primitive times, for such
different and sundry Meetings (besides the public of the whole together,) were
that clear we could be satisfied.

Ans. 1. Wisdom leftwith the Church for the Wel-being thereof.
Answ. 1. If there had not been left us a plain and direct Example for it, (as
we find in some circumstances) yet God has left his Wisdom with the Church,
Ephesians. 3. 10. 1 Cor. 2. 7. (a wisdom that is from above, James 3. 17.) in such
Cases as tend to keep up good order! Edifying and Discipline in the Body! Romans
14. 19. 1 Cor. 14. 26. and in Matters that touch not the Being, but only the
Well being of it, to further that! Now this ordering of the several meetings,
meddles not with the Being, but the Well-being of the Body! The BEING of it
lies in a Communion with all Saints, but the WELL-BEING of it in the
Well-ordering of them in their several Places and Joints, fit for service! Now
the manner or WAY mentioned in the PROPOSALS, we are not bound to, any further
then consists with the Being and Well being of this Body! for Order and Use.
Besides,

3. The Word of Prophecy is many in one.
2. A sure Word of Prophecy we shall do well to take heed unto; Now this is
the word of Prophecy, that all be Gathered into ONE, yea Isa. 60. 7 and 65. 10.
And Sharon shall be a a Fold of Flocks, and the Valley of Achor a place for
Herds to lie down in, for my People that have sought me. Many Flocks, (which
particular flocks have governance) and yet but ONE FOLD; Many herds (who have
feedings and meetings by themselves too) and yet All make but ONE PEOPLE! this
is plain: But,

3. A plain Pattern for it.
3. To be yet more plain and clear, and to satisfy you fully that desire it;
we have very express Warrant, President and Example, for this practice, from
the word of God, and Primitive Churches, viz. for Meeting. 1. Collectively. 2.
Distributively. And in both Organically, as occasion calls for it.

1. Collectively, altogether
First, Collectively, (we think none question) in the Church at Jerusalem, Acts
2. 46. They continuing daily with one Accord in the Temple. So in the Church of
Corinth, 1 Cor. 14. 23. If therefore the whole Church be come together in some
place. cha. 11. 20. When ye come together therefore into One Place! so other
Churches. Nor do they question but they were Organicall in those Meetings,
wherein they were of one heart and one mind, Acts 4. 32. though they were some
1000ds that so met, ver. 4, 5.

2. Distributively, or in several places and meetings.
Secondly, Distributively; that they so met is as plain, Acts 2. 46. and from
house to house! (which were distributive meetings, for one house could not hold
so many 1000, as were of the Church, viz. 5000 or 8000, or more.) Thus Acts 12.
12. appears the whole Church did not meet in Mary's house, but many of them
were there, and others of them at another house, (it is like at James's) v. 17.
Go show these things to James and to the Brethren, (that is, of them that were
not at Mary's house!) Besides, v. 17. he left them and went into another place.
Thus it is evident enough, that their meetings were in many places, and yet but
one Church, v. 5. So at Rome those that met in Caesar's Palace, Phil. 1. 13. and
4. 22. and the rest that met in the City, Romans 1. 7. were all but one Church.
Now as there is a Primitive Practice of joining in ONE, (in the Matters wherein
they were of one Accord, Acts 1. 14 and 2. 46. and 4. 32. 1 Cor. 14. 23.) So of
having diverse and several meetings too, and them also organically, as Acts 20.
20 I have taught you Publicly (or when All together) or from house to house;
or more Privately in their diverse and several meetings too at some times, and
yet the same Body.

And then Organically as there is need.
For in Primitive times, every such Body had diverse Ministers, Ephesians. 4. 11, 12.
Pastors, Teachers, Deacons, and gifted Brethren, 1 Cor. 14. [whereof the ablest
speakers were most Public^ (or in the whole Collective Body) and others more in
their private meetings] and of diverse Judgments, as in the Church of
Jerusalem, Gal. 2. where, because of them of the Circumcision (so rigid!) Paul
had his private meetings, (v* 2. privately or severally) and some of the Chief
of the Church did oppose him, Divisions grew, Conferences increased, but at
last were thus decided, by sorting and putting all into their own and proper
places! v. 7, 8, 9. viz. Those Ministers that were for Circumcision, to
administer to them of that judgment! and those that were for Uncircumcision,
to administer to them of their judgment! And yet all held together as Members
of that one Body (or of the Church at Jerusalem!) in their proper Judgments!
joints! and places! So v. 9. When James, Cephas, and John, perceived the grace
was given me, (that I was the Lords as well as they, and that by my Ministry
God did much good, v. 8. as well as by theirs) they gave to me and Barnabas the
right hands of fellowship, that we should go to the Gentiles (to them of our
particular Persuasions!) and They went unto the Circumcision (to them of
theirs;) and thus the Controversy is ended. For All keep together in Love,
(when All are kept and countenanced in their proper places and administrations)
and so every particular branch (as well as member) may be said (in its own
joint) to be organicall, by concurrence, appointment, and Consent of the Whole.

Q1. But did they partake of Church-Ordinances in any such distributive
Meetings? for that of praying, Acts 12. it is a common Christian Duty.

A. 1. In their several Meetings Ordinances.
Ans. Yea, Prophesying, Praying, holy Conferences, etc. are Church-ordinances,
and these they did partake of in such Meetings, Acts 20. 20. and 12. 5, 12.
Gal. 2. 2. And it is evident, (though Prayer be a common Christian Duty) yet in
Acts 12. 12. it is mentioned as a Church*ordinance, verse 5. But,

2. Those wherein One differs from another, in the different Meetings.
2. We put a Difference between these Ordinances of Christ wherein we are all
ONE, and those wherein we are not all One, but differ one from another in our
persuasions. Now those wherein we are All ONE, (or are of one accord, Acts 2.
46. and 1. 14, 15, etc.) we grant we must partake together in the whole Body;
but Different Ordinances in the D fferent Meetings (as it was of old, between
Circumcision and Uncircumcision, Observation and Non-observation of days) Romans
14. 4, 5, 6, 7, 13, 18, 19. let them do (what they do) as to the Lord, and v.
22. have their Faith to Themselves, without offending others, in their own
joints or places of those judgments. Thus Acts 16. 3. Paul circumcised Timothy
because of the Jews that were there. i. e. because this was their judgment
that there met, it was done amongst those of that Way; and he would not have
done it at Corinth amongst the Gentiles: thus he became Jew to the Jew, and
Gentile to the Gentile.

Now all that we plead for in this WAY, is but the Liberty which Christ has
purchased for us, Gal. 5. 1. that one be not bound up to another in his
Different judgment, nor the whole offended or disturbed, but that he may have
the free Exercise of it in his Different joint and place of the Body; as they
plainly had in the Primitive times, from whence we have our Pattern, both for
Collective and Distributive Meetings.

6 Object.
Obj. 6. Yea, but we cannot do as the Apostles did, nor have we the same Rule?

A. 1. One and the same Rule for the Church.
Ans. 1. But we have the same Rule which the Churches had, and are to be found
in the like practices, now this was their Rule, Gal. 6. 15, 16. Neither
Circumcision nor Vncircumsion but the New Creature, and as many as walk
according to this Rule, Peace be on them; and by this Rule they denied
Controversies, and stated affairs, Gal. 2. 7, 8, 9. to the Liberty of all
Saints.

2. Not as Apostles.
2. Under the Consideration of Apostles, men so immediately inspired, and
guided by an infallible Spirit, for the fi st Planting of the Gospel in All
Nations: we have them not our Examples, nor the same Rule to walk by, as Acts
15. 28. 25. it seems good to the holy Ghost and to us; nor dare we pretend to
it, our Rule being more ordinary, and revealed to us in the holy Scriptures!
and from the practice of all Primitive Churches. But,

3. But as Members and Ministers.
3. As Members and Ministers (or Servants of the Church) under that
Consideration, we and they have All but one and the same Rule for practice, and
that which they so did are we to do likewise, 1 Cor. 4. 16, 17. and 11. 1.
Phil. 3. 17. 1 These. 1. 6. and 2. 14. 2 These. 3. 9. but under that
consideration were they in this kind of Communion of Saints, giving this
christian Liberty to Jew and Gentile (one and another) of different judgments,
in matters doubtful and Disputable, wherein one Saint might differ from
another, and yet hold together in the BODY orderly, in due and proper places
and joints, Romans 14. 1 Cor. 12. 27, 28, 29. So Phil. 3. 16. Nevertheless,
whereto we have already attained, let us walk by the same Rule, let us mind the
same things. Brethren! be ye followers together of me! (in this) and mark them
which walk as ye have us for an Example! Now in this comprehensive Communion we
have them for Example, and that not as Apostles, but as Members of the Body and
Ministers of the Church.

Having cleared our way thorough these Objections, some perhaps may say;

7 Object.
Ob. 7. We hear indeed of a Design to rend and destroy Churches of Christ,
that some have.

Ans. 1. No injury to Churches.
Ans. 1. We are none of them, nor does this offer the least injury to any of
the true Churches of Christ, such as keep up the Communion of Saints with
purity.

2. But to make up the Breaches.
2. We are so far from Breaking them, that our Work is to make up the Breaches
of Sion, and more to Unite them in the true Principles of Separation, (from
false worships and ways of Sin) and in the things of Christ's Kingdom.

3. And to put all Forms into their right use and place.
3. We do acknowledge them (though now so many of them are settled on their
Lees, and rivited in their Forms!) to have been honorable in their Day and
Times; as the Presbit: (against the Prelat) and so was the Indep: and so has
been the Baptist: but it seems to as now that there is no Honor in setting up
one Form against another, (or of one truth against another, or of one gift
against another, or one grace against another, or one person or one party
against another,) nor yet conduceable to the service of Christ at this Day! but
all Saints to be in a consistency together. This seems more after the mind of
God; Whereby we do no more destroy them that are sound in Faith under what
Form soever, then the Gospel does destroy Law; which does not destroy, but
perfect it, and put 4. Not to rend, but reform, and refine them.
it into it is right place, and use, and Spirit.

4. This is not to rend, but reform and refine them, or to fetch them out more
pure from defilement, and Sin.

5. Who can be offended at this.
5. If we offend Any, it must be either those that are Degenerated; or those
that take offense without cause; or else those that are imprisoned, and bound
up in their own private Spirits, and Forms. For what is it we are about? but
to let us out of bondage (Gal. 2. 4.) into the true liberty of the Spirit, and
into the due (and proper) exercise of the Form, or judgment, for the Public
Good, as well as for our own Private.

Object: 8.
Object: 8. Such as think it the time, may fall to this work, but we do not
think it the TIME OF THE END, nor the OPENING OF THE TEMPLE! etc.

Ans 1. A duty at all times.
Answ: 1. If it be not so; yet this of Uniting, Communion withal Saints, and
brotherly love, is our bounden duty, at all times, and never more need to be
Practiced then now.

2. Signs of the Time of the End.
2. And yet there be more Arguments for it then against it! and the Signs of
those times (or of the time of the end) are apparent to All, that are
judicious, and observe!

3. If that Ground, be not clear to thee, yet manyare.
3. But if all the GROUNDS we have given be not clear to ALL, (for we expect it
not!) yet all may be to some, and some to All; yea, so many to every one, as
will leave him without excuse when Christ comes, that now clocks into Union,
Love, and Harmony amongst all Saints, as a Hen clocks her Chickens.

Object: 9.
Object: 9. We doubt you will have breaches and Divisions too in that Uniting
Body, as well as in others!

Ans. 1. Breaches not so likely this Way, wherein every one has his right and
Due.
Answ: 1. It is not so likely, as among those that are embodyed in any One
form! Because (to keep up their Uniformity!) they must be strict and rigid;
which frets the Members! and wounds the most spiritual of them! And many times
this Causes Parties, and so Breaches, in the Body. Besides (through there
Defect of this Rule!) they cannot admit Different judgments to have their
Places, and Freedom of exercise, (which they conceive, is there Right, and
Due!) but this we do! being not bound up to any one Particular Form. So that
it is Narrowness and Rigidity which causes contention and Breaches; and not
this sweet, equal, brotherly, and primitive-like latitude, or Christian
Liberty, given to all Saints, in their proper places, where they are profitable
and most edifying Because without this, they (justly) think that injury is done
them, but with this, there is None, for All are well-pleased with their own
Places, and joints.

2. Not so soon in a Body, Compacted well Co^^^^ed as in a B^dy pa^^^fyed and
made a Faction, or a s^^^ or but a p^^ce of Communion of Saints.
2. Not so soon when we are orderly and duly compacted together (and put into
place,) as when a Body is divided, or (indeed) of it is self, but a party; a
faction, a piece* or a form, of Saints communion. As Psalm. 122. 3. Jerusalem
is a City COMPACT, then ver. 8. For my brethrens and companions sake will I now
say, Peace be within thy Walls! that is to say, when so United, and compacted,
because Parties, and Factions, cause the Breaches, and not such a compacting,
as this is, Ephesians. 2. 21. and 4. 4. wherein we have the Bond of peace.

3. We are better able to crush and kill Divisions.
3. If so be Divisions should arise (as they did in the primitive times.) 1
Cor. 1. 10. and 11. 18. we shall be in much better Capacity,, and have more
help to deal with them this way, (as they did in the Primitive times. Romans 16.
17, 18. and 14. 19. Ephesians. 4. 3. 1 Timothy 6. 5. 2 Timothy 2. 16, etc.) that they may
never rise up unto a BREACH.

^. If breaches should arise yet the THING will stand and that rejoices our
hearts, what ^^^ become our Persons.
But if they should rise up to a BREACH (which may be possible!) yet of this we
ate well assured and resolved, that the Thing will stand, viz. the Uniting of
the Saints (of what judgment soever!) will never be dissolved or broken. Nor
do we in the least, doubt of a Comfortable Product of this present overture,
above what we (or others) may at first see, who break the ice (or make the
first Essay) to so great and good a WORK. And indeed we may be more in the
Dark, and liable to exceptions it must be expected, (as the first entrance!) as
to the MANNER and SPIRIT of it! (with us poor Worms! and shrubs!) then those
that are to FOLLOW AFTER US! But however, and what ere become of our Persons,
or of this Body, (so we may but see the THING, we hope, we shall REJOICE; or be
satisfied; As (Paul says in another case) Phil. 1. 18. What then?
Notwithstanding every Way! -- I therein do REJOICE! yea, and will REJOICE!

Object. 10.
Object: 10. Some think it would be better in an Uniformity!

Ans. 1. Uniformity not in Primitive times kept up and why?
Answ It is true the Papists, Rhemists, Erastians, Episcopalians and
Presbyterians have thought so, and some others; but to that we need to say no
more then that the Churches thought it not so, in the Primitive times; and
therefore all practiced otherwise as Corinth, Rome, Antioch, Galatia, etc.
maintaining this harmony and Unity of Jew, and Gentile, Circumcision, and
Un-circumcision, Observers, and Non-Observers of days, etc. Besides this way
of Uniformity rose up into practice about Victor's time (Bishop of Rome!) as is
well known; and yet even then it was opposed, and witnessed against by
Irenaeus, and other good men, as opening the Way to the Man of Sin, and
inconsistent with the Primitive practice! Moreover, Experience has long proved
a Spirit of Persecution, to live in the Heart of Uniformity and Rigidity of
that kind. Nay to say somewhat more, Those eminent men, Luther, Calvin* and
others, that have in their Degrees (and days) exceeded the Rest of Professors!
yet when they (or others) have come to set up their Degrees for a Standard to
other succeeding Growing Christians, it has proved a Persecution, and drawn
blood. Furthermore, the Vniformists are apt to cry up (and so contend for!) the
Form its self in stead of the Power, magnifying the Form above the Name and
Work of Christ! And by this means also, a Proud, Prelatick (or Imperious)
Spirit, gets heart and head over others! And as the ultimate, the maine Work of
Salvation (at sometimes,) of Sanctification (at other times,) and of the
Generation (almost at all times, as to most Spiritual and New Testament
Actings! or Services!) and so the Cause of Christ comes to be neglected, and at
last undervalued for the lifting up of the Form or Opinion; yea the Name of
God for that Name* as we see too too many sad symptoms of at this Day. So that
we need not say more in this Matter; only this, that it is not possible to be
the Wel-ordered Body (after the first Pattern) and yet but one Form, (or the
Form of one Member or branch!) 1 Cor. 12. 17, 18, 19, 27, 28, 29, 30.

Object: 11.
Obj. 11. But it seems to some of us (that are of the Baptized Judgment) that
the first Pattern was in our Way! Acts 2. 41. They gladly received the Word and
were Baptized, and the same day were added to the Church.

Ans. 1. The fi st pattern is before, Act. 2. 41.
Answ: 1. The first pattern is before that, viz. In Acts 1. 14, 15. where the
120 were in one Body, waiting for the Holy Ghost, which came down, Acts 2. 1,
2* now this is our pattern in our uniting and waiting for the same Promise.

2. That relates to Converts, this to Disciples.
2. That in Act. 2. 41 has relation to Converts, not to Christians already
Converted, sanctified* Persecuted, and dispersed up and down for the faith and
truth which they have received (long since!) and so growing up into, and
therefore that is no Rule to us in this Work, which consists of different
Subjects, and Matter, viz. Disciples, or persons converted, and grounded (we
hope) in the faith.

3. No primitive Church stated in One Form or judgment.
3. Nor can it appear that any Primitive Church was planted in any one Form,
judgment! or opinion! and as for this Church, at Jerusalem; this in Acts 2.
41. could not be the way of their first embodying, (or uniting!) for they were
the Church embodyed! (and so our pattern) before that; in Acts 1. 15. and it
appears to us (among others) upon these 3 Grounds mentioned in that 1 Chapt.
first, for the holy Ghost, ver. 5. Secondly, for knowledge and power, of the
witness of Jesus! ver. 8. and seed of the Kingdom, to sow the Nations!
Thirdly, for Instruction, in the second coming of Christ, ver. 11. All which
are our grounds also; not a word of baptism (or any other judgment) being
mentioned in that Chapt: as the formal part or Way of their Uniting

4. All Churches gathered and governed by this Rule of Communion with all
Saints and of liberty to all (orderly and in their Places.
4. Sure none will deny, but the Church at Jerusalem, and the Churches at
Corinth, Rome, Galatia, etc. were gathered, and governed by one, and the same
Rule; but in the Churches of Corinth, Rome, Galatia, Antioch, etc. were the
members gathered of Jews and Gentiles, 1 Cor. 9. 10. Romans 10. 12. Gal. 2. 14.
and 3. 18. Acts 15. Circumcised, and uncircumcised, and of different
judgments, Romans 14. 1. 4, 5. Gal. 2. 12. and 5, 6. 11. 1 Cor. 7. 19. and
accordingly governed with their due liberty in the Body, 1 Cor. 12. Romans 12.
and 14. Gal. 2. 9. and so it appears to be at Jerusalem, yea those that were
for the Circumcision and against the Uncircumcision, which some think to be
baptizme, by Collating, 1 Cor. 1. 13, 14. with Gal. 2. 7.) were so high and
violent, Gal. 2. 2. 3. and 6. 12. that they could not be all (in this or any
one Way or Form, gathered or governed at Jerusalem, no more then at Corinth,
Antioch, or in other Churches, consisting of Jews and Gentiles, and of diverse
judgments.

Object: 12.
Object: 12. We like the fruits very well, but not this Work, at least not
this WAY (which ye are in) of Uniting!

Ans. 1. Take the fruits with the Tree, and upon the Tree.
Answ. 1. The first part of the objection is to commend the fruits, but to
condemn the Tree, that brings them forth in their season, now to have those
fruits fresh, green, and in their Sap or sweetness, is upon the TREE, Cant.
2. 3. I sat under the shadow with great delight, and his fruit was sweet to my
taste, So may we gather the fruits as they grow amongst us, and as the old
wither or wast away, will the New come forth.

2. Take your own Way, So it be according to the Pattern and the Work.
2. Take what WAY ye will so it be not of man's devising* and so ye keep to the
WORK, that is to say UNITING WORK, which must be in such a Way as will indulge,
and give free liberty to all sorts of Saints, in their differing forms and
judgments, otherwise it is not an UNITING. Now we would gladly learn a more
excellent Way (and more up to the Primitivepatterne!) then this; if any find
it! For we are not limited but to the thing it is self, viz. an Uniting of All
Saints, with equal Liberty, Love, Indearednesse, and Indulgence.

3. It must be a Way suitable to every one for service, and exercise.
3. It must be a way that will put all the Differing Saints into their sntable
and proper places of service and Exercise: one without greiving, molesting,
opposing, oppressng, or offending another; and if the Lord do give us (or
others) more light in this Matter, we would gladly receive it. For,

4. We cannot be expected to be so Perfect at daybreake, as at Noon day.
4. We must confess (as before) that being but upon the Daybreak and Dawning
of this Business, those that begin it must needs be short of them that are to
succeed upon this Principle; and this but (in a sense) a sign of the
Day-opening, or antecedanean to somewhat of more Life, Loveliness, and Luster,
that others may be raised up into. Yet it is our Duty, and done with integrity,
and we doubt not but will be of great Use for this season, and have a singular
Testimony from Heaven. Wherefore,

5. Yet have a care every one of you, now you do reject this Way!
5. Have a care we beseech you, (in the Fear and Dread of the Heart searching
God!) and be well-advised! Least ye reject your Work (yea your present Work!)
with the WAY! Consider well! with what Spirit do ye reject it! is there not
prejudice, or envy at Persons in it? (for so John's Desciples did envy Christ's,
and did not the Pharisees so too? As the Cardinal said of Reformation, The
Thing is good, but that Luther a An Expostulation.
Raschall Friar should be the Man to put it upon us, this is intolerable.) Or
is there not offense at eminent ones holding off? (as John 7. 48, 49. Have any
of the Chief ones followed him? only this Ignorant people. So 1 Cor. 1. 26.
For ye see your calling Brethren! how not many wise, not many noble, etc. So
Acts 28. 22. It is every where spoken against?) Or do ye not decline the thing
it self, to delay and put that off? and so pretend offense at the Way of it.
Or have ye (in truth) found out a more Excellent Way unto it? then Declare it!
or else take heed how you reject this, for God will not be Mocked. Luke 14. 18.
They all with one consent began to make Excuse! I pray (says the first) have
me Excused! v. 29. and have me Excused! They have good words! Excuse us to our
Lord! we like the Thing (he invites us too) very well! and we are for it! and
are Friends! but yet we must be Excused. Wherefore if it be our Duty to Unite,
what mean we to dally or delay? They that have refused the first step, have not
had the honor Refuse the first step, and lose the second.
(or the happiness) of the next: As the Scribes and Pharisees that would not go
with John, could not go with Jesus! And if it be only because thou waitest
for a better Way! possibly it may be revealed to this poor! praying! enquiring
Body! as well and as soon as unto Others! (be we ever so unlikely in your
eyes!) and this we know, that we are (in this matter!) one step nearer to it,
then they that omit this (their) known Duty! (and thereby the great Commandment
of Love.) Besides, as John's Disciples were one step nearer to Christ and his
Call, then the Jews were; so they heard; and had the first call to the next
step who had taken that, John 1. 37, 38, 39, 40. And therefore we dare not omit
our present Work (or first step!) but rather take it in the Way to the Next,
and to that which is more Noble. Wherefore if thou dare to put off this, in
pretense thou have a better Way; let us see thee then, at this Work in thy Way
or thou sinnest yet the more: and so we leave it to thy conscience!

All Objections we can meet with, most easily Answered.
There is not one Objection more or Query (that we can hear of) material,
unless it be that the Angels (and our Lord himself! bid Mary call the
Brethren together, Mat. 28. Joh. 20. but to that we say, We are not now under
the Ministry of Angels, but a more sure Word of Prophecy! 2 Pet. 1. 19. and a
more Excellent Ministry, Heb. 8. 6. Nor have we need of an Angel to tell us
that which the word and Spirit of God, with the clear Practice of All the
Primitive Saints do put us upon, Luke 16. 31. If they hear not the Prophets,
neither will they be persuaded though one rose from the Dead! And yet to this
we have the common call from the Saints Dead, as well as Alive.

The Spirits Office is to enable us.
The Spirit which calls, is Christ's Viceroy, represents his Person! supplies
his Place! offers his Power! and is sent us in his stead until he comes; he is
his Pleny-Potentiary to help and enable us as effectually in this matter, as if
our Lord in his own person were present with us. And thus, the Voice that said
to Jairus his Daughter Arise, and to Lazarus Come forth! we hope, we have heard
and felt, (in the Spirit and divine Nature of it!) inviting, quickening, and
raising us (as from the Dead!) to this Duty. Yea, he that says, Who is he that
darkneth Counsel without Knowledge? Job 38. 2. has said unto us, Go
thorough, Go thorough, prepare your Way, cast ye up, cast up the high way,
Gather out the stones, lift ye up a Standard, Behold, the Lord has proclaimed
it to the End of the World, etc. Isa. 62. 10, 11, 12. Cant. 3. 10. Isa. 40. 3.
which End of the world is now upon us.

Our Way to it, is most Clear.
And thus (in our poor measure!) having cleared (or rather the Lord for us) by
a Light above us, sweetly lead us (as by the hand) through these Objections,
(we hope to the Satisfaction and contentment of many an honest heart!) which
Satan would have laid, to have stumbled the Weak and blockt up the Way. Now
what Remains? (brethren!) what remains? but that every one who is of a
willing heart! and Separate from the Defilements of these DAYS! do without
Delay in their several Cities and Countries set upon this WORK! and present
his Offering (be it but a little Goats-haire!) to this Tabernacle-service,
(Exodus 35. 21, 26. And All the Women whose heart stird them up spun Goatshaire.
v. 29. Every man and every Woman whose heart made them willing to bring for ALL
MANNER OF WORK, not for one sort of Work only.) Wherefore stop here a little,
(Reader!) to Remember To the Reader and his conscience.
or Revise what has been said upon this Subject! Read them over again, and yet
again! and then say, Are they Truths or no? Are they Arguments or not? Do the
Motives move? Are the Grounds good any of them? What say thou? Is it Duty to
UNITE or not? and is it not of flat Necessity? If thou say NO! Certainly thou
contradictest thine own conscience, but if YEA! then weigh but our words, with
the same Affections and Yearnings of Bowels over the Blood! Wounds! Shreds!
and Deaths! and Dust of poor (unpittied) SION, (which some think incurable!)
that they are SENT OUT unto you! (though some of them may be deemed Weak! some
Dubious! Unseasonable and Unacceptable it may be; yet) sure we are, so much
has been said (and might be) to the Proof, Profit, Verity, Excellency,
Expectation, Promise, Privileges, Nature, Nobility, and Necessity of this Work
(at this juncture of time too!) as may leave you (and others) that will reject
it, one Day Speechless and pale for it! when they shall find it was neither
Wisdom nor Grace! Comfort nor Counsel! Conscience nor Kindness! (to Christ
nor his Saints!) no nor yet Good manners, to draw back or Demur upon such a
SOLEMN INVITATION as this is, (for the Gathering the Scattered, Uniting the
Divided, and Indearing the United, etc.) from the Quick and the Dead!

THE INVITATION.
The Invita^ion to all the godly People in the three Nat^ons.
WHerefore, If there be (yet) left alive any true Grace in the hearts of
Professors, any true sense of the Cross, Death, and Blood of Christ! or of
the Cries, Blood, Ashes, Bones, and Murders of the Martyrs! Any Smart in the
heart for SIONS Deaths, Dangers, Gashes and Wounds given her by her Enemies New
and Old in these Nations! Also by the Great Divisions, Rents, Controversies,
Envyings, and Heart burnings amongst BRETHREN of the same Faith, Hope, and
Principles of Grace and Kingdom of our Lord Jesus! If (as the Apostle says in
this matter, Phil. 2. 1, 2.) there be with you anyconsolation in Christ, any
comfort of Love (left*) if any Fellowship of the Spirit, if any Bowels and
Mercies! If your souls be sensibly touched with the Dishonor of God, and
Christ! with the Death of his Cause! the Dispersion of his Saints! the Case of
the Jews! and the Promise of the Gentiles; and if ye have not sinned and
consumed away all the Fear of God, and Feeling of his heavy Hand upon us! but
that yet there is a Longing in you after these Things, and a Hungring (with
hearty and pure affections) after the Day of Christ! and HIM alone to be
Exalted, and his NAME above every Name. If it wound you to the Quick (and your
heart be melted down with tears and sighs) to hear so KILLING Cutting
Blasphemies, as are (every day) cast upon the Pure SPIRIT of God, KINGDOM
PRINCIPLES and Professors of our Lord Jesus! And if ye unfainedly (without
Courtly Complements) do desire to be Faithful to God, to Christ, to his
Spirit, his Truth, his Testimony, his Kingly Interest, and KINGDOM SEERVICE!
in such a Dismal Day of Rebuke, Blasphemy, Division, and Apostasy as this is!
or would be Undefiled and freed from the snares and evils of these Adulterate
times! If any Value be had of Oaths or Engagements! of Tears, Blood, and
Prayers! or the Promises, Privileges, and Practices of the Gospel! and if any
true endeavor and sincerity be left to Act for, and find out the Light, the
Liberty of the GOSPEL OF THE KINGDOM, and a clear PATH for every one without
offense to one another (and with a sweet contentment, Peace, Union, Love and
good Order) to walk in, after ALL these Confusions, Combustions, thick
darknesses, and Loss upon us.

The Exhortation grounded.
O then let us without fail, or further let, hindrance, or Excuse, for one
Moment, UNITE as ONE MAN, in All our Quarters and Habitations of these three
Nations. And (as we shall be able to give up our Accounts with comfort at the
Coming of our KING JESUS to perfect this his Blessed work (begun by his Word
and Spirit) 2 These. 2. 1. at the GREAT GATHERING TOGETHER of All.) Let us
gladly accept this INVITATION of Uniting, and Reviving PHILADELPHIA, (of what
Form and judgment soever we be) and take the very Next Oppertunity unto it:
Knowing how Amiable, Desirable, and indeed Practicable it is now (through
grace) made amongst us, and as it were THE MATTER pointed at by the Finger of
God himself unto us, in and by All these trying, tearing, and Mount-Perazim
Dispensations, (which we have been Exercised under of late years, Isa. 28. 21.)
Seeing not only so much Comfort, and Christian Benefit to All; But even our
Ability, Stability, Liveliness, Patience in tribulation, conquest over
temptations, vigor of love, Quickening Spirit, and power of Grace and
Godliness, Readiness of Obedience, union of affections, Resolution and
joynt-motion of Actions, for Christ and his Kingdom; yea and the very BEING of
the Churches of Christ, and Religion it self seems so much to depend upon it.

The wonderful evils of these Times amongst Professors make us look for
little from some.
Notwithstanding all that has been said; When we consider what the Day is,
that we live in! how full of Unbelief! Ignorance, Impudence! Apostasy!
Contention! Covetuousnesse! and Persecution of the power and Purity of
godliness! Selfe-seeking! and all the sins of the LAST TIMES mentioned, 2 Timothy
3. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6. and 1 Tims 4 12. 2 Pet. 2. 12. of which our Savior has
foretold us, Mat. 24. we must confess then, We must expect as little fruit or
effect from some, (and those it may be Eminent Professors too) as if we spoke
to, and powered our tears and prayers upon Posts, Pillars! Stones, LUMPS of
earth! Bars of Iron! Rocks and Flints! or at best Brute Beasts! For as Luke.
18. 8. Nevertheless when the Son of man comes, shall he find faith on the
earth? That is, say some when he comes with his Recovering Grace, and Spirit,
(when the times of Restitution begin! and of Refreshing first enter in; Acts 3.
19. 21. that is, at the time of the END!) when he comes with a recovering and a
Restoring of us, into the FIRST STATE, that he put HIS Saints into! and with
the DISCOVERIES, and tenders of a more excellent WAY, and Communion of Saints,
then we are in! Shall he then find FAITH amongst men! to believe him? to
receive him at that day? Will it then be said again? (as at the first) John 1.
11, 12. He came unto his own, and his own received him not, but as many as
received him, to them gave he the Right or Who they are that will not accept
this Call!
Privilege. There be Many sorts that will not receive him, in this tender of
Recovering grace; As the Proud; 1 Cor. 1. 26. So the Ignorant! John 20. 9, 10.
the selfe-Wise; the disputer of this world; the striver about words and vain
questions; the worldly and selfe-seeking, Professors; Hag. 12. 4. and the
times-servers; and the envious man, Acts 13. 4, 5. the Magnifyer of Forms, or
persons* one above, and against another: the Unbeliever and diffident; the
Fearful and amazed, or that are absolutely at a LOSS; the heart that is full
of any Lust to be satisfied! With the pride of life! and of gifts! and parts!
and the selfe-Justifier! and exalter! the men that are given up to strong
delusions; and to believe lies! and those that have somewhat else to set up
instead! (or elfe an Invention, to put aside this:) All these will keep off
from (if not oppose) this hopeful and blessed work, of UNITING, And we do
expect it harder, to reduce one Erroneous and rivetted, then to Reform (or
convert) an open sinner! but as one says, If one should defer his studies of
any Art, or Science, till the writers (and Professors thereof did fully and
unitedly consent! If one should vow, not to come at London, till All the clocks
do strike together! (so If one should stay from this Duty till All that seem
and say they are agreed about it!) he may stay long enough and never come to it
at last.

The benefit of them that accept this Call! and Invitation with the First!
Therefore for those Dear and precious ones that do with the FIRST, begin to
rattle by this Word of Prophecy!) Ezekiel. 37. Bone to bone, and sinnew to sinnew!
(and are gathering strength together with us in this work! that stagger not at
the promise through unbeleese (no more then Abraham, did, Romans 4. 18, 19, Who
considered not this body, now DEAD, when he was about a hundred years old nor
yet the deadness of Sarah's womb: Not considering (so as to stagger) the
deadness of others, nor as yet of our own hearts (knowing he is faithful
that has promised, Heb. 10. 24. and therefore holding fast without WAVERING!)
These, these shall drink of the brooks that are in the WAY, Psalm. 110. 7. and
butter and honey shall they eat. Isa. 7. 22. (the Emannell Food, verse. 15.)
that they may know how to choose the good and refuse the evil, Yea, and (as
Mat. 13. 15, 16, 17. When Others ears are dull of hearing, their eyes closed,
and hearts grown gross (and foggy with the flesh! shall it be said,) But
blessed are your eyes for they see* and your ears for they hear! Verily! I
say unto you, many Prophets, and righteous men have delivered to see those
things, which ye see, and have not seen them, and to hear those things which
ye hear and have not heard them.

Our Cries, and Prayers.
Wherefore our strong cries, and struggling prayers, to the God of the Primitive
Saints and Churches! are for YOU! and your spiritual growth (with All the
increasings of God!) that ye may be out of your several heaps, and Forms so
full of confusion! (whither Presbyterean Independent, Baptized, Sabbat. Seekers
or others* that are Saints by calling (and hold the foundation with us and
would be orderly jointed) gathered: knit, and Joynted. And All the whole
building FITLY FRAMED, and growing up together, into ONE TEMPLE! and one
Tabernacle, ONE Vine, ONE Kingdom, and City COMPACT, An habitation for the
Lord through the Spirit, Ephesians. 2. 21, 22 ifit were but to make the ways of
Godliness, more Amiable, desirable! delectable! profitable! safe! and sweet
unto us so UNITED! But if after all this, others can find in their (hard)
hearts to stand off from us; and withstand so hopeful, and so noble, and so
necessary! an ENTRANCE! so holy, so sweet! and so good, a MOTION! so powerful,
and so yearning an INVITATION! from Our full purpose of Heart; if, the Lord
help us.
Christ and his Spirit!) Sion, and Saints; ALIVE, and DEAD! or so natural, and
indeed unavoidable a Duty, as this is! We must leave it at their DOOR, from
this Day, forward! (with All the Evils that shall ensue from the neglect
hereof;) and them (Also) to that Day of Christ! that (in despite of all
opposers) shall perfect this Work! and raise up all the crumbs, shreds, and
dust of Sion into ONE! and yet for our parts (blessing our God, for opening our
eyes, and helping us hitherto, to make an Essay we are (we hope in his grace;)
Resolved, as bound in duty (and clearly satisfied every one of us) and as God
shall enable us to proceed* and wait upon him in this way; (for the Great
promise and the Great coming!) as confirmed in the Faith, and confident in the
Lord, and assured (in his might and grace) that he will own us eminently and
visibly in, as in his own way, and Will* as in the present WORK for Christ;
and his Kingdom (which consists of all these subjects!) to the praise of that
rich grace that has brought us together. And if Any do question it (or say
with Nathaniel, John 1. 46.) Can any good come out of Nazareth? we need say no
more but COME and SEE!

The Conclusion, To all our Brethren, and Country men.
But to conclude this SOLEMN CALL, to all the Scattered ones in the three
Nations, in so humble, loving, and indeared Faithfulness to you (Our Brethren,
and Countrymen) having stammered out a Few of our thoughts of heart!) What can
We SAY or SIGH more in this this Matter? but leave our tears, prayers, and
invitations (unto it) at your Feet, that the Lord who has chosen Jerusalem;
would affect and move your hearts, to welcome it, that comes unto you in the
Name of the Lord! Luke 19. 38.

A Remembrance.
OREMEMBER how much the NAME of God, and the very BEING of Religion, is in
danger and concerned in these Divisions! Remember the Cross and wounds of
Christ, which are set afresh bleeding, by these Divisions, and Dispersions,
Remember the Comfortable state of poor SION! Sick at the very heart! and ready
to dye; Oh Remember! what a Name ye once have had in this Nation, for
profession and the Power of Godliness! and now how it stinkes, and what a
SHAME ye are, in all the world! a SCORN and a by word! a hissing and
Astonishment even to very Heathens!

A Remembrance*
O Remember! not only how sew are converted, but ah! alas! how many are
confirmed; in their wicked and false Ways till this UNITING be) even to the
Papists; Turks, Atheists, and profane ones! by the Abominations of Professors
in England! what a HEAD, and HEART, this last and lamentable APOSTASY has
hereby; and what! O what! guilt of blood is brought upon these Nations!
Remember besides the Confusion of Tongues; and Cup of Babylon, which is given
most to drink of! And whereby so many are fox't and enchanted that they do
they know not what! And what Mercinary (divelish) and politic principles are
assumed by Professors and Preachers at this day! and what Persecution and
Oppressions are upon Consciences! O Remember! how the Churches are some of them
defiled! Growth of grace hindered; Worship polluted! the fences of Separation
pulled np! the tender grapes spoiled! Members, and Teachers rent, and torn
from us! and imprisoned at pleasure! And yet Remember, whilst there is life
there is hope! and O how wonderfully God has appeared, Prayers have been
answered? Brethren delivered? Religion revived! promises and engagements
performed? the Kingdom of Christ exilted! and poor sinking Zion saved, and
God known to be their God even in the MIDST OF HIS PEOPLE, when they were
thus UNITED!

A Challenge*
But now, If so be your Consciences be seared! your senses stopped! your
Foreheads brazened! and your hearts hardened! that nothing will move you,
(neither in heaven nor on earth, neither the LIVE, nor the GRAVE! if you care
not what become of the Great name of God! the Cause of Christ! his Gospel, his
Kingdom* his Spirit, his Churches, his Servants, his word and Ordinances in
the purity of them! If you think it not matter to see your Brethrens blood in
the streets, and their bodies broyling and frying at the stake (again) and
think that Savor is the best, and that smoke the sweetest! If ye dare stand
still, and look on the other side, (Obad. 7. 11, 12.) in this day of strong,
and TWISTED CONFEDERACY, and of casting Lots upon Jerusalem, and of violence
done to Jacob! and of your Brethrens calamity, without Remorse or Moving. If ye
dare to crucify Christ afresh, and tread his BLOOD under foot, to cast out his
Kingdom from amongst you, and kill the hopes and expectations, ye have had
(and we yet have) of HIS DAY, and REIGN! If ye dare to quit the Ground,
whereon ye have powered out so many tears, prayers, streams of blood, and loud
Appeals, into the ears and heart of Heaven! And dare to faint before the Answer
come! If ye dare to keep up (or not cast out) the Bone of contention, and the
Reproach upon the Ways of God, by suffering the world or Any (without Remorse)
to brand it for Dissembling, Delusion, most Hideous Hypocrisy, mear
State Policy, and Baseness (by the occasions lately given them) and will do
nothing for the Recovery of them! Or if ye dare to be at Defiance with the
Judgments of the Lord, that are at hand. And to contemn (and be careless of)
Christ, and his second coming, and can venture the CURSE thereof, so as not to
be in a posture meet to receive him when he comes! If ye dare to stand at a
distance from one another, and dare abandon conscience, and the communion of
Saints! If ye dare deny the Power for the Form, or oppose it with the Form!
And dare Answer to the most high God, for all the injuries that shall befall
SION, or the People of God after this! through the Divisions, Rents, and
confusions, and the Neglect of this great (indubitable) and indispensible Duty
of UNITING! Or if ye dare to take upon you and yours, the guilt of all the sins
of these times, and the evils of all these Heart-burnings, hatred, Envies,
Malice, Persecutions, and oppositions, the present Work, Truth, and Saints of
Christ meet with! And dare slight, quench, resist, or despite the Holy Ghost,
having so little of the Fear of the true and dreadful God, and dreadful day,
in your hearts, or eyes! O if you dare or can do All these things, and
wilfully reject this Grace, or this Errand unto you, and from hence forward
say, Pray, have me EXCVSED, or I cannot come! I have some other business!
Then, then tremble and Fear before the Lord, Least all the EVILS (that arise
from the Neglect hereof) do lie at your doors* And we doubt not but the voice
of JEHOVAH (or the Lord) himself will ere long speak so Roaringly out of SION,
Joel 3. 16. and Rousingly by his DISPENSATIONS! as will make your hearts to
Ache! and your ears to tingle, your knees to tremble! and joints to smite! and
your tongues to say, O WHAT WRETCHES! what wretches were we! that we durst have
been so bold, and resolved to resist! yea persist in this Disobedience! and
Despite to so Great and Good a Work! and all this that we might loll on in
our security, and stupidity!

On the contrary, an Expostulation.
But on the Contrary; If conscience be awakened, understanding enlightened, and
by the word (and otherwise) ye be convinced, that this is your Work. If your
hearts be affected, your Affections hereby whetted, and your Spirits Moved,
(with us) at the Sobs, sighs and groans, of poor Sion, (whom no man lays to
heart as he ought!) If you have but Rags for her wounds, Balsome for her sores,
Handkerchiefs for her tears, Cordialls for her Faintings! If ye have any
Pantings of heart, Longings of soul, and Workings of spirit, after Christ, the
Redemption of his people, the Reign of his Saints, and the Service of his
Kingdom! If any love unto his Government and Dominion! If any Power of
Godliness! If any purity of holiness! If any Separating from, and feelingly
mourning over the horrid Idols and Evils of these times! If any fervent
Desires, and Well-wishes to Sion in the WHOLE! and not to rend, or pull her a
pieces in PARTIES! Then we pray and beseech you to Awake! Arise! and Rouse up
upon your feet in this Work without delay! (whether in Churches or out;) and
let us rather choose to be buried together in Ashes, then be as we are! Else
what can keep out the Incursions of Enemies and the inundation of temptations,
Else what will stop up the force! and Source of Last! Pride, Ambition;
Covetuousnesse, and Sins that has broken in so violently upon the CHURCHES! Or
what can stay the Spirit of Persecution; or Oppression upon our Consciences!
from making us Absolute Slaves; and moulding us up to the Will of MAN. Or elfe
hanging, heading, chopping, and burning our Bodies to Ashes if we refuse;) What
else can keep out the crafty Combination that is made against us, from
destroying us! Else what can keep the kernel in the shell, (the power of
Religion in the Form (yea in all Forms) and Brotherly love ALIVE, amongst us
but this! And what else can repress and repel the USURPING POWER from entering
a foot (if not a head) amongst us: on purpose to keep out the Power, and
Prerogative of Christ, and how else shall we be raised out of that Deadness,
Flatnesse, Emptiness, Coldness, and miserable Slumbring most Professors are
rock't into! Else what can cure, or comfort ZION! if her members that have been
so miserably racked a sunder, be not put into JOINT and order and EXERCISE
again! Else what course can be taken to suppress that eager? Growing, and
Greedy Spirit of devouring one another; For Forms, judgments, or partial
Oppinions! Else what can impede that dangerous progress, and promoting of
parties, and factions, venting, and ventilating, their private and ambiguous
thoughts? (whose Religion lies most in their Opinions and Parties) and how can
we avoid those Busy Disputers? that lay out their time? their strength? their
zeal? their knowledge? their heat? and their Interest? and their very hearts,
about doubtful Disputations, Romans 14. 1. needless Questions that gender
strifes, 1 Timothy 2* 23. 1 Timothy 6. 3. 5. to the distraction of souls?
disturbance of Saints? decay of true grace? and heavenly life, Whiles the WHOLE
BODY becomes distempered, and disordered; yea, and languishing with such
unnatural heats; or hecticke Fevers? What course can be taken to Recover
hundreds out of the Snares of Satan? soul imprisonments of spirits, of Forms?
and else what! what will become of the deepest heart groans, And grave
groans! Faith, Prayers, and Patience of the choicest* Saints that ever the
earth bore! that have so (passionately!) longed to see such a Day! Else how is
it possible to avoid those present Noises among Professors (in and out of
CHURCHES, Of sonnding brass, and tinkling Cymballs? Else what? ah what can we
expect but the continuance and and Increase of Confusions? Darkness?
Disorders? Dispensations? Misunderstandings? and sufferings? so as All that we
look upon, for help shall fail us! and for helpers, and Deliverers shall
prove miserable comforters at last? not being able to help us, or themselves
but passing by us, and leave us bleeding? But in a word! What else is, or can,
be our Next work (for all at once) for GOD! for CHRIST! for SAINTS for MEN,
for the WHOLE NATION! and for the WHOLE CREATION? Or what can we do, or
capacity be in for any thing? or (indeed) Deliverance expect before THIS? for
as 2 Cor. 10. 6 having in a readynesse to revenge all disobedience, when your
OBEDIENCE is fulfilled. But let that be done FIRST and the Rest follows, as
the Consequent does the Antecedent. And by this means, we shall have as Free!
Full! and Natural an Access to the things we seek for! as our hearts can
desire!

But now we leave you (oh Brethren and friends of Sion of ALL SORTS!) and the
CALL to you (from a poor shrub, or BURNING BUSH! to betake our selves upon our
bended knees, again, and again! And to beg of God for you, who shall engage or
PERSUADE JAPHETH to dwell in the tents of Shem, that Canaan may be his servant)
to give (you the GRACE, to make an immediate ESSAY upon this Duty, as Psalm. 48.
12, 13. Walk about Zion round about her, tell the Towers thereof, mark ye
well her Bulwarks, Consider her Palaces that ye may tell it to the Generation
that Follows.

Leaving with you these Sobs! and Tears! of Sion! who has layn so long in
Brine and Blood!

The 27. day of the 7 month, 1657.
AGREED to by this BODY UNITED, (and WAITING as at Jerusalem) that according to
Acts 1. 15. An hundred and twenty of our Names be Subscribed, and Sent out with
a SOLEMN INVITATION to this UNITING WORK, throughout the three Nations, in the
NAME of our LORD JESUS (who is Coming!) and of the REST of this BODY UNITED, in
and about this City of London. Who have (thorough Grace!) made some little
ENTRANCE into so Great! so Hopeful! and so Necessary a WORK! that we may be
put (together) into a better Capacity for his COMING, and KINGDOM, in every
ADMINISTRATION thereof. Even so, Amen.

Isa. 49. 17. Thy Children shall make have! (Then) Thy Destroyers and them that
laid thee wast shall go forth of thee.
EDward Edmonds. Robert Clark. Nicholas Middleton. Thomas Broughton. Richard
Jones. Henry Chomley. John Whight. Thomas Dowsde. Richard Tyler. John Tyrrel.
John Allen. James Mallery. James Frances. Walter Harding. James Loud. Jon:
Merrals. S: Mast. William Russel. Frances Good. John Turner. Walter Rand. James
Wilkins. John Ward. Solomon Webster. R. Brimsal. George Johnson. Edward
Broomer. Thomas Ardree. Henry Hedges. Edw: Graves. Edmund Wood. Robert
Wingreen. John Jealous. J. Nessonby. Richard Smith. Thomas Atwood. M: Pace.
John Wandall. Daniel Rand. Samuel Gossener. John King. Evan Hewes. Edward
Glayes. Miles Cottis. E. Burges. Gregory Kirby. John Raiment. Robert Rogers.
Gilbert Lockington. M. Stowers. Thomas Crundal. John Thaire. Joseph West.
Thomas Coats. S. Freeland. Miles Coats. John Robon. Christopher Craile. K.
Johnson. Edward Squire. James Grippe. John Thomson. John Rogers. Clement
Plomsted. H: White. Thomas More. Nathaniel Bunch. Henry Martin. Anthony Aires.
Matthew Grigson. A: Curtis. Thomas Ambler. John Crump. Richard Bird. John
Massy. Francis Goram. Thomas Moreton. John Clement. William Elwood. S. Green.
S. Rowley. Robert Simmons. James Gressam. Robert Knight. S. Lockinton. William
Chandler. John Babycome. E. Chambers. George Hancock. James Doeman. Simon
Smith. A. Prichard. John Gardner. Joseph Jefferies. Edward Hewson. Joseph
Graves. John Bingel. E. Sparks. Edward Heart. Francis Simson. Francis Crane. E.
Grippe. Richard Groeme. Francis Moon. E. Thurland. S. Frances. John Crony. E.
Webster. Richard Hodges. Michael Dunwell. John Ireland. E. Rookesby. Thomas
Tailor. H. Pirkins. John Loveday. Robert Massy. A. Rawlings. Edward Bowman.
Walter Simmons. Jonathan Renolds, etc.


Acts 1. 15. The number of Names together were about 120.
SInce this has been in the Press (with some Delay,) we have from Several
Parts in the East, South, and North of this NATION, been already (and
unexpectedly!) sent unto, to Encourage and Provoke us in this WORK and WAY,
according to the PROPOSALLS; and We should gladly hear from Others.

There be Errata's which the Reader may easily recover and Correct in his own
Understanding, as p. 59. l. 21. r. desired to see, l. 30. r. orderly joined, p.
60. l. 38. r. Uncomfortable, etc.

FINIS.

