THE HUMBLE PETITION Of the Lords and Commons assembled in Parliament unto his
Majesty (with the Reasons moving them, to advise his Majesty) to decline his
intended Journey into Ireland:

Sent to York by the Earl of Stamford, Sir John Culpepper Knight, Chancellor
of the Exchequer, and Anthony Hungerford Esquire.

Who presented the same to his Majesty at York, on Monday last, being the 18
day of April, 1642.

And ordered to be printed and published by the Commons House of Parliament.

Die Veneris 22 of April. H. Elsyng Cler. Parl. D. Com.

LONDON, Printed by A.N. for John Franck, 1642.

May it please your Majesty,
YOur Majesty's most loyal, and faithful Subjects, the Lords and Commons in
Parliament have duly considered the Message received from your Majesty,
concerning your purpose of going into Ireland in your own person to prosecute
the war there with the bodies of your English Subjects levied, transported,
and mayntained at their charge, which you are pleased to propound to us, not as
a matter wherein your Majesty desires the advice of your Parliament, but as
already firmly resolved on, and forthwith to be put in execution, by granting
out Commissions for the levying of two thousand foot, and two hundred Horse for
a Guard for your person when you shall come into that Kingdom, wherein we
cannot choose but withal reverence and humility to your Majesty, observe that
you have declined your great Council the Parliament, and varied from the
usual course of your Royal Predecessors, that a business of so great
importance concerning the peace and safety of all your Subjects, and wherein
they have a special interest by your Majesty's promise, and by those great
sums which they have disbursed, and for which they stand engaged should be
concluded and undertaken without their advice, whereupon we hold it our duty to
declare, that if at this time your Majesty shall go into Ireland, you will
very much endanger the safety of your Royal Person and Kingdoms, and of all
other States professing the Protestant Religion in Christendom, and make way
to that cruel, and bloody Design of the Papists every where to root out and
destroy the Reformed Religion as the Irish Papists have in a great part already
effected in that Kingdom and in all likelihood would quickly be attempted in
other places, if the consideration of the strength and union of the two Nations
of England and Scotland, did not much hinder, and discourage the execution of
any such design, and that we may manifest to your Majesty, the danger and
misery, which such a journey and enterprise would procure we present to your
Majesty the Reasons of this our humble opinion, and advice.

1 YOur Royal person will be subject not only to the casualty of war, but
to secret practices, and conspiracies especially your Majesty continuing your
profession to mayntaine the Protestant Religion in that Kingdom which the
Papists are generally bound by their vow to extirpate.

2 It will exceedingly encourage the Rebels who do generally profess, and
declare that your Majesty does favor and allow their proceedings, and this
insurrection was undertaken by the warrant of your Commission, and it will make
good their expectation of great advantage by your Majesty's presence at this
time of so much distraction in this Kingdom, whereby they may hope we shall be
disabled to supply the war there, especially there appearing less necessity
of your Majesty's Journey at this time, by reason of the manifold successes
which God has given against them.

3. It will much hinder and impair the means, whereby this war is to be
supported, and will increase the charge of it, and in both these respects, make
it more insupportable to your Subjects: and this we can confidently affirm,
because many of the Adventurers who have already subscribed, do upon the
knowledge of your Majesty's Intentions, declare their resolutions, not to pay
in their money, and others very willing to have subscribed, do now profess
the contrary.

4. Your Majesty's absence must necessarily very much interrupt the proceedings
of Parliament, and deprive your Subjects of the benefit of those further Acts
of Grace, and Justice which we shall humbly expect from your Majesty for the
establishing of perfect union, and mutual confidence betwixt your Majesty and
your People, and procuring and confirming the prosperity and happiness of both.

5. It will exceedingly increase the jealousies and fears of your people, and
render the doubts of your Subjects more probable, of some force intended by
some evil counsels near your Majesty, in opposition to the Parliament, and
favor of the malignant party of the Kingdom.

6. It will bereave your Parliament of that advantage, whereby they were
induced to undertake this war upon your Majesty's promise, that it should be
managed by their advice, which cannot be done, if your Majesty contrary to
their Counsel shall undertake to order and govern it in your own Person.

Upon which and diverse other reasons we have resolved by the full and
concurring agreement of both Houses, that we cannot with the duty which
belongs to us, consent to any Levyes, or raising of Soldiers to be made by
your Majesty, for this your intended expedition into Ireland, or to the payment
of any Army or Soldiers there, but such as shall be employed and governed
according to our advice and direction, and that if such Levyes shall be made by
any Commission of your Majesty, not agreed to by both Houses of Parliament, we
shall be forced to interpret the same to be raised to the terror of your
people, and disturbance of the public peace, and hold our selves bound by the
Laws of the Kingdom, to apply the authority of Parliament to suppress the
same.

And we do further most humbly declare, that if your Majesty shall by ill
counsel, be persuaded to go contrary to this advice of your Parliament (which
we hope your Majesty will not, We do not in that case hold our selves bound to
submit to any Commissioners, which your Majesty shall choose, but do resolve
to preserve and govern the Kingdom by the counsel and advice of Parliament
for your Majesty and your Posterity according to Allegiance, and the Law of
the Land.

Wherefore we most humbly pray, and advise your Majesty, to desist from this
your intended passage into Ireland, and from all preparation of men and Arms
tending thereunto, and to leave the managing of that war to your Parliament,
according to your Majesty's promise made unto us and your Royal Commission
granted under your great Seal of England, by advise of both Houses, in
prosecution whereof, by Gods blessing we have made a prosperous entrance by
many defeats of the Rebels, whereby they are much weakened and dis-heartened,
and have no probable means of subsistence, if our proceedings shall not be
interrupted by this interposition of your Majesty's J urney, but that we may
hope upon good grounds, that within a short time, without hazard of your
Majesty's person, and so much dangerous confusion to your Kingdoms, which must
needs ensue if you should proceed in this resolution: We shall be enabled fully
to vindicate your Majesty's right and authority in that Kingdom, and punish
those horrible and outrageous cruelties which have bin committed in the
murdering, and spoiling so many of your Subjects, and bring that Realm to
such a Condition as may be much for the advantage of your Majesty, and this
Crown, the honor of your government and contentment of your people, for the
better, and more speedy effecting whereof we do again renew our humble
desires of your return to your Parliament. And that you will please to reject
all Counsels, and apprehensions which may any way derogate from that
faithfulness, and Allegiance which in truth and sincerity we have always
borne, and professed to your Majesty, and shall ever make good to the uttermost
with our lives and fortunes.

Die veneris 22. of April 1642.
It is this day Ordered by the Commons House of Parliament, that this Petition
shall be forthwith published in Print.

H. Elsyng. Cler. Parl. D. Com.


