A MESSAGE FROM Both Houses of Parliament, Sent to the King and Queens
Majesty's, Touching certain Letters lately intercepted, and (as it may be
conjectured,) sent from the Lord Digby, to the Queens Majesty.

Whereunto is added the Answer OF Don Allonso de Cardenas THE Spanish
Ambassador, Resident here in England, to the late Message sent to Him from both
the said Houses, Touching the Information given them of the Ships at Dunkerk,
for the aid of the Rebels in Ireland.

Febr. 21. London, Printed for Joseph Hunscott. 1641.

Most gracious Sovereign,
YOur Majesty's most Loyal and faithful Subjects, the Lords and Commons in
Parliament, have received Your Message of the 16. of this instant February,
sent at the instance of the Queens Majesty. And upon consideration thereof, to
our great joy and content, find therein clear expressions of Grace and Favor,
from both Your Majesty's for which we return our most humble thanks, and have
here withal sent the Transcript of that Letter required by Your Majesty, as
likewise of two other Letters directed to M. Secretary Nicholas, and Sir Jews
Dives, all which were brought to us under one cover indorced to M. Secretary,
with Information, that they were written by the Lord Digby; who being a person
fled from the Justice of Parliament, and one who had given many evidences of
the dis-affection to the public good; we conceived it necessary to open the
two former, and finding sundry expressions in them full of Asperitie and
Malignitie to the Parliament. We thought it very probable, That the like may be
contained in that to Her Majesty; and that it would be dishonorable to Her
Majesty, and dangerous for the Kingdom if it should not be opened, wherein we
were no whit deceived as Your Majesty may well perceive by the Contents thereof.

And although we cannot but be very sensible of the great dishonor therein
done to Your Majesty's, and the malicious endeavors of fomenting and
increasing the jealousy betwixt Your Majesty and Your people. Yet we are far
from reflecting any thing upon the Queen, or expecting any satisfaction from
Her Majesty; But impute all to the bold and envenomed spirit of the man; Only
we most earnestly beseech Your Majesty to persuade the Queen, that She will not
vouchsafe any countenance to, or correspondency with the Lord Digby or any
other of the fugative or Traitors whose offenses now depend under the
examination and judgment of Parliament, which we assure our selves will be
very effectual to further the removal of all Jealousies and discontents
betwixt Your Majesty and Your people, and the settling the great Affairs of Your
Majesty, and the Kingdom, in an assured State and condition of Honor, safety,
and prosperity.

The Spanish Ambassadors Answer to the Message from a Committee of both Houses
of Parliament.
THe Lord Ambassador of Spain, Don Allanso de Cardenas having understood what
the Lord Fielding, of the Lords House, and Sir Thomas Barrington Baronet, and
Sir John Holland Baronet of the House of Commons, All three Commissaries from
the Parliament, have said in behalf of both Houses, concerning the
advertisement given them, that in the Haven of Dunkerk there were certain Ships
laded with Ammunition, ready to take sail, intended for the relief of the
Rebels of Ireland, which they hold contrary to the Articles of Peace between
the two Crowns. And that they required he should send to Dunkerk, and all other
His Majesty's Dominions, And that he should write unto the King His Master to
make stay of those and all such Ships, as may carry supply of Powder, Victuals,
Money, or any other aid to His Majesty's Subjects, that at this present are in
Rebellion in Ireland; because otherwise it would be understood to be a breach
of the Treaties between the two Crowns, and so resented by the Parliament. The
said Ambassador of Spain answered, That besides the understanding, which he
has of the King His Masters mind and intention to conserve the friendship
which he professes with His Majesty of great Britain, he has express and
most particular notice, that the Ships which are now in Dunkerk Haven laded
with Soldiers and Ammunition and ready to sail, neither are for Ireland, nor
were they provided for any such purpose, And that this notice was given him by
Don Francisco de Melo Earl of Assumar, Governor and Captain General of the
States of Flaunders, whom the resident of His Majesty of great Britain, that
assists in Brussels, assured that he is fully satisfied of their not going for
Ireland, as is also His King, who signified so much unto him in a Letter, in
which he likewise commanded him to thank the said Don Francisco de Melo, for
denying leave, which certain Irish serving in those States, had asked to return
to their Country, which he denied; to avoid all suspicion, Notwithstanding
their end for asking it, was unknown. The same assurance did the same
Ambassador give unto the Commissaries aforesaid of the Parliament, concerning
the mentioned Ships in Dunkerk laden with Ammunition, and Soldiers, that they
are not for Ireland; And he proffered to write to Dunkerk, and all other Parts
of Flaunders and Dominions of the King His Master; and particularly to his
Catholic Majesty, to the end, That the observance of the Articles of peace,
which hitherto have been so religiously observed of the King His Masters part,
and His Subjects may be continued; and that new and strait Orders be given,
That no Subject of his Catholic Majesty, shall dare violate them, sending any
kind of aids to foster the insurrection in Ireland, under pain of the
punishment imposed upon the transgressors. And the said Ambassador to manifest
the sincerity of his heart, proffered to solicit it with the readiest and most
forcible means that lay in his power, hoping (as in reason he should,) that his
Majesty of great Britany, and the Parliament, will for their part punctually
observe the same in the aforesaid conformity toward the Rebels of the King his
Master, not permitting any kinds of succor or assistance in whatsoever
quality to be afforded them, from these Kingdoms. Renewing for this effect all
requisite Orders unto the Officers and Ports of the said Kingdoms, chastising
the transgressors of what is settled in (...) Peace, with the punishments
contained in (...) Articles of it; that so by reciprocal observan^^^ the good
correspondency, which is at this p^^sent betwixt these two Crowns of Spain a^^
England, may be assuredly maintained.

FINIS.

