INSTRVCTIONS Agreed on by a COMMITTEE Of the Lords and Commons for the
Committee for Sequestration of Delinquents estates.

Also An Order of the Commons Assembled in Parliament, concerning persons that
shall come from Oxford or any part of the KINGS army to London, without warrant
from both Houses of Parliament, or from his Excellency the Earl of Essex,
shall be apprehended as Spies, and proceeded against according to the rules of
War.

Ordered by the Commons Assembled in Parliament, That this be forthwith Printed
and published.

Hen: Elsynge Cler. Parl. D. Com.



London, Printed for Edw. Husbands, and are to be sold at his shop in the
middle Temple. April 11. 1643.

Instructions for the Committee for Sequestration of Delinquents Estates.
1. YOu are to use your best care and diligence for the speedy execution of the
Ordinance here with sent you for Sequestration of Delinquents Estates, as being
a matter of great necessity and importance, for the subsistence of the Army
raised by the Parlirment, and great affairs of the Commonwealth. 2. You are to
cause the same Ordinance, and the other Order for restraining of the Tenants
and others from paying their Rents, and other dues to the said Delinquents, to
be forthwith published in all Markets, and other convenient places within your
several Counties and Divisions. 3. You are to meet, and divide your selves
into several limits, and to appoint some times and places of further meeting
as shall be most convenient, and to call before you or any two or more of you at
such meetings, all such Officers and other persons as you shall think fit, and
give them in charge the effect of the said Ordinance, and thereby, and by all
good ways and means to enquire and inform your selves of all the particulars
therein contained; and where you find any doubt concerning any person, whether
he be comprehended within the said Ordinance, you are to certify the fame to
the Committee of Lords and Commons for this service, and in the mean time to
secure the Estates of such persons, until you shall receive further
Directions. 4. Where (after these words in the Ordinance, Such as have
voluntarily contributed, or shall voluntarily contribute) these words do
follow, viz. Not being under the power of any part of the Kings Army at the
time of such contributing; you are not to understand those latter words of such
as have willingly drawn, or consented to the drawing in of any such power, or
have willingly submitted themselves thereunto. 5. You are to call before you
the several Tenants, and others persons by whom any Rents, sums of money,
debts, or other duties are owing to the said Delinquents or any of them, and
set them a day for payment thereof, and to such Tenants as shall willingly
yield conformity to the said Ordinance; you shall abate so much of their rack
Rents where the lands are set at an improved value, and not otherwise, as you
shall think fit, according to their several conditions and necessities, not
exceeding a fourth part of such improved Rents. 6. You are to seize two parts
of the estates both real and perfonall, of all papists (as they are papists)
and the whole estates of all other sorts of Delinquents mentioned in the said
Ordinance, whether they be Papists or others; and you are to understand by two
parts of Papists estates, two of their whole Lands, and two of their Goods and
personal estate in three to be divided. 7. Upon the seizure of the Goods,
Chattells, or personal estates of any the said Delinquents, you are to cause
an appraisement thereof to be made by indifferent persons and a true Inventory
thereof to be taken, and to convey the same Goods into some safe place, or
places within the County or elsewhere, there to be kept until they may
conveniently be sold; and you are to sell the same or cause them to be sold at
as great Rates as you can, with all convenient expedition, and in the Market
where conveniently it may be. 8. You have power to let all or any the Lands,
Tenements, or Hereditaments of any the said Delinquents, from year to year, to
such Tenants as you shall think fit, and for such reasonable Rents as you can
get, unless you can otherwise employ the same to better advantages. 9. You are
to appoint Collectors for the receiving of all Rents, profits, sums of money,
debts, and other duties due or owing to the said Delinquents, or any of them,
allotting the estate of any one or more of the said Delinquents, to the charge
of one or more Collector or Collectors, as shall be most convenient; and the
said Collectors are to send up the sums by them collected, together with a
schedule of their receipts and payments, (keeping a duplicate thereof) to the
Treasurers which shall be appointed by both Houses for that service, wherein
the said Collectors, or such as they shall send up the money by, are first to
attend the said Committee of Lords and Commons for their directions herein, and
to be very careful in the safe conveying of the said money. 10. Every
Collector is to have such allowance for his pains and charges as you shall
think fit, not exceeding three pence in every pound; and every one that shall
be appointed a Solicitor by the said Lords and Commons to see this Ordinance
put in execution, is to have for his charges and pains therein, fix pence in
every pound, and every other person which shall be necessarily employed in or
about the said service, is to have such allowances, as you or any two of you or
more shall think fit, and your selves are to be allowed such recompense for
your charge and pains in this service, as shall be approved of by the Committee
of Lords and Commons. 11. You are to keep books and Registers of all such
monys, receipts, profits, and other parts of the said Delinquents estates as
shall come to your hands, and of all your receipts and payments, and to be
accomptable for the same to both Houses of Parliament, or such as they shall
appoint. 12. You are to take care for the safe keeping of the Deeds, Evidences,
and Writings of the said Delinquents, and for preserving of their Houses,
Timber Trees and Fruit Trees from waste and destruction. 13. In all other
particulars concerning this business, you are to be guided and directed by the
said Ordinance, wherein you shall conceive any doubt, you are to certify the
same to the Committee of Lords and Commons for this serviee, whereupon you
shall receive such further direction in that behalf, as shall be fit.
An Order of the Commons Assembled in Parliament, concerning persons that shall
come from Oxford, or any part of the Kings army to London, without warrant from
both Houses of Parliament, or from his Excellency the Earl of ESSEX.
Die Lunae 10. April, 1643.
IT is this day Ordered by the Commons Assembled in Parliament, That whatsoever
person shall come from Oxford, or any part of the Kings Army to London, or any
parts adjacent, or to any other part of the Army under the command of the Earl
of Essex, or to any Fort or Court of Guard, kept by the authority of both
Houses of Parliament, without the warrant of both Houses of Parliament, or of
the Lord General the Earl of Essex; Shall apprehended as spies and
intelligencers, and be proceeded against according to the rules and grounds of
War. And it is further Ordered, that the like care be taken by Water, for the
apprehending of the persons aforesaid; And all Captains of Guards and Officers,
and all other persons are required, to be very diligent in apprehending the
said persons. And it is further Ordered, That this Order be printed and
published and sent to the several Courts of Guard both by water and Land.

H: Elsynge Cler. Parl. D. Com.

FINIS.

