Die Sabbathi, 24. Maii, 1645.
IT is this day Ordered by the Lords and Commons assembled in Parliament, That
a Collection be made of all well-affected persons, within the Cities of London,
Westminster, and Parishes within the Bills of Mortality, and likewise within
the County of Middlesex; the Associated Counties late of the Earl of
Manchesters Association, and the four Associated Counties late of Sir William
Wallers Association, to be employed for the relief of the poor distressed
Inhabitants of the Town of Taunton, and such of the adjacent places, to be
disposed of, as to the Committee of the West shall be thought meet and
convenient.

Jo: Brown Cleric. Parliamentorum.
H: Elsynge, Cler. Parl.D.Com.

THe Lords and Commons assembled in Parliament having thought fit, that a
Collection shall be made for the distressed people of the Town of Taunton (as
by the Ordinance now read appears:) That you may be the better quickened to
second it with a free Contribution; It is thought fit that thereunto should be
subjoyned, a brief Delineation of their pressing Miseries; They being such as
call for tenderest bowels of compassion from all that bear the name of
Christians: It is notoriously known to all the Kingdom, That the said Town has
for these two years past, endured all the calamities almost that War (the
sharpest of all outward judgments) can bring upon a people: The first of these
two years they lay groaning and fainting under that Affliction, of which the
poor oppressed Church complains, Lam. 1.5. Their Adversaries were the Chief;
and they that hated them, ruled over them: So that they were deprived, many of
them in an instant, of their liberties, by close imprisonment; of their
estates, by Plunder, and by heavy impositions; of their dearest Friends, by
flight; yea (which is yet sad and doleful) of their Ordinances and their God.
The latter of them, they endured three as sharp and cruel Sieges from a bloody
Enemy, as ever any place has suffered since the Wars began; in which their
houses were consumed by fire, their persons slain, the Famine and the sword
contended which should prey upon them first; poor Mothers looking when the time
would come, that they should hear the Children cry for bread, and there would
be none to give them; When they should see them swoon in the top of every
street, as Lam. 2.11. However, God upholds their spirits with unshaken
resolution in the midst of fire and blood; and in the end; wrought out a great
salvation for them, whose almost matchless magnanimity, and resolute Defense
of that place, has put a greater stop to the proceedings of the King, in
hindering His Recruits, and opened a more fair advantage to the Reducing of the
Western parts, then can be easily expressed.

But yet by these calamaties and troubles, the estates of those who have
escaped the sword, are utterly exhausted and consumed, five hundred of their
houses burnt down to the ground, (being one half of the Town) by which almost
one thousand Families are turned harbourlesse and helpless to the mercy of
their Neighbors, who can only melt upon them, and weep over them, but are not
able to relieve them.

And therefore, you that have escaped these miseries, are earnestly besought to
look upon this sad Distressed Town, (sometimes the most eminent of those parts
for building and situation, and which is more, for Piety and true Religion)
now by the just displeasure of the Lord against it, raked in its own ashes,
reduced almost to the extremity of misery and want, for the Defense of that
Cause which you Profess, and take upon you to maintain: Listen and hear it
crying to you in the Churches Lamentation; See if there be any sorrow like to
my sorrow, wherewith the Lord has afflicted me in the day of his fierce anger:
and do not stop your ears against their cry for pity from you, lest the Lord
deal accordingly with you, and stop his ears against your cries for mercy,
when you have most need of it. In such a singular and extraordinary case as
this, stir up your selves to do some extraordinary thing; Do not draw out your
purses only to your poor distressed Brethren, but your very souls too, as the
Prophet speaks: This is your duty, and this will be your policy, if you desire
to save your persons, houses and estates, from that heavy misery which has
exposed them to your mercy.

London, Printed for Edward Husband, Printer to the Honorable House of Commons,
Sept 9. 1645.


