THE NEW UOTES OF PARLIAMENT FOR THE FVTHER SECVRING OF THOSE OFFICERS THAT ARE
APPOIN ted for the Ordering of the Militia, May 1642:
Rosolved.
THat this House does declare, that if any person whatsoever shall arrest, or
Imprison the Persons of those Lords and Gentlemen or any of them, or any other
of the Members of either House of Parliament that shall be employed in the
service of both Houses of Parliament, or shall offer violence to them or any of
them for doing any thing in pursuance of the commands or instructions of both
Houses, shall be held disturbers of the proceedings of Parliament and public
enemies of the State: And that all persons are bound by their Protestation to
endeavor to brirng them to condign punishment.

That this House does declare that those of the City of London, and all othar
persons that have obayed the Ordinance for the Malitia, and done any thing in
execution thereof, have done according to the Law of the Land, and in persuance
of what they were Commanded by both Houses of Parliament: and for the defense
of King and Kingdom, and shall have the assistance of both Houses of
Parliament, against any that shall presume to question them for yielding their
obedience unto the said commands in this necessary and important service: And
that whosoever shall obey the said Ordinance for the time to come, shall
receive approbation and assistance from both Houses of Parliament.

That this House does declare that they are resolved to maintain those Lords,
and Gentlemen in those things they have done, and shall further do in defense
of their Commands for thepreserving the peace of this Kingdom.

Die Martis Maii. 1642.
ORdered by the Lords and Commons in Parliament assembled, That the Persons
entrusted with the ordering of the Militia of the City of London, shall have
power to draw the trained Bands of the City into such usual and convenient
places within three miles of the said City, as to them from time to time shall
seem fit for the training and exercising of the Soldiers, and that the said
Soldiers upon summons shall from time to time appear and not depart from their
Colors without the consent of their Officers, as they will answer their
contempt to the Parliament.

Ioh Brown Cler. Parliam.
(...)

