ORDERS From the High Court OF PARLIAMENT. FOR The voting of the new Bill of
Subsidies by the Lords House. With The Earl of Bristols Speech at a Conference
with both Houses, Concerning The gathering of money for the Soldiers.

Printed in the year 1641.

The House of Peers. October. 20. 1641.
THe Lords sitting upon the late new Bill of Subsidies, which was brought up
unto them by the House of Commons, before the recesse, it was voted and
subscribed by the Lords then present.

THE EARL OF BRISTOLS SPEECH At a Conference with both Houses.
GEntlemen, and you the Knights, Citizens, and Burgesses of the House of
Commons, I am commanded by the Lords to let you know that they have taken
serious deliberation of the propositions made by you the other day in a
conference concerning the extremity in which the kingdom was for want of money
to give satisfaction to both armies: I am commanded to let you know their
Lordships pleasure in this or in any thing else that may conduce for the
service of the King, and good of the Kingdom, and will be very ready to give
such assistance as you shall propound, or upon debate with them think fit to
advance the work. You were pleased to declare the great industry used for
raising of moneys: and truly we conceive it can scarce be paralleled in any
time, where the House of Commons have showed so great affections to the good of
the Kingdom, as in their own particulars to be so engaged as they have
been. But they now perceive, though as good security as can be, and they
conceive the cause of this hindrance, must be some apprehension of danger, for
which the Kingdom has, and particularly the City of London, the fear of
unquiet and dangerous times, and so loath to part with money, for we cannot
conceive but there is money in the kingdom, and in the City. This fear is that
which makes them all keep the wealth they have to serve their turns in
extremity of danger, and therefore think fit that since there is great use of
money, to open the credit of the Kingdom; for the granting of Subsidies must
get credit, and peace and tranquillity will encourage the lending of money; and
therefore the Lords have commanded the Lord Commissioners with all speed to
bring unto you the bottom of the Treaty with the Scots, that the Kingdom may
see in what state they are. And then no doubt for these great sums the Lords
will likewise concur in that and all things else that may conduce to the
happiness of the State.

And therefore because ways of money are more proper to proceed from you then
from us, if you shall think fit that any way may be propounded by you may be
effectual, or if you propound not, their Lordships will let you know some of
their propositions. If you be not now prepared to confer about it, we shall
when you please, debate the same.

FINIS.

