AN ORDINANCE OF THE Lords and Commons ASSEMBLED IN PARLIAMENT, For charging
and taxing a Monthly rate of 300. pounds upon the County of Essex, for the
safety and Defense of the said County,

And to continue until the first day of December next, if this unnatural
War shall so long continue.

Henry Elsynge Cler. Parl. Dom. Com.

LONDON Printed for Edward Husband April 2. 1645.

Tudor rose Scottish thistle French fleur-de-lis depiction of Irish harp
3. Martii 1644.
An Ordinance of the Lords and Commons Assembled in Parliament, for charging
and taxing a Monthly Rate of 300. pounds upon the County of Essex, etc.
WHereas the County of Essex in obedience to an Ordinance of Parliament,
entitled an Ordinance for putting the Assotiated Counties into a posture of
Defense, has raised a considerable number of Horse, Foot, and Dragoones, and
must be at great charges in maintaining of adjute Officers, to order and
exercise the said Forces, and other trained Regiments, and in providing other
things requisite for the defense and safety of the said County, And without the
raising of Moneys to defray the said charge, the County cannot be put into
such a Posture as is necessary.

It is therefore Ordained by the Lords and Commons in Parliament assembled, and
by Authority of the same, that for the intents and purposes aforesaid, there
shall be monthly charged, rated, taxed, and leavied upon the said County from
the first of February 1644. the sum of three hundred pounds a month, until
the first day of December next, if this unnatural war shall so long continue.

And be it further Ordained, that every person or persons, that were or are to
be assessed or taxed by virtue of an Ordinance entitled, An Ordinance for
raising and maintaining of Forces for the defense of the Kingdom, under the
Command of Sir Thomas Fairfax, shall be assessed and taxed by this Ordinance,
in the same manner as they are or may be assessed, and taxed by virtue of the
said retired Ordinance, and shall be liable to as great forf^^^ures, and
penalties, for not paying the surance or sums to be assessed, as they should
or might have been, if the same had been ass^ssed by the said recited
Ordinance, and the Committees named and trusted in the said last recited
Ordinance, to take care for the assessing, collecting or L^avying of any monyes
in the said County, are named and trusted in this Ordinance, and have as full
power and authority given them by this Ordinance to nominate and appoint
Collectors and assessors, and to leavy, distraine, fine, imprison, or
sequester, as they or any of them have by virtue of the said last recited
Ordinance.

And the said Collectors shall pay the several sums by them collected, to the
high Constables of the several hundreds, and the Mayors or other head Officers
of Corporations respectively, within the said County, who shall pay over the
said monyes to such Treasurers, as shall be appointed by the Lord Leivtenant,
Deputy Lievtenants of the said County, or any three or more of them, who are to
issue forth the same, for the use and service of the said County, by the vote
of the Major part of the said Deputy Lievtenants present, or any three of them
present, and by their order in pursuance thereof under their hands, and not
otherwise.

And it is further Ordained that three pence in the pound shall be allowed for
every sum of money which shall be collected and paid, whereof one penny shall
be for the Collectors, one penny for the high Constables and Mayors or other
head Officers of Corporations, and one penny for the Treasurers.

And the Treasurers shall keep a Register book of the several sums
received and paid by them, and the said Committees or any three of them, have
hereby power given them, to call all Treasurers, Mayors and other head Officers
of Corporatitions, high Constables, collectors and others, that have or at any
time shall be thought to have any of the said monyes in their hands, or any
other monyes due upon the Ordinance, for the new posture, to an account, and if
any of them shall refuse to account or to pay in their moneys wherewith they
are charged, then the said Committees or any three of them, shall fine them
double the sum charged upon them, which if it be not paid within six days
after the sum is set, and notice thereof left, at his or their dwelling house,
It shall be lawful to destraine for the same, and if there be not sufficient
distress wherewith to satisfy, then the said Committees may imprison the
offender herein, and sequester his estate until the money charged and the fine
set, be leavied and paid.

And in case the said Treasurers; Mayors and other head Officers of
Corporations, high Constables, or collectors to be nominated as aforesaid,
shall refuse or neglect to leavy or receive the sums of money to be assessed,
and set by virtue of this Ordinance, or the Ordinance for the new posture, It
shall be lawful for the said Committees or any three of them, to fine the said
Treasurers, Mayors and other head Officers of Corporations, high Cunstables or
Collectors not, exceeding the sum of ten pounds, and to leavy the same by way
of distress and the sale of their goods or by imprisonment as they shall
think fit.

*

FINIS.

