portrait in oval frame of Edward VI EDWARD VI. KING OF ENGLAND. etc.
HONI S^^^ (...) ^^L Y PENSE

K. EDWARD the VIth His Own ARGUMENTS Against the Pope's Supremacy.

Wherein several Popish Doctrines and Practices, contrary to God's Word, are
animadverted on; and the Marks of Antichrist are applied to the Pope of Rome.

Translated out of the Original, written with the King's own Hand in French,
and still preserved.

To which are subjoined some Remarks upon his Life and Reign, in Vindication of
his Memory, from Dr. Heylin's severe and unjust Censure.

London, Printed by J. D. for Jonathan Robinson, at the Golden-Lion in St.
Paul's Churchyard, 1682.

THE PUBLISHER TO THE READER.
AS the Heavens are higher than the Earth, so are my Ways higher than your
Ways, and my Thoughts than your Thoughts; Was what God Almighty, by his Prophet
Esaias, spoke to his People Israel: and Sovereign Princes, his Vicegerents here
may, with due allowances, say the same of their Ways and Thoughts* compared
with those of their Subjects.

The Royal Blood* which swells their Veins, is frequently impregnated with
diviner Spirits, than are communicated to others; of which perhaps a natural
account might be given. But I should choose rather to resolve it into Faith,
from the Assurance, that God will exhibit to them Grace sufficient My Grace is
sufficient for you.
for their High Calling.

But some are in an especial manner called forth to extraordinary Work, and
these receive more immediate divine Influence, and Assistance: which I think
may well be thought of this matchless Prince, whose Autographon of the Treatise
against the Papacy now published, was found in the French Tongue, in the
Library of one of the most eminently Learned Men of the last Age, and is here
presented as 'twas faithfully translated, by a Person of very great Quality in
this.

This Pious King was the true Defender of our Faith, and under God and his
Christ, the Captain of our Reformation: And as the ensuing Discourse will
demonstrate to the World, what Principles he went upon in it, so questionless,
it will vindicate his most Glorious Memory, from the Aspersion cast upon it by
Dr. Heylyn, who Heylyn's History of the Reformation. Pref. p. 4. Whose Death I
cannot reckon for an Infelicity to the Church of England, for being
ill-principled in himself, etc.
thought it no Infelicity to the Church of England, that he was so short lived.

I am sure it may well be said of him, who was so far beyond all ordinary
Measures.

Immodicis brevis est aetas, and rara senectus. Immoderate Men live much in a
short space,
And rarely to old Age prolong their Race.
By comparing the date of his Dedication to his Uncle, with the Day of his
Birth, it appears that he was but twelve Years old when he wrote this little
Tractate; in which there is nothing but what was extraordinary for his Years,
yet many things that may satisfy the World they were his Genuine Thoughts, and
not the Dictates of a Tutor.

Indeed in several Things, one would pronounce him Inspired; he was no older at
the writing this, than our blessed Savior was when he confounded the Jewish
Doctors; and I doubt not, but this wonderful Young Prince will put those of
the Romish Church to Shame, and Confusion of Face.

It Is said of our Savior at those Years, that The Child grew, Luke 2. ver. 40.
and waxed strong in Spirit, filled with Wisdom; and the Grace of God was upon
him.

Tho the Grace of God, and divine Aid, were constantly with him; yet even His
Wisdom increased with his Years: When he was a Child, he did as a Child, he
thought as a Child: And perhaps, it is not piacular to say, that in many Things,
wherein his Mediatory Office was not concerned, he was liable to Mistakes.

Which is to me a means to remove many Objections against Holy Writ. For admit
our Modern Philosophers can demonstrate, that the Ancient Prophets were out,
in what they spoke of the Moving of the Sun, and the Stability of the Earth,
and the like: this were no Argument against their having the Spirit of
Prophecy, which was concerned only for the Matter to be delivered, leaving the
Manner to be according to Notions then received, without which they could never
have been understood in their Similitudes or Allusions.

And this may be the Reason of the Difference, in the Styles of the Sacred
Penmen, some whereof had many Things dusneta, or hard to be understood; the
Sacred Spirit working according to the Tempers, or Faculties, which it found.

The Consideration of this might induce one to believe, that it was not without
extraordinary Assistance from above, that this Heroic King encountered the
Papacy, tho now and then, like young David conquering the Philistine Giant, it
were with Pebble Stones.

Edward the Sixth, by the Grace of God, King of England, France, and Ireland,
Defender of the Faith, and on Earth, after God, Head of the Church of England,
and of Ireland.
To his most dear and well-beloved Uncle, Edward Duke of Somerset, Governor of
his Person, and Protector of his Kingdoms, Countries, and Subjects.
AFter having considered (my dear and well-beloved Uncle) how much they
displease God, who waste all their Time on the Follies and Vanities of this
World, spending it in trifling Sports and Diversions, from whence comes no
Profit or Benefit to themselves, or Mankind; I have determined to employ my
self about the doing something, which will be (as I hope) profitable to my
self, and acceptable unto you. Having then considered, that we see many Papists
not only curse us, but call and name us Heretics, because we have forsaken
their Antichrist, and its Traditions, and followed the Light which God has
been pleased to afford us; We are inclined to Write something to defend us
against their Contumelies, and lay them (as it is just) upon their own Backs.
For they call us Heretics, but Alas! they are so themselves, whilst they
forsake the pure Voice of the Gospel, and follow their own Imaginations; as is
most evident from Boniface the Third, who thought (when he was made the
Universal Bishop) that that falling away, which St. Paul speaks of in his
second Epistle to the Thessalonians, and second Chapter, had happened in
himself. For St. Paul says, We beseech you, Brethren, by the coming of our
Lord, that ye be not soon shaken in Mind, or be troubled, neither by Spirit,
nor by Word, nor by Letter, as that the day of Christ is at hand. Let no Man
deceive you by any Means; for that day shall not come, except there come a
falling away first, and that Man of Sin be revealed, the Son of Perdition; who
exalts himself above all that is called God, so that he, as God, sits in
the Temple of God, etc.

Notwithstanding he followed his own Proud Imaginations and Fancies, and did
not forsake his Errors, which he knew to be very Wicked.

Considering then by your Life and Actions, that you have a great Affection to
the Divine Word, and the sincere Religion; I dedicate this present Work to
you, Praying you to take it in good Part. God give you his perpetual Grace, and
show his Benignity upon you for ever.

From our Palace at Westminster in London, this last Day of August, 1549.
A small TREATISE Against the PRIMACY OF THE POPE.
WE may easily find and perceive by the Experience of the World, that Humane
Nature is disposed to all Evils, and entangled by all manner of Vices. For what
Nation is there in the Earth in which there is not some Vice, and many
Disorders? And principally in this Age, because now there is such an exaltation
of the great Empire of Antichrist: which is the Source of all Evil, the
Fountain of all Abomination, and true Son of the Devil. For when God had sent
his only Son to heal our Infirmities, and to reconcile the World unto himself
by his Death; The Devil instantly changed the Institutions of Christ into Human
Traditions, and perverted the Holy Scriptures to his Purposes and Designs, by
his Minister the Pope. And therefore if the Astrologers (who maintain that all
things shall return to their own Element) say a Truth, the Pope shall descend
into Hell: for he cannot belong unto God, or be his Servant, whilst under the
Pretense of Religion, and the Command of God, he usurps unto himself the
Authority of Christ, as appears in all his Works. Therefore it seemed best to
me in this little Book, first to condemn the Papacy, and afterward the
Doctrine of the said Pope. Tho I am not ignorant, that it is a difficult task,
because there are many that will contradict it: Notwithstanding we will condemn
the Supremacy of the Pope, from these following Reasons.

The First Part.
FIrst then, whereas the Papists say, that Rome is the Mother of all other
Churches, and therefore the Bishop of Rome ought to be Superior to all other
Bishops. I answer, that it is impossible; because the first Promise was made
unto the Jews: And Rome was Heathen, when Jerusalem was Christian; for St. Paul
writing to the Romans, says, through their Fall, Salvation Romans 11
is come unto the Gentiles.

And because the Papist cannot prove Rome to have been the Mother of all the
other Churches, they therefore say the Bishop of Rome has received his Power
from St. Peter: to whom had been given the same Authority with Christ, and
remains in the said Bishop of Rome to this day, which they endeavor to prove
out of these following Texts, Thou art Peter, and upon this Mat. 16.
Rock I will build my Church, says Christ; and a little after, And I will give
thee the Keys of the Kingdom of Heaven: And they allege that other place of
Scripture, where Peter says to Christ, Lord, thou know that I love thee:
Saying* that he that loves Christ is the chiefest, and Peter loving Christ,
more than any of the other Apostles loved him, is thereby the chiefest and
principal of the Apostles.

Again, they affirm that he only was commanded to feed the Sheep of Christ, and
be the Fisher of Men; and that he was the first Speaker, and made answer to
Jesus, Behold, here are two Luke 22.
Swords: from whence the Papists conclude, that Peter had a Temporal and a
Spiritual Sword.

They allege also some Human Reasons, that as the Bees have one King, so all
Christians ought to have one Pope. And that as there was of old amongst the
Jews, a principal Priest or Bishop, (as Moses and Aaron) Exodus 4.
so now it is necessary there should be a Bishop of the Bishops.

Here are two great Falsehoods in these few words: The one is, that the
Authority and Supremacy over the Church was given to St. Peter: The other, that
Peter was at Rome.

To the First, Where they say that that Authority was given him by these Words,
Thou art Peter, etc. I Answer, that if you remark the preceding and following
Words, in that Chapter of Mat. 16.
the Gospel, you will find that Christ did not speak of Peter, as he was barely
a Man, but as he was a Believer: For the foregoing Words, are, how Peter had
said, Thou art the Son of God: By which it is evident, that Christ did not say,
that Peter was the Foundation of the Church, but spoke of the Faith of Peter.
The following Words declare how Christ called Peter Satan, but the Church of
God is not founded upon Satan, therefore it is not founded upon Peter: for if
the Church was founded upon St. Peter, it would have a weak Foundation: and
like that House, a sandy Foundation that could not stand long, but, the Floods
Mat. 7.
came, and the Winds blew, and beat upon that House; and it fell. In like
manner would the Church fall, if it had so poor a Foundation. By which one may
see from these Words in the Text, Thou art Peter, and upon this Stone will I
build my Church, must not be understood of Peter, but of the Faith of Peter;
upon which the Church is founded. For he was a frail and weak Vessel, who
denied Christ thrice. Their second Text is, that the Keys of Heaven were given
to St. Peter. To Ma(...)
which I Answer, That the Keys were given not only to Peter, but also to the
other Apostles. And by this Argument, I answer, that he was not principal;
because the rest received the same Authority of the Keys, that was committed to
him. On which account St. Paul calls St. Peter, the Gal. 2.
Pillar, not the Foundation of the Church; his Companion, not his Governor:
And what are the Keys of Heaven, the Authority of pardoning Sins? No, it is the
Preaching of the Gospel of God the Father, the Gospel, I say, of God; not the
Pope's or Devil's. And as when a Door is open, every one who will, may enter
therein; so when God sent his sincere Commandments and Gospel, he opened Truth,
which is the Gate of Heaven: And gave unto Men an understanding of the
Scriptures, which if they obeyed, they should thereby 2 Cor. 2.
be saved. By which we see that the Gospel and the Truth of the Scriptures, are
the only Gates that conduct Men to the Kingdom of God. Whence St. Paul says,
Whosoever shall call upon the Romans 10
Name of the Lord, shall be saved: How then shall they call on him in whom they
have not believed? And how shall they believe in him of whom they have not
heard? And how shall they hear without a Preacher? And a little after, he
says, So then Faith comes by hearing, and hearing by the Word of God. And in
the fourth Chapter to the Romans, he also says, But to him that works not,
Romans 4.
but believes on him that justifies the Ungodly, his Faith is counted for
Righteousness. Moreover, we will prove that the Preaching of the Gospel is the
Key of Heaven: in the eighth Chapter to the Romans, Paul affirms that, Whoever
calls upon the Name of the Lord, shall be saved; and that the Preaching of the
Gospel is the Door that leads to the Invocation of the Name of God: Whence it
follows, that the Preaching of the Gospel is the way and entrance of Salvation.

Again, Paul affirms that Faith justifies, and that the Preaching of the Gospel
causes Faith (which I have showed before) whence it follows that the true
Preaching of the Word is the Door and Entrance to Justification. Like as Ground
which is sowed may produce Fruit, if the Seed be not cast into Ground which is
full of Thistles, or Thorns, or Mat. 13. Mark 4. Luke 8.
Stones; and yet although it be sowed in such Ground, it will a little meliorate
the Earth. So if the Word of God be sowed in the Hearts of honest People, or
such as have a Zeal for Truth, it will confirm them in all Goodness; but if any
be obstinate and perverse they cannot impute the Fault unto the Scriptures,
which is really in themselves.

Therefore we ought to do our utmost endeavors to cause the Gospel to be
Preached throughout all the World; as it is written, All Power is given unto me
in Heaven Mat. 28. Mar. 16. Luke 24.
and in Earth: Go ye therefore, and teach all Nations, baptizing them in my
Name.

Since then it is proved, that the Keys of Heaven is the Authority of
Preaching; and that the Authority of Preaching was given to all the Apostles.

I cannot see how by that Text, any more Authority Mat. 16.
was given to Peter, than to the other Disciples: And St. Paul says, he was not
a whit behind the very chiefest Apostles.

Then if he said true, St. Peter was not above him: And if I were asked which
of them was the better, I should say Paul, because he Preached more than them
all.

But we ought to account certainly, that the Spirit of God was poured out upon
Gal. 2. Act. 2.
them all; and that the same Spirit of God which filled St. Peter, filled also
St. Paul: from whence may be proved, that neither of them was Superior to the
other.

Again, the Papists say, that after Christ was raised from the Dead, he asked
Joh. 21.
who loved him, and that Peter answered, he loved him, and therefore (say they)
he was the chief Apostle.

By which Reason every good Man ought to have the Supremacy over every other,
because each good and pious Person loves God: for it is the Duty and Office of
every true Christian. Now the Question is not, Whether Peter was faithful,
pious, good, a holy and true Christian; but whether he was principal Head,
Governor, and King above and over the rest of the Apostles, and Ministers of
Jesus Christ? For if the Pope would have the Authority of St. Peter, which was
to Preach, I would be content to give it him: but he regards but little the
Precept of God; for Jesus departed Joh. 6.
into a Mountain alone, when he perceived the Jews would make him a King, and
Emperor: And the Pope by Wrong, or Violence, or Deceit, has made all Nations
subject unto him.

Jesus wore a Crown of Thorns, and a Purple Robe was thrown upon him in
Derision, and all the Multitude mocked and spit upon him: But the Pope decks
himself with a Triple Crown, and is adored by Kings, Princes, Emperors, and all
Estates of Persons. Jesus washed his Disciples Joh, 13.
Feet, and Kings kiss the Feet of the Pope: Jesus paid Tribute, but the Pope
Mat. 17.
receives, and pays none: Jesus opened his Mouth and Mat. 5.
taught the People, the Pope takes his ease and rest in his Castle of St.
Angelo. Jesus Luke 6.
healed all Diseases, the Pope rejoices in Blood and Massacres. Christ bore his
Cross Joh. 19.
upon his Shoulders, the Pope is born upon the Shoulders of Men. Christ came
with Peace and Poverty into the World, the Pope delights in stirring up War
amongst the Kings and Princes of the Earth. Christ Mat. 21.
came meekly, humbly, and compassionately, sitting upon an Ass, but the Pope
rides in all Pomp and Splendour. Christ was a Lamb, Joh. 1.
the Pope is a Wolf. Christ Luke 9.
was Poor, the Pope would have all Christian Kingdoms under his Power and
Command. Christ drove John 2.
the Money Changers, and Mat. 21.
Sellers out of the Temple, the Pope receives them in: Jesus instituted the
Sacrament Mar. 14. Luke 22.
in commemoration of himself; the Pope formed the Mass, a Master piece of
Imposture. Jesus ascended Mar. 16.
into Heaven, and the Pope falls into Hell. God has Deuteronomy. 6. Exo. 20.
commanded that we should have no other God but him; and the Pope makes himself
to be honored like unto a great God. God forbids us Mat. 4.
to commit Idolatry, and the Pope is the Author of Image Worship. God has
prohibited swearing in vain; Exo. 20.
but the Pope allows his Friends Perjury. God has commanded the use of
Festivals in good Works, Prayers, and Devotions, but the Pope allows Pomp,
Games, Ideleness, and Mymichry to be exercised on those days in Churches. God
has forbid Murder, and killing any Person, and it is a matter of great
Compassion and Sorrow, to see how cruelly the Pope persecutes Christians. God
foretold this Persecution in the four and twentieth Chapter of Matthew; Many
false Prophets Mat. 24.
(says Christ) shall arise at that time; and because Iniquity shall abound, the
Love of many shall wax cold: but the Gospel shall be preached in all the World;
when ye therefore shall see the Abomination of Desolation, spoken of by Daniel
the Prophet, stand in the holy Place, then let them which be in Judea, flee
into the Mountains. And is not this come to pass now? Yea, for there are many
Wolves in Sheeps clothing; who under the pretense of Religion, obscure the
true Doctrine of Christ: And almost all Abominations were introduced into the
Holy Place, that is to say, brought into the Church of God.

But to return to our Matter, God has forbid Adultery; notwithstanding the
Pope, who will be obedient to his Father the Devil, commands his Priests to
keep several Concubines and Harlots, rather than join themselves to any in
Marriage. God has forbid stealing from either Man, Woman, or Child; but the
Pope is such an old Thief, that he robs even God of his Honor, and transfers
it to himself. God has forbid bearing false Witness against any one, but the
Pope cries all is good Grist which comes to his Mill. God has commanded us to
be content with what is our own, but the Pope will have every House pay him a
Tribute: to conclude, he is in every thing opposite to God. But I cannot blame
him, for he fulfills the command of Paul, which says, Children obey your
Parents, and Ephesians. 6.
the Demon of Hypocrisy is his Father, to whom he pays all Obedience. The Devil
walks about as a roaring Lion, 1 Pet. 5.
(says St Peter) seeking whom he may devour. And does not the Pope do the
same? Yea certainly, for he not only ordains wicked and unjust Laws; but he
pursues to Death, all who have a true Zeal and Love toward God.

But to return to the Primacy of Peter. I ask how many Kingdoms St. Peter had
under his Dominion? For it was impossible that all Kingdoms should be under
him, when St. James was then Bishop of Jerusalem, and that City then Christian.
Neither can I see how Peter should be the Chief: For St. Paul says to the
Corinthians concerning the Apostles, All are yours, and you are 1 Cor. 8.
Christ's, and Christ is Gods. Likewise St. Peter calls himself by no other
Title, but Peter an Apostle of Jesus Christ, 1 Pet. 1.
by which it is manifest, that we are not Peter's, but Peter ours. Again, when
Paul came to Antioch he withstood Peter to his Face, because he was to be
blamed: which he Gal. 2.
would not have done if Peter had had any such Authority, or could not have
lied (as they say): but (as I have said thereupon) Paul seeing the
Dissimulation of Peter, said unto him, If thou, being a Gal. 2.
Jew, live after the manner of Gentiles, and not as do the Jews, why
compellest thou the Gentiles to live as do the Jews? We who are Jews by Nature,
and not Sinners of the Gentiles, knowing that a Man is not justified by the
Works of the Law, but by the Faith of Jesus Christ, even we have believed in
Jesus Christ, that we might be justified by the Faith of Christ, and not by the
Works of the Law, etc. Let us then see how it is possible that Peter should be
Chief; for if he was Principal, who loved Christ the best, it is evident that
St. John would be the chiefest of the Apostles, for Christ appointed him to
take care of his Mother, and John lay in Joh. 19. Joh. 13.
the Bosom of Jesus, whilst he Supped.

But to the Matter in hand. I ask, Whether a lawful Council can be called but
by the Pope? To which, I am sure, the Papists will answer Negatively. Then I
ask, If the Pope can call a Council before his Election: To which, I know, they
will reply, he cannot; if then no Council is lawful without a Pope, and that
none who is laboring to be elected Pope can assemble a Council, then the
Council which confirms the Pope Superior over the Church, is not lawful;
because it was not convocated by a Pope, being there was then none elected.

But being thus driven from that Argument, they fly to another, and say, that
Christ commanded Peter to feed his Sheep: but he commanded Joh. 21.
all the rest to do the same, saying, Go ye therefore and teach all Nations,
baptizing Mat. 28.
them in my Name. But the Pope does not obey the Commandment of Jesus Christ:
For he does not feed his Sheep, but devours them, like a roaring Lion who walks
about to seek his 1 Pet. 5.
prey. Now I wish the Pope would obey the Commandment which God gave unto St.
Peter: For I should not regret his having Authority to preach Christ to all the
World, but he leaves the preaching of the Gospel, and usurps the Authority of
being Head of the Church, which of right belongs to none but Christ.

It Is true, the Pope is Primate of the Church, but it is not the Divine or
Catholic Church, but the Diabolical one: For he transgresses the Commandment
given in general to St. Peter and the rest of the Apostles: For when Christ
sent his twelve Disciples to preach the Gospel of Repentance, and the Kingdom
of God, he said, Behold, I send you forth Mat. 10.
as Sheep amongst Wolves: But the Bishop of Rome is like a Wolf amongst Sheep,
eating and devouring the poor Sheep of Christ; and when they are hid by Fear,
he takes the Voice of a Sheep to betray and devour them. He excuses himself
from preaching, upon its being too low and mean an Office for him, saying, he
has lower Officers and Ministers for that Work; whilst he is taken up with
seeing and attending to the singing out of the Masses. But I answer to the
first, That if the Office of preaching was not below St. Peter, who had
received all his Authority and Power from Christ himself, methinks that those
who call themselves the Successors of Peter, should not esteem the Office too
mean for them.

St. Paul writes to Timothy what every Bishop ought to be; A Bishop (says he)
must be blameless, the Husband of one Wife, Sober, of good Behavior, 1 Timothy 3.
given to Hospitality, apt to teach, not given to Wine, no Striker, not given
to filthy Lucre, but one that rules well his own House, having his Children in
subjection with all Gravity. Now let us arraign the Pope before St. Paul, and
examine whether by St. Paul's Rule he be guilty or not. The first Command to a
Bishop is to be blameless; but we have proved that the Bishop of Rome
transgresses all the Commandments of God, by which he stands Guilty. The second
is, that he be the Husband of one Wife, in which the Bishop of Rome errs
mightily; for he allows Concubines, and counts filthy Fornication better than
lawful and honest Marriage. The third is, that he should be Sober, and full of
Wisdom and Virtue, which the Bishop of Rome very little observes. The fourth
is, that he be Liberal, given to Hospitality, not greedy of filthy Lucre; but
the Bishop of Rome is full of Avarice and Oppression. The fifth is, that he be
apt to Teach: but our Devil, or Diabolical Father accounts maintaining the
Glory of God by preaching, is too mean an Office for him; notwithstanding his
Predecessor Peter, either preached the Gospel, or sinned against God, in not
observing that Commandment; Go ye, and preach Mat. 28.
the Gospel over all the World. But he will Imprison, Slay, and Burn those who
do preach the Word, and would himself be their Executioner, if he did not find
others to do it in his stead; by which we may see that he loves himself more
than he loves God. What shall I say more? He disobeys all the Orders of S.
Paul, give Verdict therefore whether he be Guilty or Innocent.

But now we will proceed to their other Arguments, and first to their
maintaining Peter to be the Chief, for which they allege his being commanded
to feed the Joh. 21.
Sheep: To which I answer, that all the Apostles were commanded as well as he,
to feed the Sheep of Christ, in these Words of the Gospel, Go ye all and
preach, etc. Mat. 28.
For the preaching of the Gospel signifies nothing else but feeding his Sheep.
And their other Argument is not more substantial, when they say Peter was a
Fisher of Men; for I say, Andrew and John were by the same Authority made
Fishers of Men: For Fishers of Men are really nothing but Preachers of Christ.

Now if the preaching of the Gospel be unlawful, without Authority from Peter
or the Pope; then the preaching of St. Paul was not lawful, because he did not
receive his Authority from Peter; notwithstanding the Pope accounts himself a
God, saying, I cannot lie, therefore I have spoken Truth: To which I answer,
that if he be not greater than Peter, he may lie; for Peter denied Christ
thrice, Peter then lied thrice: Mat. 26.
and St Paul afterward reproved Gal. 2.
him for his Dissimulation.

But the Bishop of Rome lies notoriously, if in nothing else, but in his
pretending to be the Head of the Christian Church, and having the Keys of
Heaven. For if the Pope have the Keys of Heaven, I make this Query: When the
Pope is dead, and none has the Keys, how can any Soul enter into Heaven? No
Person till he be elected Pope having the Keys: whence it must follow, that the
Pope being dead, Heavens Gates are closed. But it is a Folly to say, that the
Pope has the Keys of Heaven and Hell, when Christ is our only Mediator, our 1 Timothy 2.
Gate, Head, Shepherd, Redeemer, and Sovereign Lord; who (after he had taught,
instructed, done many Miracles, and suffered Death for us, and pronounced Mat.
27.
Salvation to all that believe Mar. 16. Luke 24. Joh. 19. Mat. 28. Mar. 16.
Luke 24.
on his Name, and from the power of his Passion faithfully believes to be
saved) ascended into Heaven with great Honor and Glory, and is seated on the
right hand of God his Father, where he intercedes for us; remaining for ever
with his Blessed Father, and the Holy Ghost, one God in Trinity, and three
Persons in Unity, full of Power and Virtue, and free from Vice and Sin:
remaining with us by his Spirit, and being in every respect equal with his
Father, till he shall come in Glory Ephesians. 1. Heb. 1. 4. Mat. 25.
to be Judge of all the World: whose Goodness is inscrutable, Mercy
unexpressible, and Glory most inestimable; He is our Governor and Master, He
is our Shepherd and Redeemer, and we are his Subjects and Sheep; we Psalm. 22.
are ransomed by his Blood, and washed by the Waters of Baptism, to show that
we are his Sheep; none else is Joh. 10.
our Pastor or Lord: neither the Pope, or any on Earth, can be our Head; else
we should become a Monster having two Heads. Paul 1 Cor. 3.
writing to the Corinthians, says, that all is ours; Peter, Apollos, and all
the other Apostles were ours, and we are Christ's, and Christ is Gods; whereby
it appears, that Peter is not a Head, but a Minister unto us. Therefore we must
esteem God our Spiritual Father, who by the Passion of Christ, took from us all
the pains of Death and Hell, to all who believe in him: that is the Spirit of
Adoption whereby we cry, Abba, Father. If the Romans 8.
Pope then will be called our Spiritual Father, we shall have three Fathers,
whereof the one is Carnal, and two Spiritual: neither can the Pope be so, for
as Christ is the Immaculate Lamb, and only Son of God, endued with all Power:
on the other side, the Pope is an unclean and ravenous Wolf, and only Son of
the Devil his Father, from whom he has received his Authority and Office.

But I would fain know, whether the Pope be our Spiritual, Carnal, or
Diabolical Father. In the first place, I see not how he can be our Carnal
Father, because he lives celibate, and makes a profession of Chastity: neither
can he be our Spiritual Father, being so addicted to the World, and
Worldliness; then it follows that he must be our Diabolical Father. Let us
therefore conclude, that as it was said of Christ, Thou art my Son, Psalm. 2.
this day have I begotten thee; God will say to the Pope, Thou art my Enemy,
this day have I destroyed thee: and as Christ was of the Order of Melchisedek,
so the Ps. 110.
Pope is of the Order Diabolick. But as Christianity is Spiritually very good,
and well designed; yet if there be not good Order to preserve it, it must
decay: As the Body of a Man could not be healthy with two Heads, four Arms, or
four Feet; so these Christian Countries could never well subsist under the
distraction of two equal Sovereigns. But some may question me then, and say,
What then, you would not have any Kings or Emperors? But to that I answer,
that God who sent his Mat. 1.
only Son down into the World, made him King over it, putting all Spiritual and
Temporal Authority into his Hands; he by his Sovereignty Ps. 110.
has placed Kings to be his Leiutenants over the Earth; but he has not
ordained any Supreme Bishop: for we find none so authorized by the Holy
Scripture. Now if the Papists say, that the Pope is Heir to him, I would advise
him then, to stay till Christ were dead before they seized upon his Kingdom:
because no Heirs take the Possession of their Inheritances, till after the
Death of their Predecessors.

Moreover the Papists say, that as under the old Law Exodus 4.
there was an High Priest or Archbishop of the Jews; so there ought now to be
an Head or Supreme Minister amongst Christians. To which I answer, that the
Priesthood of Aaron and Moses represented the Supremacy of our Savior Christ,
not the Pope: For Christ who came down to the Earth, Mat. 1.
and suffered Death for us; says of himself, that he was John 4.
our Messiah, and that he was the true Bread which came John 6.
down from Heaven, and our only Shepherd; for St. John testifies that, he says,
I am the Door; he that enters not by Joh. 10.
me into the Sheepfold, but climbeth some other way, is a Thief; but he that
enters in by the Door, is the Shepherd of the Sheep. To him the Porter
opens, and the Sheep hear his Voice: And he calls his own Sheep by name,
and leads them out, and the Sheep follow him, for they know his Voice; and a
Stranger will they not follow. But the Pope not coming by Christ, is an
abominable Thief: therefore all true and good Sheep ought to fly from him: For
he comes to devour, not feed them; to prey upon them, not instruct them. But
the Papists being thus scourged with their own Rod (to wit, with their own
Argument) say farther, that after the Disciples had preached about the Cities,
after they returned to Jesus, he asked them; Whether they had had any Sword
with them? and that they answered, Here are two Swords. Now they urge further,
that the one of the Swords signifies the Spiritual, the other the Temporal
Power: which reason (as shall be showed hereafter) is sottish and vain. For
first, we ought to consider from whence the Apostles came; they had been sent
to preach Mark 6.
Christ to all People, and to show Luke 9.
the Light to those that sat in Darkness. Secondly, we must consider the Power
Christ had on Earth, for he said himself, that his Kingdom was not of this
World: and there are two sorts of Authority, the one Spiritual, the other
Temporal. On which account St. Paul writes in his first Epistle to the
Corinthians, as the Body is one, and 1 Cor. 12
has many Members, for several uses; so there are also in the Church of
Christ, amongst the Spiritual Ministers; first, Apostles; secondarily,
Prophets; thirdly, Teachers: and some Temporal Ministers, as Kings, Emperors,
Governors, and Leiutenants. Now Christ was a Spiritual Minister, as he
testifies of himself, saying, My Kingdom is not of this World. And again, when
two Brethren came unto him and requested him to divide their Inheritance
between them: he answered, Man, Luke 12.
who made me a Judge, or a Divider over you? The third thing to be considered,
is, that Christ spoke to the Disciples concerning the Swords Ironically.
Fourthly, that all the Apostles answered together, Behold, here are two Swords.
Fifthly, you may observe in the Text, that the Apostles understood not what
Christ meant.

By all which things we may easily understand that Text; for after the Apostles
had been sent to preach the Gospel of Truth, when they returned to Jesus, he
said unto them, Had you any Sword with you then? (as much as to say) when I
sent you first out, you would have Staves with you, but now what do you think,
Has not my Grace kept you from all Evil? Or else, What need have you had of a
Sword? Then his Disciples (not Peter only) understanding not what Christ said,
answered, There were two Swords.

By which we see Christ spoke Ironically, and that all the Disciples made
answer, not Peter alone; as if he should say, I have two Swords, the one
signifying my Temporal Authority, and the other signifying my Spiritual
Jurisdiction: neither would or could Christ give a Temporal Authority,
forasmuch as he was a Spiritual Minister. And the Papists err extremely in one
Argument, where they say, that Cephas is a Head, whereas in Truth, Cephas is a
Stone, (But when these their Arguments are weakened) then they cry it is
probable, that Peter was the chief Apostle, because he spoke first at that
time, concerning our Dispute, and so answered in behalf of all the Apostles.

But it is more likely he was not the Prince over the rest, because St. Paul
says, For I suppose I was not a whit 1 Cor. 11
behind the very chiefest Apostles; for in nothing I am behind the 1 Cor. 12
very chiefest Apostles: in which number Peter is comprised. Now we must not
dispute what is most probably true, but what is most certainly true.
Nevertheless let us examine whether it be probable or not: For Andrew sometimes
spoke first, and it is not to be doubted but that each of them sometimes spoke
first; but it does not therefore follow, that he who speaks sometimes first,
must be Bishop of the Bishops: his first speaking at that time, may signify
that he was of a very courageous Spirit; or else that he could have desired to
have been the greatest: But Christ said, They that humble themselves like a
little Child, shall be the greatest Mat. 18. Luke 1.
in the Kingdom of Heaven; neither is there any lofty proud Title in the
Kingdom or Church of Christ, as you may see in that Magnificate in Luke, for
God loves Humility; Romans 12 Phil. 2. Luke 9.
and Christ says, in Luke, If any Man desire to be first, the same shall be
last of all, and Servant unto all And in another Evangelist says, Whosoever
receives one such little Mat. 18.
Child in my Name, receives me; and unless ye become as little Children, ye
shall not be fit for the Kingdom of Heaven. Nor does Peter attribute so high a
Title to himself, as the Pope takes upon him. For he writes thus in his
Epistle, Peter a Servant and an Apostle of Jesus Christ, and no more. 2 Pet. 1.
But the Pope what does he say? Paul the Third, by the Grace of God, the most
Holy Pope and Father, Deputy to Peter, and Vicar to Christ, King of Kings,
Prince of Princes, Bishop of the Bishops, and God on Earth. Behold therefore,
how he calls himself God, and blasphemes Christ. Behold how he is filled and
puffed up with Pride and Vanity. Behold how large and fair a Name and Title he
takes, tho he be a venomous Serpent; calling himself the most Holy Father,
whereas he is a detestable Thief, and contaminated with all Uncleanness. He
calls himself the Pope, which Word signifies Father unto all Nations, whilst he
brings them to destruction. Nay he calls himself the Vicar of Christ, and
Deputy of St. Peter, and God upon Earth; whilst he is Vicar to Beelzebub, Deputy
to Lucifer, and a terrestrial Demon: for he would seem to be very Good, whilst
he is very Wicked. And it is no wonder if the Ministers of the Devil appear
brave and triumphant outwardly, for St. Paul writes to the Corinthians, No
marvel what false 2 Cor. 11
Apostles, and deceitful Workers can transform themselves into; Satan himself
being transformed into an Angel of Light.

Wherefore you may easily discern the true Ministers of the Word, from the
false Antichrists; because the true Apostles walk after the Spirit of God, and
the false walk after the Flesh. Let us therefore see whether the Pope be the
Minister of God, or the Devil: which I fear he will prove; proclaiming himself
a good Man, a most Holy Bishop, a King of Kings: whereas he is the Tyrant of
Tyrants: all others exerciseing their Tyranny over Bodies, but this Devil,
Wolf, Tyrant, exercises his over the Souls of Men, constraining the poor and
simple Lambs of God to forsake their Faith, whereby they are saved, to follow
his Abominable Traditions and Diabolical Precepts. Which if they refuse to
obey, to wit, adoring Images, and offering to his Idols and Devils, he burns,
wracks, and torments them, or forces them to a costly Recantation.

During the Reign of my late Father the King, when the Pope's Name was blotted
out of our Books, he stopped the Mouths of Christians with his six Articles, as
if he would choke them.

And at this day in France, before any one is burnt, a little before the
Execution, they cut out his Tongue, that they might not speak. Considering then
that the Pope is the Minister of Lucifer, I am in good hopes, that as Lucifer
fell from Heaven into Hell, so the Pope his Vicar will fall from the great
Glory of his Papacy, into contemptible Derision.

For David has said in the Psalm. 18.
Psalms, With the pure thou will show thy self pure, and with the froward thou will show thy self froward. Again, the Pope has taken God's Honor away from
him, therefore, I hope, God will divest him of his Honors and Glory. As Mary
the Mother of God says, He has put Luke 1.
down the Mighty from their Seats, and exalted them of low degree. Take heed of
thy self then (O Pope) for if thou tumblest, thou will have a terrible fall. As
a Man who is got up into an high Tower, would have a huge leap if he should
fall down; so thou who have exalted thy self into the Heavens, would fall
down into the Abyss of Hell: As Christ foretold of Tire and Mat. 11.
Sidon.

But to return to the Pope's Primacy: I know very well that the Scripture
speaks of one God* one Faith, one Ephesians. 4. 1 Cor. 8. 1 Timothy 2. Mat. 19.
Baptism, but no mention of one Pope. Now if Peter had been a God on Earth, and
Vicar of Christ, we should have been baptized into his Name. But Paul 2 Cor. 11
2 Cor. 12
(who affirms himself to be inferior to none of the other Apostles) will not
allow us to be baptized in his Name: nay he is so far from having us baptized
in the Name of Peter, that he will not have it said, I am of Peter, or of Paul,
or of Apollos.

And now that the Papists cannot prove by the Scriptures that we ought to have
one Pope, they run to Similitudes; saying, that as the Creatures in the Earth
(as the Bees) have a King over them; so all Christians ought to have one King
and Pope. To which I will answer three ways: First, That their Reason is not
extracted from the Holy Scripture, but from their own Invention. Secondly, That
all the Bees which are in the World, or in Christendom, have not a King.
Thirdly, That if all Bees have their King; so have we, to wit, Jesus Ephesians. 1.
Christ.

But the Papists will then say, That if we condemn the Papacy, we shall condemn
our Forefathers as Heretics. I will answer to that, as God answered Elijah, 1
Kin. 19
when he said to the Lord that the Children of Israel had forsaken his
Covenant, and were unjust and wicked, Yet I have left me seven thousand in
Israel, all the Knees which have not bowed to Baal. Neither must we imagine,
but that there have been many Christians in the World, some of which have
spoken openly against the Papacy, and others that have kept their Knowledge and
Sentiments to themselves: but the Papists will not suffer us to know more than
our Fathers. But I know very well, that our Religion consists not of old
Customs, or the Usage of our Fathers; but in the Holy Scriptures, and Divine
Word: And that (if you think Antiquity and Custom makes a thing good) is older
than the World: For God is the Word, who was without beginning, and shall
continue Joh. 1. Exodus 2.
without end; and if you think, Truth ought to be followed and obeyed, all
Truth is contained in that Book. Our Religion ought not to be steered or
governed by our Forefathers: for Ezekiel says, Walk ye not in the Statutes of
your Fathers, for they Ezekiel. 20
were polluted. Moreover, our God, and Savior, and Redeemer, Jesus Christ,
said, I am the Way, and the Truth, and Joh. 14.
the Life; he did not say, I am the old Custom.

The Papists then say, that tho Christ did not indeed ordain the Pope, yet he
left it to the Church to do it. To which I ask, how Peter then was elected the
universal Bishop? For all things necessary to our Salvation are written in the
Bible, as St. Paul testifies in his Epistle to Timothy, 1 Timothy 3.
where he says, But continue thou in the things which thou have learned, etc.
And that from a Child thou have known the Holy Scriptures, which are able to
make thee wise unto Salvation, through Faith which is in Christ Jesus.

The Second Part.
BUT to what Purpose do we go about to prove that Peter is not the Head of the
Church? For allow he had been so, that does not conclude that the Bishop of
Rome is the principal Head: For the Papists themselves cannot prove that Peter
was ever at Rome, because by the Scripture they cannot prove it; nor by any
true History: Therefore the Bishop of Rome loses one of his great Titles, of,
Papa ex Jure Divino; for no Authority can be, ex Jure Divino, unless it be
confirmed by the Scripture.

Well then, we have him in a great plunge, since he must be forced to say, Paul
Pope by Human Traditions; for if he be not Bishop by the Divine Word, but only
by Human Traditions, then all Kings, Princes and other Magistrates, may
abrogate the Statutes and Institutions made by their Fathers, as we have seen
before.

If every one then had known this, the Pope had been poor long ago. Now the
Papists say, that the Bishop of Rome was instituted by the Primitive Church;
but no more than Mahomet, for they began near the same Age, and the Pope was
elected, when all manner of wicked Errors were advanced in Christendom.

Nevertheless to prove that Peter was at Rome, they produce the Clementine
Epistles, but we will prove them counterfeited, and falsified by the Papists:
For in them it is written that Peter was at Rome, in the second Year of the
Reign of Claudius, and lived there twenty five Years: but Christ was Crucified
in the eighteenth Year of Tiberius, and he reigned five Years after the
Crucifixion: Caius Caligula reigned four Years; and Claudius two; which makes
it eleven Years before Peter went to Rome: and in the eighteenth Year of our
Lord, Paul found St. Peter Gal. 1.
in Jerusalem; by which we see their History is false. And we will prove that
it is not true that Clement wrote those Epistles unto James, for James was dead
before Clement was Bishop.

Moreover, St. Peter was the Bishop of the Jews, and not of the Gentiles: for
St. Paul glories in several places Gal. 2.
that he was the Apostle of the Gentiles. Again, St. Paul writing to the
Galatians, says, that he went up to Jerusalem Gal. 1.
to see Peter; therefore it is most probable, that Peter dwelt for the most part
in Jerusalem: or in the adjacent Cities. And here we may see the Craft of the
Devil, and the Power of God: for notwithstanding the Devil (to establish his
Power) invented the Clementine Epistles; (tho they be counterfeited by the
Papists) yet I say, God by his Goodness and Clemency toward his Elect, has
caused the said Epistles to be so written, that every one who has read
History, may plainly comprehend and understand, that they were feigned by
Serpentine Subtilty, and by some abominable and obdurate Papists.

In several other Instances also, we may discover their false Subtilty; for
notwithstanding that the Holy Scripture says, Idols are senseless things, and
without Life, they have often framed Images, which sometimes rouled their Eyes,
sometimes turned their Heads, sometimes moved their Hands, and sometimes their
whole Bodies: by which means they made People believe, that an Image made of
Wood, heard and understood them; all of it being made so to the Life, that (as
they turned them) they made the Head and Eyes of the Image to turn also. But,
as Daniel with Ashes or Sand, proved the Idol Bell did not eat, but his Priests:
So by the Holy Scriptures, the confession of several Persons, and by
Observation and Experience, they have been proved to have been mere Machines,
and other Instruments.

The Third Part.
SInce we see that Peter neither was the Chief, nor was at Rome; (considering
that they say the Pope cannot lie) we will examine whether they themselves have
not acknowledged that no Person ought to be the Primate of the Church.

For Gregory the First has written, that none ought to be Pope. Gregory was
then Bishop of Rome, and Maurice was Emperor, and there were many Heresies in
Christendom; and the Bishop and Patriarch of Constantinople, at that time
pretended to be the Universal Bishop, who was much favored by Maurice: But
Gregory declared then in his Writings, that there ought to be no Principal in
the Church.

And now the Papists are overthrown by this, they say that by the consent of
the general Councils, and Doctors, an Universal Bishop was established under
the Name of Pope: whereas for four or five hundred Years after Christ, there
was no Person in the World that was distinguished or called by that Name.
Moreover, when there were several contentions about the Papacy, all learned
Persons detested the Opinion that there must be a Pope: and sometimes the very
Bishops of Rome themselves abhorred it. And St. Cyprian, writing Cyprian. De
simplicitate Prelatorum.
concerning the Unity of the Church, says, There is one Bishop, of whom every
Bishop holds a share. For as there are many Beams in the Sun, yet the
brightness is but one: Many Branches in a Tree, several Streams from a
Fountain; in like manner the Church is but one, which being illuminated by the
Brightness of our Lord, who extends his Beams throughout all the World, yet
nevertheless the Clarity is but one, to wit, Jesus Christ. Likewise the same
Cyprian. Epist. ad Corn.
Cyprian, being Bishop of Carthage, calls the Bishop of Rome his Companion.
Moreover, St. Jerome, Bishop of Jerome. Epist. ad Euag.
Rome, humbles the Style of Primate; saying, if there be any question of the
Authority of a Primate of the Church, although there are Bishops of Nations and
Cities, it follows not therefore that there is a Primate over all the World,
for the World is much greater than any City. And also in the Council of
Carthage it was decreed, that none should be called the First or Primate of the
Bishops.

What shall I say more, August. Epist. 28. ad Constable.
'twas consented and agreed by all, for six hundred Years after Christ, that
none ought to be Pope. How could Peter then have been Primate, or the Pope his
Successor? For Peter in his Epistles does not command, but pray and beseech the
Ministers of God. Likewise when he is accused for having communicated with the
Gentiles, he does not burn Act. 11.
his Accusers, as the Pope does his: but excuses himself, and shows a
Submission.

Again, when he was sent to Samaria by his Brethren Act. 8.
and Companions, he readily obeyed their Decree and went down to that City.

The Fourth Part.
OF this Detestable and Diabolical Pope, the Holy Scriptures in several Places
give us a plenary Demonstration; some of which I shall show unto you. As first,
in the fourth of Daniel, it is set down how that Daniel (that was beloved by
Belshazzar) saw a Vision, which appeared to him thus: I saw, says Daniel, in my
Vision by Night, and behold, the four Winds of the Heaven strove upon the great
Sea, and four great Beasts came up out of the Earth; the first was like a Lion,
and had Eagles Wings; and I beheld till the Wings thereof were plucked, and a
Man's Heart was given to it. The second Beast was like unto a Bear, and it
raised up it self on one side; and they said thus unto it, Arise, devour much
Flesh. The third was like unto a Leopard, which had upon the Back of it four
Wings of a Fowl, and the said Beast had also four Heads. After this I beheld
the fourth Beast, which was dreadful and terrible, and strong exceedingly; and
it had great Iron Teeth; and devoured every thing; and it had ten Horns. And
behold, there came up among them another little Horn, before whom there were
three of the first Horns plucked up by the Roots; and it had Eyes, and a Mouth
speaking Blasphemies. And I beheld till I saw the Ancient of Days did sit, and
I beheld, says Daniel, till the Judgment was set for the Horn, and till the
Beast was slain, and his Body given to the burning Flame: and it shall be for a
time, times, and a half. Now the four Winds, and the four Beasts (as
Melancthon, Oecolampadius, and all the Learned Writers say) signify the four
Monarchies; the first was that of the Assyrians, whereof Nebuchadnezzar was
Emperor; who (after he had been made like unto the Beasts for a long Season)
had the understanding of a Man given him again. The second signified the Empire
of the Persians, which was a Dominion of great Cruelty. The third notified the
Grecian Empire, which was immediately raised to its Grandeur; and the four
Wings, and four Heads signify the four Emperors which succeeded Alexander, and
divided amongst them the Grecian Monarchy: For Seleucus was made King of Syria,
Ptolomy got Egypt, Antigonus Asia, and Cassander Greece. The fourth Beast
signifies the terrible Monarchy of the Romans, out of which arises a little
Horn, which is Antichrist; and Antichrist has two Eyes, viz. the Pope, and
Mahomet: For notwithstanding that the Pope does not speak against Christ (as
Mahomet does); nevertheless I answer, that the Pope is as much, or rather more,
an Antichrist than Mahomet. For as he who flatters us, is our Enemy (tho he
seems to be our Friend): So the Pope who styles himself the Servant of the
Servants of God, is the Enemy of Christ; whilst under the Shadow of Religion,
he puts in practice all Hypocrisy, Idolatry, Dissimulation, and all sort of
Traditions: his Time shall be a Time, Times, and a half; that is to say, his
Days shall be shortened: For the number of seven stands for a perfect number in
Scripture: for St. Paul says, the just fall seven times a day, to wit, often.
Now the half of seven, is three and a half; therefore we must interpret by that
imperfect time, that those Days shall be shortened. St. Paul also in two
Epistles, Prophesies of the Pope; first, writing to the Thessalonians, he says,
Now we beseech you 2 These. 2
Brethren, by the coming of our Lord, that ye be not soon shaken in Mind, or be
troubled, neither by Spirit, nor by Word, nor by Letter, as that the Day of
Christ is at hand. Let no Man deceive you by any Means, for that day shall not
come, except there come a falling away first, and that Man of Sin be revealed,
the Son of Perdition: who opposes and exalts himself above God, so that he
as God sits in the Temple of God, etc. Again, St. Paul writing to Timothy,
speaks thus: Now the Spirit 1 Timothy 4.
speaks expressly, that in the latter times some shall depart from the Faith;
giving heed to Doctrines of Devils, speaking Lies in Hypocrisy, forbidding to
Marry, and commanding to abstain from Meats, which God has created to be
received with Thanksgiving of them which believe. Now let every one be asked,
if the Pope has not forbidden certain Meats, at certain times: and they must
all confess he has, for most Folks have felt it; or perchance, I should not be
a Liar if I said, that almost all Folks have.

And concerning the Prohibition of Marriage, ask their own Priests. St. Peter
tells us, that there shall come 2 Pet. 3^
in the last days Scoffers, etc. St. John in the Apocalypse says, Seven Angels
poured out Apo. 16.
the Vials of God's Wrath upon the Earth; and the signification is probable to
be thus.

The first Vial to be the Assyrian Monarchy; when the People of Israel became
Captive to Nebuchadnezzar. The second the Persian Monarchy. The third Vial the
Monarchy of the Grecians, which Alexander first established. The fourth was the
Roman Monarchy, which the Apocalypse (because of its Grandeur) says, the fourth
Vial was poured upon the Sun. The fifth is our Antichrist the Pope. The sixth
Vial is the Dominion of Mahomet. The seventh Vial signifies the end of the
World, and the Day of Judgment.

In the following Chapter he declares, that one of the seven Angels came and
talked with him, and showed him the State, Honor and Riches of the Pope: For
he says, he saw, A Woman sit Apo. 17.
upon the Beast, full of Names of Blasphemy, having seven Heads, and ten Horns;
and the Woman was arrayed in Purple, and Scarlet Color, and decked with Gold;
having a golden Cup in her Hand, full of Abominations, and filthiness of her
Fornications: and upon her forehead was written, Babylon the Mother of Harlots,
and Abominations of the Earth. The seven Heads signify the seven Apo. 17.
Hills which Antichrist dwells on: For Rome is built upon seven Mountains. The
seven Horns are the number of the Kings, who made War with the Lamb, and the
Lamb overcame them, for he is Lord of Lords, and King of Kings; then another
Angel came down from Heaven, Crying, Babylon is fallen, and Apo. 18.
is become the Habitation of Devils; thence I hope, that the Kingdom of
Antichrist shall be destroyed: For tho the wicked may prosper for a time,
their Dominion shall not last; but those who study the Law of the Lord, their
Prosperity shall last for ever. St. Paul, writing to Timothy, says, This 1 Timothy
3.
know also, that in the last days, Men shall be lovers of their own 2 Pet. 3.
selves, Covetous, Boasters, Proud, Blasphemers, etc. And the Prophet Isaiah
says, that Christ shall smite the Isa. 11.
Earth, with the Rod of his Mouth, and with the Breath of his Lips shall he
slay the wicked.

Since we see then that the reign of Antichrist shall not last for ever, we
must wait for the Destruction of Babylon, and submit our selves to the Will of
the Lord.

The Conclusion.
IN the first Part of our Book, We have proved and declared that Peter was not
Primate of the Church, by confuting all the Papistical Reasons for it.

In the second, We have proved that they cannot produce and allege any true
Testimony, that St. Peter was at Rome.

In the third Part, we have proved from themselves, that they have said they
ought not to have the Primacy.

In the fourth Part, We have explained the Prophesies speaking of Antichrist.
Since then the Pope is that wicked one, very Son of the Devil, an Antichrist,
and an abominable Tyrant; let us pray unto the Lord to preserve those still in
the Light who have seen it: and that he will show the sincere, pure, and true
Light unto those who sit in Darkness: that all the World may glorify God in
this Life, and be Partakers of the Eternal Kingdom of Heaven in the World to
come, by the Merits of Jesus Christ our Savior; to whom with the Father, and
the Holy Ghost, be all Honor, Glory, Dominion and Praise, for ever and ever.
Amen.

Remarques upon the Life and Reign of King Edward the Sixth, in Vindication of
his Memory, from Dr. Heylin's severe and unjust Censure.
WHen I consider what exemplary Virtue, and Piety, shone forth in the Words,
Actions, and Writings of this Illustrious King, some of whose Papers I have
been an unworthy Instrument of transmitting to the admiration of Posterity; I
cannot but with Indignation repeat the thought of Dr. Pref. to Hist. of Ref.
sup.
Heylin's snarling Censure, who counted it no Infelicity, that he was so soon
succeeded by Q. Mary, a bloody Popish Queen, and had the Malice to charge him
with being ill Ibid.
principled in himself, and easily inclined to embrace such Councils, as the
Doctor looked upon as pernicious to the Church. Nay, he says expressly, that his
Hist. of Ref. f. 131.
Minority was abused to many Acts of Spoil and Rapine, even to an high degree
of Sacrilege, and having affirmed that this was only to the raising of some,
and to the enriching of others about him, without any manner of improvement to
his own Estate; he, with a sly Insinuation, leaves it to the Readers Judgment,
Whether Ibid. p. 132.
the King being in the sixteenth Year of his Age, were either better studied in
his own Concernments, or seemed to be worse. principled in matters which
conconcerned the Church.

Hereby the Doctor wipes away all the Eulogies, which in several places of his
Book Truth had drawn from him. Indeed he cites the Passage out of Josephus,
who, speaking of good King Josias, says, When he grew to be twelve years Hist.
of Ref. f. 38.
old, he gave manifest proof of his Piety and Justice: for he drew the People
to a conformable course of Life, and to the detestation and abolishing of
Idols, that were no Gods, and to the Service of the only true God of their
Forefathers; and considering the Actions of his Predecessors, he began to
rectify them in that wherein they were deficient, with no less circumspection
than if he had been an old Man, and that which he found to be correspondent and
advisedly done by them, that he did both maintain and imitate: all which things
he did both by reason of his innate Wisdom, as also by the Admonishment and
Counsel of his Elders: in following orderly the Laws, not only in Matters of
Religion, but of Civil Polity. Which as the Doctor acknowledges, puts the
Parallel betwixt the two young Kings beyond all exception.

But then the forementioned Reflection is big with a monstrous Intimation, as
if all the vast hopes which this young King gave, were blasted in their too
forward Spring.

And the ground of all this Sacrilege, as I may call it, against his Memory,
was taken from some Instructions (which a learned Dr. Burnet's Hist. of Ref.
par. 2. f. 217.
Author excuses, from their being signed as they were brought to him in his
Sickness, whereby he appointed Heylin's Hist. f. 95. and 132.
Visitors to examine, What Jewels of Gold and Silver, or Silver Crosses,
Candlesticks, Censers, Challices, Copes, and other Vestments were then
remaining, in any of the Cathedral, or Parochial Churches, or otherwise had
been embezelled or taken away: What was convenient for use, was to be
distributed Burnet's Hist. f. 217.
to every Church, Chapel, or Cathedral, of the Surplusage part was to be given
to the Poor, and the other part was to be delivered to the King's Treasurer.

Now admit that the young King did not think every thing to be God's, which was
given him by superstitious Piety, not believing that God would accept that as
his peculiary, which served either for vain Pomp, and Ostentation, or else
administered to the Luxury and Pride of the lazy Priests; Was not his well
managed Zeal against Popery, and his full purpose of reforming the Nation from
Idolatry, and Superstition, (and that too crowned with Success, far beyond what
could have been expected from such a conspiration of Circumstances, as then
were against it,) enough to atone for this?

The Doctor himself was Heylin's Hist. f. 9.
obliged to own, That by clear Light of Holy Scripture, and the principal
Duties of Religion laid open to them, the People were the better able to
discern the Errors and Corruptions of the Church of Rome, from which by the
Piety of this Prince they were fully freed. And is not the good of Souls, and
the Edification of God's Church and People, preservable before the Ornaments of
the Altar, and the excessive Riches, or vain Vestments of Churchmen?

But the supposed Sacrilege is Death in the Pot.

-- Manet alta mente repostum, Judicium Edwardi; spretique injuria Spectri. If
you look to the bottom of this Clamor about Sacrilege, it is not for robbing
God of what is his; for if it were so, Churchmen could have no Power of
disposing of things once given to the Church, tho with the consent of the
Founder, whereas even in the most Superstitious Times, some Spiritual
Corporations might have alien'd their Church Lands, without consent of the 1
Inst. f. 300. b.
Founders. So that in short, the Sacrilege lies in clipping the Wings, and
abridging the Power of Churchmen, who were little God-almighties in the
Affairs of the Church; in which they would have nothing done without their
Consent. But truly I must submit it to better Judgments than mine own, whether
what is dedicated to Superstitious Uses in the Service of the true God, be much
more pleasing to him, than what is devoted to false Gods: Nay, I have Authority
from Dr. Stillingfleet to Stillingfl. of the Idolatry of the Church of Rome. p.
47.
say, that there may be Idolatry in an unwarranted, or at least forbidden,
dedication of things to God's Service.

Wherefore some perhaps would be likely to compare Dr. Heylin's Censures upon
King Edward, to the ravings of one of Baal's Priests, when good King Josias
defiled the 2 Kings 23. 8.
high places where the Priests had burnt Incense.

To be sure Cardan, tho a Papist, yet had so much of a Philosopher in him, that
Mother Church could not bribe him to defraud so brave an Enemy of his due
Praises; but, in a transport of Admiration, he declares, that Not only England,
but the World has reason to lament Burnet's Hist. f. 3.
his being so early snatc'd away. While Dr. Heylin an English Divine, so great
is Diana of the Ephesians! seems to rejoice, that Queen Mary secured to the
Church her Ornaments, and to Churchmen that Power, which, no doubt, he thought
the Spirit of Reformation, working in, and like a Glory adorning this Prince,
would be likely to reduce to the Primitive Authority of Preaching, and
Administering the Sacraments.

That indeed is a Principle which this young King discovers in the Papers here
set forth, and if I hereby expose P. 12, 13, 14, 15, 16.
his Memory to farther rudenesses, I am persuaded the thinking and
disinterested part of Mankind will laugh at such impotent Malice.

But I shall offer a few Considerations, besides what have been already
interspersed, which may revive the Protestant Reader's Sense, of the loss our
Religion had by this King's immature Death.

The first thing remarkable to this Purpose, was the Ingenuity and Sweetness of
his Disposition; which, as a Papist Cardan.
himself confesses, raised in all good and learned Men, the greatest
expectation of him possible: this without doubt, was in great measure derived
from his beautiful Mother. Who has left behind her the Character, of being the
discreetest, Heylin's Hist. of Ref. f. 7.
humblest, and fairest of all King Henry the Eight's Wives.

Dos est magna Parentum virtus. Says the Poet, and certain it is, that the rich
Dowry of Virtue, which his Mother brought with her, descended with advantage on
the Son; Whose Mind was a vast Treasury of Graces, and contained more than the
Scene of his short Life could give him occasion of exerting: so that if there
were any one thing for which the Lives of former Hero's might have been more
memorable than his, it proceeded from the want of time to give an Example to
all following Kings in every thing praiseworthy. Wherefore Cardan said rightly,

Specimen virtutis exhibere potuit, non exemplum. But the love of Truth was
natural to him; and indeed Dr. Burnet's Hist. f. 25. Hayward p. 7.
that Sweetness and Evenness of Temper, which won upon the Hearts of all that
approached him, gave him an extraordinary Capacity for the finding it out. The
Light of Reason, as an elegant Writer has it, is Lumen Culverwell's Light of
Nature. p. 66.
tranquillum and amicum: This Candle would shine more clearly and equally, if
the Winds of Passions were not injurious to it.

But, besides, that his Temper of Mind, fitted him to attend to the
consequences of things, and to judge without disorder or partiality, it was very
pious, and he had an inbred Veneration for God's Word, which is sufficient to
lead us into all needful Truths; and it is not to be questioned but God will
reward the esteem of the sacred Truths there contained, with a proportionate
degree of understanding in them.

It has been observed even by his Calumniator, That in the Days of his
Childbood, Heylin f. 14.
when being about to take down something, which seemed to be above his reach,
one of his Fellows proffered him a bossed-plated-Bible to stand upon, and
heighten him, for taking that which he desired: when he perceived it to be a
Bible, with holy Indignation, he refused it, and sharply reprehended him that
made the proffer. Nay, Dr. Heylin is forced upon this to Remarque, that it was
A strong Assurance of that dear Esteem and Veneration, in which he held that
Sacred Book in his riper Years.

2. The Probity of his Manners was so great, that one may well say, his Zeal
for Divine Truth, was not without true saving Knowledge, nor his Knowledge
unoperative: and this made him Dr. Burnet supra. f. 25.
very inclinable to love and cherish true Religion.

3. His early Diligence and Application of Mind, to understand the Principles
of his Religion was wonderful. I my self have seen a Collection of his, under
his own ^^nd, of the Texts of Scripture relating to the Nature of Faith and
Justification, put together with great Care and Judgment, and translated into
the French Tongue, which was done when he was but Eleven Years of Age, the Year
before he wrote the Treatise now published; it is likewise dedicated to his
Uncle with a great deal of Piety, and Manly Sense.

4. He Lived and Dyed in an utter detestation and abhorrence of Popery; his
Sister Mary was a bigoted Papist, and Dr. Heylin takes Hist. of Ref. f. 102.
pains to show us, that she was obliged by her Interest to be so; to be sure
the Emperor engaged so heartily for her having Liberty to keep up her way of
Worship, that the Council persuaded the King to consent to it; which he not
only opposed with such Reasons as amazed his Bishops, who were for complying
with the Emperor; but with so much true Compassion for her Errors, and pious
Displeasure, that he should be pressed to suffer her in her Sin, Heylin f. 103.
that the Tears ran down his Cheeks, and made his Bishops weep too, it may be,
to see their tardy Zeal rebuked by the Kings.

But that which gives the greatest Demonstration of his abhorrence of Popery,
and true value for the Protestant Religion, was his dying Prayer; which as Dr.
Heylin himself tells us, was not so much aiming at the prolonging Heylin f. 140.
of his Life, as the continuance of Religion; not so much at the freeing
himself from his Disease, as the preserving the Church from the danger of
Popery. Which dying Prayer, as it was taken from his Mouth, was in these Words
following

LOrd God, deliver me out of this wretched and miserable Life, and take me
among thy chosen. Howbeit not my Will but thine be done. Lord, I commit my
Spirit to thee. O Lord, Thou know how happy it were for me to be with thee;
yet for thy Chosen's sake, send me Life and Health, that I may truly serve
thee. Oh my Lord God! Bless my People, and save thine Inheritance. O Lord God,
save thy chosen People of England. O Lord God, Defend this Realm from Papistry,
and maintain thy true Religion, that I and my People may praise thy Holy Name,
for Jesus Christ his sake.

Add to all this, his undaunted Courage, which he discovered as far as his
Opportunities could give him leave, his great Conduct in the management of
public Affairs, his exact Judgment in all Things; and consider the esteem
which flowed from all these, and would have facilitated the success of any
Undertaking, with Foreign Princes, or amongst his own Subjects, for the
advantage of the Protestant Cause: and certainly, it cannot but be Vid. The
Character given him by Dr. Burnet. Hist. of Ref. f. 225, 226.
thought a great Infelicity to the Protestant Religion, that he lived not to
finish his glorious Designs of settling and confirming the true Religion at
home, and encouraging it abroad, till it became the prevailing Interest of
Christendom. If any think that this would have been fatal to the Church of
England, certainly they put a great Scandal upon it; but God keep that Church
from flourishing, to which the length of such a Kings Reign would be fatal.

FINIS.

