EDWARD LITLETON, Lord Keeper of the Great Seal of ENGLAND, And Lord Speaker
in the House of Peers Escape from the PARLIAMENT.

And his flight to the KING Now Resident at YORK ALSO, Sir THOMAS GARDENER the
Recorder of London's Letter to his MAJESTY.

WITH, The Parliament's Message to the Lord Savill, the Lord Seymer, and the
Lord Rich., etc. who attend his Majesty at York, and their denial to come to
the House of PEERS.

And Lastly, The Votes of the House of Commons, passing upon the said LORDS.

I. B. Cler. P.

London, Printed for T. H. 1642.

Edward Littleton, Lord Keeper of the great Seal of England, his escape from
the Parliament, and his flight to the King, now resident at York.
AMongst all men, those in Authority ought to be most cautious, and ought to
carry themselves circumspective in the Function of their Offices, that no
occasion of suspicion may be at any time reflected on, for according to that
oraculous sentence,

Omne animi vitium, tanto conspectius in se,
Crimen habet, quanto major, qui peccat, habetur.
Every vice of the mind makes the crime more heinous and conspicuous, by how
much the more that person is esteemed greater who offends. For he that is
placed in Dignity, ought to be a Cynosura, a Guide, and as it were, a
propitious Star to direct others in the unquestionable path of the truth: but
if these directions be contrary, and opposite to truth, it is a most despicable
error, Non tam quod ipse peccat, sed quod peccatum in alios diffundit: not so
much that he does offend himself, but that he diffuseth the offense committed
to many other, who are taught by his example to offend. I accuse no man, but
desire, and do heartily wish, that all Men, who are exalted to such
super-eminece, may be so indubitable in their lives, and the real execution of
their offices. John, Lord Finch, Lord Keeper of the great Seal before, being
found very culpable in many things, and being guilty of many impositions and
grievous taxes on the Subjects, was voted a Delinquent, but he escaped in a
disguised habit, and fled beyond Sea. Then the Parliament giving great
approbation to the Lord Littleton of his sufficiency, immediately chose him
Lord Keeper, and speaker of the House of Peers, who succeeded Finch, and
continued (as appeared by public silence) unquestionable in that place. Till
of late his Majesty sent some express orders to him, That he should give out
Writs for the removing the Term to York, and to subscribe the great Seal of
England to some other strange things: which the Parliament conceiving to be
disadvantagious, and prejudicial to the general good of the Kingdom;
contrarily ordered, That he should neither give out any Writs, or subscribe any
Seal, not knowing the dangerous consequence that might ensue thereby. Then his
Majesty being highly incensed, threatened to turn him out of his place, if he
did not obey his commands, which if he had performed, he had not possibly
escaped the Parliaments censure. And being thus variously distracted, his fancy
guided sometime with the smiling Wind of Hope, another time tossed with the
impetuous Tempest of Fear; he at length intended to establish some resolution
in his mind, and taking the broad Seal along with him, he escaped from the
Parliament the 25 day of this Month, and fled for protection to his Majesty
now residing at York. But Posts, and the Pursevants of the House being sent
after him, he went above twenty miles wide, that so he might not be traced and
overtaken. Notwithstanding, some conceive the cause of his flight was of more
impendent consequence, That there were some Articles, wherein he was highly
impeached to have been delivered against him: other report, That it was for
certain words spoken in the Kings behalf against the Parliament; but the
truth and certainety hereof is somewhat dubious; and without question the sure:
ground of his departure will be shortly published by the Parliament.

St Thomas Gardener Recorder of the City of London, being greatly attached of
Articles of high Consequence, and being conscious of the same, knew not how to
purge himself, either from the imputation of that high Impeachment, or avoid
the imminent censure, which he supposed would be suddenly granted by the
Parliament. Wherefore to secure himself from Imprisonment, or the suspicion of
any future danger, he without detraction of time, or procrastination of
intention, sent a Letter the same day, that the Lord Keeper fled to York, for
the protection of his Majesty.

The Lord Savill, the Lord Seymer, the Lord Rich, etc. by the command of the
King, went to York, without either the assent or consent of the House of
Peers. Wherefore they were incontinently sent for by special order from the
Parliament, to attend the House, whereof they were members, and ought not to
absent themselves upon no occasion whatsoever, without the Houses leave,
especially at this time, they having such weighty and serious matters of (...)
in hand, and the great affairs of the Kingdom, being so dangerous withal.
But the Houses received intelligence, and certain Information from York, from
the Committee sitting there, that these Noblemen were refrectory to their
Message, and denied absolutely to come, saving confidently, That they were
bound by the Oath of Allegiance to attend and obey his Majesty; and having
received his special command therefore, dare not presume to return without
his Majesty's leave. But although they refuse, rather to attend the King, then
the Parliament, whose members they are, and ought not therefore either to
absent themselves without the Houses consent, or stay from them* when as they
send special Order for their appearance; yet without doubt, the Parliament
have authority to command them.

Wherefore the 23 day of this present Month, the House of Commons being
completed, took into deliberate and mature consideration, the absolute denial
of those several Lords (aforenamed) sent for to attend the House. And after
some serious delate thereon, they Voted them delinquents, and therefore worthy
to be suspended the House: which Vote they sent and acquainted the Lords with,
by Message, and desired their ascents, and concurrance therein: but they being
greatly employed, took longer time to consider thereof.

May all Offenders and Delinquents whatsoever, who do meritoriously deserve
censure, suffer exemplary and condign punishment according to their demerits,
without partiality or connivance. May the King and his Parliament concur and
agree, that no occ^sion of danger or difference, that no suspicion of Fear or
jealousy may be fomented between either of them: May the manifold distractions
of this Kingdom be suddenly composed: May the bleeding wound^ of Ireland be
forthwith healed: May the Militia of this Kingdom be put into a sudden posture
of defense, that so we may be armed either to withstand any unexpected
Insurrection of Intestine or Domesticke Foes, or the Opposition of any
foreign Enemy whatsoever. And lastly, May the discerted Church be settled in
a true Reformation, correspondent to the Word of God; and that Faction and
Schism may be rooted out amongst us, to the glory of God, and the secure
prosperity of all Britain.

FINIS.

