AN ORDINANCE Of The LORDS and COMMONS Assembled in PARLIAMENT. Concerning the
Archbishop of CANTERBURY, who by reason of many great and weighty businesses,
cannot as yet be brought to his Trial.

Die Veneris, 17. Maii, 1643.

ORdered by the Lords and Commons Assembled in Parliament, that this Ordinance
shall be sorthwith Printed and published.

John Brown Cler. Parliamentorum.

LONDON, May 19. Printed for John Wright, in the Old-Bailey. 1643

Die Martis, 16. Maii* 1643.
WHereas William Lord Archbishop of Canterbury, stands Impeached in this
present Parliament for High Treason, and for diverse other great offenses and
misdemeanors, and by reason of many great and weighty businesses he cannot yet
be brought to trial for the said offenses and misdemeanors, and he in respect
of his said Archbishopprick of Canterbury, has power to give and Collate fic
Clerks diverse Parsonages, Vicaridges, Prebends, and other Ecclesiastical
promotions and preferments, and if any of them should become void, and he left
to prefer whom he please to the ^me, the same may prove very inconvenient, he
bestowing them upon unfit and unworthy persons; Be it therefore Ordered and
Ordained, by the Lords and Commons in this present Parliament, that in case any
of the foresaid Parsonages, Vicaridges, Prebends, or other Ecclesiastical
promotions or preferments now be, or shall hereafter and before the trial of
the said Lord Archbishop become void, that the said Lord Archbishop of
Canterbuty shall forbear to present or Collate any person or persons
thereunto, without the leave and Order of both Houses of Parliament: And it is
further Ordered and Ordained, that the said Lord Archbishop shall from time to
time until his said trial, present and Collate such fit person or persons, to
every such Parsonage, Vicaridge, Prebend and other Ecclesiastical preferment
as aforesaid, which now are, or hereafter before his said trial shall become
void, as by both Houses of Parliament shall be nominated and appointed. And it
is further Ordered by the said Lords and Commons in Parliament, that al
Archdeacons, Registers, and other Officers, Ministers, and persons whatsoever,
shall forbear to give or make any Admission, Institution, Collation, or
Induction of any person or persons whatsoever, which by the said Archbishop
shall be presented, in or to any such Parsonage, Vicaridge, Prebend, or other
Ecclesiastical preferment, other then such person and persons as shall be
nominated and appointed by both Houses of Parliament as aforesaid. And it is
lastly Ordered, that the said Lord Archbishop, and the Churchwardens of every
Parish and other Officers of the Church, where any Parsonage, Viccaridge,
Prebend, or other Ec-clesiasticall promotions or preferments, in the Donation
or gift of the said Archbishop is, shall within two months after the
respective avoydance thereof, give notice of such avoydance to the Lord Speaker
of the House of Peers for the time being.

FINIS.

