An Ordinance of both Houses of Parliament, for the safeguard of the
Parliament, Tower and City of London, under the Command of Sergeant Major
General Skippon.
WHereas upon the 12. of January last past (amongst other things in that
Order;) It is ordered by the Lords and Commons in Parliament, in these words:
And for the better safeguard of the Tower, It is further Ordered by both Houses
of Parliament, That the Sheriffs of London and Middlesex, shall appoint and
place a sufficient Guard about the Tower, both by Land and Water, under the
Command of Sergeant Major General Skippon, Commander of the Guards of the
Parliament, And that those Guards be careful to see the former Order observed.
Now whereas the said Sergeant Major having (in his great care and
faithfulness) given his advice to the said Sheriffs, concerning what Guards
he conceived to be fitting, and how the same Guards ought to have been Ordered
by Water and Land, as he thought most advantageous for the said service.
Whereas also the said Sergeant Major has given his further advice and Order to
diverse other persons concerning the timely discovery, and preventing of any
thing that might have been attempted or done contrary to the intent of the said
Order of both Houses of Parliament.

And whereas the said Sergeant Major Skippon has according to the trust
reposed in him by the City of London, placed the Trained-Bands of the said
City, at the further end of Tower-Street, and in such other places within and
about the City, as he conceived to be most for the safety of the City: All
and every particular of the which premises, and whatsoever else in the same
kind, and to the same ends, that he the said Sergeant Major has advised, or
done, or shall advise or do according to the Order aforesaid, is hereby well
approved off, and fully warranted by both Houses of Parliament, as being for
the Real good service of His Majesty, and the Commonwealth; as also for the
safety of the Parliament and City: And is in all and every part thereof
according to his Duty, the last Protestation, and the Laws of this Kingdom. And
if any person shall arrest, or any other way trouble him for so doing, he does
break the Privilege of Parliament, Violate the Liberty of the Subject, and is
hereby declared an enemy to the Commonwealth.

February 18. London, Printed for Joseph Hunscott. 1641.


