Die Sabbathi, 1. Novembr. 1645.
An Ordinance of the Lords and Commons assembled in Parliament, for
Compositions for VVardships in the Court of Wards and Liveries, and for
Signing of Bills, and passing of them under the Great Seal.
Whereas diverse Compositions have been heretofore made by sundry persons, with
the Master and Council of His Majesty's Court of Wards and Liveries at
Westminster, for the Wardships of the Bodies of diverse of his Majesty's Wards,
upon some of which Compositions, considerable Sums of money have been already
paid, and others are to be paid; But in regard the Grants of the said Wardships
are to pass under the great Seal, by Bill Signed by His Majesty, which in
these times of distraction cannot be obtained; By means whereof, the said
persons who have already so compounded and paid their said moneys, are without
the fruit of their said Compositions, And also as well those which have
compounded and have not yet paid, as others which are prepared to compound for
several Wardships, are for the reasons aforesaid, discouraged to make their
several Compositions and payments with the said Master and Council: The Lords
and Commons assembled in Parliament, do therefore hereby Ordain and Declare,
That all and every such Bill or Bills as hereafter shall be Signed by the
Master and Clerk of the said Court of Wards and Liveries for the time being,
notwithstanding their not being Signed by His Majesty, shall be passed under
the great Seal in form usual. And the Commissioners of the said great Seal for
the time being, are hereby required and Authorized to pass Letters Patents in
form usual from time to time under the said great Seal unto the several
Committees, or Grantees of the Marriages of the said respective Wards, according
to the tenor and effect of the said Bills so Signed as aforesaid: And this
Ordinance shall be their sufficient Warrant in that behalf; which Letters
Patents so passed, shall be effectual in Law, according to the tenor thereof,
the not Signing thereof by His Majesty notwithstanding. And it is also Ordained
by the Lords and Commons aforesaid, That the Master and Council of the said
Court, shall proceed in all things belonging to the Jurisdiction of that Court
according to Law.

Io: Brown, Cleric. Parliamentorum.
H: Elsynge, Cler. Parl. D. Com.


