The Doting DOCTOR, OR The Icarion PREACHER. Calculated for the better
instruction of King BLAKE of Coven-Garden: Representing the Meridian of his
Dunghill Embassy, where the Pole is elevated many Degrees beyond the Manners
of the King the Author.

By N. E. Gent. 1655.

1. Tim. 3.6. Not a Novice, lest being lifted up etc.

Printed in the Year, 1655.

The Doting Doctor, OR, The Icarion Preacher.
BEloved, these are Days of Liberty, in which we may be free to speak or
write our minds (we hope) in Detection of any presumption whatsoever, without
any prejudice to Church, or State etc. Our business therefore is to treat a
little of a large Pamphlet set forth by one Blake a Draper, being thus
entitled, viz: An Embassy from the Kings of the East to his Highness the Lord
Protector, wherein the man at first vaunteth highly, aiming at no low things,
but in the end, for want of matter spiritual enough (for to the spirit he
pretends much) he dawbs with untempered mortar not suiting the purpose of what
he pretends too, so that of all his tedious trifling discourse we may say with
Horace, -- amphora coepit
Institui currente rota cur urceus exit.
It did begin at first to be a pot of Largest size,
But in the end pot would not come, but pitcher did arise.


We pass by our Preface and come to the subject matter of our discourse, viz.
the Book as above Entitled, which seems to me to consist of nothing but a
mess of spiritual Nonsense, and falacious stuff, altogether unbecoming such
an Embassage, proceeding from so great a King of the East, but may it please
your Majesty (if you are a King) to discover to us that Samuel who anointed
your Grace: if you cannot, we shall take you to be more Ambitious then truly
vertu^us or Religious.

Secondly, if you are a King of the East, I demand then what star has led you
so far out of the way, or why you relate nothing of your starry Conductor etc.
Thirdly, if so be you are a true King of the East, wherefore looked you not on
those Royal Presidents who followed the star at the birth of our Blessed
Savior, viz Gasper, Balthazar, Melchior and in imitation brought some presents
which the East Country had aforded to declare you to have bin a real King of
the East, for the story has in thus of them. v^z.

Gasper with his Myrrh began these presents to unfold Thu^ Melchior brought in
Frankincense, and Balthozor brought Gold. But not one word of any such thing
do I find you pretend to offer at all: well then seeing it in consistent with
Reason, that you should be a King of the East part of the world, we will see
how it may relate to the East of England, the situation of your Highness house
is Goven* Graden, London, which is indeed something North East, or (to speak
like a Mariner) East and by North from Charing Cross, which imports you to
be not King of the East here neither: this savors now something of Pride, but
before I sum up the total, it may be he harh the East side of Worcester house
to Preach in (some may say) and so may entitle himself King of the East from
thence, if he should have the East side of the house to preach in, as he has
not, yet could not he be called King of the East for that at all; but oh that
Royal Gaspar were alive, what would he say to this puny* King for his
presumption? surely thus might he disdain such an unworthy comparison: Simia
quam similis turpissimae bestia nobis. I must needs wonder when I see, a
pouch-mouth'd Ape so like to me.

Thus have we noted the manner of the man, we come now to his Learning, which
is much of the same stamp, with his manners, he begins with an Epistle to my
Lord Protector, and another to the Israel of God; in the first his Grace is
something doubtful of the constancy of Atlas, deems him to be drawing away his
shoulders, letting the Heavens and Eternity so low, that he fears an intended
conjunction before he be well prepared etc. In the second, he professes not to
care who rules, so Christ and his Saints Reign, viz. Those who are best at
praying and Preaching, Renowned King William (but no Conqueror) here is
something of modesty -- these words, if you mean only spiritually; but I would
propose one thing to your consideration; have you not, think you, expulsed your
self here from Rule, in your desire that only those who are best at praying
and preaching might Reign? I hope, my Liege, you are convinced of your own
deficiency in both, as not being so excellent in either, as to be accounted or
approved of, as one who is best at praying and preaching unless you are of the
same opinion as you were some years since at Somerset House, to conclude those
best at both which cannot say, Boh to a Goose, as my self heard your
hautinesse most pitifully affirm.

But now his Majesty vants of the Saints Managements, tells his Reader it is
enough for Peter, Paul, James, Jack, or John, and the poor saints so to do,
etc. before I ask his wisdom what to do, I demand of him in what Diary,
Calendar, or Chronicle of Saints he ever found Saint Jack, I know no reason his
Excellency has to gainsay the Anabaptist since himself is tut'nd Anabaptizer
of saints, now would I know what this Saint Jack with the rest of his fellows
should do, or what is enough for them to do, but my good King William tells me
nothing of that but some of his fellow Kings (were they not all Buzzards or
blockheads) might tell him he did more then enough, when he writ such a
Mountain of Nonsense and illiterate stuff, unbecomming so great a King of the
East.

Instead of his impudencyes Picture he presents us with the Portract of a
bird, which he calls an Eagle, with a pen in the mouth of it ready made,
though it be better known (then his kingly wit) that in Eagle is not
commonly trained up to writing, and indeed Eagles are birds which are very rare
and seldom found in England, how his Malmsines got this into his Cage (we
know not) but much wonder, but Considering the paucity of such Birds here, I
must believe that as his Embassy consists of nothing but figments and
owly-glasses and shadows, so has he cut and carbed this shadow of the
Eagles writing after the conceit of his Beefe-Braind understanding etc.

Page 1. Come we now to the Embassy it self, which we will but touch
lightly, lest we should glorify this pretended King too much, in the very
entry he howles abominably for his Liberty and his Magna Charta purchased by
the blood of Christ etc. as if there were no such thing granted as the seedome
of Spirit. Page 7. He goes on charging my L. P. with keeping the Libertyes of
his good King from him, with abundance more of the same stamp: and in the end
of his sabberings, tells us he is so straightened he cannot own Christ in the
Congregations, nor make use of his privileges in exercising his gifts there,
and it is his sin and shame to keep silent any longer: how fair would this Mouse
cast a shadow like an Elephant, how willingly would Esops Crow become an Eagle?
a fin and shame, to be silent any longer do you say, sir, not I hope unless
your preaching transcend your writing; for know, that a fool is known by the
multitude of words, but may it please your Highness, who has thus abridged you
of your freedom? why did not your Grace continue your exercises longer at
Somerset house, when no one offered to quench the ruffling motions of your Esau
like Spirit? I doubt your Majesty had canted Nonsense so long there that you
had prated your self ashamed, and so deserted your Ministry and Auditory both
together? and yet now you are ashamed to keep silence any longer? O wrestles
King of the East, neither well, full, nor fasting, will neither preaching nor
silence satisfy you? sure you have been overtaken with some Epidemick fit,
which has mightily exhausted the treasury of your Majesty's wisdom, and now
your Hogsheads empty, how can we expect otherwise but that it should sound?
but he goes on still girding at my Lord P. O. my Lord Cromwell, (says he)
under God our Protector, if you say that the time is not yet come and defer us
one moment longer, God will lay you by -- out of the hearts of his dearest
ones, and raise deliverance some other way: how, what, not only King but also
Prophet, then blessed be the Drapers, is not this a pretty Sprinsius, belike
he was at Gods Counsel table and had a vote in the decree, it his prophecy
be true, or it may be as it is most likely, he has drawn up some, muddy,
nasty, exhalation by the strength of his pragmatick understanding, and so
generated some Cometicall chimerae in his narrow Braynpan, but the matter being
by nature hot (and he in a Religious Lunacy) chanced to make an escape through
his hog-noddle, and has by some kind of transmutation in its fall (or flight
rather) become a Commet, of no less fury then the threatening of our chiefest
Governors: is not this a fine swelling piece of vanity and has certainly
been in the University of Bedlam, as appears by the candor of his cracked wits?

Page 10. Not like a Madman, or King of the East, but like a beaten Spaniell,
or very crafty companion, he fawns upon him whom he has cursed by bell,
book, and candle, even my L. P. though we have rayled at you, prayed to God
to blast your late proceedings, yet now we will hug you etc. here is a fine
saintling that can imitate the Devil in the Proverb, as to be so purely good
if pleased, or the Satyr in the Fable can blow hot and cold with a breath, but
here thou lukewarm Laodicean, though thou art a King of the East, yet thy
huggs, fawnings, prayers, etc. of his Highness my L. P. will in no wise
extenuate his reverend and Christian esteem of the learned to hearken to luch
Ignora's as you, lest with your huggs, prayers and closest embraces, you also
have ready at hand a sop, with a Hail Master at the end etc.

Page 14. This King Symplicius cautionizeth the honest Protestant, not to wink
at what he sees in gifted Christians, but to take heed he refuse not him that
speaks from Heaven, for God gives them gifts without latin phrases though ten
thousand refuse it, how; now: what, a King? and King of the East too* and
speak against Latin, O'h ignorant Animal! O'h unworthy King of the East!

I look for Scholar ship, but it appears
Hoods make no Monks, nor bea^ds Philosophers.
Page.16. This Icarus will parley with the Ministers too, and says truly that
of all good men godly Ministers are the best; but a little after as if he had
spoken a left handed truth, tells us they are so in one sense, and says also
that the setting up of such dull men, is the pulling down of the gifted, for
their preaching is empty, their praying Pop^sh, etc. (and in Page 66. wishes
his fellow Kings never to stay for Psalme-men or Readers for they may go all
to play, or to plough, or sing Te Deum) this says King wiseacres Grice pleases
for ^h^ present but damns in the and; but weel' leave these snaffs and old
Priests: thus far King Broomstaffe, Would any body think that his Majesty
should be so fortish as to think that his Majesty should be so sottish as to
think that, to sing Te Deum, were not as good as his nonsensicall prating; for
what does the Animal intend by it? do we not all know that singing to God is
the most acceptablest sacrifice in the world? or did this King Dunderhead
think the singing Te Deum had signified somewhat else. beside singing to God?
but i will leave this Buttologist who can damn both City and Country for going
to Marybone, Padington, etc. and he calls it to have a lick at Antichrists
tail, I only ask the Green head this Quere, whether men had not better go
to Maribone to here a learned Scholar preach? (for such is Doctor Swadlin)
then to go to Worcester House to see the Kings of the East throw stones
against the wind in the West:

O simple Blake, O^h silly Eastern King,
Can thou damn folks, and not Te Deum sing?
This Captain Cretensis is still on his march, coming with great threats and
brags against the Ministry in Page 23 thus, stand away straight, or we will
preach you down, pray you down, write you down, Pull you down headlong etc.
-- Make room for young Phaeton, he comes loftily mounted with buggs words in
his mouth, not like a King of the East, but like a seven headed Hydra or a
Hercules at least, thus has his Majesty showed impudence enough to make
himself a fool* in barking like an angry Mastife at the reverend Ministry, at
whose feet this vain fellow may learn better manners, at least to know his
duty toward his neighbor; but it should seem with his reason he has abjured
all good manners as well as common civillity etc. But

The folly which Grand Pluto dreads, King Blake of Covent Garden spread Page 60
To show his power or will rather, he threatens the poor Gospel Minister or
gifted Christian, if he once takes him in a lie, or cheating, etc. he will
hang him at his shop: your Majesty is somewhat too rigid here, for I question
not but were your Grace observed in cutting off but one yard of Cloth, we might
find you guilty of twenty lies, if nor a little cheating too: would your
goodness be contented if ( Hamman l^ke) you handsell what you have pu^chased
for poor Mordecay: but Sir me thinks you deviate wonderfully here from him who
is the true president of Kings, even the Lord Jesus, more merciful unto Peter
when he he had not lied only, but also foresworne himself, but I pass this
by as a zealous bolt too soon shot etc.

Page 53. But to wind up all, his Grace shows us how fruitful he would be in
his work, against sin, Satan, Turk, Pope, Devils Mates -- Muncks, Punks,
Jews, -- Rogues, Rovers, -- Pigmongers, Whoremongers, Applemongers, Egg, Corn,
Pease* and Baconmongers, -- Greedy dogs etc.

Again, to bind up all his legal stuff in a bundle (as in Page 43 himself
do(...)h the Scripture) away runs the rabble, (and they must needs run that
the Devil drives) the Kings of the East, drive these Locusts to the West, the
Devils to their Dens, Imphs to their dams, Errors to their homes; all to the
Devil, most to the Pope: (O acute Logitian) many to the M^ss Priest, the other
Priest too and his tail, lustful, lazy, idle, -- Shakers, Quakers, and
ungodly Ranters, -- and your Iurney-jobbers, red faced Clerks, Sawers,
Psalme-men, Wardens, Pares, -- drunken Readers etc.

Good King be not so lavish, half this stuff
Will make a Coat, to prove you fool enough
Thus you see how his Majesty fooms at mouth, and beats himself as if he were
in a Religious Lunacy, ( Alias the falling Sickness) or else most deeply
troubled with Defluxionem per caput vermiculans in Naremcrassam abtusamque,
which makes him thus to Glander and sling about his filth. But I have honored
this [Sublicium] caput too much already, I forbear, yet since he has
Adventured upon the stage, my muse accounts him somewhat deserving, Ergo: in the
name of Democritus, I dub him an honorable fellow.

Rise up Will Blake, mount up (alas)!
An Eastern King, or English Ass.
FINIS.
To the Reader.
I Had not noted this Palpit-monsters ignorance, had be not carped at the
regular course of nature, he might have bin a writer, and Preacher, ex argillo
in luto conficti, still, had he bin so wise as not to have betrayed his
ignorance, in joining world gazing, and stargazing together, and carping at the
glory of Science, a thing he so little understands, but Scientia non habet
inimicum nisi ignorantem, it his speculation be so divine and piercing, that he
thinks he can gaze beyond the stars, or above them, he must know he cannot
do that unless he first gaze up to them, or else (to make his position good)
he must pull out those oculus out of his own head, and gaze only by Oculi
fidei, or the world and stars (to use his Majesty's Dialect) those carnal
objects, will betray his ignorant sight, so long, as those carnal eyes, have a
prospect out of that capitis of his, etc. But.

Fox-like he slights those things he cannot Reach,
I Will pray for Prophets, when such Asses Preach.


