An Ordinance of the Lords and Commons Assembled in Parliament, for the
continuance of Tonnage and Poundage.
Die Sabbathi, 13. Martii. 1646.
THe Lords and Commons assembled in Parliament, taking into consideration, that
there is a continuance of those causes that first induced them to pass the
Ordinance of Tonnage and Poundage, the affairs of the Kingdom, and other His
Majesty's Dominions, necessitating the setting forth, and maintaining of
several Fleets of Ships at Sea, as well for defense of the Kingdom, as safety
of Navigation and Commerce, do therefore hereby Order and Ordain, That the
respective Ordinances of Parliament, concerning the Subsidy of Tonnage and
Poundage, dated the first of July, 1642. and the one and twentieth of February,
1644. together with the Book of Rates, agreed on by the House of Commons; and
by their Order published in print; and all and every the Clauses, Articles, and
Instructions, in the said Ordinances, and Book of Rates set down, shall
continue and stand in full force and virtue, from the twenty six of March next
inclusive, (the time of their expiration, unto the twenty six of March, which
shall be in the year of our Lord, 1648. inclusive. And Samuel Avery, Alderman
of the City of London, Richard Bateman, Charles Lloyd, Christopher Pack, and
Walter Boothby Merchants, the present Commissioners of the Customs, are hereby
continued Commissioners, and Collectors of all such Moneys as shall be paid
for Customs, or advanced by way of Loan, for goods and Merchandise imported
into, or exported out of this Kingdom of England, Dominion of Wales, and Port
and Town of Berwick, with so full power in all particulars, as has been
granted them by any Order or Ordinance of Parliament. Provided always that the
whole Duties advanced on Currants, shall be employed for the use of the Navy.

Die Sabbathi, 13. Martii. 1646.
ORdered by the Lords Assembled in Parliament, That this Ordinance be forthwith
printed and published.

Joh. Brown Cler. Parliamentorum.

Printed at London for John Wright at the Kings Head in the Old Baily. 1646.


