Die Jovis, 4. Febr. 1646.
An Ordinance of the Lords and Commons assembled in Parliament, Concerning The
growth and spreading of Errors, Heresies and Blasphemies; Setting apart a Day
of public Humiliation to seek Gods assistance for the suppressing and
preventing the same.
WE the Lords and Commons assembled in the Parliament of England, having entered
into a Solemn Covenant, to endeavor sincerely, really and constantly, the
Reformation of Religion, in Doctrine, Discipline and Worship, and the
extirpation of Popery, Superstition, Heresy, Schism, Profaneness, and
whatsoever shall be found contrary to sound Doctrine and the power of
godliness; and having found the presence of God wonderfully assisting us in
this Cause, especially since our said engagement in pursuance of the said
Covenant, Have thought fit (lest we partake in other men's sins, and thereby be
in danger to receive of their plagues) to set forth this our deep sense of the
great dishonor of God, and perilous condition that this Kingdom is in, through
the abominable Blasphemies, and damnable Heresies vented and spread abroad
therein, tending to the subversion of the Faith, contempt of the Ministry, and
Ordinance of Jesus Christ: And as we are resolved to employ and improve the
utmost of our power, that nothing be said or done against the Truth, but for
the Truth, so we desire that both our selves and the whole Kingdom may be
deeply humbled before the Lord for that great reproach and contempt which has
been cast upon his (...)e and saving Truths, and for that swift destruction
which we may justly fear will fall upon the immortal souls of such who are or
may be drawn away, by giving heed to seducing Spirits. In the hearty and tender
compassion whereof, We the said Lords and Commons do Order and Ordain, That
Wednesday being the tenth day of March next, be set apart for a day of
public Humiliation for the growth and spreading of Errors, Heresies and
Blaphemies, to be observed in all places within the Kingdom of England and
Dominion of Wales, and Town of Berwick, and to seek God for his direction and
assistance for the suppression and preventing the sam. And all Ministers are
hereby enjoined to publish this present Ordinance upon the Lords day preceding
the said Tenth day of March.

Die Sabbathi 13. Febr. 1646.
ORdered by the Commons assembled in Parliam^^t, That the Ordinance for
observing the Tenth of March as a Fast, to be humbled for the growth and
s^^eading of Heresies, be forthwith P^t^ted; And that the Members of the House
that serve for the respec^^ve Counties, Cities and Boroughs, do send them to
the respective Places for which they serve.

H. Elsy^ge, Cler. Parl D. Com.

London, Printed for Edw. Husband, P^inter to the Honble House of Commons.


