Die Martis, 9. Januarii. 1643.

AN ORDINANCE OF THE LORDS And COMMONS Assembled In PARLIAMENT, Touching the
EXCISE OF Flesh-Victuals, and Salt.

Hen. Elsynge, Cler. Parl. D. Com.

LONDON, Printed by Rich. Cotes and Joh. Raworth, 1644.

Die Martis, 9 Januarii. 1643.
AN ORDINANCE Of the Lords and Commons assembled in PARLIAMENT, Touching the
Excise of Flesh-Victualls and Salt.
THe Lords and Commons assembled in Parliament having, by an Ordinance dated
the eleventh of September last, set a Rate of Excise and New-Impost upon
several Commodities, as well Native as Foreign, for the maintenance of the
Armies raised in defense of the King and Parliament, and other great Affairs of
the Commonwealth; amongst which, they had special regard to the Navy, for
guard of the Seas: And now finding, That through the loss of several Ports of
the Kingdom, and daily decay of Trade, the Navy cannot be sufficiently
maintained out of the Revenue of the Customs, as these times of imminent
danger do require; nor such a convenient Fleet set forth this next Summer, for
the guard of the Seas, defense of the Kingdom, and preservation of Trade,
without further supply of Moneys, to be raised by some equal and indifferent
way, as may be most easy to the well-affected Subjects of this Kingdom:

Be it therefore Ordained by the said Lords and Commons, That from and after
the tenth day of this instant January, all the several sorts and kinds of
Flesh-Meats, as also all Salt imported, or made within this Kingdom, shall pay
the several Rates of Excise or New-Impost hereafter appointed and specified,
according as the said Excise is hereby directed to be leavied and paid, Viz.

THat all Foreign Salt imported, or to be imported into the Kingdom of
England, Dominion of Wales, and Town of Barwick, shall pay one penny upon every
Gallon, to be paid by the first buyer of such Salt.

That all Salt made within the Kingdoms of England and Scotland, and Dominion
of Wales, shall pay one halfpenny upon every Gallon. And that all Salt upon
Salt, that is made of Salt, within the said Kingdom of England, and Dominion of
Wales, which has once paid the Excise, shall pay one farthing upon every
Gallon, to be paid by the maker of all such Salt, before such time as the said
Salt shall be put to sale. And that all Salt upon Salt, that is made of Salt in
the Kingdom of Scotland, which has once paid the Excise, shall pay one
farthing upon every Gallon, to be paid by the first buyer of such Salt. And
that all other Salt upon Salt, imported, or to be imported, in the said Kingdom
of England, Dominion of Wales, and Town of Barwick, shall pay one penny
halfpenny upon every Gallon; to be paid by the first buyer of such Salt:
Provided always, That no Salt expended upon Fishing, shall be liable to this
Excise.

That all Beefs, Muttons, Veals, Porks, Lambs, and other Butchers Meat, to be
killed for provision of Victuals, shall pay one shilling in every twenty
shillings value of the Beast, when he is living.

That all Conies or Rabbets, shall pay one half penny a piece.

That all Pigeons shall pay after the rate of one penny for every dozen.

That all Butchers, or others, who do kill and sell any Beef, Veal, Mutton,
Lamb, Pork, or any other Swines flesh whatsoever, for the Market or sale, do
weekly give an Account to such Office of Excise under which their dwelling, or
other place of residence is; and at the same time pay the Excise before
mentioned, upon forfeiture of double the value of all such Beasts, and other
Cattle, as by two Witnesses, or other good proof, shall be proved to have been
killed at any time, after the tenth day of January, 1643. for which no Excise
has been paid: and further, To be restrained from the killing and selling of
any Flesh Meat, for one whole year, after such proof as aforesaid.

That all Poulterers, and others, who make sale of any Rabbets or Pigeons, do
weekly make like account to the Office of Excise under which their Habitation
and Trading is, of all Rabbets and Pigeons by them sold from time to time; And
at the same time pay the Duty of Excise before appointed in this particular,
upon the like penalty respectively, and to be restrained from such trading and
dealing in any kind whatsoever, for one whole year after.

That al Housekeepers, who, for their own spending, shall at any time kill any
Beefs, Calves, Sheep, Lambs, Porkers, Rabbets, or Pigeons, shall weekly pay
Excise, after the rate aforesaid, unto such Collector or Collectors as shall be
appointed to that purpose. And all persons who shall refuse or neglect to give a
true weekly Account, either of their killing for sale, or of their own expense,
as aforesaid, shall be liable, upon proof of one or two witnesses, as before
directed, to the fine of treble the value, toties quoties, to be levied by
distress; and, in default thereof, unto imprisonment, until the Excise and
penalty be both satisfied.

That al Sum and Sums of money received by virtue of this Ordinance, upon any
Butchers Meat, Rabbets or Pigeons, before mentioned; as also, of al Salt
imported, or made in the Land, be appropriated to the maintenance of the Navy,
and from time to time issued and paid out, according to the Orders of the
Committee of the House of Commons for the Navy; which shall be a sufficient
discharge to the Commissioners for Excise, being signed by the hand of the
Chairman of that Committee for the time being.

That John Towse, Thomas Foot, John Kendrick, and Thomas Cullum, Esquires,
Aldermen of the City of London, Simon Edmonds, John Lamot, and Edward Claxton
of London, Esquires, shall be Commissioners for the receipt of the
before-mentione^ Excise, according as they are already appointe^ and
authorized, by Ordinance of the eleventh o^ September last, for the receipt of
the Excise and New-Impost therein rated and expressed, and receive the like
allowance of six pence in every pound for the receipt; And shall and may
likewise execute al and every thing and things therein prescribed, for the
better managing of this Work mutatis mutandis, as shall be requisite, for the
due performance of this Ordinance, according to the true intent and meaning
thereof: And that Thomas Fawkonbridge and William Bond, Gentlemen, shall be
Auditors to execute this Ordinance, by the same Rules and Limitations as they
are authorized by the former Ordinance of Excise.

And all persons who shall seek to elude this Ordinance, by concealment, or
other fraudulent practice, or by non-payment of the Excise as aforesaid, shall
be subject to all Fines, Forfeiture, Imprisonment, or other punishment
whatsoever, as in the said Ordinance of the eleventh of September last is more
at large Declared and Ordained.

Provided, That in case there shall happen to be an overplus of Money arising by
virtue of this Ordinance, which shall not be necessary for the support of the
Navy, That in such cases the overplus shall not be disposed to any uses, but by
Order of both Houses of Parliament.

Provided, That this Ordinance shall continue in full force for one whole year
after the date hereof.

Hen. Elsynge, Cler. Parl. D. Com.

FINIS.

