Die Martis, 18 Junii, 1644.
An Ordinance of the Lords and Commons Assembled in Parliament for the speedy
sending out the Auxiliaries, under the Command of Major General Brown.
IT is this day Ordained by the Lords and Commons in Parliament Assembled, That
the Committee of the Militia of the City of London, shall have power, and is
hereby Authorized to command three Regiments of Auxiliaries, raised within
London, and the Liberties, consisting of four thousand and two hundred men, or
any less number, and such other Forces as they shall think fit, either of
Horse or Foot, raised, or to be raised, under the Command of the said Militia,
within the Lines of Communication, or Parishes mentioned in the weekly Bills of
Mortality, and Hamblets of the Tower, to March according to the Discipline and
order of War, under the Conduct and Command of Major General Brown. And
such Colonels; Lieutenant Colonels, Captains, and other Officers as the said
Committee shall appoint, Together with all necessary provisions of Arms,
Ammunition, Ordinance, and other Carriages, into the Counties of Oxford, Berks,
and Buckingham, to join with such other Forces under his Command of Horse and
Foot, already raised, or to be raised, in the said Counties, or else where,
for the Recovery and preservation of such parts thereof, as are now possessed
by the Enemy; And upon such other Service as shall be Commanded by the said
Major General, with the consent of the said Committee.

And it is further Ordained, that the said Committee shall have power, and is
hereby Authorized to call back such Forces as they shall command, to March
forth by virtue of this Ordinance, when they shall think fit. And that all the
said Colonels, Lieutenant Colonels, Captains, other Officers and Soldiers,
and other Persons under the Command of the said Committee of the Militia,
whether Masters, or Servants, shall obey the directions of the said Committee
of the Militia, from time to time, upon pain of Imprisonment, or expulsion out
of the Limits aforesaid, and such other punishments as the said Committee shall
think fit to impose upon them, by reasonable Fines, or according to the course
of War, And to levy the said Fines by distress, and sale of their Goods, and
to Employ the same for the Service of the City, as the said Committee shall
think fit: And all Sub committees, made, or to be made, Constables,
Headboroughes, Provost Marshals, and other Officers, are hereby required to be
aiding and assisting from time to time, for the better furthering and effecting
all such Services as are contained or intended by this Ordinance, according as
they shall be directed by the said Committee within the Limits aforesaid, as
they will answer the contrary under the penalties herein mentioned.

And it is further Ordained, that all such Forces as shall be sent forth by the
Committee of the Militia by virtue of this Ordinance, shall be paid during
their continuance abroad, according to the new establishment of the Army, under
the immediate Command of his Excellency the Earl of Essex: by the Committee,
or Committees established, or to be established in any of the Counties
aforesaid; out of such Moneys as shall be raised by them, in any of the said
Counties; And likewise to make satisfaction to the Committee of the Militia,
for any Horse, Arms, Ammunition, Money, or other necessaries, which they shall
provide or disburse, for the furtherance of this Service: And in defect
thereof, all the said Forces, and Provisions, to be otherwise provided, and
paid for by the Parliament.

And it is further ordained, that the Sub-Committees appointed, or to be
appointed by the said Committee of the Militia, shall have power, and are
hereby authorized, to cause all, or any of the clauses contained in this
Ordinance, to be put in due execution, when, and as often as they shall
receive directions from the said Committee.

And as well the said Committee, as also their Sub-Committees, and all other
Persons acting in the Premises, according to the intent of this Ordinance;
shall be saved harmless, by the Authority of both Houses of Parliament.

Jo. Brown Cleric. Parliamentorum. H. Elsynge Cler. Parl. D. Com.


Printed at London by Richard Cotes, 1644.


