THE PETITION AND ARTICLES EXHIBITED IN PARLIAMENT Against Dr FVLLER, DEANE OF
ELY, AND Vicar of S. Giles Cripple-gate. WITH THE PETITION Exhibited in
Parliament against Timothy Hutton, Curate of the said Parish, By the
Parishioners of Saint Giles.

Wherein are discovered many Popish Innovations, and disservice to the Church,
and placing such to officiate, who prefer the Playhouse and the Taverns
before the performance of their Office in the Church, as may appear by the
said Articles.

LONDON. Printed 1641.

TO THE HONORABLE THE Knights. Citizens* and Burgesses, Nowassembled in
PARLIAMENT.
The humble Petition of diverse of the Parishioners of St. Giles Cripple-gato,
London.
HUMBLY SHOWING,
THat the said Parish is very great, consisting of 40000 souls, or
thereabouts, having no constant Preaching Minister amongst them, although the
Living be worth seven hundred pounds, per annum, to the present incumbent
William Fuller Dr. in Divinity, who being a Popish Innovator, broacheth very
pernicious etc dangerous Doctrines, imployeth to officiate for him, men
scandalous in life, and by a selected vestry fit for his turn, does grievously
oppress the said Parishioners: as will further appear by the Schedule of
Articles hereunto annexed.

May it therefore please this Honorable House, to take into consideration
these Premises, with the several Articles annexed, and to grant such relief
herein, as to your great vvisedomes shall seem most meet.

And your Petitioners shall pray, etc.

THE ARTICLES EXHIBITED In Parliament against Dr. Fuller Vicar of St. Giles
Cripple-Gate.
THe said Dr. Fuller in the Petition before mentioned, has Pluralities of
livings, and thereby is a Non-Resident, allowing no Sermons on the Lords day in
the afternoon for many months together, and if any at all, ^^ne but
scandalous livers have usually supplye^ the place.

2. He uses superstitious cringing and bowing to the Communion table, and the
name Jesus, holding such a venerable esteem of the Ray los about the Table;
that he has caused diverse persons for resting thereon in Sermon time, to be
violently thrust out of the church, to the great disturbance of the
Congregation, but slubbereth over the Sacrament of Baptism when the
Congregation is appointed to sing a psalm: so that they cannot mind the duty
to join with them in prayer.

3. He has caused the new Canons with the Oath to be published in our church,
urging obedience thereunto, saying, we have been feign to establish the Kings
regal power, and we have taken great pains to establish this for you, he
being then a convocation man.

4 He has published in the pulpit, that all our estates are at the Kings
disposing, and that th^^e is no difference between our church of England, and
the church of Rome, in matter of substance, but in circumstance only, which
might easily be reconciled.

5 He has affirmed in his Sermon, since the Archbishops imprisonment, that
there were diverse who sought the life of the Archbishop, but if they did
obtain it, God would require his brood at their hands.

6 The said Dr. has causelessly sued and excommunicated diverse poor
parishioners, for that they refused to pay his pretended dues lest unpaid by
the former Inhabitants in their houses, enforcing them to sell their household
stuff to pay the same.

7 The said Dr. and his Substitutes have exacted diverse sums of money for
Burials and other (...) refusing to officiate in cases of necessity, without
composition before hand, forcing thereby the Parishioners to bury the dead
themselves, and to keep their children unbaptized half a year together.

8 The said Dr. by his conclave, or selected Vestry, exercises tyranny over
the estates and liberties of the said Parishioners, by injurious taxing, and
levying diverse sums of money, easing them selves, and burd'ning others
therein, disposing of the principal Officers at their pleasure, preferring
friends and Allies (though scandalous in life) and keeping out godly and
well-affected persons, under the name of Puritan's.

9 The said Dr. Fuller has so ill provided for this so great a Parish, that
besides much other disservice: there having certain Parishioners attended to
see the christian burial of a dead corpse, could neither find the said Doctor
or his Curate, though having notice before thereof: after that also, another
Corpse, then a third, all attending in the church yard, And at the last; hearing
that Timothy Hutton his Curate, was at the Fortune to see a Play, they sent to
desire him, to officiate for the three corpse: but he would by no means come;
then they sent a second, and a third time also, certifying how long they had
there waited: yet would the said Timothy Hutton by no means come, until such
time that the play was ended.

10 The said Doctor Fuller has so oppressed the said parish, by profane and
ungodly persons, to officiate for him, as have given very ill examples, and of
dangerous consequent to evill-affected people in the parish, as the said
Timothy Hutton; who has from his pulpit repaired to the tavern on the Lords
day, and there drinking uncivilly, danced and sung most profaine, and ungodly
songs, and dances, to the shame and disgrace of Religion, and to the grief of
many Godly people, who took Notice thereof.

THE HUMBLE PETITION Of diverse of the Purishioners of St. Giles Cripple-Gate,
London, against Timothy Hutton, Curate.
Humbly showing,
THat on Thursday, being the 15. day of October 16^1, at ten of the clock in
the morning, John Sedgwick, Bachelor in Divinity, an Orthodox Minister of the
Church of England, together with a Congregation of about four hundred persons,
all Parishioners of St. Giles Cripplegate, London; waited at the Church door
of St. Giles aforesaid, expecting the opening of the church doors, for the
continuance of a weekly Lecture there; begun that day seven night by the said
Mr. Sedgwick, according to an Order of the said House dated the viij. day of
September last. And after one honres attendance in the rain, they were
compelled to depart from the church door, being kept out, by the command of
William Fuller, vicar there, Timothy Hutton his Curate, Thomas Bough, Godfrey
Holmes, Samuel Tailor, Jonathan Goldsmith, Churchwardens, Richard Harwood, and
William Guly, Sextons, all Agents for the said vicar, James Andrews, and
Hutchins, pretended Clerks of the said Parish: all enemies to the Reformation
intended, and disturbers of the peace of the said Congregation.

This deboist Curate was taken out of the kennell drunk, at midnight, in a most
lamentable case, and was forced by a Justice of peace, not long since, to pay a
shillings for swearing of two Oaths. His freshest Deploit was at a late Annual
Feast: whereunto being sent to invite a Noble Parishioner, who gave him 20 s.
to carry the Stewards, to help bear their Charge and expenses. He deivered
only ten shillings to them, and reserved the rest of the money to himself;
which knavish pranke being afterward discovered, occasioned these following
verses.

WHy how now Hutton, art thou grown so poor,
That thou esteem'st thy credit worth no mare
Then half a piece: me thinks its very strange,
That one of your Frofession should exchange
Plain dealing, for to get a little pelf;
Sure you were drunk, at least were not your self:
When as you wont t'invite that Noble Guest,
Unto your Parish-Cockneyes yearly Feast,
A business wherewith any Porter might,
Have bin entrusted, and have dealt upright.
Yet you a Pulpeciere, the more's the pity,
We have too many such within the City:
But He forbear, and so conclude in few words,
Wishing the Cockney's to get better Stewards;
For thou art bafe, consider of is Hutton,
Thy Credit hence forth, is not worth a Button.
FINIS.

