Questions resolved upon by both Houses of Parliament. With an Order for the
speedy Rigging of the Navy, for the defense of the Kingdom.
Resolved upon the Question by both Houses of Parliament,

Resolved, etc.

Resolved, etc. viz. 1. To lay down the just causes of the fears and jealousies
given to these Houses: and to clear these Houses from any jealousies conceived
against them. 2. And to consider of all matters that may arise upon this
Message of His Majesty, and to declare their opinions what is fit to be done
thereupon.


Die Mercurii, 2 Martii. 1641.
THe Lords and Commons in this present Parliament assembled, having received
advertisement of extraordinary preparations made by the neighboring Princes,
both by Land and Sea; the intentions whereof have been so represented, as to
raise an apprehension in both Houses, That the public Honor, Peace, and
Safety of His Majesty and His Kingdom cannot be secured, unless a timely
course be taken for the putting of this Kingdom into a Condition of defense, at
Sea, as well as Land. It is therefore Ordered, by the Lords and Commons
aforesaid, That the Earl of Northumberland, Lord high Admiral of England, do
forthwith give effectual direction and order, that all and every the Ships
belonging to His Majesty's Navy, which are fit for service, and not already
abroad, nor designed for this Summers Fleet, be withal speed Rigged, and put
in such a readiness, as that they may soon be fitted for the Sea; And that his
Lordship do also make known unto all the Masters and Owners of such Ships as
now are in, or about any the Harbors of this Kingdom, and may be of use for
the public defense thereof, That it will be an acceptable service to the King
and Parliament, if they likewise will cause their Ships to be Rigged, and so
far put in a readiness, as they may be at a short warning set forth to Sea,
upon any immergent occasion, which will be a means of great security to his
Majesty and his Dominions.

London, Printed for Joseph Hunscott. 1641.


