HAving diligently perused this Antapologia, I find it so full and just, and
necessary an examination, and discovery of the Apologeticall Narration both in
matters of fact, and of opinion, that because I dare not (as too many) have the
faith of our Lord Jesus Christ the Lord of glory with respect of persons, I
approve it to be imprinted, and commend it (Reader) to thy most serious
consideration.

Ia. Cranford.

ANTAPOLOGIA: Or, A Full Answer to the Apologeticall Narration OF Mr Goodwin,
Mr Nigh, Mr Sympson, Mr Buroughs, Mr Bridge, Members of the Assembly of Divines.

Wherein is handled many of the Controversies of these Times: viz.

1. Of a particular visible Church. 2. Of Classes and Synods. 3. Of the
Scriptures how far a Rule for Church Government. 4. Of Forms of Prayer. 5.
Of the Qualifications of Church members. 6. Of Submissio^ and Non-Co^munio^. 7.
Of Excommunication. 8. Of the Power of the Civil Magistrate in
Ecclesiasticals. 9. Of Separation and Schism. 10. Of Tolerations, and
particularly of the Toleration of Independencie. 11. Of Suspension from the
Lords Supper. 12. Of Ordination of Ministers by the people. 13. Of Church
Covenant. 14. Of Non-residencie of Church Members.
Humbly also submitted to the Honorable Houses of Parliament, By THOMAS
EDWARDS, Minister of the Gospel.

Ephesians. 4. 14. That we henceforth be no more children, tossed to and fro, and
carried about with every wind of doctrine, by the sl^ight of men, and cunning
craftiness, whereby they lie in wait to deceive.

Verse. (...). But speaking the truth in love* may grow up into him in all
things which is the head, even Christ.

Matthew. 24. 26. Wherefore, if they shall say unto you, Behold, he is in the
desert, go not forth: Behold, he is in the secret chambers, believe it not.

Augustinus Vincentio epist. 48. Non enim propter malos boni deserendi, sed
propter bonos mali tolerandi ^ti sicut toleraverunt prophetae contra quos (...)
dicebant, (...) communionem sacramentorum illius populi relinquebant.

Bezae epist. prima D'Andreae Duditio. lactabimusne libertatem conscientiis
permittendam esse? Minime ut haec quidem liberta intelligitur, id est, ut quo
quisque modo volet Deum colat. Est enim hoc mere diabolicum dogma, Sinendum
esse unumquemque ut si volet pereat. Et illa est diabolica libertas quae
Poloniam and Transylvaniam hodie tot pestibus implevit, quas nullae alioqui sub
sole regiones toleratent.

London, Printed by G. M. for Ralph Smith at the Bible in Cornhill near the
Royal Exchange. 1644.

To the tender Consciensed, scrupulous, doubting Christian.
Dear and beloved Christians, for your sal^es in special who are apt to be
troubled with many doubts and fears about the Constitution and Government of
the visible Church, and the way of Worship and Communion in it, have I drawn up
this present Answer, as to undeceive you in the Apologists, the Apology, and
their Church Way, so to satisfy you in your scruples and doubts about
Presbytery. It was my love, care and respect to tender consciences, that more
especially moved me at first (now some seven years ago) to fall upon the more
thorough studying and searching into the controversies of the Church, etc. And
the grounds which now of late have afresh revived my thoughts and studies that
way, are, 1. The recovering and reducing conscientious Christians who are not
too far engaged. 2. The settling some who are wavering and doubtful. 3. The
keeping of others from falling* Now the first borne of my latter thoughts and
studies in this kind, is this Antapologi^, which I here recommend to you for a
true glass to behold the faces of Presbytery and Independencie in, with the
beauty, order, strength of the one, and the deformity, disorder and weakness
of the other: And good Reader, I have some reason to believe and hope, that if
you will indeed read and consider, look impartially and thoroughly into this
glass, you may be either changed into the image of it, or at least so stumbled
at Independencie, as to be kept from falling into it, and willing in the mean
time to wait upon God in that way of his, an Assembly of so many learned and
godly Divines, to see what he will be pleased to speak by them: I at first
intended, and accordingly provided materials for a large Epistle to this Book,
the more to make way for it in the hearts and consciences of the people, as
well knowing there are laid in before hand by many of the Independent party,
many prejudices both against my person and the Book, to hinder if possible the
fruit and benefit of it, yea to keep people from so much as reading any part of
it, that so receiving and believing the Independent Grounds without hearing or
examining the other side, they may be still kept in ignorance and error: I had
many thoughts and purposes in my Epistle, to have given the Reader an account
of my especial call to the making this Answer, as also to have laid down the
Principles and Rules I more especially went by in the studying of these
controversies, and then to have Apologized for my self and Book, by answering
some objections and clearing aspersions cast abroad in this mistaking age, and
by representing to the Reader my many sufferings, constant labors, etc. and so
to have compared my grounds moving me to make this Antapologia, with the
Apologists grounds occasioning their Apologeticall Narration, and my Principles
with their three Principles expressed in their Apology, and my sufferings,
troubles, patience and labors, with their exile and patience, etc. and then
left them to the Reader to judge in those matters between us; but conceiving
the danger of this way in comparing with the Apologists, least I might become a
fool in glorying, and run into the same fault I charge upon the Apologists,
and least it might be thought I sought to commend my Answer by such ways
rather then by the strength of the discourse it self, I resolved to forbear
all those comparisons and vindications of my self, and to refer all to God;
and that I may not hold the Reader too long in the portch, I will only insist
somewhat upon justifying and clearing the lawfulness of the way and manner of
this Answer, and the grounds I go upon for matters of fact reported in it, and
this I must do of necessity, for besides other grounds calling for it, within
these few days, just before the Antapologie was coming forth, a Pamphlet,
entitled The Anatomist Anatomized was printed, rather to prepossesse the
Reader against the Antapologie, then to answer the Anatomy of Independencie
(as all may see) and to be a shelter rather against this shower (as the
Anatomizer calls it) ready to fall, then to dry up the drops already fallen:
But (...) shall by the help of God, not only satisfy the Reader, that this
covering is too narrow, and the stuff too slight to keep out the shower from
wetting, but make an advantage of it, even to gain the greater credit and
belief to the things asserted in my Book, and to remove this opinion from
lurking in many other bosoms, and in particular to make the charge sit heavier
upon the Anatomizer, by speaking particularly to the matters of fact concerning
him, in accepting of his motion and request, of proving the reports concerning
him by witnesses, and before a judicatorie, I must therefore answer to the
three Propositions of the Anatomizer as they have reference to the Antapologie.
1. That many things reported in this Antapologie are misreported. 1. Let the
Reader observe, that the Anatomizer though he play the fore-game, and will be
before hand in speaking to a Book before it come forth (and because truth will
hardly overtake a^ye that is set out four or five days before it (as himself
speaks) therefore he will be sure to send forth in time even some days before
reports come out) yet the Anatomizer does not say all things reported are
misreported, so that though many things may be misreported, many things also
may be truly reported; and in page 4. in the definition he is pleased to give
of the Antapologie, it is a Collection of such faults, as either meant mistakes
and malice, or perhaps men's own infirmities have made, either beyond the seas
or here, he denies not the truth of all the reports and fa^les, but grants them
with a perhaps. 2. I desire the Reader to consider, that for the matters of
fact related in the Apology, which in this Answer I speak unto, asserting the
contrary upon Reasons and grounds laid down by me, I never intended by such an
Answer, to make a Judiciarie infallible proof (which as it is not necessary in
the way of answering matter of fact, so neither can it be by rational men
expected, as if without that no sufficient Answer were given to disprove facts)
but only a rational probable proof from Letters and other Manuscripts going
under the names of the Apologists, and superscribed to their known friends,
from reports of men of credit, and such who have lived amongst them, hearing
and seeing things, and from many circumstances of place, time, etc. by which in
reason men may well judge accordingly, and for this kind of proof I believe I
can make as rational and conscientious a one to satisfy my self and all
indifferent persons, to judge according to what I write, as has been made
these many years (for since the Apology came forth, I have used a great deal
of care, diligence and circumspection, both by (...) to know the truth of
things I formerly had been informed of, and by inquiting particularly of many
persons concerning circumstances and their proofs, and questioning with them
how they knew such a thing, etc. as also by forbearing to insert matters
related to me upon a single tes^monie and witness, where there were not other
strong circumstances con^ing to make them out;) And yet for all the care I have
used, it is possible that among so many things related by (...), there may be
some mistakes in the reports of some circumstances in matter of order and time,
place or number (though I know none such) and yet the report and fact true, (A
report may be true and yet mistaken in one circumstance, which when it comes to
scanning may prove more foul in another*) so that the ^se stands thus, whether
the Apologists relating such and such matters o^ fact, an Answe^er having
evidences and testimonies by him of Letters written in their names, reports
from credible men, as godly Ministers and Christians their own friends, with
other circumstances concurring, has not reason to question the truth of such
facts, and to answer to them, by laying down his grounds why he judges
otherwise; and for my Answer to the Apologists, if in their Reply they deny any
of the matters of fact I speak unto, I will in my Rejoinder at the end of it,
print all their Letters, with other Letters of their friends that I have by me,
and name the parties from whose hands I had them, and how I came by them, and
relate other circumstances which for present I have concealed, and then let the
Reader judge whether I had not reason to believe, and Answer as I do. But as
for a Judiciarie proof of all matters of fact in my Antapologie, I not seeing
those Letters writ, and most of my Letters being but copies, and many of the
facts being done beyond the seas, considering also it is possible the relators
may mistake in some things, I cannot positively and judicially swear, and make
out such a kind of proof, 3. For some matters of fact spoken to in this
Antapologia* I know and am certain of in my own knowledge, and had them from
some of the Apologists own mouths, and though they (...) have forgotten them,
I can for a need rub up their memories, by minding them (...) the places,
times and occasions which they cannot deny; I have also some original Letters
by me to prove some things asserted by me in this Answer, and for the most
material things of their preaching and acting for their way, besides that the
things themselves speak and are notorious, I have many ear and eye witnesses
both of Ministers and people which I can produce, so that if I have reason to
beeleeve a report of any thing I see no^, nor bear not upon the place, as that
there was a siege at York and a great victory obtained by the Parliaments
Forces near York, etc. I have ground to believe many of the particulars
instanced in by way of Answer to the Apologeticall Narration^ Now finding
several passages in the Apology in point of fact, related with height of
considence, contrary to my knowledge and to the testimony of many, with a
co^currence of other circumstances which I could not doubt of, and observing
other matters of fact brought by the Apologists to take the people with,
against which though there were not such strong proofs, yet in the drawing up
my Answer to such p^ticulars, whether might not I now upon probable grounds as
one sufficient witness with the circumstance of place and time, etc. question
these, and judge them to be much like the others. 4. Particularly for M.
Simpson, because he has publicly printed that the Antapologie is a ^ction of
such faults as either men's mistakes and malice, or perhaps me^ own infirmities
have made either beyond the seas or here, (in which sentence it is to be
observed by the way he confu^es all that is brought by himself against the
Anatomy or the Antapologie, himself taking up reports suddenly, and believing
here says, before he ever saw any one sheet yea or one page of the
Antapologie, branding a Minister and his, Book for a collection of such faults
as either men's mistakes and malice have made, by tellin^ this not only to a
particular Church, but to all the Churches in the World, as printing does,) and
because he puts up a req^est, that the Reader will not believe a^y reports of
this kind in the Book that i^ coming forth (meaning the Antapologie) until
the Authors of them will appear and bring their witnesses to a fair, hearing
in any lawful though the strictest ^licatorie, etc. and because he says, in
what he is guilty before men he will confess ingeniously; That the Reader may
not be^uded to believe what is said by him there, and by that be prepossest
against the truth of the Antapologie, I accept of his motion and request, and
if he will be pleased to procure any lawful though the strictest Judicatorie,
yea the highest, I am ready for so much as concerns him, to appear and bring
my witnesses to a fair hearing, and if the Judicature will give time, and
grant Warrants to bring in the witnesses that they may be deposed, I doubt not
but besides a rational Answer by way of writing (which I intended) to make
also a full Judiciar^ proof, yea to prove more then yet I have charged Mr
Simpson with, only I desire if I must be put to this trouble, that Mr. Simpsons
small and just request may be granted by the Judicature, that he may suffer if
he have done what in the Antapologie is reported of him, and if I cannot make
it good, then I am contented to suffer, and I am willing also to be judged by
his own Law, Page 7. Lege Remmia, to be branded with a K in the forehead, if I
do not by witnesses prove his preaching and acting for his way, upon condition
he may be served so if I do, and to the letter K to have the addition of L and
P. But it may be objected, Why does Mr. Simpson of all the Apologists put forth
such a Book before hand, and dare it thus? I answer in his own words, some may
perhaps conceive it is a sign of guilt to speak so much, and I conceive Mr
Simpsons guilt and consciousnesse caused fear, and fear that hastened him to
thrust forth something in the way of the Antapologie, to blast the credit of it
before it was come forth, and the truth of it is, he of all the Apologists has
been most faulty both in Holland and in England, and for the close of this
concerning what is reported in the Antapologie of M. Sympson, I shall speak in
the words made use of by himself, God takes the wise in their own
crastinesse, and will destroy such wisdom, and so I believe he has done this
of M Sympsons forestalling the Antapologie, ^ad M. Sympson remembered a late
example of M. P. and M. W. brought in to prove what they had said and written
of a Person of place, and the issue of that ^iall, or had he staid till the
Antapologie had come forth to have read what I charge him with, he would never
have written thus.

2. Propos. That it is no way of God to divulge men's personal faults, supposing
the matter of facts to be true yet the divulging of them in this manner is not
according to the Word of God.

I answer, all that is brought by the Anatomizer for proof page 5. out of
Matt. 18. and his other grounds are nothing to the case and point in hand,
namely of making this Answer, and I would ask Mr Sympson, whether it be
lawful to make any Answer at all to the Apology, if it be, then certainly if
the Apologists have personal things and matters of fact, no man can answer
them fully, and as they ought to be answered, but he must speak to personal
things and matters of fact, and the fault of divulging personal things is not
in the Antapologist but in the Apologists: As for the 18. of Matthew. that
speaks of private offenses, and of offenses that may be in that way healed,
and the other grounds brought by M. Sympson speaks to offenses already repented
of, and not of such which in stead of being judged faults are made use of
publicly to draw men into a way of error by, I give therefore these two
distinct Answers: 1. The Apologists have publicly and openly sinned in
avowing some things in the Apology, and they never yet repented of them, (as I
heard) but M. Sympson justifies himself, and them in his Anatomist anatomized,
page 4. Now the Apostles rule is 1 Timothy 5. 19, 20. though Timothy may not
receive an accusation against an Elder under two or three witnesses, yet them
that sin openly may be rebuked before all, that others may fear, now as the*
Apologists by Printing told all the Churches, so by Printing it may be told to
all the Churches, the remedy ought to be proportioned according to the
disease, the plaster to be as large as the sore, the Apology has spread it
self to the Parliament, City, Kingdom, and so ought the Remedy; may
Independents publicly and confidently write untruths, and may not others in
way of answering plainly point at them, but it is against the way of God, and not
according to the Word, 2. This may not only lawfully be done, but this ought to
be done, when men shall tell sine stories, and bring matters of fact,
interweave them all along to prove such a way by, and to gain people to
errors by such Rhetorical arguments, he who answers such a book, and would
preserve people from errors is bound to disprove all he can those matters of
fact, and to speak to those popular arguments, by weakening the truth of those
Relations all he knows, and secondly by showing how they are not argumentative
nor evincing, supposing they were true: It Is well known by them who are verst
in the writings of the Protestants against the Papists, how in many of the
Controversies, especially upon the notes of the Church, the Protestant writers
do, wherein they stand on matters of fact, disprove them by matters of fact
and personal things, as upon Unity, Holiness of life, etc. and I conceive in
giving an Answer to the Apology, I could not have declined matters of fact
without gratifying the cause of Independencie, and wronging the truth; I
suppose the excellency of an Answer, as distinct from writing Tractates upon
such a subject, or such a point consists in three things: 1. In not speaking
whatever a man pleases, or bringing in whatever he has a mind to, but in
following the text before him, and in keeping his discourse close to that. 2.
In not omitting any material passages, skipping over the knots, passing by the
hard arguments and falling on the weak, snatching here and there, but going
thorough all. 3. In laboring to take the Authors mind laid down in the words
and scope, and in not wresting and fastening another sense upon the Author: All
which I propounded to my self in falling upon this Answer, and have aimed at
in it, and therefore could not omit matters of fact nor personal things
brought by the Apologists, especially when all along they are with much art
framed and set to gain credit to the Church way, to prove some maine
principles of their way, and to effect their desires; For instance, how is a
story with the Apologists practice upon it, page 16, 17, 20, 21. brought to
prove the effectual success of submission and Non-communion, how is their
good carriage since their return into England, and their exile made use of to
move for a Toleration, how is all that Narration of 3, 4, (...)* pages, of
their inquiry into the Word of Christ, etc. laid down as so many grounds to
possess the Reader of the truth of the Church way, let the Apologeticall
Narration be analiz'd, and it will be found there is no point of fact, or
personal thing in it, but is brought in some way or other as a motive or
argument for their way, so that of necessity I could not avoid matter of fact,
unless I would betray the truth. Paul in the second of the Galathians 11, 12,
13. openly rebukes Peter, because he was to be blamed for his withdrawing and
separating himself, and because others thereupon were carried away with it, and
so because the Apologists do not only withdraw and separate themselv^, but by
their Apologeticall Narration do even compel others also, I cannot but speak.

3. Propos. That it is not argumentative against the cause that, falsely called
Independencie, nor rational or conducing to decide any, or this controversy.

1. That the Apologists and the Anatomizers way is not falsely but truly called
Independencie, I refer the Reader to these pages in this present answer, 201,
202, 203. Secondly, were all the matters of fact, and the Narration of them
argumentative for the Apologists cause to move the Parliament, and to draw the
Reader to their way, and is not the disproving of them argumentative against
it, if this be not argumentative against Independencie, then I am sure the
greatest part of the Apologet. Narration is nothing material for it, and
wher^fore then was that story of a Minister deposed, and matter of fact upon
it inserted in the Narration with many other, and supposing that to be true,
that there is no reasoning from the quality of the person to his cause, why then
do you so much do it in your Apology, taking all occasions to magnify your
party, and reasoning from your persons to your cause, from your sufferings,
patience, etc. but whether there be any strength or no in that, it matters not,
it is strongly argumentative in any point to overthrow men's own mediums, and that
the Antapologie does; in a word, there is more consequence then the Anato^zer is
willing to see in that maine Assertion of the Apology, That one Church may
non-Communion, but not excommunicate another (as he terms it,) to the
miscarriages of M. Sympson and his Church, for might Presbyteriall Government
take place, we should not have men so easily principled into Anabaptisme, nor
make a covenant with separation, etc. as in this answer in many places is
proved. And so much for answer to Mr. Sympsons Book as far as it concerns the
Antapologie, and may be a block in the way of it, Now besides this, there is
one objection more that has been in the mouths of some Independents, and may
be instilled into many more to hinder the fruit (...) benefit of this Answer,
namely (against the manner of the Answer) that it is (...) Answer full of
bitterness, malice, reproaches, railings, and that it is a book written against
Gods people and good men. For consutation of this objection, I present to the
Readers apprehension these following particulars. 1. I have endeavored for the
manner of doing it, that it might be without all just exceptions in regard of
hard words and better speeches, and I can truly say I have declined many words
and phrases more proper, and taken other words which in some places have
readred the style more rugged to avoid offensive phrases, and all along though
I often disprove matters of fact, yet I never use so harsh a word (to my
remembrance) as false, much less a lie, but untrue, and this is not so,
whereas M. Sympson in his Pamphlet uses falsely and has the word lie. 2. I
desire the conscientious indisterent Reader to consider my book is not a
Treatise or Tractate upon what subject I please to speak of, but an Answer, and
so must follow where that leads me, and speak to that. 2. It Is an Answer to a
book full of matter of fact, and stories of the Authors themselves, so that I
cannot answer without particularising, the truth cannot be evidenced to the
Reader without coming somewhat to particulars. (...). The Book contains matter
of high praise of themselves and their party (a few inconsiderable persons
comparatively) with many close, indirect, and dangerous insinuations against
all the Reformed Churches, which cannot be answered particularly without some
recrimination and charge. 4. There are many particulars in matters of fact, I
prove and charge the Apologists with, and some too bad for untruth. 5. I
forbear men^oning the names of many particular persons which this Apology
leads me unto, some wholly, others I speak of only under the (...) letter of
their names, and for the Apologists though I often particularly name them, yet
in some places of my Book, and in some grosser things, I forbear
particularizing them too. 6. I meddle not with personal things and matters of
fact that are heterogeneall, to relate other kind of facts and practices which
I have heard on known of any the Apologists; but speak only of such as are
proper to the matter occasioned from their Apology, or the effects and fruits
of their Church way, the Apologists themselves give the occasion to the laying
open so many particulars, which no other occasion but such an one as this could
have drawn forth from me to have made their names and practices thus public.
7. In many passages of this Answer I do upon several occasions give the
Apologists a just testimony of that worth for parts and piety which is in
them, and speak to them, and of them as Brethren, so that let but all these
things be laid: together, considering also the Rules of Scripture in such
Cases, and that I intended a plain particular downright Answer, and this
Answer will then be accounted candid, moderate, my pe^dipped in oil, and not
in vinegar.

3. I can truly speak it that this present Antapologia is so far from being
written out of any malice or ill will to the Apologists, that I love their
persons, and value them as brethren, yea some of them above brethren, and
besides that love I bear to them as Saints, I have a personal love, and a
particular love of friendship to some of them, and I can truly speak it, that
I writ not this book nor any part of it out of any personal quarrel, old
grudge, or former difference (for to this day there never was any such
difference or unkindnesse passed between us) but I have writ it with much
sorrow, unwillingnesse and some kind of conflict, in respect of that old
personal love and friendship still strong in me, and had not the truth
constrained me, my call to this work been strong, and the cause of God and
Reformation much in my eye, I had out of my personal love and respect to some
of the Apologists given over the work: I can, and am ready to do them any
service of love, even the meanest, to wash their feet, and should much rejoice
in their happy union and growing into one body with us in this Reformation. And
let not this Answer for the truth and plainness of it, be branded for a
bitter, railing, malicious Answer, but let this also be added to the former
premises, that the Apologists needed such an Answer as should not flatter nor
extol them, but be free and plain; for the truth is the Apologists have been
too much flattered both in their persons and Church Way, and they are undone
for want of being dealt with plainly and freely; a candle has been too much
held to them, and I hope this Answer may do much good, even to abate their
swellings and confidence, and if many of the Ministers would deal more
plainly with them, it would be better both for them and us: I remember a
passage of Calv. epist. 65. Melanct. Verum si in nobis omnibus esset is animus
qul esse debet aliquod forsan remedium posset inveniti. Et certe foedum
exemplum transmi^imus ad posterot, etc.
Calvin in an Epistle of his to Melancthon concerning Luther, which may be
applied to the Ministers in reference to the Apologists, how that if there were
that mind in all of us which ought to be, some remedy might be found: And
certainly we transmit an unworthy example to posterity, whilst we cast away all
liberty rather then we will offend one man, and will not his vehemency the
more rise and grow whilst all bear with him and suffer all things, etc.

4. Answ. The writing of Books against the errors and opinions (though of good
men) is not speaking against good men, or opposing godliness; when the
Apologists in their Apology writ against Authoritative Presbyteriall
Government, and in page (...) and 24 of their Apology do professedly declare
they judge the Calvinian Reformed Churches to stand in need of a further
Reformation themselves, and that the truth lies in the ^ddle way betwixt
Authoritative Presbyteriall government, etc. did they speak against the Saints
and all the godly Ministers in those Churches: when Paul withstood Peter to the
face, because he was to be blamed for his withdrawing and separating, did Paul
speak against the Apostles of Christ, or speak evil of the Saints? no more
do, I in writing this Book.

Good Reader, Not to de^ine thee longer from en^ing into the house it self,
lay all things together, consider wisely of persons and things, and have not
the faith of our Lord Jesus Christ the Lord of glory with respect of persons,
Accept and take in good part what is now brought to thy hand, as intended for
thy spiritual good, for the recovering or preserving thee from errors on the
right hand, and let love cover any mistakes or faults thou may meet with in
it. I am but one against five, as also in so many sheets there may well be
Errata, and all things not so strong, in much writing a man's pen may slip and
mistake, and with long waking a watchful man may wink now and then; consider
also this Answer has been made in the midst of much preaching and many other
businesses, having been destitute also of some advantages and helps which at
another time I might have had. Thy good acceptance of it; thy profiting by it,
and thy earnest prayers to God for me, will encourage me to go on in further
writing, to which I have so deeply engaged my self in this Book; and God
sparing me life and health, I have taken up a fixed resolution, never to give
over writing till this Church be settled, and these great schisms amongst us
healed: But if it should so happen that this Antapologia should profit nothing
at all many Christians whom I intend it most unto, yet I question not but it
will profit some, even as August. Vincentio Epist. 48. Nunc vero etiam si tibi
nihil profit, non puto nihil ijs profuturam qui eam legere cum Deitimore, and
sine personarum acceptione curaverint. a Beza Epist. 1. And 1. Duditio, Dominus
te totamque familiam ob omni malo, ac praesertim a Daemoniss meridianis istie
obambulantibus custodiat.
Augustine in his Epistle to Vincentius writes, even them who have a care to
read it with the fear of God, and without respect of persons. Now the God of
truth and peace reveal abundance of truth and peace, and give us truth and
peace always by all means; He fulfill that promise in Jeremy, to his people
in this Kingdom, to give them one heart and one way to fear him, for the good
of them and their children after them: And so commending thee dear Christian
to God, and the word of his grace, and this work of mine to his blessing, I
conclude this Epistle as Beza does his to Duditius, Farewell, The Lord keep
thee and all thine from all evil, and especially from nooneday Devils, which
walk about in this place and in these times, that is, from the errors of
Anabaptisme, Brownisme, Antinomianisme, Toleration of Sects and schisms under
pretense of liberty of conscience. Amen.

Yours in Christ, Tho. Edwards.

Errata.
Page 1. Marg, for Mat. 1. read Mat. 1^. p. 12. l* 6. add and. p. 14. l. 22.
for had r. have. p. 36. l. ^0, Tor wa r. is. p. 41. l, 15. for nor r. not. p.
42. l. 29. for Pareus^ r. Pareushesess^. p. 43. l. 1^. for satisfy r.
satisfied. p. 44 l. 24. for conceive r. conceived. p. 46. l. 19. at the full
point, 6. following lin^ though they be printed of the same character which the
words of the Letter are, yet they be the words of the Author of this Answer. p.
47. l. 6. for remain t rem^e. p. 53. l. 14. add after rel^ short. p. 57. l.
28. but must be transposed after there, and dele the: p. 64. l. ^1. r. for
which though coming it be, which committed though it be. p. 6^, l. 15. (...)
censures add the. p. 85. l. 15. for lib^tles r. Libertines. p. 8^. l. 30. for
marks r. rules. p. 94. l. 26. after others, add to all the Ordinances. p. 101.
l. 17. r. for leave to follow, leave follovving the. p. 107. l. 9. r. for
conceiving, receiving. p 124. l. (...). for to r. of. l 9. for real r. evil.
p. 134. l. 16. for Offices upon mistaken partialiti^, r. offenses upon mistakes
and partiality. p. 1^5. l. 2. r, for judge it, judged. p. 153. l. ^4. for each
r. the, p. 154. l. 12. addd after be, as. p. 156. l. 2. at thus must be a full
point, and all the semicircles in this page must be put out. p. 217. l. ^7. for
state pars^te r. state part. p. 28^. l. 28 for pleas^ r. partaker^. p. 305. for
s^ r. (...). p. ^71. l. (...). add for before, (...) full. p. 285. l. 27. for
diametrally r. diametrically. p. 294. l. 2. for witnesses r witnessed. p. 295.
l. (...). ^adde after according to. p. 2^6, l. 13. for should r. could, p. 297.
l. 36. for beat r. break.

ANTAPOLOGIA, OR, A full Answer to a Book Entitled, An Apologeticall
Narration, etc.
AS the Assertors of truth, through the subtilty and malice of Satan and his
instruments, causing prejudices and mistakes in the minds of many, have been
necessitated to write Apologies and make defenses (as Mat. 1. v. 18, 19. Acts
7. from v. 2. to v. 57. Acts 22. v. 1. to v 2^. Acts cap 24. Acts cap. 26.
the Scriptures, and many Authors both Justin. Mart. 2. Apolog. pro
Christianis. Tertul. Apol. Athenag. Apol. vel legatio pro Christianis. Athanas.
Apol. Arnobij Apol. Eulog. Apolog^t. Sanctorum Martyr.
Ancient and Zuinglij Apol. qua ad crimina respondet. Apologet. contra Episcop.
Constant. Bucer. Apolog. contra Brentium. Dannaei Apolog. pro Helvet.
Ecclesijs. Apolog Dan. pro adoratione. Melancthonis Apol. August. consess.
Apolog. pro Luthero: Gualtb. Apol pro Zuinglio. Beza Apolog. Jevelli Apolog.
Eccl. Anglicanae. Mort. Apol. Cathol.
Modern do abundantly testify,) Sc^venfeld. Apol. contra Fabium, Apol ad
Rege^. Hung. de mediatione. Stancari. Apolog. Vorstij. Theses Apolog. Exeg.
Apol. Oration Apolog. Bertij Apolog. Apolog. Remonstrantium. Apolog. Schast.
Francae. D. P. Dirick P^ps Apol Apolog. Episcop. Francisc. de St^ Cl.
So many who have maintained errors, have purposely chosen the way of making
Apologies, and justifications both of themselves and their opinions, that so by
good words, and fair speeches, they might deceive the hearts of the simple.
Amongst other erroneous spirits who have used this Artifice, the Apology of
the Brownists. Robins. Apolog. Justif. of Separat.
Brownists, and Separatists have not been least: (as is to be seen in some of
their Books,) Apolog. for Chapter Cove. Apol. Reply Davenport.
The Independents and Semiseparatists have also taken up this way, as
heretofore, so now in this present Apologeticall Narration, which I shall
examine, and return an Answer to, with all candor, fairness and respect,
both to the Authors, and to the Book, so far forth as the truth and cause
of God may suffer no prejudice. And I shall speak; first to the Title of the
Book, and then to the Book it self.

As for the Title; An Apologeticall Narration of some Ministers formerly in
Exile, now Members of the Assembly of Divines. It might have been fitlier
styled, A Panegyricall Oration of some Ministers: Or, An Encomiastick: For all
along the discourse, Encomiums and Praises are interwoven, and the Authors
take all occasions to extol, and magnify both themselves, and their party; as
many several passages testify.

Narration.] 1. An Accusation rather: for both openly, and more closely there
are many dangerous insinuations, (and those oftentimes nothing to the matter in
hand) by way of derogation, and depression of all Reformed Churches differing
from them: as the Reader may observe in these pages. 2. A Narration should be
plain*, clear, particular, true, perfect; or else it answers not the * Page,
4. 11, 19, 12, 24.
nature and end of a Narrative: But this Narration will be found dark,
doubtful, general, untrue, imperfect both in matter of fact and opinion;
relating only part, and having a Reserve.

Of some Ministers formerly in Exile.] As this is part of the Title in the
Frontispiece to invite the Reader, and take the people; so it is often mentioned
in the body of the Book, some ten times, Usque ad Nauseam. But into what
remote, and far Country were you banished? and what were the Companions of
your Exile? Certainly the Reader, into whose hands your Apologeticall
Narration comes, and finds, both in the Title and Book so often mention, and
such a matter made of Exile and banishment; will think, Alas! good men, into
what Patmos, Indies, or remote wilderness were they banished and for^'t to
fly? and will never imagine, that these were the exiled Ministers, and this
their exile, who in a time of common danger, and suffering in their own land,
went with their wives, children, estates, friends, Knights, Gentlemen and
Citizens over into Holland, where they lived in safety, plenty, pomp and ease,
enjoying their own ways and freedom: and when the coasts were cleared, came
over into England, were entertained and received with all respects and
applause, and are now Members of the Assembly of Divines.

For the Book it self: It consists of three maine parts. 1. The occasion of
putting forth this Apologeticall Narration at this time. 2. The Narration it
self. 3. The end and aim of it, expressed in the last page of the book. To
each of which parts, and all the particulars, I shall give a direct and
positive Answer, by subjoyning the Answer to every passage of the Narration;
whereby both being in the Readers eye, he may compare them together; and so
judge the better both of the Apologeticall Narration, and the Antapologie. And
I shall follow from page to page, and line to line, not omitting any material
passage, either in matter or manner of expression, and in the matter no
particular either of fact or opinion. And the Reader may observe, that I have
tied my self to follow close where they lead me, not taking liberty to range
or digress. And this Answer, though it be not written in such strong lines,
and enticing words as the Narration, yet (by the grace of God) it shall excel
it in plainness and evidence; and in the words of truth and soberness.

As for this Apologeticall Narration, though at the first view and reading of
it, it carries a face of fairness, candidnesse, modesty, ingenuity,
especially to such who know not the Authors, neither the History, nor all the
opinions, so that the learned Licenser, having lived remote (till of late) was
strangly deceived to give such a testimony to it; much more may the people. Yet
many learned and godly Ministers who understand their way, and them; and have
observed, their rise, progress and proceedings in their Church way; even such
who are their good friends, and tender enough of them, have quite another
opinion of their book; and judge they were much overseen in the framing of it:
and that they have much lost themselves by it, and in due time, may hear more
of it, as weli for the unseasonables of it, as for some things contained in it.
My judgment of it is this: That it is indeed cunningly, and advantagiously
drawn up, for to take, and deceive good people; to gather, increase and
confirm their party by it; being full of specious and glorious pretenses, and
all plausible seeming compliance and correspondency with the Churches they d^rt
from. And therefore my scope in this Answer, is the i^avouring to undeceive the
people, and to wipe off the paint, and to show the snake under the green
grass, and the foul hand under the white glove: and upon the through and full
examination of the book, I can bring in this just charge against it: That
there is not only fraud in relating part of the story and opinions, and not the
whole, holding out the bright-side of the cloud, but hiding the black, but
there are many manifest untruths in some of their Relations; and that even
where God and men are called to witness: And I could in most passages of the
Apology, which are matters of fact, write the quite contrary to what they
affirm. Besides, that some passages in the book, cross and enterfeere with
others. As also there i^ a dealing in generals, and in the clouds, with many
doubtful and double expressions like Apollo's Oracles: There being few
passages of moment either in matter of fact, or opinion, but they are so framed
that they may receive a double construction: and that sense which according to
Grammar, and ordinary acception they carry, cannot be meant.

[Now this charge and every particular of it, I shall make good in this
following discourse. And because they have now by Name in so open a manner
appeared in print, as to present this Apology to both Hous^s of Parliament; I
must be forced (though against my mind, and contrary to my purposes and
resolutions) to name persons, times, places, occasions, with other
circumstances which may evidence the truth of what I write to the Reader,
calling God to witness (whom I desire to fear, and to whom I know I must give
an account) that I feign nothing, nor wittingly mis-report any thing, no, not
in the least circumstance: neither have I taken up reports lightly, but what
ever I affirm or assert in this Answer, I either had it from their own
mouths, or can show it in their own letters, or in other manuscripts, or in
some printed books of men of their way and communion: or else have received it
from credible persons, many of them ear witnesses, and eyewitnesses upon the
places; All which witnesses are either learned, godly, judicious Ministers; or
else godly Christians, some their friends and familiars who have been amongst
them, and converst with them, both in Holland and England. And I appeal to
many of my Reverend Brethren in the Ministry, and to many godly Christians,
and to the consciences of the Authors of this Apology, upon second thoughts;
and to their own followers, and Churchmembers, whether, all along I speak not
the truth.

Our ears have been of late so filled with a sudden unexpected Apolog.
noise of confused Exclamations (though not so expressly directed against us
in particular, yet in the interpretation of the most reflecting on us) that
awakened thereby, we are enforced to anticipate a little that discovery of our
selves which otherwise we resolved to have left to time and experience of our
ways and spirits, the truest discoverers, and surest judges of all men and
their actions.]

You make the ground and occasion of setting forth this Apologeticall Narration
now, to be your ears of late so filled with a sudden and unexpected noise of
confused exclamations, interpretatively reflecting on you. It will hardly be
believed by wise men, that such men as you should make such an Apology, and
that in such a juncture of time, (the Assembly sitting, and being upon
Discipline, and you members of it) upon so weak and slight grounds as a
sudden and unexpected noise of confused exclamations coming to your ears;
which, as they are soon raised, so are they as soon gone and often die of
themselves, and by wise men nothing more slighted, especially being sudden and
confused. If other of your brethren who swim not with the stream of the
times, and are not the darlings of the people, should upon every occasion of
their ears filled with a sudden and unexpected noise of confused exclamations;
(even when they are expressly directed against them, and not only in
interpretation reflecting on them) write Apologies and make defenses, they
should judge they had little to do, and might have filled City and Country
with Apologies before now. There are who will not be persuaded, but are induced
rather to think, there were other motives and grounds of your writing that
Apology at that time: and the rather, because there have been heretofore, such
noises of confused exclamations (at least interpretatively reflecting on you)
and you passed them by. Shall I tell you what is judged to have rather enforced
you unto this work: Many of the Ministers in the City, not long before drew up
a letter to the Assembly concerning some Church grievances, and in particular,
that of gathering of Churches, and drawing away their people: which letter, as
it was not directed in particular against you, so, it reflected in the words
and sense upon many others rather then your selves: which letter how it was
accepted of by the Assembly, and what speeches and motions were upon it, how to
remedy, and prevent the evils represented, and especially, that of gathering
Churches, you better know then I. But soon after, some considerations were put
forth, by many members of the Assembly, to dissuade from gathering Churches: to
which considerations your hands were subscribed. (Upon what reasons you
complied in that, and whether you could not well avoid it, without greater
prejudice to your cause, you know best.) And now whether this Apologeticall
Narration was not first hastened to follow upon these considerations to
counter-ballance that act of yours against further gathering of Churches, that
your cause and way might receive no loss and prejudice, and to satisfy your
own party (many of them greatly exclaiming against you for your hands to those
considerations,) and so thinking by this after game to recover all, I leave to
the reader to judge? 2. Whether also, you well knowing that the Assembly was
upon the borders of the maine points in difference and upon coming to debate
Presbytery, Ordination, Excommunication, you put not forth this book to taste
and try the spirits of the Assembly and others before hand? 3. Whether also,
this was not intended to pre-possesse the peoples minds to lay in prejudice
against what the Assembly might determine: and by discovering your selves so
before hand, and so publicly engaging your selves, your party might appear,
and stand the more by you, and with you for a toleration, the great design of
the men of this way in these times? 4. Lastly, Whether (as much as you durst)
this Apology was not set out just upon the commingin of our brethren of
Scotland to our help, to asperse the Government and Reformation of the Church
of Scotland, and to lessen the esteem of that Kingdom and Church, so much and
so deservedly valued by this Kingdom, but looked upon by all the men of the
new Church way, as the great let of their Independent government? These reasons
with some other may well be thought to be the ground of your Apology, but that
alleged by you (the sudden and unexpected noise of confused exclamations)
seems so far from a Reason, that upon good grounds is doubted whether it can
be true that a noise of confused exclamations reflecting on you and your ways
could be sudden and unexpected to you: It Is strange to me that exclamations
should be to you at that time unexpected, that a few men going in a new by way
different from all the Reformed Churches of Christendom, and that with so high
a hand as you, and your party have done, should not expect speaking against,
and to have their ears filled with outcryes and exclamations (not only
confused and interpretative) but distinct, particular and personal. Now as the
pretended ground of making this Apology is taken from you, so what you affirm
in the following words (that you were awakened thereby) is denied, for you have
never been asleep since your coming over into England, but have been always
watchful, and intent to the uttermost upon all things which might either
further your way, or might hinder it, it is we who need something to awaken us,
as having been too much asleep in respect of you, for whilst the husbandmen
have slept, you have both sowed tares, and reaped a harvest: But I am in hope
that your Apologeticall Narration and this Antapologia together, will awaken
both Parliament, Ministers and people, more and more, and open men's eyes to
judge of things aright between you and us.

As for the being enforced to anticipate a little that discovery of your selves
which otherwise you resolved to have left to time and experience of your ways
and spirits.

It appears manifestly by what I have answered already, both of the weakness
of that ground (a sudden and unexpected noise of confused exclamations) and
that in all reason you could not but expect exclamations that you were not
enforced by that to make this Apology, and to anticipate the discovery of your
selves; Being scholars and understanding men, you may blush to write that such
poor things should enforce you against your resolutions, but you were willing
and desirous to make such an Anticipation, and so you would make and find some
ground for it, judging a sorry excuse better then none at all, but however, you
were not enforced to anticipate, yet I must tell you this Aoplogie is an
Anticipation with a witness, such an Anticipation, both for the
unseasonablenesse of it, and for the manner and way of it, as I judge no story
nor age can parallel it: That you could not stay a little longer, but in such a
time when we need so much the assistance of our brethren of Scotland, and the
help of all other Reformed Churches, in the face of the Parliament, Assembly
and Kingdom, to put out such a piece, and to do such an act as this is beyond
all example, and I will but represent to your selves and the reader in a third
person, what you have done in making this Apologeticall Narration, and then
leave you to give sentence. Suppose any other five Members of the Assembly,
men, as considerable as your selves every way, both for piety and learning;
nay, any twenty Members of the Assembly, had at the same time when you put
forth this Apologeticall Narration, only presented a bare Narration of a
Government, different, both from the Government by Archbishops, Bishops, etc.
and from the Presbyteriall, to both Houses of Parliament; and that without
reciting their doings, and sufferings, or pleading their great merits; or
without casting any aspertions on Presbyteriall government, and the Reformed
Churches: and should have peremptorily concluded, as you do in two several
pages, viz. 22, and 24. That we do here publicly* profess, the true
Government to stand, and consist in the middle way, betwixt that which is
called Episcopal and Presbyteriall: What would you five have thought of this?
and how (think you) would this have been taken by the Houses of Parliament, and
by the Assembly? Whether would not you five, and some others of you, have cried
out of this, as a most strange fact, and have strongly moov'd, and aggravated
it with all your might, that this affront, both to the Parliament, and the
Assembly, so contrary to the nature and end of this meeting, to pre-judge, and
pre-determine a Government, might be censured with a suspension from the
Assembly, at least, if not an utter expulsion. [As for the discovering of your
selves by this Apologeticall Narration, which otherwise you should have left to
time and experience: This book, is not only a little discovery of your selves;
but a mighty discoverer of your ways and spirits; and shows us what we may
judge of you, who will put out in public a piece so fallacious, and untrue as
this will appear to be. But how ever this is the first discovery of your
selves in this way, with all your hands subscribed: yet, we have had a
discovery of you for some years past, both in your practices of withdrawing
from our Public Assemblies; and in gathering and constituting separated
Churches; preaching (also) often on the points concerning your Church Way: as
also, writing Letters and other Manuscripts, about ^ose matters; with other
ways, wherein time, and experi^ce of 7, or 8, years last past, has been
sufficient discoverers, and sure judges of you and your actions.

And now we shall begin to make some appearance into public Apolog.
light, unto whose view and judgments should we (that have hitherto lain
under so dark^ a cloud of manifold mis-apprehensions) at first present our
selves, but to the Supreme judicatory of this Kingdom, which is and has
been in all times the most just and severe tribunal for guiltiness to
appear before, much more to dare to appeal unto; and yet withal, the most
sacred refuge and Asylum for mistaken, and mis-judged innocence.

It Is strange, that having kept out of public light, (as you say) all this
three years space, you could not forbear a little longer from telling fine
stories of your selves, and publishing your particular private opinions in
print: Especially, considering there was an Assembly of Learned Divines (of
which you are Members) to declare unto, and with whom you might debate the
points in difference: where (also) you know you have all freedom, and just
respect. And I must tell you, it is the judgment, of some of your good friends,
that you were much mistaken in the time now, and that you had been far more
excusable, if you had put out this Apologeticall Narration a year or two ago:
they interpreting it a violation of the Or^nce, by which you are Members, a
high affront, and contempt to the Assembly in pre-judging of it: and such a
preingaging of your selves, and party; as you cannot retreat so easily, and
with that honor as you might before: As also, a ground of much disturbance and
prejudice with the people against what shall be determined by the Assembly. As
to that, you say, we now begin to make some appearance into public light: In a
sense'tis true, for all the time, that you have been in your Church way, both
in Holland and England, you have carried things closely; and concealed all that
you could possibly, your opinions, and practices, with the grounds of them,
from your brethren the Ministers, who studied and understood the points: But
for tender conscienced, and weak Christians (especially such whom you had any
interest in, any ways, and you had any probability to gain to you) you have
not been wanting, either in letters of Invitation, or cominending some books of
the Church Way to them: as also by preaching, and conference to draw them to
you. As for that quere, Unto whose view, and judgment, should we at first
present our selves, but to the Supreme judicatory of this Kingdom? I answer,
1. To any, rather then to the two Houses of Parliament, to present before them
such a dark, covert, doubtful, un-true Relation. 2. In these points of
difference about Church Government and worship, you should have presented your
selves rather to the Assembly than the Parliament, and if you consult the
Ordinance (by virtue of which you are Members) you will find it more
conformable to have first propounded your doubts to the Assembly; and if the
Assembly could not have satisfied you, then, afterward you had an allowance of
giving in your Dissents, with the grounds of them to both Houses. As to that
passage, Your having hitherto lain under so dark a cloud of manifold
misapprehensions: which you make the ground of first presenting your selves to
the Parliament by this Apology: How does this agree with what you write in
page 24? And we found many of those mists, that had gathered about us, or were
rather cast upon our persons, in our absence, began by our presence again,
(and the blessing of God upon us) in a great measure to scatter and vanish
without speaking a word for our selves or cause. And if at your first
appearing, so many of those mists, and in so great a measure were vanished; then
surely, by that time your writ this Apology, all might have been vanished and
scattered: But let me ask you: Whose mis-apprehensions, do you understand,
you lay under, that you present this Apology to the Parliament, and appeal to
them? Do you mean, you have lain under the dark cloud of the manifold
mis-apprehensions of the Parliament (...) or, of the people of the Kingdom?
Certainly, not under the dark cloud of the mis-apprehensions of the
Parliament, They are too great, and wise a Body, to be guilty of manifold
misapprehensions of you: Besides, what Ministers have had the sun of their
favor shining upon them, more then your selves* You all have been made Members
of the Assembly by them, called to preach before them, upon their public
solemn occasions: and some of you employed in extraordinary services: But if
you understand the mis-apprehensions of the body of the people: why do you
present this Apology to the Parliament? what would you have them do for you?
or how shall they free you from the dark cloud of manifold misapprehensions? I
suppose, you do not expect, that the Houses should set forth a Declaration to
clear you five: neither make an Ordinance, that whosoever mis-apprehends you
and your ways, shall be reputed ill affected to the public (though M. S. your
new great friend sets the brand of malignancie on them who are against M S. to
A. S. cap. 5. page 83.
you:) Why do you then appeal to them, in respect of the misapprehensions of
the people? or trouble them with so trivial a matter? Do you not know, the
people will mis-apprehend persons, and opinions, though plainly and fully laid
down? which yours never yet were. And indeed, for any cloud of manifold
mis-apprehensions you have hitherto lain under, you may thank your selves,
and never appeal to the Parliament, to be a refuge, and Asylum, for your
mistaken, and mis-judged innocence; whenas according to your own confessions
in this Apology, going in a new, and different way from all the Reformed
Churches, you have never yet declared what you hold, and what not: neither have
answered the Books written against your way, but have reserved your selves:
And yet, whereas you pretend a cloud of manifold mis-apprehensions as the
ground in this way, first to present your selves, and to appeal to the
Parliament: And it is a usual phrase in the mouths of your party to put off
arguments with, that you are mistaken. I know not for mine own part, and some
others of my brethren, wherein any of you have been mis-apprehended by us; but
we have so far judged of you, as to go by no other rules but your known
practices, and your letters, and other manuscripts given, and sent out to your
followers; and from what some who are of your own Churches, and your familiar
friends have held out, and pleaded for, as your Principles: together with what
we find in the printed Treatises of them of New England, the New England way
being generally taken to be your way: and I heard Mr Bridge since this
Parliament openly affirm it, for himself and others, we agree with them of
New England, and are of their Church Way: And Mr Buroughs has said so too.

As for the first presenting your selves to the Supreme judicatory of this
Kingdom: had it not been, for the reasons given you above, I should not have
spoken against it: but seeing you have appealed unto them, unto them ye shall
go (...) unto the Parliament; as the most just and severe tribunal for
guiltiness, and withal, the most sacred Refuge and Asylum for innocence, I
appeal too: humbly desiring them (if their great affairs can spare any time)
to read this Antapologie, with the Reasons I, above two yeare^ since, presented
to the House of Commons, against your Helena of Independencie, and your Diana
of toleration. Mean time I cannot but stand and wonder, that you knowing and
acknowledging the Houses to be the Supreme Judicatory of the Kingdom, etc.
how you had the face to present an appeal to them in things untrue: wherein
many people can point to and say, passages in the 25, and 26 pages, are not so:
I heard (says one) at such a Church one of the five preach of their
Church Way; and I heard (says another) another of them, at such a Church,
preach the like. But why do I wonder? when it will appear in the following
discourse, you have so much in your own cause at this time lost your selves,
and forgot your principles; as that ye do ascribe to the grace of God, and
call God to witness your constant forbearance of publishing your opinions by
preaching, etc. which how untrue it is, I shall evince when I come to the 25,
and 26 pages, or else let me suffer. And thus much for the occasion, or Preface
of this Apologeticall Narration.

The most, if not all of us, had ten years since (some more, some less)
several settled stations in the Ministry, in places of public Apolog.
use in the Church, not unknown to many of your selves; but the sinful evil
of those corruptions in the public worship and government of this Church,
which all do now so generally acknowledge and decrie, took hold upon our
consciences long before some others of our brethren; And then how impossible it
was to continue in those times our service and standings, all men's
apprehensions will readily acquit us.]

Here begins the Narration, wherein we may consider, the Matter of it; and the
Manner and way of the carriage and contrivance of it.

The Matter consists, partly of Fact and Practice: And partly of Opinions and
Tenants: both which all along in their Narration are interwoven within each
other: Their opinions and Tenants in their practices, and their practices in
their opinions. The matter of the Narration consists of three maine parts:
First, of their Opinion and fact before their Exile: The second of their
Opinions and Practices in their Exile: The third of their carriage and
behavior since their return into England, from their first coming over to
the time of putting forth this Apology. The Manner of carrying it all along,
is clothing the Narration in such words, phrases and in such a way (though the
Church principles are laid down and maintained in it) as to make the
Parliament and Kingdom believe they differ little or nothing from the Reformed
Churches, and from our Church now: And in the things wherein there is some
difference, of which they give but three instances (though the differences be
many, and so great in their account as to constitute new Churches and to
forsake communion upon them) yet they render them so to the Parliament and
Reader, as if the Reformed Churches in the differences between them could not
but allow their way and practices, though there may be some just question about
their own. Now this Apologeticall Narration in all the parts of it both for
matter and manner has many flawes, both of untruths, and of doubtful, dark
expressions, consisting of generals, etc. The particulars I shall observe all
along, and give animadversions upon them in their proper place.

Now before I answer to all the particulars contained in this Narration, I
propound these two Questions to the Apologists to consider of.

Quest. 1. Considering that all of you fell not off from the dark part
together, nor upon enquiring into the light part at the same time, that you
went not over into Holland together, neither lived in Holland nor England near
each other, neither communicated principles at first to one another, yea were
not some of you for a good time so much as acquainted together, besides that
you were not all in the same condition, with other different circumstances; nay
yet more that some of you, as Mr Bridge and Mr Sympson, for some years in
Holland so opposite to one another: How you five could in this Apology all
along, both concerning matters of Fact and Opinion in England, Holland, and
since your return, make such narrations and solemn professions both
positively and negatively (not only every man for himself) but each in the
Name of all and for all: Amongst many instances I will name these; 1. How you
can in the third page, every man for the other, speak what is there expressed,
for suppose Mr Goodwin might look upon the word of Christ as impartially and
unprejudicedly, etc. yet how can Mr Goodwin speak this for Mr Sympson and Mr
Bridge (the condition they were in being different from his) and I wonder how
Mr Sympson and Mr Bridge can write this as agreeing to them both, knowing so
well the contrary, and having in many words and letters to their friends,
charged each other with great partiality and self-seeking. 2. How could you in
the 6th page, make that profession for one another, that all that conscience of
the defilements, etc. did never work in any of us any other thought, much less
opinion, when as you knew not one another thoughts and opinions. 3. How you
can in the 24, and 25, pages write for one another, which we had not attempted
in the least, we call God and men to witness our constant forbearance either
to publish our opinions by preaching, etc. whenas you do not know all that
others of you may have done or preached.

Quest. 2. Seeing you do in this Apology write so often we have so and so,
and we have not, we had not, nor any of us, supposing now some of you to have
done, or not to have done, yet if it be found that any of you have done
contrary, whether are not the others guilty in this case, and is not the
proving such facts against any one or more of you, a proving against you all,
and a direct confutation of your Apology in those particulars: For instance,
suppose Mr Ny and Mr Goodwin have not for their particulars published their
opinions by preaching, nor attempted in the least to make a party, but yet Mr
Bridge, Mr Sympson, Mr Buroughs, have; and again, suppose Mr Goodwin, Mr Ny,
Mr Bridge, Mr Buroughs have not gathered nor added to their Churches
multitudes, but Mr Sympson only, whither now Mr Goodwin and Mr Ny, having made
professions, protestations in the Name of all, are not faulty and guilty too,
and may not be justly charged in the Answer, of untruths in such particulars
(though Mr Bridge and Mr Sympson should only be formally guilty.)

The four first lines of this Section, containing the relation of your
stations in the Ministry, is granted you: But as to that part of this Section,
The sinful evil of those corruptions in the public worship and government of
this Church, etc. I desire to propound this question to you: Whether by the
sinful evil of those corruptions, in the public worship and government of
this Church, you understand the things reputed to be established by law, as the
Book of Common Prayer: The Entrance into our Ministry by Ordination of
Bishops, and living under the Episcopal government? Or whether, by the sinful
evil, the Innovations in the government and worship, as bowing to Altars, etc.
which came in of later days? Now if you mean the first, that which usually
was called, Old conformity, in opposition to the New: So I deny that all do
now generally acknowledge and decrie that as sinfully evil; which appears
thus: Because that Remonstrance presented to the House of Commons in the
beginning of the Parliament, subscribed by many hundred godly Ministers,
conformists, and non-conformists for Reformation in Worship, Doctrine,
Government and Discipline: The Government, Worship and Ceremonies were
impleaded, in respect of many inconveniences, and evil consequents; but
Petitioning against them, as sinfully evil, and absolutely unlawful was
declined: And there are many Parliament men and Ministers, who have a great
zeal to the present Reformation in casting out the Hierarchy and Ceremonies,
who are not yet convinced that all their former practice in the way of old
conformity, was sinful: But as those times were, do judge they did lawfully
continue their standing in their places and in this Church: much less are they
satisfied that either Episcopal government, or the Lyturgy were sufficient
grounds of forsaking our Public Assemblies, and erecting new: Amongst a cloud
of Learned and godly men, take the testimony of Gerson Bucerus in his learned
answer to Doctor Downham, who for the point of Dissert. de Guber. Eccl. page
620.
Episcopacie allows not of schism in the Church, but vindicates Quinam buju^
criminis rei judicentur me quidem latet, neque in qirere ad nos attinet. Hoc
scio, no^ convenire in eos, qui intra sententiae nostrae terminos se continent.
himself and others who keep within the bounds of his opinion from being
guilty in that kind. Which Answer to the first part of this Section is not here
given by me, in the least to plead for the Hierarchy, Ceremonies or present
Liturgy (for I heartily desire their removal) but only to show the Apologists
mistake in asserting that all do now so generally acknowledge and decrie them
as sinfully evil. And besides, if you understand these, you cannot be ignorant
that Episcopacy, and the old Ceremonies took hold upon the consciences of many
others before you: even upon the good old non-conformists you speak of
afterward, Yea, and upon many of your Brethren (of the same time) long before
you, as Mr R. Mr H. Mr Sl. Mr R. Mr A. Mr P. cum alijs: who yet never ran into
your principles of forsaking the public Assemblies, and gathering Churches: so
that many non-conformists leaving the Ceremonies before you, and yet being
far from your Church Way, may counter-ballance what you would gain with the
people by your Insinuations, and Narrations of leaving the Ceremonies long
before some of us: But if by sinful evil, you mean, the Innovations, of
bowing to Altars, etc. then those of us who stand for a general Reformation,
did then acknowledge and decrie them, and they took hold upon our consciences
as soon as any of yours: We as much abhorring bowing to Altars, publishing the
Declaration for Sports, etc. as you: and witnessing more frequently against
them in our Ministry then some of you.

As to those lines in the close of this Section, The impossibility of
continuing your stanaings in those times, I confess there was a great
improbability of continuing your public ministry in those places of London,
Cambridge, etc. But whether in some other parts of the Kingdom more remote and
obscure you might not have enjoyed your Ministry without an impossibility, I
question.

Neither at the first did we see or look farther then the dark part, the
evil of those superstitions adjoined to the worship of Apolog.
God, which have been the common stumbling block and offense of many thousand
tender consciences, both in our own and our neighbor Churches, ever since the
first Reformation of Religion: which yet was enough to deprive us of the
public exercise of our Ministeries, and together therewith (as the
watchfulness of those times grew) of our personal participation in some
ordinances; and further exposed us either to personal violence and
persecution, or an exile to avoid it: which latter we did the rather choose,
that so the use and exercise of our Ministeries (for which we were borne and
live) might not be wholly lost, nor our selves remain debarred from the
enjoyment of the Ordinances of Christ, which we account our birthright, and
best portion in this life.]

For some of you, I judge this to be true, as of Mr Goodwin, and Mr Nigh;
knowing something of the story of Mr Goodwins first coming to fall off from
the Ceremonies, (having seen and perused the Arguments and Reasons that past
between him and Mr Cotton and some others:) and Mr Goodwin assured me, some
Months after his going off, that he had nothing to say but against the
Ceremonies: The Lyturgy offended him not; much less dreamed he of this
Church Way he since fell into: So that is true, at first he saw but the dark
part, and that but of the Ceremonies. But for others of you: as namely, Mr
Bridge, and Mr Buroughs, whose hands are subscribed to this Apologeticall
Narration (and this passage is spoken in the Name of you all, not some, or most
of us, (as in some other passages) but We, as relating to all,) they did not
at first see the dark part, nor the evil of those superstitions, (namely, the
Ceremonies) but were men judged conformable, and practiced conformity till the
year of Bishop Wrens Visitation, and the sending down to Norwich his
Injunctions: about which time, and upon which occasion, Mr Bridge, with other
Ministers of the City of Norwich, being first suspended, and Mr Buroughs
afterward at the Visitation; and times growing so very bad, that there was
small hopes of admittance again into their places upon old Conformity, Mr
Bridge took his degree per saltum, from a reputed Conformitant in the Church
of England, and might have continued so till this present Parliament, (for
ought I know) to fall suddenly into the Church Way, without long seeing, or
looking into the dark part or inquiring into the light part of Church-worship
and government, as that short space between his suspension at Norwich, and his
being received into a Church at Rotterdam, and thereupon his fierce Letters to
some of his old friends in Norwich to come from the Church of England, will
fully show, by which it is manifest, To his loving friends Mr Henry King, Mr
Tossed, Mr Smith, Mr Raner, Mr Mapp.
the sinful evils of those Ceremonies took not hold upon Mr Bridge, and Mr
Buroughs consciences till suspensions for Bishop Wrens Innovations first took
hold of them.

It Is confessed the refusing of the Ceremonies in the places you were settled in,
was enough to deprive you of the public exercise of your Ministeries in those
places: Especially considering the using of the Ceremonies could not preserve
some of you from suspensions; But the refusing of the Innovations, was matter
enough to silence you there: But whether the simple forbearing of the
Ceremonies (especially having left your places, and not taken others) was
enough to deprive you of your personal participation in some Ordinances, and
further exposed you, either to personal violence and persecution, or an exile
to avoid it, that I much doubt, and am no way satisfied: Considering,
notwithstanding the watchfulness of those times, that many non-conformists did
enjoy, not only some, but a personal participation in all the Ordinances of
Worship, (as we use to speak:) namely, Word, Prayer, Sacraments, singing of
Psalms: and that in some good degree of peace (so as to be kept out of the
High Commission Court, and prisons) and were not put upon a necessity of exile:
And how ever, they resolved to venture some persecution, and violence to do
God some service in their own Country, rather then to leave the Land, and
desert the cause of God here, and so give it up wholly, (as it were) to the
enemy: If all others had done as you five, according to an ordinary way, what
had become of this Kingdom? But besides this I remember some of you, as Mr
Goodwin and Mr Nigh, after ye fell off from the Ceremonies, did for some space
so long as you saw no farther then the dark part, partake in the Ordinances
here, and in that of the Lords Supper too, without kneeling: and Mr Nye's
children were baptized without the sign of the Cross: and in the sixth page of
this Apology you acknowledge, that some of you, even after you actually were
in this way of communion, baptized your children in Parishonall Congregations;
which I suppose you would not have done without liberty, from the evil of
those superstitions annexed to the worship of God: And further, for some three
years space after Mr Goodwin and Mr Nigh, saw the dark part, (nay, after some
good time they saw the light part,) they stayed in the Kingdom, and were both
of them public enough, and preached sometimes, yet free from personal
violence and persecution, and needed not for any personal persecution or
violence they were under to have left the Kingdom: And so Mr Buroughs, what
ever his judgment was after his suspension about the dark part and the light
part, was free and safe in the Kingdom till for some speeches spoken about the
Scottish War in some company not to be trusted, he for fear thereof fled in
all haste to Rotterdam. So that these things stumble me at the truth of these
particulars, that you needed not have chosen for the bare refusing the
Ceremonies, that which you so often term Exile and Banishment to enjoy the
Ordinances, and to avoid personal violence and persecution. But, how ever
this is held out as a fine story to the Reader, yet to me, there are other
Reasons seem more probable (which you thought good in your wisdoms to
conceal) which made you choose that which you so affect to call Exile, namely,
that you might enjoy all the Ordinances of Christ, (as you use to speak)
whereof some of them the Reformed Churches have not, and that in your
Church Way of separated Assemblies (which is implied by you in the close of
this Section) as also, that you might have some maintenance by the people that
went over with you, and still hoped upon the bad times in England to draw over
more, which according to the good old non-conformists principles you could not
do: As also, that you might secure your selves from all possibility and fear
of persecutions, be certainly safe upon the shore whilst your brethren were at
sea sea in the storm.

This being our condition, we were cast upon a farther necessity Apolog.
of enquiring into and viewing the light part, the positive partof
Church-worship and government; And to that end to search out what were the
first Apostolic directions, pattern and examples of those Primitive Churches
recorded in the New Testament, as that sacred pillar of fire to guide us. And
in this enquire we looked upon the word of Christ as impartially, and
unprejudicedly, as men made of flesh and blood are like to do in any juncture
of time that may fall out; the places we went to, the condition we were in, the
company we went forth with, affording no temptations to byas us any way, but
leaving us as freely to be guided by that light and touch Gods Spirit should by
the word vouchsafe our consciences, as the Needle touched with the Lodestone is
in the Compass: And we had (of all men) the greatest reason to be true to our
own consciences in what we should embrace, seeing it was for our consciences
that we were deprived at once of what ever was dear to us. We had no new
Commonwealths to rear, to frame Church Government unto, whereof any one piece
might stand in the others light, to cause the least variation by us from the
Primitive pattern; we had no State-ends or Political interests to comply with;
No Kingdoms in our ^ye to subdue unto our mould; (which yet will be coexsistent
with the peace of any form of Civil Government on earth:) No prefenment or
worldly respects to shape our opinions for: we had nothing else to do but
simply and singly to consider how to worship God acceptably, and so most
according to his word.

This being our condition, must relate to what goes before, which I judge from
the literal and gramaticall sense can be no other but this: That falling from
the Ceremonies, which was enough to deprive you of your Ministeries, and the
participation of some Ordinances, and further exposed you to violence or exile
to avoid it, which latter of exile you choosing rather for the ends specified,
that put you upon a necessity of enquiring into and viewing the light part, the
positive part of Church-worship and Government; Which words seem to carry this
sense that upon your choosing exile, you fell upon enquiring into the light
part, and not before, and all the understanding Readers, whom I have spoken
with about this passage, take them so: But because you do not positively say
so, and your words may have some evasion; and I would not fasten any thing on
you, as said by you in this book that you affirm not; Let me put to you, for
the understanding your minds, this question, Whether you take choosing an Exile,
for, your resolution and purpose when you should see convenient time to leave
the Land; (and not for your actual leaving the Kingdom;) and so fell upon
enquiring and viewing the positive part of Church-worship and Government; and
to that end to search out what were the first Apostolic directions recorded
in the New Testament, whilst you were in the Kingdom? Or else, Whether after
you were come into Holland, and so actually were Exiles, then you were cast
upon the enquiring into the light part? Now if you mean, these words, in the
first sense, and that the Reader must understand them so; which I must tell you
(as it is a very harsh sense, and for a Narration to speak so doubtfully, is
not fair,) so all your discourse following upon it in the 3, 4, 5, 6, 7 page
is vain, and to no purpose to work that in the minds of the Reader which you
drive at: Besides there are many passages in those pages cannot admit of such a
sense, but plainly refer to your being in Holland; as, those words, The
places we went to, the condition we were in, the company we went forth with;
and we had of all men the greatest reason to be true to our own consciences in
what we should embrace, seeing it was for our consciences that we were deprived
at once of what ever was dear to us; with many other like passages: But if you
mean the words in the second sense, as the coherence and scope of the
discourse going before and following, carry it; namely, that when you were in
Exile, then you began to search out the positive part of Church-worship and
Government; let me propound my reasons, why I do not believe it, but do
judge, that most of you (if not all) were upon the light part, and in the
Church Way in your judgments before your leaving England, and so when you came
over needed no great search into it. In the sixth page you speak expressly,
that some of you were actually in this way of communion, and after that
baptized your children in Parishonall Congregations; which words there expressed
must of necessity refer to England before your going over, and cannot be
understood whilst you were in Holland or since your return into England,
unless you mean things quite otherwise then you speak. And that you were
beyond the dark part, the evil of those superstitions adjoined to the worship
of God, (which have been the common stumblingblock of many thousand tender
consciences, which cannot be understood but of the Ceremonies and some
corruptions in the Lyturgy) let me besides your own confession in the sixth
page, put these questions to your consciences, and in your answer deny them if
you can.

1. Whether some of you whilst you were in England, did not for a long time,
wholly forbear coming to the Lyturgy, and coming to the Lords Supper at all
in our Congregations, because of the prescribed form of Prayer, and mixed
Communion?

2. Whether one of you five told not some friends that he had found out a form
of Church Government as far beyond M Cartwrights, as his was beyond that of
Bishops?

3. Whether another of you had not so much declared his judgment against the
lawfulness of set forms of prayer prescribed, as thereupon, at the request of
some great persons of worth, Mr Ball (now with God) had not a conference and
dispute with him at Mr Knightlyes upon it? And whether the same person residing
near Banbury did not both by preaching and otherways vent many things against
prescribed forms of prayer, and Communicating in our assemblies, so that the
Country thereabouts was much disturbed, and that painful preacher Mr
Wheateley (now with God) much grieved by the falling off and withdrawing of
some?

4. Whether also, one of these Apologists, was not so far gone in the
principles of the new Church Way, as that he would not be Apol. Iusta and
necessaria per Joh. Robins. cap. 6. De conjugio per pastores Ecclesiae
celebrato.
married by Ministers, but deferred marriage till he came into Holland, where
presently after his coming he was married, (not in the way of the Reformed
Churches there,) but by the Magistrates according to the way of the Brownists,
as it is laid down in Robinsons Apology?

5. I ask, What some of you, whose Names are to this Apology, with other
Ministers of your way (who are now with God) with some Gentlemen, did at
Missendon in Buckingham-shiere, the winter and spring before you went into
Holland, and whether that company which went over with you into Holland were
not engaged in the Church Way, and principles before you left England? And I
ask, how long it was, when once you came to Viana, where you settled for a
time, before you practiced your Church Way? Whether you took any long time of
searchingout what were the first Apostolic directions, before you fell to the
practice of it? I deny not but you might add somethings to your Church Way
after your coming over; and had you stayed there till this time you had added
with a witness: of which I shall speak more afterward.

6. If Mr Bridge carried not the positive part over with him, I ask, whether
upon the change of the air presently after his coming over, without any great
time of searching out what were the first Apostoilque directions, he were not
admitted a member in the Church Way, and then chosen one of the Ministers of
that Church at Rotterdam, And whether Mr Buroughs, flying over for words
spoken, was not quickly admitted into the Church at Rotterdam? So that, if
these instances be true, here was no great time of enquiring and viewing, after
Exile, before you fell to practice; nor no great time allotted to search out
what were the first Apostolic directions, pattern and examples of those
Primitive Churches recorded in the New Testament. And to put it past question
that you were resolved of your Chu^-way before you left England, (at least Mr
Goodwin and Mr Nigh) I have a Letter by me under Mr Archers hand the Pastor of
their Church, dated September. 12, 1637. which was about six weeks after
landing, (for in another Letter from him to me, he writes, I landed July 27.)
wherein he writes thus in way of an answer to a passage in a Letter of mine
dated August 23. concerning his being in the Church Way; As for your judgment
and the work you are about, I heard of it before: and have not so long stood
by afflicted, soberly and conscientiously ta search out the truth, but have
thoroughly seen into the bottom of it, in such a measure, as I am confident
that in the end you will all come to us, and not we to you: And in the same
Letter he speaks of all with him to be of the same judgment, which fully
shows their engagement before they came to Holland.

But as to that Dilemma, whether before your going into Holland, or whether
afterward you fell upon the positive part of Church-worship and Government; it
matters not much in reference to that which follows upon it: for even that
which is granted by you without any question, namely, your stumbling at the
Ceremonies; and thereupon choosing Exile to avoid the possible hazard of
personal violence and persecution, which put you upon necessity of enquiring
into the light part, has much in it of self to byas, and to draw you to that
way of Worship and Government in which you are in, that so you might be
provided for, well and comfortably in your Exile with company and maintenance;
(which only could be in these principles of your Church Way) for according to
the non-conformists-principles you could not have drawn any over, nor set up
your Church Way: and I should in reason have thought, that had you been free
and not cast upon this necessity by choosing Exile, (as my self and others
were) in the studying of these points, (though in as much danger from the
Prelaticall faction as your-selves) you might more impartially and without
preingagement have seen the truth: for it is too often seen, that necessity is
ingens telum, and draws aside often the judgment and practices of good and
wise men: and so might do yours: And therefore you must pardon me if I
question whether in your enquiry into the first Apostolic directions, you
looked upon the word of Christ as impartially and unprejudicedly as men made of
flesh and blood are like to do in any juncture of time that may fall out: I
judge, the Reformers in the Reformed Churches of Geneva, Scotland, etc. upon
many reasons, (some Reformat. of Chapter Govern. in Scotland, page 4, 5, 18, 19.
whereof are hinted by the Commissioners of the Church of Scotland) were like
to look more impartially, and without prejudice upon the word of Christ, then
you; they were not forced to fall on their Church Government, by a necessity of
Exile, but having learned it from the word, some of them suffered Exile for it:
and others resolved to hazard the utmost for it, not upon every fear and
imagination, forsaking their people and country; but resolving to do the will
of God, and to promote his cause in their own country what ever it cost them:
And besides the first Reformers, I believe there be many in these times, who
studying these points have looked more impartially upon Church Government and
discipline, and been freer from engagements and worldly respects then your
selves: and when I weigh the Reasons intimated of your impartiality, and free
guidance by the Spirit, I am no way satisfied, but they serve all to afford
temptations to byas you that way you are in.

As 1. For the Company you went forth with, both men and women were principled
and engaged in the Church Way, and the company some of you went to, being in
the open practice of it: And 2. As for the Places you went to, namely, Holland,
that gives liberty of conscience, and toleration to sundry Sects, which is an
invitation to errors; So that you had certainty of enjoying your way there: 3.
As for the Condition you were in, (which is before specified,) so besides one
of you was not willing, for some reasons he knows best, to live wholly upon
his wives means, and so needed a Church to allow him maintenance: Another
being in debt: A third forced to fly for fear of severe punishment for words
spoken left you not as freely to be guided by that light and touch Gods Spirit
should by the word vouch safe your consciences as the Needle touched with the
Loadstone is in the Compass: So that if these circumstances be well
considered; with some others of the like nature; the door of hopes, being shut
up here, of your public Ministry, and the means of livelihood to most of
you, and without holding and maintaining these principles, there being no way
of having Churches, whether it is not more probable, you being men made of
flesh and blood, (as that you confess your selves) and having hearts
deceitful as well as other men, may be partial in this relation of your
selves, and the temptations of company, place, condition draw you strongly,
though you thought it not. But before I pass to other Reasons expressed by you
in this page, I cannot pass over the high and great words of your selves,
namely, In this enquiry we looked upon the word of Christ as impartially, and
unprejudicedly, as men made of flesh and blood are like to do in any juncture
of time that may fall out: the places we went to, the condition we were in, the
company we went forth with affording no temptation to by as us any way, but
leaving us as freely to be guided by that light and touch Gods Spirit should by
the word vouchsafe our consciences, as the Needle touched with the Loadstone is
in the compass.

Brethren, it had been more humility and modesty to have suspected your selves,
and to have preferred in honor, others before your selves, and it had been more
agreeable to the counsel of the Holy Ghost, not to have thus extold your
selves: Who are you? And what are you? that you should affirm all this of your
selves: The Apostles St Paul, Peter, James and John, would not have spoken
these words of themselves: and indeed, some of the words do more suite the
condition of Angels, and the spirits of just men made perfect, then men on
earth subject to like passions as other men: What! your condition, etc. afford
no temptation, to by at you any way, but leaving you so freely, etc. It Is such:
a piece of selfe-flattery and pride, that hardly the Popes-parasites have in
the sense of these words exceeded: The great lights of the Church in the first
Reformation, Luther, Calvin, Knox, etc. would have blushed to have had these
lines affirmed of them, much more to have been spoken by themselves: but how
meanly soever you may think of the Reformers before you, in comparison of your
selves (as some passages in your Apology imply) yet how know you who may come
after you to excel you as much in light, as you judge you do the Reformers
that went before you, that you speak of the time that may fall out, and is yet
to come: can you foresee what men are like to do in aftertimes. As for that
express reason: You had of all men the greatest reason to be true to your own
consciences in what you should embrace, seeing it was for your consciences that
you were deprived at once of what ever was dear to you: In which passage, you
intimate your great sufferings above other men, as if you above others had the
greatest reason to be true to your consciences, they not suffering like you: I
must tell you, I know some men, that for God and his truth suffered more in
England then all you five, and all your Churches put together did in Holland;
who yet were against your Church Way. And for this reason, there is little
strength or truth in it: and the former part of it is as likely to be true as
the latter: Let me sadly put the question to you: How dare you affirm, that
for your consciences you were deprived at once of what ever was dear to you I
Were not your wives, children, estates, friends and lives dear to you? Had you
not all these with you (...) and did you not in the Netherlands live in the
best places, in much plenty, ease and pomp? But what great deprivation at once
is this, of what ever is dear? for men to take their own times, and to go in
Summer time with Knights, Ladies and Gentlewomen with all necessaries into
Holland, and there to take choice of all the Land where to reside, and with
wives, children, in the midst of friends and acquaintance, free from the
fears, and possibilities of vexations of the Spiritual Courts and Prisons, to
enjoy all plenty and freedom, as you did? There are many would have been glad,
and still would be of such a deprivation at once, as to be so Exiled into
Holland, to be able to spend, two, or three hundred pounds per annum there. And
I must here mind one of you, in whose Name this reason is brought, that this
cannot be affirmed of him, that for his conscience he was deprived at once of
what ever was dear to him, seeing he fled into Holland for words about State
matters. As for those other Reasons following: You had no now Commonwealths to
near, to frame Church Government unto, you had no State ends, or poloticall
interests to comply with; no Kingdom^ in your eye to subdue unto your mould; no
preferment or worldly respects to shape your opinions for. Suppose all this to
be true which you say, (which yet, I for my part, upon good reasons doubt) what
will you build upon it; What follows, that therefore you must alone be in the
right for Church Government? it is denied, it no way follows: for many of the
poor Anabaptists and Brownists had no new Commonwealths to rear, not so many
State ends, and political interests to comply with, as you (as upon good
reason, and the experience of you here, all men will grant:) and yet you
confess the Anabaptists and rigid Brownists are out of the way. And besides,
had not many of the first Reformers, Reformat. of Chapter Govern. in Scotland, page
10.
(as the Commissioners of the Church of Scotland well observe) as few
Commonwealths to rear, as few State-ends, or policicall interests to comply
with, as you? Nay, are not some of you greater Statesmen, and politicians, and
look more to preferment and worldly respects, then ever they did? And are
there not amongst us in these times, men differing from your Church Way, that
eye Commonwealths, State-ends, and political interests as little as you do?
why then is all this brought in by you* quorsum haec? to what end is all this,
with the preceding passage, but to insinuate with the people as if you alone
were the men that looked so impartially and ^prejudicedly on the word; as if you
alone had no State-ends, nor political interests, no^ (...) preferments in
your eye; and therefore in searching into the word have found out the right
way: but other men, not having suffered as you, and having State-ends and
worldly preferments to look to, etc. they are out of the way. But, as I said,
I doubt concerning all these grounds given by you: You had new Commonwealths
to rear; to frame Church-goverment unto, when you first fell to these
principles; namely, the new Commonwealth of New England to frame your
Church Government unto, where some of you were first bound in your thoughts and
purposes (as you well know,) and I shall make more evident in a following page:
And therefore the Church Government there might stand in your light when you
first enquired into the Church Way; and might cause some variation by you from
the Primitive pattern, namely, to look too much to that where you thought to
have Ministry and Subsistence: You had also, some ends, and interests, and
worldly respects to comply with in your going into Holland, rather then
New England which you first intended: and these may fitly be termed State-ends,
and political interests, namely ^at when some great persons, Lords and others
should be forced, through the badnesse of the times, (as was expected and
feared) to seek for shelter in Providence, and Hispani^la, you might be there
ready to remoove with them, and be taken along into those Countries, where you
hoped to set up new Churches, and subdue those Countries and people which
should come over, into your mould. Or if otherwise things in England should
come to have a great turn, (as they had by this Parliament) then also by being
in Holland rather then New England, you were nigh hand, and your estates more
at command, quickly to return to England, having this Kingdom in your eye,
hoping you might either subdue England into the way of your Church-gover^ent;
or else gain a great party to you (...) the Kingdom, (which we see is
unhappily fallen out:) And (...), all the State-ends and interests to come,
which you might lo^ke upon in your remooving to Holland, there were worldly
r^spects and interests for the present, to make you go in the Chur^-way (as I
have before observed.) And to all these, whereas yo^ make the having no
new-Common-wealths, no Kingdoms to eye, to frame Church Government unto; as
the ground of falling upon the right way; Let it be considered by you and the
Reader, that the framing of a Church Government according to the conjunction of
a few godly persons, either in a Plantation, or as strangers in a
Commonwealth; Reformat. of Chapter Govern. page 18. It Is laid for a common ground
by the Divines in all the ^eformed Churches, that where a whole Nation is
converted to the Christian faith, every particular Church is not to be left to
it self as if it were alone in a Nation, but that Christ has provided a way
and there is a necessity of a common National government to preserve all the
Church^ in unity and peace.
and not considering of a Church Government for Nations and Kingdoms, that
when Kingdoms and Nations do receive the faith, and the Magistrates are
Christians and Orthodox, that there must be a Church Government as for a Nation
and Kingdom; is that very thing that deceives you: there being, alia ratio
urbis ac orbis, and so a great difference of governing a family two or three,
or of a Town, and of governing a Nation and Kingdom. But as for that
Parenthesis you make, before you end this Section; (That your Government will
b^ coexistent with the peace of any form of Civil Governme^ on earth,) out of
the great care you have, least your Church-g^nment should suffer in the
thoughts of many; (that it is not consistent with the peace of
Civill-government) it is so far from truth, that your Government and
Church Way cannot stand with the peace of any form of Civil government; no
not with Democraticall government, much less Aristocraticall; or Monarchical:
but should it be but tolerated, much more established, as the government in a
Kingdom and Nation; we should quickly find the contrary with a witness. In
this Intervall of Church Government we feel (without a formal toleration of
it) woeful effects opposite to the peace and good of civil government: And I
desire to know from you, how you will prove it, and we shall be assured of it,
(for we dare not take your bare word; (seeing that never yet any Kingdom, or
Nation entertained your Church Way and government, there being yet no
experiment of it, which of the Presbyteriall government has been in Kingdoms
and Commonwealths this fourscore years. And I must tell you that in
New England (which yet was far from being a Kingdom and Nation) when they
began to multiply and increase, this government had like to have ruined them,
both in Church and Commonwealth: and had they not enterposed, (and since do
daily) the power of the Magistrate, and many suitable principles to the
Presbyteriall way, they had been ruined before this: and what yet will be the
issue (unless they fall off more and more from their Independency) a little
time will show, and there are Letters from thence complaining of the confusions
of necessity depending on that government.

We were not engaged by Education or otherwise to any other of Apolog.
the Reformed Churches; And although we consulted with reverence what they hold
forth both in their writings and practis^, yet we could not but suppose that
they might not see into all things about worship and Government, their
intentions being most spent (as also of our first Reformers in England) upon
the Reformation in Doctrine, in which they had a most happy hand: And (...) had
with many others observed, that although the exercise of that Government had
been accompanied with more peace, yet the practical part, the power of
godliness and the profession thereof, with difference from carnal and formal
Christians, had not bee^ advanced and held forth among them, as in this our
Island, as themselves have generally acknowledged. We had the advantage of all
that light which the conflicts of our own Divines (the good old
Non-conformists) had struck forth in their times; And the draughts of
Discipline which they had drawn; which we found not in all things, the very
same with the practices of the Reformed Churches; And that they had written
came much more commended to us, not only because they were our own, but because
sealed with their manifold and bitter sufferings. We had likewise the fat^ll
miscarriages and ship-wracks of the Separation (whom ye call Brownists) as
Landmarks to forewarne us of th^se rocks and shelves they ran upon; which also
did put us upon an inquiry into the principles that might be the causes of
their divisions. Last of all, We had the recent and later example of the ways
and practices (and those improved to a better Edition and greater refinement,
by all the forementioned helps) of those multitudes of godly men of our own
Nation, almost to the number of another Nation, and among them some as holy and
judicio^ Divines as this Kingdom has bred; whose sincerity in the^ way has
been testified before all the world, and will be to all generations to come, by
the greatest undertaking (but that of our father Abraham out of his own
Country, and his s^ed after him) a transplanting themselves many thousand
miles distance, and and that by sea, into a wilderness, merely to worship God
more purely, whither to allure them there could be no other invitement. And yet
we still stood as vnengaged spectators, free to examine and consider what truth
is to be found in and amongst all these, (all which we look upon as Reformed
Churches) and this nakedly according to the word; We resolved not to take up
our Religion by or from any party, and yet to approve and hold fast whatsoever
is good in any, though never so much differing from us, yea orposite unto us.]

It may be if you had been engaged by Education, or otherwise to any other of
the Reformed Churches, that you had seen the order, and peace in some of the
Reformed Churches; and had you conversed with them before you drunk in these
opinions; you had never been transported with them in opposition to so many
most worthy Churches: but to what end is this brought in, with all those
particulars newly mentioned in the foregoing page; (We had, we had,) with that
passage in the close of the last Section: We had nothing else to do but simply
and singly to consider how to worship God acceptably and so most according to
his word? unless to insin^ate, and to cast an aspersion upon all others, they
had so and so; and they were engaged by Education and otherwise: (a fine
R^hetoricall way of casting blemishes upon all others, and freeing your selves)
as much as in plain English to say, That State-ends, political interests,
preferments and worldly respects, engagements by Education, and such like; with
the stream of public interest, might bear all others down, that they should
not find out the truth: but you, alas! good men, so f^e from having any thing
to do in this world, or regarding worldly preferments, or hanging upon great
persons, that you must needs find out the truth. But as you would bring
Education in, and conversing with the Reformed Churches, as the by as to draw
many to the Presbyteriall way; So let me tell you, though you were no^ engaged
any way to the Reformed Churches of Europe, yet you were many ways to the
Reformed Churches of New England* and to some prime m^n in New England, by a
high admiration of them. One of you (more especially) was so e^aged in his high
thoughts of one of the Ministers of New England, (by whom also, I am sure he
was first taken off the dark part) that he has said, there was not such
another man in the world again: Which Minister, after his going into
New England, and falling into the Church Way there, and sending over Letters
into England, about the New-way; presently after these Letters, began the
falling off, and questioning Communion in our Churches: and before these
Letters were sent into England, and the coppies of them communicated to diverse;
I never by discourse with any of you, nor from others, heard, that you were
fallen into the Church Way. As for your consulting with reverence what the
Reformed Churches held forth, both in their writings and practice, that could
be no long time, (as appears by what I have before prooved,), and besides, the
short time you took to consult of Church Government and worship after your
landing in Holland, there are many passages in this Apology show no great
reverence toward them: and if a man should guess of your reverence to the
Churches of Scotland and France by many of your way both Ministers and people,
what they speak of Presbyteriall government, and of those Churches; he would
conclude it were very little: But these good words of the Reformed Churches,
are to make way for a back-blow to those Churches, and to get some advantage
still to your own way, namely, that you could not but suppose that they might
not see into all things about worship and government, their intentions being
most spent upon the Reformation in Doctrine, etc. And why may not I suppose the
same thing of Mr Goodwin Mr Nigh, and the rest of you? that you may not see into
all things about worship and government; for if they might not, then much more
not you, they excelling you in piety, learning, sufferings, years: But suppose
the Reformed Churches at first might not, yet considering that it is now, above
fourscore years, since government and worship was purged (as well as
Reformation in Doctrine, which you say was so well settled at first) and since,
so many questions and controversies having risen about Worship and Government
in their Churches and ours; as about Morelius, and about the Anabaptists and
Brownists; and of late the Independents: and these differences having been
debated in Synods and Assemblies, having heard and seen all they could say
against Presbyteriall government, and what could be said for themselves; if
either they or you, had the truth on your sides; what reason can you give, why
they should not see into it upon so much enquity, study and dispute, the
Reformed Churches being more free to entertain truths, and change somewhat in
their Discipline then you were in your first entertaining this New-way? For
example, The Churches of France, living under persecution for their Religion,
and the truth of God, if your way had any truth in it, it were all one for
matter of persecution to receive yours as their own. As to that passage in this
Section, concerning the good old nonconformists, that you say, We had the
advantage of all that light which their conflicts struck forth in their times,
etc, I answer, a great part of their light, as in Mr Cartwright, Mr Hildersham,
etc. was against the Separatists and their practices (as their writings
testify,) as well as against the Diocesan Bishops and Ceremonies: and it had
been happy for you and this Kingdom, that you had made better use of their
light, and of their draughts of Discipline; the Reformation had been more
easy, and the godly party more united, and the common enemy had never
conceived such hopes and taken such heart as he does from your opinions. And
what ever you say, it seems, that a great part of what the good old
non-conformists writ, came not much commended to you, (though your own, and for
all their sufferings) because you follow it no better.

As to that passage, about the Separation (following the passage of the
Non-conformists) It is well, you (acknowledge that the Separation had fatal
miscarriages, and ship-wracks in their way: and it was well you took such
notice of them, that you counted them as Land-markes to fore war^e you of those
rocks and shelves they ran upon: and that thereupon you did enquire into the
principles that might be the causes of their divisions: this is one of the best
passages in your book: (As there are four passages (among so many bad) that
are good and useful: One of the Parliament: A second of the Assembly of
Divines: The third, this of the Separatists: The fourth, a Description of many
of the Pro^torus, and people of this Kingdom:) But it had been better, you
had, made so good a use of this observation and inquiry in Gods visibly
witnessing from Heaven against the Separation, in giving them up to fearful
sins, in inflicting fearful judgments, and leaving them to strange divisions
(which your selves allude to in this passage) and you know was in the stories
of Brown, Bolton, Barrow, Smith, Iohnsons, etc. so as to have kept further
from their principles; and thereupon to have feared forsaking communion with
our Churches, and setting up Separated Assemblies, and agreeing so much with
them in most of the fundamental and essential principles and practices, and
not to have come so nigh to them against whom God witnessed by so many fatal
miscarriages and ship-wracks, as only to resine and qualify Brownisme, and to
spinne it of a finer thread then the old Separatists did. But let me here put
this Dilemma to you: Seeing the Separatists fatal miscarriages and
ship-wracks, did put you upon an enquiry into the principles and causes of
their divisions; upon the enquiry either you found out and discovered those
principles, or you did not: If you did not discover them, why do you insert
these words here, and carry it so to make the Reader believe as if you had: and
that you declined the rocks and shelves they ran upon: But if you did discover
those principles of the Brownists, which were the causes of their divisions;
why do you pass them over in silence? In this Apologeticall Narration you
make many a parenthesis, and addition to what you are speaking of, nothing so
material nor proper to the points in hand (for example, In that passage
immediately following these words, you lanch out into the high praises of
New England in many lines) as the laying down those principles, which are the
causes of the Brownists divisions, would have been: So that I much wonder (if
you found them out) that you past them over in silence, for these might have
been of great use to the Separatists themselves for the time to come, and of
great use to have preserved others from Brownisme who are inclining that way,
besides the benefit to your own party by looking upon them to prevent the like
fatal miscarriages and ship-wracks in their way: so that I know not how this
omission of yours can be excused. Besides, how came it to pass, that you who
are the Authors of this Apology, and your Churches made no better an use of
all your enquiry and discovery? but in the time you were abroad to fall into
the same fatal miscarriages and ship-wracks, namely the same divisions and
sins; nay, greater and worse then some of the Separatists Churches did; (as
ever I heard.) For proof whereof I have been informed both by word of mouth
and Letters from good hands of these following particulars.

In Holland there were but two Churches of your way and communion, one of which
was at Rotterdam where Mr Bridge and Mr Sympson were members, and afterward Mr
Buroughs: which Church of Rotterdam (like the old Separatists at Amsterdam)
split into two; Mr Sympson at first, and some others after him renting
themselves from Mr Bridges Church to the great offense thereof; Mr Sympson
setting up a new-Church, Mr White the Merchant and his wife only at first
joining with him: Mr Sympsons Church being founded by a woman, (Mr Bridge
himself heretofore telling me so, and calling Mrs White the Foundresse of that
Church.) And after this great rent, and setting up a Church against a Church
under Mr Bridges nose, Mr Ward, Mr Bridges colleague, and old friend at Norwich
was deposed from his Ministry and office, for frivolous matters and some
differences by Mr Bridges Church: And here if I should but relate all the maine
passages that fell out between these Ministers and their Churches, after this
Renting and Deposition within the space of a year following, namely the
Letters sent into England, each for themselves, and against each other; all the
stories told of one another; and all the bitternesses and revilings between the
Churches of Mr Bridge and Mr Sympsons; with the desperate scandalls and
reproaches cast out (especially upon Mr Bridge;) the Readers ears would
tingle, and I should be too long; especially, because I must touch upon this
string again when I come to that story related in the Apology, page 16. The
other Church was first at Viana, then at Arnhim, of which Mr Goodwin and Mr Nigh
were Teachers, concerning which Church, if I should but relate all the strange
conceits and opinions held, and practiced in that Church, (besides some
preached) even before Mr Goodwins and Mr Nye's coming back to England, with
all the differences and divisions that fell out; I should make this answer too
large: I will for the present relate these few passages, reserving the rest
till I put out a^ Rejoinder upon their Reply to this Answer. Anointing the
sick* with oil was held in that Church of Arnhim, as a standing ordinance for
Church members, (for others had no right to that ordinance) as laying on of
hands was a standing ordinance for Church Officers: There was a writing amongst
them in many hands, prooving it to be so, and there were some cases propounded,
with what oil the sick members of the Church were to* be anointed, and there
was a resolution of the case, namely with Olive oil. A copy of this writing
some Ministers of the Assembly have perused, and one of them has it amongst
his papers in the Country. Mr Goodwin* did anoint a Gentlewoman (whose name I
conceal) when she was sick, and she recovered after it (they say.) A Gentleman
of note in that Church, (one of those two so much commended in the twentieth
page of this book, for wisdom and piety,) did propound in the Church, that
singing of Hymns was an ordinance, (which is that any person of the
Congregation exercising their own gifts, should bring a^ Hymn and sing it in
the Congregation, all the rest being silent and giving audience;) now upon the
propounding of this, another Gentleman did oppose it, (as not judging it an
ordinance:) to whom the former Gentleman replied, that he destroyed in opposing
this, what he had built up: whereupon words passing between them, a difference
grew between these two Gentlemen; and this second Gentleman was complained of
to the Church by the first: and upon hearing the whole business, and all words
that past between them, this second Gentleman was censured by the Church, and
Mr Nigh charged sin upon him: (that was the phrase) in many particulars, and
still at the end of every charge Mr Nigh repeated, This wis your sin: After,
this censure so solemnly done, the Gentleman censured, brings in Accusations
against Mr Nigh in several Artiles, charging him with pride, want of charity,
etc* in the manner of the censure; And this being brought before the Church,
continued in debate about half a year, three, or four days in a week, and
sometimes more before all the Congregation: diverse, of the members having
callings to follow, they desired to have leave to be absent: Mr Goodwin of^
professed publicly upon these differences, if this were their Church Fellowship
he would lay down his Eldership; and nothing was more commonly spoke among the
members, then that certainly for matter of Discipline, they were not in the
right way, for that there was no way of bringing things to an end: At last,
after more then half a years debate, not being able to bring these
differences to an end, and being to come into England, they had their last
meeting about it, to agree not to publish it abroad when they came into
England, hoping that God would give some opportunity when they came into
England to make an end of it, which whether it be ended yet. I doubt much,
because of some speeches reported to me spoken by one of these persons
concerning the other two: Now if this Church of Arnhim, consisting of
Ministers, moderate and wise, standing upon their credits and reputations, and
of prime Gentlemen, and picked Christians, being in exile, and leaving all for
their consciences (as they say) do yet run into such strange conceits, and
break among themselves thus, what can be expected of Independent Churches
here, that may consist of raw and fiery spirited men, and of the vulgar and all
kind of spirits?

But before I leave this passage of yours concerning the Separation, pray let
me ask you the reason of this Parenthesis, and to whom you speak it, (whom ye
call Brownists?) and why could you not have writ, who are commmonly called
Brownists? Is it not to both the Houses of Parliament to whom this Apology is
presented, and to whom you appeal? your discourse being carried as spoken to
them; and does not this phrase of speech carry with it a secret check of the
Houses for calling the Separatists Brownists, calling them so, as you would not
call them? But who are you, that you may not speak (for so much as concerns
this) in the language of both Houses? if both Houses call them Brownists, Why
may not you Five term them so? but, we may guess the Reason, Mr Brown and
your Principles are too nigh a kind, and you feared, lest you might be called
so: but let me tell you, though the Reformed Churches may not be called
disgracefully Calvinians, (as the Commissioners of the Church of Scotland have
well Page 9.
observed in their late book) yet the Separatists, and all Sectaries, may fitly
be termed from the Authors, and so the Separatists, justly called Brownists,
because as he was one of the first Leaders in that way; so he was the first
that digested that way into form and method, and writ so for it: and the first
that visibly and openly drew so many out of this Kingdom beyond the Seas: and
therefore both Houses of Parliament, and others too, may truly term those who
go in Brownes-way, Brownists.

As for that last passage in this Section, that last of all, We had the recent
and la^er example of the ways and practices of those multitudes of godly men
of our own Nation, etc. which (without so many words) you might have said
New England; but that on purpose you would take an occasion of extolling them
to the Heavens, and so render both your selves and way in them more glorious
both to the Parliament and people into whose hands your Apology should come.
Sure, you might more truly and ingeniously have put them in the first place,
and have writ, First of all, We had the recent and later example of
New England; which wrought (to my knowledge) with some of you very much: and
that the purposes and intentions of some of you, were first for New England (as
you may remember some of you told me.) One of you marrying a wife in reference
to your going to New England; and how far he was hindered, or altered by her
death, he knows. Another of you, having sent over goods before, (and in
particular) books, where he meant to follow after. (I have a very bad memory if
these things be not so.) A third, (namely, Mr Simpson) when he desired his
dismission from that Church at Rotterdam, he alleged that as a cause, that he
was intended for New England: but I must examine the Encomium, made by you
here, of New England, and see whether to make it hold, the words must not have
the allowance of that figure in Rhetoric called Hyperbole: the first part of
the praise is, Multitudes of godly men of our own Nation, almost to the number
of another Nation. Are the godly men in New England so many in number, that
they are almost the number of another Nation, that they do almost make such
another Nation as England? then New England has more godly persons in it then
old England; for the multitudes of godly persons amongst us, are not almost so
many here, as to make another Nation: but it will be found, that granting, all
the men in New England were godly (which yet you dare not affirm) seeing
multitudes live there without the Church, who are not accounted visible Saints)
yet what are they to so many people as are in England? reckon up all the
persons in New England, good and bad, and list them, and they will be found not
to come almost to the number of the Nation that lives in London; nay, hardly to
come to the twentieth part there: What are they then in New England to this
whole Kingdom? and then do but substract all that are not of their Church,
and it is evident your affection is better to New England then your
Arithmeticke, and in this particular, that Proverb of Almost must help you:
But shall I give you the reason of this stretching here? It Is to possess the
Parliament and Kingdom what a great party you have for your Church Way, Almost
another Nation in New England, and Almost another Nation of your way in old
England, which may serve to balance your opposite party of Presbytery in
England and Scotland; and therefore the Parliament shall do well to take
notice of your Numbers, to grant you a Toleration (at least) of your
Church Way, lest you being such multitudes should, etc. I could tell stories,
what some of your way have spoken, if they might not have their way; but I
shall spare them now. The second part of your praise of New England is, And
among them some as holy and judicious Divines as this Kingdom has bred: That
there are holy and good Divines among them, whom I truly love and honor, I
acknowledge: but I judge this too transcendent a phrase, and more then befits
the words of soberness. Some as holy and judicious as this Kingdom has bred:
It had been an expression high enough to say, as holy and judicious Divines as
any you now know in this Kingdom; but to say as this Kingdom has bred; how
know you that? and how can you affirm it? You were not acquainted with many who
lived before (being all young men, to speak of) so that there might be (before
your times) men more judicious and holy: and if we may judge by the works of
some men, and by their lives written, and by the reports from good hands of the
godly, ancient Ministers, there were men, more judicious and learned, then any
now in New England, as Whitaker, Reynolds, Brightman, and others; and more
holy, as Mr Greenham, Mr Banes, old Mr. Dod, etc. But for the holy and
judicious Divines of New England there are not above three or four at most
were ever accounted so eminent, (I might say but two) and yet the present age
has Divines in England to compare with them, both for learning, judiciousnesse
and piety: so as you needed not to have gone back to the ages past. Take the
prime man of them all in new England, and yet, he is not to be accounted as
judicious and learned as ever any this kingdom bred: Doctor Whitakers never
Me^ch. Adam. vita Whitak. page 177.
held any opinion that was accounted erroneous; nor any private peculiar
opinion, but what was commonly held in the Church of God (as it is reported in
his life) but the most eminent Minister in New England (though he be an
excellent and worthy man) has had his errors; and I refer you for proof to
his Discourse about clearing the Doctrine of Reprobation (which is in some of
your hands) with his being deceived (for a time) in the business of M*
Wheelwright, and Mistress Hutchinson, and some of those opinions about
Sanctification evidencing Justification: and to some other manuscripts and
printed things about the Church Way, where there are many things of wit and
fancy more then of deep judgment.

The third part of your praise, rises so high, as it is hardly to be paralel'd:
The sincerity of them of New England in their way restisi'd before all the
world, and will be to all generations to come by the greatest undertaking (but
that of our father Abraham out of his own Country, and his seed after him) a
transplanting themselves many thousand miles distance, and that by sea into a
wilderness, etc. Certainly some Independents then must write their Chronicle,
or else their sincerity will not be so testified to all the world, neither will
they be so famous to all succeeding generations: It is well, that in this high
praise of them who went to New England, there was some exception, and that
Abraham their father was excepted: (how ever in the instance you presently give
of their undertaking) you secretly prefer the men of New England before
Abraham: for Abraham went by land, and not by sea; and not many thousand miles
distance, nor into a wilderness: But I am not satisfied in the truth of this
undertaking for New England, but am of the mind, there both have been and are,
greater undertakings, (besides Abraham and his seed after him,) namely, that of
Moses and Aaron, carrying the people out of Egypt, and leading them through the
wilderness to Canaan; of Nehemiah and Zerubbabel in building of the Temple:
besides, the present undertaking of the Parliament for Reformation in
Church Government and worship, against the Papists, Prelates and Malignants,
(which you had seen when you writ this Apology) was far greater, and is
testified before the world, and will be to all generations to come, far
beyond that of New England: It Is strange to me, you should thus forget your
selves to make the undertaking of New England to be the greatest that ever was
in the world but that of Abraham's: But thus partial, we see, good men are apt
to be for their own party; and even stark blind in their own cause. And as I
am no whit satisfied in this third particular of your praise of New England; so
nor in the truth of the thing that you affirm they went to New England for,
namely, merely to worship God more purely, whether to allure them there could
be no other invitement. For that which was first held out and most spoken of in
the beginning of that Plantation in New England, was the hopes of converting
the poor Indians; There were some Ministers of note and others who dealt first
in that business and were prime actors in it, that propounded that, and really
intended it, as Mr White of Dorchester, Mr Humphreys, (and I am forgetful, if
I have not read some things printed to that purpose,) As for the worshipping
God more purely, (if your words could bare that sense, or you understood them
of being freed of the Ceremonies, and of Episcopal government,) that was some
part of the design and aim, (though not merely that,) but if by worshipping
God more purely be meant, the worshipping God in the Church Way, and the
Church Government pleaded for in this Apology, it was not in the thoughts of
them who were the first movers in it, or of the Ministers who were sent over in
the beginning, (as is apparent by a Letter of Mr Cottons sent to Mr Skeleton a
Minister) upon his falling into the Church Way after he came over, wherein Mr
Cotton writes to him, that he went from England of another judgment, and tells
him how this came about, namely from them of New-Plymouth, who were Mr
Robinsons people; and further unto many who went over to New England, after the
first and second year, there were other invitements, then merely worshipping
God more purely, some of them concluding peremptorily this Kingdom would be
destroyed, and there would be a hiding place, as also the great commendations
of the Country and Land for subsistence, (many being low in their estates
here,) led many into a fools parad^ce, who finding all things so contrary to
the high reports given out, and their expectations, have had leisure enough to
repent since; And some of you, (who to my knowledge intended for New England)
yet when you came to understand better, what a hard Country it was, would not
be of the number of them, whose sincerity should be testified before all the
world, and unto all generations to come, by going to New England to worship God
more purely, when to allure you thither, there was no other invitement. And now
after all this large narration of your falling off from the dark part, and of
your inquiring into the light part, and the story of your impartial looking
upon the word of Christ, and of your consulting with reformed Churches, and
looking upon the old Non-conformists, and observing the Separatists, together
with the examples of New England, you plainly come in the close of this
Section, to declare that, for which all this was written, namely, to possess
the Reader of your freedom and un-ingagement, notwithstanding all this, to
take that way, or every thing in each way, that was truth, whereas you would
insinuate, that other men who differ from you, were not so free, nor
un-engaged; But how likely this is, and how un-ingaged and free you were, I
desire the Reader to remember what presumption (if not proofs,) I have already
brought to prove the contrary.

As for those two Parenthesis brought in of the way of New England, namely,
those improved to a better Edition, and greater refinement by all the
fore-montioned helps, and that, all which we look upon as reformed Churches:
To the first of these, I say, 1. It is a high confidence, and presumption, to
judge the ways and practices of a few in New England, to be better, and more
refined, then of all the reformed Churches in Christendom. 2. What ever the
Edition, and refinement of New England is, they made little use of all the
forementioned helps, named by you, to attain unto it, few of them consulted
with reverence the reformed Churches, etc. But the maine ground of their
improvement, to this new Edition and great refinement, (as you term it,) was
their consultation with them of New-Plymouth, as appears both by Mr Cottons
Letter, and by other relations. To the second, I can Mr Ra^b. Narration of Chapter
courses, p. 1. The rest of the Churches in New England came at first to them in
Plymouth to crave their direction in Chapter courses and made them their pattern.
judge no other reason of inserting it here, nor of calling the way of
New England, in that first Parenthesis, a better Edition, and greater
refinement, then of any of the reformed Churches, but only, that we may
understand, in what sense you took that part of the Covenant, to be brought to
agreement with the best reformed Churches, that you meant and accounted
New England, the best reformed Churches, and so satisfy your consciences in
taking that branch of the Covenant; whereas we look upon the reformed
Churches, those of France, Scotland, Holland etc. who are known to us, by their
confessions, and I never knew till this Apology came forth, that ever, the
Churches of New England were styled the reformed Churches, as the Brownists and
Separatists never yet were, unto whom yet the Parenthesis relates as well as to
any of the other Churches.

And for our own Congregations, we mean of England (in Apolog.
which through the grace of Christ we were converted, and exercised our
Ministeries long, to the conversion of many others) we have this sincere
profession to make before God and all the world, that all that conscience of
the defilements, we conceived to cleave to the true worship of God in them, or
of the unwarranted power in Church Governors exercised therein, did never work
in any of us any other thought, much less opinion, but that multitudes of the
Assemblies and Parochial Congregations thereof were the true Churches and body
of Christ, and the Ministry thereof a true Ministry. Much less did it ever
enter into our hearts to judge them Antichristian; we saw and cannot but see
that by the same reason the Churches abroad in Scotland, Holland, etc. (though
more reformed) yet for their mixture must be in like manner judged no Churches
also, which to imagine or conceive, is and has ever been an horror to our
thoughts. Yea we always have professed, and that in these times when the
Church of England were the most, either actually over spread with defilements,
or in the greatest danger thereof, and when our selves had least, yea no hopes
of ever so much as visiting our own Land again in peace and safety to our
persons; that we both d^d and would hold a Communion with them as the Churches
of Christ. And besides this profession, as a real testimony thereof, some of
us after we, actually, were in this way of communion, baptized our children in
Parishionall Congregations, and (as we had occasion) did offer to receive into
the Communion of the Lords Supper with us, some (whom we knew godly that came
to visit us when we were in our exile) upon that relation, fellowship and
commembership they held in their Parish Churches in England, they professing
themselves to be members thereof, and belonging thereunto. What we have since
our return publicly and avowedly mad^ declarations of to this purpose, many
hundreds can witness, and some of our brethren in their printed books
heartily do testify for us.]

In this Section you come to declare your judgments concerning the
Congregations of England and the Ministry of them, wherein you apologize for
your selves in regard of misapprehensions you might lie under, in respect of
your judgments concerning them: For what good you speak of them now, and for
owning them as your own, in which you were converted, and in which you
converted many others, I thank you; But for the sincere profession you make
before God and all the world, that all that conscience of the defilements you
conceive to cleave to the true worship of God in them, or of the unwarranted
power in Church Governors exercised therein, did never work in any of you, any
other thought much less opinion, but that multitudes of the Assemblies and
Parochial Congregations thereof were the true Churches and body of Christ, and
the Ministry thereof a true Ministry: much less did it ever enter into your
hearts to judge them Antichristian. You must pardon me, if I believe not this
profession, Nay, I must tell some of you, that if Letters and other Manuscripts
which go out under some of your names, and are in my hands be yours, (as I
have great reason to believe they are,) I shall prove this sincere profession
of yours, to be insincere, and shall evidence the contrary to what you profess
before God and the world, namely, that the corruptions, which did cleave to our
worship, and the unwarranted power, did not only work thoughts and opinions in
you, that our Churches and Ministers were not true, but that you expressed so
much and acted in the virtue of it, nay even to judge them Antichristian; There
are some passages in one Letter (more especially amongst others,) written by Mr
Bridge to his loving friends in Norwich, Mr Henry King, Mr Toft, Mr Smith, Mr
Rayner, Mr. Mapp, the substance of which Letter to Letter.
them is, Not to be content with the ordinance of hearing, but to look out
after the plat-forme of Government, left by Christ and his Apostles, by Elders,
Pastors, Teachers, Deacons and Widows, and to consider, that every Church
has the power within it self, and is not subject to one Officer, or to
another Congregation, but to the whole body, and to that, whereof the member is
a part, (And then Mr Bridge falls upon Episcopal government, under which these
friends of his lived, as Antichristian,) and that their Episcopal government
under which they lived, was Papal and Romish, and then brings in these words;
And will you then submit unto it, what becomes of them, that do worship the
beast, and what of them, that receive his mark, Rev, 13. 8. Rev. 149, 10. It
is a worshipping, it is a receiving a mark to practice any Canon, constitution
or order that is framed or enjoined by that government: What? you have no
Elders, Pastors, etc. What? you sit, stand, kneel at the command of that
government; and in the Postscript of this Letter, he adds these words; paying a
Pepper-corne may acknowledge a Landlord, and the standing up at the Creed may
acknowledge the government. Now I demand of Mr Bridge and the other Apologists,
what multitudes of the Assemblies and parochial Congregations were there in
England, that were wholly exempt from that Government? or whether there was any
that did refuse wholly, all the Orders, enjoined by that Government? and if so,
whether then in Mr Bridges opinion, and in his letters all our Congregations
and M^nisters, were not Antichristian, in worshipping the Beast, and receiving
his mark, let all the world, and his own conscience judge? And for further
proof, unto one of Mr Bridges letters were seven Questions annexed and
propounded, concerning the Ministry, worship, and constitution of the Church
Assemblies in England, the usual questions the Brownists make: I have also the
copy of a letter written from Mr Simpson to a man of note in London (whose
name out of respect to him, I conceal) the substance of which letter is, to
have him consider, Whether he may live without all the Ordinances, if they be
any where to be had, or live in danger of daily defilement, and there is one
thing, which together with these, he desires him to think upon, namely, what
that state and condition is, wherein we should enjoy the Ordinances, we should
call nothing the means of salvation or Ordinances, but what God has appointed
to his Church. A Church is Christ's body, it consists of holy members, in show
at least, joined together to Christ, as to a Head, and as there is a bond
whereby we are invisibly joined, so is there a bond to him visibly. Ceremonies
are nothing in regard of this, they make things accidentally evil, according
as this is, things are, or are not ordinances, and means of salvation.
Baptism is no baptism, unless it be administered by a Minister: A Minister
is no Minister, unless called by the Church, and so I might speak of other
things. By all which it will appear that Mr Simpson had thoughts, and doubts,
and would have others have such thoughts too, that we have neither Churches,
nor Ordinances, nor Ministers, according to his definition of a Church, and to
the matter contained in his letter, and in the close of his letter though he
writes,

I meddle not with judging of these things with you, but propound you a rule,
or way to judge of things by; I dare not say, your Congregations are not
Churches, but desire you to look that they be so, for your own peace, yet it
is evident by what he says in his letter, that he accounts, neither our
Churches, nor our Ministers true, and would stumble him in these things to whom
he wrote. I have a manuscript entitled, a Treatise of the Church, going under
the name of one of these Apologists, and a godly Minister from whose hands I
had it, assured it me it was his. In which Treatise there is an answer to this
question; But suppose Saints live in a Nation, wherein there is some kind of a
Church constituted already, may they gather themselves into a Church? The
Answer is as follows. 1. If you suppose that there are Churches in England,
yet such as never were truly members of any of them, are free to begin, and
gather themselves into a Church, and to be of the best Institution they can,
this liberty we under the Gospel have, which the Jews had not. 2. Although
they are Churches, yet we ^re not to continue in them, and not remain from
them. 1. In that they are Churches defective in some Ordinances, as namely,
Prophesying, mutual admonition, excommunication. 2. They are Churches defiled
in our judgments, in which communicating, we cannot but be defiled now though
they be Churches, as a leprous man was a man, yet being defiled, we cannot
communi^ate with them, and so in regard of our use, now no Churches; and in the
same page it is added, we may be kept from joining with the true Church, and
yet not withdraw from these, as no Churches, but as no Churches of use to us.
Now I appeal to the Reader, what he can judge of your profession in the sixth
page, and of these passages in your letters and manuscripts; and as some of
your hands are contrary to this profession, so your works are contrary to it;
in forsaking the communion of our Churches and ministry, and in drawing
others away, and in writing to many to come to you, and in setting up Churches:
and pray deal ingeniously once in your Reply; seeing you ever held, and do
now much more; that our Assemblies are true Churches, and our Ministers true
Ministers; how you can satisfy your own consciences and us, from any
Scripture ground, either of precept or example to separate from us? I am
assured you cannot produce any ground, and that all Scripture instances,
whether in examples or precepts will never come up to your practice and case:
But (Brethren) why will you in a Narration that should be plain (that all who
^unne may read it) deal thus fallaciously, amuse the Reader with your
profession of our Churches and Ministry, in such generals, and never declare
what you hold particularly of them? Few Readers, unless some, who have
thoroughly studied your principles and distinctions, being never the wiser for
your profession: I must therefore of necessity English your words, and tell the
meaning of all this: That is, neither the Church or Churches of England; nor
the Ministry thereof, as they are in their frame and constitution, according
to the Laws; and as they are in their visible order, are true Churches or true
Ministry: But now, so far, as in many of our Parochial Congregations,
there is something common with what you hold about a Church and Ministry: so
far true, and not Antichristian. As for example, you hold, that in some
Congregations, we have many visible Saints, and in some Parishes, Ministers
chosen by the people, which Ministers preach and pray according to your way;
but for what we else practice in our making of Ministers, in our forms of
prescribed prayers, etc. So no true Churches nor Ministry. And that this is
your meaning will appear by what follows. 1. Letters and speeches of some of
your way, who write not so warily (as you) show so much. Mr Batchelour a member
of your Church Way, in printed letters of his, dated from Rotterdam, September
the 4th 1641. both to Ministers here in London, and to Citizens, speaks thus
in reference to you; And whereas it is believed, they are friends to
separation, this I can assure you, that they deny not the Churches in England,
such as M. Calamies and M. Goodwins in Coleman-street, to be true Churches. And
why M. Goodwins, and M. Calamies; but because they were chosen by the
Congregations, and there are many visible Saints in those Congregations; and so
others of your way, having been reasoned with, how according to your
principles, That there is no National visible Church under the new Testament,
no visible Church but a particular Congregation, and that the Essence of
Ministers calling is Election by the people, and that the form of a Church is
a particular Covenant, with other things of this Nature: And therefore
considering the Church of England is National, and has no such Covenant, nor
such a way of Ministry, how they could hold we had true Churches and true
Ministers: Their Answer has been, You have Implicit Churches, and Implicit
Ministers. But if you will say, you understand your words in this Section (not
as M. Batchelour nor as others of your way) but plainly, as Divines usually
take Churches and Ministry; then I desire you to reconcile together all your
definitions and descriptions of true visible Churches, and true Ministers, with
our Church and Ministry of England: And for further satisfaction in this
point, I desire you in your reply to this Answer, heartily, and clearly to
express your selves, when you fell to your Church Way, and were to be taken
for Ministers in those Churches; whether you held your selves, or were looked
upon by your Churches, as true Ministers by virtue of your calling in England?
Or whether (rather) you were not looked upon only as gifted men, and did not
some of you (at least) renounce and disclaim your calling in England, and were
made Ministers a new by the Church consisting only of people, or Lay Elders at
the best, without Ministers? M. Williams in his Answer to M. Cottons letter, Mr
Cottons letter examined and answered, page 44. Mr Cotton himself and other
most eminent Ministers in N^w-England had freely confessed that notwithstanding
their former profession of Ministry in old England, yet in New England till
they received a particular calling from a particular Church, that they were but
private Christians. Apolog. Robin. p. 10, 11. etc. 12. de Eccl. Angl.
openly justifies, they held and practiced so in New England: Now your
principles agreeing so with theirs, and some Stories related to me of some of
you, makes me doubt the same of you. As for that reason you give why you never
held our Churches no true Churches, namely, your seeing, that if you had
accounted our Churches no true Churches; that by the same reason, the Churches
abroad in Scotland, Holland, etc. yet for their mixture must in like manner be
judged no Churches also; I answer, it is no concluding Argument: M. Robinson
(who was quick-sighted, and lived in Holland long) and seeing their mixture,
yet acknowledges those Churches true, but denies ours to be true upon other
grounds besides the mixture, and it is evident, your reason is insufficient, for
if your description of a visible Church were only upon difference in the point
of mixture, and your grounds of separation only upon mixed communion, then your
Reason had some weight in it; but you know your exceptions were many against
our Churches, which lay not against the Reformed Churches: but it is strange to
me, if you were so good at consequences, that you saw and could not but see
when there was no necessity of seeing; you could not see the necessary
consequences of your principles about a Church and Ministry; nay not see,
even your contradictions. For let a man but take your own Positions and
Assertions concerning a true visible Church, and the true calling of Ministers,
and lay together your quarrelling with us, and leaving us upon those grounds,
because we have no such Churches and Ministers; and ye^ to affirm, that
multitudes of our Parochial Churches are true Churches. And certainly, however
you (who are Scholars) might be such good Logicians to make such distinctions
to salve all (as you conceited) yet your people could not, but they from your
principles and positions about Church, Ministry, Worship and Government, have
judged us no true Churches, nor true Ministers; but have wondered at this
sincere profession of yours before God and the world concerning our Churches
and Ministers, saying, they understood you otherwise, and they were much
deceived if you held not otherwise at first (though now you express your
selves after this manner) And I can hardly believe had you made always and
frequently such professions of our Churches and Ministers, and of keeping
communion with them, as the Churches of Christ, that ever so many had fallen
off to your way. But thus it is in all the way of errors, men by sits will
express things as other men do who are Orthodox (but yet in a sense of their
own) to avoid exceptions, and that they may be thought to hold as others do,
thereby the more to draw and work some men off to their way, when yet in the
common sense and understanding of the points they hold otherwise. As the
Socinians say they hold Christ God, and call him so, but in a sense of their
own, and yet deny it in the Orthodox sense: So Pelagians and Arminians will
extol the grace of God, and that a man can do nothing without it, and yet in
that sense wherein the controversy is, they set up free will, above the grace
of God; And so Antinomians will say, they do not deny the law of God; and yet
in the sense controverted, are flat against it. And so the Papists will say,
they hold and look to be saved by Christ, as well as any Protestant (though
it is well known there is a great difference between them, in the point of
Justification:) So you and many of your way, in a sense of your own, give us
good words, and say, we have true Churches and true Ministry; and yet in the
sense of the controversy, you teach flat contrary; (as does appear both by
printed Tract^tes, and by manuscripts and many practices.) As to that
Profession in this Section, That in the times, when the Churches of England,
were most either actually overspread with defilements; or in the greatest
danger thereof, that we both did, and would bold a communion with them as the
Churches of Christ: I answer, what do I hear words, when I see deeds so
contrary? How can I believe this profession, that ye would hold communion with
the Churches of England, as the Churches of Christ, under their greatest
defilements, when as, you have never held communion with any of them in the
time of their greatest reformation and purity? In this three years last,
since your coming over, wherein we have been so free from pollution in
worship, and since that in so many Churches in London, there has bin the
total laying aside of prescribed forms of prayer; and that great care, to
keep away both ignorant and profane persons: Which of you five have received
the Lords Supper in any of these true Churches and bodies of Christ? I never
could learn, that any of you five nor any of the members of your Churches have
communicated with us. I can tell you of the adding to your Church Assemblies,
great numbers since and of your receiving the Lords Supper at night in private
houses, and how some of you, who have not Churches here in London, go to
separated Churches to partake in the Lords Supper. But (Brethren) why do you
deal thus and write thus, to make men believe as if you held great communion
with our Churches now, who would have held it with them in such bad times? I
desire you to speak plain English, and not to speak after this manner (as
you do too often in this Apology) and to interpret to us in your Reply to
this Answer, what you mean by both Did and Would hold communion with the
Churches of England as the Churches of Christ? I know no communion you did
hold, or do with us now (though so reformed.) And if you do and will, what
means that wall of partition between us your new constituted Churches? As for
the ^aring of Sermons sometimes in our Churches, and preachi^g in our
Congregations, I doubt whether you hold that a keeping communion with our
Churches and Ministers; but rather, preach as gifted men; and hear ours as
gifted men, and how ever ( Robins. Apol. cap. 12. p 78. Propria, inqu^, and
peculiaria in quibus verbi auditionem simpliciter no^ annumero: ^pote inqua non
intercedit inter docentem and discentem communio spirituali^, sive Eccl. sive
personalis, nisi ex unione prae via Ecclesiastica aut personal.
if M. Robinson and some of your way may be believed) they hold hearing of the
Word no Act of Communion, nor no proper nor peculiar thing of the Church: And
that you are of the same judgment, I have great reason both from your
principles and practice to think so. As for that real testimony (besides
your profession) That some of us after we actually were in this way of
communion, baptized our children in Parishionall Congregations; whereby you
would infer, you held a communion with our Congations as the Churches of
Christ: I answer, this is no real testimony thereof, because it cannot be
understood but in the sense before opened, of Churches and Ministry: And
besides, if Mr Sympson were one of this Some, who baptized his children in
Parishionall Congregations, it is so inconsistent with what he writ in the
Letter before quoted of the Church and baptism; that I know not how to
reconcile these together: And the truth is, many of your practices are often
times so in-coherent with some of your principles of Church Fellowship, (as for
instance) Pastors are necessary Officers in your Churches, and yet according to
your practices your Churches are many years without them, that a man cannot
tell when he has a real testimony what you hold, or how long you have held
it. And as for that other real testimony, as you had occasion, offering to
receive, some of ours whom ye knew godly that came to visit you when you were
in exile, upon that relation, fellowship and com-membership they held in their
Parishchurches in England. 1. It Is no real testimony, because you o^red it,
but do not say you performed it. 2. If you had actually performed it, it is no
such real testimony of the truth of our Churches and ministry, but of your
own rather; into the communion whereof they were received. 3. Still, their
admission was founded upon that distinction of Implicit Churches, as appears
by your following words. For you would admit them upon such terms, as you
would gain a principle of your own by them; get more by it, then communion
with you was worth, namely, that such who were known to be godly, might not
come to the Sacrament of the Lords Supper, unless they were members of some
particular Congregation, and so, in their partaking Robins Catechis. Quest. May
all the faithful partake in the Sacraments? Ans. No, except they be also added
to some particular Congregation.
with you, they must yield, that grand Brownisticall principle, the foundation
of other errors among the Separatists, namely, that Sacraments belong not to
visible believers but as they are members of some particular Congregation. As
also you put them upon a practice and order, never required, by example or
precept in the Scriptures. And let me entreat you, in your reply you give to
this answer, to give me a Scripture, to prove that all men who come to the
Lords Supper must profess their member-ship, and their retaining to such a
particular Congregation: I profess my self of another judgment, and cast the
glove to any of you five, or to you all; That it is lawful for the Ministers
of Christ to receive such whom they know to be godly, to the Lords Supper,
though they be not members of a particular Church, and to receive those who are
members without any professing themselves to be so: Suppose, some godly
Merchants or Mariners, who all their days travel, and never stay long in any
one place, yet in all places where they come, desire to join in the
ordinances, ought not such to be received? The standing rule of coming to the
Lords Supper will be found to be faith and godliness shown forth, rather then
the formality of membership: But deal ingeniously, do you tell us here, all
that you required of the godly, that came to visit you, or do you tell us only
a part? which question, I the rather propound, because, as you do relate in
other parts of this Narration, (as in the eighth page,) so I find Mr Batchelour
(one of you,) writing from Rotterdam of your Churches, that they will not keep
back the Sacrament from any of the godly of such Churches in England, as Mr
Goodwins and Mr Calamyes are, (always provided that their own Pastors do
consent unto it.) Now the godly who are gone into Holland, and especially to
New England, not finding any such word in Scripture, of bringing a ticket from
their Ministers, and so coming into those Countries without it, may be long
kept from the Sacrament of the Lords Supper, till they either go into England,
and fetch it, or till they send for it over, and have a return back of the
consent of their own Pastors, (which may be, was the reason, that though you
offered to receive into the Communion of the Lords Supper some godly that came
to visit you in your exile, yet for want of bringing their Pastors consent unto
it, returned into England without partaking in the Lords Supper with you,)
Which (by the way) will be a good warning for all that henceforth go over into
Holland or New England, to carry their Ministers consents over with them, least
otherwise they be not admitted to the Lords Supper; and that you do not deal
plainly with us, in this relation of admitting the godly in the Parish
Churches of England, into the Communion of the Lords Supper with you, but there
is some reservation and evasion; I much doubt, because the known godly in the
Parish Church of Coleman-street (which amongst Parish-churches, is one of your
true Churches in England) cannot be admitted to the Sacrament of the Lords
Supper by virtue of their relation of membership they hold in the Parish Church
never since their Pastor fell into your Church Way; As for your public and
avowed declarations to this purpose, which many hundreds can witness, I never
heard of any of them in any public meetings; though I have been in many, nor
in any Sermons you have preached, though I have heard of many things you preached
(which you are like to hear of in this Answer,) But if I may speak what I
have heard, there has been a Narrative promised from you, of what you hold,
(which many Ministers also can witness,) but was never performed by you till
this day; As to that, in the close of this Section, that some of your brethren,
in their printed books do heartily testify for you, It is but one of them,
not some unless you take in Mr Herles Imprimatur to your Apology, who I doubt
not before this time, by what he has heard from some of his brethren of the
Assembly, and seen in that book entitled Reformation of Church Government in
Scotland, with the contents of the Letters from some Churches beyond the seas,
besides the light this Answer will give, will see easily, how by your courting
of him, he was surprised: And it is no wonder that Mr Herle, Mr Channel, with
some other men of worth (having lived somewhat remote, and having not been much
conversant with you and your distinctions,) might be at first mistaken with
such good words, and solemn professions.

And as we always held this respect unto our own Churches in this Kingdom, so
we received and were entertained with the Apolog.
like from those reformed Churches abroad, among whom we were cast to live, we
both mutually gave and received the right hand of fellowship, which they on
their parts abundantly manifested by the very same characters and testimonies
of difference which are proper to their own orthodox Churches, and whereby they
use to distinguish them from all those Sects (which they tolerate but not
own) and all the assemblies of them (which yet now we are here some would
needs rank us with) granting to some of us their own Churches, or public
places for worship, to assemble in, where themselves met, for the worship of
God, at differing hours the same day. As likewise the privilege of ringing a
public Bell to call unto our meetings: Which we mention, because it is amongst
them made the great signal of difference between their own allowed Churches,
and all other assemblies, unto whom it is strictly prohibited and forbidden, as
Guiciardine has long since observed: And others of us found such acceptance
with them, that in testimony thereof they allowed a full and liberal
maintenance annually for our Ministers, yea and constantly also wine for our
Communions. And then we again on our parts, not only held all brotherly
correspondencie with their Divines, but received also some of the members of
their Churches (who desired to communicate with us) unto communion in the
Sacraments and other ordinances, by virtue of their relation of membership
retained in those Churches.

In the last Section, I prooved, both by Letters and many other presumptions,
you always held not that respect to the Church of England you seem to
profess in that Section* if now at last, you be grown more sober and wise,
upon reviewing your principles, I am glad of it, non est pudor ad meliora
transire; For this Section, your being received and entertained with the like
respect from those Reformed Churches abroad, and your mutually giving and
receiving the right hand of fellowship. If I may believe reports and Letters
(and those not light, but from Ministers and good people;) I have been by word
of mouth told, and I have in writing from thence, grounds to question the truth
of this Narration. A godly Minister out of Holland in answer to some questions
sent about the truth of your Apology, writes thus to this present Section: And
here I cannot but add this; that whereas the Apologeticall Narration mentions
these things as an argument Letter out of Holland.
of the encouragements they had in these parts, and their good concurrence with
the Churches here, it has been affirmed to me from very good testimony, that
however the Magistrates at Rotterdam for politic ends, as to gather company to
them which is for the profit of the place; yet the Churches there (I mean the
Dutch) never approoved of the course held there by these Brethren and their
people. It has been affirmed to me that many of the Dutch Ministers were much
offended at Mr Bridges being ordained Minister by the Lay Elders without any
preaching Presbyters: And what ever right hand fellowship, and brotherly
correspondency you might hold with the Dutch Divines; some of the English
Ministers of the Reformed Churches there, have complained of your great
strangeness and distance toward them; and, instance has been given me
particularly, (by a great friend of yours now in London) that when some of you
have come to Amsterdam, you never would go to Mr Herrings, (a good old
nonconformist) but have gone to Mr Canne's (the Separatist) and to his Church.
And besides, this report, told me some years ago, from a friend of your own,
that I might not only believe reports, I sent over into Holland some questions
about the truth of some things related by you in this Apology, the contrary
whereunto, I had been informed of before: and among other questions, upon this
Section, I propounded, what communion and converse, passed between the godly
English Ministers and their Congregations, and you? or whether, when you came
to Amsterdam, you went not rather to the Brownists meetings, and conversed with
Mr Can more then the Reformed Ministers: Unto which question, I had this
answer in so many words sent: To this I can say, that since my coming hither,
we have had no such communion with them, as that we have prevailed with any of
them to preach in our Congregation, though I am sure, some of them have been
earnestly importuned thereunto, indeed Mr Bridge seemed once to be willing, but
did not. And for their going to the Brownists, and conversing with Mr Can
more then us; that is undeniable, What you may of this read, in Epistle to the
Rejoinder indefence of Mr Bradshaw, against Mr Can, is most true and certain.

But suffer me a little to examine the particulars wherein you would prove,
the mutual giving and receiving the right hand of fellowship: For the first;
That you were received and entertained with the like respect that you gave to
our Churches in England, I easily believe (which was but little.) And if the
Reformed Churches looked upon you, and you on them, as you did upon our
Churches in this Kingdom; you have no cause to boast here, of mutual giving
and receiving the right hand of fellowship, remembering what I answered to your
last Section concerning your profession of our Churches. As to that proof you
bring, of their giving you the right hand of fellowship, in their abundantly
manifesting it by the very same characters and testimonies of difference, which
are proper to their own orthodox Churches, and whereby they use to distinguish
them from all those Sects, etc, I answer, this was not to all of your Churches,
for Mr Simpson (which yet is your way, and is here owned by you all in this
Apology) had not a Church, or public place for worship granted to him, nor
the privilege of ringing a Bell to call to meetings, but was looked upon as a
Sect, (as Mr Bridge told me.) And in a Letter out of Holland from a good hand
to that question: Whether Mr Simpsons Church had the allowance of ringing a
public Bell to call to their meeting, and whether any maintenance allowed by
the States: It Is answered: To this, I shall say, I never yet heard by any, that
his Church had any such allowance of Bell, or maintenance by the States. Now if
Mr Simpsons Church was looked upon as a Sect, (tolerated but not owned) wanting
that great signal of difference between allowed Churches and all other
assemblies, namely, the privilege of ringing a public Bell to call unto their
meetings: and the rest of your Churches being just of the same way and
constitution with his, (as appears by this Apology) then, the ranking of you,
now you are here, with Sects, is no great injury to you: Neither will the
granting to your two other Churches, public places to worship, with
maintenance for some of your Ministers, etc. free you from being looked upon as
Sects by the Churches and Ministers there: but I must tell you, these
privileges came from other grounds, as namely, one of your Churches consisting
of many persons of great quality, and going at first to a privileged place;
the other Church having formerly been a Church in the way of the Reformed
Churches there, and so had then the allowance of a public place. (The first
sensible declining of that Church to the new-way, being by Mr Peter's, (before
he went to New England,) Now Mr Bridge coming to that Church, and bringing
with him and after him wealthy Citizens and Clothiers, by which the Magistrates
at Rotterdam knowing well their advantage; No wonder though they permitted that
Church, their public place, and gave to their Ministers a full and liberal
maintenance, yea and Wine for their Communions, and yet should gain well by
it. As for your holding all brotherly correspondency with their Divines (which
I suppose you mean the Dutch) not knowing any of them, I can say nothing
against it; but only it is a great presumption that holding so little brotherly
correspondencie with our own English Divines there, you held not much with the
Dutch: But grant that which you say to be true, that you held all De Ecclesijs
reformatis quid aliud dicam? eas pro veris and genuinis, etc. Ecclesijs
bahemus: cum eisdem in sacris Dei communionem prositemur, and quantum in nobis
est colimus: conciones publicas ab illarum pastoribus habitas ex nostris, qui
norant linguam Eelgicam frequentant. Sacra^ coenam earum membris, siqua forte
nostro coetui intersint nobis cognita participamus, Robin. Apolog. Apolog.
fair correspondencie with them that might be upon other grounds, for your own
advantage and benefit many ways, you being strangers and they in their own
country, as also to see if you could gain any of their Ministers to your
Church Way. And as for your receiving some of their members unto communion in
the Sacraments, that might be but to strengthen your own way and to advance
that Church-principle of receiving them by virtue of their relation of
membership. And here I desire to put two questions to you. 1. Whether in
receiving some members of the Dutch Churches (who desired to communicate with
you) you put them upon professing themselves to be members of their Churches,
and belonging thereunto (as you did the English who came to you.) 2. Though you
received some of them unto communion in your Churches, whether any of you ever
received the Lords Supper in any of their Churches? or in any of the English
Churches in Holland who were not of your way and communion? But grant all you
say in all your profession of your respect and holding communion with the Dutch
Churches, whereby you would free your selves from the imputation of Separation,
and make the Reader believe the Brownists and you had no affinity: I answer,
You say no more, nor hardly so much as Mr Robinson writ in his Apology 25
years since of those Reformed Churches, page 10, 11.

Now for the way and practice of our Churches we give this brief and general
account. Our public worship was made up of no other parts then the worship of
all other reformed Churches does consist of. As public and solemn prayers for
Kings and all in authority, etc. the reading the Scriptures of the Old and New
Testament; Exposition of them as occasion was; and constant preaching of the
word; the administration of the two Sacraments, Baptism to Infants, and the
Lords Supper; singing of Psalms; collections for the poor, etc. every Lords
day. For Officers and public Rulers in the Church, we set up no other but the
very same which the reformed Churches judge necessary and sufficient, and as
Instituted by Christ and his Apostles for the perpetual government of his
Church, that is, Pastors, Teachers, Ruling-Elders, (with us not lay but
Ecclesiastique persons separated to that service) and Deacons. And for the
matter of government and censures of the Church, we had nor executed any other
but what all acknowledge, namely, Admonition, and Excommunication upon
obstinacy and impenitency, (which we bless God we never exercised.) This
latter we judged should be put in execution, for no other kind of sins then may
evidently be presumed to be perpetrated against the parties known light; as
whether it be a sin in manners and conversation, such as is committed against
the light of nature, or the common received practices of Christianity,
professed in all the Churches of Christ; or if in opinions, then such, as are
likewise contrary to the received principles of Christianity, and the power of
godliness, professed by the party himself, and universally acknowledged in
all the rest of the Churches, and no other sins to be the subject of that
dreadful sentence.]

In this Section you give us a Narration of the way and practices of your
Churches. Wherein, in the beginning you tell the Reader, We give this brief
and general account; But how much better had it been, and more proper to have
given a full, and particular account here, then in your other parts, about
New England, and the Reformed Churches in Holland; A full and particular
account of the way and practices of your Churches, had answered more the nature
of such a Narration, and would have satisfied all men: but why did you in the
most material part give such a brief and general account? knowing that under
brevities and generalities, there lies much mistake and deceit. And let me tell
you, this brief and general account, falls short of your way and practices:
and either you had bad memories in your writing this Apology, about the parts
of your worship, Officers and censures, to forget some of them; or else you
have on purpose concealed them; holding out the bright side of the cloud
(namely, what the Reformed Churches practice) but hiding the back: which is so
much the more justly to be excepted against, because as you set down the words,
and give the account, they are not true; but I can say, (and make it good too)
your public worship was made up of other parts then the worship of all other
Reformed Churches, namely, of Prophesying in your Congregations: and for
Officers and public Rulers in the Church, you set up others then the reformed
Churches, namely Widows: And for the matter of government and censures of the
Church; you have executed others, besides Admonition and Excommunication,
namely, deposition of a Minister, and confession of offenses publicly, and
orderings of solemn Fasting for Humiliation upon confession of sins, as your
selves relate the story in the 16th page, and one and twentieth: besides, you
hold other censures of the Church: the Sentence of of Non-communion with
Declaration, and Protestation to all other Churches; as appears by your own
relation, page 17, 18, 19. For public worship that you exercised prophesying,
I could name unto you, who of the members have prophesied at Arnheim, and upon
what subject, but I spare them; I could tell you, how Mr Bridge and Mr Sympson
fell out upon the point of Prophecy, (as Mr Bridge informed me) and of the
exercising of Prophecy in Mr Sympsons Church at Rotterdam, as well as at
Arnheim, I could out of manuscripts produce how arguments are framed to draw
away people from our Churches upon this ground, as being defective in some
ordinances, namely prophesying. And besides prophesying, I propound it to you,
whether some of you have not held out some other public worship, then the
reformed Churches hold, namely Hymns and anointing the sick members of the
Church with oil; As also, whether a little before your coming over into
England, some members of the Church of Arnheim, did not propound the holy
kiss, or the kiss of love, to be practiced by Church Members; Nay whether by
some persons in that Church, was it not begun to be used and practiced; And in
this enumeration of the parts of public worship, I desire to know why you put
in etc. and what is meant by etc. for that implies more parts then you
enumerate. And we know, etc. is a dangerous and suspicious phrase ever since
the late Canons and Oath, for under that etc. may be meant Prophesying, and
Hymns, and Anointing with oil, and the Kiss of love, and many other parts
which the reformed Churches practice not, and so your public worship may be
made up of many other parts then the worship of all other reformed Churches,
and that there is great cause to speak thus, and doubt, appears, because I
know not, nor cannot reckon up any other part of public worship used every
Lords day in the reformed Churches then the particulars mentionad by you
without an etc. and therefore what you mean by under etc. unless Prophesying,
Hymns and such like, I cannot imagine. For Officers and public Rulers in the
Church, whether you actually had made any Church-Widdowes in any of your
Churches, (they being matter of charge, which also, as for admitting of poor
members, some of you are very careful of,) I cannot affirm, but that you hold
Widows to be Officers of the Church, and part of the Church government, that
I can prove by these following instances. 1. By a passage in a Letter from Mr
Bridge to some at Norwitch, by Mr Davenports profession of faith printed, and
Letter to Mr King, Mr Tossed, etc.
by Mr Cottons Catechism. And how much you have of late reasoned, for such a
Church Officer in the Assembly, you know; And let the Reader observe that by
the way, that we must judge of your ways rather by what you hold, then always
by your practice, for one of your Churches has been some years without a
Pastor the first and chief Officer, and yet you set up such, much more may
you be without Widows for some years, and yet hold them, and as you have
Widows a Church Officer, which the reformed Churches hold not, so in one of
your Churches you have had Teaching Elders, besides a Pastor, and Teacher; And
what ever the reformed Churches hold of their Officers as necessary and
sufficient for the perpetual government of the Church, Yet your practice is
not, as if you held them necessary and perpetual; for one of your Churches,
has been many years without a Pastor, the prime Officer and Ruler in the
Church, and other of your Churches without other officers, which if they were
so necessary, and as instituted by Christ and his Apostles, for the perpetual
Government of the Church; how you can be without these officers, and namely
the most necessary and principal, for many years together, I cannot see: And
I desire you in your Reply, to satisfy us; and to show Reason, how you can
depart from that which is confessed by all Churches, and your selves to, for the
maintaining an opinion of the essential difference, between Pastors and
Teachers in each Congregation, so much denied by many learned and godly
Divines. As for that Parenthesis about ruling Elders (with us not Lay but
Ecclesiastic persons separated to that service) I desire to know, wherein and
how, your ruling Elders, are more Ecclesiasticke persons, and separated to that
service, then the ruling Elders of the Reformed Churches: The Reformed
Churches, account their ruling-Elders Ecclesiastical persons, and they are
separated to that work, by election and ordination; and whereas you make a
distinction in the manner of your expressions, between ruling Elders separated
to that service and Deacons. I ask you, whether Deacons are not
Ecclesiastical persons, and separated to that service by Election and
ordination, as well as Elders? what, are your more, and in what further degree,
are they Ecclesiastical then the ruling Elders of the Reformed Churches, or
your own Deacons; do you mean them so Ecclesiastical and separated to that
service of ruling, so as the Pastors and Teachers are to their office, that
is, separated from all civil Employments and callings to the work of wholly
attending the flock, and of being as Ministers and preachers of the word; now
if you understand it in this sense that all your ruling-Elders do give over
their civil callings and worldly employments, and are so separated, as
Pastors and Teachers are, it being the duty of the ruling-Elder to teach
publicly as well as govern, then I have nothing to say against your
ruling-Elders. And this puts an end to all that controversy about Lay Elders,
only let me ask you two questions. 1. What specificall difference you will
give me, between those officers the Ministers of the word, and ruling-Elders.
Seeing both rule and preach, and what becomes then of those texts, 1 Cor. 12.
Romans 12. Which are held out to prove Church Government by, and amongst other
particulars are brought to prove, that besides those who teach and preach the
word, the Scripture reckons up Governors and Rulers. 2. Whether did your
Gentlemen and Merchants, who were made ruling-Elders among you, upon their
office give over their merchandising, and their way of living, as Gentlemen,
wholly applying themselves to their studies, and to all gravitie in apparel,
hair, etc. But now, if your ruling-Elders, do follow, their merchandising and
trade, and are not as Pastors and Teachers, how can you affirm of them, to be
more Ecclesiastic persons then your Deacons, or then the Elders of other
Reformed Churches. And as for the matter of Government, and censures of the
Church, you did forget here, what you were to write in the 16th page, and in
the 21th. How one of your Churches unhappily deposed one of their Ministers,
which censure was neither admonition nor excommunication upon obstinacy and
impenitence. But the particulars under this head, I have spoken to, upon this
Section already. But as I have clearly and unanswerably showed your public
worship was made up of other parts, then the worship of all other Reformed
Churches, and have instanced wherein you practiced and held over and above, so
let me from this Narration of your ways and practices here, question, whether
you practiced all parts of worship, and censures, which other Churches
practice. For I fear, your Narration, as it is all a long subtly carried
(for though you say, your worship was made of no other parts, nor you executed
no other censures, but what all acknowledge) so it may be here, and you may
conceal, what you have omitted, was your worship then, and is it still made up
of all these: Do all of you hold, or did you practice, in Holland, the reading
the Scriptures of the old and new Testament, as an Ordinance without any
exposition, and do you practice the singing of Psalms, according to the way
of Reformed Churches. I have been told that at Roterdam, the Scriptures were
never read barely without Exposition, and there are many of your Church way and
communion, that will neither join in hearing the Scriptures read, nor in
singing of Psalms in our Congregations. Which makes me doubt some of you may
be of the same opinion and practice. And did all of you whilst you were in
Holland, and do you now administer Baptism to all the Infants of your
Churches, or are there not some Infants unbaptized amongst you; and for the
matter of censures, though you say you had, nor executed no other, but what all
acknowledge, yet you do not affirm, you executed all censures which other
Reformed Churches acknowledge, and so you conceal your judgment of things.
Yet in this Narration of your way and practices, you carry your discourse so in
this Section, as if your practice and way were all the same with the Reformed
Churches, but had you dealt ingeniously, in the Narration of the way, and
practices of your Churches, you should have laid down particularly as wherein,
and how far you agreed with the Reformed Churches, so also wherein you
departed from them: namely you should have showed in what you practiced more
then they do, and wherein you practice short of them, and in the things you
practiced with them, yet how you differed in the manner of them; but to return
to that of censures Reformed Churches practice, besides admonition, and before
they come to excommunication, that which is called by Divines, Abstentio a
sacracaena, but you do not so, but conceal this; but brethren, why should you
not practice this, especially considering how according to your principles; the
Church is to receive the Lords Supper, every Lords day: Now suppose some
members commit a great sin on the Saturday, which though coming it be known
to the Ministers or Elders, and some of the people, either there may be no time
to call the Church to admonish the parties, or if there be for admonition, yet
not time sufficient for the parties to testify Repentance, and yet, the
persons may not be judged obstinate and impenitent as to be excommunicated; but
the persons offending will come now to the Lords table; in the interim, what
will you do in this case? And further the Reformed Churches enjoyne the
censure of open confession of sins, and practice deposition of officers from
their places, which may justly arise upon some cases, and yet not think it fit
to proceed unto excommunication. (as your selves practiced in M. Wards case)
never proceeding to give him up to Satan; but how lame and defective is this
your Narration, about the government of the Church; only relating two things,
you practiced in common with the Reformed Churches, and as concealing other
things you practiced not with them, so wholly passing over in silence here all
your different way of practicing from all Churches, in the way of ordination,
in the way of constituting Churches, and admission into them, and in the way of
governing by the votes and suffrages of the whole body, in the way of
celebration the Lords Supper, receiving it at night, etc. in the Sacrament of
Baptism, with many other particulars; which whether it be fairly done, I
appeal to the Reader, who is by this much deceived, thinking upon the reading
of: this Narration, that you had agreed in all things, of Worship, Officers,
Censures with the Reformed Churches: But to return to that censure of
Excommunication, which you insist upon, laying down your judgment about the
subject of that censure: As for your blessing God, you never exercised it.
There may be but little ground for such a blessing, but cause rather to be
humbled for not using it seasonably: I judge had you practiced it, some
revilings, evil speakings between many members of your Churches, with some
other offenses might have been prevented: But there is no such great cause to
set out your selves, by the non-exercise of Excommunication, if what you hold
for the matter of it be considered, wherein I suppose you differ from all
Orthodox Reformed Churches, and do open a wide gappe to much licentiousness
both in doctrine and practice: What do you judge? Is it not to be put in
Execution for no other kind of sins, then may evidently be presumed to be
perpetrated against the parties known light, etc. What if men practice
Polygamie, profane the Lords day, by using it as they do any other day, what
if they do hold, and accordingly will have practiced community of goods
amongst believers, what if they maintain that Christians ought not to be
Magistrates, all which are not condemned in all the Churches of Christ
(especially if some Churches may be taken for Churches of Christ, and we have
reason to believe by your manner of expressions you include such) neither are
perpetrated against the parties known light, but rather are practiced upon new
light, and as new truths; and let me entreat you in your Reply to explain
your meaning, what you mean by all the Churches of Christ, and by the common
received practices of Christianity; and what by the principles of
Christianity universally acknowledged in all the rest of the Churches, whether
by Churches you understand the Churches only of your own communion and way,
or the Churches which are commonly called the Reformed: Or else all Churches
whatsoever that are so called, as, besides your own and the Reformed, the
Churches of the Anabaptists, Antinomians, and such like: And I have reason to
propound this question, your words being so doubtful: Now if your words and
phrases be taken in the first sense, of your Churches only, that those sins
and no other are to be the subject of Excommunication, then great sins and
errors according to the Scripture, and judged so by Orthodox Churches, may
escape Excommunication; and on the contrary, many matters, which according to
Scripture are neither sins nor errors, but only your Churches hold them so,
may have that dreadful sentenee pass upon them: but if you mean it in the
largest sense, for all kind of Churches, and for the received principles and
practices of Christianity professed and acknowledged in all the Churches, then
more sins and errors so judged by the word, by most Churches, and by your
own Churches too, will not be acknowledged for such in all the rest of the
Churches, and so shall escape that censure: But if you should say, you mean
only the Reformed-churches commonly so called, and the common received
practices professed by them, it cannot be so understood (as is evident) by your
own expressions in this passage about Excommunication.

So that here are strange unsafe rules to go by in the censure of
Excommunication, and I judge it is a part of the new light, and now truths of
these times, never yet given by any learned Classical Author. How much better
were it for Churches to make the subject of Excommunication, such sins and
errors which the Scripture has made so, and those sins to be agreed upon,
by common consent in Assemblies, and Synods so drawn up for all to know them.
But if it be objected that this may hinder further light, and an after
discovery. I answer, when any thing more shall come to be found out, this need
be no hinderance unto any light; but by the public Government, and common
consent, upon good grounds may be added: But this your judgment about the
censure of Excommunication I fear is calculated for the Meridian of pretended
liberty of conscience. Now this position of holding the subject of
Excommunication, to be only such sins and errors as are against the parties
known light, and the common received practices of Christianity professed in
all Churches, and no other to be the subject of it, tends much to the
tolerating of Sects and Heresies, which in this impure age is by many men, and
by too many of the Church way so studiously promoted against the nature of
Reformation and true zeal. But if one of the great ends of Excommunication be
to preserve others from infection, and to keep the Church of God pure, (as
Divines teach;) then thuogh the party offending shall pretend such sins or
errors are not against his known light, neither contrary to the received
principles of Christianity universally acknowledged in all the rest of the
Churches, yet Excommunication ought to be exercised by them who have power in
the Church.

And for our direction in these or whatsoever else requisite to the manage of
them. We had these three principles more especially Apolog.
in our eye, to guide and steer our practice by.

1. First, The supreme rule without us, was the Primitive pattern, and
example of the Churches erected by the Apostles. Our consciences were possessed
with that reverence and adoration of the fullness of the Scriptures, that there
is therein a complete sufficiency, as to make the man of God perfect so also
to make the Churches of God perfect; (mere circumstances we except, or what
rules the law of nature does in common dictate) if the directions and examples
therein delivered were fully known and followed. And although we cannot
profess that sufficiency of knowledge as to be able to lay forth all those
rules therein, which may meet with all cases and emergencies, that may or
sometimes did fall out amongst us, or that may give satisfaction unto all
Queries possible to be put unto us; yet we found principles enough, not only
fundamental and essential to the being of a Church, but superstructorie also
for the well-being of it, and those to us clear and certain, and such as might
well serve to preserve our Churches in peace and from offense, and would
comfortably guide us to heaven in a safe way: And the observation of so many of
those particulars to be laid forth in the word, became to us a more certain
evidence and clear confirmation that there were the like rules and ruled cases
for all occasions whatsoever, if we were able to discern them. And for all
such cases wherein we saw not a clear resolution from Scripture, example or
direction, we still professedly suspended, until God should give us further
light, not daring to seek out what was defective in our light in matters
divine with human^ prudence (the fatal error to Reformation) lest by sowing
any piece of the old garment unto the new, we should make the rent worse, we
having this promise of grace for our encouragement in this, which in our
public Assemblies was often for our comfort mentioned, that in thus doing the
will of God we should know more.

From the Narration of your way and practices of your Churches, you come now to
show the three great principles above all others by which you guided your
selves in your practice; which I come now to examine, and doubt not but as you
have expressed them to discover to the Readers their weakness and
defectivenesse, and easily to take off, all the seeming strength of the reasons
hinted in them for your selves, and against us.

To the first Principle, the supreme rule without you, the primitive pattern
and example of the Churches erected by the Apostles (which also is expressed by
you in the third page) as that sacredpillar of fire to guide you by in all the
positive part of Church worship and Government. I answer, why is the old
Testament forgotten by you, and in both these places, not so much as mentioned.
What, is the old Testament no pattern, nor example to you in Church-worship
and government, nor is there nothing recorded there any part of the sacred
pillar of fire to guide you by: Consider whether in this, you follow not too
much the example of some Heretics and erroneous spirits, who will have
nothing to do with the old Testament, in the points they hold: This is the way
of the Anabaptists, and of the Antinomians, both of old and at this day, and I
am sorry such men as you, in such a formal Apology and Narration of your way
(as you hold out this to be) should so far forget your selves, as to
countenance such persons so far. And I must tell you, that your search was
insufficient and your rule too short, if you looked only on the first
Apostolic directions, pattern and examples of those Primitive Churches
erected by the Apostles: For in the old Testament there are many rules,
directions and examples, as a pillar of fire to guide the Churches now by (as
that Romans 15. 4. shows) namely those examples and rules of moral and common
equity, else the Church of God should loose now many a good ground, for many
practices, and you and your party have been ill advised to fetch grounds out
of the old Testament for many things you hold and practice. There are some
things you practice that you have no proof for at all out of the new
Testament, either in example or precept: As for instance in the point of
Ordination by the people without Officers you allege the 8. Numb. 20. but can
bring none out of the new Testament, so for the Church Covenant you multiply
places out of the old, as Ier. 50. 5. etc. But none out of the new, and so for
that power which you allow Christian Magistrates in the Church, you fetch from
the old Testament. So in the point of idolatry against the naming the names
used by Idolaters, you bring all out of the old Testament (as Mr Buroughs in
his Exposition on Hosea 2.) And without the taking in the old Testament (which
you so wholly forget in this your first principle) you would loose much
strength in several points you hold and practice, against some who differ from
you. As in the Baptism of Infants from the Covenant made with Abraham and his
seed, and the Circumcision of Infants, as in keeping the Christian Sabbath from
the fourth Commandment, as in speaking against humane inventions in the
worship of God from the second Commandment, with other particulars of the same
kind. Now if you will use the old Testament in some examples and commands, as
you do, (though here you forget to mention it,) Then grounds out of the old
Testament, (in matters not ceremonial and judicial proper to the Jews
policy, Nation and times,) but in things of moral and common equity will
justify other practices. And how then you can escape in the way of Church
government, the lawfullnesse of appeals from lower Judicatories to higher, and
the lawfullnesse of Forms of public prayer composed and prescribed, with
other particulars, I see not: But because you foresaw these, and such like, (as
that of a National Church) you here decline the old Testament and speak only
of the New, and but of a part only of that too, namely that of the Acts of the
Apostles, and the Epistles, as your words in both pages, third and ninth,
intimate, The Churches erected by the Apostles, and the first Apostolic
directions, patterns and examples of the Primitive Churches recorded in the
new Testament, which reaches no farther then the Acts of the Apostles and the
Epistles: But though you do not deal fairly in abridging the Scriptures, and
making your supreme rule so narrow, as the Acts and Epistles; and I might
justly stand upon it, to make you enlarge your rule to the books both of Old
and new Testament: yet well knowing the Acts of Apostles and Epistles will cast
you; I am well contented, and most ready at that weapon alone to try it with
you, and care not in the present controversy of the Church Way, as to let all
other Authors, so for the old Testament, and that part of the New too, the
Gospells, to stand by; And if you can make good out of the Acts of the Apostles
and the Epistles by any Apostolic direction, pattern or example of those
Primitive Churches, directed by the Apostles, many things you practice and
maintain, as Ordination of Ministers by the people alone, as your
Church Covenant, as a few private Christians to gather and constitute a Church,
as persons to be members of such Congregations where they live constantly many
miles distant from their Ministers and the meeting places, with other such, I
will yield the cause, and if I make not good from the Acts of the Apostles and
Epistles, things mainly opposed by you, but affirmed by us; As that of
particular Churches to consist of more then can meet in one place to be edified
in all parts of worship, with other such, then blame me: So that I may say of
your Church Way, and the questions between us, (as Tertullian answered long
since some heretics,) That if they were to be determined by the Scriptures
they would not subsist; Tertul. de Resur. carn^, (...). 3.
Now as to the ground of this principle within you, yeur consciences were
possessed with that reverence and adoration of the fulness of the Scriptures,
that there is therein a complete sufficiency, as to make the man of God
perfect, so also to make the Churches of God perfect, etc. First, I answer,
Your ground here alleged, does not prove your supreme rule without you,
(namely the Primitive pattern and example of the Churches erected by the
Apostles) to be completely sufficient to make the Churches of God perfect,
because that speaks as of the whole Scriptures, that there is in them a
complete sufficiency and not as of a part, now though the Scriptures may be
and are so full and perfect, yet every part may not: you can in reason conceive
that the whole may be completely sufficient to all ends and uses for which it
was intended, when a part or parts may not suffice. And that Scripture which
you allude unto for proof, 2 Timothy 3. v. 16, 17. speaks of the whole
Scripture, and not of a part only, the Papists would have (...) in that text,
to signify non totam, sed omnem Scripturam, and so would give that praise, not
to the whole body of the Scriptures, but to particular parts of it: Learned
Chamier. Panstrat. Cathol. lib. 8. de Canone, cap. 3.
Chamier snewes the contrary, how that the whole Scripture is here rather to be
understood, and he proves it by a threefold argument, and in this great
question between us and the Papists, An Scriptura Christianum perf^ctum reddat,
resolves the question to be understood of the whole canon in the Old and new
Testament: And so does Whitak. de Script. perfect. quae. 6. cap. 14.
Dr Whitakers, by which you may judge how unsufficient and short your first
principle was, being only a part of the Scriptures, but not the whole, and you
may observe the fallaciousnesse of your reason propounded to argue from the
whole to a part, because the whole Scriptures have a complete sufficiency to
make the Churches of God perfect, therefore the Primitive pattern and example
of the Churches erected by the Apostles have too. Secondly, I do also adore
the fulness of the Scriptures, and God forbid that I should take from the
Scriptures any thing God gives unto them, or that which in the Scripture is
attributed unto it; but we must not give unto the Scriptures more then what God
intended them for, or what the Scripture affirms of it self, for that is to
be wise above what is written, and to add unto the word, and may be and has
been a ground of dangerous consequence in the Church of God, and to clear it
from your own instances of exception: (Mere circumstances we except, etc.) Now
suppose some to speak as you do, and to be really acted also upon the same
ground of the fulness and sufficiency of the Scriptures, should yet affirm
of the Scriptures without all exception of me (...) circumstances, and of the
rules which the law of nature does in common dictate, and should say nothing
must be practiced, no not in mere circumstances, but by some direction from
the word; and as for the rules the law of nature does in common dictate, in
them also the Scripture gives light how to do them, and thereupon should
speak as you do all along in this Section; would not this prove inconvenient
and trouble you in your Churches; Nay suppose some should so extol the
fulness and sufficiency of the Scriptures that they should hold them so
perfect and sufficient for all Christians as to be a perfect rule for all
civil government, and that Chrstian commonwealths ought to be governed by
laws only there recorded and by no other (which opinion in substance
Carolostadius held; That in Courts of justice Judges should not proceed
according to In soro non ex jure humano sed ex lege Mosis pronunciandum esse
contendit, Melch, Adam. vit. Carolost.
humane laws, but according to the law of Moses; and so for Military practices
should hold all the way of War must be founded upon the Scriptures, and
thereupon should clamor against any other art and way of War, then what was
practiced there. What would you reply to these men, or what strength were there
in such principles, would not you answer them, in what sense the Scriptures
were perfect, and how they must understand it. Men have often by giving more to
the most excellent creatures and things then the Scriptures allow, fallen into
great errors and mistakes. The Papists and Ubiquitaries speak highly of the
body of Christ, and it is all in the way of magnifying it, and Schuvenckfeldius
did boast himself to be the Assertor of the glory of the flesh of Christ in
Heaven, (which other Preachers neglected Schlusselburg. de Secta Schuvenck^ld.
or else opposed,) and yet all these held great errors about the body, and
humane nature of Christ, under the notion of advancing it. So in the present
controversy, by giving to the Scriptures that which God has not given to
them, both is, and may be a ground of error. And therefore I refer you for
the true sense of that question concerning the fulness and sufficiency of
the Scriptures to make the Churches of God perfect, unto the answers our
Protestant Divines give the Papists in that controversy about the perfection
of the Scriptures. (And by the way, let me commend to you, and all the
Ministers of the Church Way, to study our Protestant writers, as Whitakers,
Chamier, etc. against the Papists upon the Church, and of the notes of the
visible Church, upon the controversy concerning the Scriptures, the authority
of Councels and Synods; and you shall find satisfaction to most of the
material grounds which have misled you in your Church Way.) In which answers
you shall find, that the perfection and sufficiency of the Scripture is
principally meant in matters of doctrine, and in points necessary to salvation:
And for policy and external order wherein the Scriptures do reach to them,
it is to be understood of the Essentials, Substantials and Fundamentals of
Government and Discipline, and not of the accidentals, accessaries and
circumstantials, as I could abundantly out of Calvin, Beza, Zanchius, Iunius,
Daneus show you: But I intend a whole Tractate upon that question of the
Scriptures, how far they are a rule for all matters of external government
and order in the visible Church, with an answer to this objection particularly,
and will not enlarge further, saving only that I will add the resolution of
this question and case out of Whitaker, Chamier and Cameron, who are full and
clear, that it is not against the perfection and sufficiency of the
Scriptures, that all matter of external order and policy are not laid down in
the word: Learned Chamier shows the judgment of the Churches of France,
Holland, nay he shows, it is the perpetual opinion of all the Protestants, and
he adds, Yea truly to speak (as the matter is:) The Church cannot be
altogether without unwritten traditions, and he instances in certain Rites
according to places, times, and persons, changeable and various: So Cameron,
For since the Scripture has Cameron. S^ ver. Judge in controvers. c. 11.
been ordained of God to make one wise unto salvation, and perfect unto every
good work, it must without doubt contain all doctrine necessary to salvation,
otherwise it could not attain its end: Let us then adore (as Tertullian
speaks) the fullness of the Scriptures, and let us not hear (as Athanasius
speaks) neither receive any thing besides or above them in that which
concerns the doctrine of faith. For touching the policy and ceremonies used
in the Church; it is another matter, we avouch that the Fathers did not think,
themselves bound to give an account of them by the Scripture. So Dr Whitakers
speaks also the same in that question and controversy of the perfection of the
Scriptures against humane traditions.

Catholici in hoc toto negotio distinguendum putant inter r^s quae traduntur in
Ecclesia and rationem earum tradendarum: and Chamier. Panstrat. Cathol. de
Canone. l. 8. c. 1. de persectione Scripturae. Stat^ controversiae. Sect. 16.
res ipsas esse duorum generum, scilicot alias in quibus substantia est, and
quasi conpus religionis Christianae; non tantum ad fidem, sed etiam ad mores
formandos, politiamque Ecclesiae continendam: proinde necessarias ex vi
institutionis divinae: alias eju^ essentiae velut appondices, ejusque corporis
ornamenta; neque ex s^, neque ex institutiono divina necessarias, sed potiu^
(...), and politi^ tantum causa in usum receptas: ut sunt disciplinae partos
varijs caeno^ibus sancitae.

Imo vero ut fateamur quod res est, omnino non potest Ecclesia carere
Traditionibus non scrip^is; sive intelligas quotidianam tradendae Cham. de
Canone. l. 8. c. 2. Sect. 20.
fid^libus ojus veritatis, quae non aliunde hauritur quam e libris sacris
rationem: sive ritus quosdampro locis, temp^ribus, and pers^nis varios: aptos
tamen exercendae pietati, charitatique conservandae: qui etsi non extent in
canone totidem literis, tamen a nemine contemni debent, eo ipso quod ab
Ecclesia, id est pastoribus instituti sunt: dum tamen nihil officiant aut
sinceritati doctrinae aut libertati conscientiae: cui proprie leges prescribit,
non nisi Deus.

Non dicimus, omnes liberas ceremonias esse nominatim in Scripturis traditas,
ut quemadmodum se gerere debeant homines Whitak. de Script Perfect. contra Hum.
Tradit. quae. 6. c. 10.
in sacris caetibus and hujusmodi, quas esse varias and (...) pro temporum and
personarum ratione minime ignoramus: de caeremonijs (inquam) liberis quae ad
externam tantum politiam and decorum pertinent non contendimus, sed de
necessaria doctrina. Haec perpetua; illae vero non perpetuae, sed ad tempora
accommodatae.

Deinde fatemur Apostolos in singulis Ecclesiis ritus aliquos atque
consuetudines ordinis and decoris causa sanxisse, non autem Whitak. de Script.
perfect. quaest. 6. c. 6. Status quaestionis proponitur. 6 Article of the
sufficiency of the Scriptures for salvation. Vide 39 Articles of Relig. of Chapter
of Engl.
scripsisse; quia hi ritus non fuerunt perpetui futuri, sed liberi, qui pro
commodo and temporum ratione mu^ri possunt. Praescriptos autem ab illis esse
ejusmodi ritus aliquos ad honestam Ecclesiae (...) accommodatos, pater ex 1
Cor. 11. and 14. cap. Tantum generalis regula habetur in Scripturis, omnes
istosritus ad adificationem ac decorum esse dirigendos; sed ipsi particulares
ritus non proponuntur. At dicimus omnia, quae necessaria sunt, sive ad fidem
sive ad vitam spectent, aperte and abunde in Scripturis explicari.

Now as for the exception made by you of this rule of mere circumstances, and
the rules of the law of nature, where what you affirm, seems to amount to
this, that you practiced all the examples of the Primitive Churches erected by
the Apostles, (excepting those.) Suffer me to ask you these few questions upon
your exceptions made of this first rule.

First, What you mean by mere circumstances, and what by the rules the law of
nature does in common dictate? because the Reader may be much deceived in these
general and doubtful expressions: you should have done well to have
particularized what you judge circumstances, and what mere circumstances, and
what be the rules the law of nature does in common dictate, as also have laid
down before the Reader, how you in your Church Way keep unto these; and I
ask the rather, because I find a Sermon of Mr Bridge, (one of the Authors of
this Apology) preached before the House of Commons not Sermon. at public Fast,
November. 29, 1643. page 26.
long before this Apology came forth, that makes none of these exceptions, but
excepts and excludes them, showing that in the visible Church Gods word is our
line able to reach unto all particular affairs of the Churches: and in
particular he labors to answer that of circumstances, and perverts two sayings
of Luther and Bishop Jewel.

Secondly, Whether you do practice and observe your own rule here given with
the exceptions made by you? or whether you do not much depart from it in your
Church Way, not yielding to mere circumstances nor the rules the law of nature
does in common dictate? as for instance, receiving the Lords Supper at night,
contrary to the practice of the reformed Churches, standing upon that
circumstance of time; denying appeals from the particular Congregations,
whereas appeals are a rule the law of nature does in common dictate.

Thirdly, I demand of you, how you could so nakedly propound the Apostolical
directions, patterns and examples of the Primitive Churches to walk by,
(excepting mere circumstances and the rules of the law of nature,) and not
except withal extraordinary and miraculous, personal and particular,
occasional and accidental, temporary and local patterns and examples. I own
the Scripture for the rule, rightly understanding it, and in matters of
Discipline and Church Order profess to walk by it, desiring to be tied to the
Scripture patterns, particularly to the patterns of examples and precepts
recorded in the new Testament, (provided this be understood in essentials and
fundamentals of order, in matters of perpetual use, and of a common reason to
all times and places;) only I add that in some things, where in matter of
order and external government there may be no such clear directions either by
precept or example, there general rules of the word, with deductions out of
Scripture examples, and from precepts by way of Analogy, with rules of common
prudence be taken in too. Now the interpretation of this rule (as I have laid
it down) being rejected, and the rule simply taken up without such
limitations, will produce a wild and strange discipline and Church Order, to
practice all things recorded in the Acts of the Apostles and Epistles, without
distinction and difference of those times, persons, places, and ours: and on
the other hand to practice nothing but what has a clear example, or precept
is strange too, and in so doing, reasonable men cannot become a Church society,
nor exercise Church communion. And however in matters of external government
and administration of holy things in the visible Church some pretend to this,
to practice whatever they find recorded in the Scriptures, and to practice
nothing whatsoever they find not there, yet none of the Independents, no not
the highest form of them, the Anabaptists, nor the highest sort of Anabaptists
(who were called Apostolici from their pretending to imitate the Apostles in
all things) ever yet have or do practice all patterns and examples recorded
in the new Testament, or are contented with them alone, but practice somewhat
over and above not particularly recorded in Scripture. I could lay down a
catalogue of many particulars specified in the Acts of the Apostles and
Epistles, not practiced in your Churches, nor in any Churches of the
independent way, as also of many things practiced by you (which we never read
of in the Scriptures,) so that all the Independents are in many things
according to the first pattern both defective and excessive. But I refer the
full handling of this to a Tractate I intend concerning the Scriptures, How
far the Scriptures are a rule for all matters of Church government and order
in the visible Church; I add only one thing for the Readers sake, that they be
careful to understand this first principle of yours, not so nakedly as you lay
it down in page 8, 9, 10, 11. because it has been, is, and may be a rock to
split many on, and an Ignis fatuus to lead many into waters, instead of a
sacred pillar of fire to guide to Heaven in a safe way. This foolish imitation
of the Apostles in all things in matters of external order, has been and is
the great foundation of evils on all hands, both in many practices and points
of Popery, and amongst the Anabaptists, (as I could demonstrate in
particulars.) Learned Danaei Comment in 1 Timothy 5. v. 13. and v. 17. Cum (...)
quadam homines omnia quae Apostolorum temporibus observata suerant sibi
putarent imitanda, neque locorum, neque temporum, neque rerum diss^nilium
rationem baberent, e^am and ipsi suas Dioconissas retinere praec^e voluerunt.
Sed cum posterioribus temporibus, etc. Et certe ^is impudentes sunt
Catabaptistae qui Pauli facti and exempli praetex^ omnes verbi Dei ministros ad
manualia o^era cogendos esse contendunt, ut victum comparent.
Danaeus in his Commentaries upon 1. Tim. cap. 5. speaks of it. Apostolici
inter Anabaptist as cognominati sunt, quia Apostolos aemulari in omnibus
decreverunt. Hi nudam Scripturae literam tenere se jactabant. Absque ba^ulo,
calceis, pera, pecunia hinc inde vigabantur, juxta Christi verba. Ascende^ant
in tecta domorum, ex quibus habebant conciones, quia Christus dixisset, quae in
aurem accepist is; annunciate in t^ctis. Pedes sibi invicem lavabant; cum puer
is rep^erascebant, hoc est pueriliter se gerebant; uxores, liberos, domu^,
opificia deserebant, quia Christus dixisset: nisi quis reliquerit do^um,
uxorem, etc. propter me, non potest esse meus discipulus, Schlu^leb, de Secta
Anabaptist.
Schlusselburgius writes also, that there is a sort of Anabaptists called
Apostolici, so named because they professed to imitate the Apostles in all
things, they washed one another feet, they held all things ought to be common,
they travailed up and down without staff, shoes, cloak, money, because of
Christ's words, they went up to the tops of houses to preach, because Christ had
said, what you have heard in the ear, preach upon the house top. Now how far
the want of these limitations and distinctions in this your first rule has led
some of you into errors and strange practices and may lead you further, as
into annoynting the sick with oil, baptising in rivers, etc. I leave you to
consider of.

But yet this first and great principle upon which you went and reared up your
new Church way, how difficult and abstruse a rule, and how doubtful a
groundwork do you make it, before you pass from it, by making that
supposition upon it, If the directions and examples therein delivered were
fully known and followed. And that you cannot profess that sufficiency of
knowledge as to be able to lay forth all those rules, etc. Now then brethren
consider with your selves according to your own grant, how for all this
principle of the Primitive pattern to guide you by, yet it being so hard to
know and find out the way, and you not having that sufficiency of knowledge to
lay forth the rules, how easily might you be out of the way then for all this
principle, and how can we indeed think otherwise of you, being a few men and
going by your selves: So that supposing the Apostolical directions and
Primitive examples of the Churches (not excluding the Old Testament and
Gospels) to be the only rule of the outward administration and government of
the visible Church, and granting these were more especially in your eye to
guide and steer your practice by, (considering by your own confession there is
so much difficulty to make these out, and to lay down what is a binding and
standing direction, and what not, what is merely circumstantiall and what not,
and how to apply many things which fall out to such rules and such examples
recorded;) Yet we may see, how unsafe and dangerous it was for you, and for a
few persons to set up Churches and Church Government, and we may hence learn,
what great use and need there is of Synods and Assemblies to draw out
Church Government and discipline, and still in all difficult cases to meet for
the debating and determining of things. And by the way let me admonish many of
your followers of their boldness and rashnesle of determining in matters of
Church Government, and order, holding all things about discipline and
Church Government to be so manifestly and clearly laid down in the
Scriptures, as the light of the Sun, and thereupon censuring many for not
holding with them, imputing it to their want of self-denial and spiritual
knowledge: By this they may see their great Leaders judge otherwise, who
speaking upon the Scriptures being a complete rule to make the Churches
perfect, put in a caution, and declare, They cannot profess that sufficiency
of knowledge, as to be able to lay forth all those rules therein, which may
meet with all cases and emergencies that may or sometimes did fall out amongst
them. Now if the Apologists, men so able cannot profess that sufficiency of
knowledge, etc. who yet according to their own Narration tell us, how they saw
the dark part before many others, and how they had all that light of the
Non-conformists, Reformed-churches, New England, etc. What shall we think of a
few private illiterate Christians setting up of Churches, and framing a
government, will this assure them (though the Scriptures be a perfect rule for
Church Government, and this is the supreme rule they go by) that therefore
they are in the right, certainly the great difficulty in knowing and finding
out the directions and examples, and in applying them aright, and their weak
knowledge will give ground sufficient to all reasonable men to suspect the
contrary. And for your selves Brethren, the Reader has greater reason to judge
from what you here grant about the difficulty of the Scriptures in the
Church Way, and your insufficiency and ignorance in many cases and to many
queries, that you might be out of the way, then from the sufficiency of the
Scriptures to make Churches perfect, and your making the Scriptures your
supreme rule, that you only should be in the right; and withal taking-in
this, that the Reformed Churches you depart from, (and all along reflect upon
in this Apologeticall Narration,) holding the Scriptures (in a true sense) to
have a perfection for Church Government, and setting them up as the supreme
rule to eye continually, and having the great advantage of you knowing the
directions and examples in Scripture better then you by reason of their great
learning, numbers, long studying these points, all you speak here of this
principle as a ground to take men with and possess the Readers of the truthof
your way rather then theirs, has no strength in it, but the scale of
sufficiency of knowledge and ability of finding out the rules and applying,
being heavier on the Reformed Churches side, and the other scale of making the
Scriptures the rule, equal to yours also; you must needs be found light
compared with them. But after your supposition of the great difficulty of
understanding this rule, and profession of the non-sufficiencie of your
knowledge, by which you weaken so much what you would gain by the narration of
setting up this first principle, as the supreme rule without you, yet, before
you leave it, in the following words you seem to affirm it, Indeed
interfeering and hovering about, not knowing well where to light and to settle
between the perfection and sufficiency of the Scriptures to all Church
matters, and the difficulty of finding out the rules and directions (As the
precedent words and subsequent put together do show) For you found principles
enough not only fundamental and essential, but superstructorie also, and
those to you clear and certain, and such as might well serve, etc. Now let
the Reader judge, if these words do not not declare a sufficiency of your
knowledge without either Ifs or Ands: But you must pardon me, if I do not
believe, you found principles enough superstructorie and that upon these two
following grounds.

1. Had you found principles enough superstructorie for the welbeing of your
Churches, and those clear and certain, and such as might well serve to
preserve your Churches in peace and from offense, and would comfortably guide
you to heaven in a safe way. How came it to pass that you made no better a use
of them, for the well-being of your Churches to have preserved them in peace
and from offense, but that in so short a time so many offenses and differences
should fall out, and you go so uncomfortably to heaven, doubting whether you
were in the right way for Church Government and order.

2. If you had found out principles enough superstructorie, why did you not
name them, at least some of them? you might have done well to have given the
Reader a taste of them, it would have given good content, especially in such a
Narration: I am of opinion both upon your total silence and upon some search
into these points, that besides the fundamental and essential principles to
the being of a visible Ministerial Church you found not many superstructories
laid down particularly in the Primitive Churches either in practice or precept
(namely ordinary, perpetual, etc.) And I do desire you (setting aside
Fundamental essential and substantial principles) that for the
superstructories upon them, and your deductions, you would give me proofs from
the Scripture for many of your practices (setting aside general rules of the
word and common rules of reason and prudence.) And whereas you make the
observation of so many of those particulars laid forth in the word, to become a
more certain evidence and clear confirmation that there were the like rules
and ruled cases for all occasions whatsoever, if you were able to discern
them. Had you expressed any of those particulars, the Reader might have gained
somewhat, and I could have better told from your instances, what to have
answered you; and might have shown you the dissimilitude, how they might not
have inferred the rest; but here, as in other passages of your book, you find
it safest to be in the clouds, and to lie hid in generals. But grant it for
once you observed many particulars. It follows not therefore from many to all.
But this is a point and principle wherein weak arguments will become certain
evidence and clear confirmation to you. But let me hint only some things to
you now (because this discourse is but the answer of a Narration, not of all
arguments that may be brought) you are mistaken both in your Observation and
your clear confirmation of what follows, for you shall find that in the
superstructories of the government of the Church, there are but few particulars
laid down in the pattern and example of the Primitive Churches, and those
primitive practices are not such a rule given by God in matters of that nature,
as that all things then practiced must be so in all after times, or that
nothing afterward might be practiced, but what is found there. For, besides
mere circumstances, and the rules of the law of nature, there are in several
Churches, other things tending to the better edification of those Churches, to
comeliness, decency, outward reverence, order, peace, (grounded upon general
rules of the word) which in other Churches are not so, by reason of the
different customs of such countries, and the diversities of times and places
wherein they were. (For that is comeliness and reverence in one country, which
is not in another.) So that my observation of so few particular
superstructories recorded in the Primitive Churches, namely of common,
ordinary, perpetual order, with the different practices in the several
Churches, recorded in the new Testament, and sometimes in the same Church, in
many things of the outward administration of external order are sound proofs
to me, there are not rules nor ruled cases for many superstructories in
external Government. And as to that clause which follows next in this
Section, for all such cases wherein you saw not a clear resolution from
Scripture, example or direction, you still professedly suspended, until God
should give you further light, not daring to eeke out what was defective in
your light in matters divine with humane prudence, etc. For answer, I must tell
you, you either saw that in the Scripture, that we cannot see by all search, or
else you practiced many things that have no clear resolution from Scripture,
neither in example or direction, and pray in your Reply to this answer, show me
what clear Resolution you saw from Scripture for your Church Covenant. If it
be so clear show it us. What* came the word of God out from you, or came it to
you only, has God given us eyes to see and know the mysteries of his kingdom,
to see such things as no glorious hypocrite in the highest form can see, and
can we not see what is common to hypocrites as well as Mr Tho: Goodwins answer
to a letter with a Qu^re concerning the Church Covenant. Confident we are (is
considence it self can make us) that there is no commandment given to the
Churches for exacting any such covenant of those that are to be admitted into
Church Fellowship with them. Quere concerning the Church Covenant.
to true Saints: Certainly had Mr Goodwin had such clear resolution from
Scripture for the Church Covenant, he would never have returned such an answer
after so long a time of receiving Mr John Goodwins letter, written with such
Giant-like confidence against the Church Covenant, as to desire after many
weeks, longer day to give satisfaction, in regard Church Covenant lay so deep
and remote amongst the fundamentals of Church Fellowship, which debt I believe
was never yet paid to this day. I should be loath for my part in any thing I
practice or hold to have a clear resolution from Scripture, to put off my
Brother for proof of it till to morrow. Give me an Apostolical example or
rule (if you can) where ever the people alone made Ministers; why did you not
here suspend, how durst you be made Ministers in this way by the people alone,
and either be Ministers without Imposition of hands at all, or if any
Imposition, not by the laying-on of the hands of the Presbytery, but the hands
of the people, both which are not only without any example of Scripture, but
against the Primitive pattern and example. Give me a Primitive pattern
wherein baptized persons professing the faith of Christ, and walking so, may
not be admitted to Fellowship and communion in the Lords Supper, without
professing their membership of some particular Congregation. Give me a word,
either of precept or example, where ever the Lay Elders did examine persons
professing the faith, whether they were fit for Church Fellowship, and
thereupon did propound their names in the Congregation, with many such
particulars; so that you have dared to eeke out divine matters with your own
inventions, not indeed with humane Prudence, but against humane Prudence and
reason (as that instance in the way of your making Ministers by the people
clearly shows:) And I desire that you and others would consider what I say
upon this occasion, that this is so preposterous and irrational a rule, that
had you indeed, or should others observe it, to practice nothing in matter of
external order, unless you have a clear resolution from Scripture in an
example or direction, you had never met together in a Church Way, nor can any
society or company of men meet to those ends of constituting a Church and
Government and walking in the practice of it, but that some things must be done
not particularly mentioned in the Scriptures. As for your calling humane
prudence, the fatal error to Reformation, I judge that the want of it in
Reformation has still proved fatal, as amongst the Anabaptists, Brownists,
and in New England also, till humane prudence eeked out what was defective in
the way of their gathering Churches at the first, and till humane prudence
punished by banishment and imprisonment (under the name of disturbers of the
civil peace) many members of their Churches for Familisme, Anabaptisme, etc.
without which courses, and others or the like kind, their Churches and
Commonwealth had been long ago^ ruined. And I much wonder you style humane
prudence, the fatal error to Reformation, and make Reformation of the Church
and humane prudence so opposite, especially you your selves knowing and
expressing in the 28th page of your Apology, the calling of this Assembly of
Divines, The way of God wisely assumed by the prudence of the State. I suppose
you call it not the way of God, as holding there is a clear resolution from
Scripture in any Apostolical primitive pattern of the Churches erected by the
Apostles of an A^embly so chosen by the Magistrates to draw up a gov^ment and
direction in worship for so many Ch^s, (many of which Church^ have not so much
as any one of their members there) but only, a way of God according to
general rules and Prudence, and so, wisely assumed by the Parliament, and yet
I hope you and your party will not afterward, if the Assembly should determine
against Independencie, style that the fatal error to Reformation. But how
ever we gain thus much from your being members of the Assembly, voting in it,
and calling your selves by that name, Members of the Assembly of Divines,
namely a clear answer, (that humane prudence is not always a fatal error to
Reformation, and, that a man needs not always suspend his practice, though he
have not a clear resolution of example or direction from the Primitive
Churches (witness the acceptance of your being chosen to the Assembly.) As to
that Metaphorical expression of yours, the ground of your judging humane
prudence so fatal to Reformation, Least by sowing any piece of the old garment
to the new, you should make the rent worse. I answer, if that be not understood
aright and soberly, it has been and will be the ground of great deformation in
the Church, and of running into errors on the right hand: Thus the
Anabaptists, least they should sow any piece of the old garment unto the new,
renounce their Baptism, and the Brownists will have the material Churches
pulled down, and our Ministers and Congregations quite made null, and all our
Ministers and Congregations newly ordained and constituted. The ground of which
mistakes arises from not considering the difference between the gathering and
planting a Church out of Iudaisme and Heathenisme, and the purging and building
up a Church corrupted and fallen. As for that promise of encouragement made to
such a suspension (which you say) in your public Assemblies was for your
comfort often mentioned, you should have done well to have quoted the text, and
then I might have examined the place, whether there had been a foundation for
any such promise to a few persons in a particular Congregation, withdrawing
from the fellowship of other Churches, and forbearing all things in matter of
external order (though agreed upon by other Churches) without a clear
resolution from Scripture example, or direction, that in so doing they should
know more in the matter of order and government.

A second Principle we carried along with us in all our resolutions, Apolog.
was, not to make our present judgment and practice a binding law unto our
selves for the future, which we in like manner made continual profession of
upon all occasions. We had too great an instance of our own frailty in the
former way of our conformity; and therefore in a jealousy of our selves, we
kept this reserve, (which we made open and constant professions of) to alter
and retract (though not lightly) what ever should be discovered to be taken up
out of a misunderstanding of the rule: Which principle we wish were (next to
that most supreme, namely, to be in all things guided by the perfect will of
God) enacted as the most sacred law of all other, in the midst of all other
laws and Canons Ecclesiastical in Christian States and Churches throughout the
world.

This is a dangerous principle to go by in the Church of God, excellent for
unstable men, and wanton wits fitted for libertins, and running heads that love
no fixed nor settled government, and serves well to the humor of a few
particular persons, but pernicious and sad for National Churches and
Kingdoms, a reserve indeed and a good back door to go out at from Brownisme
to Anabaptisme, and from Anabaptisme to Sebaptisme, and from thence to
Famialisme and Socinianisme; It is a ready prepared way for those that would
draw men into errors under the pretense of new light, to work upon, and so to
lead men from one error to another till there be no end. Which kind of
principle of uncertainty in matters of religion, the Remonstrants did hold
forth in those sad times of the troubles of the Churches in the Netherlands,
that so they might overturne all forms and harmonies, whereby the Churches
both within themselves and one toward another might be settled and associated:
that was one of the scepticall rules of the Arminians, dies diem docet: But
this principle of yours so carried all along in your resolutions, seems to
cross that first principle of the Scriptures, the supreme rule and perfect
for Church government; for in effect it is as much as to hold that the
government and way of the Church visible is so uncertain and doubtful, as
that little or none may be positively laid down and concluded as Iure Divino.
Now according to this second principle and profession of yours, why do you
make such outeries and tragedies in the Church, forsaking all Churches for you
know not what, even for that which you made open and constant professions upon
all occasions you would not be bound to; and pray how does this agree with your
principle of Church government, that it is in all particulars perpetual and
unchangeable, whenas you will be changing it so often; But certainly when you
first fell to your Church Way and took up this principle, you were not resolved
what way to follow, but thought that in some years by adding now and then, and
forsaking this and the other, you might attain to something in the end: But
let me ask you, ought men in the matters of Religion, and in things of the
Kingdom of Christ to be Scepticks and so irresolved, or ought not men to be
persuaded in their consciences? But I hope the Parliament will observe this
great principle you were first acted by, and still are in all your Church Way,
and will see how dangerous the tolerating of your way will be; for though you
should for present hold nothing much different from the established rule, yet
being allowed what may you not come to; according to this principle, how shall
any State be sure of you long what you will hold: What if you should bring in
community of goods, baptizing in rivers, the holy Kiss into your Assemblies at
the beginning and ending of your Ordinances, anointing sick persons with oil?
it is but according to your principle: And we see you make so much of this
principle and are so in love with it, that you wish it next to your first
principle, enacted as the most sacred Law of all other, to live and walk by it
in Christian States and Churches throughout the world; and I am persuaded if
you would speak out, you wish it instead of all other Laws and Canons (...):
You are not content your selves to be Scepticks and loose in the government of
the visible Church, but you would have all others to be li^ unto you, not to
make their present judgment and practice a binding law for the future, but to
make continual professions upon all occasions of altering. But let us consider
what may be the reasons of such a passionate desire that this principle were
enacted in all Churches, I conceive these following; 1. That others changing
and altering as well as you, the imputation of inconstancy and lightness might
not stick upon you. 2. That so you might gai^ more to your way and Church, by
possessing them with this principle, (having this advantage to work upon, and
this engine to draw the people with:) There is nothing you have concluded on
but you are free and at choice still to take what seems most probable to you,
(whereas if men be set down and resolved they are not so apt to change.) 3.
That so you might not, as you pretend, block up the way to further light, but
keep alive that principle of New light, and New truths, and that men must not
content themselves with old truths and the old light, but they must seek out
after New light; whereas establishment and settling of points (upon serious
debates and disputes) both in points of doctrine with the fundamentals and
substantials of discipline, as the truths of God and the way for men to walk
in upon such Scriptures and reasons, will shut out such search (as you
conceive;) but this is a mistake to imagine that if any evident light from
Scripture should come in afterward (especially considering that reformed
Churches in their confessions and Articles, hold that particular Churches may
err and may receive increase of knowledge, and for matters of Discipline
declare particularly, that in the accessaries, accidentals, circumstantials,
Churches have liberty to change upon inconveniences and different occasions
that may arise) that they are ever the further off from it. But this principle
of irresolution and uncertainty in matters of Religion upon the ground of New
light and New truths, as it is commonly laid down and drunk in now by men of
the Church Way, makes men unsatisfied, restless, doubtful in their present
practice, and upon searching when they can find none, the Devil and their own
corruptions will make some, and brings them old errors for New truths, and men
being possessed by some that principles are to be new studied, and that there are
New truths and New light never known before, Satan is not wanting to raise up
one or other to vent errors under those notions (as we see at this day in the
Antinomians and the Anabaptists) their great argument whereby they take so many,
being that of New light and New truths which God has revealed in these times.
4. I hope this principle so rooted in you, and your frailty in the former way
of conformity, may be a reserve for you to come off from Independencie to
Presbytery upon the debates of the Assembly, and from your Church Way to the
way of the reformed Churches, which I heartily pray may be the fruit of this
principle so openly and constantly professed, and am not wholly out of hope
(especially of some of you.)

Thirdly, We are able to hold forth this true and just Apology unto the world,
That in the matters of greatest moment and controversy, Apolog.
we still choose to practice safely, and so, as we had reason to judge that all
sorts, or the most of all the Churches did acknowledge warrantable, although
they make additaments thereunto.

To this third great principle of yours I answer:

1. To it generally as you lay it down here generally, and afterward more
particularly to the instances and particulars brought by you to make it good.
In this principle you labor to cast an odium upon all the reformed Churches
who differ from you, dealing by them in such a medium and way as the
Protestants do by the Papists, whereas we allege against the Papists that the
Protestant Religion is via tuta, and what we practice they themselves cannot
but allow, only they hold and practice over and above; as namely they add to
Christ's Righteousness their own in the point of Justification, to Christ's
intercession, the intercession of the Virgin Mary and Saints, to prayers unto
God prayers to Angels and Saints, to the Scriptures the traditions of the
Church, to our Sacraments (confessed by themselves) five others, etc. So here you
say that you chose to practice safely, and so as you had reason to judge other
Churches did acknowledge warrantable; but they make additaments, and this you
weave in all along in the particular instances under this head, and it lies
upon them to prove what they add over and above: Now besides the great
dissimilitude and difference of additaments in the things themselves between
the Protestants and Papists, and you and the reformed Churches, the Papists
additaments being in matters of faith and substance of worship, but the matters
excepted against by you being about outward government and order, and that not
so much about the things themselves, the officers, parts of worship, but about
the different manner and way of them (as you acknowledge in your eighth pages)
and so you had no such cause to insinuate such matters against the reformed
Churches, yet consider that what you do hold forth and take as your medium,
you have no good ground for, which will appear in three particulars, and so
your Apology held forth unto the world is neither true nor just.

1. I will demonstrate that in many matters of greatest moment and controversy
you did not still choose to practice safely, and so as you had reason to judge
that all sorts or most of the Churches did acknowledge warrantable.

2. That the reformed Churches practiced more safely then you and did not make
additaments as you charge them.

3. That you in many Church practices have made additaments and superadditions,
and that in more material things then in such circumstances wherein you tax
the reformed Churches.

For the first of these three: Take these three Instances for the present. 1.
It is a matter of great moment and controversy to forsake the public
Assemblies (which you confess are true Churches and the body of Christ) and to
set up separated assemblies without and against the leave of the Magistrate,
Ministers and Churches: This is, by the judgment of all the godly and learned
Divines of note, both in other Churches and in our own, condemned as unlawful,
by Calvin, Beza, Peter Martyr, Zanchius, Bullinger, Iunius, Pareus, Morneus,
Arnesius, Voetius, etc. with Whitakers, Brightman, Perkins, Cartwright, Parker,
Banes, Hildersham, Ball. etc. I could fill a book with the testimonies of
these and many others, and I do challenge the Separatists of all sorts,
whether them of the head-forme the Anabaptists, or of the middle-forme the old
Brownists, or the lowest-forme the Semi-Separatists, to give me any precept or
allowed example of such a practice out of the Primitive pattern, show it me
and I will yield the cause: As for that place Rev. 18. 4. you profess against
that in your 6t page, of having any thoughts of our Churches or Ministers to be
Antichristian and Babilonish; I could allege many Scriptures against this
practice, Jude v. 19, etc. The Apostles who were sent by Christ into the world
to make Disciples, and to bring men from Judaisme and Heathenisme to believe in
Christ, and to plant Churches of such, yet they never taught nor practiced to
gather and separate some Christians from the rest, one part of the Church from
the other, to go constitute a purer Church, neither in Corinth, Philippi, etc.
Although there were many corruptions, and many loose persons: But Paul taught
and practiced to censure and cast out evil persons (but in case those who had
power neglected their duty) he never taught the godly to separate from the
Lords Supper celebrated in the public Assemblies, much less for a few to
withdraw from their Pastors and other brethren, and to set up new Churches of
themselves: You are Scholars and well read in the Scriptures; show me but any
such direction from the Apostles and I am yours. 2. It is a matter of moment
and controversy, the right making and calling of the Ministers of the Gospel,
now all the reformed Churches according to the examples of Scripture, hold
Ministers are not to be made by the people alone, and that the people have not
power of Ordination and Imposition of hands but the Presbyters, and yet you
have practiced the being called and made Ministers by the people, without the
Imposition of hands of the preaching Presbyters. 3. It is a matter of great
moment and controversy, whether private Christians who were never trained up
in Arts and learning, nor intended the Ministry, may in the public
Congregation Prophecy, which Prophesying as it is not practiced by the
Reformed Churches, so by most of them it is not counted warrantable, and yet
you allowed it in your Churches, to which I might add more instances, but that
the book would swell into too great a volume.

To the second head, it is evident the r^formed Churchs practiced more safely
as in declining your way, in the last mentioned Instances, in not permitting
such as are Laymen to preach or prophecy, in not forsaking true Churches or
true Ministry for the mixture of wicked men, but rather casting out such, who
after admonition continue impenitent; so in other practices practicing as the
Apostles, receiving men into their fellowship without any such curious inquiry
and long detention, sending men from one to another, and requiring such
preparatives and conditions to Church Fellowship (as your Churches have done.)
The ways and practices the reformed Churches walked in, were the good old way,
known and beaten for some score of years, in which so many great lights and
godly people have walked, and so more safe then bie and new ways that a few men
but of yesterday have taken up, and have not yet well aired much less
digested: And in the name of other reformed Churches, France, Holland,
Scotland, I deny the things you charge them with to be additaments, or to be
properly so called; for if the particulars instanced in by you, will be found
to have a footing in the Scriptures and practiced in the Primitive Apostolical
Churches, then they will be no additaments, or if some of those things
alleged by you be of the nature of circumstances in the point of government
and order, or according to the rules of the law of nature and the rules of
common prudence, agreeable also to the general rules of the word, then they
are not truly by you called additaments and super-additions; for it is one
thing to add to the word of God and his worship, and another thing from
general (...)
rules of the word and common principles of the light of nature and prudence,
considering the differences of times, places, persons, dispensations of gifts,
to explicate and determine of many things in the administration of the visible
Church: Now of things of this kind something must be which the word of God
presupposes, or else you can have no settled government in the Church; and you
may as well style set Catechismes, confessions of Faith, reading of Chapters
translated by others, singing of Psalms between Chapters and after Sermons,
preaching constantly upon Texts of Scripture, giving thanks after eating meat,
etc. additaments, as some of the things instanced in by you. And let me hint
this to you (which I know you understand well enough) but forget it often to
parallel it with other passages, that in your practice of the administration of
the Sacraments, and in other parts of worship you add several things besides
what is recorded of Christ or the Apostles practice, or given particularly in
any precept, (which I speak not to blame such practices) but to mind you such
things are not fitly styled additaments.

To the third, that you have made additaments and superadditions, and that in
more material things then the reformed Churches, being your selves guilty of
what you accuse them, this being the strongest plea, and the only plea to
speak of in all your book by way of Argument, the rest being bare narrations,
I shall make good against you by particular instances: the prooving of which
practices of yours from Apostolical directions must rest upon you who do
them, and in so doing have departed from your selves and other reformed
Churches; amongst many particulars take these following: To the Ministerial
preaching and dispensation of the word, you subjoyned prophesying by the
people. 2. To the power of government by the Officers of the Church, you have
added the power of the people. 3. In joining in particular Congregations you
did super-adde the Church Covenant. 4. To the Pastor you super-adde the
Teacher, as a necessary distinct Officer from him, and so necessary, as in one
of your Churches you had two Teachers, and have been some years without a
Pastor at all, (which is a sad condition for people to be without a
Sheapheard.) 5. To the Deacon you added the Church-widdow as a distinct
Officer, and as necessary for the perpetual government of the Church. 6. To
our Parochial Assemblies in England, which you call in the sixth page the true
Churches and body of Christ, and abhor the thought of counting them
Antichristian; where you say you hold communion as with true Churches, you have
super-added and erected new-Churches. 7. To our Ministry of the Parochial
Assemblies (which is true also by your own confession and not Antichristian)
you have superinstituted and superinducted another Ministry, any one of which
particulars to be laid down in the Primitive pattern I professedly deny, and
it rests upon you who allow what reformed Churches practice, but in the
particulars instanced and many more, do practice over and above what the
reformed Churches do, to make evident and demonstrate upon clear grounds,
especially when men set up a new way, and leave the practice of all reformed
Churches, (double light being required for separation in any kind, whereas
single light suffices for any man continuing in his standing.) And certainly
of all other things in the matter of practice in the visible Church, the
meddling with the keys of the kingdom of God, I. G. Letter to T. G.
both in doctrine and discipline, with the withdrawing and forsaking the true
Churches of Christ, and the Ministry thereof, wherein men have been converted
and built up, and have converted and built-up so many, with the setting up of
new Churches against the leave and will of the civil Magistrate, without the
consent of those Churches departed from, and to the scandal and grief of so
many godly Ministers and Christians, nay the scandal of all Reformed Churches,
and all this under pretense of spiritual power and liberty purchased for them
by Christ, had need have a clear and full proof, and not be built only upon
such weak and slight grounds, as flattering similitudes, witty allusions,
remote consequences, strained and forced Interpretations from hard and much
controverted Scriptures: And now by what I have already answered to this
Principle in these three particulars, let the indifferent Reader and your own
consciences be judge, whether you or the Reformed Churches practice most
safely, and do that which most Churches acknowledge warrantable, and who is
most guilty of making additaments, when as you and all of your way allow that
which they practice in the seven particulars instanced in, but you practice
many things which all Churches condemn, excepting the Churches of the
Independent way; and if one thing be considered to what I have said that you
put the weight and stamp of divine Institution, and of necessity upon your
additaments, making them parts of worship and essential, as upon prophesying,
as upon the office of teachers distinct from Pastors, etc. but the Reformed
Churches in what you call their additaments, even in some of them instanced in
by you, put not so great an authority, but only an allowance and lawfulness
of set-formes of prayer prescribed, not a necessity, but a lawfulness of
mixtures in Congregations, so as not to leave the Church for that; and in other
practices, you count additaments in matters circumstantiall of time, place,
manner and way of doing things, which upon good reasons may be changed, so that
here is a wide difference between that which you call their additaments, and
yours truly so called, and let me add this that the great pinch of a
conscience and the poison in Ecclesiastical matters concerning outward
Government and order (wherein the Scripture has not laid down a particular
rule for) lies in the stamp of putting a necessity and a divine Institution
upon them, and unto such and of such is that Scripture spoken so frequently in
the mouths of men of your way. In vain do you worship me, teaching for
doctrine the commandments of men.

For instance: whereas one great controversy of these times is Apolog.
about the qualification of the Members of Churches, and the promiscuous
receiving and mixture of good and bad; therein we chose the better part, and to
be sure, received in none but such as all the Churches in the world would by
the balance of the Sanctuary acknowledge faithful. And yet in this we are
able to make this true and just profession also, that the rules which we gave
up our judgments unto, to judge those we received in amongst us by, were of
that latitude as would take in any member of Christ, the meanest, in whom there
may be supposed to be the least of Christ, and indeed such and no other at all
the godly in this kingdom carry in their bosoms to judge others by. We took
measure of no man's holiness by his opinion, whether concurring with us, or
adverse unto us; And Churches made up of such, we were sure no Protestant could
but approve of, (as touching the members of it) to be a true Church, with which
communion might be held.

And having answered generally, I come now to the particulars brought to make
this third principle good, and shall show how little there is in them to make
good that they are brought for.

To your first instance of choosing the better part, and to be sure receiving in
none for members of Churches, but such as all Churches in the world would by
the balance of the Sanctuary acknowledge faithful.

1. To speak nothing now of that, how in Churches there may be a receiving to
some of the ordinances (and so to be under the care of the Ministers) a
receiving of others, that is, there may be members to a part, and there are
members as to all the ordinances, and so according to the first there may be a
promiscuous receiving and mixture, for which I can give good reasons and
instances as in children, catechumenists, but must not handle at large every
point now which your Narration hints a^.

2. In your admission of members you chose not the better part, nor the safer:
To go on the hand of charity and love is the better part, and safer hand,
which charity if you look into the 1 Cor. 13. hopes the best, thinks no
evil, etc. And a man had better receive some of whom there may be some doubt
and fear, then discourage and refuse any of Christ little ones, which both
your principle and practice has done abundantly in New England and in England:
But here in your Narration you deal fallaciously in stating the question. For
the question is not about receiving in none, but such as all Churches in the
world would acknowledge faithful, but about receiving in all and refusing none
whom the Churches had no reason, but to acknowledge faithful; For according to
your words laid down, and as you would carry it to deceive the Reader with, of
receiving none, but such as all Churches would acknowledge faithful, you might
receive in, but a few of high form Christians, whom also all the Churches in
the world would not (as some hold the balance) acknowledge to be faithful;
and so you might receive in, but a very few: And it is evident by your practice
that many whom all the Reformed Churches hold fit to be received, having a
competent knowledge of God, Christ and themselves, and live free from all
scandalous and gross sins, and outwardly practice duties both to God and man,
even multitudes of these you will not admit, nor do not into your Churches.
And as to that just and true profession you are able to make, That the rules
you gave up your judgments unto, to judge those you received in amongst you
by, were of that latitude to take in any member of Christ, etc. I must tell you
this is like some of your just and true professions before, namely, unjust and
untrue and this is neither the first nor the last unjust and untrue profession
in your Narration, and I shall make it good both by your practices, and by some
rules laid down by some of your selves. Mr Goodwins letter in answer to Mr John
Goodwin grants, they require of men to admission into their Churches, that they
know what belongs to Church Fellowship, and do acknowledge the same, and
approve thereof, with other things of that nature: now whether this be a rule
of that latitude, that will take in any member of Christ, the meanest, in whom
there may be supposed to be the least of Christ, and indeed such and no other,
as all the godly in this kingdom carry in their bosoms to judge others by: I
appeal to your own consciences. That holy Martyr Bradford with many more, not
only the least, but great stars in the firmament of the Church, never knew
nor dreamt of what belonged to your Church Fellowship, and I am confident that
M. Goodwin, M. Bridge, my self, with many others, many years after we were
members of Christ, and conversed together in Cambridge as Saints, yet
understood not what belonged to this Church Covenant and Church Fellowship: and
this is such a rule that multitudes of the godly in this kingdom, carry not in
their bosoms to judge others by, nor would not themselves be judged by, nor
never heard of such things till your times: And if your rules were of such a
latitude as would take in any members of Christ the meanest, whence came it to
pass that in New England so many men (in whom the godly have presumed to be
something of Christ) and who are you to judge the contrary, have not yet been
admitted, and amongst many other instances that might be given in your own
Churches, I will name one: Mistress Symonds, a modest, humble woman, many years
well reputed of in England, of godly Parents, wife to a godly Minister, who
though her husband was received a member of M. Sympsons Church, and then chosen
the Pastor, yet his wife could not be received into the Church along time, and
whether yet she be I know not: I have been told also from one who lived in
those parts, that after M. Sympson upon rending from M. Bridge had set up a new
Church, one who was upon his trial for admission into M. Sympsons Church, was
openly asked by a prime man (who had a hand in that rent) what his judgment
was of the Brethrens liberty to prophecy; and if the man had not been right
in that point, it might have hazarded his Membership. And that the Reader may
not be abused nor amused with such kind of passages, but that it may appear
what ever here you say you have other rules, and require other things of men to
communion with you, pray satisfy us: What was the reason, and what is the
matter that when M. John Goodwin fell to your principles and way, so many godly
persons of his own Parish could not be received in by him as Church Members,
nor accounted so, without yielding to some rules and conditions, which they
being members of Christ (and some of them n^ne of the meanest) could not
condescend unto. As to that you say, You took measure of no man's holiness by
his opinion, whether concurring with you or adverse unto you. I appeal to your
consciences, if my self or some others whom you have accounted godly should
have declared their opinions adverse to your Church Covenant, and other of your
Church principles, and yet being in Holland should have desired for the time to
have been a^itted to fellowship with you in the Lords Supper, whether would you
have admitted us? Now to that passage of yours in the close of this first
instance: and Churches made up of such we were sure no Protestant could but
approve of, etc. This goes upon the mistake observed by me before, That the
question in controversy about Church Members is not, nor cannot be meant,
Whether Churches made up of such members, as all account faithful, be by all
Protestants approved of to be true Churches, with whom communion may be held:
But whether communion may not be held with such Churches, and such received
into communion and fellowship of Churches, whom many Churches (especially yours
and those of the Church Way) do not upon your principles acknowledge true and
fit matter. And in this I am sure all Protestants of note are against you, and
for us, accounting such visible Churches (as you here instance in) an Utopia,
holding it Donatisme, and Anabaptisme, and when the Papists do in their
writings father upon them such a visible Church as you dream of, and such
principles as you hold, they disclaim it (as learned Whitakers) it being the
constant opinion of all the great Protestant Divines, Calvin, Luther, Zanchius,
Iunius, etc. Whitaker. d^ Eccles.
That the visible Church of Christ consists of good and bad, resembled
therefore to a field, net, floor, where chasse as well as good grain, etc.

Again, concerning the great ordinance of public Prayer, and the Liturgy of
the Church, whereas there is this great controversy Apolog.
upon it about the lawfulness of set-formes prescribed; we practiced (without
condemning others) what all sides do allow and themselves do practice also,
that the public prayers in our Assemblies should be framed by the meditations
and study of our own Ministers, out of their own gifts (the fruits of
Christ's Ascension) as well as their Sermons use to be. This we were sure all
allowed of, though they super-added the other.

To this 2d Instance concerning the great ordinance of public prayer, and the
Liturgy of the Church, I shall give you one Answer after another, following
you according to your expressions upon it, wherein I find you like your selves
in the other precedent parts, in generals and in the dark, so as few Readers
can tell by your Narration here what you hold and practice about public prayer.

1. Whereas you say, There is this great controversy upon it about the
lawfulness of set-formes prescribed. I must tell you this great controversy
upon it is raised only by your selves and the Brownists, there being no
Divines, nor no Reformed Churches that I know of, but do allow the lawful use
of set-formes of prayer, composed and framed by others (as by Synods and
Assemblies) and do make use of such sometimes, as the Churches of France and
Holland in the administration of Sacraments usually do, and those who practice
them not so much, yet at least hold them lawful. And I challenge you in all
your reading to name one Divine of note and Orthodox that ever held set-formes
of prayer prescribed unlawful, excepting only Independents.

2. What understand you by set-formes prescribed, whether prayers only made
and framed by others: As suppose by an Assembly or Synod, but yet not imposed,
or whether prayers composed by others, and then prescribed and required by
authority to be used: Now if you say you understand it in the second sense,
that you question the lawfulness of that, but not in the first: I ask you
whether you will practice, and do hold it lawful to use in your Assemblies,
Prayers made and framed by others? As suppose a directory for worship, which I
the rather ask you, because your words afterward hinted as the ground for
your own practice, and against the practices of the Reformed Churches, speak
against all set-formes of prayer composed by others (That the public prayers
in our Assemblies should be framed by the meditations and study of our own
Ministers out of their own gifts) which reaches to all prayers framed by
other men, though they be left at liberty to use or not use them: And further
this argument of yours speaks only against forms of prayer, as in the first
sense, but speaks not at all to it, as imposed and enjoined; but let your
expressions of set-formes of prayer prescribed be taken in the second sense,
yet I am ready to maintain against you that set-formes of Prayer, lawful for
their materials, and established by a lawful power to be used in the public
Assemblies, may lawfully be practiced by Ministers, and the people safely join
in them.

3. As I asked of you in what sense you took set-formes prescribed, so I desire
to know whether in the questioning of the lawfulness of set-formes of prayer,
you understand only forms of prayer framed by men and Ministers in the
Church, or whether not also prayers recorded in the Scriptures (as for instance
the Lords prayer) whether ever you practice the use of that in your Assemblies
(which question I make, because I never heard that any of you five ever used
the Lords prayer, either in your own Assemblies, or in ours, nor indeed that
any of your way did, it being now made by many a note of a Formalist) Now if
you account the use of it lawful, considering the great offense, the total
disuse of it gives to many, and how it hinders the word to many, considering
that Scripture with other like, 1 Cor. 10. 32. I wonder how you dare neglect it
(and by the way let me tell you that 1 Cor. 10. 32. is stronger to command you
the use of the Lords prayer, then for what it is alleged by you in the 17.
page, namely, for your principle of submission of Churches, etc. And I propound
to you further, whether if some other prayers word for word recorded in the
Scriptures should be put into a directorie, you would use them? As also,
whether you would practice the reading of set Psalms and Chapters appointed
out for you?

4. As for the practicing your own prayers without condemning others. I
answer, that is not so, 1. Because you bring many arguments against set-formes
of prayer, framed by others and prescribed that amount to a condemnation in a
high nature, terming such prayers will worship, inventions of men, as is
evident both by Manuscripts and by printed Discourses of Mr Davenports, M.
Cottons, Manuscr. Arg. of M. Nigh against setformes of prayer prescribed.
M. Nyes. 2. You withdrew from our Sacraments and public Assemblies upon
this ground and have drawn many away with you, and have set up new Churches.

But it may be you will in this Narration have this evasion, that though you
condemn the practice, yet not all the persons that use them, you do not
condemn them as ungodly. I answer, no more do the rigid M. Williams answer to
Mr Cottons letter. Queries proposed upon occasion of an Apologeticall N^ration.
Robinsoni Apolog. cap. 12. de Eccles. Anglic.
Brownists nor Anabaptists, who yet condemn sufficiently our Churches and our
prayers, and yours too, for they acknowledge both you and us to have eminent
personal graces.

5. As to that Argument brought by you for conceived prayers, but against
set-formes made by other men, I briefly suggest these following things to you
and the Reader. 1. That by your own concession set forms of prayer are not
unlawful, because they be set and framed before hand, and not conceived
suddenly, wherein you grant, that the public prayers in the Assemblies may be
premeditated, framed and studied before hand, as well as Sermons, which
concession takes off one of the strongest Arguments used against set-formes of
prayer. 2. I answer, it is not against the fruits of Christ's ascension into
Heaven, and of giving gifts unto men for the Ministry, that they do not
always in all their prayers exercise their own gifts of invention and
composall of prayer, for so the using of the Lords prayer should be unlawful
at any time for the Ministers (which is no prayer framed out of their own
meditations and study, and their own gifts.) 3. I answer, there is a great
dissimilitude in many respects, between Sermons and prayers, so that it will
not hold, though Sermons ought to be framed always out of our own gifts, that
therefore prayers always should be. And this I will demonstrate in a Discourse
of the lawfulness of using set-formes of prayer composed by others. 4. It is
not against the fruit of Christ's ascension, nor the gifts given then for
Ministers, in some instructions and teachings of the people to make use of some
thing sometimes in public, either doctrinall or practical, not framed out of
their own gifts, but by others. As suppose the reading in the Congregation to
the people often some confession of faith, or some exhortation about maine
things of use to them, having still the free use of their giftsto preach
besides. 5. Suppose you five should join together out of your own meditations
and studies, exercising your own gifts to frame public prayers of maine
petitions needful for the state of all your Churches, whether might they be
used by you in your public Assemblies. 6. Whether each of you by your selves
framing upon meditation and study a set-forme of prayer, may not use that
often in your Assemblies without sin, having also your liberty to add
conceived prayers at the same time.

But to put all out of question about the second instance, I judge that set
forms of prayer prescribed taken in both senses, that is neither made nor
framed out of the gifts of the persons who use them, nor left at liberty, but
by public consent agreed upon to be used, are not unlawful to be practiced:
but the Scriptures give us examples for such prayers, as in 2 Chronicles. 29. 30.
Moreover Hezekiah the King, and the Princes commanded the Levites to sing
praise unto the Lord, with the words of David, and of Asaph the Seer: and they
sang praises with gladness, and they bowed their heads and worshipped. And
therefore the use of set forms of prayer, framed and composed by others and
prescribed, having example in Scripture (as well as conceived) are no
additament nor superaddition; but the reformed Churches in practicing both,
practice most safely, according to Scripture patterns, and your Churches using
only one sort and not the other, leave to follow examples recorded in
Scripture; and we may more justly cast upon you the taking away from Scripture
(taking away being a like branded by Scripture as adding;) But you do unjustly
cast upon the reformed Churches adding to the word, the Scriptures holding out
examples for both: And for the further clearing your mistakes in this great
ordinance of public prayer, I shall only add this, all that God has
commanded either in the old Testament or new about public prayer, is, that
prayers be made in the public Assemblies, and that those prayers be of
petitions for their matter and kind lawful, according unto the will of God,
directed unto God alone in the Name of Christ, with humility, fervency, faith
and such like; but that God has required, that as often as Ministers pray, they
must put up prayers framed by their own meditations and studies out of their
own gifts, and that the words and phrases must be various and diversified or
else their prayers are not lawful, there is never such a syllable to prove it
in the Scripture; But we have examples of both, namely set and conceived, and
Gods servants used both indifferently, and we may use both according as we see
occasion, and as we find may make most for edification and Gods glory. And I
desire you in your Reply to this Answer to give any instance to the contrary
and I shall thank you, for I seek truth and peace, and not victory nor
contention; And let me mind you whilst you go about in this instance to clear
your selves of additaments; you are in this and other instances guilty of
taking away from the Word, falling short, as in other things, practicing above
what is written, besides your different way of practicing in some things.

So likewise for the government and discipline in the Churches, however the
practice of the reformed Churches is in greater matters Apolog.
to govern each particular Congregation by a combined Presbytery of the Elders
of several Congregations united in one for government; yet so, as in their
judgments they allow, especially in some cases, a particular Congregation, an
entire and complete power of jurisdiction to be exercised by the Elders
thereof within it self; Yea and our own Mr Cartwright, holy Baynes, and other
old Non-conformists, place the power of excommunication in the Eldership of
each particular Church with the consent of the Church, until they do
miscarry, and then indeed they do subject them to such Presbyteriall and
Provincial Assemblies as the proper refuge for appeals and for compounding of
differences amongst Churches, which combination of Churches others of them
therefore call Ecclesiae ortae, but particular Congregations Ecclesiae primae,
as wherein firstly the power and privilege of a Church is to be exercised. And
withal we could not but imagine, that the first Churches planted by the
Apostles, were ordinarily of no more in one City at first then might make up
one entire Congregation, ruled by their own Elders, that also preached to them;
for that in every City where they came, the number of converts did or should
arise to such a multitude as to make several and sundry Congregations, or that
the Apostles should stay the setting up of any Churches at all, until they
rose to such a numerous multiplication as might make such a Presbyteriall
combination, we did not imagine. We found also those non-conformists (that
wrote against the Episcopal government) in their answer to the arguments used
for Episcopal government over many Churches, brought from the instances of the
multitude of believers at Jerusalem, and other places and Cities mentioned in
the new Testament, to assert that it would not be infallibly proved that any of
those we read of in the Acts and elsewhere; were yet so numerous, as
necessarily to exceed the limits of one particular Congregation in those first
times. We found it also granted by them all, that there should be several
Elders in every Congregation, who had power over them in the Lord; and we
judged that all those precepts, obey your Elders, and them that are over you,
were (to be sure, and all grant it) meant of the Pastors and Teachers, and
other Elders that were set over them in each particular Congregation
respectively, and to be as certainly the intendment of the holy Ghost, as in
those like commands, Wives obey your own husbands, Servants your own
Governors, to be meant of their several families respectively. We could not
therefore but judge it a safe and an allowed way to retain the government of
our several Congregations for matters of discipline within themselves, to be
exercised by their own Elders, whereof we had (for the most part of the time we
were abroad) three at least in each Congregation, whom we were subject to: yet
not claiming to our selves an independent power in every Congregation, to give
account or be subject to none others; but only a full and entire power
complete within our selves, until we should be challenged to err grossly;
such as Corporations enjoy, who have the power and privilege to pass sentence
for life and death within themselves, and yet are accountable to the State they
live in. But that it should be the institution of Christ or his Apostles, that
the combination of the Elders of many Churches should be the first complete
and entire seat of Church power over each Congregation so combined; or that
they could challenge and assume that authority over those Churches they feed
and teach not ordinarily by virtue of those forementioned Apostolical
precepts, was to us a question, and judged to be an additament unto the other,
which therefore rested on those that allowed us what we practiced over and
above, to make evident and demonstrate: (and certainly of all other the
challenge of all spiritual power from Christ had need have a clear pattent to
show for it:) Yea we appeal further unto them that have read books, whether
until those later writings of the two Reverend and Learned Divines of
Scotland, set forth after our return, nor much more then two years since, and
others of no elder date from Holland, and one of our own Divines more lately
Written with much learning and ingenuity; there has been much settly and
directly, or with strength insisted on to prove that government, and although
assert and inculcate it they do as their opinions, yet the full strength and
stream of our non-conformists Writings and others, are spent rather in
arguments against, and for the overthrowing the Episcopal government, and the
corruptions that cleave to our Worship, and in maintaining those several
Officers in Churches Which Christ has instituted in stead thereof (in which we
fully agree with them) then in the proof of a combined classical
Presbyteriall government as it is authoritatively practiced in the most
reformed Churches.

Before I give a full answer to your third and last instance of the government
and discipline in the Churches. I premise this; that in all the differences
between you and us in the principles and practices of the visible Church and
government of it, you give but three instances only, wherein you practice more
safely then the reformed Churches (although you make such a great principle and
matter of it in the eleventh page,) yet there are many things besides these
three, wherein you practice differently from all reformed Churches; as in the
way of gathering and constituting Churches, in the way of making Ministers, in
the power you give the people in Church government, cum multis alijs: why did
you in this Narration pass by these? Is it not either because you were not
willing to tell all you hold and practice, (the time being not yet come to open
all your way and principles, which is one of the things I blame you for, your
reservednesse in keeping back so great a part, showing us only the fairest side
of that wherein you differ,) or else if you had thought fit to have related
them; you in your own wisdoms questioned, whether those other particulars
wherein you differ would bare so fair a gloss as of practicing most safely,
and of fastening the odium of additaments so well upon the reformed Churches, as
these three instances you give; And I might here take an occasion to show
further how the reformed Churches practiced more safely on both hands then you,
neither adding not taking away, and so I might strongly retort this whole third
principle of yours back upon you, but that may suffice I have already hinted of
it.

Now for this third and last instance of your walking safely, but fastening
additaments in government and discipline on the reformed Churches, this being
laid down so largely as that it is a third part of your book within a very
little, beginning in the twelfth page, and continuing to the end of the one and
twentieth page, containing in it many various things: I must therefore because
of the intermixture of persons and things in this part of your Narration more
then in any other, going forward and backward, up and down, that I may let
nothing escape of moment, I shall endeavor to draw out the several ends of
these twined threads and entangled discourse, and to wind them up upon their
several bottomes, by reducing this part of your Narrative to these following
heads; whereon I may more distinctly fasten my answers, both for yours and the
Readers better satisfaction.

1. You relate what the reformed Churches do practice and allow, as also what
our old non-conformists granted, and what your selves allow and grant about a
Church and the government of it.

2. You relate what you disallow and are not satisfied in.

3. You couch some arguments and reasons for your own way and practice, and
against the practice of the reformed Churches.

4. You answer a common objection brought against your way, by laying down the
principles that you hold in such a case, as also by relating your practice
occasioned upon an offense committed in one of your Churches.

5. Upon this answer you make a comparison between the effectualnesse of your
way in what you hold and practice, and what the Presbyterians hold, to reduce
Churches and to compose differences: in which comparison you make the scales to
fall on your side rather.

Now the Reader must expect here as in other passages of this Narration,
general, doubtful, dark, partial and reserved relations with mistating the
questions which, in my answers I shall observe and point at all along.

To the first of these five heads, (wherein also are three particulars;) To the
first of these concerning the reformed Churches, namely what they practice and
allow: I answer, you should have done well to have instanced their practices,
what were the greater matters governed in common by the Presbytery of several
Congregations, and what were the lesser matters wherein each particular
Congregation was governed by their particular Elders; As also what were those
cases wherein the reformed Churches allow particular Congregations such an
entire and complete power to be exercised by the Elders within themselves, and
wherein not; such a particular Narration would have carried in the face of it
some ground for the defference of their practice and allowance, and might have
served to have pointed out the differences between your way and theirs. But
secondly, As you relate the way and discipline of the reformed Churches, it
sounds somewhat harsh and strange that their practice should be one way and
their judgments another, their practice to govern each particular
Congregation by a combined Presbytery of the Elders of several Congregations
united in one for government, and yet in their judgments to allow, especially
in some cases a particular Congregation and entire and complete power of
jurisdiction within it self: Do they practice one way and allow another way,
or do they hold both ways the ways of God, or what is it you mean in this
Narration of those Churches, or can it be meant in the same sense and acception
to practice one thing and yet allow another, or will you make the lesser
matters practiced in their particular Churches by their own Elders to be the
same with some cases, wherein they allow particular Congregations an entire and
complete power of jurisdiction within themselves: Now the latter, namely in
some cases, cannot be meant, for then this last part is no more then the first,
neither can your words of an entire complete power of jurisdiction in the
particular Congregations be meant of smaller matters, but of the greatest
matters in some cases: You shall do well in your reply, to english these lines
about the difference of the reformed Churches practices in greater matters, and
their different judgments in some cases, and show us in what sense they mean
it, and whether it can be properly and truly alleged for your case of entire
and complete power in your Congregations. Thirdly, This which you here relate
of the reformed Churches practice and allowance is fallaciously set down and
for your own advantage, merely to make out this third principle, that you
still chose to practice safely, namely, what the reformed Churches allowed and
acknowledged warrantable, only they superadded Presbyteriall combinations,
whereas the reformed Churches do not, as you well know in the case and
question controverted between them and you allow particular Congregations in a
Kingdom and nation, conceiving the reformed Religion to have an entire and
complete power of jurisdiction within themselves, what may be in some of their
books in extraordinary or special cases, where there is but one particular
Congregation in a Country or the like, that is nothing to the point in hand,
it being laid for a common ground by them all, that every particular Church in
a Nation or Kingdom is not to be left to it self, but that there is a
necessity of a common national government to preserve all the Churches in
unity and peace; And to clear the reformed Churches of France, Holland,
Reform. of Chapter government in Scotland, cleared, page 18.
Scotland from what you say they allow, I do not find in their books of
discipline and platformes of Church government (by which we must judge of their
judgments) nor in their practices, that they do allow an entire and complete
power to be exercised by the Elders of every Congregation alone, either in the
making or ordaining of Ministers, or in deposing their Ministers, or in drawing
up a form of doctrine, worship and discipline for themselves, they allow power
of admonition, suspension from the Lords Supper, and of taking up lesser
differences by the particular Eldership; and if I forget not, the Churches of
France only, practice excommunication by the Elders in particular
Congregations, without carrying it at first higher; but then if we consider
that in those Churches of France their Elderships go upon certain fixed rules
in there excommunications laid down in their books of discipline (who if they
proceed otherwise are liable to censure themselves) and their being appeals to
Synods and Assemblies, and all being carried in reference and dependence to
Assemblies, the case is very different: now if the Churches of your way and
communion in old England and in New, would yield to have a government fixed and
settled by Synods and Assemblies; established also by the Magistrates, upon which
Rules and Orders they should proceed in the way of making Ministers, and that
such errors in doctrine and such evil manners, ought to be the subject of
excommunication, and then agree upon appeals to Synods and Assemblies, then
there would be less dang^r in such an entire and complete power in particular
Congregations.

To the second particular under this first head, namely what some of the old
non-conformists grant, placing the power of excommunication in the Eldership of
each particular Church until they do miscarry, and then indeed subj^cting
them to Presbyt^riall and Provincial Assemblies, and that it could not be
infallibly prooved that any of the Churches recorded in the new Testament, were
so numerous as necessarily to exceed the limits of one particular Congregation:
And that both the Ministers of the reformed Churches and our non-conformists,
all granted that there should be several Elders in every Congregation, who had
power over them in the Lord: I answer as follows; For Mr Cartwright, you not
quoting which of his books you have reference to, and so not knowing which to
turn to, to find out what you assert of him, I shall not deny it; but as for
Mr Baynes Diocesans Trial, (which is the only book I ever heard of, wherein
he handles these points) he does in the third question give the Ecclesiastical
power and the exercise of it to a united multitude of Presbyters, in which
book, howsoever as intending his book against Diocesan Bishops and Diocesan
Churches, to whom all Presbyters and Churches stand in subjection and
subordination, he pleads against them for the power of the particular Elders in
the several Congregations, yet as against the reformed Churches practice,
namely of a Presbyteriall Church consisting of many particular Congregations
and ruled by the Elders of several Congregations combined, he pleads not,
but expressly in answer made to those two objections from the Churches and
Elders where there is a co-ordination and a communi^y in government, as in the
Low Countries and at Geneva, he grants the thing contended for against your
Congregationall way (even before miscarrying,) and shows the great difference
between the Diocesan government and the Presbyteriall in several particulars,
and answers your objections which you commonly make of a foreign extrinsicall
power: And for your better satisfaction, read and compare together the
passages in these pages of Mr Baynes Diocesans Trial, page 21, page 11. What
is meant by a Diocesan Church, and in the 12th page, two first conclusions
agreed in, and in the 16th page: And for the non-conformists in their writings
against the Episcopal government and Diocesan Churches, though they put the
Bishops their adversaries all they could to it, to make them prove infallibly
and necessarily a particular Church to exceed the limits of one particular
Congregation, yet they never intended it as against the reformed Churches: Now
you know the saying, Authoris aliud agentis parva est auth^ritas: But show us
where ever the old non-conformists as against the reformed Churches held so: It
will appear by Gerson Bucerus* and by the practice of the reformed Churches in
Geneva Dissert. de Gub. Ecclesiae, page 11. Robins. Apol. cap. 1. de Eccles.
amplitudin^.
and Holland, (for which Mr Robinson so objects against them in his Apology)
that though they were against the government of Bishops and Diocesan Churches
(that is of a head Church over many Congregations united to it) yet not of a
particular Church of such a City, consisting of many particular Congregations:
And as for that you take for granted by all, that there should be several
Elders in every Congregation, it is denied you: For some Divines, as Danaeus
and Cartwright (as I remember) hold it not necessary for every small
Congregation in villages, but for Cities and more populous places to which the
lesser villages being conjoined, have the benefit and support of all the Elders
and Ministers in the exercising of government. As for that you say, Others of
them calling the combination of Churches Ecclesiae ortae, but particular
Congregations Ecclesiae primae, as wherein firstly the power and privilege of
a Church is to be exercised (that others was Polit. Ecclesiast. l. 3. c. (...).
etc. ^2.
Mr Parker, who in his Politia Ecclesiastica, gives us this distinction)* and
was the first who brought it up (as ever I read of) who differing from Mr
Baynes and other non-conformists, and most Divines of the reformed Churches in
the subject of the power of the keys, giving it to the Polit. Eccles. l.
(...). c. 1.
body of the Church, agreeing therein too much with you, no wonder he called
particular Congregations Ecclesiae primae: But as he was mistaken in the first
receptacle and subject of the power of the keys, so he might be in his
distinction of Ecclesiae primae and ortae. For the first Churches, namely that
of Jerusalem, Rome, Ephesus, with others were not particular Congregations, but
Churches consisting of many Congregations, several meeting places, some
preaching in one place, and others in other places, but governed by the Elders
in common, which City Churches were the first Churches still first planted by
the Apostles, and particular Congregations in villages were Ecclesiae ortae
(the City Churches in this sense being the mothers, and the particular
Congregations rather the daughters) the full proof and demonstration whereof I
refer to a tractate I intend about the nature of the visible Church. But by
what I have answered upon this head the Reader (...) Balls friendly trial of
separation.
may observe there is not all granted, which you took for granted from the
Reformed Churches, and the Non-conformists, and what is yielded slowes from
another spring, and is upon another ground writing against Diocesan Bishops
(quite another controversy) but otherwise even when Non-conformists have come
to write against the separation, and upon the nature of a visible Church (as Mr
Balla) they hold the contrary: And for learned men of other Churches (even when
they writ against Episcopacie) yet they were far from holding that a
particular visible Church was only a particular Congregation Gersom Bucerus
Dissert, de Gub. Eccles. p. 11. Nos particularem Eccle siam intelligimus
quemlibet credentium c^tum in unam vocationem divinam Evangelij praedicatio^e
sacrarumque institutionum observatione adunatum, ac uni Presbyterio subjunctum,
sacros vero conventus uno out pluribus locis agit^ntem. Nam Paraeciarum in
quibus convenitur numerus accidentaria res est, nihil ad Ecclesiae particularis
essentiam pertinens.
(as Gersom Bucerus in his answer to D^ Downham) A particular Church is any
company of believers conjoined in the observation of holy ordinances and
united to one Presbytery, keeping their meetings in one or more places: For
the number of Parishes in which they meet is a thing accidental being nothing
at all to the essence of a particular Church. And even the Non-conformists you
speak of, as it appears by the wary expressions your selves use of them,
namely infallibly and necessarily do even give the cause: For that is (as you
imply) the Non-conformists in their answers could not deny but probably the
number of believers were so numerous as to exceed the limits of one particular
Congregation in those first tim^s, though not infallibly and rationally, though
not necessarily: Now in points of external order and government which depend
upon the story; and circumstances of time and place, how many things are there
practiced, but of presumption* though not of certainty, and though they cannot
be infallibly and necessarily proved, so as to stop all mouths, and all that
the wit of man can possibly find out, yet if the things asserted can be but
probably proved upon better reasons then the contrary, we may incline to that
as to the safer part: How many practices and tenants have you in your
Church Way that cannot be infallibly and necessarily proved, but stronger
answers may be and are given to the reasons you bring for them, then any the
Non-conformists could give to that instance of the Church of Jerusalem, and yet
you hold to your principles for all that; and it is a rule has been pleaded by
some of you, that in things of that nature where the Scripture is not express,
but holds them out most probably though not infallibly and necessarily, yet we
ought to incline to that: As for Mr Baynes answer (though directed against
Diocesan Bishops and Diocesan Churches) to that instance of the Church of
Jerusalem, it is no whit satisfactorie nor concluding to any man, who is of
another judgment, as the Reader may read in the 15. and 16. page of the
Dioces. Trial.

To the 3d particular under the first head, namely what you allow and grant
about a Church and the Government, that you could not but imagine that the
first Churches planted by the Apostles, were ordinarily of no more in one City
at the first then might make up one entire Congregation, ruled by their own
Elders that also preached to them, and that you could not but judge it a safe
and an allowed way to retain the government of your several Congregations for
matter of discipline within themselves to be exercised by their own Elders,
etc. In way of answer I must first complain of your old fault, the slippery
and uncertain expressions used in the relation of what you own and allow
about a Church in those phrases, the first Churches ordinarily and at first. I
demand the reason of you, why you put in ordinarily and at first, was it not
because you foresaw the Church of Jerusalem and some few others recorded in
the New Testament, though not in the first Chapter of the Acts, and at the
beginning yet would at last by the 8. of the Acts and Acts 21. amount to more
then could meet in one Congregation, and therefore you expressed it so. Is this
fair dealing, or what other reason can you give for using such doubtful
expressions: the question is not between you and us, whether all the Churches
and most of the Churches, or whether at first, and in the beginning of them
they consisted of no more in one City, then to make up one Congregation, but
whether the Scriptures in the Acts of the Apostles and Epistles, be it first or
last, sooner or later gives any pattern or example of a particular Church,
exceeding the number of them, who may ordinarily meet together in one place for
the worshipping of God, and the sanctification of the Lord's Day, which if it
can be proved, overthrowes M. Robinsons, M. Cottons definitions of Churche^ and
your principles, who all keep to this as to a foundation upon which is built
many of your other practices: For we know at first the Church of Jerusalem, and
other Churches were not more numerous then to exceed the limits of one
particular Congregation, neither could it be expected that all should come in
at first, and we know for many other Churches the Scriptures do not so
particularly relate the growth and accessions of them: But if any one instance
can be given, it is not material whether first or last, sooner or later,
whether in the beginning, middle, or end of the story, for then your Positions
and assertions of a particular visible Church are overthrown, for one
affirmative overthrowes a universal negative. And I ask of you whether you
take ordinarily here as opposed to extraordinary, or take ordinarily, for
commonly as opposed to rarely and seldom; now if you mean it in the first
sense, that the Church of Jerusalem and other Churches that may be instanced
in, their case was extraordinary, and though the Apostles suffered them to grow
so rank and numerous, yet we may not do so now: I desire to know of you then,
what is become of your first general rule the Primitive patterns of Churches
erected by the Apostles, and I desire to know what r^le you walk by, and
whether the first constituted Church of all were not likely to be the pattern
for constituted Churches, seeing Primum in unoquoque genere est regula and
mensura reliquorum. But if you mean ordinarily in the second sense, as that
there is but one only instance, the most if not all other Churches were
otherwise; that you see will not by what I have above written help you,
besides what ever you can probably allege that the Churches of these times
should be conformed to such Churches, which consisted of no greater number then
to make one particular Congregation, I will give more and better why the
Churches of a Nation and kingdom should be conformed to that of Jerusalem; As
for those phrases of yours, which you bring in by way of caution and clearing
the way of your government within your selves, that you claim not an
Independent power to give no account or be subject to none others, but only a
full and entire power complete within your selves, until you shall be
challenged to err grossly. Whilst in these first lines you deny Independent
power in words, yet in your latter words you grant it, claiming a full and
entire power complete within your selves, which is Independent power, and is
the full sense of that which has been fastened on you by us; and I will show
it more fully in the proper place; when I come to the 23. page (especially if
you take upon you to enjoy it so long, until you shall be challenged to err
grossly) I had thought it had been enough upon your being challenged to err
to have given an account, but belike it must be erring grossly (I suspect
something lies under this, as under many other of your phrases, whereby you
evade and hide your selves, stating points wrongfully) Pray what do you
account erring grossly, and whether do you judge any thing erring grossly in
your particular Churches, but such kinds of sins in manners, and such kind of
opinions as are against the Churches known light, and the common received
practices and principles of Christianity professed by the Churches themselves
and universally acknowledged in all the rest of the Churches, and no other
sins to be the ground of giving an account (as they are not of
Excommunication with you, page 9.) (both being of equal latitude, sins of
particular persons to a Church, and the sins of a particular Church to a
Community of Churches) and if that be your meaning you shall be Independent
enough. And then further I demand of you, how you can use those phrases of not
claiming a power to be subject to none others: I confess you may better use
those words of giving account, holding, counselling and advising by
sister-Churches, but as for that phrase of subjecting to none others; I
understand it not, what censure will your Churches subject unto from other
Churches, will they yield to the deposition of their Ministers, Excommunication
of their members, etc. or how can there be any subjection to other Churches in
your principles (the phrase being taken properly and usually) when as all along
you plead against authoritative Presbyteriall power, so often expressed in page
15, 16. and is the great point in controversy in this instance betwixt you and
the Presbyterians: How often do you deny the subjection of a particular Church
to all other Churches, and are against all subjecting to censures, yea to be
subjected as to counsel and advices from the other Churches. As to that
phrase, your own Elders, whereof you had three at least in each Congregation
whom you were subject to, in which you seem to hold out the government and
power of the Church to lie in the Elders, and not in the body of the
Congregation, I desire you to satisfy me in this point, whether all of you
hold the power and authority to be in the Elders or in the Church, and whether
by go tell the Church is meant, tell the Elders or the body M. Bridges letter
to M. To^, M. Smith, M. Henry King, etc. The Keys were given to the whole
Church; unles we say they were given to Peter only and his successors: search
the Scriptures and see if you can find any place, where any body or particular
Church is subject to one man or officer.
of the Congregation, and whether according to the principles of the Church Way
in M. Robinsons works, and the books of New England, and M. Bridges own
letter (unless some of you have lately seen another light) you might have
truly written three Elders at least in every Congregation to whom the
Congregations were subject, or else three Elders who were subject to their own
Congregations: and this shall suffice for answer to the first head of the five
concerning the third Instance.

To the second head under this third instance, what you are not satisfied in
nor cannot allow. 1. About particular visible Churches, That you could not
imagine in every City where the Apostles came, the number of the converts did
or should arise to such a multitude as to make several and sundry
Congregations.

2. About the government of it, that it should be the institution of Christ or
his Apostles, that the combination of the Elders of many Churches should be the
first complete and entire seat of Church power over each Congregation so
combined, or that they could challenge and assume that authority over those
Churches they teach not, etc. In both these you deal fallaciously and relate
the controversy to your advantage and our disadvantage. For the first, whereas
had you dealt ingenuously your words should have been these, for that in any
City, where the Apostles came the number of converts did or should arise to
such a multitude as to make several and sundry Congregations, you put it in
every City, which we affirm not, nor need not to carry the cause against you,
for if we can prove it in some Cities, or in any Cities that the number of
Converts did arise to such a multitude, as to make several and sundry
Congregations, then we prove the Scripture holds out a Presbyteriall Classical
Church, and overthrow your grand principle about a particular Church: And
Reader observe the fallacy of these Apologists, how in the manner of their
expression, and as they propound it, though the thing may be true, yet they
alter quite the state of the Question. For though in every City, where the
Apostles came, you could not imagine the number of Converts should be so great
nor we neither, yet in some Cities you might have well imagined it, as in
Jerusalem and Rome. But Brethren, why will you who are Scholars, and without
question weighed well all your words and manner of expressions, having so many
heads in the framing this Apology, deal thus with the Reader in a Narration:
speak truly, though you did not imagine the number of Converts were so many in
every City, yet did not you imagine the number might be so great in some
Cities, as in Jerusalem; and if still you will not imagine it, for the helping
of your imagination, consider whether you have not more reason (if not
infallible and necessary, yet probable and rational) to imagine the Church of
Hi^rusalem consisting of so many thousands of people, and having so many
Ministers to preach unto them, as 12. Apostles besides the seventy Disciples,
and they meeting in so many distinct houses, and not having the power and
command of any public large place or liberty (through those times) to fit it
for such multitudes to hear the word, join in prayer, and Sacraments, should
have several and sundry Congregations rather then to imagine all those should
make but one standing Congregation to meet in one place and room.

2. It is stated otherwise, carried higher then need be granted, and that in
all your expressions of it, for the Scriptures may hold forth a combination of
the Elders of many Churches for government and yet not be the Institution of
Christ or his Apostles: It may be allowed and agreeable to the word, have a jus
divinum, permissivum upon general rules of the word, and according to the
rules of the law of nature and of Prudence, yea and may have some examples of
it, and yet not amount to a divine Institution, many who hold the thing will
not in those phrases own it.

2. These Elders of many Congregations may have a power of Government in common
over all, and yet not be the first seat of Church Power; for it is not denied
but some particular Congregations, having a competent number of Presbyters,
both have and may exercise Church Power, before any such combination is, or can
be.

3. These Elders combined may have Church Power to rule these Congregations so
combined, and yet not have a complete and entire seat of Church Power, but a
power liable to appeals unto Synods and general Assemblies. The question
between you and us is whether Classes or Presbyteries have power in
Ecclesiastical matters, as Ordination, Excommunication, etc. within the number
of Congregations so combined, or may by warrant from the word exercise any
power in Church matters, but in their own particular Congregations; the
question is not, whether it be the Institution of Christ or his Apostles that
the combination of the Elders of many Churches should be the first complete
and entire seat of Church, power: As you state it, you strangely mistate the
question to lay it down in these words, That the combination of the Elders of
many Churches should be the first seat of Church Power over each Congregation
so combined, whereas the opinion of the Reformed Churches is quite contrary,
not holding Classes and Synods to be the first subject of Church Power, from
whence it is consequently derived and conferred upon particular Churches, but
that particular congregations having power in themselves and amongst themselves
equal power, do in Classes and Synods confer and execute in common their
own power, even as those who are colleagues and equal members of some
political society.

4. The power which particular officers, and Presbyters of combined
congregations may have over particular members of those Churches they teach not
ordinarily, does not amount to the challenging and assuming an authority over
those Churches they feed and teach not; your expression is a mistake, it is not
an assuming a power and authority by some over other Churches, but it is a
power of the whole, and of themselves too, even those particular Churches in
their officers over particular members; as in the Parliament no member has
power over another, more then another over him, but the whole has power over
all the particulars; for the clearing of which, the Commissioners of the Church
of Scotland speak fully in their Reformation of Church government in Scotland
cleared, page 24, 25. And for the close of this second head, wherein you stand
upon what you are not satisfied in but disallow, if you would impartially
consider that the Scriptures in the Acts of the Apostles and Epistles, do as
well hold out grounds, yea and more indubitable (as I shall make evident in a
particular Tractate of the visible Church) that the first particular Churches
planted by the Apostles consisted of more Congregations, and distinct meeting
places, then of one only Congregation, you will acknowledge that where there
are many Presbyters to feed and rule, and many more Christians living in a
vicinity, then can meet in one place, it is not the most safe and allowed way
to retain the government of each Congregation thus within themselves, neither
that it is an additament in the reformed Churches to practice so, but rather an
additament on their part, who living in a City where the number of believers
are so numerous as to make many meeting places, there to make these places and
persons such distinct Churches as to manage all things each one within
themselves, and not to grow into one for government. And I am so far versed
in these controversies, that I challenge you five to give me an example of any
City where it is probable the multitude of believers were so numerous as to
make many meeting places, that ever they were governed and ruled but in common,
or ever called Churches but Church, still called the Church of Corinth, and the
Church of Jerusalem: I foresee only one instance that can be probably alleged,
that in Romans 16. 1. of the Church which is at Cenchrea, which Cenchrea was a
part of Corinth and near to Corinth, yet named a Church as well as the Church
of Corinth, but the insufficiency of that ground I shall at large show in that
Tractate of the visible Church; which Primitive practice has so far wrought
with some of the reformed Churches, as those of Holland, that in great Cities
where the number of their people are so many as they cannot meet in one place,
but have more meeting places, yet in imitation of the Scriptures (giving that
ground to some who have asked them a reason) they make City Churches but one,
and the Ministers are Ministers in common of them all, preaching in their
courses in the several meeting places, and governed in common, and this they
do to keep nearest to Apostolical practice; whereas now in the Country where
villages are, and the meetings are scattered, they do not all preach to all:
And to add this further, to show your unsafe way of practicing in the way of
your particular Congregations, over the reformed Churches and our Churches in
England, your Congregations (as in London) where the meeting place is, and the
Ministers reside, is made up of members, as of some living in London, so of
some in Surrey, Middlesex, Hartfordsheire, Essex, where they have fixum
domicilium being twenty miles asunder, and many members meeting but sometimes
in a Month, where neither Ministers can oversee them, nor members watch over
one another, not knowing what the conversation of each other is (which yet are
brought as the maine grounds for your Church Fellowship) which non-residencie
of the members from one another, and of the officers from so many of the
members, whether it overthrow not and be not point blank against many of your
principles of the Church Way, I leave to your selves to judge? besides that it
is without any Primitive pattern and example of the Churches erected by the
Apostles, the Churches being still styled according to the places where they
lived and met, as in Romans 1. 7. To all that be in Rome, beloved of God, called
to be Saints: And so in the Epistles to the Corinthians: To the Church of God
which is at Corinth. And I desire you to give me any Primitive pattern of any
who belonged to the Church of Rome, Corinth, Jerusalem, (that is, were standing
members of those Churches) who lived and inhabited ten miles, twenty, five
miles, etc. round about those Cities, so that we find here in this third
instance, namely in the government and discipline of the Churches, as well as
in the first instance in the qualification of your members, that the additament
is on your sides and not on the reformed Churches.

To the third head, namely the reasons couched and hinted for your own practice
and against the practice and way of the reformed Churches: to the first reason
I answer, as the relating of the state of the questions was not proper, so this
argument hinted here is not properly expressed, for their might be such a
Presbyteriall Church and government as is maintained against you, namely but
two or three distinct meeting places, and yet not Churches, rising to such a
numerous multiplication, nor Apostles staying to the setting up of Churches
until they rose to such a numerous multiplication: But pray what do you mean
by those expressions? We did not imagine, but might you not? or could you not
have imagined it, though you did not nor would not: and what by this, that the
Apostles should stay the setting up of any Churches at all, until they rose to
make such a numerous multiplication as might make such a Presbyteriall
combination. Do you carry the words in reference only to that numerous
multiplication? or simply and positively, that the Apostles did not stay so
long in any City as to set up any Churches at all? Now if you will have your
words interpreted in the first sense, then judge how improper the speech and
narration of your mind is, for then it should have gone thus, that the Apostles
should stay the setting up of so many Churches until they rose to such a
numerous multiplication, for the denying the setting up of any Churches and at
all, agree not with the following words, until they rose to such a numerous
multiplication; the former being a diminitive nay a negative, and cannot agree
to such an augmentative as the latter, besides your first words carried in
reference to the following, have no strength to prove what you bring them for,
namely what you allowed and practiced, or what you disallowed; for though the
Apostles should not stay so long as the setting up so many Churches as might
arise to such a numerous multiplication of several and sundry Congregations,
yet there might be such a Presbyteriall classical Church, a Church consisting
of more then could meet in one place, which is the controversy between us: But
if you understand your words simply and positively, that the Apostles did not
stay the setting up of any Churches at all, I desire you to remember your own
principles and expressions in many books and discourses of your way, that the
Apostles were the founders of the first Churches, as at Corinth, Rome, and for
Jerusalem especially, (which is the particular Church we most stand upon) the
Apostles staid long enough there, to set up not only any Churches at all, but
many to make such a Presbyteriall combination as is stood for, as will appear,
both by Acts 8. Acts 15. Acts 21. and it is the judgment of Mr Robinson, that
Jerusalem was never without some of the Apostles there (which the two first
chapters of the Galathians give a strong ground for,) besides the many
Presbyters that belonged thereunto; And so for the Church of Ephesus, Paul
stayed at one time in those parts three years together, long enough to make so
many Churches as might make a Presbyteriall combination: which that of the
Acts, chap. 20. verse. 17, 18, 25, 28, 29, 31. do give hints enough for, if the
nature of an answer to a Narration would permit to draw them out at length. To
the second reason hinted, that those precepts, Obey your Elders and them that
are over you, were to be sure meant of the Pastors and teachers set over them
in each particular Congregation respectively, and to be as certainly the
intendment of the Holy Ghost, as in those commands, Wives obey your own
husbands, etc. I answer, that in Scripture a particular Church consisting of
more Congregations then one, and the Ministers and Elders feeding them and
governing them in common (as at Jerusalem, and as it is in the Low Countries,
in Cities there, as at Amsterdam, etc.) all the Ministers and Elders are their
own Ministers and Elders, as the husbands are the own of their wives, and
those Scriptures are to be understood of all their Pastors and Ministers, and
not of some only, or in respect of some, and not of the rest, and it is as
certainly the intendment of the Holy Ghost (as in that command, Wives obey
your own husbands,) that obey your Elders, etc. be meant not of some but of
them all. 2. In Churches by their combination consisting of many Congregations
where ordinarily some Pastors and teachers feed some Congregations and not the
rest, Ministers being fixed, some to that Congregation, and others to other
Congregations, yet there being a government in common by all the Presbyters of
those Congregations in all weighty matters and greater cases that fall out,
those precepts of obey your Elders and them that are over you, reach to all the
Elders as well as to those that particularly and ordinarily preach to them, and
however it is true such places are especially understood of them, yet not of
them only, and alone, as excluding others, as your argument carried it, but
including others who are over them too: And to answer you by your own instance
given of servants, obey your own governors, as by virtue of that text,
particular servants are to obey their own Masters, so by the same text each
particular servant and all of them together of such a Company and Hall, in the
things and rules of their calling (for the public good of that Society) they
are to obey and be subject to the whole Company, namely the particular masters
of other servants as to their own masters, yea and to submit to the common
Orders and good Rules of such a Hall and Corporation though their particular
Masters do not vote for but against them. 3. Those Rulers who are of the
Presbytery are not foreign nor extrinsicall to the Congregations, but
intrinsicall and natural as well as their particular Elders, so that another
without themselves does not bear rule over them, but all of them together by
common consent do rule every one, which is a most mild and free form of
Church government, for the proof of which I shall not enlarge but refer you
for satisfaction to what is said to this point, both by the Commissioners of
the Church of Scotland, and by some Churches from beyond the Reform. of Chapter
government cleared, p. 25.
seas, in their Letters upon occasion of your Apology. 4. It is a fallacious
way of reasoning from the oeconomicall relations and government of husbands
over wives, and fathers over children, and masters over servants, and their
subjection and obedience to husbands, etc. unto the Ecclesiastical and
Political, because it is not to speak ad idem, for in each of these the way
of government is different: for instance in those oeconomicall relations a
woman can have but one husband, one man can be but her husband, and one man a
father, and the wife and child cannot Pelinquish them, di^avow them though very
bad, nor deny those duties they owe them in those relations though censured by
the Church, but they are to obey them, which yet holds not in the members of a
particular Congregation to Elders and Ministers that are unworthy and
excommunicated, that the members must be subject to them. The Royalists that
argue so from that subjection and obedience which children owe their fathers,
to subjects subjection and obedience to Princes; and the Hierarchicall men,
that argue from what children owe to natural parents though wicked and ungodly,
to what the people owe to wicked ministers, are answered at large, and you know
what Mr Robinson and many of your way say to that: Now the same will serve to
answer your comparisons, that the places hold not alike between the people and
the Elders, and the wives and their husbands: Mr Baynes answers in the last
page of his Diocesans Trial, that which is objected touching Pastors and
Fathers: That the similitude holds not in all things, parents and sheapheards,
are absolutely parents and sheapheards, be they good or evil; but spiritual
parents are no longer so then they do accordingly behave themselves. 5. The
very instances you give of wives obey your own husbands, and servants your own
governors, does not therefore only tie them to civil subjection and obedience
to husbands and Masters, exempting them from subjection to any others, but they
are subject to the Magistrates in the Commonwealth and to common-Lawes
notwithstanding, so neither does the Scriptures, obey your Elders, etc.
(supposing the full latitude of those Scriptures were of the Elders of
particular Congregations) forbid or exempt men from that Ecclesiastical
subjection and obedience which concerns them as they stand in relation to the
community.

To the third Reason hinted for your selves, and against the reformed Churches,
that the Elders of other Congregations should have power and rule over
Churches, which they do not teach and feed ordinarily, by virtue of those
forementioned precepts, was to you a question, etc. I answer, Suppose three or
four Congregations in one great Town, should have Ministers in common to
teach and feed them ordinarily (as in Holland,) would you in such a case yield
to a Presbyteriall combination; if you say you would, then the case is
determined for us, and thus I judge it was in the Acts of the Apostles in
Primitive Churches, but if you answer you would not yield to such a classical
government, then I reply, it is not for want of such Ministers teaching you and
feeding ordinarily that you will not obey, but upon some other ground, and then
this argument is lost: Secondly, I answer, your ruling Elders do not feed nor
teach you ordinarily, but only govern you, and yet by virtue of those
forementioned precepts you obey them, and are subject to them, so that this is
no good argument against the lawfulness of having power and authority over
those whom men teach not ordinarily; for then what becomes of the Ruling Elders
in the Church, who are neither Pastors nor Teachers.

To the fourth Reason drawn from Corporations, who have the power and
privilege of life and death within themselves, which kind of power you would
have. I answer, you cannot frame a good argunment from Corporations and civil
power, to bodies Ecclesiastical, and spiritual power, and I might give you
the many differences alleged by your selves between civil power, and
Ecclesiastical, and the different manner of dispensation, but I must not
enlarge here, only refer you for this to Robins. Justif. of separat.
Mr Robinson, Mr Buroughs on Hosea, seventh Lecture, p. 174. If we consider
the difference between Ecclesiastical power and civil power, we shall see it
clear that there cannot be a ministe^ll head of the Church.
Mr Buroughs, and Ames. Med. Theol.
Dr Ames. 2. Corporations go according to the Laws of the Land, and to their
Charters agreed upon, and made in Parliaments, they make not themselves a
Corporation, nor go not according to private rules and orders to pass
sentence of death, etc. but are ruled (though they have Officers, as Major and
Aldermen) by the Laws of the Land, and so going, they may more safely have a
power within themselves: but your particular Congregations set up your selves
without leave of Magistrates or Ministers, not proceeding upon common rules of
government in sentences of Excommunication, etc. agreed by Synods, but only
upon your own wills, and private rules which you have fancied are laid down in
Scripture. 3. Corporations though they judge their members, and pass sentence
of life and death within themselves, yet sometimes, nay often in greater cases
and offenses, their inhabitants are tried, and sentences passed upon them in
other Courts of Justice, and that when they would proceed against them, yet the
matter is carried higher to be tried; If you would grant this in the
Corporations to your Congregations, that Assemblies and Synods might judge and
pass sentence upon your members (as often as they see just ground) the
controversy were at an end. 4. The Corporations (that is those in place and
power) if they proceed unjustly, are accountable to the State they live in,
that is to a higher civil power, and adjudged themselves in cases of wrong,
condemning the innocent, suffering delinquents to escape, but your Corporations
of particular Congregations even in case of real Administration, are against
all judging and all Ecclesiastical Authoritative power out of your own
Congregations.

To the fifth Reason hinted by you to strengthen your practice that it was safe
and allowed, and the Reformed Churches more questionable, namely appealing to
them who have read books, whether much has been written with strength, setly
and directly to prove that government, but rather to overthrow Episcopal, and
to maintain those several Officers in Churches which Christ has instituted,
and therefore you infer you might have more ground to question this
government of combined classical Presbyteriall government. I answer, the
ground of that is fully laid down in the Reformation of the Church of Scotland,
page 17 and 18. with an account of what has been written and done by the
reformed Churches in France for the Presbyteriall way, and against the popular
Independent way (which is more then you once in this Reason hinted) but suppose
that in former writings of Calvin, Beza, Zanchius, Peter Martyr; Danaeus,
Iunius, Zepp^rus, Gersom Bucerus, Dr Reynolds, Parker, there has not been much
setly and directly insisted on, and with strength to prove the government of
Synods and Classes (though in some of these more especially, as against the
Church of Rome, and Episcopal government, much strength is brought for the
government by Synods and Classes) yet that which those Divines of Scotland,
Holland, England, have written of late against the Independent congregationall
government, might have been enough to have satisfied you, and that's not
material that no more have written, seeing out of the mouth of two or three
witnesses every word shall be established; and if these books had not strength
to satisfy you, why have not you all this while answered them? but I must mind
you of forgetting one of your own Divines, for besides the learned Licensers
book against Independencie, another book was written, called Reasons against
the Independent government of particular Congregations, and the Toleration of
them in this Kingdom: which book in your seeming to take no notice of, I
believe you remember above the rest, and in the 25 page of your Apology, it
appears you remember it, but the Author of it belike is none of your Divines.
And in the close now of this answer to your Reasons hinted about the government
and discipline of the Church, why you in your Congregationall way should be in
the truth, but the Presbyteriall government was a question to you and judged an
additament, because the Presbyterians allowed you what you practiced, and
granted what you held, but themselves held and practiced over and above; I
answer, this is no Argument at all, for by the same reason the Samaritans
should have worshipped God truly, but the Jews falsely, and the Samaritans
might have John 4 10, 22.
said to the Jews as you do to the Presbyterianns; the five books of Moses
which we own to be sure they are from God, you acknowledge them, but for the
books of the Prophets, that's a question which rests upon you that allow what we
hold, to make evident and demonstrate: and so the Jews may now by the same
reason speak against the Christians, and say, we are in the safer way, to be
sure we practice safely, for you Christians confess what we hold, namely Moses
and the Prophets to be the Scriptures, but for the new Testament that is to us
a question and an additament, which therefore rests upon you Christians to make
good, who believe and practice over and above us.

And whereas the common prejudice and exception laid into all Apolog.
men's thoughts against us, and our opinions is, that in such a Congregationall
government thus entire within it self, there is no allowed sufficient remedy
for miscarriages, though never so gross^; no relief for wrongful sentences or
persons injured thereby; no room for complaints: no powerful or effectual
means to reduce a Church or Churches that fall into heresy, schism, etc. but
every one is left and may take liberty without control to do what is good in
their own eyes; we have (through the good providence of God upon us) from the
avowed declarations of our judgments among our Churches mutually during our
exile, and that also confirmed by the most solemn instance of our practice,
wherewith to vindicate our selves and way in this particular, which upon no
other occasion we should ever have made thus public.

God so ordered it that a scandal and offense fell out between those very
Churches whilst living in this banishment (whereof we our selves, that write
these things, were then the Ministers) one of our Churches having unhappily
deposed one of their Ministers, the other judged it not only as too sudden an
act (having proceeded in a matter of so great moment without ^nsulting their
sister Churches, as was publicly professed we should have done in such cases
of concernment) but also in the proceedings thereof as too severe, and not
managed according to the rules laid down in the word. In this case our
Churches did mutually and universally acknowledge and submit to this as a
sacred and undoubted principle and supreme law to be observed among all
Churches, that as by virtue of that Apostolical command, Churches as well as
particular men are bound to give no offense neither to Jew nor Gentile, nor the
Churches of God they live amongst; So that in all cases of such offense or
difference, by the obligation of the Common Law of communion of Churches, and
for the vindication of the glory of Christ, which in common they holdforth, the
Church or Churches challenged to offend or differ, are to submit themselves
(upon the challenge of the offense or complaint of the person wronged) to the
most full and open trial and examination by other neighbor Churches offended
thereat, of what ever has given the offense: And further that by virtue of the
same and like law of not partaking in other men's sins, the Churches offended
may and ought upon the impenitencie of those Churches, persisting in their
error and miscarriage to pronounce that heavy sentence against them, of
withdrawing and renouncing all Christian communion with them until they do
repent; And further to declare and protest this, with the causes thereof, to
all other Churches of Christ, that they may do the like.

And what further authority, or proceedings purely Ecclesiastical, of one, or
many sister Churches, toward another whole Church, or Churches offending,
either the Scriptures do holdforth, or can rationally be put in execution
(without the Magistrates interposing a power of another nature, unto which we
upon his particular cognizance, and examination of such causes, profess ever
to submit, and also to be most willing to have recourse unto) for our parts we
saw not then, nor do yet see. And likewise we did then suppose, and do yet,
that this principle of submission of Churches that miscarry unto other Churches
offended, together with this other, that it is a command from Christ enjoined
to Churches that are finally offended, to pronounce such a sentence of
noncommunion and withdrawing from them whilst impenitent, ac unworthy to hold
forth the Name of Christ, (these principles being received and generally
acknowledged by the Churches of Christ to be a mutual duty, as strictly
enjoined them by Christ as any other) that these would be as effectual means
(through the blessing of Christ) to awe and preserve Churches and their Elders
in their duties, as that other of claim to an authoritative power
Ecclesiastical to excommunicate other Churches or their Elders offending; For
if the one be compared with the other, in a mere Ecclesiastical notion, that
of Excommunication pretended has but this more in it, That it is a delivering
of whole Churches, and their Elders offending unto Satan, (for which we know no
warrant in the Scriptures, that Churches should have such a power over other
Churches.) And then as for the binding obligation both of the one way and the
other, it can be supposed to lie but in these two things; First, In a warrant
and injunction given by Christ to his Churches, to put either the one or the
other into execution: And secondly, That men's consciences be accordingly taken
therewith, so as to subject themselves whether unto the one way or the other:
For suppose that other principle of an authoritative power in the greater part
of Churches combined to excommunicate other Churches, etc. to be the ordinance
of God, yet unless it do take hold of men's consciences, and be received
amongst all Churches, the offending Churches will steight all such
excommunications as much, as they may be supposed to do our way of
protestation and sentence of non-communion. On the other side, let this way of
ours be but as strongly entertained, as that which is the way and command of
Christ, and upon all occasions be heedfully put in execution, it will awe men's
consciences as much, and produce the same effects. And if the Magistrates power
(to which we give as much, and (as we think) more, then the principles of the
Presbyteriall government will suffer them to yield) do but assist and back the
sentence of other Churches denouncing this non-communion against Churches
miscarrying, according to the nature of the crime, as they judge meet, and as
they would the sentence of Churches excommunicating others Churches in such
cases, upon their own particular judgment of the cause; then, without all
controversy this our way of Church proceeding will be every way as effectual
as their other can be supposed to be; and we are sure, more brotherly and more
suited to that liberty and equality Christ has endowed his Churches with, But
without the Magistrates interposing their authority, their way of proceeding
will be as ineffectuall as ours; and more liable to contempt, by how much it is
pretended to be more authoritative; and to inflict a more dreadful punishment,
which carnal spirits are seldom sensible of. This for our judgments.

And for a real evidence and demonstration both that this was then our
judgments, as likewise for an instance of the effectual success of such a
course held by Churches in such cases, our own practice, and the blessing of
God thereon, may plead and testify for us to all the world. The manage of this
transaction in brief was this. That Church which (with others) was most
scandalized, did by Letters declare their offense, requiring of the Church
(supposed to be) offending in the Name and for the vindication of the honor of
Christ, and the relieving the party wronged, to yield a full and public
hearing before all the Churches of our Nation, or any other whomsoever
offended, of what they could give in charge against their proceedings in that
deposition of their Minister, and to subject themselves to an open trial and
review of all those forepassed carriages that concerned that particular; which
they most cheerfully and readily (according to the forementioned principles)
submitted unto, in a place, and State where no outward violence or any other
external authority either civil or Ecclesiastical, would have enforced them
thereunto: And accordingly the Ministers of the Church offended with other two
Gentlemen, of much worth, wisdom and piety, members thereof, were sent as
messengers from that Church; and at the introduction and intrance into that
solemn assembly (the solemnity of which has left as deep an impression upon
our hearts of Christ's dreadful presence as ever any we have been present at,)
it was openly and publicly prosessed in a speech that was the preface to that
discussion, to this effect, that it was the most to be abhorred maxim that any
religion has ever made profession of, and therefore of all other the most
contradictory and dishonorable unto. that of Christianity, that a single and
particular society of men professing the Name of Christ, and pretending to be
endowed with a power from Christ to judge them that are of the same body and
society within themselves, should further arrogate unto themselves an exemption
from giving account or being censurable by any other, either Christian
Magistrates above them, or neighbor Churches about them. So far were our
judgments from that independent liberty that is imputed to us, then, when we
had least dependency on this Kingdom, or so much as hopes ever to abide therein
in peace. And for the issue and success of this agitation, after there had
been for many days as judiciary and full a charge, trial and deposition of
witnesses openly before all comers of all sorts, as can be expected in any
Court where authority enjoynes it, that Church, which had offended, did as
publicly acknowledge their sinful aberration in it, restored their Minister
to his place again, and ordered a solemn day of fasting to humble themselves
before God and men, for their sinful carriage in it; and the party also which
had been deposed did acknowledge to that Church wherein he had likewise sinned.

In this part of your Apology are contained the fourth and fifth of those five
forementioned heads, unto which I referred all I should answer to what you say
upon your third and last instance about the government and discipline in the
Churches: The scope of which fourth head is, to answer and take off a common
objection brought against your way, the strength of which answer is made up of
those parts, and stands in these particulars. First, In laying down your own
principles which you hold in such a case. Secondly, Your practice according to
those principles, occasioned upon an offense committed in one of your Churches
(which story you briefly relate.) Thirdly, The success and effectualnesse of
your practice according to your principles, illustrated by an instance.

Now for that common exception laid into all men's thoughts against your
Congregationall way, it is both a just and strong Argument against it, and that
which many of your way, when it has been, objected to them have confessed,
there is no remedy nor help in such cases, but advice and counsel, all must be
left to Christ, Christ will take care of his own way, they had not found out
this allowed sufficient remedy for miscarriages which you have here propounded,
but I shall labor to make evident, that all you bring by way of answer in
declaration of your judgments and practice does not satisfy this objection.
And first for your judgments in the principles you hold and lay down, I shall
endeavor to prove, that you have no Scripture grounds, nor Primitive patterns
for such principles, and such a way in such cases. Secondly, Besides that these
principles have no footing in Scripture, and so they are no allowed remedy for
miscarriages, etc. are not nor will not be a sufficient remedy for
miscarriages, nor relief for wrongful sentences, nor powerful effectual
means to reduce a Church, etc. For the first I shall take it for granted, you
being wise men, that in such a point as this (being the maine point of
difference between you and the Presbterians) and at such a time as this you
would bring the strongest Scriptures and grounds you had for your sacred
principle and supreme law to be observed among all Churches, namely of
submission of Churchrs, and for that other principle of pronouncing that heavy
sentence of noncommunion against a Church or Churches; and if I can show the
invalidity and weakness of these brought by you, a man may conclude there is no
fear of what is behind: Now a man would wonder that wise men as you are should
except against a government received so generally amongst the reformed
Church^s, and blessed so from Heaven in the effectualnesse of it, for the space
of so many years, as a sufficient remedy not only to reduce men from heresies
and schism, but to prevent Churches from falling into heresy, schism, etc.
(which is more) and go set up a new way so different and so distasteful to the
reformed Churches; and all upon pretenses of no sound proof in Scripture for
such a government, because there is not an Apostolical direction either in
example or precept for it, and in the mean time to contend for such a
government wherein yourselves cannot deny but has fallen out strange
miscarriages, (and you tell us an unhappy story for proof, and yet the way and
course you have substituted for remedy, has neither example nor precept in the
word of God to practice any title of all that you relate to us, and besides
that the course prescribed by you is not commanded in the word, it is no whit
so rational, nor conducible to the ends you appoint it for, as we will show
presently: Now for the Scriptures brought by you, the first is, 1 Cor. 10. 32.
Give none offense neither to the Jews nor to the Gentiles, nor to the Church
of God: where first the Reader may observe you alter the text, putting Churches
of God instead of Church of God; and then you add they live amongst: The
alteration (I suppose) you make upon this ground, for fear this text in the
reading of it should hint that truth, how the visible Church in Scripture is
taken for more then one particular Congregation: the addition they live
amongst, to make it a seeming ground for Churches in a vicinitie: whereas the
Apostle speaks of the Church of God generally, all the Churches, whether we
live amongst them or far from them, and the scope of the Apostle in this
place, is upon the occasion of that particular offense which might arise to
some Corinthians, from eating meat sacrificed to Idols, having been told that
this is sacrificed to Idols, to lay down a general rule to all Christians
against giving offense to any, whether Jews, Gentiles or Christians, (under
which three ranks all men then in those times were comprehended:) Now pray tell
me how will you make this text to prove, that Churches offending and distering
among themselves, must submit themselves to the most full and open trial and
examination of other neighbor Churches offended? and how will you from this
place draw ou^ a power for neighbor Churches to send unto and require this of
the Churches who have offended them; This Scripture (if all Interpreters
understand it that I have consulted with) lays down a rule, that every
particular Christian, and so all Christians must so walk as to become all
things to all men, to please all men in all things lawful, as the 33 verse
interprets it, and to give none offense; But where does this Scripture speak,
and how does it affirm, that if either Churches or particular Christians do
practice things that offend other Churches, they who are offended have power
and authority to send to them, and to call them to the most full and open
trial and examination, and that such who are challenged to offend, must submit
to such a judicial and open trial before all comers? In this text there is
no more said of the Church of God then of the Jews and Gentiles, who must not
be offended neither, and will you allow Jews and Gentiles offended by things
done in your Churches, to call your Churches to an account and you must submit:
This text reaches to Churches that live in other Countries, and unto particular
Christians, though they be not members of any such instituted Church as you
speak of, so that by virtue of this text we ought to give them no offense; but
will you grant that Churches of other Countries and Kingdoms may call Churches
in another Kingdom to an open trial and examination, and send their
messengers to question them, and thereupon pronounce sentence of renouncing all
Christian communion with them, or that every particular man offended may call
Churches to an account, and they are bound to submit to hearing and trial? I
will give you one instance; I am much offended at the great rent and difference
that was betwixt Mr Bridge and Mr Simpson, and at Mr Simpsons setting up a new
Church, and at all that great bitterness betwixt those Churches; and I am much
offended at the Church of Arnheim, for letting pass that schism and all those
differences, never questioning it, especially questioning Mr Bridges Church:
Now have I a power by virtue of this precept, to call both you and your
Churches to an account, and to require of you a most full and open trial
before all comers, and are you bound to submit to it? answer me this question
in your Reply, and you shall see what I will say to you in my Rejoinder. For
that other Scripture, 1 Timothy 5. 22. Neither be partakers of oth^ men's sins;
that is spoken to Timothy in regard of his authoritative power in the Church of
God, as the scope of the chapter, and the immediate precedent words show,
(which is not your case denying authoritative power;) but if you say this text
is meant secondarily of all Churches and Christians, though they have not
authoritative power; I grant it, but then it is in ways suitable which the
word of God gives warrant and allowance for; as in reproving, mourning for the
sin, etc. which must be shown in some other Scriptures; For else the
Presbyterians may pretend by virtue of this text, that they ought not to be
partaker of other men's sins; that they may censure, depose, excommunicate
members of other Churches who are suffered to go on in sin, better then you
can draw from this text, that you may call not only particular members, but
whole Churches to an account, examine them and pronounce that heavy sentence of
noncommunion against them: But in a word brethren let me tell you, if such
general texts as these, that may be applied to any course and way conceived by
men in their own brains, to hinder sin and reduce from offenses, will serve
turn for Church government, and for remedies to reduce Churches, then we can
give you besides your own two texts quoted here for your principle of
submission of Churches and non-communion, many other such and more probable
too, for the authoritative power of Presbyteries and Sinods, as that in 1 Cor.
14. 22. And the spirits of the Prophets are subject to the Prophets; but we are
not so hard put to it, there being particular instances and examples (if the
nature of an Answer to such a Narration would permit me to insist at large)
that prove the points in difference, namely of acts of power exercised by
Churches in common, as in elections, determinations, and impositions upon
differences and controversies, as Acts 15. 2. 4, 6, 7, 13, 22, 23, 24, 28, 29.
Acts 16. 4, 5. 2 Corinih. 8. 18, 19. But let the indifferent reader judge by
this which has been said, whether the reformed Churches or the Independent
practice most safely, there being a ground as your selves confess for the
sentence of excommunication, such a sentence you acknowledge in particular
Churches, and practice it, and such a sentence has been decreed and past upon
members of Churches, by those who were not members of those Churches, as the
Scriptures are clear for it, 1 Timothy 1. 19, 20. But on the other hand it is not
granted, that the Scriptures give any ground of pronouncing the sentence of
noncommunion against whole Churches, or do allow any such practice of
declarations and protestations unto all Churches against whole Churches, this I
utterly deny, and your Scriptures prove them not; and I wonder how you dare
call it the command of Christ, and the way of Christ, as you do in page 18,
19. And brethren, besides that, the Scriptures give neither precept nor example
for your way of non-communion, consider whether the Scriptures give not grounds
rather to the contrary, namely against a particular Churches withdrawing and
renouncing all Christian communion with whole Churches upon an error and
miscarriage, for let me ask you, may not such a Church or Churches be true
Churches for all this, continue in their offices upon mistaken partiality, and
notwithstanding all the light a particular Church can give them be unsatisfied?
now if a particular man may not separate nor withdraw Christian communion from
a true Church, though upon his counsel and advise she redress not, but it is a
schism, then for one Church upon counsel and advice given to more Churches
(though not taken) to separate formally from many Churches by pronouncing that
heavy sentence of withdrawing and renouncing all Christian communion cannot be
justified: Paul did not renounce nor cast-off Churches for many things amiss,
though upon his counsel they were not mended, (as appears in the Church of
Corinth that had been twice admonished, 2 Cor. 13. 1, 2. and ^t repented not,
and now Paul does it the third time,) and yet refusing Paul's counsel and power
being so infallible and authoritative, deserved more the sentence of
noncommunion, then the often rejecting the counsel and power of any particular
Church can do. But I will answer you in your own language, that your sacred
and undoubted principles, and supreme laws of submission of Churches, and of
the power of Churches offended to pronounce the heavy sentence of non-communion
against the Churches offending, and of Declarations and Protestations to all
other Churches of Christ that they might do the like, with your own practice
expressed in the 20 and 21. page, are to me Apocriph^, and judge it to be an
additament, which therefore rests on you who allow the sentence of
excommunication, to make evident and demonstrate that of non-communion,
Protestations, Declarations, etc. And thus it often falls out whilst men will
oppose that which has long been received in the Church of God upon pretense of
the want of Scripture grounds, and bring in new ways, they practice novelties
upon less ground and foundation from Scriptures then they rejected the old (as
is to be seen in this instance.)

2. As these principles of your^ have no footing in Scripture, so it will
appear they are no sufficient remedies for miscarriages and evils, which fall
out in particular Churches by reason of their complete and entire power within
themselves: first, because there are more acts of power then your principle of
submission of Churches and the instances you give upon it reach unto, so that
granting all you say of it, yet it would but reach to that particular case, or
some such like cases, but would be no way sufficient either for preventing or
remedying other evils and mischiefs which d^e and would arise upon a
Congregationall government thus entire within it self: So that here lies the
fallacy in the question between you and the reformed Churches in point of
government, you speak to some points of government but not to all, and instead
of laying down principles that should answer all cases, they only serve but to
some, and so your principles that should be simpliciter, are only secundum
quid: For in the government of the Church there are many other acts of power,
as of making and ordaining Ministers, of receiving in Members, of agreeing upon
a government, doctrine and worship, etc. which this full complete entire power
of particular Congregations takes upon them to do, of which many great
mischiefs do arise and are like errors in the first concoction, which your
principle of submission of Churches reaches not unto, nor does not help. But
secondly, besides this, the principle of submission of Churches that miscarry
unto the other Churches offended, with that practice of Churches finally
offended to denounce such a sen^ence of Non-communion, does not answer the case
alleged in heresies, schism, or persons injured, nor is not a sufficient
remedy, like that of combination of Elders, and for the making good of that I
shall examine the way, and course prescribed by you, in your principles here
laid down of Submission, Non-communion, Declarations and Protestations; and
though as coming out in such a juncture of time, wherein the strife is
between Presbyteriall government and Independent for preeminence, and coming
from so many heads laid together, it cannot be imagined, but it should come
forth doubly refined, and in the most plausible advantageous way, and in the
best edition that it is possible such wits, and so many could set it out in (an
Utopia indeed rather then what it can be in common practice) (this being the
third Edition, the first that of the Brownists, the second of New England, and
now this the third) yet the Reader may observe into what uncertainties,
labirinths, tediousness, delays, nay absurdities and contrarieties these
principles do lead them that follow them.

1. Whereas in Presbyteriall government each part and every particular is ruled
by the whole and in common, the less by the greater, in your way an equal
part must take upon them cognizance and call to an account an equal.

2. Not only so, but suppose two or three Churches fall out and have a
difference among themselves, and there be but one Church free, who yet is
offended at the others, then one must order two or three, the less the
greater, and what a rule is this.

3. This principle of submission being voluntary amongst the Churches, we may
well suppose sometimes the Churches challenged to offend or differ will submit,
and sometimes they will not, or at least not yet, and when they know themselves
faulty, they may pretend many things to put it off and to delay the time (which
time will be both very prejudicial to the persons wronged, and to the
spreading of the heresy and schism) and if by delays they see they cannot
have their ends, what if for all their principle of submission, they fly of,
and refuse to yield to such a full and open trial before all comers, and
shall deny other Churches that power of examining, deposing Witnesse^, etc.
upon pretense of conscience, that there is no primitive pattern for it (as you
do deny the power of determination and imposition) how will you bring them to
it; whereas in Presbyteriall government times of meeting being fixed, and agreed
upon, men cannot evade, but matters will be quickly heard and remedied.

4. As in reason and by experience amongst wise men it is held a vain course
which no public company of men will yield to (but such practices are rather
accounted ridiculous) to raise such dust and make such (...) do to call others
to account, to depose Witnesses, spending many days in a judiciarie way, and
yet have no power to end things, to be never the nearer, but that Delinquents
may do nevertheless what they please, so it cannot be conceived that the wise
God has ordered in the Government of his Churches such a kind of way for
Churches who are of a public capacity, and have a power (as you grant) to
call Churches thus to an account, etc. and yet nothing to be done to the
offenders: Churches offended either have not power to do thus much as you
grant, or else they have a greater power, namely to bring about the ends, which
these means tend unto, namely determination and decision, the righting persons
injured, and the censuring the offending parties: But it will be said by you,
that if the Churches offending take not the counsel and advice of their sister
Churches about them, but persist in their error and miscarriage, that censure
of the sentence of Non-communion will be a sufficient remedy and an effectual
means to reduce them, and remedy all, as well as that of the Presbyterians. I
will not here enter into comparison between these two, but do reserve it to
it is proper place.

The 5t and last general head, though besides Excommunicaon there are other
things in the Classical Synodicall way both to preserve and reduce Churches
(which are not in the Independent way.) But I answer this is no likely means
nor way, for which I shall give these following reasons. 1. One Church may not
be able to convince another of their error or evil, much less one Church two
or three Churches offending and differing. 2. The Church offending may stand
upon it, that what they do is according to their light, it is according to
their conscience to hold such an opinion, or to do such a fact, as to depose
their Minister, because he has no better gifts of preaching, and whether may
another Church pass the sentence of Non-communion against whole Churches, and
declare and protest this to all other Churches of Christ, that they may do the
like for opinions or practices that are not against the Churches known light?
For if no other kind of sins then may evidently be presumed to be perpetrated
against the parties known light may be the subject of excommunication in
particular persons, may they be the subject of Non-communion of whole Churches?
3. In reason this seems not a powerful means or probable way, for if this
one Church offended shall renounce the Churches challenged to offend, they may
and will renounce that Church also, passing the sentence of Non-communion, etc.
against that, and how shall the matter now be healed and remedied. 4. That
Church or Churches thus sentenced (may be) care not for the Communion of this
Church that cast them off, nor of no others, as long as they can have communion
amongst themselves; These kind of Churches that hold such principles of entire
complete power within themselves, with that principle of sufficiency of all
gifts, and all ordinances within themselves, will go on in their errors and
sinful practices for all that. 5. The Churches renounced and cast out may
challenge the Churches casting them out for injuring of them, and thereupon
both Churches may declare and protest against each other to all other Churches
of Christ, which will prove as great a rent-difference, nay worse then the
first, and this will produce a great deal of defending and proving; for if the
Churches on both sides do declare against one another unto the other Churches,
which of them now shall be believed, and what if the Churches protested and
declared unto, will not upon the Protestations withdraw and renounce all
Christian communion with them, must they then protest against them also, and
what the Churches protesting may account matter of Non-communion, other
Churches declared and protested unto may not judge so, so that here will be
worse matter of difference and divisions in the Church of God then before, and
I suppose you would not have those Churches declared and protested unto to
condemn the rest sentenced without a hearing (especially where there is but
one to one, or where one may declare and protest against two or three) so that
then there must be sending for all these Churches, and meetings appointed for
the Churches protested unto, to hear the Churches on both sides, and what now
if the Churches declared unto upon the hearing the Churches on both sides, both
censuring and censured, shall acquit the Churches condemned and censured, and
shall condemn and judge those Churches for renouncing communion as too severe
and declaring thus to all other Churches against them: what must be done in
these cases? will these Churches censuring now acknowledge their offense, and
revoke their sentence of Non-communion, or if they will not, what must these
Churches protested unto do in this case? must not they pass the sentence of
Non-communion against them? and if they do so, what if these Churches
censuring shall also pronounce the heavy sentence of Non-communion even
against these Churches protested and declared unto? Now that these things and
worse may not and will not fall out cannot be denied, which things as to the
neighbor Churches among themselves will be great occasion of schisms and
continual differences, so will they minister matter of great scandal to all
other Churches, and of triumph and evil speaking unto enemies, all which will
be easily prevented and remedied in the Presbyteriall government. Sixthly, Two
or three Churches or more of your Independent way living amongst other
Churches, (as you did in Holland) or if your Congregations should be tolerated
in England according to your desire, you may hold this principle of submission
to one another, and yet all agree in holding some errors, with which errors
you may infect many of the members of the Presbyteriall Churches, for which you
will not question one another, what remedy or means is there now to reduce
your Churches or preserve ours? Seventhly, Some of your Churches by virtue of
this principle, that Church or Churches challenged to offend or differ, are to
submit themselves upon the challenge of the offense to the most full and open
trial and examination by other neighbor Churches, may be ever and anon
unjustly calling upon some of the Churches to submit, and challenging them
first with being offended by them, least themselves should be challenged to
have offended, and so (as we speak) call whore first, and also they who are
challenged to offend, to be even with them, will challenge them again, and
what must be done in this case, and who shall interpose to determine these
differences, or may both parties judged thus by each other to be offenders,
determine against one an other. Eighthly, If Churches must thus submit to trials
and examinations, these being the acts of whole Churches, here will be nothing
but trials and examinations and censures one upon another, and this instead of
a sufficient remedy is like to prove a continual vexation and molestation to
neighbor Churches. Ninethly, What must be done in case one Church or more take
offense unjustly at others, and trouble them thus to call them to open
examination, etc. what satisfaction must be given to the Church troubled and
examined. Tenthly, In this principle of submission of Churches, suppose that
upon a hearing, the Church offending will not redress the grievance or relieve
a person injured: But go on, and slight communion with other Churches, the
persons injured in the mean time are debarred from the ordinances, and cannot
remove their dwellings without manifest ruin of their families, how does this
help such persons injured, or is a sufficient remedy for wrongful sentences,
etc. Whereas now in the Presbyteriall way if such a Minister or officers who
are the cause of this may be deposed, and acts pass against them, and others
placed in their rooms, this will remedy and redress it: And so suppose a
Minister of note fall into heresy and error, and draw the most of his people
after him, so that he cannot be deposed by the Church, what good will the
noncommunion pronounced against this Church by other Churches do for reducing
them, but now if this Minister may be deposed, and an orthodox Minister put in
to preach the truth, here is a powerful means to reduce and preserve.
Eleventhly, Let me ask you, and pray determine it from the Scriptures, in case
two or three Churches offended do challenge a Church or Churches offending,
who yet upon submitting to a hearing will not yield to the counsel and advice
of those Churches, who? how? where? after what time, and how many meetings? and
after what manner must this sentence of non-communion be denounced against this
Church or Churches? whether must it be denounced in and upon the place where
they meet to hear and examine? or in the meeting place of each of these
Churches offended? or must these Churches offended meet in one of their meeting
places to pronounce it together? and who must be the mouth? and who by warrant
out of the Scriptures has the power to pronounce that heavy sentence of
non-communion? and how must it be made known unto the offending Churches, with
other things of this like nature? To say no more now, this principle of
non-communion is so far from being a sufficient remedy for miscarriages, or a
relief for wrongful sentences, or a powerful means to reduce a Church or
Churches, etc. that it is a remedy worse then the disease, and if it should be
practiced would be the ground of many schisms, separations, mischiefs in the
Church of God and that amongst whole Churches, so that it were far better
particular persons should suffer wrong, or particular persons fall into schism
and be left to their liberty, then whole Churches suffer those evils which your
principles of non-communion, Declarations, Protestations would undoubtedly
produce (as the Reader may judge by what is here written.) For the second, your
practice according to this principle, occasioned upon an offense that fell out
in your Churches; I shall show that as insufficient as your principles, and
shall animadvert upon the most solemn instances of your practice: As for the
Introduction into your relation of the scandal and offense, I readily assent
unto you, had you not judged it for the advantage of your selves and way you
would upon no other occasion have made it thus public; for you are good at
concealing of all your principles and practices, but when and where you may
further and propagate your way; For the story it self (as it is related by
you) it is very short and general, neither expressing the Ministers name
deposed, nor the causes of his deposition, nor the first occasion of the
differences, nor the way the Church took before they deposed him, nor the
manner how they proceeded, nor how long he stood so deposed; so that the Reader
cannot well tell what to make of it for want of a more full particular
relation, or how to judge whether your principle of submission of Churches, and
your practice here laid down upon it was so proper, and so sufficient a
remedy, and so effectual a course as you boast of in page 20, 21. I must
therefore of necessity in reference to the disprooving and weakening of what you
would infer from your sacred principle and supreme law of submission, and
the more solemn instance of your practice wherewith to vindicate your selves
and way in this particular, and that it may appear it was but a half, slight,
late and partial remedy to the offenses and scandal, relate the story more at
large, and then make some queries upon it, and your solemn practice thereupon,
and then I shall leave it to the Reader to judge whether your principle of
submission be comparable to the way of the combined classical Presbyteriall
government. The Church in which this offense fell out was at Roterdam, of which
Mr Bridge and Mr Ward of Norwich, old loving friends, and both flying upon the
same cause, Bishop Wrens Innovations, were the Ministers, and the Minister
deposed by the Church was this Mr Ward, who for appearing and siding against Mr
Bridge in some particulars, and for his preaching of Sermons in the Church at
Roterdam, which he had preached before in his Church at Norwich, and for his
giving too much heed to the reports of simple people and old wives tales, was
thus deposed; but I cannot so fully cause the Reader to understand matters
without relating the first difference between Mr Bridge and Mr Simpson; the
true ground and rise of this latter offense. Mr Simpson one of the Authors of
this Apologeticall Narration, after some time of beholding the order and way of
this Church at Rotterdam, desired to be admitted a member, and was upon his
confession, etc. received in, but not long after (what were the true reasons he
best knows) he disliked some persons and things in that Church, and he stood
for the ordinance of prophesying to be exercised in that Church, that the
people on the Lords days should have l^berty after the Sermons ended, to put
doubts and questions to the Ministers, etc. and he was troubled at a ruling
Elder in that Church brought in by Mr Bridge (which belike had more power and
bore more sway then himself) who as Mr Simpson in a Letter to a Minister in
London, complaining of the difference between him and Mr Bridge, writ how that
Elder was in that Church over all persons and over all causes; but Mr Bridge
opposed Mr Simpsons prophesying upon so the rational grounds of
inconveniencits (as himself told me the story, which were too long to relate,)
yet he yielded so far that the Church should meet on a week day, and then
they should have that liberty, but this would no way satisfy Mr Simpson,
whereupon the difference increased and there were sidings, but Mr Bridges power
was the greater to carry things in the Church, and so Mr Simpson would abide no
longer, but quitted that Church, (though he had no Letters of dismission from
that Church) and with the help of a woman (whom Mr Bridge called, telling me
the story of things between them, the foundresse of Mr Simpsons Church) set up
a Church against a Church, consisting but of five persons at the most in the
beginning, whereof the woman and her husband were two, but this Church of Mr
Simpsons increased, as being extolled for a purer Church and for more
ordinances, but Mr Bridges Church was cried down for old rotten members, and
for the want of prophecy, and so the fire of contention and difference grew
more and more between Mr Bridge and Mr Simpson, and their Churches: Now Mr
Ward, Mr Bridges colleague sided with Mr Simpson, stood for prophesying, and
though Mr Simpson had left that Church, yet Mr Ward in that Church was for Mr
Simpsons way; whereupon by occasion of that and for exercising his gifts no
better, but to preach his old Sermons he had formerly preached at Norwich, and
believing of tales, giving so much way to reports, he was deposed by that
Church: Amongst 17 or 18 Reasons of Mr Wards deposition, a godly learned
Minister who had seen them in writing, told me these were the most material:
And now upon Mr Simpsons rending from the Church, and setting up a Church
against a Church under Mr Bridges nose, and upon Mr Wards deposition from his
Ministry, and Mr Simpsons Church increasing in fame and number, but Mr Bridges
decreasing and some others rending themselves away, and upon wicked reports
raised about Mr Bridge, there grew that bitterness, evil speakings, deep
censurings, deadly feauds amongst these Ministers and their Churches, as never
was more betwixt the Jews and the Samaritans: Mr Bridge confessed to me, there
were no such sharp tongues nor bitter divisions as these: Letters from all
three were sent into England both into City and Country against each other, Mr
Simpson dispacht many Letters into England against Mr Bridge, as to Mr M. Mr B.
Mr H. Mr R. etc. and Mr Bridge against Mr Simpson. Mr Bridge and Mr Ward writ
many Letters one against the other, particularly to Norwich, and among other,
many sharp Letters were sent to a D of Physic about the differences, and upon
their coming over into England, they told sad stories for themselves, and each
against other: M^ Bridge laid these bitter differences and reports so to heart,
that they were a great means of her death, and whether Mr Bridges weaknesses
and distempers were not occasioned by the divisions and the wicked scandalls
unjustly (I believe) raised upon him as well as by the air of Rotterdam, Mr
Bridge knows best; And thus much for the particular relation of the scandal
and offense that fell out in that Church of Rotterdam, as it has been related
to me from good hands, from some who have lived in Holland, and as I had part
of it from Mr Bridges own mouth, and some of it from Letters of Mr Simpsons
written into England, and from other men of credit who have seen Letters and
relations written from thence: Now from the relation of this story and your
practice upon it, I shall propound these queries, which will give some light to
judge whether there was any sufficiency in your course, to remedy and redress
things amiss in Churches, and betwixt persons offending.

1. Whether your Churches did agree upon and tie your selves to this principle
of submission, and the sentence of non-communion at your first setting up and
coming into that place of exile, or did you first acknowledge it, and were
willing to submit upon the occasion of the scandal of Mr Wards deposing, and
that great clamor upon it both in Holland and England?

2. Whether did you then, or do you now acknowledge that principle of
submission to all other neighbor Churches, as well as to them of your own way,
as namely to the Presbyterian Churches, those English Churches at Amsterdam,
Hague, Utrich; etc. and would you have submitted to those Churches to have so
proceeded upon offenses, and differences amongst you?

3. How long was it, was it not for the space of between a year and two that
Mr Ward stood deposed and laid aside from his Ministry and maintenance, before
he was restored, and if so was not this a late remedy, and i^ it so in
Presbyteriall government.

4. When, and at what time was this principle of s^bmission and your solemn
practice both of ^equiring the Church offending to give an account, with their
ch^arfull submitting and restoring Mr Ward agreed upon? was it not upon the
news of the Parliament, and the probability of the revolution of things? And I
propound this question, because Mr B^rroughs who came in M. Wards place after
his deposition, came back to England, but at the beginning of the Parliament,
and till he came or was resolved to come, it is not probable M. Ward was
restored, and if so, that it was done when all was like to break up, and they
to come f^ England, may we not suspect it was done for an instance to vindicate
your way with, and to serve your turn, as in this Apology, rather then from
any necessity of righting a person ^jured, or correcting a Church offending?

5. Why did not the Church of Arnheim take offense as well at M. Sympsons
Church, and at his schism in setting up another Church, and at all that
bitterness, evil speaking between those two Churches (the ground indeed and
foundation of that unhappy business about M. Ward, and of all the evil
committed therein) and accordingly have required M. Sympsons Church to have
submitted, but here is not a hint of this in all the relation of your practice.
I have a letter out of Holland by me that concerning this business writes
thus, That though M. Sympson with some f^w more r^t themselves from M. Bridges
Church, to the great offense thereof, yet M. Goodwin and his Associates when
they came to hear the business about M. Ward, never questioned that scandal,
I mean of their schism from the same Church. Now if it were so, was not this
a partial remedy, not reaching to all the offense, no^ to the bottom of it,
why did you not summon both these Churches in the matter of scandal and
difference to submit as well as one of the Churches? will not your principles
serve in difference between Churches, as for difference in one Church, or was
it that there was no complaint of neither side? or was it because you are
tender of questioning the multiplication of Churches? (though by separation and
schi^me) Or what was the reason you questioned not that?

6. Whether were the other Churches of our Nation or any of them (who could not
but be offended) as them of Amsterdam, Hague, Utrich, Leyden, Delph, called in
by Arnheim, or by the Church at Roterdam to join in the hearing, trying of
that business, and deposing Witnesses, or did they send Messengers, or was it
only agitated by two Ministers and two Messengers of t^ Church of Arnheim, one
Church only, (...) to (...), one to one, both equal? and whether there can be
the like majesty and solemnity of a meeting where they are equal, ^ay an
inferiority, (in as much as a representative Church consisting of four is
below a Church represented,) as in a Presbyteriall ass^bly? I have a Letter
from Holland by me, wherein a godly Minist^r writes thus, I was desired by Mr
Ward to be present at that meeting, but when the time came, neither I, nor any
other English Ministers but they of Arnheim were called.

7. To what or to how much did your practice (who were the Church offended)
amount unto upon Mr Bridges Church submission, and your full hearing and
finding both sides to be in an error? did you injoyne and draw up an order,
that the Church offending should publicly acknowledge their sinf^ abe^ation
before you and the comers of all sorts? and restore their Minister again? and
that they should keep a solemn day of fasting to humble themselves for their
sinful carriage? and that the Minister deposed should acknowledge to the
Church wherein he had likewise sinned? or did you leave them to themselves,
upon your finding the offense, to do what they thought fitting, both Church
and Minister, as being against your principles for one Church to decree and
impose any thing upon another, and so they ^ooke up this way voluntarily, would
you would speak out, and once tell us plainly what you hold, and what you
wo^ld (...) that so the Reader might judge of the effectualness^ of your (...).

8. I ask of you whether Mr Bridge with the offending Church at Rotterdam did
sit as Judges with them o^ (...), in their own cause to examine, depose, etc.
or else (...) by a^ delinquents, to be charged, tried, etc.

9. I de^e to know of you, (...) (...) (...) (...) he was r^stored, did as
formely officiate in that Church, and how long? and whether Mr Bridge and he
continued there as fellow Ministers? and whether both between them two, and
between the Church and Mr Ward, there was that mutual carriage as before, and
ought to be between fellow Ministers, and Ministers and people?

10. How can a Church representative be a sufficient and allowed remedy to take
up great offenses in a Church at a great distance? and whether this implies not
an implicit faith in the represented, to let the representers upon hearing put
a final determination and conclusion to great offenses and differences without
returning back the business to the Church represented, or so much as ever
acquainting them with the business before all was ended, (as was in this
particular case) and whether Robi^s. Justif. of separat. Robi^s. Catech. A
representative Church in a case of faith and conscience without the consent of
the represented in the particular decree, establishes the popish doctrine of
implicit faith.
Mr Robins^s arguments against the Presbyterians about the power of their
Elders be not strong against your principles and practices here related? and
what ground is there from the Scripture, that four men of another Church
should have power to call unto and insist upon a judiciarie charge against them
who were greater then themselves, namely against a whole Church consisting of
officer^ and people.

11. Suppose the Church of Ar^m (who sent two Minister^ and two Gentlemen ^s
messengers of their Church, upon their return back to the Church and giving an
account of all the proceedings, and issue of that business) had disliked the
determinations, and judged some of the proceedings unjust, other^
unsatisfactory, and not according to the rules of the word, (as the Church of
(...) might well have done, there being just ground for it, as I will show in
the second particular under the next head.) What must have been done in this
case? must the messengers themselves have been now questioned by the Church for
managing matters no better? or must the sentences agreed upon both for the
Church and Mr Ward be reversed? or must other messengers be sent to hear
matters again, and to change, or add what was amiss? and what if the Church
would not alter that which upon so full a hearing and trial was agreed upon?
now I ask of you, and appeal to the Reader, considering that the Church or
Churches themselves may probably (and it cannot but be expected) (...) and vary
in their judgments from their messengers about the determination of offenses
and differences, whether this be a likely means and sufficient remedy to end
all strifed, or rather will not be as the beginning of new strife, and an
occasion of endless contentions.

12. In this way of submission of Churches, and your practices upon occasion of
offenses and differences, what if the messengers of the Churches upon hearing
and examining differ among themselves about the differences and offenses in the
Church ^ending, and about the sentences to be agreed upon to be commended to
the offending parties? yea and what if the Churches themselves upon return
made by the messengers how they find matters, differ also, one of the Churches
offended being of one mind, and the other Church offended of another mind, what
remedy is there now for miscarriages? what relief for a person injured? or
what effectual and powerful means to reduce a Church or Churches?

13. In your sentence of non-communion against Churches, and in your
Declarations and Protestations to all other Churches of Christ that they may
do the like, what shall become of some innocent godly persons in that Church
renounced and protested against, must they be renounced communion with? what
will you do in the case where some in a Church may be free from the errors
and evils which the greater number are guilty of (which you account the
Church,) must (they be debarred of all Christian communion with the Church
offended, and all other Churches of Christ protested to? (you speak nothing
here in this case, nor take no care for them, but wrap up all alike in your
sentence of non-communion) must the innocent party now in this Church offending
separate and withdraw from their own Church, and renounce communion too, as
well as the Church offended? what if all their maintenance and livelihood
depends in living in that place, so that if they withdraw from them, they must
either live without public ordinances and communion, or else if they come
away, ruin themselves and families? what also if in this Church offending the
wife be one of the innocent persons in that Church, but the husband of the
number of them that persist in their error and miscarriage? the son and
daughter among the innocent, the fathers and mothers among the offenders, what
must the wives and children renounce communion with their husbands and parents,
and now either live without the ordinances there, or else go away from their
husbands and parents to some other Churches (...) And in your drawing up your
Declarations and Protestations against those Churches persisting in their
errors and miscarriages, will you in the gross do it, or will you signify
and declare all the names of those who remain obstinate and impenitent in such
Churches, with the names of those who are free from those errors and offenses,
least you should bring all the Churches of Christ protested unto into sin and a
snare? pray resolve these cases with many such (which by these now hinted) you
may foresee will fall out in your principle of non-communion of Churches and
Protestations.

Thirdly, For the success and effectualnes of your practice, I answer. 1.
Supposing the particular instance of your practice, according to the principle
of submission of Churches that miscarry, to have had a good effect (as you
relate in your two Churches of Arnheim and Rottendam) yet it follows not, it
is a powerful and effectual means to reduce Churches; for a course may
prevail in one and take with one, and yet have no rationality to carry it in
others, for though this Church at Rotterdam did submit to them of Arnheim who
were of note for parts, quality, etc. yet it is a question whether these would
to some other particular Churches who had challenged them, and whether these
men would also at all times, had there not been something cast in the balance
before hinted.

2. Take the best that came of the issue and success of this agitation between
the Church of Arnheim and that of Rotterdam (namely that Church which had
offended, acknowledging their offense in deposing Mr Ward and restoring him to
his place again) it was but a slender satisfaction for the loss of his
Ministry and maintenance for so long a time, and for all the suffering of him
and his family: If the Church offending had been enjoined, or had ordered
themselves to have paid him the profits of his place, or to have given him a
good sum of money on their fast day, this had been some relief for a
wrongful sentence, and a person injured thereby, and might have been a means
to have preserved them from doing the like for time to come, but for a Minister
and his family to be so long in a sad condition without all maintenance in a
strange Land, and in the issue for them who did this to acknowledge only their
sinful aberration, and the Minister thus suffering to acknowledge his sin too,
and both of them to be humbled for it alike; here was a poor remedy, ^ay as
you relate it your selves it is very unjust and injurious, for in some passages
of your Narration, you acknowledge the fault on the Churches side, as in page
16. and in page ^0. and that Mr Ward was wronged, and yet they were both
equally ordered to a public confession of sin and solemn fasting, the
Delinquent and the Innocent alike deal with, is this the fruit of your
principle of submission of Churches and non-communion? is this the real
evidence and demonstration of the effectual success of such a course held by
Churches in such a case? and was this the issue of all that sending to and
solemn assembly, and the agitation of so many days, public hearing by
deposition of witnesses, so largely and formally related in page 20, 21? I
wonder wise men (as you pretend to be) should not see into the weakness and
folly of your own practice in this case, but tell such a story so to shame your
selves, you should never have troubled your selves to have come so many dutch
miles, not the Church at Rotterdam, nor made so great ado for many days of
deposing witnesses, etc. (as your selves relate in page 20, 21.) to have put
together the Innocent and Delinquents. And let me here put you this dilemma,
either Mr Ward was unjustly deposed from his Ministry, both materially and
formally upon unsufficient causes, as the matter for such a censure, and for
the way and manner of it, as being too sudden before admonition, and before
fasting and prayer preceding, etc. (...) was justly deposed by the Church? if
unjustly in both these respects (as your Narration implies, page 16.) why was
Mr. Ward put upon acknowledging his sin to the Church, and put in the same
condition with them who had dealt so unjustly both materially and formally? and
whether this was not a means to hinder the Churches repentance and humiliation
for their sin, when they should be put but to do as Mr Ward? But if Mr Ward
were justly doposed, why was the Church then put upon public acknowledgement,
and ordered a solemn day of fasting to humble themselves before God and man?
and whether was Mr Bridge as well as the Church enjoined to confess his
sinful aberration in it, in that he did not interpose his authority and
interest in the Church, nor speak a word to hinder the deposing of Mr Ward,
and so to have prevented so great a scandal and offense as this was?

To the fifth and last general head, the comparison you make between the
effectualnesse and powerfulness of your way of submission and non-communion,
and that of the Presbyterians, to awe and preserve Churches and Elders in their
duties, and to reduce Churches miscarrying, where you make the s^ales fall on
your side rather. I answer, Besides some considerable things already hinted
under some of the former heads (especially under the fourth head) which do
show a wide difference of the effectualnesse and success which the
Presbyterian principles and way hold out over your Congregationall, th^e are
many other to (...) the s^les, which I shall now speak of, according as it is
laid down here by you in the 17, 18, and 19, pages.

1. That you may render your way the more specious and probable, you beg the
question, and take for granted things denied, supposing that also which never
has fallen out in the reformed Churches; and you speak but to a part of the
way and remedy, (namely excommunication) an^ from all these false premises you
make your conclusion. You lay down your way of submission and noncommunion
(...) that ^ch is the (...) and way of Christ, and to be strictly enjoined by
Christ ^d that it is a command from Christ enjoined to Churches that are ^ly
offended, to denounce such a sentence of non-communion; which is a mere device
of your own brains, and sound out to give a colorable answer to that common
and (...) reason against the Church Way (...) you make that (...) (...) in
Presbyteries, to be an excommunicating of whole Churches, and ^s delivering of
whole Churches and their Eldere offending unto Sa^n, (which is a scandalous
charge laid to tho Presbyterian government) and never yet was ^rd of in any of
the reformed Churches for the space now of a hundred years past: You lay you
give more to the Magistrates power then the principle of the Presbyteriall
government will suffer them to yield, whereas in some things, I shall show the
contrary, and in other things you may out of policy at this time give more
then the Scriptures allow: You speak only of excommunication, a part of their
way, whereas in combined classical government there are many other means and
ways from first to last to preserve and reduce from errors and offenses.

2. The comparison made by you between the Presbyterians and Independents
stands in two things: First, In the Ecclesiastical proceedings and power;
Secondly, In the civil Magistrates power: 1. For the Ecclesiastical, you make
that principle of submission of Churches that miscarry: and that of
non-communion as effectual as excommunication, which supposing they were (as I
shall show they are not) yet it is a fallacious reasoning by comparing the whole
with a part, for a whole of one kind may be better and more excellent then some
part of another kind, and yet not comparable to the whole: now there are many
things in Presbyteriall government besides excommunication, excellent to
preserve and keep the Churches: Their reformation and constitution being settled
by Synods and Assemblies, their Ministers being ordained by Presbyteries and
classes, their Doctrine, worship, government and discipline, upon serious
debate, and by common content drawn up, then rules being fixed, known and
certain, their classical meetings frequent and constant, with higher
Assemblies for appeals, their number and abilities great, their remedies and
censures more solemn, and more in number, as deposition, suspension, etc. all
which are wanting in the Church way (as I could show at large, but that this
answer would be too great a volume:) But to come to particulars, the
Presbyterian is more effectual then your Independent way: 1. Because it does
prevent and preserve from those many errors, divisions, evils which fall in
your way (as is evident by experience, and is founded upon good reason will
fall out) now how much better and more effectual a way it is to play the
fore-game then the after-game, all men know: it is better to prevent the plague
and taking in poison then to expel it; government is for prevention as well as
recovering, if your way were as effectual to compose differences and reduce
Churches, yet not so to prevent, which is one of the great ends of Church
government. 2. Your way wraps in whole Churches in sin and guilt, and you have
no remedy but it must come to non-communion of whole Churches, but in
Presbyteriall it is not so, no example being extant among them of
excommunicating whole Churches, so that if an error take one or two, they are
presently dealt with, and the error spreads not to a whole Church. 3. In the
Presbyteriall way, the persons offending and sinning in Congregations are
proceeded with and punished, every man bears his own sin, but the innocent
persons suffer not; but here in the way of non-communion, some who are good in
the Church suffer also many ways, and here is no difference made by you, but
all involved in the same condition. 4. In your way, as if all sins were equal,
and all offenders alike, all are punished with the same sentence of
non-communion; but it is not so in the Presbyteriall way. 5. Your submissions
and meetings are accidental, uncertain, free and at choice, they may be, and
may not be, there are many ways to evade and put them off; whereas the
combinations and consociations of Churches, are fixed, set, certain. Amongst
your Churches in Holland, in three or four years there was but one act of
submission, and one meeting, which is here related: In that difference between
those two Churches at Rotterdam, there was no submission, but each Church blew
the trumpet of defiance against each other; and so about the differences at
Arnheim which the Church could not end in so long a time, no Church interposed;
but in the classical government there is such a subordination and dependencie,
such stated and fixed meetings, that if men should escape one, they do not all:
now in government and order there is a material difference between what men
may do, or not do, and what they have tied themselves unto and must stand to:
In matters of civil difference referred to Arbitratours, it is one thing to
submit to hearing, and to counsel upon it, and another thing to be bound to
stand to the determination. There are many will do justly, and perform such
trusts whilst bound, who left at liberty will do just nothing; now in your
submission of Churches, though you submit to a hearing, yet you do not submit
to their determinations unless it like you, you do not submit to do what
they enjoyne, but you will order your selves according to their counsel (as
you see occasion) now men being partial in their own cause, and still their
own judges, what a remedy is this? it is one thing when men know they are at
liberty, and may do, or not do as they see good, and another thing when they
must; we find it so in all, converse with men, and good men are men; there is a
great deal of difference between authority and obedience, and only persuasion
on the one part, and free will on the other, no man will deny but in civil
matters there is a great difference in such cases; were it in the power of
particular members in your Churches to submit or not submit, as they please,
there would be much ado to remedy any thing, as will be betwixt Churches
differing: But particularly for excommunication and non-communion,
excommunication may upon these grounds awe men's consciences more, and be more
effectual then non-communion; 1. Because there is something positive in it, it
is a delivering of the offenders up unto Satan, but your non-communion is a
privative depriving only of communion; now there is more efficacy in a positive
then in a privative and negative. Secondly, Excommunication does deprive the
persons offending, or the Churches of all communion among themselves as well as
the communion of other Churches, whereas the sentence of noncommunion does but
take other Churches off from communion with them, but meddles not to debar them
of communion among themselves in their own particular Churches, but still they
enjoy the word, prayers, Sacraments, etc. which is a great difference. Thirdly,
Your selves make excommunication the greater censure, as appears by your own
phrases, calling it an authoritative power, etc. and not practicing that
against other Churches, whereas you do exercise the sentence of non-communion,
and we know it is the highest censure in the Church; now certainly the greatest
censures and more dreadful punishments according to Christ's institution and
intention, are more effectual and powerful to awe and to remedy things
amiss then the lesser and lower censures. And so much for the comparison in
the Ecclesiastical proceedings.

Secondly, In the civil Magistrates power you granting that ought to back and
assist the sentence of non-communion against Churches miscarrying according to
the nature of the crime, and you giving more (as you think) to the Magistrates
power in matters Ecclesiastical then the principles of the Presbyteriall
government will suffer them to ye^ld, your way of Church proceeding will be
every way as effectual as the Presbyterians. I answer, supposing all that you
say of giving so much power to the Magistrate, etc, were true, yet that makes
not your submission and non-communion so effectual a means as
excommunication, for the question is about Ecclesiastical authority and
spiritual power, and about spiritual means and remedies for the conscience
and soul, and not about civil power, and civil external means* and I would
ask you this question upon this passage of the civil Magistrate, either you
give him an Ecclesiastical spiritual power of applying spiritual remedies
and means to Churches miscarrying, or you do not, if you give him not this
first (as I judge your principles will not allow you) he being no
Church Officer of Christ's church, but only Christ gave Pastors, teachers, etc.
as necessary and sufficient for the government of his Church, then all you say
of the Magistrate helps you not, it is nothing to the question in hand; but
before I speak any more to that point, that the Magistrates power backing your
sentence of non-communion is not comparable to the Presbyterian way, I must
animadvert upon the passage it self both in the comparative of your saying,
you think you give more to the Magistrate then the Presbyterians, and upon the
positive what you give them.

1. For the comparison, it is an odious and dangerous insinuation to prepare
King and Parliament to reject the Presbytery, as not giving so much to
Magistrates in matters of Religion and Church government as is their due, and
it is scandalous against Scotland and all the reformed Churches: but what is the
maine and of it, or what may be conceived the reason of your saying you give so
much to the Magistrates power, and more then the Presbyterians, (seeing men of
your Church principles were never guilty yet of giving too much Ecclesiastical
power to Magistrates: you are the first Independents, and this is the first
time that ever publicly you have expressed your selves thus,) I judge you being
Politicians (Politici Theologi) to flatter the Parliament at this time the
better to work your ends for a toleration, and to promote your Church Way you
write thus: It Is observed by Learned men, that amongst the principal attempts
and policies of the Remonstrants whereby they labored to bring the Churches of
the Netherlands into commotion, and to obtain their own ends, this was a great
one, the crying up the power of the civil Magistrate, both by writing of Books
of their great power in Ecclesiasticals, and in their Sermons every where, and
their aspersing the orthodox Ministers and their lawful meetings and
Ecclesiastical actions with the contrary, and amongst many other particulars
of the great power they gave the Magistrates in Ecclesiasticals this was one,
that they did ascribe to the Magistrate the ultimate and highest jurisdiction
and power of giving judgment in Ecclesiastical matters, reasoning, that unto
the Magistrate alone immediately under Christ did belong the judgment when
controversies of faith did arise in the Church; And therefore after the
Arminians despaired of prevailing by the Ecclesiastical Assemblies, they
brought and removed their cause from the Ecclesiastical cognizance to another
Court, by their policy and artifices, making use of the Authority of one or
two chief men in place to work for them: And that this new-way might have
some color and that so much the more easily the favor of many Politicians, or
at least a toleration might be procured for these Arminian novelties, there was
a book set forth by Uttenbogardus, de Iure Supremi Magistratus in
Ecclesiasticis; Many other of the Arminians also sung the same song, as
Episcopius printed a Disputation de Iure Magistratus circa sacra, Barlaeus,
Grotius, etc. And besides all these, there was a great number of books put
forth in the vulgar and mother tongue of the power and authority of the
Magistrates: And thus whilst the Magistrates let the Arminians alon^, and did
nothing against them, even till the Synod of Dort in the year 1618. they
slattered them thus: But after the Synod of Dort had determined against their
opinions, and that the Magistrates were agai^t them, then they lifted up the
heel and then they write books in a far other style, and in their Apology,
that power which before they had so liberally measured out for them, they did
not a little limit, and contract, and offended as much in the defect, giving
Magistrates too little, as before they had in the excess, giving them too
much: For the full proof of this I refer the Reader to learned Voetius
select. Disput. de quaestione pe^es quos sit potestas Ecclesiastica, These 1.
These. 4 These. 5. Ut aute^ n ovu^ hic agendi modus colorem aliquem haberet. and
tanto facilius mult^rum politicorum savor, aut saltem Tolerantia
Remonstranticis novi^atibus conciaretur, editu^ est ab Iohanne Vttenbogardo
Ecclesialiste tunc Hag^ cometano tractatus de jure supremi Magistratus in
Ecclesiasticis. E^ita fuerunt Grotij piet as ordinum, Episcopij disputatio de
jure magistratus circa sacra, Barlei declamatio seu Philippica quaedam in
ministros qui orthodoxam and receptam religionem tuebantur, etc. Praeter quae,
vulgares and vernaculi libelli, quorum numerus innumerus, and consiones
Remonstrantium nihil aliud quam authoritatem and potestatem magistratuum
perstrepebant: and nescio qua invidia orthodoxos pastores, ^orumque legitimos
co^ventus and actiones Ecclesiasticas gravabant. Et hac quidem inprimis in
dictis duabus provincij^* nam in Geldria aliter canebant, aut Mussitabant: quod
Ill. Curja conatibus ipsorum minime faveret. Idem fere accidebat in Frisia
Amstelredami, atque alibi, ubi magistratus omnia contra Presbyteria and
pastores non statuebat ex (...), aut in favorem Remonstrantium. Post habitam
synodum Dordracenam, libelli ipsorum vernaculi long alio stilo conscripti
sunt, quin and in ipsa Apologia (quam tamen magistratibus probari volebant)
cap. 25. potestatem hanc non parum limitant ac contrahunt, quam tamen tam
liberaliter ante hac ad mens^ erant.
Voetius select disputations concerning that question, penes quos sit potestas
ecclesiastica (where he does at large relate this and their opinions about the
Magistrates power, after the Synod of Dort:) and unto Vedelius de Episcop.
Constant. magni. page 3, 4, 5, 6. Arminiani e contrario in excessu peccant,
Etenim ante Synodum Dordracenam contendebant, sub magistratu orthodoxo
Ecclesiam per se nullam babere potestatem spiritualem: ministros Ecclesiae
officio suo defungi nomine magistratus, ita ut magistratus, quia ipse per alia
negotia concionari, etc. non possit, per ministros doceat qui vices ipsius
gerant in docendo, quem admndum vicarius Trajani Imperatoris vices gerebat sui
Imperatoris. Et sic ministros non habere suam potes^atem a Christo, sed a
Magistratu, qui and quidem solus eam potestatem immediate a Christo acceperit:
Gubernationem Ecclesiae assignabant soli magistratui, ab ea excludentes
ministros, nisi in quantum essent vicarij and instrumenta, seu servi
magistratus: Speciatim electionem ministrorum seu vocationem, item dopositionem
tribuebant soli magistra^, etc. Contendebant etiamad solum magistratum
immediate sub Christo pertine^ judicium quando controversiae sidei ^rtae sunt
in Ecclesia, Post Synodum in Confess. and Apol. cap. 25. negant eju^ jus aut
officium esse, ad decreta Synodica, ut ut verbo Dei conformia sint, observanda
obligare ^omines sua auctoritate and potestate ulla coactiva uti in ea part,
negant etiam magistratum ju^ habere in privatos conventus, sed tantum in
exercitia quae in templis seu locis publicis ad magistratum pertinentibu^
instituuntur. Nam cum rebus sua ita consultum putarent, aliter statueba^t and
contrarium, quam admodum alibi a nobis est ostensum.
Vedelius de Episcopatu Constantini magni (who as all men know gives in that
book power enough to Magistrates in Ecclesiasticals) yet he lays down at
large, that as the Anabaptists and Socinians following the Donatists, give too
little to the Magistrate, so the Arminians did offend in the excess. For
before the Synod of Dort they contended, that under the Orthodox Magistrate the
Church had of it self no spiritual power. The Ministers of the Church did
perform their office in the name of the Magistrate, so that the Magistrate,
because he for other businesses could not preach, etc. he did preach by the
Ministers; they gave the government of the Church to the Magistrates alone,
they gave the calling of Ministers and their deposing to the Magistrate alone,
with many other such, but after the Synod they deny it is their right and
office to oblige men by their authority to the decrees of Synods however
agreeable to the word, or to use any coactive power in that case, etc. in which
they take away as much from the Magistrate, as in other things they seemed to
give: And it may be feared however these Apologists now to ingratiate
themselves, and being left alone in their Church Way, say, they give more to
the Magistrates then the Presbyteriall, and that they profess to submit, and
to be most willing to have recourse to the Magistrates judgment and
cognizance, and examination of Ecclesiastical causes, yet when they shall come
once to be crossed, and the Parliament by the advice of the Assembly to settle
the government of the Church, and by their authority to bind them to the
things agreeable to the word, we shall see then what they will say of the
Magistrates power; there are too many speeches already since the meeting of
the Assembly (out of their fear how things may go) which have fallen from
many Independents, that prognosticate they will do by the Parliament as the
Remonstrants did after the Synod of Dort by the States. 2. But whatever you say
here, that you think you give more to the Magistrates then the principles
Robinson Apolog. cap. 11. de magistratu polit. Idem prorsus sentimus de
magistratu et illius munere quod ecclesiae Belgicae and earum consession^ hac
in re, ex animo suffragamur.
of the Presbyterian Government will suffer them to yield, I do much doubt it,
and do judge that in many things you give no more in Ecclesiasticals then the
Presbyterians, and in others you give less, and they give more. M. Robinson in
his Apology says of himself and his Church, that in the point of the civil
Magistrate and his office, they hold altogether the same thing which the
Belgicke Churches do, and that to their Confession in this point, they do ex
animo agree. Now the Belgic Churches are Presbyterians, and your Church Way,
and M. Robinsons differ not much, ^o that till you know what you give more to
the civil Magistrate, then M. Robinson and his Church do, I cannot believe
you, especially considering that M. Burroughes one of you in his Lectures upon
Hosea, speaking of the power of Magistrates in Church affairs, Buroughs o^
Hosea, sixth Lect. page 164, 165, 166. ^ Ju^us lib. 1. de Pontif. cap. 7 not. 2.
Nos ita distinguamus, m^gistratus qua magistratu^ est humanae societatis caput,
humana ordinatione, qua Christianus vero est divinae societatis in Ecclesia
membrum, divina ordinatione, and in eadem custos and vindex ordinis, ut membrum
electum ipsius, and not. 4. se Christiani, s^t praestantia Ecclesiae membra. b
Voetius Disp. de quaest, penes quos sit potestas Ecclesiastica. part. prim.
These. 4. These. 5. Rejicimus haec nova dictata Remonstranti^ cap. 25. Apolog
quorum prius; non posse magistra^ii a^ decreta Synodica ve^
gives no more to them then the rigidest Presbyterians, namely, That the King
is supreme governor to govern in a civil way by civil Laws, so as to s^
Christ not dishonored, so as to keep out Idolatry, to protect the Church, to
punish enormitios that are there, to defind it from enemies: In that sense he
is said to be the head, but that title of supreme Governor being understood
in a civil way is more proper. Now it were easy out of Beza, Calvin,
Zanchius, and many Presbyterians to show more power given to Kings by them in
matters of Religion, then by M. Burroughes there, so that I have more reason to
judge of your principles by what M. Burroughes writes particularly, and by way
of answering doubts of conscience, then from a Narrration in general, and from
we think more then the principles of Presbyteriall Government will suffer them
to yield. In other things you give not so much to the Magistrates, as the
Presbyterians.

First, whereas the a Presbyterians do acknowledge the Protestant Prince and
Magistrate, an eminent member of the Church, and in their greatest Assemblies
and Councels give him an eminent place and power, you according to your
principles do not own him for a member of the Church, neither shall his
children be admitted to Baptism, nor he to the ordinances, though a Protestant
and Orthodoxe, unless you account him a visible Saint, etc. neither do you
give him so much power or vote, no not in a particular Church in any Church
matters of censures, admissions, election of officers, etc. as you do give to
one of your serving men, and the supreme Magistrate and his children though
brought up, and professing the true Religion, may be and will be kept from the
Sacraments all their days.

2. The Presbyterians give to the Magistrate a coercive and coactive power, to
suppress heresies, schism, to correct troublers and unruly persons in the
Church, to tie and bind men by their authority to the decrees of Synods made
according to the word of God, which power as b Voetius shows, only the
Remonstrants with the Libertines did not admit, but all the Presbyterians do
reject such opinions, that the Magistrate could not by his Dei consor^ia
observandum sua authoritate obligare and con. stringere.
authority bind and compel men to observe the decrees of Synods, conformable
to the word of God Apollo^. ju^ majest. circa. sacra par. post: cap 3 exam. qu.
12. statuimus quo^ magistratus potestatem habeat coactivam, qua res
Ecclesiasticas ex praescripto verbi Dei constitut as, legitima via urget, and
subdit is imponit ad disciplinam Ecclesiae stabilienda^, and Ecclesiasticum
tuendum ordinem.
, now do you allow the Magistrates such a power? By your pleading for
tolerations of Religion, and for liberty of conscience, and that conscience is
not to be tied, and by your speaking against impositions of things lawful and
agreeable to the word, as set forms of prayer, decreed by Synods and such
like, it is very suspicious you allow not such a power to Magistrates, and your
good friend M. S to A. S. p. 55, 5^, 57, 58, 59, ^0.
M. S. in his answer to the observations and considerations upon your
Apologeticall Narration pleading your cause denies, and pleads against this
coercive power of the Magistrate.

3. The Presbyterians give a great deal of power to the supreme Christian
Magistrate in the Reformation of Religion, and in repairing and building the
house of God, as might be shown out of Calvin, Zanchius, Peter Martyr, etc.
but whether the Independents give as much, when they allow private men to
gather and make Churches and Ministers, to do such public works, and that
without leave, nay against the mind and laws of the supreme Magistrate, I
question: There is a Tractate in my hands about a Church, that goes under the
name of one of you, wherein civil Magistrates are cut off, and Ministers too
from having any power to make Churches, and the immediate Independent power
from Christ is given to the Saints only, to gather and combine themselves in
such an Assembly without expecting warrant from any Governors what soever upon
earth: Saints as Saints have a right and full power to cast themselves into the
fellowship without asking the consent of Governors and civil Magistrates, who
have no power in the marriage of their people, nor should have, it being an act
of natural civil right, and as Magistrates have no power over
Family-government to appoint whom I shall admit into my Family, etc. much less
have they power over Christ's Family; this union of a Church is a spiritual
right which is transcendently out of the sphere of the Magistrates authority,
and the Apostles taught the Saints to do it without asking leave of the
Magistrates, yea not to for sake it though the Magistrates forbad it, Heb. 10.
25.Now I believe you cannot show me any principle in Presbyteriall Government,
nor quote me the judgment of any Presbyterian that cuts short the power of the
Orthodox Protestant Magistrate about Congregations and Assemblies as this does.

4. The Presbyterians do grant the Magistrate a power about the public
exercise of the Ministry, that it is so far subject to the direction of the
Magistrate, that without his approbative authority or confirming authority,
or his toleration of it, it ought not by the Church to be publicly begun in
his territories nor practiced. Concedendum publicum ministerij (...) ^um
omnibus sui^ circ^mstantijs politicis and (...) consideratum, eat. nus
magistratus directioni subjectum esse. quod absque authoritate ejus
approbativa, seu confirmativa, seu to^erantiae jurisdictione, ab Ecclesia
public in ejus ditioneinstitui, and cum a^paratu politico executioni ma^dari
non possit; nisi leges Reipublic^ junda. mentales subditis id concedant and
tribuant. Apollon. jus majestatis circa sacra. par. post. cap. 3. Exam. quaest.
d^decimae.
Apollonius of Zeland who writ an answer to Vedellius by the command of the
Wa^achrian Classis, was a great Presbyterian; and in that answer must needs
show it, upon occasion of Vedelius giving so much to the Magistrate in
Ecclesiastical things, yet he grants the Magistrate this power about the
exercise of the Ministry. Now whether your principles allow this to the
Magistrate, let your practices speak about your making Ministers and
exercising of it as you do.

5. The Presbyterians grant to the Magistrates a power in private meetings as
well as in public Churches, over exercises there, as well as those in the
public places: So Rejicimus haec nova dictata Remonstrantiam: Magistratus
nullam esse potestate^ in priva^s conven^us, sed ^tum in publica tempta. Voet.
disput penes quos sit potest as Eccl. These. 4.
Voetius, We reject that noveltie of the Remonstrants that the Magistrate has
no power in private meetings, but only in public Temples: Now whether you
allow the Magistrates a power concerning your private meetings, or only over
the public meetings, or whether you do not with the Arminians make the ground
of this power in the Magistrate, the granting of a public meeting place, I
desire to be satisfied from you. But by all this the Reader may see in these
particulars you do not give more power to the Magistrate; for the
Presbyterians give what you give, and not only so, but they give that which
you deny, and so give more then you: But Brethren wherein and in what do you
give more to the Magistrates power then the Presbyterians? Had you expressed,
wherein the Presbyterians give too little to the Magistrates power, and in what
their principles are defective, and wherein you give more, you had dealt
fairly and ingeniously, and a man might have known where to have had you, and
how to have answered you, but to accuse thus in the general, and not to
signify the crime is not just; but as you do throughout your Apology under
the figge-leaves of dark, doubtful, general speeches, cover your opinions,
least your nakedness should appear, so in this place: but not to let you go
away thus, but that I may drive you out of your holes and thickets and divest
you of your coverings, and that I may a little take off the Odium and suspicion
that Presbyteriall Government may lie under amongst many who know not their
principles by reason of this passage of yours, (The Magistrates power to which
we give as much, and (as we think) more then the principles of the
Presbyteriall government will suffer them to yield) I will propound some
questions to you to draw out what you hold about the power of the Magistrate in
Ecclesiastical things, and to give some further light for the present of the
Presbyterian principles concerning the power of Magistrates (referving the
particular laying down what the Presbyterians give to the Magistrate in
Ecclesiastical things and what not, till my Rejoinder shall come out to your
Reply.)

1. Whether the power of the Magistrate about Ecclesiastical things be a power
extrinsecall, objective, coercive, indirect, mediate, accidental and
consequent, or spiritual intrinsecall, formal, proper and antecedent: Now
concerning the first, the Presbyterians give as much to the Magistrate as you,
nay more, as has been partly showed already: but for the other the
spiritual, intrinsecall, formal, etc. If you ascribe that to the Magistrate,
as I think you do not, nor your principles do not yield it; unless according
to your second great principle laid down in the 10. and 11. page, you are
since the Assembly to please the Parliament the more (as you may imagine come
off from your former judgment and practice.) I do refer you for
satisfaction to the three most learned, select Disputations of De quest. Penes
quos sit potest as Ecclesiastica.
Voetius and unto Wale. Tractde officio ministrorum, and authoritate atque
inspectione qua magistratus super ministros haber^ debet.
Wa^us excellent answer to the tractate of Uttengobardus (so strong that the
Author could never reply again, though in a book published he promised to
do it,) and unto Apollon. sus majestat^ circasacra.
Apollonius learned answer to Vedelius Dissertation.

2. I ask of you whether the civil power does contain the Ecclesiastical
formally and eminently, so as that power can give and produce the other? or
whether there is an intrinsecall dependence of the Ecclesiastical upon the
Political in their nature, form, and exercise of them? or whether there does
not reside in the Church all Ecclesiastical power absolutely necessary to the
building up of the Kingdom of Christ, and salvation of men, even when the
Magistrate is not of the Church?

3. I ask of you whether in writing this passage of your Apology you
considered and remembered all those differences and distinctions given by so
many excellent Divines, as Iunius, Zanchius, Amesius, etc. concerning those two
powers, Civil and Ecclesiastical, and their Administration, and in particular
amongst the rest, that difference taken from their Altera differentia d wateria
sumitur, subjectoque administrationum. Politicae administrationis sub. jectum
esse res humanas in des^tione nostra posuimus, ecclesiasticae divine esse and
sacras docuimus. Iunius Eccles. l. 3. c. 4.
matter, and the subject, wherein they make the subject of political
administration to be humane things and matters, but of Ecclesiastical to be
divine and sacred, and if so, whether do not Presbyterians according to those
differences and distinctions (which distinctions are acknowledged also by your
selves, as by M. Robinson and by some of you in your printed books (as I
remember) give the Magistrate that power in Ecclesiasticals which is given him
in the word of God.

4. Considering all Ecclesiastical power and right is commonly by Divines
reduced to a threefold head, namely potestas (...), which of these powers do
you give more to the Magistrates then the Presbyterians, or in all of them do
you give more, or do you not? For the present that power you seem to give the
Magistrate, and intimate it that you give more then the Pres^eriall principles
allow (as may be gathered from the following words in p. 19. and from those
words in p. 17. The Magistrates interposing a power of an other nature, unto
which we upon his particular coguizance and examination of such causes profes
ever to submit, and also to be most willing to have recourse unto) must fall
under the last head of the power of judging and determining in matters
Ecclesiastical, and that upon complaints and appeals; now the Presbyterians in
that give the Magistrate a power about the use and abuse of Ecclesiastical
discipline and Ecclesiastical Causes and businesses, yea and definitive to,
namely, a political, objective, consequent power, which may be diversely
exercised, both ordinarily and extraordinarily in a Church constituted and in a
good estate, and in a Church fallen and corrupted; Voetius in his disputations
upon that question: In whose hands the Ecclesiastical Habere magistratum qua
talem publicam potestatem judicialem seu judicandi, judicio cognitionis non
tantum, sed and decinitivo de negot ijs and caufis Ecclesiasticis. Quod judici^
consequens ^st, non antecedens (neque enim sunt (...) in Ecclesia) adhaec
praesuppositive est Theologicum, sed formaliter politicum; quia disquisitio
ultimata in eo non est, an hoc sit verum, sed an velint illud publica
authoritate tueri and exequi. Voet de quaest penes quos sit potest as Eccl.
par. 1. These 4. Apoll ^us majest. circa sacra. cap. a par. post. page 63, 64,
65, 6^, 67, 68.
power is (a great Presbyterian in that question) grants and gives to the
Magistrate a public judicial power of judging, not only with the judgment
of knowledge, but definitive in causes and matters Ecclesiastical, which
judgment is consequent, not antecedent, because the ultimate disquisition is
not in that, whether that be true, but whether they will by public Authority
maintain and execute that. So * Apollonius in his Answer to Vedelius where he
strongly pleads for the Presbyterians in that point of Ecclesiastical power,
yet gives much to the Magistrate ordinarily in a Church constituted and well
reformed in the point of this part of power, and extraordinarily in the state
of a Church corrupted, and greatly disordered, when the doctrine is corrupted,
and the Sacraments contaminated with idolatrous rites, and discipline turned
into tyranny, and when the Ministry and all Ecclesiastical meetings both
inferior and superior conspire to oppress the truth of God, and to establish
tyranny in the Church, in such cases the Magistrate may do many things besides
the ordinary way: now let me entreat you to consult the books of the
Presbyterians, and especially Apollonius answer to Vedelius of the several
particulars of the power of Magistrates about the use and abuse of discipline
in a constituted Church, besides the power given them in extraordinary cases,
and in your Reply to this Answer satisfy me what you give more. But let me
tell you whatever power you five may have found out for the Magistrate, which
the principles of Presbyteriall government will not suffer them to yield (some
new power may be like that devise of Non-communion of Churches, and
Protestation to all Churches that they may do the like) yet your Churches may
not grant it, and so the Magistrates shall be never the nearer; the power you
give the Magistrate in the 17. and 19. page is not yielded by many of your own
Churches whereof you are Ministers; A Gentleman, a prime member of one of your
Churches immediately after the coming forth of your Apologeticall Narration
disclaimed and renounced that power of the Magistrate expressed by you, in the
hearing of a Minister, a member of the Assembly, who related it to me. But what
is it wherein you give more to the Magistrates, sure there is something you
mean and aim at in it, if we could find it out; suffer me to guess at it,
and you shall see though you do not formally express so much, yet I have some
reason to judge so: First, Do you not mean in this phrase, the Magistrates
power, to which we give as much, and as we think more then the principles of
Presbyteriall government will suffer them to yield, that your Churchway
consisting all of particular Congregations, and not growing into great bodies
by combinations and Synods, the Magistrates power is greater over you, in that
he may easily deal with you, and dissolve you at pleasure; but for a power to
grow into so great a body, an Ecclesiastical power as large as the civil, so
combined, this may be formidable and dangerous to the State, and too great for
the Magistrate hereafter to rectify; this has been by an active Independent
upon discourse of these points suggested to me, and how far one of you has
reasoned thus in the hearing of many, against Presbyteriall government, and for
Congregationall, you can remember: Or secondly, Do you understand by this
phrase, that when heresies, schisms or strange opinions are broacht in your
Churches, and you cannot tell what to do with them, nor how to suppress them,
nor how to have the persons censured, being so powerful in particular
Congregations whereof they are members, in such a case you give the civil
Magistrate a power to question them for these heresies, schisms, and to
imprison, banish, etc. if they do not revoke them; New England practicing the
way of Independencie, and not having Classes, Synods, that have authoritative
power to call to account and censure such persons, were necessitated to make
use of the Magistrates, and to give the more to them, a power of questioning
for doctrines, and judging of errors; and punishing with imprisonment,
banishment, and they found out a pretty fine destinction to deceive themselves
with, and to salve the contrariety of this practice to some other principles,
that the Magistrate questioned and punished for these opinions and errors
(which now for want of Ecclesiastical discipline and censure they knew not
what to do with) not as heresies and such opinions, but as breaches of the
civil peace, and disturbances to the Commonwealth, (which distinction if the
Parliament would have learned from you, and proceeded upon, they might long
ago have put down all your Churches and Congregations, and justly have dealt
with you, as the Magistrates in New England did with Mr Williams and the
Antinomians, Familists and Anabaptists there, and yet have said they punished
you not for your consciences, nor because of such opinions, but because your
opinions, ways and practices were an occasion of much hurt to the
Commonwealth, a breach of civil peace, a great cause of many people sitting
so loose from the Parliament, a great hinderance to the Reformation, and a
ground of much distraction to the public, and of strengthening the enemy,)
whereas the Presbyterians give the power in cases of heresies, errors, etc.
that are not remedied in the particular Congregation, to Classes, Synods,
Assemblies, to question, convince, judge of, censure and to apply spiritual
remedies proper to spiritual diseases, which I am confident of, had such been
in New England in the Presbyteriall way, there had never been so many
imprisoned, banished for errors, nor the Magistrates put upon that distinction.
Or thirdly, Is it that you do give a power to the Magistrate in
Ecclesiastical things of the ultimate determination of matters purely
Ecclesiastical (which the Presbyterians principles do not) as now in matters
of doctrine, and in matters of scandal, and in matters of censures,
excommunication, deposition, etc. which are brought before and have past in
Ecclesiastical Assemblies, to appeal from them to the civil Magistrate, and
to carry causes from thence to civil Courts, to repeal and revoke them; Your
words and passages about the Magistrates power imply this, and I find that many
quick sighted men as the Walachrian classis, nay a whole Synod after them in
their late Letters to the Assembly apprehend you so, and therefore I may upon
good grounds judge, besides the two former, that you aim at this third, in
saying you give more to the Magistrates power then the Presbyterians:
Concerning which question, it being a point that I have not much studied, I
shall not declare my judgment in it; But in the Church of Israel it seems
that in the things of Jehovah the last judgment did belong to the chief
Ecclesiastical Assembly which sat at Jerusalem, Deuteronomy. 17. 8, 9, 10, 11, 12,
13 verses, as Iunius in his Analisis illustrates that place, and the arguments
brought by Apollonius in this point, Apollon. ^s majest. circa sacra, cap. 2.
examen quaestionis septimae.
with his answers to Vedelius arguments have a great deal of strength in them,
and I entreat you in your Reply, if you will formally own the giving of this
power to the Magistrate, that you will answer that second chapter of Apollonius.

But to draw toward a conclusion of the comparison of the effectualnesse
between the two ways, supposing all you say of Submission, Non-communion,
Protestation were true, as also that you did give more to the Magistrate then
the Presbyterian, and that in spiritual matters, in cases of difference,
injuries, etc. you would from the Church have recourse to the Magistrate and
submit to his judgment, and that you did allow and would stand to the
Magistrates assisting and backing the sentence of non-communion against
Churches miscarrying according to the nature of the crime, as they judge meet;
(notwithstanding you have determined it, that without all controversy your way
of Church proceeding will be every way as effectual as the other can be
supposed to be,) yet I must tell you, it falls far short of the Presbyterian
way, both in preventing and remedying sins, errors, offenses, and in promoting
knowledge, godliness and peace in the Churches; For suppose non-communion of
Churches were a way of Christ and a remedy (the contrary to which I have at
large shown,) yet you must confess it is but a lower remedy, not an
authoritative, powererfull, dreadful remedy and means like that of
excommunication, which is the highest and greatest censure in the Church, the
Churches thunderbolt, and Anathema, a remedy and last means, which recovers a
sinner when all others will not, as admonition, suspension, deposition, and so
when non-communion and Protestation will not: In the Scriptures are laid down
many eminent fruits and effects of excommunication in the people of God, which
are not of any censure else, and I might fill a book with the ends, benefits
and fruits of this censure laid down by Divines in their Tractates and common
places of Ecclesiastical discipline and excommunication, but I will name only
that of the Professors of Leyden: Nam and remedium extre^um atque acer^mum est
ad carnem in homine domanda^, ac spiritum vivisicandum, and exemplum
efficacissimum, ne pars sincera ^rabatur, adversus ver^ eas qui in contunacia
and imp^itentia perseverant medium unicum ad Dei domum fermento and Ecclesia
Christi scandalia liberandam, atque adeo verbum and sacramenta a pro pbanatione
and nomen Dei ab externorum blasphematione vindicandum, Synops: Punor. Theol.
Disput. 48. de Eccl. discipl. these. 59.
Excommunication is the last remedy and the sharpest for the subduing of the
flesh in a man, and for the quickening of the spirit: and the most efficacious
example least the sound part should be corrupted: But against them, who
persevere in their contumacie and impenitencie it is the only means to free the
house of God of leaven, and the Church of Christ from scandals; and so to
vindicate the Word and Sacraments from profanation, and the Name of God from
the blaspheming of them without. Now pray show us in the Scripture any where,
the excellent fruits, benefits, ends of non-communion of Churches and
Protestation against them, as we can of excommunication in 1 Cor. 5. 5. 2 Cor.
2. 6, 7, 8, 9, 10. 2 Thessalonians. 3. 14. 1 Timothy 1. 20. And then for that other
remedy of the Magistrates power added to non-communion, to eeke out wherein
non-communion may be defective to excommunication, and for that purpose you say
you give more to the Magistrates power, that so what you fail and come short
in Ecclesiastical power, you may make it up in giving more civil power in
Ecclesiastical causes, the result of which must needs be this, that though in
your Church Way, you have not so much Ecclesiastical authoritative power for
miscarriages, and for reducing Churches that fall into heresy and schism, yet
you give more civil power, and allow the Magistrate more to interpose for
helping and reducing, so that less Ecclesiastical power and authority with a
large civil power to back it, will be every way as effectual as much
Ecclesiastical authority, with a small civil power: But of this I shall show
you your mistake, because the question is of Church matters, and matters of
conscience and the inward man, and of the Kingdom of Christ: Now the remedies
and means appointed for these are spiritual and Ecclesiastical; namely
spiritual punishments: Christ says my Kingdom is not of this world; and the
Apostle, 2 Cor. 10. 3, 4, 5. The weapons of our warfare are not carnal but
mighty through God to the pulling down of strong holds, by which the spirit
and the inward man, even every thought is subjected to the obedience of Christ,
spiritual remedies and means must be used in the Kingdom of Christ, and by
them Christ does his work, and hence in Ecclesiastical discipline, and those
scandalls in the Church (which is the point in hand) punishments in the body or
in the purse, etc. which can be by the power of the Magistrate, have no place
at all; Illa vero quae a spiritual Christi regno aliena sunt, effectus, qui ad
hoc coeleste Christi regnil pertinent producere nequeunt, proinde quod
institutione divina ad eos producendos non sunt sanctificata.
neither can such means which are of a different kind from the spiritual
Kingdom of Christ, produce those effects which belong Disciplina (...) c.
clesiastica nihil statuit in hominum bona, jura, dignitates, fortunas, etc. Sed
paena quae clavium potestate in^gitur spiritualis and qu^ hominem internum est
spiritualem, ejus slatum concernit. At veroextra speram activitatis politici
Magistratus est internum hominem subigers, spiritutiem poenam conscient ijs
infer, vel hominii animas ab ijs liberare. Apoll. ^us Majes^* circa sacra.
cap. a. exam. quest. 7. page 10^.
to that heavenly Kingdom: It Is out of the sphere of the activity of the
political Magistrate to subdue the inward man, or to inflict spiritual
punishment upon the consciences: And there is nothing more common in the
writings of the most learned and orthodox Divines, then to show that the civil
power and government of the Magistrate, and the Ecclesiastical government of
the Church are toto genere disjoined, and thereupon the power of the Magistrate
by which he deals with the corrupt manners and disorders of his people, is in
the nature and specificall reason distinct from Ecclesiastical discipline. For
the power of the Magistrate, by which he punishes sin, does not subserve to the
Kingdom of Christ the Mediator, that he may apply efficaciously to the elect
(...) of the Prophetical and Priestly office of Christ; he does not affect the
inward man and conscience with spiritual punishment, neither is this
instituted of God and sanctified as the means for the destruction of the
flesh, that the spirit may be saved in the day of Christ. Hence also by
Divines, the manifold difference between the censure of excommunication and the
punishment of the Magistrate is observed, Zanch. de Discipl. Eccl.
Zanchius does accurately show the difference between them, The cause of
excommunication is not the punishment of sin, but the salvation of the
sinner, and the edification of the Church, and the glory of God: but the scope
of the civil Magistrate and his office, is that he should punish the sin it
self, neither does it look to the salvation or damnation of the offender:
whereupon although the sinner repent, yet he does not spare, but punishes
according to his office: But the Church according to Christ's doctrine does not
strike with the spiritual sword, unless he be impenitent, neither is this
done for death but for salvation, therefore where any one rep^nts, the Church
receives him: so that in substituting the Magistrates power in defect of
excommunication, and giving a great deal more civil power for want of
spiritual to make it as availeable for those spiritual ends of the Church, is
to leave the proper remedies and means, and to take up others; and I would
desire you to answer me, whether the proper remedies and means appointed for
such ends and uses, or the improper remedies, nay remedies appointed and
intended mainly for other ends, be most effectual and powerful to accomplish
those ends? as also whether a part of a proper remedy being assisted and backed
with a great proportion of a remedy of another nature and kind, can be as
effectual as the whole remedy and means? as for instance, whether a little
grace assisted by civility and fairness of nature, will do as much to
overcome lusts and destroy the flesh, as the highest degrees of grace that
Saints may attain unto? and whether a little spiritual knowledge, seconded
with a great deal of common and outward Ad b^c multa etiam sunt scelera. in
quae ne Magistratus quidem Christianus animadvertere so let aut tenetur ex
legibus suis, v^uti sunt privatae in ^tiae, simultaies, participatio ^um
idalolatris in aliquo impio cultu, dissimulatio verae religionis: deni^ multi
man mores, tum domestic, tum public, qui non turbant aut pac^m publicam, aut
honestate^, and commodum publicum^ Ec^lesia vero ne ^sta quidem far debet sed
corrigere juxta Christi iusti^tum, Zanch. de Discip Ecclesiast.
knowledge, is as availeable for a Christian conversation as great measures of
spiritual knowledge, though a man have but a little knowledge in Philosophy,
Physic, Law? etc. But more particularly to let you see, that your recourse
unto the Magistrate and the Magistrates assisting and backing the sentence of
non-communion is not comparable to that of excommunication and Presbyteriall
government; I shall commend to your consideration these eight following
particulars;

First, There may be many sins and errors which the Christian Magistrate
meddles not with, are not matters of his cognizance, if you would have recourse
to him, or if the sentence of non-communion be pronounced against a Church
because of impenitencie in them, he has nothing to do to assist and back it;
there are no laws for such things, which yet being spiritual evils and
prejudicial to the souls of men, should be dealt with to recover men out of
them: Learned Zanchius in his differences that he gives between the censure of
excommunication and the Magistrates censure, observes this for a special one:
There are many wickednesses against which the Magistrate truly Christian does
not use to proceed; neither is bound by his Laws; as for instance, private
fallings out, hatreds, etc, as also many evil manners both domestical and
public, which do not disturb the public peace or the public good, but the
Church ought not to bare these, but to correct them according to Christ's
institution; Now what will you do in this case, here your recourse of
submission to the Magistrate, with the Magistrates backing non-communion fail
you and conduce nothing at all.

Secondly; In case the Magistrates be of those Churches and chief in those
sins, and miscarriages for which non-communion is denounced against those
Churches (as may easily fall out) how will you have the sentence of
non-communion now backed and assisted? both those Churches and the Magistrates
members of them, shall have nothing to back non-communion, to make it
equivalent to excommunication; nay I ask of you, who bring in more of the
Magistrates power to supply the want of excommunication, where the particular
Church will not, and the Classes may not, what shall be done with the
Magistrates offending, what means has God left for the recovery of them? you
cannot imagine they will make use of their power against themselves, now if
they may not have spiritual remedies and censure, as of excommunication, this
principle of the Magistrates power falls short here, whereas in Presbyteriall
government there is a remedy and redress for all, and certainly Gods ways of
governing his Church provides for all, whereas yours falls short.

3. What if upon the sentence of non-communion denounced against a Church or
Churches, the Magistrate judge otherwise, and hold the sentence of
non-communion unjust and will not assist it, (which may ordinarily fall out)
what effectual means has the offending Church of being reduced now by virtue
of the Magistrates power? and what must be done in this case? May the
Magistrate revoke that sentence of the Church, or Churches offended, and
declare it null, and cause the Churches who passed the sentence to recall it,
and to continue their communion? and suppose those Churches will not revoke it
but stand to their act, what shall be done in this case? who must judge now
between these Churches and the Magistrate? may the Magistrate now by his power
which you give him in Ecclesiasticals, instead of backing the sentence of
non-communion against a Church miscarrying (as the Church supposed) now turn
his power against the Church for denouncing the sentence of non-communion
uojustly (as the Magistrate judges) and not only declare it void, but punish
this Church or Churches for denouncing such a sentence of non-communion, and
declaring and protesting to all other Churches that they may do the like? and
what if all the Churches protested to, will continue to renounce communion with
the Church censured with the sentence of non-communion, notwithstanding the
Magistrates refusing to assist that sentence, nay though he declare it void? or
what if upon the Magistrates declaration, some of the Churches give the
righ-hand of fellowship again, but others will not, what must the Magistrate,
or the Churches do in these cases, and the like? consider well of it, whether
this effectual way of yours, the Magistrates assisting and backing the
sentence of non-communion, instead of a powerful means to relieve injured
persons, or reduce Churches, will not prove a means of great differences and
divisions, as well between the Churches and the Magistrate, as between the
Churches themselves.

4. Must the Magistrate assist and back the sentence of non-communion against
the Church or Churches offending and persisting therein, upon the coming of it
to him? and so punish it according to the nature of the crime as he judges
meet, without first hearing what the Church can say for it self, or must he
first hear them both? and in case more Churches mutually renounce communion
with one another, and protest against each other, with other particulars
instanced in about the remedy of non-communion under the fourth general head,
what shall he do in these cases, must he hear all?

5. What Magistrate or Magistrates do you mean, to whom in Ecclesiastical
causes you will have recourse unto, and that must assist and back the sentence
of non-communion? Do you mean the supreme and chief Magistrate, the highest
powers only, or all inferior Magistrates in their several stations and
divisions where these things fall out, as Majors of Cities and Towns, Justices
of Peace and such Magistrates? or do you mean the Christian Protestant
Magistrate, or Magistrates, though Heathens, Popish, Arrians? or do you mean
by the Magistrates power that there shall be Courts of civil Judicature
erected in every division of the Counties, to hear the differences that fall
out between Churches offended one with another? etc. or what do you mean? If
you understand the supreme Magistrate only and the highest powers, can they
always hear or attend unto, through the many great businesses of State
affairs, all the differences, scandals, schisms, that both in particular
Churches, and between Churches will fall out in a Kingdom or Nation in this
way of non-communion and protestation against one another? (especially in
Independent Churches, where people make Churches and Ministers in that way they
do, and have no fixed rules nor certain way) I warrant the supreme
Magistrate, and higher Powers, Kings and Parliaments shall have something to
do to back the sentence of non-communion, and to hear all causes and
differences: But if you understand the inferiors also, Majors, Bailiffs, etc. I
represent it to you, what fit judges most of them are to judge and determine of
such difficult Ecclesiastical causes in heresies, schisms, scandals, etc.
which fall out amongst the Ministers of Churches, and between Churches
themselves: Again, If you understand the Magistrate indefinitely and
obsolutely, any Magistrate, though Heathen, Popish, Arrian, as Mr Robinson does
in his Apology; and I find it in your manuscripts and principles, that you
take it so; judge then in your selves if the Church has not remedies among
themselves; how fit are they who understand not Christian religion, nor the
doctrines according to godliness, to judge of the great differences between
Churches, and to assist the sentence of non-communion against Churches? if the
Apostle Paul reproved the Corinthians so in 1 Cor. 6, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7. for
cariying matters from the Church (even the smallest matters, the things that
pertained to this life) unto unbeleevers, how would he blame the carrying of
things spiritual and Ecclesiastical unto Heathen from the Ministers of the
Church: or do you understand, that there shall be Courts of civil Judicature
to appeal unto, etc. then there must be certain Laws and rules agreed upon,
as for particular Churches, so between the Churches, according to which they
must proceed to back the sentence of non-communion and protestation, etc.
(which yet you practice not.) Now the many inconveniences that would come of
such Courts you may easily foresee, so that this is not like to be an
effectual remedy.

6. What shall be done in case there be no Magistrates at all, to take any
notice, in matters of Religion and Church government, but leave Churches to
themselves in that; as it was with you in Holland, there were no Magistrates
meddled with the government and order of your Churches, nor none to have
recourse unto, or to back the sentence of Non-communion, you being in a place
and State where no outward violence or any other external authority, either
civil or Ecclesiastical would have enforced you, what shall in this case
supply the defect of Excommunication, and of an Ecclesiastical authoritative
power? Has not the wisdom of Christ provided remedies in the Church for all
the internal necessities of the Church, and constituted it a perfect body
within it self?

7. Whether can it be rationally and probably thought that in an ordinary way
the having recourse unto the Magistrate though orthodox, and the submitting to
his particular cognizance and examination of such causes, with his backing the
sentence of Noncommunion in Ecclesiastical causes, in cases of sins,
errors, differences that arise in Churches, should be as effectual and
sufficient a remedy as the way of Classes and Synods? and that the Magistrates
interposing their authority and power of another nature will be as good as the
Authoritative Presbyteriall Government in all the subordinations and
proceedings of it: Now that it is not probable it should be, or that it should
serve in stead of Synods and Classes, take these probable and rational
grounds. 1. All wanton wits and erroneous spirits, all your Sectaries and
Novelists are rather for this way then for Synods and Classes, (though most of
them would have neither to meddle at all in matters of Religion, as the
Socinians, Anabaptists, etc.) Thus the Arminians were against Classes and
Synods, and all for the power of Magistrates, and it was their chief Engine by
which in those sad days of the Netherlands, they increased their party, and
came to such a height. Sectaries hope that if they can decline the
Ecclesiastical Assemblies, they sha'l what by flattery, and what by delay
(through other great businesses of State) and what by sophismes and fallacies,
and what from principles of policy in many Statesmen, and what by friends,
etc. effect that which they have no hopes at all by Ecclesiastical Assemblies,
they know the Presbyteries and Synods are able to discover their fallacies,
answer their arguments, will mind those businesses wholly, are not to be
wrought upon by State principles, etc. Now if in experience and reason, this
way were as powerful to reduce a Church or Churches from schism and heresy,
they would never be so much for this way rather then Presbytery. 2. Natural
reason dictates that they are best able and fittest to judge and resolve of
things, who do above others give themselves to the study and profession of
those things, as Physicians can best judge of wholesome meats, and diseases,
and Lawyers of the laws and differences arising in them, a Counsel of War
of difficult cases and points in war; And therefore in things that belong to
the spiritual good of the soul and the Church, the Ministers of the Church
are most likely to resolve and to remedy things: Can it ordinarily be expected
that the Magistrate should in matter of doctrine and opinion, in matters of
schism, and in matters of worthiness and abilities of Ministers, and in many
cases that arise, be able to judge and determine matters, as the Ministers and
Pastors of the Church? 3. Those who have most time and leisure to attend a
work and business, to sift into it, to hear all that can be said, and can
mind it, they being able and understanding are likeliest to determine best, and
bring things to a good end: we see in experience that able and honest men
through multitudes of business, delay long, slubber over businesses, and
cannot do things so effectually as they ought, and seldom prove good
Arbitratours in difficult, intricate cases: Now Magistrates through many great
and necessary businesses of State, having large dominions, cannot so well
attend as the Classes and Synods to hear and examine all the differences,
scandals, schisms, etc. that do and may arise both in Churches, and between
Churches (especially as would fall out in the Independent way, and particularly
in this way of submission, Non-communion and mutual Protestation) but matters
would be delayed and neglected, or escape wholly, or be hudled up. 4. To these
I might add as follows, that the Magistrate through his just greatness would
not know the spirits and dispositions of Ministers and people, nor of other
matters so well, as the Ministers who live among them, and converse with one
another frequently, neither would there be that easiness of access to the
Magistrates and great persons, as to their Ministers and Pastors, with other
such like.

8. But in Ecclesiastical matters and differences, upon the Magistrates
interposing his power, what is it you will submit unto? and what will you allow
him to do? And what is that power you will give him in backing the sentence of
Noncommunion upon his judgment of the cause; and how far and in what will
you obey him, that so we may understand how this Civil power is intended by
you for a remedy and help in Churches and between Churches? For instance
will you submit not to gather Churches, nor set up Assemblies witho^ ^is leave,
and upon complaints of the many mischiefs and differences occasioned
thereupon, will you upon his hearing both sides, and judging that those who are
gathered shall be dissolved, dissolve them and not meet in those ways any
more? Will you upon some members complaining to the Magistrate of some Minister
or Ministers in their Church, for preaching erroneous and unprofitable
doctrine, mere novelties, subtilties, and the Magistrate upon particular
cognizance and examination of such causes, judging that he shall preach no
more, will the Minister forbear upon it? or the Church to hear him in case
the Minister would not yield? will the Church now go choose a new and Orthodox
Minister upon it? or in case a member or more be unjustly excommunicated, and
they complain to the Magistrate, who calling the Church to account, and
hearing both sides, shall judge on the Complaiants side, and now order the
Church to absolve him, and order them to confess their sin publicly, and
appoint them to keep a day of humiliation for it, and order them to give him
such a sum of money for the wrong, trouble, and loss of his time in following
the business against them, will the Church now submit to do all this yea or
no? What say you to these and the like cases? Now I ask you this in the close,
because you pretend a great deal of submission to the Magistrate, and to give
him much power (which though you did grant, yet for the many reasons and
grounds already specified, this would not countervaile the way of the
Presbyterians in their spiritual censures by Presbyters and Synods) whether
you clearly and plainly allow this to the Magistrate? because I find in
Manuscripts, and hear that in Sermons by men of your Church Way, the contrary
is publicly preached and held, as for example in that Treatise about a Church,
which goes under one of your names, there is this passage, with more to that
purpose. The Saints need not expect their power or leave for to gather
together, so as without it such a combination is unlawful, nor should they
forbear it out of conscience of the Magistrates prohibition, indeed if the
Magistrate should force or compel them to forbear or persecute them, they may
forbear actual assembling, (Act. 8. 1.) not because the Magistrate forbids
it, but in mercy to themselves: And indeed about a Church Christian
Magistrates have no more power then Heathen Magistrates had: So that this is
spoken by you where Magistrates are Christian, and where Churches are already
settled: And add to this that M. S. in his Reply in defense of your Apology is
against coercive and coactive power in matters of Religion, and that you all
hold a toleration, and that the Magistrates ought not to hinder men, or punish
them for the matter of their consciences, how then notwithstanding all your
discourse of the power of the Magistrate, which added to Non-communion will be
an effectual means to releeve persons injured, to reduce Churches and persons
going in schism and errors, shall persons injured be remedied or Churches and
persons reduced? For suppose the persons or Churches that now fall into such
errors and schisms will pretend, nay it is so really, that they in their
conscience hold errors for truths, and thereupon withdraw from such Churches
to others, nay suppose those who now receive these new truths should cast out
of their fellowship, and excommunicate some for holding otherwise, as for
instance a Church falling into Antinomianisme should censure some of their
members that remain orthodox for legal Christians, and for being enemies to
free grace, and should judge themselves bound to do so in these and such like
cases, what remedy is there for miscarrying Churches by all the power of the
Magistrate you pretend to give to him? But this is brought in here by you, and
given to him, to put of that strong argument against your way, and that you may
have something for present to blind the eyes, and stop the mouths of many that
look no further, that it may serve your turn at such a straight, whereas upon
other principles you deny the Magistrate this when it shall come to be a
matter of conscience: And now by all the several particulars under this fifth
head, the understanding Reader may observe that not only in many respects your
non-Communion and Magistrates power are not a remedy comparable to the
Presbyterian way, not proper, nor to the nature of the offenses and things in
question, a way in stead of bringing things to an end, redressing and mending
matters amiss, that will be but the beginning of more strife and making more
differences and evils then either it sindes, or can heal, the mother and nurse
of Confusions, Disorders, and endless contentions; but also that all the power
here pretended to be given to the Magistrate upon examination is no such matter
nor will not amount to make good the ends propounded; whereas the Presbyteriall
Government here scandalized, as either wholly inconsistent with this form of
Civil Government, or else not giving it its due, will be found by its
principles not only to have powerful spiritual remedies for all spiritual
evils of the Church, but will be found in many respects to make use of, and to
give honor and power to the Civil Magistrate as a nursing Father from first
to last, even in the ordinary way of the Order and Government of the Church
beyond you, besides what they give more in extraordinary cases, in a Church
miserably corrupted, disordered, etc. Of which the Reader may read at large in
Apollonius (who was a great Presbyterian, cap. 2.) And so learned Illi certe
nullo modosinendi sunt vivere, cii illorum temporali^ vita alijs (...) aeterna
mors. Za^ch. de magistr. 168. Beza. Epist. 83.
Zanchius in his Tractate de Magistratis, shows it is in the power of the
Magistrate not to suffer Heretics nor erroneous persons to preach, and he
gives him coactive punitive power to cut them off. Beza a great Presbyterian,
in his Epistles and other writings, in matters of Religion does not exclude the
Magistrate, but gives him that power in some things which you deny: but besides
that power they give the Magistrate, they stand for, as needful in the Church,
Classes and Synods for the Government of it: Zanchy shows that discipline
cannot Zanch de Eccl. (...). gubern. p 552. (...) quar. praecept 713.
take place, where the Ministers never meet together, the me^ting of Ministers
and Ecclesiastical Synods we judge most necessary; As no Polity,
Commonwealth or Kingdom can consist without their meetings, Senates and
Councels; so there is need of Synods for the governing of the Church and for
the preventing of her^fies: In a word all things are loose in independent
Government, every one is left, and may take liberty without control, to do
what is good in their own eyes, if they like not any Church whereof they are
members, they may go to another, nay, a few in a Church disliking that Church
may go make a Church themselves, and make Ministers, and hold what they will,
as Mr Sympson did with some few more, and since some have rent from Mr Sympsons
Church as he from Mr Bridge. The rules they go by are loose, nothing being
fixed nor certain among them, and there can be no setlednesse of mind, nor
consistence of Principles, in that way simple and well meaning people according
to their Principles must be drawn till they come to that, to hold that there
are no true Churches, nor Ministers at all yet upon the earth (which principle
begins to take, and spread already amongst many Independents.) In a word, that
Liberty and looseness, which is from first to last in Independent Government,
holding no authoritative Ecclesiastical power out of the particular
Congregation to remedy or prevent any matter, and that which is in the
particular Congregation, being on many Grounds and Principles of theirs so
slight and weak, as the only subject of Excommunication being no other kind of
sins then may evidently be presumed to be perpetrated against the parties
known light, etc. as that two or three Saints, or now of late six or seven may
withdraw from Churches defective and impure, and make Churches and choose all
officers etc. with other like; (so that what need they care then for that
Church of which they are members though cast out, seeing they can make new, and
have all to their own mind, be chief there) is a dangerous temptation even
to sober men, to make them presume to broach that, practice that which else
they would never have done. But in the Order and Government of the Reformed
Churches there is consistence, unity and strength (as is evident by a hundred
years visible experience of Gods blessing from heaven upon them) there is also
a certainty and fixednesse of rules agreed on, both for particular
congregations, for Classes and Synods; there is an awing and preserving of
officers and people in their bounds, and keeping them from running out to
errors, etc. there being no man, be he never so able or subtle that can
escape calling to account and censure. Magistrates and Ministers have their
power in the Church without usurpation and confusion, and to conclude in the
words of the Commissioners of the Church of Scotland; were Magistrates and
civil power acquainted with this order and government of the Church, they
would find their authority increased, their work more easy, and their
places more comfortable thereby.

And now having given an answer to that part of your Apology under that
instance of the government and discipline of the Churches, by speaking fully of
those five heads unto which I refer all your discourse about the government
and discipline of the Churches, (beginning in page 12. and ending in the 21.) I
will for a close speak something to some of your passages contained in this
part of your Narration, which could not so well be taken in, nor so properly
animadverted upon under those five heads without the Readers being much
confounded and entangled.

1. To that passage, p. 14. We had for the most part of the time we were abroad
three Elders at least in each congregation whom we were subject to: I ask if
the Churches were subject to the Elders, you many times having but three, and
sometimes but two, nay one Elder, the government of your Churches then was
either Monarchical Government, or Oligarchicall at best? And if the Churches
were subject to the Elders, who were the Elders subject to, the Elders then
were under no subjection, but if the Churches were subject to the Elders, and
not the Elders to the Churches, riddle me what is the meaning of all those
phrases, the Church still did so and so, not the Elders, the Church at Roterdam
deposed M. Ward, and not M. Bridge and an Elder or two, and so M. Nigh and M.
Goodwin the Ministers, were sent by the Church, and that Church which had
offended, confessed their sin, and restored their Minister to his place again,
which sure was not M. Bridge and a lay-Elder or two.

2. To those passages of Churches offended, calling to an account Churches
offending, proceeding to full and open trials, and examinations, to Iudiciarie
charges, and deposition of witnesses openly before all comers of all sorts, as
can be expected in any Court where Authority about them enjoins it, and of a
particular Church being censurable by neighbor Churches about them. I desire
to put this disjunctive proposition, Either this power of calling to an
account, examining, deposing witnesses, censuring them, etc. are acts of ruling
and government, and in the Churches challenged acts of subjection, or they are
not; if you grant they be acts of rule and government, then there is an
authoritative power which Churches have out of their Churches, and you grant it
in such acts at least, though not in that of excommunication: But whether if it
be so in these, that of excommunication will not follow, let it be considered,
for either the censure of excommunication is not founded upon the common
grounds, on which callings to account, and some censures are, or else there is
some proper peculiar grounds in the nature of that ordinance, or in the
Scripture forbidding that, (though allowing others,) neither of which will be
found to have a foundation in Scripture, and if so, why then do you make all
this ado of entire, full, complete power within your selves, and are against
the combination of Churches in Classes, and Presbyteries, to do that
constantly, certainly and presently upon scandals that fall out in a Church,
which you do at best but at uncertainties, and after a long time, when the
remedy may come too late, a year or two afterward; But if you answer these
are no acts of government and rule in this Church or Churches, but merely acts
of consultation, advice, persuasion, and that when the Churches offended have
heard all, they only give their counsel and advice, and commend it to them,
but it is in their liberty to do or not to do; for though they submit to a
hearing, and open trial by virtue of the principle of submission, yet they
submitted not to stand to the determination and agreement of that Church, or
Churches: I answer, if you mean no more then the bare power of counsel and
advice in all this, and no power of Authoritative determination and decision,
this is no more, nor you give no more to the Churches offended then to
particular Christians who may counsel them in such cases; And why then do you
hold out such words, and your practice of a full and open trial, and what
speak you of room for complaints, and of subjecting to an open trial, and
review of what can be brought, and of being censurable by neighbor Churches,
etc. Whether be not all these the usual phrases and expressions of acts of
power and government? can there be so much as trial, and examination, and
judiciary charges, and deposition of witnesses without authority, much less
censure? can you ever show it either in civil government in Commonwealth, or
in Ecclesiastical in Churches, out of Scripture, or stories, where all these
acts were exercised and practiced by persons who only had power of counsel and
advice? and if you cannot, how can you make it good, but that this must be more
then advice and counsel, namely authoritative power. It is given as a rule by
your selves, that in matters of a common nature, it is in Ecclesiastical
government as in civil; Now if in all civil Assemblies, all these acts and
practices be acts of authority and government, why holds it not so in
Ecclesiastical? And further to reason though Churches be sisters, and equal
each considered by it self, yet in cases of offense and difference between
Churches, the Churches complained and appealed unto, to whom the rest submit,
should now be greater, and have more power in this thing, then the Churches
submitting, and their acts should be authoritative, as in reason, 6, or 8, men
falling out, and choosing and submitting to others to hear the business and
make an end of it, these are now greater, and have a power and authority over
these quo ad hoc, and in these acts and what they do are acts of power, which
they must stand unto or suffer the penalty.

Thirdly, You speak more then once upon occasion of this scandal committed in
that Church at Rotterdam, of Churches as in the plural number, sister Churches
to be consulted with before hand, and of your Churches mutually and universally
acknowledging that principle of submission, and how that Church which with
others was most scandalized, did by Letters declare their offense, and of
requiring a full and public hearing before all the Churches of our Nation: Now
what, and where were those other Churches of whom all this is spoke? I grant,
that at Arnheim was one Church that Mr Bridges Church should have consulted
with, or have submitted to, but where were any other Churches? I will yield the
Church at Arnheim might by letters declare their offense, but I know not what
other Churches did by letters do the like; I grant the Church at Arnheim was a
Church of our Nation, before whom the offending Church did yield a public
hearing, but I know of no other, I will not question but that the Church at
Arnheim, and Mr Bridges Church, did upon the offense of deposing Mr Ward,
acknowledge that principle of submission, and submit to one another, but I
doubt no other did then mutually submit, for besides the Church at Arnheim
offended, and Mr Bridges Church offending, there was no other Church of your
way and communion for the offending Church to consult with, or that did write
letters, or before whom the business was heard, etc. for I suppose and judge
Mr Simpsons new Church being at that difference with Mr Bridges Church, and Mr
Bridge with him, Mr Bridges Church should not have consulted with Mr Simpsons
before hand, and that Mr Bridges Church would not have yielded the principle of
submission, to have submitted to a full trial and examination of all
proceedings before Mr Simpsons, and in case Mr Simpsons Church had sent letters
declaring their offense, they would have declined it as partial, and as
accounting them the parties offending; and I never heard that Mr Simpson with
some messengers of his Church joined with the messengers of Arnheim in the
trial of that business of Mr Ward, or sat as Judges, etc. so that I cannot
tell why you use Churches in the plural number thus all along in that
business, but that the Reader might conceive for your greater authority and
esteem, and for the greater solemnity of the action, there were more Churches
besides that at Arnheim.

Fourthly, For those two Gentlemen who were sent with the Ministers of the
Church offended, to require an account, whether were those Gentlemen Elders of
the Church of Arnheim, or private members only? If they were not Elders, why
were private members sent before Elders, show us a rule for that? and satisfy
us how private persons and no officers of the Church should represent the
Church? but if they were Elders, why do you name them Gentlemen only and not
speak of them as officers?

5. Whether though you make so sure of it, yet it be not to be doubted upon the
grounds of reason and light of nature, that it is not more brotherly and more
suited to that liberty and equality Christ has endowed his Churches with, but
a point of greater authority, inequality and usurpation for four men (grant
them to be a Church representative) to take upon them what those four members
of Arnheim did to a whole Church for so many days, so fully and judiciarily to
proceed (as you write in the 21 page) then for a whole Presbytery of Ministers
and Elders, or a grave Synod to call to an account, and hear the offenses of
two or three in a particular Church, and together with that Church
representative to decree such censures, as public acknowledgement of their
offenses, or excommunication, etc.

Sixthly, I much wonder how you can call the meeting of Mr Goodwin and Mr Nigh,
with two Gentlemen more, calling Mr Bridge with the rest of that Church,
supposed to be delinquents, such a sol^mne Assembly, the solemnity of which
has left as deep an impr^ssion upon your hearts of Christ's dreadful presence
as ever you have bee^ present at: Certainly you have either been but at few
solemn Assemblies where Christ's dreadful presence has been, or else your
phancie was mighty high at that time, as to make such a deep impression upon
you of a dreadful presence as ever you have been at: Let me ask Mr Nigh, what
was this Assembly, beyond the solemn general Assembly of Scotland, where you
were present when the great solemn Covenant of the Kingdoms passed, of which
you write so highly into England? or was it beyond the Assembly of Divines,
wherein not only two of you are for consultation, but all you ^ive, (with so
many other godly Divines, where instead of two Gentlemen assisting then, here
the Worthies of both Houses, Lords and Commons assist,) nay a Theater of all
other the most judicious and severe, where much of the piety, learning and
wisdom of two Kingdoms are met in one (as your selves confess afterward in
the 27 page,) I am of the mind there are ordinarily many Assemblies, and where
you may have been, that have a more dreadful presence of Christ then that had.
The Church meeting to partake in the Lords Supper, called the dreadful and
terrible hour by some of the Fathers, the Church meeting to excommunicate an
impenitent sinner, (where there is a promise of binding in Heaven what is bound
on earth) which you cannot show in your principle of submission and
non-communion: But this parenthesis is drawn in, in the relation of your
practice (like many other particulars in this book) to take with the simple
people, and to possess them with the excellency and majesty of your
Congregationall way, beyond the Presbyteriall and Synodicall, and this passage
here with many others in your Apologeticall Narration, are parallel to passages
in Mr Bachelours letters, (who after his sudden conversion to the
Church Way,) for want of better arguments to win the people, and to evince
the truth of the Church Way, writes thus. For mine Rotterdam, September. 4t^.
1641. New; style.
own part, though but a few weeks agone when I was in England, I found some
objection in my spirit, against the way of the Holland Churches, and conceived
wrongfully (as Mr Edwards now does) through misunderstanding cast abroad by
them, whose sore eyes cannot endure the light of truth, yet since by a good
hand of providence I have been at Rotterdam and beheld the beautiful face of
holiness, the lively representations of Jesus Christ in his ordinances, the
sweet and blessed communion of the Saints in all love and dearness, mine
objections are removed, mine heart is convinced, and I think many thousands in
England as well as my self would soon be overcome at the very sight thereof.
A soul of gracious ingenuity needs no other Rhetoric to win it then the
presence of these heavenly administrations? But what Anabaptist or Antinomian
cannot say all this for their way, and more too, crying out the ravishments of
the spirit, free and glorious grace, etc.

7. You speak of consulting with sister Churches before that you proceed to
matters of great moment, and that you professed publicly in cases of
concernment you ought so to do, page 16. and yet in page 15. you claim a full
and entire power complete within your selves until you shall be challenged to
err grossly, now how do these agree? for if you must consult before hand,
then it is not an entire, full, complete power before miscarrying, and it is but
a power of consulting and advising after miscarriages and erring grossly, and
not an authoritative power.

8. Whereas you call Presbyteriall excommunication, excommunication pretended;
how much more truly may we call non-communion pretended, and Protestation
pretended? for besides that in the Scripture, excommunication is to be found,
there is such a censure there, but no such sentence at all as non-communion;
there is also ground in Scriptures, that Churches may be excommunicated as well
as particular persons, and of this in the Observations and Annotations upon
your Apologeticall Narration, page 43, 44. you may read strong proofs, which
your good friend M. S. thought best to take no notice of, as not knowing how to
answer them, and I turn them over from M. S. to you five, to give a satisfying
answer.

9. For that learned Speech made at the introduction and entrance into that
solemn Assembly, as the preface to it, that it was the most to be abhorred
maxim that any Religion has ever made profession of, etc. I say it is but a
mere flourish, and according to the Proverb, here is a great deal of cry, but
a little wool, and notwithstanding all these swelling words, you are guilty
indeed, what in words and phrases you deny, and in the more proper place when I
shall speak to it in page 23, of your Apology, I will evince you are guilty
of Independent liberty.

Thus we have rendered some small account of those, the saddest Apolog.
days of our pilgrimage on earth, wherein although we enjoyed God, yet besides
many other miseries (the companions of banishment) we lost some friends and
companions, our f^llow laborers in the Gospel, as precious men as this earth
bears any, through the distemper of the place, and our selves came hardly off
that service with our healths, yea lives.

To this Section which contains the close and winding up of that part of your
Narration, during the time of your exile. I answer, It is a small account
indeed you have rendered to what you seem to hold out, and to what such a
Narration should have amounted, concealing and reserving so much of your
practice and ways, (as I have before observed;) And as for those words, the
saddest days of our pilgrimage on earth, etc. I wonder at them, sure you have
been very happy men, and have enjoyed many very good days, that in your whole
pilgrimage on earth of forty years and upwards, those three or four years in
Holland, where you enjoyed so many outward comforts and blessings, should be
your saddest days; for my part I cannot say so; Neither am I satisfied in
those words, besides many other miseries the companions of banishment: For
though in some banishments there are many other miseries the companions of
them, as deprivation of wife, children, friends, maintenance, with nakedness,
hunger, wandering up and down in strange and desolate places, harsh usage in a
strange land, yet you felt none of these: But on the contrary, you enjoyed
wives, children, estates, suitable friends, good houses, full fare, I cannot
imagine fewer miseries, (had you been in England) could have waited upon you,
then did there, (unless that of bitter divisions, and deadly differences, the
constant companions of your Church Way:) I could name many more miseries did
abide some of us that stayed behind, and might have done you to, had you stayed
in England: As for those two instanced in, particularly the loss of some
friends and companions, your fellow laborers in the Gospel, and your selves
coming off hardly with your healths, yea lives, I must tell you, those cannot
properly and truly be called the companions of your banishment; for those two
Ministers (namely Mr Archer and Mr Harris) according to all reason and humane
probability might not have lived longer in England, both of them (as it is well
known) having been long weak men in consumptions, and sometimes nigh unto
death before they went, and for one of these Ministers Mr Archer, he was so
far from being worse that he grew better and stronger in stomach, sleep,
strength and spirits after he went over into Holland, (as besides the many
letters writ into England to friends of all sorts of the healthfulnesse of that
place where he was with some of you, and of the increase of his strength,) I
have letters written to me under his own hand, to show the contrary to what you
affirm both of the distemper of the place, and of the many other miseries the
companions of that banishment: In one letter he writes thus; For Holland, it is
much better then I expected, for pleasantness, health, plenty of flesh and
foul: we alter not o^r English diet in any thing: Utrich is a brave City, a
University with godly professors, full of English; a man may live as pleasantly
there as at Hartford. And in another, My stomach, sleep, strength and vigor,
are sensibly increased, the Lord be praised: And besides these letters the
thing it self speaks, for whereas in England he was not able to preach, nor
had not hardly three times in three years, after he came into Holland he was
Pastor of the Church at Arnheim, and preached constantly, and had that strength
to beget a son, whereas he being married many years in England never had any
child. And not only from him but from others also there have been many letters
sent to commend the places where you lost your fellow laborers, to be so
healthful and pleasant as to resemble them to Bury in Suffolk and Heart ford.
As for that high praise of those two worthy Ministers, as precious men as this
earth bears any: I think it becomes you not, they being yours, and of your
way, and cannot be interpreted by the understanding Reader, but that you take
occasion here, as in all other places of your Apologeticall Narration, to
magnify and cry up your own party, the more to make people to be in love with
your way, which had as precious men as this earth bears any, but I judge it is
too high and hyperbolicall; for though I dearly loved the men, and do
acknowledge they were precious, and believe they are gone (as that great Divine
said in his sickness he was going) where Luther and Zuinglius do well agree;
yet I must needs correct that phrase, as this earth bears any: For I am of
opinion that both in learning and piety they were inferior to some, not only
in the earth which is wide and spacious, containing Churches and Ministers more
precious then you know of, but in this earth of England and Scotland, and your
Encomium of them (if you remember what you writ before of some precious men
alive now in New England as ever this Kingdom bred) and granting that
New England is the earth, does amount to this, that these two Ministers Mr
Archer and Mr Harris, were as precious men as ever were in England, which you
must pardon me if I doubt it, (for I believe Whitakers, Reynolds, Baynes,
Greeneham, Dod, Brightman, with many more were more precious:) As for that
other instance, Your selves coming hardly off that service with your healths,
yea lives; I have not heard of any great sicknesses any of you five had there,
(excepting Mr Bridge who came hardly off with his health,) Some of you indeed
had Agues there, which you might have had in England, in Suffolk, or in
Oxfordshire, and for Mr Bridges sickness, I judge it was as well occasioned,
and strengthened upon the unhappy differences and bitter divisions between him
and Mr Simpson, and Mr Ward and their Churches, and the wicked reports raised
upon him, which discontented and troubled his spirit, as by the distemper of
the place or change of the air; and for others of you, how fat and well liking
you came back into England, and how all of you returned well clad and shining
beyond most of us, who lived always in England, many can witness, and have
spoken of it (all which were no great signs either of the many other miseries
the companions of your banishment, nor of the coming off so hardly with your
healths and lives.)

When it pleased God to bring us his poor Exiles back again Apolog,
in these revolutions of the times, as also of the condition of this Kingdom,
into our own Land (the pouring forth of manifold prayers and tears for the
prosperity whereof, had been no small part of that public worship we offered
up to God in a strange Land;) we found the judgment of many of our godly,
learned brethren in the Ministry (that desired a general Reformation) to
differ from ours in some things, wherein we do professedly judge the Calvinian
Reformed Churches of the first Reformation from out of Popery, to stand in
need of a further Reformation themselves; And it may without prejudice to them,
or the imputation of schism in us from them, be thought that they coming new
out of Popery (as well as England) and the founders of that Reformation not
having Apostolic infallibility, might not be fully perfect the first day,
yea and it may hopefully be conceived, that God in his secret, yet wise and
sacred dispensation, had left England more unreformed, as touching the outward
form, both of worship and Church Government, then the neighbor Churches were,
having yet powerfully continued a constant conflict and contention for a
further Reformation for these four score years, during which time he had
likewise in stead thereof, blessed them with the spiritual light (and that
increasing) of the power of Religion in the practique part of it, shining
brighter and clearer then in the neighbor Churches, as having in his infinite
mercy on purpose reserved and provided some better thing for this Nation when
it should come to be reformed, that the other Churches might not be made
perfect without it, as the Apostle speaks.

Having Apologized for your selves and way in your principles, opinions,
practices and carriage toward all sorts both before your exile and in your
exile, here in this section you come to Apologize for your selves, and for what
you have done since your coming back into England, both before the Assembly
and since the Assembly, until the time of putting forth this present
Apologeticall Narration, which beginning in this section is continued by you in
the following sections to the 30th page: But brethren why do you in the
beginning of this part of your Apology give your selves that name of Gods
poor Exiles, was it not enough to have said, when it pleased God to bring us
back again into our own Land; but you must call your selves Gods Exiles and
poor Exiles; I wonder you termed not your selves poor pilgrims: But the
reason why you name your selves so here, and in this Apology take occasion so
often to speak of exile and banishment, may easily be guest at, namely to
commend your persons and way the more to the people, and for want of better, to
take them with such popular arguments, as suffering a grievous exile: Thus in
many other passages of your Apology, you bring in and insert many such kind of
phrases to work with the people the more, but do insinuate many things
against the Presbyteriall way, as of engagements, public interest, etc. But
let me a little examine whether you five can fitly be styled Gods poor Exiles,
I think to speak properly, you neither were Exiles, nor poor, for you were
not banished, nor forced out of your own Laud, neither by being brought into
the High Commission Court, or by Letters missive, and Attachments out against
you, (as ever I heard) but (excepting M. Burroughes who fled in haste, as being
in dangers for words spoken) you went at your own times over into Holland with
all conveniences of your Families and other company. Peter. Martyr. loc.
commun. Class 4 cap. 14. de exilio. Groe^ etiam (...) a fugiendo exilium
vocarent.
Among the Greeks Fuga was called exilium, and so you flying out of the
kingdom, in that sense may be called exiles, but how ever in some sense you may
call it exile, because you did fly out of your own Country (though none
persecuted you) to shun persecution before it came, as foreseeing possibility
of danger, yet you can in no sense be called poor Exiles, for you were rich
Exiles, who in Holland enjoyed many conveniences and such abundance, as to be
able (some of you) to spend 200 or 300. lb. per annum, and to do other
expensive acts (which for present I forbear to name) And I can produce letters
of many conveniences which you enjoyed there; Letters before quoted by me of
M. Archers speak so much. Poor exiles are such who have no certain
dewlling place, maintenance, friends, but how they can be called poor Exiles,
that enjoy wives, children, friends full and liberal maintenance annually,
liberty of callings, with all pleasures and delights as much, or rather more
then in their own country I see not: Suppose some merchants and tradesmen who
could not so well nor so much to their advantage follow their callings, and
drive their trade in their own country should for their better advantage, and
accomodatons in these kinds, go with their families into another Country, can
these be called Exiles? Suppose a Minister, who disliking some things here in
the present Government to be established; or wanting a liberal maintenance, or
fearing the war, should go over to Roterdam, Hambrough to preach to the
company of Merchants there, where he shall have better means, can this
Minister be styled a poor exile: Now I leave you and the Readers to make
application. As for those words: Gods bringing you back again in these
revolutions of the times into your own land. I know God permitted it, and
ordered it, but I well know Satan hastened and furthered it, for the dividing
of the godly party here, and for the obstructing the work of Reformation and
hindering the settling the government of the Church, that so in the mean time
he might increase his kingdom, and bring in a flood of all errors and
licentiousness upon us; and Brethren let me speak sadly to you (not out of
passion, but out of long and serious deliberation) it had been good for you,
and for us that you had continued exiles still, and that neither you five, nor
they of New England had heard of the revolution of our times and Gods visiting
us in mercy, till the Church and government had been settled; I am confident
that things had not then been at that pass now as they are: As for that
Parenthesis, the pouring forth of manifold prayers and tears for the
prosperity of the Kingdom in a strange Land: I will not gainsay it, only
let me mind you of two passages in your Apology, Our selves had no hopes of
ever so much as visiting our own land again in peace and safety to our persons,
and the other, when we had least dependencie on this kingdom, or so much as
hopes ever to abide therein in peace. Now take away faith and hope, and
endeavors will much cease, and this I judge should much hinder your prayers and
tears for the prosperity of the land (for my part I had much hope of the
kingdom, when things were at worst, and I expressed it both in preaching and
conference to many, and some can witness what I have said to them of the
Archbishop of Canterbury and the rest of that faction, and of the revolution
of the times) God was pleased so to support my spirit, that I expected and
waited (as men do for the light of the morning) when that every day God would
arise, and do some great work and change the times and seasons. As for your
finding the judgment of many of your godly, learned brethren in the Ministry
(that desired a general Reformation) to differ from yours in some things, that
was no marvel, I wonder you could expect it otherwise, being but a few young
men of yesterday, and going a way by your selves so different from all Reformed
Churches: But I must tell you, you found not only the judgment of many godly
Ministers that desired a general Reformation, but the judgment of them all,
who were in public employment, and of any great account to differ from yours,
not only in some things, but even in your whole Church way; how ever that
since by your presence, and your politic way of working, and the strong
stream of popular applause running that way, some few Ministers, uncertain,
heady, inconstant, wanton-witted men are since come off to your way; but as for
your confidence and open profession that in the things wherein you differed
from many of your godly brethren, that you professedly judge the Calvinian
reformed Churches of the first Reformation from out of Popery to stand in need
of a further Reformation themselves. I answer they may do so, and I know no
Church yet so perfect but may stand in need of some further Reformation, and
the Commissioners of the Church of Scotland grant you so much, page 7. That
they are most willing to hear Reformat. of Church Government.
and learn from the word of God what needs further to be reformed in the
Church of Scotland: Now whether your Churches and those of new England be so
perfect, (though not of the first Reformation) as to stand in no need of a
further Reformation in government I much doubt, especially considering that
letter lately come from New England written by M. Parker, as also a another
Letter from M. Wilson of Boston, and a terrible Let from a reverend godly
Minister there, whose name I have been entreated to conceal (least it might
much prejudice him there,) but for answer I must tell you I do professedly
judge, that in your sense in the things excepted against by you, the Reformed
Churches (particularly that of Scotland) need not a further Reformation, namely
to come to your principles of Democracie, Independencie, Libertinisme, and to
keep all those and their children from admission into the visible Church whom
you keep out, and to condemn as unlawful all set forms of prayer composed
by Synods and Assemblies (though never so holy and heavenly for matter and
frame:) And as to that, that it may without prejudice to them, or the
imputation of Schism in you be thought that coming new out of Popery, they
might not be fully perfect the first day. I answer, they never thought so,
neither were they so fully perfect in Church government the first day, but the
reformed Churches (particularly the French-Churches) had many Synods,
Assemblies and Colloquies, where points of government and order have been
further debated, cleared, and Canons added, and in the Church of Scotland after
doctrine was established, they were exercised in conferences and Assemblies
about matters of Discipline and Government (which is the perfection spoken of
here by you) above twenty years. Reformat. of Church gover. page 14.
Besides considering that the Reformed Churches both in France, Scotland and
Holland, have heretofore been troubled with the maine of your principles, and
have heard all the Arguments and reasons for them, and against their own way,
and that both of old, and now of later years, Scotland of old having been
troubled with the Separatists, and the Churches of France by Morellius, against
whom Sadeel did write, and Bez. Epist. ^8
Beza in his Epistles writes against that principle of the power of the people,
that nothing is ratified except the people present by their express suffrages
do decree it, and against Bez. Epist. 83
private men's prophesying in the Church: and of late (though the controversy
be grown so high) yet Divines both in Holland and Scotland (as your selves
confess) have writ against your way, and can see no light I^m it, and in a
general Assembly of Scotland since our Parliament, the point being moved and
debated there, it was concluded against by the whole Assembly, nemine
contradiconte, as a Letter written from that Assembly to many Ministers in the
City (which I heard read at a meeting) testifies, neither are any of the
Reformed Churches yet satisfied, by all that has been written about your
Independent government, nor our present Assembly by all they have heard from
you, after so many days speaking for your way: So that what the Reformed
Churches stand for now, is not as coming new out of Popery, and so wanting
light (as you assert) and therefore though they had not Apostolic
Infallibility, yet they might well be in the right for Church Government, and
therefore the Reformed Churches, and the Church of England too judging of
government now after above 80. years coming out of Popery, and after hearing
all that has been said, and that you can say (now after almost a years
sitting in the Assembly.) They yet judge Presbyteriall government by Classes
and Synods to be the true form of Church Government, against your
Independencie, so that now the ground you going upon, being taken away, you
cannot without great prejudice to the Reformed Churches so peremptorily judge
them (as you do in this place of your Apology:) And as your practice cannot
be without prejudice to them, and the imputation of Schism in you from them,
to set up new Churches and divide from them upon these grounds, so this passage
of yours here against all the Reformed Churches, cannot avoid the suspicion of
great arrogancy and pride, to proclaim your selves to see more then all the
Churches in worship and government, and to judge them so: It Is a high
presumption that five such young men as you are, and no deeplier studied,
should thus proudly, and tanquam ex tripode, so magisterially conclude against
all the Reformed Churches. Certainly, had you had the humility of many of Gods
servants you would rather have feared, and questioned whether you might not
have been mistaken in your grounds, and therefore modestly have propounded your
doubts to the Assembly to have resolved them, rather then before the points
ever came to be debated in the Assembly (in such matters where you go against
the common stream of all Reformed Churches) to have thus professedly,
peremptorily and resolvedly; both in this Section, and in the next page 24.
determined the questions. And brethren let me friendly mind you who are you
five? of what standing, reading, graces to take so much to your selves; and to
be so peremptory, that you should see that, which all the Reformed Churches do
not, nor are not able by any of your Arguments, nor what else is extant to see
or be convinced of; But as for the close to this part of the Section concerning
the Calvinian Reformed Churches, that it may hopefully be conceived that God
left England more unreformed as touching Government and Worship then the
neighbor Churches were, etc. It is a strange speech, and savours of a strange
high conceit of your own way of Independencie, and of your great light and
ability in this Assembly, (where the Church of England is to be reformed) and
to speak plainly, the English and sense of all these lines is this, That it
may be hopefully conceived that God in his secret, yet wise and gracious
dispensation has all this long time for above 80. years left England more
unreformed, and of his infinite mercy on purpose reserved it for this present
Assembly, that M. Goodwin, M. Nigh, etc. might bring a new light in Church
government and order, and so Scotland and the Neighbour-Churches might be
new-moulded into their way: But how ever some of you are men of strong fancies,
and all of high confidences of your own opinions and ways, yet I believe you
will be deceived at this time, (how ever you may comfort your selves and
Churches with the hopes of prevailing at another time, saying that Presbytery
shall fall as Episcopacie has done after it is time) (one of that way for want
of arguments having used such words to me) and that M. Goodwin, M. Nigh, etc.
will not be able to effect what they desire and hope for, but it may be rather
hopefully conceived, that in stead of the reformed Churches coming to them,
these five members of the Assembly at last, with others to, upon this glorious
Reformation will be brought to join with other reformed Churches, according to
the solemn Covenant and oath themselves have entered into.

We found also (which was as great an affliction to us as our former Apolog.
troubles and banishment) our opinions and ways (wherein we might seem to
differ) environed about with a cloud of mistakes and misapprehensions, and our
persons with reproaches; Besides other calumnies as of schism, etc. (which yet
must either relate to a differi^g from the former Ecclesiastical government of
this Church established, and then who is not involved in it as well as we, or
to that constitution and government that is yet to come; and until that be
agreed on, established and declared, and actually exist, there can be no guilt
or imputation of schism from it,) That proud and insolent title of
independencie was affixed unto us, as our claim; the very sound of which
conveyes to all men's apprehensions the challenge of an exemption of all
Churches from all subjection and dependence, or rather a trumpet of defiance
against what ever power, spiritual or civil, which we do abhor and detest,
or else the odious name of Brownisme together with all their opinions as they
have stated and maintained them, must needs be owned by us: Although upon the
very first declaring our judgments in the chief and fundamental point of all
Church discipline, and likewise since it has been acknowledged that we differ
much from them. And we did then, and do here publicly profess, we believe
the truth to lie and consist in a middle way betwixt that which is falsely
charged on us, Brownisme; and that which is the contention of these times, the
Authoritative Presbyteriall government in all the subordinations and
proceedings of it.

I desire you to resolve me, and the Reader, how the first sentence in this
Section, Your opinions and ways environed about with a cloud of mistakes and
misapprehensions and your persons with reproaches can stand with those words in
the 24 page: We found many of those mists that had gathered about us, or were
rather cast upon our persons in our absence, begun by our presence again, and
the blessing of God upon us, in a great measure to scatter and vanish without
speaking a word for our selves and cause. And now if upon your presence only
and that without speaking a word they vanished and were scattered, how did they
then vanish upon speaking for your selves and way, and then how could this
cloud of mistakes, etc. so easily blown away by your breath, nay without your
breath be so great an affliction to you, (certainly you are men very tender of
any mistake, misapprehension or reproach upon you,) but I think it may be
salved by your comparison as great to us as our former troubles and banishment;
both much alike great, that is, neither of them: But what mean you by that
parenthesis (wherein we might seem to differ) did but your opinions seem to
differ from ours, and do they not really? why then have you, and do you make
all this ado in our Church? as for your opinions and ways environed with
mistakes and misapprehensions, I know nothing for my part has been fastened
upon your ways, but what has been found in letters, manuscripts, your known
practices, and in printed books of New England, and in the discourses of your
own members and familiars: But if some men who have not studied the points, nor
given themselves to understand your way, did mistake and misapprehend you, that
was your own fault, that walking so in the dark, and having been so often
desired to give a Narrative of what you hold in difference, never yet would; As
for the calumnies east upon you of Schisms, Independencie and Brownisme, with
the reasons inserted to vindicate your selves from them. I shall first give a
general answer to them together, and then to each of them apart.

1. In general, how ever you do in words wash your hands of these
imputations, and wipe your mouths, confidently denying them, yet all the water
in the Thames will not wash you from all just imputation of these: It is no new
thing for men who go in bye ways and maintain errors whether more
fundamental, or superstructory, to abominate the names and titles given to
those opinions, whether from the Authors who first broacht them, or from the
matter of them, and to deny the opinions and points charged upon them, by
finding out some distinctions, or doubtful words and expressions to cloud them
with, in which sense they wrap up themselves, and deceive many, and so give
other names: I might fill up a book in giving Instances out of ancient and
modern writers of this Artifice: Those who are commonly called Saracens, their
name is Haggarens, (as coming of Hagak) but they would not be so called, but
name themselves Saracens, sons of the freewoman: The Schwenefeldians, called by
Luther, Philip Melancton and other famous Divines, Stenckfeldians, from Catal
Haeretic. Schlusselb. lib. decimus de Sect a Stenck ^elp.
the ill savor of their opinions, yet Schuvenckfeldius entitled them with
that glorious name, the confessors of the glory of Christ. The Antinomians will
not endure to be called by that name, but style themselves the Hearers of the
Gospel, and of Free Grace; the old Separatists could not endure to be called
Brownists, or Barrowists, (as appears by the title of Mr Robinsons Apology,)
so, you will not endure the titles of Schism, Separation, Independencie, but
you call it the Congregationall government, and the Church way, and an entire,
full, complete power, but by no means Independent government, that will not
be endured; As no sin will be called willingly by its own name, but takes other
names; drunkenness will be called good fellowship, covetousness good husbandry
and providence; so few errors will be called after the name of the first
father, or the matter simply they hold; and I could give you many reasons of
this, amongst others take these: 1. Many are possessed by books and arguments
against such and such errors under such names and titles; now that erroneous
men may avoid all the dint of the arguments and the impressions such names and
terms have left upon many, they disclaim the old and invent new words and
phrases against which the people have not been possessed, the better to take
them. 2. Erroneous spirits would have nothing fixed or certain to be fastened on
them, upon which able men might bring arguments and reasons against them: But
the reader shall see all this will not help you, but that the just charge of
these must lie upon you. 2. To answer particularly, You are justly charged of
Schism and Separation, and if you consult with the Scriptures and Authors both
ancient and modern: Austin, Calvin, Zanchius, Morneus, Peter Martyr, Iunius,
Perkins, Parker, and see what they write of schism and separation, you will be
found guilty of it, and as for the argument brought by you by which you would
clear your selves from schism, that it must either relate to your differing
from the former Ecclesiastical government of Bishops, or to that constitution
and government that is yet to come, etc. I answer, though it relate to neither
of them, yet it may arise from other causes, your disjunctive proposition does
not contain a full enumeration of all the causes, or reasons of schism, for
the non-conformists did of old differ from that former Ecclesiastical
government, and yet were never justly accused of separation and schism, but
writ most vehemently against it, neither is schism to be judged of upon some
difference in judgment which may be from that constitution and government,
that is yet to come, for though some men should differ from it, as not holding
it the best government, yet so long as they separate not from the public
worship and ordinances, neither do draw people into separated Assemblies, they
cannot be charged with separation; The ground therefore of schism imputed to
you, comes as from your forsaking our public Assemblies, and separating from
Gods ordinances and his servants, because of mixed communion, and setting up of
Churches against our Church, and going on still in that way, notwithstanding
all the Reformation begun, and that which is likely to be perfected; so also
from not joining your selves with the other reformed Churches. But if you say,
that you cannot be counted guilty of schism and separation, because you do
not withdraw from us with condemnation of us, as no true Churches, nor true
Ministers, (as the Brownists do.) I answer, you do the same thing they do,
though upon different grounds; Now suppose a woman should withdraw from her
husband, and join to another ordinarily, yet not with condemnation of him as
no husband, but would now and then keep communion with him; suppose a servant
forsake his Master, and join to another, yet comes away without railing
against him, does this justify him? But why make you such a business of it
(as you do) to forsake the communion of all our Churches, and of all the
reformed Churches, and of joining to Churches only of such a constitution, if
you condemned them not? what though you do not leave them as Antichristian,
Babilonish, as false and untrue, yet if you leave such Churches, because
impure, defective, under bondage, not of so good a constitution? in this you
condemn them, and so are guilty of schism: I ask of you, if the members of
some of your Churches should upon grounds, not because you are false Churches,
and false Ministers, but because you are not to pure as some others, nor as
they could set up a Church? (as for instance, because wicked men are admitted
to prayer amongst you, or because the ordinance of Hymns is not yet settled in
all your Churches, etc.) forsake and leave your Assemblies, and yet should
openly profess they do not condemn your Churches as no Churches, but only
join to Churches of a purer constitution, or set up a new Church (as Mr
Simpson did) whether is this a schism and separation? do you not hold this
unlawful, (especially this being without your consents, nay against them (as
not being satisfied in the reasons and causes of such a departure.) Now if it
be schism and separation in some of your members, pray free your selves, and
in your Reply wash your Churches from this offense, in withdrawing from ours,
and answer that axiom, that magis and minus non variant speciem, and what ever
you can say for your departing from us to enjoy further degrees of purity, or
because our Churches are defective in some ordinances, etc. that your members
may for themselves, (for according to your own confession in Apology, page 30.
you differ little from us and the reformed Church, yea far less then the
Anabaptists or some sort of Brownists do from you: Now then I put this Dilemma
to you, whether is it schism in your members or not? if it be schism in them,
and they may not leave your Churches, then it is schism in you, and you may
not forsake ours; but if it be no schism in them, but they may do so, members
may still go from one pure Church to a purer (according to their new light,)
then satisfy me where you will stay, and make a stand? and what is schism and
separation? and whether a great gap and wide door be not left open for schism
upon schism, and separation upon separation, from your Churches to the
Brownists, and from the Brownists to the Anabaptists, and so in infinitum? And
let me tell you, though you who are Scholars have found out these distinctions
about our Churches and Ministers, whereby you think you salve all, and so make
account you are not guilty of schism, (as the learned Papists having
distinctions about Images, Worship, etc. say, they worship not the Images, but
the persons in the Images, etc.) (though the people who do not so well
understand nor cannot always remember such distinctions) worship the very
Images, and that with the same worship as they do God,) so the people who by
your counsel and example, had forsaken our Churches, they leave our Churches
and Ministers as not true, they condemn our Churches and Ministers, and wonder
at those passages in your Apology, page 6. and say they took you otherwise,
and so they become guilty of schism and separation without such distinctions,
(though you with distinctions.)

For that title of Independencie affixed unto you as your claim, it is well
you call it a proud and insolent title, had I styled it so in my Reasons
against Independent government, it would have been counted by your side a
reviling of the way of God, and a casting great reproach upon Christ's
government; but I shall give you and the reader a good account for that title
affixed unto the Church Way and communion that you are of, (and if it be
offensive you must blame your selves, and your own party, and not me:) This
Independencie and Independent government, was a name of your own giving, and
sure, I, and others might lawfully call the child by the name the father and
friends gave it; To speak nothing of the name of Independent government given
to particular Congregations in many books of the total Separatists maintaining
it formally in those words, it will be found in many printed books and
manuscripts written by many men of your way and communion, (namely of the
middle way as you call it) who own and call the government of particular
Congregations Independent, and reason for it under that name. Amongst others
you shall find it in these books, Protestation Protested, Mr Davenports
Profession of his Faith, Sions Prerogative royal, Independe^ce of particular
Congregations pleaded for, page 100, 101, 102, 103
A Discourse opening the nature of Episcopacie, The Answer from New England to
Mr Herles book against Independencie, in Every particular Congregation is an
absolute Church, having no jurisdiction over it but Christ's alone, and that
immediately, page 52, 59.
Christ upon his Throne; and in manuscripts not a few, particularly in a
manuscript entitled, a Treatise about a Church, (going under one of your
names) speaks often of Independent power and Independent government. Besides
Independent government has been preached for at Margrets Church in
Westminster, and the City of London in those words, so that I wonder how you
dare make such a flourish; for my part I should never have invented the name,
neither would it have ever entered into my mind, but that it was common in the
books, manuscripts and mouths of men of your way: And this has been taken so
for granted, that not I alone (who might more easily have mistaken) writ
against the government of your Congregations under that name, but the learned
and reverend Divines of Scotland writ against it under that name, (using those
terms and phrases often) and the learned Divines of Holland, (particularly
Voctius) Mr. Herle The Independency on Scriptures, of the Independencie of
Churches. hRise, growth and danger of Socinianisme, page 65, 66.
and a learned and ingenious Divine of our own too, writ against your
government under the title of Independencie, (whose book contains many
passages particularly referring to you the Apologists:) And so ^ Mr Channel
who heartily testifies for you, (even when he would free you from being called
Brownists) yet says you be commonly called the Independent Ministers, and does
by way of distinction from the reformed Churches, call your Congregations
Independent. But yet further to fasten on you (as you are pleased to style it,
that proud and insolent title of Independencie) however that you disclaim the
title here and in other pages 14, 21, yet you acknowledge the thing abundantly
in the book, namely a full and entire power, complete within your selves,
until you be challenged to err grossly, and then when you are challenged to
err grossly, and upon examination and deposition it is fully proved, yet you
will not subject to any Authoritative, Ecclesiastical power out of the
particular Congregation, this is the only thing in your Apology largely, and
with any seeming strength insisted upon, and for the exemption from that, you
have found out the device of submission and non-communion, and tell us your
solemn practice upon it, with the success of it: Now what else has been
fastened on you as your claim by them who have writ against your way, but this,
did any of the Divines commended by you? or did I in my reasons against your
government, write in any other sense but in the point of Ecclesiastical
government and power? did we lay to your charge in our writing against
Independencie, that you challenged an exemption of all Churches from all
subjection and dependence, or rather, that you should blow a trumpet of
desiance against what ever power, spiritual or civil? did I, or any others
charge you with refusing all subjection to the civil Magistrate? And for that
other dependence of consultation and non-communion upon other Churches, the
power you give in that kind to Synods, etc. I acknowledged it in my eight
reason, Reasons against Independent government, page 19.
and argued from thence to the power of excommunication; why then do you deal
thus deceitfully and doubly, pretending to abhor and detest Independencie as
it was objected and pleaded against you, when as besides the very words and
phrases found in so many printed books and notes, you hold all that in the
question, which is the difference betwixt you and the Presbyterians, as also in
some of your books, Independent and entire power are termini convertibiles, (as
in the title of Sions Prerogative Royal) (which entire, full, complete power,
in terminis, and in so many sillables you own more then once in this
Apology,) so that all your great words of abhorring and detesting the
exemption of your Churches from all power spiritual, or civil, will not save
you from Independencie justly affixed unto you: As for civil power, it is not
the question in controversy, neither was it affixt unto you, and for
spiritual power properly called you deny it all along, in many pages speaking
against authoritative power often, page 15, 18, 19. And to put you this
Dilemma, either you give authoritative power to other Churches, or you do not,
if you do give it, why do you speak so against it in your Apology, but if
you do not give it, why would you make your Reader believe you do give
spiritual power, and are not against it, is not this doubling and shuffling,
and troubling the waters that the Reader cannot tell where to find you, nor
what you hold, (too great an evidence of a weak and bad cause, becoming not
such men as you would be taken for) truth is open and naked, and does not seek
out holes and subterfugies. But brethren do not deceive your selves, nor your
Reader any longer, if you be not against spiritual power properly so called of
any Classes or Synods in reference to particular Congregations, what mean you
by all you say from page 12, to the end of the 19? and of all that controversy
and Tragedies made by you against the reformed Churches, for giving a power to
Classes and Synods; and let me entreat you, (that the controversy may be
brought to some end between you and us) in your Reply set down particularly
what you will allow to Classes Synods, general Assemblies and Councels, in
matter of government? and whether that you will allow and give Authority and
power yea or no, and what you will not give nor allow them, and then state the
question so, and I do promise you in my Rejoinder to apply my self to give
you satisfaction (as if you except Excommunication, Ordination, or what else)
to show you the grounds for them, and if we love truth and peace, either you
shall win me, or I you.

3. For the odious name of Brownisme, together with all their opinions, as they
have stated and maintained them, must needs be owned by us. I answer, Brownisme
(as you in these words express it) has not been fastened on you by any that I
know, but on the contrary, you have been commonly contra-distinguish'd from
them, being called Independents, Semi-separatists; and in my reasons against
Independent government, I do in many passages difference you from them; and
for all their opinions, as they have stated and maintained them, namely drawing
such consequences, and conclusions, and going so far as they, I have often
vindicated you, but yet, for all that you cannot justly free your selves from
the odious name of Brownisme in most of the fundamental principles and
practices of your Churches, no not with all your Artifices and specious
pretenses: As the Brownists growing up, and out of the Anabaptists, did refine
and qualify Anabaptisine in many things, in government, prophesying, etc. So
have you refined and qualified Brownisme from the grossness and rigidnesse of
it, as it was held by the first Fathers and Authors of it; (as I could show in
many particulars) you do not go so far as they, neither are you against
some practices of other Churches upon those high terms; but yet for substance,
from the first stone to the last, in departing from our Assemblies and
constituting new, you agree with them (as by a A brief Narration of some
Church courses held in opinion and practice in New England, by W. R.
parallel between the way of your Communion and the Separatists lately printed
does appear:) And in a word it is evident thus: You agree with the way of
New England (as is confessed by some of yourselves) and we may judge so by your
high praise of them. Now the Churches of New England agree with them of M.
Robinsons Church, who are moderate and qualified Brownists: Now that the
Church Way of New England is the same with them of M. Robinsons Church is
proved thus: The Church at New-Plymouth was the first company that planted in
those parts, who coming from Leiden where they were members of M. Robinsons
Church a moderate Brownist in his latter time, practiced the Church-opinions
and ways they formerly, had in Holland, and when they of New England went over
first (through their conversing with them and nearenesse of situation) they
took up and learned their way, (as appears by these particulars.)

First, M. W. an eminent man of the Church of New-Plymouth, told W. R. that the
rest of the Churches of New England at first came to them of Plymouth to crave
their direction in Churchcourses and made them their pattern.

Secondly, M. Cotton in a letter to M. Skeleton one of the first Ministers that
went over thither, writes thus to him, in way of M. Cottons letter from out of
England to M. Skeleton in New England.
answer to this Position, that M. Skeleton held: That our Congregations in
England are none of them particular Reformed Churches, but M. Lathrops and such
as his. This error requires rather a Book then a letter to answer it, you
went hence of another judgment, and I am afraid your change has sprung from
New-Plymouth men, whom though I much esteem as godly, loving Christians, yet
their grounds which for this Tenet they received from M. Robinson, do not
satisfy me.

Thirdly, There is great commendations given to the Church of Plymouth by M.
Cotton after coming to New England, in his letter to M. Williams, page 13.

Fourthly, All the Ministers and Elders of New England do affirm, that all
the Churches in New England, viz. in the Bay, in the jurisdiction of Plymouth
and at Connet^acute, are one and the same way in Church constitution,
government and discipline without any material difference. Now what can be
said more plain? Add to all these, that I had it from the mouth of a godly
Ans. to 32 questions. p. 82.
Minister of the City, conferring with one of your precious Ministers about
these points, before he went into Holland, and telling him, This is Brownisme
and Brown held thus; what are you a Brownist? Your companion and
fellow laborer answered him thus: The way was of God, but the man was naught,
namely Brown. As for those words whereby you would evade the naine of
Brownisme, That upon the very first declaring your judgments in the chief and
fundamental point of all Church discipline; and likewise since, it has been
acknowledged, you differ much from them: It Is not your saying so will clear
you, unless you had named what that chief and fundamental point of all
Church Discipline is, and how, and in what words you declared your judgments;
and to whom: for you might so express your selves (as you do in this Apology
too often) whereby you might deceive the most of them to whom you declared your
judgments: yea many able Ministers and Scholars (who are not versed in your
distinctions and reservations) and yet for all the declaring of your
judgments, differ very little from the Brownists, except in different phrases,
and in not deducing such consequences. Let me entreat you therefore to lie no
longer hid under such generals, but in your Reply, declare particularly what
you hold the chief point of all Church Discipline, and wherein in that you
differ from them: But may I guess at the chief and fundamental point of all
Church Government and discipline, wherein you declared your judgments, by
which you would distinguish your selves from the Brownists: Is it not, that you
give the power and authority to the officers, and not to the people only? I
have heard that of late you have declared your selves thus, and the late
Epistle before M. Cottons book written by two of you implies so much? But be
it so (though I can out of a letter of M. Bridges, and from notes and
manuscripts show, that seven years ago the expressions of some of you were
otherwise) yet this will not free yo^, for M. Johnson fell to this, and yet was
guilty of Brownisme for all that. But in this also your principles and your
practices are incoherent, and however in fine words, and flattering
similitudes, you dilate upon it in your Epistle to M. Cottons late book, yet
it comes much to one, the substance of which Epistle I will answer in my
Rejoinder to your Reply, or in some thing by it self, and will wipe off the
paint and guilt, and then the naked counter and rotten post will appear. As
for your public profession, that you believe the truth to lie and consist in a
middle way betwixt Brownisme, and that which is the contention of these times,
the Authoritative Presbyteriall Government in all the subordinations and
proceedings of it. I answer, then Actum est de Presbyterio, and de Synodo. You
have determined the cause already, the Assembly may rise when they please, and
need sit no longer, for the truth lies and consists in Independencie, but I
suppose, though heretofore, and when you wrote this Apology, you did so
publicly prefesso, and believe the truth to lie in your way (the middle way as
you term it) yet by what has past since, your height and courage is somewhat
abated, and you are not now so peremptory, and I find now, you write in another
style (which becomes you much better) We humbly suppose, we humbly conceive,
again in all humility: But if you be high still, I must tell you your
confidence has deceived you, and your middle way (as you fancy it) (though I
Keys of the kingdom of Heaven. Epist. to the Reader.
must still charge upon you refined Brownisme) will prove like other pretended
truths lying in middle ways, just as the Catholic and Arminian moderatours,
Cassander, the book called Schlusselb. de Adiapho. lib. 13
Interim, and that book of late times called media via, between the Papists
and Protestants, and between the Calvinists and Arminians: And as for the way
of your expression of Presbyteriall government, I cannot but except at it,
observing that all along obliquely, and as far as you may, you still asperse
that. You can here express Brownisme simply, without any additions to it, but
you cannot pass by Presbyteriall government without a lash at it, which is the
contention of these times, as if you would insinuate the blame of all the
contentions and stir of these times to be Presbyteriall Government, whereas
the truth is, the contention of these times is Episcopal, and your Independent
Government, which have caused, and do continue all the contention and stirs
in Church and Commonwealth, they mutually strengthening each other against
Presbyteriall government; and ^o it is still to be observed, that all along in
this Apology, where you speak of Presbyteriall Government; you state the
questions about that, in the highest and utmost latitude, but of your own
Church and way in the lowest, yea lower then you hold (as for instance in 11,
12. page about the qualification of Church Members) to deceive the Reader with
your pretended moderation, and the more to possess the Reader against the jus
divinum of the Presbyteriall way, as for example in this place, Authoritative
Presbyteriall government in all the subordinations and proceedings of it: Now
the substance and sum of Presbyteriall government may be according to
Apostolical Primitive patterns, and yet all the subordinations and
proceedings of it, as it is practiced in the Church of Scotland, fitted to that
Nation and Kingdom, may have no Scripture examples: Presbyteriall government
in some Reformed Churches, as at Geneva, has not all the subordinations and
proceedings as Scotland, being no Kingdom nor Nation; and Presbyteriall
government in England, might have one subordination more then Scotland, and
some different proceedings in the manner and form of carrying matters
according to particular circumstances and occasions of time and place. The
Ministers of the Church of Scotland, who hold their Church Government to be
laid down in the word of God for the substance and essentials of it, do not
(as I suppose) hold that all the subordinations and proceedings, as practiced
in their kingdom, have a particular rule, either of precept or example: I
doubt not but they well understand, no whole Nation was converted to the faith
in the time that the Acts of the Apostles and Epistles were written; nor the
supreme Magistrate in any Kingdom or Nation; and therefore in no one Church
or Nation where Christians were converted, and Churches planted, there could
not be that formal combination into Classes, settled Synods or general
Assemblies; neither could the supreme Magistrate, or a Commissioner for him be
a prime member in their chief Assemblies; and so I might instance in other
particulars; but the Church of Scotland find Presbyteriall Government in
subordinations and appeals; that is Government exercised in Churches and
Assemblies which consisted of more members then could meet in one place, and
they find Assemblies, where upon cases of difference there were more members
and officers then of one Church (as the Acts of the Apostles shows fully) and
this serves for Scripture grounds to them: Now then for the manner of ordering
of this, according to different Kingdoms, Nations or Cities, in fewer or more
subordinations; and in the way and manner of proceedings by several Churches,
according to local, temporal and personal circumstances, they know well they
must go according to general rules of the word, to the common laws of nature
and prudence, and so they leave other Churches to do the like.

And had we been led in our former ways, and our removal Apolog.
out of this Kingdom by any such spirit of faction and division, or of pride
and singularity (which are the usual grounds of all schism) we had since our
returns again, during this intermisticall season, tentations, yea
provocations enough to have drawn forth such a spirit; having manifold
advantages to make and increase a party, which we have not in the least
attempted. We found the spirits of the people of this Kingdom that profess or
pretend to the power of godliness (they finding themselves to be so much at
liberty, and new come out of bondage) ready to take any impressions, and to
be cast into any mould that has but the appearance of a stricter way. And we
found that many of those mists that had gathered about us, or were rather cast
upon our persons in our absence, began by our presence again, and the blessing
of God upon us, in a great measure to scatter and vanish without speaking a
word for our selves or cause.

Whether all of you, or only some of you, were led in your former ways, and in
your removal out of this Kingdom, by any such spirit of faction, etc. I will
not enter into your bosoms, nor judge of secret things, I leave you to search
your selves, and to give account of your spirits to the Father of spirits; and
whether you were led in your former ways, and in your removal out of the
Kingdom by any such spirit, or no, it is too evident by what I have
forementioned, that a spirit of faction and division, or of pride and
singularity, wrought too much amongst some of you abroad: But though no such
spirit led you, there are to me and many others, sufficient visible grounds of
your removal out of this Kingdom after you once were off your settled places,
as your fear of personal violence, your self-love and worldly wisdom to
provide for your selves and yours (what ever became of the public) your
horrible despair of coming in again here, or things ever turning in this
Land (as you twice express it) your great and excessive admiration of the
persons of some who were in the Church Way (accounting there were no such men
in the world as they) your discontent and anger at the course and harsh usage
in casting some of you out of your places (which often times are grounds of
heresies and schisms) as I could show out of Ecclesiastical histories in
Tertullian, etc. And besides these grounds, if I may judge of your being led in
your former ways, and of your removal out of the Kingdom (as your selves
make the argument) by your spirit being drawn forth since your return in
making and increasing a party, if that will evince your being led formerly by
a spirit of faction and division or of pride and singularity, I know not how
you will free your selves, for since your returns again during this
intermysticall season, you have not been idle, nor lost time, but have laid
hold on the temptations, provocations and the manifold advantages to make and
increase a party, nay you have not only laid hold on what you found ready to
your hands, namely, the intermysticall season (through so many great businesses
coming in upon the Parliament one upon another) and the spirits of the people
of the kingdom that profess or pretend to the power of godliness, finding
themselves to be so much at liberty and new come out of bondage ready to take
any impressions, etc. but you have made and increased new for the making of a
party. And I much wonder how you dare speak thus, much less publicly in
print to publish, that you have not in the least attempted to make and increase
a party; the contrary whereunto is written in such great letters; that he who
runs may read it, and I shall presently make evident in answering this
passage, with others of the like nature in the 25. and 26. pages. For the
spirits of the people of this Kingdom, that profess or pretend to the power
of godliness, and especially of the City and the adjacent parts, you give a
true character, together with the ground of it, finding themselves to be so
much at liberty, and new come out of bonduge; and it is amongst all the
passages in your book one of the best; and if the people would well mind, and
consider of it, that they are ready to take any impressions, and to be cast
into any mould that has but the appearance of a stricter way; This might do
them as much good, as all the Sermons you have preached among them since your
returns, and might prove an antidote both against the golden sweet poison in
this book, and the principles of your Church Way: But thus we see (by your
own confession) how easily and readily errors are entertained by the good
people of this Kingdom, when as truth may stand without doors and knock long
before opened unto, even as good Physicians and good right physic has a
great deal a do to find acceptance and admittance among the common people,
when Mountabancks and Empricks are sought unto. As to those words the finding
that many of those mists that had gathered about you, or were rather cast upon
your persons in your absence, began by your presence again in a great measure
to scatter and vanish, without speaking a word for your selves and cause. I
answer, O happy rare men, powerful and gracious with the people, whose very
presence without speaking a word for themselves or cause, could do thus much
after a long absence, what will not your speaking and writing for your selves
then do? It Is well for you, the most eminent servants of God in all ages have
not found mists that had gathered about them, or cast upon their persons to
scatter and vanish away so easily, but after all Apologies and Defense for
themselves and cause have found them to stick close; and we find it harder to
wipe off the aspersions and mistakes cast on us from your side (though for
nothing else but for discharging our consciences, and laboring to keep good
people from errors:) But Brethren if it were so with you (as here you write.)
what need had you then to write this Apology to clear your selves from
mistakes (especially having been now so long present in the Kingdom, and
resident in the chief City, having the liberty of the Pulpits, and being
members of the Assembly) would not the sudden confused noise of exclamations
restecting upon you interpretatively, without the writing of this Apology have
been suddenly blown over and presently have died by the continued presence of
your persons, and by your preaching, etc. as the many mists that had gathered
about you in your absence, by your bare presence, without sp^aking a word were
scattered? It is much, your former experience did not teach you to expect the
latter, and to have reasoned from that to this, so as to have caused you to
have forborne making such an Apology at such a time (as this) upon such an
occasion, as a sudden unexpected noise of confused exclamations. But how ever
you hold out this in the beginning of your Apology, as the ground of it, yet
something else moved you to that work, and you have learned like the lap-wing
to cry furthest off the nest.

But through the grace of Christ, our spirits are and have been so remote from
such dispositions and aims, that on the contrary Apolog.
we call God and men to witness our constant forbearance either to publish our
opinions by preaching (although we had the Pulpits free) or to print any thing
of our own or others for the vindication of our selves (although the presses
were more free then the Pulpits) or to act for our selves or way; although we
have been from the first provoked unto all these all sorts of ways, both by
the common mis-understandings and mis-representations of our opinions and
practices, together with encitements to this state not to allow us the
peaceable practices of our consciences, which the Reformed Churches abroad
allowed us, and these edged with calumnies and reproaches cast upon our persons
in print; and all these heightened with this further prejudice and provocation,
that this our silence was interpreted, that we were either ashamed of our
opinions, ex able to say little for them; when as on the other side (besides
all other advantages) Books have bin written by men of much worth, learning
and authority, with moderation and strength, to pre-possesse the peoples minds
against what are supposed our Tenets. But we knew and considered that it was
the second blow that makes the quarrel, and that the beginning of strife would
have been as the breaking in of waters, and the sad and conscientious
apprehension of the danger of rending and dividing the godly Protestant party
in this Kingdom that were desirous of Reformation, and of making several
interests among them in a time when there was an absolute necessity of their
nearest union and conjunction, and all little enough to effect that Reformation
intended, and so long contended for; against a common adversary that had both
present possession to plead for it self, power to support it, and had enjoyed
a long continued settlement which had rooted it in the hearts of men; And this
seconded by the instant and continual advices and conjurements of many
honorable, wise and godly personages of both Houses of Parliament, to forbear
what might any way be like to occasion or augment this unhappy difference; They
having also by their Declarations to his Majesty professed their endeavor and
desire to unite the Protestant party in this Kingdom, that agree in
fundamental truths against Popery and other heresies, and to have that
respect^ to tender consciences as might prevent oppressions and inconveniences,
which had formerly been; Together with that strict engagement willingly entered
into by us for these common ends, with the rest of our brethren of the
Ministry, (which though made to continue but ad placitum, yet has bin sacred
to us.) And above all, the due respect we have had to the peaceable and orderly
Reformation of this Church and State; the hopeful expectation we have been
entertained with of an happy latitude and agreement by means of this Assembly,
and the wisdom of this Parliament: The conscience and consideration of all
these, and the weight of each, have hitherto had more power with us to this
deep silence and forbearance, then all our own interest^ have any way prevailed
with us to occasion the least disturbance amongst the poople. We have and are
yet resolved to bear all this with a quiet and strong patience; (in the
strength of which we now speak, or rather sigh forth this little) referring
the vindication of our persons to God, and a further experience of us by men;
and the declaration of our judgments, and what we conceive to be his truth
therein, to the due and orderly agitation of this Assembly, whereof both Houses
were pleased to make us members.

In this Section are three maine things; 1. Your way and carriage of your
selves since your return into England, as not in the least attempting to make
and increase a party, but on the contrary, constantly forbearing either by
preaching, etc. to do any thing for you selves and way. 2. The provocations
you have had from the first, all sorts of ways to have done otherwise, whereby
you the more set out and commend your patience and forbearance. 3. The grounds
and reasons laid down of your deep silence and forbearance: now all, and every
one of these I will examine, and give the Reader and your selves this account
following:

For the first of these three, and your expressions in it, above all other
passages in your Narration, I cannot but admire and wonder what you meant by
them, and where your consciences, memories and wisdoms were when you writ
them? many passages in other Sections of this Apology are strange for their
doubtful double meaning, and for their untruth, but some passages in this
Section were beyond my imagination of you, not only thus publicly to write
manifest untruths, and to subscribe to them with your own hands, but to father
them on the grace of Christ, and to invocate the Name of God to make him own
them, calling God to witness, yea, and men too, to witness such untruths,
(when as God and men know the contrary to what you here assert,) I marvel,
none of you, (one at least) had not relented, and startled at these passages in
the first part of this Section, But through the grace of Christ, our spirits
are, and have been so remote from such dispositions and aims, that on the
contrary we call God and men to witness our constant forbearance either to
publish our opinions by preaching, etc. Now the first part of this Section,
instead of what you write here, may be thus truly written (and I shall
presently make it good:) We since our returns into the Kingdom, having had
manifold advantages to make and increase a party, have made use of them, and in
a great measure attempted it, for through the want of the grace of Christ, our
spirits have had such dispositions and aims, that God and men can witness,
our dealing
and trading for our opinions and way, both by preaching, and some of us by
printing; and many other ways acting for our selves and way; so that the
conscience and consideration of all the reasons, as the sad apprehension of the
danger of rending and dividing the godly Protestant party in this Kingdom,
etc. ^or the weight of each, have not had power with us to a deep silence and
forbearance, but our own interests have much provailed with us to occasion much
disturbance among the people. Brethren what is this you write in this Section?
how can you write it? Have not some of you, nor any of you, no not in the least
attempted to make a party? What have your spirits been so remote from such
dispositions and aims, that on the contrary you call God and ^on to witness
your constant forbearance either to publish your opinions by preaching, o^ to
print any thing of your own or others, for the vindication of your selves, or
to all for your selves or way? What have you kept a deep silence and
forbearance? What have not all your own interests prevailed with you, to
occasion the least disturbance amongst the people? As for God, who is called to
witness by you, without great repentance for these words, he will be a swift
witness against you; Mal. 3. 5. And as for men, whom you call also to
witness, I being one, and therefore being called out by your selves to
witness, I must speak being called unto it; and I entreat you blame not me
for witnessing and speaking the truth, declaring what I know of your preaching,
etc, but thank your selves who have called me to it: And being thus called, I
should sin against God, and the truth, If I should not speak the truth, and
the whole truth, (so far as I know and have been from good hands informed;)
and yet I will speak nothing but what I believe to be truth: I do therefore
contrary (to what you call God and men to witness unto) charge you with these
following particulars.

First, All of you have not constantly forborne to publish your opinions by
preaching, but you have vented your principles and opinions, by preaching,
sometimes more generally and covertly, (yet so as your followers understand
you,) and sometimes particularly and plainly: In a more general and covert
way, you have done it often, under preaching for purity of Ordinances, the
standing for the Kingly office of Christ, the being in a Church Way, the
performing of all ordinances in the due and right order, etc. wherein you do
for your way just as the Malignant Ministers preach against the Parliament and
for the Cavaliers, under generalities, by preaching against Rebellion, and
fighting against the King, and rising up against him, and for peace, etc.
(which the Malignants understand well enough, and flock to them upon it;) And
so more particularly, fully and plainly, you have preached for your way, for
instance, Mr Simpson, (one of the Apologists,) has frequently, and did
constantly (for one space) in many Lectures at Blackfriars, (more especially
on that Text, Psalm. 119. 6. Then shall I not be ashamed, when I have respect
unto all thy Commandments:) preach for his opinions and way, and did answer
many objectious against their Church Way, pleading strongly for it; and for
pretended liberty of conscience and toleration: So on Fishstreet-hill, on that
Text of Romans 12. 2. That ye may prove what is that good, that acceptable and
perfect will of God: he preached largely for his Church Way, and propounded and
resolved nine Questions about it: And at Mr. Simpsons Sermon on Pro. 8. 15, 16.
page 26, 27, 28, 29, 32, 33. Sermon called Reformations Preservation, page 25,
26, 27.
Westminster also, in Sermons preached there, he had many passages for the
Church Way, as for Toleration, as for the matter of their Church, visible
Saints, etc. Mr Buroughs another of the Apologists, has published his
opinions by preaching, and has preached for his way, at Mildreds-Breadstreet,
on that Text, Gal. 5. 1. preaching against National Churches under the new
Testament, and for the way of their particular Churches. Mr Buroughs, before
the Lord Major and Aldermen in his public Sermon at Easter, preached for
toleration of all Sects and opinions, (so they were not against fundamentals in
doctrine, and the fundamentals of civil government:) and he has frequently in
his Lectures at Michael Cornhill, (some of which are since printed) preached
for their way; besides what he may have preached at Stepny and elsewhere, (of
which I have not yet sufficiently informed my self as to be able to prove it.)
Mr Bridge, another of these Apologists, in a Sermon at Westminster in the first
year of the Parliaments sitting, before many Parliament men, had up that Mat.
18. Go tell the Church; but Christ does not send them from that Church to
another Church, etc. So in his Sermon before the Honorable House of Commons,
Fast Sermon, page 20, 21, 24. 25, 26, 28, 31.
(preached about a month before this Apology came forth) there are several
passages for the Church Way. And in his Sermon called Babylons downfall,
preached before sundry of the House of Commons, there are passages for the
Church Way, page 13, 15. In London also at the Bridge-foote, he has preached
several things tending that way; particularly, about the people, being Gods
porters to let the Ministers into the Church, and how no men come in truly
called but they. In the Country too, he has preached for his way (as I have
been informed by a good hand,) both at Norwich, and at Ipswich: But if it be
asked what he has done at Yarmouth, I shall in my Rejoinder give you a full
account of him there, (being not yet so well prepared for that.) Mr Goodwin,
another of the Apologists, has preached and published his opinions (on that
Text, Ephesians. 1. 22, 23.) at large, for no other visible Ministerial Church,
but a particular Congregation, with his reasons for it; (though that Text
speaks of the Church, in statu mistico, and not of an instituted particular
Church:) and so at Westminster, in his first Sermon, preached before many of
the House of Commons, he had passages of Christ's Kingly office, and the
government of the Church, clearly for this way, and against the Presbyterians.
So in his Sermon preached before the House of Commons, called Zer^bbabels
Encouragement, there are many things for the Church Way, page 18. and from page
29. to page 44. (which though they be but generals) yet in the Epistle before
the sermon it is confessed they be for that way. As for Mr Nigh, he having lived
a great part of his time since his return into England in Noblemens families,
and in Yorkshire, and having preached little in the Parishes here in London, I
cannot prove that he has published his opinions by preaching particularly for
them: But whether Mr Nigh has not acted the State-parasite and played the
politician the more, and dealing in private, under hand, and hand to hand with
some men of note for the Church Way, and against the government of the Church
of Scotland, and particularly at Hull, (as I have some ground for what I
write,) so I appeal to his conscience, and entreat him to rub up his memory
whom he has conferred with about these points: but though I cannot prove Mr
Nigh has published his opinions by preaching, yet Mr Nigh affirming this not
only for himself, but for all the rest, speaking not only in his own name, but
in the name of the other Apologists too, we call God and men to witness our
constant forbearance either to publish our opinions by preaching, etc. whether
according to that second question in page 14, of this Antapologie, is not he
guilty also, and may here be justly charged with writing of an untruth. But let
me ask you, though you say you have not published your opinions by preaching,
do you not understand it by preaching in pulpits? (for I find it in the
parenthesis referred to pulpits) but whether all of you, or some of you have
not published your opinions by preaching out of pulpits, at Tables, and in
chambers in your Church meetings, and in houses where some of you have
exercised before supper, when friends and company have been invited, (which is
an acting for your selves and way,) I refer to your consciences to consider
of: only I must tell you, that I have it from a sure hand, of no worse rank of
men, then of the Ministry, and of no flighter sort of witness then an care
witness, that things about the Church Way, have been often so preached in
houses; and in particular, I ask Mr Bridge, whether it be not so? but if it be
answered by you, (for the avoiding this imputation fastened on you) of calling
God and men to witness an untruth, that your words do not import a total
forbearance of preaching your opinions, neither do you mean, that you never
preached them; but a constant forbearance, that is, you did for the greater
part forbear in the constant course of your Ministry to preach of these
points: I reply, your words cannot bare that sense, neither does, nor can such
a meaning agree with your words going before and following after, nor with the
scope and intent of this Section: For the words which go before, of our
spirits remote from such dispositions and aims, are in reference to these
words in the former Section, not in the least attempting to make and increase a
party: and for the words following (toward the end of this present Section)
namely, this deep silence and forbearance, so as not to occasion the least
disturbance amongst the people, and bearing all with a quiet and strong
patience, they refer to this passage of calling God and men to witness our
constant forbearance, either to publish our opinions by preaching, etc. Now how
can it be a deep silence and forbearance not to occasion the least disturbance
amongst the people, and a quiet and strong patience to bear all, whenas you
did preach often of those points, though you might oftener forbear? and I ask
you, whether Sermons now and then preached of the opinions, was not an
attempting to make and increase a party, and that more then in the least? as
also, whether some Sermons (though but now and then) would not occasion the
least disturbance among the people? But besides the scope and intent of this
whole Section, being to show that you did not take advantage to make and
increase a party, with the laying down the Reasons and grounds of your
forbearance, which are all against such a gloss and sense, your words of a
constant forbearance to publish your opinions by preaching, cannot be
understood of publishing your opinions now and then by preaching, though you
did oftener preach upon other subjects, for preaching now and then would be in
the least an attempting to make and increase a party, and preaching now and
then could not be a deep silence and forbearance, and some Sermons would be
the beginning of strife, and would be a means of rending and dividing the
godly Protestant party in this Kingdom; Besides, the instant and continual
advices of Parliament men to you, were not that you would not for the most part
preach of your opinions, but not at all, namely, to forbear what might any way
be like to occasion or augment this unhappy difference and your engagement to
the Ministers of silence, was not partial or for the most part not to preach
of those points, but it was total, not to preach of them at all: And further,
Constant forbearance to publish your opinions by preaching, must have the same
construction as it has in those words, printing any thing of your own or
others, for the vindication of your selves, or acting for your selves and way:
both which, (especially that of printing) must necessarily be understood of a
total forbearance; for I suppose you do not understand by those words,
printing any thing, that you did not print so many books of your own, or
others, as you could, and might have done, only a few books were now and then
printed by you for your way, you would not have us put such an interpretation
upon that part which concerns printing; so neither can it be upon that of
preaching; and in a word, Constant, is not a Diminutive, (as such a gloss
would make it,) but an Augmentative, (as we use to say,) a constant friend, and
a constant preacher; and yet according to this sense, (which yet is against all
Grammar, and against the Analysis and scope of this Section) some of you cannot
evade, as Mr Simpson, Mr Buroughs, Mr Bridge, who in several Churches, and
upon several texts, have frequently, sometimes in general and more darkely,
and sometimes more plainly and particularly, published their opinions by
preaching: And if any of these Apologists shall in their Reply either deny or
put off any of the particulars I have charged them with in point of preaching,
(as being not a publishing their opinions, nor points of the Church Way,) I
will in my Rejoinder (God sparing me life and health) print at large the
particulars preached by them, and then the Reader shall judge (which now I omit
least my book should be too great.)

2. All of you have not forborne to print any thing of your own, for your
opinions and ways: For Mr Bridge, Mr Simpson and Mr Buroughs, have printed
Sermons and Expositions of their own, wherein are several things about the
Church Way; as is to be seen in Mr Buroughs Exposition on the three first
Chapters of Hosea, 1. Lecture on Hos. 2. 1, 2. page 224, 225. 7. Lect. on Hos.
1. 11. page 173. 5. Lect. on Hos. 1. 10. page 134, 141. 3. Lect. on Hos. 2.
page 288. 13. Lect. on Hos. 2. 15. and in many other places of those
expositions, passages are sprinkled for the Church Way. And in Mr Simpsons
Sermons, called Reformations Preservatio^, on Isa. 4. the latter part of the
fifth verse, and on Prove. 8. 15, 16. and in Mr Bridges Sermons, called Babylons
Downfall, and that on Zech. chap. 1. ver. 18, 19, 20, 21. But supposing you had
wholly forborne printing any thing of your own, you might well have done it out
of policy, and yet your way not have suffered by it; so many books, and little
Pamphlets having been printed, and reprinted since this Parliament for the
Church Way, as amounts to the number (I think) of almost one hundred: And I
ask of you, whether one or more of you, have not had a hand in perusing and
examining some books of others, or in counselling and consenting to the
printing of them, (especially some books from out of New England, and
particularly of Mr Cottons.)

3. Neither I, nor many other Ministers, are not satisfied of the truth of
those words, That you have not acted for your selves and way: which words, as
here brought in by you, must be understood, of acting, as distinct from
preaching and printing, that is, as you have not published your opinions by
preaching, so you have not by other ways and means acted for your selves or
way: as in making friends, or in mooving any Parliament men, or in consulting
together what to do about your way; no, alas good men, you have kept your
houses close, and followed your studies hard, and seldom gone to Westminster,
but have left the business of Independencie and the Church Way* to God wholly,
leaving him to take care of his own way and cause. Brethren, how dare you write
thus? if you have not acted for your selves and way since your returns into
England, and improoved your time well too, most who know you, are much deceived
in you, and strangely mistaken: And suffer me to deal plainly with you, I am
persuaded, (that setting aside the Jesuits acting for themselves and way) you
Five have acted for your selves and way, both by your selves, and by your
instruments, both upon the stage, and behind the curtain, (considering
circumstances, and laying all things together) more then any five men have done
in so short a time this 60 years: and if it be not so, whence have come all
the swarms and troops of Independents in Ministry, Armies, City, Country,
Gentry, and amongst the common people of all sorts, men, women, servants,
children: have not you five had the greatest influence to cause this? who have
wrought so many Ministers, Gentlemen and people to your way? can it be in
Reason thought all this is come about without your acting for your selves and
way? is the peoples golden Calfe of Independencie and Democracie come out of it
self, without Aarons making it? And whether you five have Exodus 32. 24.
not acted for your selves and way since this Parliament? I desire you to
answer these questions, and then according to the truth of those questions let
your consciences judge of the truth of these words.

1. Whether came not you over into England, and left your Churches in Holland
with their leave, or rather being sent as Messengers to negotiate for your way,
and for a Toleration of some Churches to enjoy Independent government, that is,
a full, entire, complete power within your selves.

2. When you were come over, did you not in the first year of the Parliaments
sitting, consult together, and debate about a Petition, and was there not one
drawn to be presented to the House of Commons for a Toleration of some
Congregations to enjoy a Congregationall government.

3. Have you not been all along from your first coming over into England, to
the writing of this present Apology, intent and watchful upon every thing in
agitation, or about to pass in matters of Religion, that might make though but
remotely for Presbyteriall government, and might (though but by a remote
consequence and at a distance) touch upon or prejudice your Church way: As for
instance, about the time of passing a Bill in the House of Commons against
Episcopacy, and of consultation and debate what should be in the interim, till
another Government could be settled, were not you zealous and active against
that advice and counsel of a certain number of grave Ministers in each County
to be substituted for the time, (out of your fear of having but a shadow of
Presbyterian government, though but pro tempore) and how much you worked in
that, with some of place, and what the issue of that was, you may remember: So
upon thoughts and consultations (since this war, of entering into a Covenant)
and some Ministers being advised with, whether did not some of you stand for a
clause to be inserted in the Covenant for liberty to tender consciences, and
for want of such a clause, (that being opposed by some,) how long it was laid
aside, etc. I desire you to remember. Again, about the beginning of the
Assembly, in the review and examination of of some of the Articles of Religion,
and in the propounding but some orders to have been agreed on about the way of
managing the Disputes and Debates in the Assembly, how tender have you been of
any thing tending but to Presbytery, and that might (though but indirectly)
reflect upon any of your Principles.

4. Have not some of you, (though may be not all) acted for your selves and way
by constant Church meetings on the Lords day, in private houses preaching the
word and administering the Sacraments even in the times of the public
Assemblies, where besides your own Church members, have resorted to your
meetings many other persons, some members of Churches in New England, and
others belonging to the Church of England, and whereas Mr Simpson was a
Minister of a Church at Rotterdam (which Church is still there) has not Mr
Simpson since his return well acted for himself and his way, in getting such
a rich and numerous Church, consisting of so many Gentlemen and Gentlewomen,
rich Citizens, rich Virgins, etc. and has not Mr Goodwin acted for himself and
way, and at least in the least attempted to increase a party, when besides
those of his Church at Arnheim, that came over from thence, there are others
here in London have gone to his Church meetings, and there are some, if not
actually members (the ceremony may be being forborne that it may be said he
has added none to his Church) yet are Competentes Candidati Probationers,
members in fieri, with their faces to Zion, and reputed members actually by
them of nearest Relations and Co-habitations, (as I am credibly informed) but
must name none to prevent differences in near Relations.

5. Have not some of you, if not all of you acted for your selves and way, in
actually speaking, and moving some Parliament men to stand for you and for a
Toleration of your Church way, and have you not been answered, show us your
grounds, let us know what you hold, and what you would have, and then you shall
see that shall be done which is sitting; and out of zeal of acting for your
selves and way, have not some of you suggested in private to Parliament men,
the prejudice of their Parliamentary power, if they should admit of the
Government of the Church of Scotland; pleading also for a necessity of a
Toleration, and in particular I ask Mr Nigh if he remember no such discourses,
and that at Hull too.

6. Whether have not some of you, if not all, out of acting for your selves and
way, hindered all that ^lay in you, the sending for our brethren of Scotland to
come to our help? and whether have not some of you much pleaded against sending
for them in? and objected (as the Malignants do) of the danger of their
coming in, etc? and whether in as much as lay in you, did not you so act for
your own opinions and Church way that you would have hazarded the Kingdom,
Religion, and all, rather then the loss of your Independencie, which you knew
the Scots were so averse unto?

7. Whether have not some of you in Conferences with many good people, and by
discourses in private, ac^ed for your selves and way, by stumbling them in the
point of a particular Church, and in the point of coming to the Sacrament of
the Lords Supper, and by pleading for a Toleration of all opinions (that may
stand with saving Grace) and does none of you remember what was answered you?
that Polig^mie might stand with saving Grace; and must that be tolerated?

8. Whether have not some of you tampered with some Parliament men about
delaying the meeting of the Assembly, and suggesting to them doubts and fears
about it? and whether in the Assembly have you not by all possible ways both
in opposing some orders of speaking but so many times to one point (the sooner
to bring things to an end) and by other ways all that you could delaied the
proceedings of the Assembly, and all this out of acting for your selves and
way, that so your party might increase, and your opinions spread before the
Government might be settled.

9. Have not some of you out of acting for your selves and way endeavored the
bringing into the Assembly (since the sitting of it) some Independents to be
members of it, and upon their being stopped, have not some of you earnestly
dealt with some members of the House of Commons that they might pass their
House? and what could this be but out of acting for your selves and way?

10. Whether have not you out of acting for your selves and way, had many
meetings and consultations both of writing letters into New England for their
help and furtherance, and about what you should do, and how to order matters
since the Scots must be sent for, and since the Assembly could not be hindered,
how things might be managed and carried for the best advantage of your cause
and way? and whether was not this Apologeticall Narration one of the Products
of your consultations? Now unto these ten I might add other Quaeres, but shall
reserve them to my Rejoinder, these being sufficient to satisfy you and the
Reader: So that laying all these things together, what did you mean or think
with your selves when you writ^ these passages? could you imagine you danced in
a net all this time, and that men took no notice of you, or that all had been
forgotten that you had done and preached? or did you imagine your power was so
great with the people (having such a name) that all would be taken for truth
you writ, or that your greatness was such that no man durst question what you
had done, or appear against your Apology, (or if they did they should but
blast themselves among the people, and the people would believe nothing against
you,) what strange spirit possessed you to write thus? For my part, I fear not
my name (I have learned to trust God with it,) and I dare (by the Grace and
help of Gods Spirit) deal with you, and all of you in these Controversies:
But supposing all you affirm of your selves had been true, eujus contrarium
verum est (as is too evident by what I have proved) that you had neither
preached, printed, nor acted personally for your selves, and way, yet all this
forbearance might have been not from the grounds and reasons brought by you in
this Section, but from other principles of wisdom and policy, as the more to
ingratiate your selves with the Houses of Parliament, and to insinuate into
their favor, and that you might the better make such an Apology as this, and
make use of it to your advantage at such a time as this, and I judge such
considerations have restrained some of you, and prevailed with you, not to act
so much as your fellows, and not so openly (as otherwise you would) especially
knowing whilst you were in the Tyring-house unseene, the Scene was full, and
the Tragedy went on, there being no want of Actors on the open Stage to carry
on your Church way: As for instance Mr W. Mr P. Mr K. Mr B. Dr H. Mr L. Mr G.
Mr C. Mr B. Mr P. Mr G. Mr W. Mr W. S. Mr C. Mr E. Mr C. Mr A. Mr L. cum multis
aliis, of whose preachings, and acting for themselves and way in gathering of
Churches, etc. and of books made by some of them, and printed by others of
them; it would fill a book to enumerate particulars, and to declare what has
been done in City, Country, Armies, and in all places to make and increase
parties, and to occasion so great disturbance amongst all sorts, as that it
will be found a hard work to settle the Government of the Church, and to
reduce the people. And I confess you having such choice of Instruments and
under-wor^men to work by, and to build your Babel, I marvel you contented not
your selves with only casting the Model, and giving the pattern and aim to
others, but that you should appear upon the works your selves (as oftentimes
you did.)

To your second main part in this Section, the Provocations you have had all
sorts of ways to have preached, printed, and acted for your selves both by the
Common misunderstandings and misrepresentations of your opinions and practices,
etc. I must tell you, I judge, and that upon good grounds, never men laying all
things together, consideratis considerandis, had fewer provocations, for
considering you were but a few in comparison, and going in a new different way
from all the Reformed Churches, and the destructivenesse of your principles to
Reformation, with the danger of them in drawing away and stealing our sheep
from us, and the contempt of our Ministry (occasioned by your principles)
among all the people generally of your way, as also your leaving the land in
the greatest need; notwithstanding all these and many more that all the godly
Ministers of City, and Country should carry themselves toward you with that
love, respect, fairness, brotherly kindness, as they did, might have provoked
you indeed, but in another way then you express it: And for the truth of this
I appeal to your own breasts, and to the knowledge of my brethren, and to
these following demonstrations. 1. There was a great deal of loving respects,
and fair carriage toward you, both in admitting you into their Pulpits, and
in forbearing all things offensive to you, and your party before the Sermons,
to gratify you. 2. There was a great deal of fair respects to you in
admitting you into their Society, and public meetings about the matters of
Reformation. 3. There was a general silence by the Godly Ministers, (I fear
unto sinful) in forbearing preaching against your points, and that when some
of you preached for your way and many Pamphlets were printed for it. 4. The
Ministers suffered some of you, and no ways interposed to hinder you from
being the universal Lecturers of the City, who if they had appeared against
you might have crossed it. 5. The Ministers courted you by all ways of
respect, and of high entertainment of you in loving speech, friendly
countenance, familiar conversing with you, giving you the right hand of
fellowship, and in a brotherly entreating you, not to appear for your way,
that so our differences might not hinder the work of Reformation, withal
promising you when they had obtained the Reformation desired, they should be
ready to gratify you all they could, and to consider you as godly Brethren. 6.
Upon the Proposition and motion of silence about the points in difference, the
Ministers were most ready and willing to enter into a strict engagement with
you, and that though some of your way had been before hand with them in venting
your principles amongst the people. 7. There has been much tenderness
expressed toward you, and readiness of yielding to you all along (the more to
win you, to prevent an open breach, and to stop peoples mouths) and
particularly in the Assembly of Divines, where that patience, longsuffering,
forbearing has been exercised toward you, in your often and long speaking
upon points, in speaking the same things over and over again, etc. as would
hardly have been toward any others, and I may truly speak it, many of our
Ministers have not carried themselves toward one another with that love and
respect as they have done to you. 8. The Ministers have in honor preferred you
before themselves, and have been contented (in a good sense) to let you
increase and they to decrease, and could be so contented still for Gods glory
and the good of the Church. But I will particularly answer to your Provocations
here alleged, and show you, that they were no Provocations to have caused you,
to make and increase a party by preaching, etc.

For the 1. the common misunderstandings and mis-representations of your
opinions and practices was not a sufficient provocation to preaching, etc. 1.
because many of those mists were scattered by your presence again without
speaking a word for your selves or cause, and therefore needed not neither
preaching, printing, nor acting for your selves and way. 2. You may justly
thank your selves for the misunderstandings of your opinions, and practices,
carrying them so in the dark, and putting off from time to time a Narrative of
your opinions and ways (thoug^ so earnestly desired by the Godly Ministers,
and you sent unto so solemnly for it, as also promised by you often,) so that
it was no fault at all in the standers by to misunderstand or mistake some
things in your opinions and practices (especially being new, strange, and
hidden too.) 3. Although you speak thus, that your opinions and ways were
misunderstood, and misrepresented (that being one of your usual Artifices to
delude with, and to keep off arguments brought against you) yet I do not know
any opinion or practice of yours misunderstood and misrepresented, I know none
that was written against, or fathered on you, but what was either to be found
in some of your Manuscripts, etc. (but of this I have spoken before.)

For the second Provocation, the Incitements to this State not to allow you the
peaceable practices of your Consciences, which the Reformed Churches abroad
allowed you, and these edged with Calumnies and reproaches cast upon your
persons in print. I suppose in this you mean that book written by me,
entitled Reasons against Independent Government and against the Toleration of
it, presented to the House of Commons; for as for any other book of that nature
I remember none, besides you commend the other books written against your way
and Tenets, page 15. Now that book gives Reasons and Grounds for what it
writes against, and you should have done well (either any one of you, or all of
you) to have answered it, and had you showed those Reasons to have been weak
and unjust, then there had been some color for you to have made that a
Provocation to have acted for your selves and way, but by your silence you
seem to give consent to what was written against you. But how ever (though I
writ both against your Government, and the Toleration of it in this kingdom,)
yet not against the peaceable practices of your Consciences, but the
unpeaceable practice of them (as you would order matters in England:) For I
spent some leaves in that book to allow you the peaceable practice of your
consciences, and chaulked Reasons against ^oleration, page 43, 44, 45.
you out a way, even with the saving of your principles (for which you have
cause to thank me.) As for my incitement to the State, it was not to
persecution against you, for Page 42.
I laid down a clear medium between persecution and a Toleration: As for that
passage, which the Reformed Churches abroad allowed us; I have already answered
that at large in my former book, and I Reasons against Toleration, page 37, 38.
will here add another Answer to those I gave then; the reformed Churches
abroad might safelier allow you the liberty of your consciences there, then
this State can; for there being strangers, you and your Churches looked for
nothing else, you looked not to enjoy the privileges of offices, places in
Church and Commonwealth, not to be in the rank of States, Burgomasters, etc.
but here in England you Independents will look for the like privileges that
others enjoy, as to be Majors of Towns, chosen Burgesses and Knights for
Parliament, etc. whereby you will have a mighty influence and advantages to
countenance and promote your way, and make parties every where (which must
needs be of dangerous consequence to this State.) Now for those words, and
these edged with calumnies and reproaches cast upon our persons in print. I
answer, let the whole book be perused, and let the Reader judge if the first
part of the book consisting of the Reasons against Independent government be
not wholly argumentative, (containing nothing personal, but rational,) and
for the second part, the Reasons against the Toleration, let it be examined
whether that be not rational also, and in many pages as full of yealding and
sweetness as can well be with the keeping of peace and truth, and could be
expected in such a difference of judgment; And whether also I give not in
several passages of that book to Ministers of that way, due respects, and
fitting terms, only in one page of the book, in answering a popular Reason of
yours for a Toleration (which I Reason against Toleration, page 49.
had from one of your own mouths) I gave a popular answer suitable to the
Argument, (but so as without either foul or railing language.) 2. I named you
not, but spoke as of many of your Ministers, why do you then appropriate it to
your selves? and I can truly speak it, that for one of you five to whom
application is made more especially of some thing there written, I did not so
much as mean or intend him, but do openly acquit him, and disclaim it. I
deny that any words or phrases in that book, spoken of those persons I intended
them to, are calumnies, there is not a word but is true, and many can and do
witness so much, (who yet wish the passage had been left out, because* then
all pretense of exceptions and cavil against the book had been taken away,)
and for the reproaches you speak of, (which are a matter of truth) they are
rather upon the opinions and principles, then the persons, coming to the
persons from the opinions and principles received; And for my own part, I never
wished that passage had been left out, for I know no reason, but when people
fall into a way, because of the pretense of the great holiness and grace of
the men of that way, when those be the Arguments that take and deceive the
people, but it is the duty of him who would preserve from the error of that
way, to show the contrary effects (if he can,) and what did I do more?

For the third provocation, all these heightened with this further prejudice and
provocation that our silence was interpreted that we were either ashamed of our
opinions or able to say little for them. I conceive that in this you may aim
at me (as in the former) and I ingenuously confess that your silence in not
answering books, and particularly mine was interpreted so by me, and I have
spoken to some, and spoke it (even while it was given out by some of you it
should be answered,) that you would not answer it for two Reasons. 1. Because
you were not yet willing to make known your opinions, what you held, and what
not, (the answer to which book would necessarily have drawn out what you were
not then willing to speak, nor yet do in this Apology.) 2. Because being
accounted Scholars, if you did not answer it fully, and to purpose, you would
rather loose then gain, in a word, I thought you could not answer it
satisfyingly, neither were you willing to impart your opinions publicly, so as
they might be fastened on, that these are your opinions, so that considering how
ready you have been in pulpits, and with the people (whom you might probably
gain) to vent your opinions, speaking where you should have been silent, and
being silent when you have been desired by the Ministers (who understand
controversies as well as your selves) and never answering any books written
against your way, nor laying down neither in writing, nor by printing what you
held with your grounds in a Scholasticall way, did give me and many others
cause to interpret that kind of silence and reservednesse, to spring either
from your being ashamed of your opinions, or from being able to say little for
them: And if you answer not this Antapologie, I shall be like enough to
interpret your silence, that either you are ashamed of some of your opinions,
or able to say little for them.

For the fourth provocation, Whenas on the other side (besides all other
advantages*) books have been written by men of much worth, learning and
authority, with moderation and strength, to prepossesse the peoples minds
against what are supposed our Tenets. I answer, 1. You should have done well to
have named what all other advantages our side had of you which might have
provoked you to preach, print and act for your selves and way: You confess in
the last Section, page 24. You had manifold advantages to make and increase a
party: but I know not what advantages were on our side, or if we had, that they
were taken by us against you, whereby you have any just ground to set out your
patience in not being provoked. 2. You should have done well to have answered
the books, written by men of much worth, learning and authority, with
moderation and strength; (though you answered not mine) and no man would have
blamed you for that, but all men expected it, and blame you rather, for
declining all those ways of disputes, and of stating the points in difference
between you and the Ministers, and dealing in popular ways, and under-board
with the people, who were ready to take any impression, and to be cast into any
mould that had but the appearance of a stricter way. 3. If the books written
by men of much worth, learning and authority, with moderation and strength,
were but against your supposed Tenets, (as you say) and not your Tenets indeed,
you not being named, nor personated in them, this was no such provocation to
you to publish your opinions by preaching, printing, and to act for your selves
or way: A clear conscience might have slighted them, and ingenuous men might
in a few leaves, have clearly disclaimed all those points as not holding them,
and there had been an end of all controversy. 4. I cannot let pass under this
fourth provocation, that expression of yours, against what are supposed our
Tenets, a usual artifice of you and yourfollowers, that when any thing is
written strongly against your way, which you know not how, nor never mean to
awswer, you put it off with this, The question is mistaken, we hold not so, we
hold otherwise: the answer you have given to all our books written by men of
much worth, etc. the way the Arminians used to put off the learned answers made
to their books, and the Tractates written by our Divines against their
opinions, a very Jesuiticall device, and most unworthy of men professing
conscience and piety, (in which expression of Jesuiticall, I entreat the Reader
not to mistake me, as if I called the Apologists so, or would rank them in the
form of Jesuits, no I intend not that at all, but merely to show this way is
not fair, as being the practice of Arminians and Jesuits, and so becomes not
good men, as I judge the Apologists are.) But let the Reader judge, can it be
thought, that all the books written since this Parliament by men of much
worth, learning and authority; with moderation and strength, should be against
you, upon supposed Tenets? that they should all fight with their own shadows,
and set up a man of cloutes, and beat him with strength, to suppose you to
hold such Tenets which you do not; what an imputation is this upon all who
have written on these points? how does this imply a contradiction in the words
and expressions used by your selves? that they should be men of much worth,
learning, etc. and yet write against what are supposed your Tenets: this argued
not much worth, nor strength in them; and suffer me here to vindicate those
worthy men who have written of late against Independency and for combined
Presbytery and Synods, that they write not against what are supposed your
Tenets, but what are your Tenets really: Can it be thought that the learned
Divines of Holland, as Mr Paget, who being exercised with Mr Davenport, Mr
Hooker and others of your way upon the points, in many Conferences, and
afterward writ a book on purpose upon those points, should write against
supposed Tenets, and that the most learned Voetius living in Holland, and
having spoken with many of your way, yea with some of you (if I mistake not,)
and writing so lately upon these points, upon the occasion of the newness of
the controversy, should so mistake; or that the two reverend and learned
Divines of Scotland, setting forth books chiefly upon the occasion of your
dissents; (the first Divine having been in England so long in the first year
of the Parliaments sitting, and having had discourse with some of you upon the
points, and the later Mr Rutherford, being so able a man and so well versed in
the controversy) should conspire to prepossesse the peoples minds against what
are supposed your Tenets: But if all these should have mistaken, that yet one
of your own Divines who writ more lately with much learning and ingenuity (as
your selves confess,) and your Licenser too, should fasten upon you supposed
Tenets, seems strange: But the best is, we have your selves confessing in the
15. page of your Apology, that these Divines of Holland, Scotland and England,
have written against your Tenets and government, directly, setly and with
strength: and how could Mr Herles book against Independency be written with
much ingenuity, if he had prepossessed the peoples minds against what are
supposed your Tenets, but are not so indeed: And however, though neither my
self, nor my book against Independent government are not in the number of the
men and books of much worth and learning, written with moderation and strength;
yet it is probable those Reasons against Independent government and
Toleration, troubles you as much as any other book written, and may be more
aimed at by you in this passage then other books, and therefore, to free my
self, I have not ass^rted any thing in that book as your Tenet, but what I
have good reason to believe you have held: and I can produce it, either as your
known practice, or out of some Manuscripts that go under some of your names;
or from your own mouths, or some intimate familiars of yours: so that unless
according to your second great principle in the 10th page, you have altered and
retracted within these few years what six or seven years ago you held, the
peoples minds have not been propossest by me with what are your supposed
Tenets, but with your real Tenets: and I desire you in your Reply, to give any
instances to the contrary: And that neither I nor others may not write against
your supposed Tenets any longer, I do beleech you for the glory of God and the
peace of the Church, to set down positively and plainly all your Tenets,
wherein you differ from the reformed Churches and the Reformation likely to be
settled, and that with the grounds of them, or without the grounds, (if your
other occasions will not allow you time) and I do promise you by the help of
God, in a short convenient time (without any thing personal or matter of fact)
to give you a direct answer from Scripture and reasons grounded thereupon,
whereby we may understand one another the better, and bring this sad
controversy between brethren to an end the sooner. 5. We, who have written
any thing against your way, have not so much prepossessed the peoples minds
against your Tenets, as labored to dispossess them: we have all played the
after-game too much, you the fore-game; you and your party have prepossessed
the peoples minds with your principles, and have filled the City and Kingdom
with your Tenets, and you have been on the prepossessing hand, filling many
Parliament men's ear^s, and the peoples minds against Presbyteriall government,
and instilling into them, things but supposed against that government, (as not
giving enough to the power of the civil Magistrate:) It would grieve an
ingenious and conscientious man, to see where ever one comes, how many good
people of the Kingdom are prepossessed by being prejudiced against
Presbyteriall government, that it will be worse then the Hierarchy, and more
tiranicall to the consciences and liberties of the people, with such like:
There was therefore, and is much need to cast out these Devils, and to
unpossesse the people possessed, and by preaching, conference and writing, to
preserve such who are not yet possessed, and to prepossesse them with truth,
because such is the nature of your errors, that hither to few who take hold of
them ever return; like Goodwin sands, that if a ship once strike upon them,
there is no fetching her off: or as poison, which is hardly expelled, if once
it be diffused through the body.

3. For the grounds and reasons of your pretended deep silence, and
forbearance of venting your opinions to the multitude, I grant they are well
summed up by you, and I wish they had wrought as well with you to a deep
silence and forbearance; but whatever you say of the conscience and
consideration of all these, and the weight of each, to have had such a power
with you hitherto, the contrary has been prooved, and I am ready yet further
to make it good; and will upon your Reply to this Answer say a great deal
more. But now I must come to examine each of your grounds apart; which you say
wrought upon you not to attempt in the least to make a party or to act for your
selves or way.

1. But we knew and considered, that it was the second blow that makes the
quarrel, and that the beginning of strife would have been as the breaking in
of waters, and the sad and conscientious apprehension of the danger of rending
and dividing the godly Protestant party in this Kingdom, that were desirous of
Reformation, and of making several interests among them, when there was an
absolute necessity of their nearest union and conjunction, etc.

I answer, It is spoken like an Oracle, and might indeed have wrought upon you
to a burying of your opinions, to a total forbearance of them for a time, and
to have spent your time in a conjuring all the Ministers and people of your
way, not to have spoken a word, not to have appeared in the least for those
points till the Reformation intended had been effected; but brethren, was it
practiced by you as well as it is here spoken? I beseech you, let your
consciences answer, and in cool blood, (laying aside all particular interests,
passion, prejudice,) consider whether it be not by your means, or by some of
you more especially who writ this, that the godly Protestant party of this
Kingdom desirous of a reformation, is rent and divided, and have several
interests mong them in a time when there was an absolute necessity of their
necrest union and conjunction, and all little enough to effect that Reformation
intended: Have not some of your Sermons? have not the practices of some of you
in assembling in private houses, and in the gathering of many to your Churches?
have not your discourses and conferences with some Ministers and well affect^d
people upon your points? (with many other things that I could name) been a
great cause of rending and dividing the godly Protestant party, and of much
distracting them, and of making several interests? Whence have come all the
rents and divisions (to speak of) in the godly Protestant party, all the ^ets,
stopps and delays in the intended Reformation, but from you and by occasion
and means of you? The authority of your names holding these opinions (having
the reputation of Scholars, and of excellent Preachers,) whereby you are cried
up of many, and so much followed; your interest, and favor in too many
considerable persons have drawn so much; had it not been for your sakes, these
rents and divisions had never come to this head, there had not been that
connivance, nor such delays of settling government, etc. most of the rest of
your way were in comparison contemptible both for name and gifts, and could not
have done that hurt; and why then, in a time (by your own confession) of
absolute necessity of the nearest union and conjunction, and all little enough
to effect that Reformation intended, and so long contended for against a common
adversary, that had both present possession to plead for it self, power to
support it, and had enjoyed a long continued settlement, which had rooted it in
the hearts of men, have you done so much by preaching and acting to rend and
divide the godly protestant party? there was no absolute necessity, just at
that time when you did preach and stir for your way, for you to have done so;
affirmatives though they do bind semper, yet not ad semper, there were greater
truths in doctrine and in Reformation of government, which you might have
preached on for that time, but there was an absolute necessity of the nearest
union and conjunction: I heartily with, this first Reason and ground deeply
laid to heart by you, and then I know you must greatly repent for what you
have done in this particular, since your return into England; and had not God
been, and were he not the more gracious, and better to us then ordinary, your
carriage, and what has been by your means, would have spoiled our
Reformation, and has done much to keep the common Adversary in his present
possession, and long continued settlement: but I pray God humble you for it,
and forgive you; and seeing you knew and considered, that it was the second
blow that makes the quarrel, and that the beginning of strife would have been
as the breaking in of waters, why were you not contented with the giving of the
first blow, and the first occasion of the quarrel, both by your former
preaching and practicing, but to add this second great blow, the writing of
this Apologeticall Narration, which though it be not on your parts the
beginning of strife, yet it will prove as the breaking in of waters, and as the
kindling of a fire, not likely to be put out in have.

2. And this seconded by the instant and continual advices and conjurements of
many honorable, wise and godly Personages of both Houses of Parliament, to
forbear what might any way be like to occasion or augment this unhappy
difference; They having also by their Declarations to his Majesty, professed
their endeavor and desire to unite the Protestant party in this Kingdom that
agree in fundamental truths against Popery and other heresies, and to have
that respect to tender consciences as might prevent oppressions and
inconveniences which has formerly been.

I judge this ground seconding the former, should have been powerful with you
to a deep silence and forbearance, every particular branch of it speaks
strongly to you, to forbear what ever might any way be like to occasion; or
augment this unhappy difference; Nay almost every word in it, ^s an argument to
command, The instant, and continual advices, and conjurements of many
honorable, wise, and godly Personages of both Houses of Parliament, what might
not all these have wrought? and then take in also, that they had by their
Declarations to His Majesty, etc. and that they would have a respect to tender
Consciences; Now what could you almost have wished more, or what better
security for your selves and way: A man would think all these might have
commanded you, not to have acted for your selves and way, and certainly your
fault was the greater in doing contrary, and you are the more inexcusable, had
not this seconded the former, yet your knowledge of the first was enough to
have taken ingenuous spirits, but this seconding the first, it is too bad that
you went contrary to the instant and continual advices, and conjurement, of
many Honorable, wise and godly Personages of both Houses of Parliament. As for
those passages inserted in this Reason, the Parliaments Declarations to his
Majesty, professing their endeavor and desire to unite the Protestant party
in this Kingdom that agree in fundamental truths, and to have that respect to
tender Consciences, wherein you would insinuate that the Parliament had put you
in some hopes of a Toleration, and that grounded upon some passages in their
Declarations, had you named what Declarations speak so, I could have perused
and examined them, and have returned you an answer (I question it not) from
the words and sense; but to put it out of doubt, that the Parliament intends no
Toleration, in such words as having respect to tender consciences, etc. I
refer you to the first and great Remonstrance and Declaration of the House of
Commons, wherein they declare the contrary, and engage themselves to the
Kingdom against it, answering to that as a Calumny cast upon them to traduce
their proceedings: They infuse into A Remonstrance of the state of the
Kingdom. Printed. 1641.
the people that we mean to abolish all Church Government, and leave every man
to his own fancy for the Service and Worship of God, absolving him of that
obedience which he owes under God unto his Majesty, whom we know to be
entrusted with the Ecclesiastical Law as well as with the temporal, to
regulate all the members of the Church of England by such rules of Order and
Discipline as are established by Parliament, which is his great Council in all
affairs both in Church and State: And we do here declare that it is far
from our purpose or desire to let loose the golden reins of Discipline and
Government in the Church, to leave private persons, or particular Congregations
to take up what form of Divine Service they please; for we hold it requisite
that there should be throughout the whole Realm a Conformity to that Order
which the Laws enjoyne according to the Word of God: And we desire to
unburthen the Consciences of men of needless and superstitious Ceremonies,
suppress innovations, and take away the monuments of idolatry. And the better
to effect the intended Reformation, we desire there may be a general Synod of
the most grave, pious, learned and judicious Divines of this Island, assisted
with some from foreign parts professing the same Religion with us, who may
consider of all things necessary for the peace and good Government of the
Church, and represent the results of their Consultations unto the Parliament,
to be there allowed of and confirmed, and receive the stamp of authority,
thereby to find passage and obedience throughout the Kingdom. Also I refer
you to Declarations both of Lords and Commons about Uniformitie in
Church Government, Worship, etc. intended by them. And for the words as you
express them here, respect to tender Consciences, as might prevent oppressions
and inconveniences which had formerly been; they interpret themselves, implying
a taking away the Ceremonies and other offensive things, and a not enforcing
and injoyning Subscriptions to all points in matter of Order and External
Government, as had formerly been: but as for Tolerating different Churches, and
a different form of Church Government to be publicly exercised, besides the
established, as I do not believe that to be any part of their meaning in their
Declarations, so their words are express against it in the first Remonstrance,
and in some later Declarations; besides that the Parliament well knows a
Toleration would bring in greater inconveniences to tender Consciences then can
at first be imagined, and would prove a far greater mischief to the Church,
and to Reformation both in Doctrine and Government, then the Episcopal.

3. Together with that strict engagement willingly entered into by us for these
common ends with the rest of our brethren of the Ministry (which though made
to continue but ad placitum, yet has been sa^red to us:) As for this third
ground alleged by you for silence, it prevailed no more with you then the
former, for notwithstanding this strict engagement, even since that time you
have both preached, and printed for your way, namely Mr Borroughs* Mr Bridge,
Mr Sympson, and Mr Goodwin, and many of the particulars formentioned have been
preached since that agreement, so that it seems it has not been so sacred to
you as you would make the Reader believe. But if you answer, you understand
that engagement entered into with the Ministers was sacred to you, and so
observed as long as the agreement lasted, but the particulars instanced in
preached by you were since that agreement ceased by mutual content: I answer,
your words, and the scope for which they are brought joined to the precedent
passages refer to a silence, and forbearance till the time of putting forth
this Apology, and that Parenthesis, which though made to continue but ad
placitum, implies so much, that though you were at liberty, yet you took not
that liberty. But secondly, I must mind you that the groundwork laid by you,
by which you would the more commend your own silence, and moderation, namely
the agreement to continue but ad placitum was not so, for it was agreed upon,
it should continue till both sides in a full meeting did declare the contrary,
and in case one side did transgress by preaching, etc. none of the other side
should take liberty to do the like, till the company was acquainted with it,
and the thing proved, and the matters of difference not being taken up, the
agreement thereupon was declared to be null, whereupon, though some men
included, and particularly named at the agreement were complained of in a full
meeting to have transgressed the agreement, yet it was still continued
notwithstanding some breach on the Independent side, in reference to the
public union against the common enemy, and for those common ends, which was
the first ground of it. 3. I desire it may be considered of by Mr Borroughs Mr
Sympson, and M. Bridge, whether some passages in some of their Sermons and
Expositions about the Church way, will not by calculating the time when they
were preached, and the time of the engagement for silence, (namely before the
formal Declaration of the Company in a public meeting, that the agreement
ceased, and that every man was left to his former liberty) be found to be
preached within the compass of the time, even before the mutual strict
engagement was declared null: And because you here give the occasion by making
this mutual strict engagement between you and us one great ground of your deep
silence, I shall faithfully, and impartially (to my best remembrance) relate
that whole business of the agreement of the Ministers for silence, the truth
of which many Ministers then present upon the place can testify also: The
Ministers of both sides, both they and we desirous of Reformation in
Church Government, and Worship, being sensible how much our differences, and
divisions might distract the Parliament, and hinder the taking away of
Episcopal Government, and the Reformation intended, in a full and great
meeting consulted together upon ways to prevent it, and by vote agreed upon
these: 1. That the Godly Ministers of the City and Country should continue
the use of some part of the Liturgy (namely, what was best, and least
offensive,) because they found that the Bishops fought under that Banner, and
made use with the Gentry and body of the common people to wrap up themselves
in that, suggesting that the Parliament would take away the Common Prayer
Book, (which they made use of to save their own standing, and to work their
own ends the better.) And M. Goodwin ingenuously professed that he judged the
moderate use of the Lyturgie in this juncture of things, and for a time,
conduced much to the Reformation aimed at, and were his Principles as ours,
that any prescribed Prayers might be used, he would use it, (and saving his
Judgment about Lyturgies) his vote was to use it, whereupon there being such a
general concurrence of Judgment amongst the Ministers, some one or two
Ministers in the City who were taken notice of wholly to disuse it, and to
have laid it aside in all Administrations, were sent unto from the Company of
Ministers (and one of them came presently) to whom the sense of the Company was
represented, and he dealt with to take it up again, and to use some part of
the Prayers in the Lyturgie, especially in the Administration of the
Sacraments. Secondly, the Ministers finding that the preaching of some Laymen,
Tradesmen, and Mechanics in the public Congregations was a great stone of
offense in the building of the Temple, a way was agreed upon by the Ministers
to deal with them, and to take them off that practice, and some of the Company
(judged to be most gracious and powerful with them) were chosen by the whole
to deal with them, and to acquaint them with the sense of the Ministers, and
some grounds against their practice, especially at that time (though the
Company of Ministers who sent; declared formally their judgment against the
practice of it at all times,) Thirdly, A mutual silence was agreed upon for
both sides, both in preaching, printing, and conferring with the people, (and
especially Parliament men) of any of the points in difference between us, but
yet so that both they and we should join together to preach against the
Anabaptists and rigid Brownists, which these Apologists promised, only they
desired first to bring in a Narrative to us; of all their opinions that they
held in difference, (which also they promised with all convenient speed, in a
short time should be brought in, and then they would preach against them;) Now
for the better keeping of the agreement, and understanding one another, for
preventing mistakes, and differences amongst us, a Committee was chosen out of
the Company, some of them, and some of our side to draw up the particulars in
writing, which was accordingly done, and the Agreement under the hands of both
sides for our part was to be left with M. Calamie (at whose house we met,) that
so if any difference did arise, or complaint come, we might recurre to the
writing drawn up between us, and accordingly do: Now this strict engagement
entered into by you with the rest of your brethren in the Ministry for common
ends, brought by you here as one great ground of not attempting to make a
party, and of your deep silence and forbearance, no one thing that ever was
done by you was more advantageous to your side, and to the increasing of a
party, (which indeed proved as it was feared it would, and was by my self and
some others objected as a ground against any such agreement,) for look what
came of the Declarations set out by the King (by means of the Bishops) that in
the Arminian points there should be on both sides a total silence in
preaching, and printing, (namely, a greater prevailing of the Arminian points,
and spreading of them, but a suppressing of the Orthodox) so fell it out here,
for by that means nothing was preached, nor printed against their way to
hinder the growth of it, but in the mean time many things were preached and
printed for it, our side made conscience of the promise, and forbore totally
preaching and printing: For my own part though for many Reasons I desired to
have been excepted from the agreement, as being engaged by a former promise in
print to set out speedily some Tractates against their way, and never did
formally promise silence, yet because my brethren undertook for me (for
without my forbearing to print and preach, they would not have yielded to the
Agreement) that I might not be singular, and go against the Judgment of all
my brethren (though my Judgment was against the promise of silence upon what I
evidently foresaw would follow upon it, the advantage they would make by it to
increase a party) and that I might not be guilty of hindering the common ends
held out, I did totally both in preaching and printing decline all those points
of difference, and notwithstanding I heard and knew that some of their side
preached contrary to the agreement, yet all that time, until it was openly
declared in a full Assembly the agreement was broken, and I declared I would be
at freedom, and some of them said the like, I preached not upon those points,
whereas in this time many of their way preached for their way both in City and
Country, and some who by name were spoken of at the agreement (as Mr P. and M.
W.) besides books were printed too in that interim for their way, as M.
Cottons answer to M. Ball about Forms of Prayer, and his Church Catechism,
etc. In a word in the whole carriage of that business they were too hard for
us by their policy and subtilty, for whereas a mutual silence was agreed upon
both in preaching, etc. and that out of hand they should bring in a Narrative
of their opinions wherein they differed from us, and then should join with us
in preaching against the Brownists and Anabaptists, they never brought in their
Narrative till this day, and though at full meetings of the Ministers they have
been spoken unto, and some Ministers have been sent from the Company to some,
or one of them, and the Narrative was promised at such a time, and then at such
a time, yet it was never performed, and whereas the agreement in writing for
our side was left in M. Calamies hand, M. Nigh comes after some time to M.
Calamy, and pretends some reasons for to borrow it for a while, but after he
had it, he carries it away into Yorkshire, that so upon occasions of complaints
of the breach of the agreement, when we would have consulted with that, that
was gone, and M. Nigh keeps it till this day, and having been moved to restore
it, his answer is, it is at Hull amongst other papers.

4. And above all the due respect we have had to the peaceable and orderly
Reformation of this Church and State, the hopeful expectation we have been
entertained with of an happy latitude and agreement by means of this Assembly,
and the wisdom of this Parliament.

Strong motives indeed, peaceable and orderly Reformation with a hopeful
expectation of an happy latitude and agreement, powerful and effectual to
have commanded peaceable and orderly men, but though you make these grounds
above all the rest to have carried weight, yet they could no more prevail with
you then the forenamed, (as I have fully proved) and whether you have had such
due respect to the peaceable and orderly Reformation of this Church and State,
let what follows speak: Is it peaceable and orderly in a time when the
Magistrate makes it his maine work to reform, and calls so many godly learned
Ministers from all parts to consult with, to settle the Church and Government
according to the Word of God, for particular private men to gather Churches,
and to add to them daily without and against the consent of the Magistrate;
yea, against the instant and continual advices and conjurements of many
honorable, wise, and godly Personages of both Houses of Parliament, to
forbear what might any way be like to occasion or augment this unhappy
difference; now no one thing could hardly more occasion or augment the
differences then this of gathering Churches, according to your way, one or two
out of this godly Ministers Parish, one or two out of this Family, the wife
from the husband against his consent, etc? Again, is it peaceable and orderly
for these gathered Churches to meet on the Sabbath day in private houses at the
times of the public Assemblies, whereby great tumults and combustions have
been and may be occasioned in the streets? And is it a due respect to peaceable
and orderly Reformation to preach publicly upon points in difference, and for
a Toleration of diverse Sects and opinions? And lastly, is that a due respect to
the peaceable and orderly Reformation of this Church and Si^te, to see in
Churches (where you, and other Ministers of your way have preached) great
tumults and disorders committed by your followers against the use of any part
of the Lyturgie, and yet never to reprove them for it, nor to teach them to
expect and wait till the Parliament would settle things* which of you have
preached against the tumults in Churches, or the Lay-preaching, or the
gathering of Churches by the people? We have had a sprinkling of a little Court
holy water for a color in one or two Sermons against some who say we have had
no Churches, no Ministers, etc. with which the eyes of many men who have not
studied the controversies, neither understand them have been blinded; and by
which you have the more readily drawn some either to your Church Way by your
pretended moderation, or to plead for you against the aspersion of Brownisme.
But what have you either done really; or forborne for the peaceable and orderly
Reformation of this Church and State, have not all the notorious and visible
disorders in our Churches (since this Parliament) both in City and Country
(which have wrought such great disgusts in many (though unjustly) against the
Reformation and the Parliament, that as old Jacob said to Simeon and L^vi, Ye
have troubled me; to make me to stincke amongst the inhabitants of the land,
and I being few in number, they shall gather themselves together against me;
and ^ay me, etc. so might Reformation and Parliament speak) been committed by
your followers, and men of your way and ^ommunion* yea many of them in your
presence, when some of you have been to preach (for as for the rigid Brownists
and A^baptists they come not to our Assemblies at all.) O the great advantage
and gain the common enemy has made amongst many of these things, and the
great loss and hinderance the Reformation and Parliament has sustained by
them. What that happy latitude and agreement is with which you have ^een so
hop^fully entertained by some, you should have done well to have spoken out,
and have told us whether any men in place have given you promises of a
Toleration for your way* (for I suppose by your phrase that is the happy
latitude and agreement you mean,) B^ if any have, I hope it is more then they
can perform and mak^ good, besides those persons are free from their promise,
and you have justly forfeited that hopeful expectation, for whereas they
entertained you with it (as your selves say) that you might keep silence, and
forbear all acting for your selves or way* you have practiced quite contrary
(as is evident by the many instances give^ in my Answer to this Section*) Now
as this deep silence and forbearance of yours, is sufficiently disprooved (for
what hear I words, when I see deeds so contrary) so neither the conscience non
consideration of all these, nor the weight of each have had any great power
with you hitherto, but your own interests: For your private particular Church
way has prevailed with you above all the public, to occasion great
disturbance amongst the people; and so great disturbance has been, and is
occasioned by your means; that the swarm is up and settles in so many places;
as without Gods great mercy, they will never be got into one hive again. The
Lord only knows, when these disturbances will be settled and qui^ted, it were
easy to fill up such a book as your Apologeticall Narration with the
particulars of the disturbances occasioned amongst the people; by means of
you, and other Ministers of your communion. In a word, at that time when some
of you whose names are here subscribed, did keep any silence, I think it was
not so much these Reasons pretended by you, as the advantage of our silence in
forbearing preaching and printing, (some books being then even ready to have
come out) that was aimed at; and was a greater w^ght then the Reasons here
mentioned by you, and besides you in your wisdoms knew well enough there we^
many of your way (though you were silent) would be doing and driving on the
trade, there would be preaching and printing that would serve to take with the
people; and in the interim you should gain time to ripen, shapen and bring
forth your opinions the better with their grounds* As to those words in the
close of this Section* w^ have and (...) yet resolved to ^re all this with a
quiet and strong (...) in the strength of which we now speak or rather sigh
forth this little, etc* So it seems, witness this Apologeticall Narration,
that you have, and are resolved to bear all this with a quiet and strong
patience, It is a wonder if your patience was so quiet and so strong, (in the
strength of which you now speak, or rather sigh forth this little book) you
could not forbear a little longer from putting forth this Popular and
Rhetorical Discourse to take the people with, and to vindicate your selves and
way (especially having so many advantages.) 1. That many of the mists gathered
about you were in a great measure scattered without speaking a word. 2. The
good opinion both Houses had of you to make you members of the Assembly, with
other favors conferred upon you. 3. Your swimming with the stream of popular
applause, cried up, and followed so by the people, with your great interest and
familiarity in many men of place and power. 4. Eminent Lectures, and the most
public places to preach in. 5. Above all, your being members of the Assembly,
as also the Assembly being upon the very borders of the points in difference:
In consideration of all which (I judge) a very little patience might have
served the turn to have left the vindi^ation of your persons to God, and to a
further (...) of you by ^en; so that it seems not true to me, that in the
strength of a quiet and strong patience you now speak or sigh forth this
Apology, but rather this Apology was made for want of patience to wait, and
out of that common design of acting for your selves and way, and to lay in
something before hand with the Parliament and the people, (what ever the
Assembly might chance to conclude,) in a word, to prejudge the Assembly, to
play the fore-game, and to prepossesse the minds of men with a further high
opinion of you and your way, but I believe, God has turned all to the
contrary, taking the wise in their own craftiness, and this Apology has,
and will make more against you then any one thing you ever did. I have been
told by an intimate familiar friend of yours, that one of you five told him, it
proved quite contrary to your expectation, and you admired at it, it should be
so ill taken by the Assembly, etc. It is the worst evil that ever befell you
since your return from your exile, worse then all the misunderstandings and
misrepresentations of your opinions, and the incitements to the S^te edged with
calumnies and reproaches against Toleration of your Churches, and the sudden
and unexpected noise of confus^d exclamations: So soon as ever I read it over
with deliberation, I presently apprehended it the beginning of your fall, (in
regard of your Church Way,) and could not but wonder at the Providence of God,
in leaving you to pen such a strange piece, both for matter and manner, so
justly liable to exceptions and offense, which would loose you among your
friends, and draw pens of all sorts, and from all parts against you, and give
occasion for drawing up such answers to it (and you can blame none but your
selves) as would upon necessity discover, and lay open both matter of fact and
opinions more then ever else there would have been any pretense of ground to
have done it. As for referring the vindication of your Persons to God and a
further experience of you by men. I answer, that without great repentance for
this Apologeticall Narration, and some other practices since your return into
England, in stead of Gods vindicating your Persons, you cannot but expect God
will visit you; and whether hereafter men may have occasion to vindicate you
upon further experience of you, I refer that to time, but for the experience
they have had of you this Parliament, before the writing of this Apology, and
by the writing of it, and since till this very day, they can have no great
cause of vindicating you, but rather (particularly by this Apology) they have
matter of great offense and scandal: And I judge this Apology has in one
sense given a further experience of your ways and spirits to men, then the
experience of many years hereafter might have done. As for referring the
Declaration of your judgments, and what you conceive to be Gods truth therein
to the due and orderly agitation of this Assembly; why did you not as you
speak, refer it to the agitation of the Assembly, but write this book just
before the agitation, wherein you had declared your judgments in the points
controverted, and let me ask you, seeing you meant to refer the declaration
of your judgments to the due and orderly agitation of this Assembly, why would
you agitate the points before hand, as in this Apology, in so undue and
disorderly a way, why would you so publicly engage your selves in print
before hand, yea, and peremptorily conclude the points before ever disputed,
(as in the 22, 24. pages you do.) And let me tell you, you had ne^ agitate
what you conceive to be truth in this cause more duly and orderly in the
Assembly, then you do in the Apology; for I believe this Apology
(considering all circumstances) was borne and brought forth the most out of due
time and order of any book put forth thi^ forty years. As for that clause, of
this Assembly wh^reof both Houses were pleased to make us members, it might
have been here spared, because in the title of the book, and in other places
you speak of your selves as member^ of the Assembly, but if you added it here
as by way of acknowledgement of the great favor and good pleasure of the
Houses to make you so, (being members of other Churches then the Church of
England, and having received another Ministry, and never purposing to be bound
by the determinations of the Assembly,) then there may be some reason of this
addition.

And whereas our silence upon all the forementioned grounds (for which we know
we can never lose esteem with good and Apolog.
wise men) has been by the ill interpretation of some, imputed either to our
consciousnesse of the badnesse and weakness of our Cause, or to our unabilitie
to maintain what we assert in diff^rence from others, or answer what has been
written by others, we shall (with all modesty) only present this to all men's
apprehension^ in confutation of it. That what ever the truth and justness of
our Cause may prove to be, or how slend^r our abiliti^s to defend it, yet we
pretend at least to so much wisdom, that we would never have reserved our
selves for, but rather by all ways have declined this Theater, of all other,
the most judicious and severe, an Assembly of so many able, learned, and grave
Divines, where much of the Piety, wisdom, and learning of two Kingdoms are
met in one, honored and assisted with the presence of the Worthies of both
Houses at all debates (as often as they please to vouchsafe their presence) as
the stage whereon first we would bring forth into public view our Tenets (if
false and counterf^it) together with our own folly and weakness: We would
much rather ^ave chos^n to have been v^nting them to the multitude* apt to be
seduced, (which we have had these three years opportunity to have done.) But
in a conscientious regard had to the orderly and peaceable way of searching out
truths, and reforming the Churches of Christ, we have adventured our selves
upon this way of God, wisely assumed by the providence of the State; And
therein also upon all sorts of disadvantages (which we could not but foresee)
both of number, abilities of learning, Authority, the stream of public
interest; Trusting God both with our selves and his own truth, as he shall be
pleased to manage it by us.

I answer, whereas you speak of silence upon all the forementioned grounds,
you have not been silent in the Pulpits, and among the people, but in many
Sermons, and in diverse Congregations, and at sundry times, most of you have
both plainly, particularly, and at large, (besides more darkly and generally)
preached your Church Way: so that, what you would infer is denied you, for
had you indeed been silent amongst the people, and where you ought to have kept
silence, you could not have lost esteem with good and wise men, but it had
been your praise with God and Men: but this is that I charge you with, and for
which you may well suffer in the thoughts of good and wise men, that you have
been very silent and reserved where you should have spoken, and have been
desired; and where the free and plain declaring your judgments would not have
prejudiced the forementioned grounds, but on the other hand where you should
have been silent, and your speaking could tend to no other ends, but to
di^union in dividing the godly party, and to the increasing of your own party,
there you have been free to speak out, but to your godly and learned brethren
in the Ministry differing from you, you never brought in a Narrative of your
Tenets, (as was desired, and you promised) nor ever laid down clearly your
positions with the grounds of them, (as who but you would in three years time
have done, and have desired satisfaction) but you still declined disputes and
reasonings upon the points in difference, as upon that about Forms of Prayer,
(whereupon the meeting among Ministers was laid aside for a time.) You never
answered any of the books written by men of much worth and learning, and with
much strength and moderation, (as your selves confess) but it was still given
out by your followers upon the coming forth of the books, they should be
answered, and that the Question was mistaken, and you held not so, with such
like put off's: You have declined giving in your positions and grounds to some
Parliament men that desired them, who promised to be ready to do any thing for
you, provided they might know what your way was, and see your grounds to
consider of them, whether they were according to Scriptures: but now in
Pulpits, and in houses among common people (and especially the female sex) apt
to be seduced, strong in their affections, and loving too much Independency,
but weak and easy in their understandings, not able to examine grounds and
reasons, nor to answer you, there you have vented abundantly your conceits,
setting fire upon the thatch of the house (as Mr John Goodwin in former times
used to express it.) Upon which grounds and considerations, no marvel though
it were interpreted by some Ministers, and by my self too, (I freely confess
it) that you were somewhat conscious of a weak and bad Cause, or of unabilitie
to maintain what you asserted in difference from others, or to answer the
books written against your way: and I appeal to the Reader, whether this was
an ill Interpretation, or whether we might not justly and rationally impute
such a silence to the badnesse and weakness of the cause, etc. It was ever
accounted an argument of a weak and bad cause to delay, and shift off the
trial, and hearing of it; and of a bad commodity to be shy of the light; and I
have read it somewhere as a speech quoted out of Tertullian, that opinion ought
to be suspected, which would be hid, and you know that common saying, Veritas
non quaerit angulos. But as for that which you present to all men's
apprehensions for the confutation of that Interpretation and Construction of
your silence; That what ever the truth and justness^ of your cause may prove to
be, or how slender your abilities to def^nd it, yet you pretend at least to so
much wisdom, that you would never have reserved your selves for, but rather
by all ways have declined this Theater of all other the most judicious and
severe, an Assembly of so many able, learned, and grave Divines, etc. I answer,
it is no concluding argument, it follows not, because there is an Assembly now
sitting, whereof you are members, where you resolve to bring forth your grounds
for your Tenets, that therefore your former silence then, could not be imputed
to consciousnesse of a bad and weak Cause, or unabilitie to maintain it, and
it will appear thus: because of the different times, and that distance between
then and now, you might not see such good grounds, nor be so well versed and
studied in it then; besides, you might be in great hopes that it would be long
before any such Assembly should meet, (as it was) and when they did meet, it
should be long before those points should come to dispute and debate, (as we
see has fallen out) and in the mean time you should gain time, which
Politicians and wise men (as you are) make much account of, and set that
against many things, whereby to work out their ends; and then you should try
the spirits of men in the Assembly, and see how things were like to go; and if
things did not cotton to your mind, you might return back, and so never
discover your weakness, but if things went on well, and affairs were likely
to succeed on the Parliaments side, and matters must come to dispute and debate
in the Assembly, then you would do as you should find occasion, and fall upon
such consultations as the times would suffer, then reason and dispute it when
brought to a necessity, and it could not be helped; but yet so long as no need
kept it off, especially upon some hopes it might never come to that: many will
adventure upon a thing with more disadvantages when they see there is no remedy
for it, who yet so long as they can be at choice and at liberty will decline
the thing out of diffidence of their strength, and fear of their ability to
carry it. Many a man shuns fighting when he can avoid it, out of consciousnesse
of his weakness, and want of skill, and hopes of doing so still, who yet when
he must either fight or die, will fight and lay about him as well as he is
able, and this was, and is your case: ^d whereas you say, what ever your Cause
may prove to be, etc. yet you pretend at least to so much wisdom that you
would never have reserved your selves for the Assembly, etc. I must answer you,
I believe upon good grounds, and so do many more, you never took any great
content or joy in the thoughts of this Assembly, but have done your utmost to
delay it, and to put it by: God knows your hearts, and men some of your
speeches about the meeting of this Assembly, but seeing it could not be helped,
and that you could not keep it off by all your friends, you could neither will
nor choose, you have reserved your selves, and not by all ways declined being
members of it; and good reason why, for otherwise you must have lost all, and
for ever have had your mouths stopped for your way, if being chosen of the
Assembly you had declined it; but by being members of the Assembly, you hoped
at least to do something for your way, hinder, and stumble the other way, keep
it longer from being settled (by which you should gain, and make an advantage)
or get a Toleration for your Churches, or possibly might carry it at least in
some things: For without doubt you reasoned after this manner, There are some
ten for our way in the Assembly, and we hope to bring in more of our mind (as
you have attempted since the sitting of the Assembly) some besides there are of
the Assembly fairly inclining toward us, and ready to comply with us, some
also but little studied in the points, and other more indifferent about
Government: now we in policy, diligence, speech, and parts excelling many
others too, may have some hopes to carry it, or at least to qualify and
moderate the Assembly to our way; (especially having observed the Ministers so
desirous of peace, and loath to break with us almost upon any terms:) but
supposing the worst whatever the issue of things might prove to be in the
Assembly, you had this Maxim to guide you by, when men can do no otherwise,
they must do as well as they can: And as for the wisdom you pretend unto,
not to bring forth your Tenets into public view first on the stage of the
Assembly, (if false and counterfeit) together with your own folly and
weakness: I answer, the wisdom that many have pretended to, (as much as you
can) has deceived them; and instead of truth and strength have brought forth
their folly and weakness; and whether none of you, who pretend to much
wisdom, have not in the Assembly brought forth into public view, upon
occasion of your Tenets, their folly and weakness, I leave the Assembly to
judge of that. Only before I take off my hand from this brought by you in
confutation of the ill interpretation of some, I cannot let pass this
testimony given by you Five to the Assembly: That it is a Theater of all other
the most judicious and severe, an Assembly of so many able, learned, and grave
Divines, where much of the piety, wisdom and learning of two Kingdoms are
met in one, etc. which testimony given by you to this Assembly, and that
Character given by you of the people and the Professors of this Kingdom in
page 24. and 28. are worthy to be observed and are of great use in these times,
when the Assembly and their proceedings are so much traduced and spoken against
by your followers and Churches; and let me make this use of it to the people,
and sadly put this question to their Consciences, Whether is more probable,
that an Assembly so judicious, of so many able, learned, and grave Divines,
where much of the piety, wisdom, and learning of two Kingdoms are met in
one, going in Gods way (as you say, page 28.) making it their work and
business to find out the Government and the truth about the order of the
Church visible, and giving freedom of debates to men of different minds and
apprehensions, seeking God publicly and privately daily (with so many prayers
put up for them in all Churches at home, and abroad beyond the Seas,) should
find out the truth; or Mr Lockyer, Mr Bachelor, Mr Carter, with a company of
weak, ignorant men and women, youths and maids, apt to be seduced, and ready
to take any impressions, and to be cast into any mould that has but the
appearance of a stricter way? As to those words: We would much rather have
chosen to have been venting them to the multitude apt to be seduced: I answer,
so you did, much rather choose to vent your opinions and principles both in
public and private to the multitude, apt to be seduced, according to the
opportunities you had these three years, then to communicate them to your
godly brethren of the Ministry, (as I have before fully showed.) For this
passage of yours, But in a conscientious regard had to the orderly and
peaceable way of searching out truths, and reforming the Churches of Christ,
we have adventured our selves upon this way of God, wisely assumed by the
prudence of the State; whether this be so or no, that you have had a
conscientious regard to the orderly and peaceable way of searching out truth,
and reforming the Churches of Christ, let my last answer, and what is before
proved witness, and if out of a conscientious regard to the orderly, etc. you
adventured to be members of the Assembly, and upon this way by an Assembly of
searching out truths, why did you not before the Assembly forbear the
disorderly and unpeaceable way of venting your selves to the multitude, and of
gathering Churches, etc. as also since the Assembly the disorderly and
unpeaceable way of searching out truths in writing this Apology, in preaching
some Sermons, with some other practices, which were no orderly nor peaceable
ways of searching out truths (especially the Assembly sitting;) But them
believe you that will, I judge, and that upon grounds and hints already given,
that other things made you adventure to be of the Assembly, and to come thither
constantly, rather then the conscientious regard had to the orderly and
peaceable way of searching out truths; and I cannot let pass without some
animadversions the phrase used by you here of your being members of the
Assembly, We have adventured our selves, a very significant and true
expression, for I believe you accounted this Assembly a great Adventure for
your Church Way, and such a bottom as you would not have put it in, (at least
not so soon) if all the ways you could have devised under heaven would have
hindered it, but it happened to you according to the Proverb, Nothing venture,
nothing have; for supposing there must be an Assembly, you might perhaps by
being members of it do your selves and way some good, but by declining and
refusing it, you had been certainly lost. But brethren, what is the reason,
that in this Section, wherein you give so full a testimony to the Assembly,
and of your great adventuring to be members of it, that you annex in the close
these words following: And therein also upon all sorts of disadvantages, both
of number, abilities of learning, Authority, the stream of public interest,
trusting God both with our selves and his own truth, etc. Whether does not this
somewhat reflect upon the Assembly? as if there were a great hazard that things
would be carried there by number, abilities of learning, Authority, the stream
of public interest, rather then by truth? for if points were not likely to be
carried so, by plurality of Votes, etc. but by the clearest proofs from
Scripture, then these were no disadvantages to you, but all the advantage,
would lie on that side whether many or few, whether greater Scholars, or less,
that could bring the strongest Scripture grounds; and I must tell you, that in
such an Assembly as you confess this is and is well known to be, both for the
persons and ends of its calling, that great liberty of speech and debate, with
that solemn Protestation taken by every member at first sitting there, a man
need not account those things specified by you for any disadvantages: for any
two or three men, nay, one of a different judgment in Doctrine or discipline
from that Assembly, having truth on his side, and but so much learning as to
manage and make out his evidences (though a man of no authority) might easily
cause the consciences of most there to own and fall down before that truth,
and to change their minds; yea, and to bless God for the light, and embrace
the person or persons that brought it; much less need you, whose number is
sufficient, about ten (besides some who are half Independents,) having parts
and abilities enough, and Authority to manage your arguments, and even to
command free and long audience, complain of these things for disadvantages;
but I am jealous this passage is here inserted and brought in to possess the
peoples minds (fearing by this time this Apology was set out things might not
go on your side) and to give them something to confirm them in your way, to
teach them what to say, namely, though you had the truth, and brought such
strong arguments as were not answered, yet you could not be heard, but matters
were carried against you by pieces, (the greater number of the Assembly by far
being of another judgment, as also by the stream of public interest,
Authority, etc.) And many of the people of the Church way speak thus already,
that the Assembly cannot answer your arguments, but bear you down with
numbers, the Parliament should have done well to have chosen as many of your
way as on the other side, and then there would have been a fair and even
trial: but I will examine all your disadvantages apart, and give you and the
Reader a particular account of them.

First, For Number, though you have not so many of your judgment in the
Assembly, yet you have a competent number to plead your cause, and to be the
mouth for all of your way, to speak whatever any of your way can say for it.
Secondly, When an Assembly was first agreed upon, there were not many more
Ministers and Scholars of your way in the Kingdom, who were capeable of such
a service, (how ever you may be increased since) so that you had as much
advantage as your condition was capeable of, yea and favor too. Thirdly,
Considering the many hundred Ministers in this Kingdom that petitioned for
Reformation, and subscribed the Remonstrance, (who also bore the heat of the
day and never flinched for it,) and the small number of the Independent (who
fled also to save their stake, and to keep in a whole skin) having quitted to
our Churches and Ministry, and making no account to be bound by the
determinations of the Assembly, it is more in proportion, both Arithmeticall
and Geometrical, to have Ten of you members in the Assembly, then some
hundreds of our Ministers; and yet you know, the whole number of Divines who
meet there, does not much exceed 80 persons. Fourthly, Number is little, where
conscientious men having taken such a Protestation, come together to seek out
truth, being free also to receive and choose any government laid down in the
word, and not overawed by power or fear of crushing, nor byased by hopes of
preferment: it is true in such an Assembly, as the Convocation house of Bishops
and their Clerks was, number was a great disadvantage.

Secondly, For abilities of Learning, I grant you there are many members of the
Assembly go far beyond any of you in that, yet among you all, and in some
particular men of you, there are abilities enough of learning, speech, and wit
to bring out and enforce to the greatest advantage upon study, taking time
(which you do) and writing down your grounds, any Scripture or Reasons for
your way, so that you need not complain for want of learning, but rather for
want of truth in your cause, which will afford no better arguments for it.

Thirdly, For Authority, I know not well what you mean by that in this place
(you having so many doubtful passages in your Apology) whether the Authority
of Parliament, or whether the Ministers who are for Presbytery have greater
Authority in the Assembly then you, or what else. Now if you mean the first,
that the Presbyterian party has the advantage of you, namely the Authority of
Parliament: I answer, the Parliament interposes no authority to determine what
government shall be, but calls the Assembly to advise with, and draw up for
them what government is most agreeable to the word, giving also a liberty to
the fewer number in matters of dissent to give in their Reasons (as you in the
30th page grant, and imply you will do;) And as for the Parliament who are
Authority, there are but few Ministers of the Assembly, who have been able to
do more with them then you? or who have had a greater interest in their favor
then your selves? witness all passages of Parliament from first to last,
wherein the Parliament has honored any of the Ministers either in preaching
before them upon solemn occasions, or in calling this Assembly; or in
employing them about the Scottish affairs, either in England, or into
Scotland, or in the setting up a Lecture at Westminster, or in appointing
Licensers for printing of books, what ever it has been, or how few the number
that have been employed, though but two, or three, yet still an Independent
has been one. But secondly, if you mean that the Ministers who differ in
judgment from you have a greater Authority in the Assembly then you, I answer,
you are all equal, having a brotherly equality there; the whole Assembly not
having Authority, that is Jurisdiction and power of censure over the meanest,
to cast him out, or to hinder him from speech, according to rule and order: And
as for authority of speaking in the Assembly and of being heard, some of you
have exercised as much of that as most there; and for authority with the people
to lead them, whether you, or most of the Ministers in the Assembly have the
greatest is no controversy; witness the deep censures upon the Assembly, and
the godly Ministers every where, by multitudes of the people, but the great
applause and crying up of you and other independents: So that if authority with
many well meaning people be an advantge it is on your side, and that has done
you heretofore some service, to make many men more shie of preaching against
your way, because of your great authority with the people, that being ground
enough to put many men out of the state of grace with some sorts of people;
besides ^f authority in the peoples hearts could sway any thing with the
Assembly against the truth, yea but to suspend their judgments about the truth
(as I am confident it does not) then you would have the advantage of authority,
to sway the Assembly rather to your side, then against you.

4. For the fourth disadvantage, the stream of public interest, this is a
dangerous insinuation against the Assembly, yea and the Parliament too, without
whom nothing the Assemby does can be of any validity, as if they would be
carried with the stream of public interests rather then by the word of God,
and would bend the word of God to the stream of public interest; now let me
put you this Dilemma, either the public interest of this Kingdom at this time
will stand and agree with the word of God, or it will not; if it will stand,
then not only the Assembly, but you also should be for that interest,
accounting the public interest, so suiting to the word of God an advantage;
but if it will not stand with the word, but that the stream of public
interest runs one way, and Gods word another way, can you think the Assembly
will be carried with public interest, and leave the stream of the word? would
not the Assembly rather follow the word of God, accounting walking according to
that, the greatest and most public interest? has the Parliament, Kingdom and
Ministers done and suffered so much for a Reformation according to the word of
God, and now after all this, is there a stream of public interest divided
from the word, to carry away the Ministers called together, according to which
a government must be framed, and the Church reformed, and this is the great
disadvantage that some members of the Assembly who would go according to the
word of God meet withal, and must be put to swim against: Brethren what
will the Prelates say of our Reformation and Church government when you speak
thus? have not you put a sword into their hands this day against us? and shall
we not hear of it? but I wish brethren whilst you thus asperse the Assembly
with the danger of being carried a way with the stream of public interest,
that the stream of your own particular private interest, and credit among the
people did not too much carry you away, as many other ways, so in writing of
this Apology; But the Reader may ask, what is the plain English of the
stream of public interest, according to which there was so great danger the
Assembly would swim? I answer, I conceive one of these two things, or else it
is probable both are meant by the Apologists. 1. That the Ministers of the
Assembly for themselves and their fellow Ministers, would stand for such a
government as wherein the power should be in their own hands, and not in the
peoples, to do with them for maintenance and standing at their pleasure, and
therefore they would establish Presbyteriall government rather then
Independent. 2. The Parliament of England upon great Armies raised against
them, needing help, calls in for the Kingdom of Scotland to assist them, now
the Scots being for Presbyteriall government, and against Independent, and
desirous of uniformity in government between the Kingdoms, therefore for
gratifying the Scots, the Assembly is like to be swayed that way, is this the
stream of public interest meant by you? oh how unworthy an insinuation is
this, and how prejudicall this will be to the Reformation in after times, I
desire you to consider of in cool blood, and what the enemies will say of it,
the government and Reformation of this Church was not free, not according to
the word of God, but what Scotland would have, Englands need of Scotland made
them at least swayed much to take up their government; but how ever this is
insinuated for the holding up the credit of your cause against the time the
Assembly shall come to reject it as Apocripha, yet I must tell you, you foresaw
that, which is no such stream of public interest, nor no cause of
disadvantage to you: For the Commissioners of the Church of Scotland were not
sent hither to put their government upon us, but came as well to receive any
light and help, as to give, and to come to us in what should be found upon
debate more agreeable to the word, as we to come to them, and the Covenant of
the Kingdoms does not tie us to the Reformation of the Church of Scotland, but
binds us to Reformation according to the word of God and the example of the
best reformed Churches; and then requires both of us and them an uniformity
according to the word of God: And indeed the Assembly consisting of so many
able, learned and grave Divines, where much of the wisdom, piety and learning
of two Kingdoms are met, cannot well be thought to be carried away from the
word by the stream of public interest, especially most of the Assembly being
men not engaged by education or otherwise to any other of the reformed
Churches, or by former declarations of their judgments, nor appointed by the
Parliament to Presbyteriall government, but left freely to be guided by the
light of the word in this way of God communicated to them, besides that the
Commissioners of the Church of Scotland (however they be present in the
Assembly to hear debates and to give their Reasons) yet never gave their
voices in any point that has passed the Assembly. As for the close of this
Section, trusting God both with your selves and his own truth as he shall be
pleased to manage it by us. Had you in adventuring your selves upon this
Assembly, and therein really believing all the sorts of disadvantages (as you
here speak) trusted God both with your selves and that you call his own truth,
some of you would never have brought such arguments for your way (as you have
done.) And certainly if some of you did trust God as you ought with your
selves, etc. you would not trust so much to your wits and policy, nor be so
full of reservations, fetches, doubtful expressions as you are. And brethren
let me deal with you plainly (I hope it may do you good,) many speak of
your policy and subtlety, some who are strangers to you (yet being members of
the Assembly) and beholding your managing of your opinions and way there,
wonder that good men should be so politic and subtle as you are, especially
if the cause were good.

Moreover, if in all matters of Doctrine, we were not as orthodox Apolog.
in our judgments as our brethren themselves, we would never have exposed our
selves to this trial and hazard of discovery in this Assembly, the mixture of
whose spirits, the quick-sightednesse of whose judgments (intent enough upon
us) and variety of debates about all sorts of controversies afoot in these
times of contradiction, are such, as would be sure soon to find us out if we
nourished any monsters or serpents of opinions lurking in our bosoms. And if
we had carried it so, as that hitherto such errors were not aforehand open to
the view and judgment of all, yet sitting here (unless we would be silent,
which we have not been) we could not long be hid. But it is sufficiently known
that in all points of doctrine (which hitherto in the review and examination of
the Articles of our Church, or upon other occasions have been gone through) our
judgments have still concurred with the greatest part of our brethren,
neither do we know wherein we have dissented. And in matters of discipline we
are so far from holding up the differences that occur, or making the
breaches greater or wider, that we endeavor upon all such occasions to grant
and yield (as all may see and cannot but testify for us) to the utmost
latitude of our light and consciences; professing it to be as high a point of
Religion and conscience, readily to own, yea fall down before whatsoever is
truth in the hands of those that differ, yea though they should be enemies unto
us, as much as earnestly to contend for and hold fast those truths wherein we
should be found dissenting from them; and this is in relation to peace, so also
as a just due to truth and goodness, even to approve it and acknowledge it to
the uttermost grain of it, though mingled with what is opposite unto us. And
further when matters by discussion are brought to the smallest dissent that may
be, we have hitherto been found to be no backward urgers unto a temper (not
only in things that have concerned our own consciences, but when of others
also) such as may suite and tend to union as well as searching out of truth;
judging this to be as great and useful an end of Synods and Assemblies, as a
curious and exact discussion of all sorts of lesser differences with binding
determinations of truth one way.

Whether in all matters of Doctrine all of you be as Orthodox in your
Judgments as your brethren themselves, I question it, (though in the most
Doctrines and in the maine I grant it) I have been told of some odd things in
matter of Doctrine preached by one of you five both in England and Holland, and
of some points preached in the Church of Arnheim never questioned there, and
since printed, not very Orthodox, as for instance (amongst others) that the
souls of the Saints do not go to heaven to be with Christ, expressly contrary
to the 2 Cor. 5. 6, 8. and to Philip. 1. 23. now whether some of you may not
hold those opinions, seeing they were publicly preached at Arnheim, and never
condemned (as ever I heard,) I know not, but have reason rather to suspect you
do, how ever though you do not nourish any Monsters or Serpents of opinions
in your bosoms, yet I fear you have running worms in your heads, and
together with the gold, silver, and Ivory of Orthodox truths, you have store of
Apes and Peacocks, conceits and toys, as strange coined distinctions, new
strained expositions of Scriptures, odd opinions about the personal reign of
Christ on earth, and I ask you what the anointing with oil of sick persons
as an Ordinance for Church Members, and what the bringing in of Hymns composed
by the gift of a Churchmember, cum multis aliis, are? whether are not these
strange conceits? and how ever you may be free of Monsters and Serpents of
opinions lurking in your bosoms, yet there is much of a Monster and the
Serpent lurking in this Apology, and to be sure one Monster of opinions you
all hold generally, and some of you have preached for, A Toleration of diverse
sects and opinions, and let me tell you, granting you five be so Orthodox, and
supposing your argument good to prove it, exposing your selves to the hazard of
discovery in this Assembly (which is no concluding argument) yet there are many
members of those Churches to which you belong, besides many other members of
Churches of your way and communion, whom I suppose must be tolerated as well as
your selves, that do hold very odd and strange things. Some of Arnheim hold
strange conceits, and some members of Mr Sympsons Church hold some of the
points of the Anabaptists, and daily the Independent Churches like Africa do
breed and bring forth the Monsters of Anabaptisme, Antinomianisme, Familisme,
nay that huge Monster and old flying serpent of the Mortality of the soul of
man, and indeed there is no end of errors that the Independent principles and
practices lead unto. As for those words, if we had carried it so as that
hitherto such errors were not aforehand open to the view and Judgment of all
yet sitting here, unless we would be silent we could not be long hid, etc. I
answer, some one or two Heterodox opinions may be hid where men are Orthodox in
the most, especially if all points of doctrine have not been discussed, nor
reviewed, as in the Assembly they have not, (many Articles of our Church not
having yet been gone through) so that your errors in doctrine may be behind,
and your trial of being Orthodox will be when the Assembly comes to these
Articles: Article 19, 22, 23. and 26. and when that doctrine concerning the
Lawfulness of a Toleration of diverse sects and opinions shall come to be
discussed: But before I pass from this, I desire the Apologists to remember
and the Reader to observe they call the Church of England Our Church, and so in
the fifth page of this Apology Our own Congregations we mean of England. So
that if you mean as you here write, then the National Church of England is
your Church and the Parochial Congregations are yours, and so you establish a
National visible Church under the new Testament, and if so, why do you erect
other Churches, and withdraw from your own? but if you do not mean so, nor
believe there is a National visible Church, nor account your selves members of
this National Church, why do you speak so, and call the Church of England
your own Church, and the Parochial Churches your own Congregations? As for
that part of this Section which concerns your good carriage in the Assembly in
matters of Discipline, In matters of Discipline we are so far from holding up
the differences that occur, or making the breaches greater or wider, that we
endeavor upon all such occasions to grant and yield, etc. I not being present
at the debates will say nothing against it, but whether since the writing of
your Apology, and the Assembly coming to the points of Discipline which are
properly yours, (your freehold) you have been so fair and moderate,
endeavoring upon all occasions to grant, and yield to the utmost latitude of
your light and Consciences, that I doubt, and your best friends are not
satisfied in it, but rather much offended, and you have much lost your selves
with them, by your demeanor and way of managing matters of difference in the
Assembly: But supposing all you say of your selves in this Section were fully
so, both before, and since your Apology, yet it were not much material, nor
much to be trusted to, being upon the trial of your good behavior: for it is
probable all that may be done out of policy, in reference to the main design
of obtaining a Toleration, which at first cannot be imagined to have any
probability of being gained without all seeming fairness and compliance, and
drawing near to us, and therefore this Apology is so framed in the words,
phrases, and composure of it, that in it you have stretched your selves to the
utmost latitude, and highest compliance with the Church of England, and the
Reformed Churches, even beyond what is meant by you in our sense, and in common
acception, and beyond what many of your followers will own: As also you hide
and reserve several things you hold both in matter and manner, that so by all
this you might court the Parliament, Assembly, Reformed Churches to bear with
such conscientious men, who differ so little from them, and are so moderate and
temperate also in and about the debate of those differences, but the Parliament
and the Assembly are wise to see into and thorough these Artifices, and to
consider that if once a Toleration were granted, there would quickly be
discovered another face of things, which hitherto stands behind the curtain. As
for this passage in the close of this Section, your not being backward urgers
unto a temper not only in things concerning your own consciences, but others
also, such as may suit and tend to union as well as searching out of truth,
judging this to be as great and useful an end of Synods, as a curious and
exact discussion of all sorts of lesser differences with binding determintions
of truth one way. I judge then you had but a weak ground to urge you to temper
in matter of difference, and I question whether you were so forward to a temper
in the things that might suit and tend to union, for I suppose you are so farie
from holding that a great and useful end of Synods, a curious and exact
discussion of all sorts of lesser differences with binding Determinations of
truth one way, as that you deny it: I have read a letter out of New England
from a Minister of note there, speaking of that Synod which met upon occasion
of the Antinomians and Familists, formally denying this power of binding
determinations to it: and in the Epistle before Mr Cottons late book, Mr
Goodwin and Mr Nigh have many passages against Assemblies and Synods having
power of binding Determinations (though a Ministerial Doctrinall power they
grant) and did you give to Synods and Assemblies in all sorts of lesser
differences a binding Determination of truth one way, and not only of
consultation, direction, and at utmost but of Doctrinall Decernment, the
controversy would be at an end, and therefore in writing thus, judging that to
be as great an end of Synods as this of binding Determinations, and not holding
it, you hold neither, and then what tends all this to but to deceive the Reader.

And thus we have nakedly, and with all simplicity rendered a Apolog.
clear and true account of our ways and spirits hitherto; Which we made
choice of now at first to make our selves known by, rather then by a more exact
and Scolastique relation of our Judgments in the points of difference about
Church-Governement; reserving that unto the more proper season and opportunity
of this Assembly, and that liberty given by both Honorable Houses in matters
of dissent; or as necessity shall after require, to a more public way of
stating and asserting of them. In the mean time from this brief historical
relation of our practices, there may a true estimate be taken of our opinions
in difference, which being instanced in, and set out by practices, is the most
real and least collusive way, and carries its own evidence with it. All which
we have taken the boldness together with our selves humbly to lay at the feet
of your wisdom and piety; Beseeching you to look upon us under no other
Notion, or Character then as those, who if we cannot assume to have been no way
furtherers of that Reformation you intend, yet who have been no way hinderers
thereof, or disturbers of the public peace; and who in our Judgments about
the present work of this age, the Reformation of Worship and Discipline, do
differ as little from the Reformed Churches, and our brethren, yea far less,
then they do from what themselves were three years past, or then the
generality of this Kingdom from it self of late.

I wonder how you can say, We have nakedly and with all simplicity rendered a
clear and true account of our ways and spirits hitherto, and for the truth of
these lines I appeal to any indifferent Reader, and to your own Consciences,
upon the review and examination of your book, and I desire the Reader to
remember what all along in my answer I have observed and made good against many
passages both in matters of fact and opinion, and the result will be, that in
truth the words may be inverted, in stead of Nakedly, covertly, in stead of all
simplicity, all subtilty, in stead of a clear and true account of your ways
and spirits, a dark, concealed, and untrue account, so that your words might
have been trulyer written, And thus we have covertly and with all subtilty
rendered a dark, concealed and untrue account. of our ways and spirits
hitherto. As for those words, which we made choice of now at first to make our
solves known by, rather then by a more exact and Scholastique relation of our
Judgments, etc. I answer it was the special hand of God against you and your
way, (and I cannot but take special notice of it, and desire you would) that
you should choose now at first to make your selves known by such an Apology,
and in such a way rather then by a Scholastique relation of your Judgments. A
Scholastique relation would not have made you to known as this, neither have
discovered your spirits, nor have given that just occasion and necessity of
discovering you, it would not have drawn in so many against you, nor have
drawn forth such answers as this: But let me ask you the reason, why chose
you this way at first rather then a Scholasticall way, if you would now in the
time of the Assembly have been making your selves known in your tenets and
opinions, and not have stayed till the debating and discussing of them, it had
been for many Reasons best to have printed an exact and Scholastique relation
of your judgments in the points of difference, rather then such a popular and
Rhetorical discourse? Can there be any reasons given for it, but that this was
writ to take the people with, to prepare their minds for your way (for fear
the Assembly should conclude against it,) and the more to engage your party to
stand for you, (you having thus openly and confidently declared your selves,)
as also, because you are best at this weapon, more able in a laxe discoursing
way to express your selves, then in a close, press, Syllogisticall,
Argumentative way, and people are most taken with such kind of discourses,
rather then with arguments. As for that you say of reserving that unto the more
proper season, and opportunity of this Assembly, and that liberty given by
both Honorable Houses in matters of dissent, or as necessity shall after
require to a more public way of stating and asserting of them. Why could you
not as well reserve this Apologeticall, Narration a little longer as the
Scholastique Relation of your Judgments, especially having reserved it so
long, were you in such have that the Assembly being upon the borders of the
points in difference, nay they being brought in by the Committees to be
discussed, you must send out such a discourse to prepare the way for you? did
you hope the Assembly as well as the people would be taken with good words and
such, flourishes? and since (as you pretend) the ground of your silence in page
27. (such a one as it was) was that you might reserve your selves for the
Assembly, and let that be the stage whereon first you would bring your Tenets
into public view, why did you go contrary, and first bring your opinions
forth upon the stage of this Apology to all the world, before you brought them
to the Assembly? and so frustrate your own resolutions, and cross your own
words in page 27. But before I leave this I cannot but observe that you
express you will draw up your dissent from the Assemble in a Scholastique way
to both Houses, and afterward publicly print your grounds, belike you are
beforehand resolved what to h^ld, and so are preparing your selves to draw up
your grounds for both Houses, you meditate upon dissent and nonagreement, and I
perceive the Assembly must expect to be dealt with by you, as the Synod of Dort
was by the Arminians, you will be Remonstrants: well you may take your course,
and begin when you please, the Assembly has members enough able to deal with
you at that weapon: As to those words, In the mean time from this brief
historical relation of our practices, there may a true estimate be taken of
our opinions in difference, which being instanced in and set out by practices,
is the most real and least collusive way and carries its own evidence with it.
For answer, I propund to the Reader as follows this question of your words: In
the mean time from this brief, general, partial, concealed, untrue,
historical relation of your practices, there can be little true estimate taken
of your opinions in difference; which being set out by practices but in part,
and not the whole, in the bright side, and not the black, is the least real,
without any evidence in it, but the most collusive way, especially with the
people, and with such who have not studied the controversies, nor know not the
points in difference: But I will show unto you a more real way, if you will
promise to answer positively, and plainly to such questions and positions as I
shall draw up for you concerning your Church Way, then there may be an estimate
of the opinions in difference, and for requital of this, I will promise you to
answer clearly and fully to any questions both of doctrine, discipline and
worship that you can put unto me; As for those words, All which we have taken
the boldness together with our selves, humbly to lay at the feet of your
wisdom and piety, etc. I answer, it is a great boldness indeed to present
such an Apology to both Houses, the supreme Iudicatory of this Kingdom, which
is and has been in all times the most just and severe tribunal for
guiltiness to appear before, wherein besides the questions and controversies
so mistated, and so many doubtful dark passages, there are many untrue
relations, and I wonder how you durst presume to lay so much folly and
indiscretion, with untruth, at the feet of so much wisdom and piety: had your
Apology been only adpopulum, who are weak, and apt to be deceived, it had
been more excusable, but to appeal by such an Apology to both Houses of
Parliament is very strange, but we may see by this, how far applause and
favor with the people, and confidence of success will carry men: You have
need indeed to beseech the Parliament to look upon you under no other notion
or character then as those who if you cannot assume to have been no way
furtherers of the Reformation, yet who have been no way hinderers thereof or
disturbers of the public peace. I think your consciences should tell you the
Parliament has reason to look upon you under other notions and characters
then you represent your selves by, which (I judge) is the ground of your
deprecating the Houses, and indeed I wonder how you can make such a Petition to
both Houses, for it is evident you have been no furtherers of that Reformation
which the Parliament, or ever any wise State did in any age intend; but you may
assume to have been furtherers of a Reformation for Independent government, and
separation, which the Parliament never intended: But whether you have been no
way hinderers of the Reformation intended, nor disturbers of the public peace,
let the things alleged in this answer speak, witness gathering of Churches,
witness the tumults that have been in streets upon some of your private
meetings, witness the disturbance of the public peace in some Churches upon
your preaching, and particularly if the delaying the work of Reformation, and
settling Church government be some way an hinderance to it, and an occasion of
disturbing the public peace, then you five have not been the least nor last in
some way hindering Reformation, and disturbing the public peace. And brethren
what is the great thing that lets, and will let but you five, I am confident
had it not been for you five, and a few more, the Reformation intended, and the
public peace of the Church had been in a far fairer way then now it is:
Brethren there are many complaints, and that by your dear friends of
retarding the work of Reformation by your means, you are the Remora to the
Ship under sails, you are the spokes in the wheels of the Chariot of
Reformation; Parliament complains, Assembly, City, Country, all complain of
the work retarded, and all is resolved into you five principally: I could tell
you many particular passages, but you know what I mean; In a word all the
Prelates and the Papists cannot, nor do not so much hinder the work of
Reformation as you five members of the Assembly, and the Lord in merey work
so, that by occasion of you, and by means of your principles, and many persons
of your Church Way, there do not yet rise up another great mountain before
Zerubbabel, to hinder the laying the head stone of that building, the
foundation whereof is laid. As for your differing so little in your judgments
about the present work of this ag^, Reformation of worship and discipline from
the reformed Churches and your brethren, etc. I answer, if so be that you
differ so little from the reformed Churches, and your brethren, yea far
less then they do from what themselves were three years past, why do you
not then incorporate with us? why will you, or how can you answer it to God for
that to make a rent? and to desire to have Churches of your own way, and to be
an occasion of so much evil, as that would prove to this Church? the smaller
the difference is the greater is the schism and separation, for the less the
cause of a separation is, the greater the fault is in those that make it. Are
we come so far to you so many miles, (as you imply in those words, from what
themselves were three years past,) and will not you come a step or two to us
for union and peace, and to heal that great schism, with many other
inconveniences: We have and are coming (blessed be God) a great way to Church
reformation and worship, but the points that you would have us come to you in,
besides that they are Apocripha not to be found in Scripture, we cannot being a
Nation and Kingdom come to you in your way, your Independent government and
particular gathered Churches cannot stand with a National Reformation, as some
of your way have confessed; and therefore would have but a toleration for
themselves, but you may come to our Reformation easily; though a Nation cannot
be contained in a few, yet a few may well in a Nation, besides if you by your
confessions differ far less from us then what we did from our selves three
years past, why will you for all that great difference in us then, and now,
and what need have you to go make new separated Churches from whom you far
less differ, but what ever you say here of your small difference between you
and the reformed Churches and us, the more to work with the Parliament for a
toleration in some lesser differences, yet the differences, are held by you to
be greater and more material, or else you would close with us so reforming;
and among other particulars you differ more from your brethren then your
brethren from themselves three years past, your brethren being of one Church
both then and now, but you and your brethren being of two distinct Churches and
communions, you setting up new because you cannot continue in the old with
them, and certainly men of one and the same Church and communion differ less
among themselves, then persons of a Church and communion set up against that
Church, but least from this passage your followers should make use to tax the
Ministers of our Church who have desired Reformation with inconstancy, and
going according to the times, and your selves make use of it to defend your
running so far in your way, the Ministers differing far more from
themselves within this three years past then you do from them, I must
propound this to prevent those consequences, namely that most of your brethren
both of the Assembly, and of other parts of the Kingdom differ little from
themselves in judgment from what they held three years past, or many years
past, namely might they have had their desire, and could their votes have
carried it, they would have voted out Ceremonies, government by Archbishops,
Bishops, etc. this Lyturgie and Service Book, and though they now practice not
many things they did before, but forbear, yet some things are forborne as being
matter of offense among the people, and other things as having been an occasion
of much hurt in the Church, and now there being so open a door for a full
Reformation they do labor after the best, and follow what they judge most for
edification now, not condemning all their former practices (especially
considering those times) unlawful and sinful.

And withal to consider us as those, who in these former times, Apolog.
for many years suffered even to exile, for what the Kingdom it self now
suffers in the endeavor to cast out, and who in these present times, and since
the change of them, have endured (that which to our spirits is no less
grievous) the opposition and reproach of good men, even to the threatening of
another banishment, and have been through the grace of God upon us, the same
men in both, in the midst of these varieties; And finally, as those that do
pursue no other interest or design but a subsistence (be it the poorest and
meanest) in our own Land (where we have and may do further service, and which
is our birthright as we are men) with the enjoyment of the ordinances of
Christ (which are our portion as we are Christians) with the allowance of a
latitude to some lesser differences with peaceablenesse, as not knowing where
else with safety, health and livelihood, to set our feet on earth.

For my part I wonder with what face you can write this, And withal to
consider us as those who in these former times, for many years suffered even
to exile, and bring it as an argument to the Parliament to consider you the
more, namely to grant you a toleration. All the answer I shall return is, that
the Parliament and Kingdom shall and may do well to look upon you, and
consider you instead of many years suffering even to exile, as men who
voluntarily went into another Country nigh at hand, to live safely out of
gunshot, and there lived richly, plentifully and freely, whilst other godly
Ministers lived here in continual fears, dangers, tossings, suspensions,
attachments and consumptions of their estates: It is strange that men should be
so far partial, as to frame an argument, and make account the more to be
considered and favored for flying away, and deserting the Cause in the open
field: Suppose some Captains and Soldiers in the Parliaments service should
put up a petition to the Houses, forasmuch as they left the rest of the Army in
distress, and withdrew in the day of battle, and never returned till the
enemy was put to the worst, and the battle turned, therefore they would be
pleased to afford them an exemption from common taxes, etc. and vouchsafe them
some special privilege, what would you think of such a motion? the
application is obvious, you deserted the Cause, and in as much as in you lay
hazarded all, and yet are not content with this, to come in upon the victory,
and divide the spoils with those who helped to win the field, to enjoy the
prime Lectures and places in and near the City, both of note and profit with
all respect and countenance from Parliament and City, but you would have
Peculiars, and enjoy such a way as should shut out all in comparison, an
unreasonable request, and a strange instance for all posterity if it should be
granted: For our parts many of us who bore the heat of the day, stood to it
and ventured breaking and undoing many times over, request no such favor nor
exemption, but to take our lot in common with the Kingdom and Ministers in
things established; and I know no reason that upon any considerations either
extrinsicall or intrinsicall you should be considered above the godly Ministers
of the Church of England: I know and could give many to the contrary, but
besides that I have before fully spoken (more then once) how little there is in
this argument of yours so often inculcated of exile, and suffering to exile,
the cause here rendered by you of your suffering even to exile, namely for what
the Kingdom it self now suffers in the endeavor to cast out, is not true,
nor proper: For however the Kingdom now suffers for casting out the
Hierarchy, and some corruptions in worship, and for a Reformation according to
the word of God, and the example of the best reformed Churches, yet your
suffering unto exile was not for that (for which the non-conformists more
forward then you suffered) but your leaving the Kingdom was to enjoy the
Church way, without which (we suppose) you will not be contented though
Ceremonies, Episcopacie and Lyturgie be now cast out by the Kingdom, as the
fruit of all their sufferings, but if Presbytery be settled, and Independencie
may not be tolerated you will go away the second time and may be call that
exile and banishment too: As for your enduring in these present times and since
the change of them, that which to your spirits is no less grievous, the
opposition and reproach of good men, by which you would further persuade and
move the Parliament to allow you a Toleration, let me mind you that I believe
in no age five men practicing, and acting as you have done contrary to the
Judgment of all the Churches, and of the Ministers your brethren, and that to
the sensible disadvantage of the public Reformation, ever met with less
opposition and contradiction of good men, and as for reproach none at all: I
will not reiterate what I have formerly expressed in page 226, 227. but it is
beyond all president the silence, compliance, respects, fair carriage you have
been entertained with from the Ministers, and good men, neither Luther that
eminent servant of God and excellent Instrument, nor others could find the
like in their time from the Ministers differing from them, and therefore the
complaint is very groundless, and to speak truth, you were so much the
peoples Darlings and Favorites having such a power both with the people, and
with many in place, that not to oppose or reproach your persons, but your
opinions, and that but collaterally and interpretatively was enough to unsaint
many men as good as your selves, and to blast them with many for the present;
As for that comparison, the opposition and reproach of good men as grievous to
your spirits as suffering Exile, I conclude your Exile was very gentle then, and
I judge both much alike grievous, that is neither; but what tender spirits have
you? and what constitution are you made of? that a little opposition, and
reproach of good men^ (especially having with it so great applause, and high
esteem to overbalance it) should be so grievous to your spirits as many
years suffering even unto exile: Many of us have and do endure great
oppositions, reproaches, revilings, and stornes from those who would be thought
not only good, but the best men, with many neglects; slightings, desertings,
and ingratitude, from whom we had all reason to have expected the contrary, and
all this in the shade without any one beam of special favor / shining upon
us (which though we could not but see, and take notice of all along, and cannot
but upon this occasion upbraide the unthankfulness of many people, leaving all
to God to clear our righteousness, and to convince them) yet we have made no
complaints to the world, nor written Apologies for our selves, but through the
grace of Christ have in patience possessed our souls without much
grievousnesse to our spirits, our Consciences within us witnessing we have
suffered all this for our faithfulness to God and to his people, and for no
other cause given to them; and if opposition and reproach from good men be no
less grievous then Exile, some of us who have been Anti-Independent have
suffered a sore Exile more years then you the Apologists: For besides our
reproaches during the time of your Exile in Holland, we have since your return
from Exile even to this present day suffered many reproaches, and lost all
manner of ways, in name, estate, and friends, for nothing else but for
appearing against the Brownists and Independents, and how much in the mean
time most of you have gained all manner of ways is written with a sun-beame:
But what is this opposition and reproach from good men you have endured no
less grievous then an Exile for many years: you say even the threatening of
another banishment: Is the threatening of another banishment so grievous a
matter, that you here present it to both Houses, as a motive to persuade the
Parliament to grant you a Toleration, Threatened folks (they say) live long,
and so may you, you are not yet banished, nor used as men likely to be
banished; besides, the good men that threatened it had no power to perform it;
Banishment belongs not to them, I can hardly believe it that such high and
confident men as you are should be so troubled with threats, (especially from
men in whose power it lies not,) but you are willing to make any thing an
Argument to both Houses to consider you in that point: If one or both Houses
had threatened you banishment, that might have been as grievous to you as your
former Exile, but for any of your fellow-Ministers you might have threatened
them again, and have stood upon equal terms, I know in some cases, and could
name how some of you have done it, and when words have been spoken to you about
your opinions by some Ministers, you have given as good as was brought you, and
have bid them do their worst, you doubted not but by your friends to make your
part good, and that you had as many for your way, as they. But for my part I
do not remember any good men who have threatened you with another banishment,
some may in reasoning with you have argued against a Toleration of your
Independent Government, and if you will from thence by consequences say they
threatened you banishment, I judge this is far fetched; For my book which (may
be) is partly aimed at in this as well as in other passages of your Apology, I
can clear it that I threatened you not with banishment, but labored to
satisfy you how you might enjoy your consciences in your own land, and did lay
down a Medium between banishment and a Toleration: As for that which you say of
your selves, that you have been through, the grace of God upon you, the same
men in both in the midst of these varieties: I answer if you were the same men
in your Exile as you have been since your return into the Kingdom, you have
no great reason to boast of it, nor to present it to the Houses as a Motive to
be the more considered of, for most of you have been in England very high and
peremptory, and your own Apology with this Antapologie gives a full
Character of your carriage here, so that I may turn these words thus, we have
been through the corruption in us the same men in Holland and England in the
midst of these varieties, namely seeking our selves and our own particular
ends too much, yea too high, confident and peremptory in our way; As for the
close of your Apology in the last nine lines, And finally, as those that do
pursue no other interest nor design but a subsistence (be it the poorest and
meanest) in our own land, etc. You come in this to that which was first in your
Intention, though brought in last for a Conclusion, on purpose to leave a
deeper impression in the Parliament at the close of all, namely that the Houses
would grant you a Toleration of your Independent Churches expressed in these
soft and fair words, the allowance of a latitude to some lesser differences
with peaceablenesse, which Toleration is ushered in, compassed about, and
closed up with what may be most likely to take, namely summing up what is past,
all your sufferings and patience in Exile, reproaches, etc. with your doings
for Reformation, and being the same men in all conditions, and what is yet to
come, laying all together to draw both Houses toward you, and to work the
people of the Kingdom to stand the more for you: Now for answer to this close
of your Apology, as containing the end and aim of your writing it, I will
first examine the Arguments and expressions brought by you to effect your end,
to persuade the Houses, and secondly, speak to the thing and matter, namely
the Toleration of Independent Churches and Government in this Kingdom.

For the first I answer, what you may do for the future, whether you will
pursue no other Interest nor design in this Kingdom but a subsistence, be it
the poorest and meanest, I will not prophecy, but if we may argue from what
you have done, and what yet you do, then there is great cause of fear you
will pursue other Interest and designs: for you have and do pursue the
design of increasing your party, and spreading your way as the only way of
God, else why have you preached and done so much for it? neither can I believe
you are so low spirited and so terrene as to look out after no other inrerest
but a poor subsistence in this Kingdom, what have you not the design and
interest of setting up Christ's Kingdom and pure Ordinances in the midst of us?
I profess for my self and brethren that we have greater interests and
designs in our seeking Reformation, then a subsistence in our own land
(though it might be never so full and plentiful) namely the glory of God, the
advancement of the Kingdom of Christ, the opportunities of doing more service:
And as for a subsistence be it the poorest and meanest, I appeal to the
Conscience of the Reader whether that be likely, have you contented your selves
with a poor and mean condition hitherto? have you lived in a poor rank,
preaching in poor and mean Congregations, or have you not ruffled it, bearing
a higher sail, and carrying a greater port then most of the Godly Ministers in
City or Country? have not some of you the prime Lectures of the City, and
other good places of advantage and profit, (besides what some of you have from
your own Churches,) could not you have been contented to have added more
places, and can any who know you in what height you live, and what Grandees of
the times you are, and how much you appear in public in the chief places of
resort, and have insinuated into so many great men, believe that you would live
contented with a subsistence (be it the poorest and meanest?) let them believe
you who will, for my part I am not satisfied in the truth of it, but do
suspect that if the Parliament should make an offer to you to this purpose you
would refuse it. You say you pursue no other Interest or design, but a
subsistence (be it the poorest and meanest) in your own land, well, you five
shall have your. Church Way, and enjoy Congregations in such a remote corner of
the Kingdom, provided you shall not have above fifty pounds a year, nor
above fifty persons to each Church, you shall add none from any other
Congregations of the Kingdom, nor admit any of other Congregations to come to
hear you, nor never preach in any of our Churches any of your
Church-Principles, nor speak of them in private to any but your own members,
would this satisfy you? in your Reply give a positive and clear answer. As
for that you say, where we have and may do further service. I answer, before
you fell into this new Church way, you did God service, but since, you have
done more dis-service then ever service, and if God be pleased to bring you
back into the fellowship of this Church, and to join in this Reformation to
grow up into one body, you may do him further service; otherwise in the way of
a Toleration which you aim at, you will do more hurt then you can do good in
this Kingdom (yea though you had the tongues and parts of Angels.) As for those
words a subsistence in the land which is our birthright as we are men, and the
enjoyment of the Ordinances of Christ our portion as we are Christians; I
answer, a subsistence in the land according to the Laws established is your
birthright, but not otherwise; besides, the denial of a Toleration of your
Churches does not deny you a subsistence in the land, but you may subsist if
you please though no Toleration: But supposing you may not have what you
please, if thereupon you will remove to other Kingdoms, that is your fault,
and not the States; when a Father or Master lets their children and servants
have what is good and fitting, but denies to let them do what they list, and
refuses to grant what would hurt them, if the children and servants will go
away, and put themselves upon inconveniences to have their minds and wills
elsewhere, it is not the parents and masters fault, but the children and
servants; if men will punish themselves with Exile, because they cannot have
their wills, they can blame none but themselves. And as for the enjoyment of the
Ordinances of Christ, which you say are your portion as you are Christians,
then they are your portion not as Church members, but as Christians, and why
then do you keep away many good Christians from them, for want of being Church
members after your way; but let me tell you though the ordinances of Christ be
the portion of Christians, yet not in what way and dress so ever they will
have them, for so the Papists may plead to enjoy them in their way, and the
Anabaptists in their way, but they are the portion of Christians so as to enjoy
them according to the word of God in the public Assemblies, and not in a
schismatic way, and so may you enjoy among us public ordinances in the
public Assemblies, but to forsake the public Assemblies and draw away others
with you, and to set up a wall of separation between you and the reformed
Churches, this is not your portion as you are Christians, but it is against
Christianity, and is your sin and schism. As for that allowance of a
latitude to some lesser differences with peaceablenesse, you need not doubt
that, so far as will stand with peaceablenesse, that is so as not to urge
subscriptions upon you to all the points of government and order, not to cast
you out from preaching amongst us though you may be of a different judgment in
some lesser matters (especially so long as you keep your judgments to your
selves, and preach not contrary to what is established to make factions and
parties:) But if you mean by the allowance of a latitude to some lesser
differences, that you and others may have free leave to set up separated
Congregations, and go and receive in to your Churches whom you please, and
govern Independently in a different form of government from the government
established, I must tell you this ought not to be granted, as being
inconsistent with peace and truth, and would be a perpetual root and source of
many bitter divisions, errors and mischiefs in this Kingdom: As for your
last words of all, not knowing where else with safety, health and livelihood to
sot your seet on earth, that seems strange to me, do none of the English
Ministers who live in other parts of the world, as in Holland, New England and
other places enjoy safety, health and livelihood, are these things confined and
tied only to England? did not most of you enjoy all these abroad? livelihood is
confessed in your Apology, a full and liberal maintenance annually: safety
you went over for, and found; and as for health, some of your way have
commended Arnheim you lived at, to be like Hartford and Bury in Suffolk, and
one of you Roterdam to be as good, if not better then London; which places for
health are sufficiently known. And however all these things of no other
interest but a subsistence in our own land, and of enjoying the ordinances of
Christ, and not knowing where else with safety, health and livelihood to set
our feet on earth, be held forth as specious pretenses to the Parliament and
Reader to persuade and to allure them, yet the bottom of all this desire of a
toleration in England (though concealed) is that there is no other place on
earth, where you are like to propagate your way, to gain so great a party, to
enjoy such full and rich Congregations, and to have that respect and applause
in your way as in England, and in England as London and the adjacent parts, or
where you can have those fair hopes and probabilities of drawing so great a
part of a Kingdom to your Church Way as here: and where if you go on to act
as diligently and politickly as you have done in these three years last past,
and the Ministers be as generally silent, and the common people of the Kingdom
come a little more to understand your principles, and have time to digest and
consider of the great liberty and power they have thereby, the rest of the
Kingdom may in time come to be beholding to you for a toleration of
Presbytery (if it be established) (which you will as soon grant, if you come
to have power in your hands, as you will Episcopacy and Popery,) many of your
Church Way ordinarily affirming they had rather have Episcopacie then
Presbytery; and it has been affirmed to me by a Minister of note, that a
Minister of the Church Way preferred Popery in this Kingdom before
Presbytery, for if Popery should come in, it would be but short lived, but
Presbytery was like to be long lived: The Arminians in the Netherlands at
first desired but a toleration, no more but to be permitted to enjoy in some
Churches of their own their consciences with peaceablene^, but afterward that
by the connivance and favor of the Magistrates they were in some Cities and
places (as Amsterdam etc.) grown to a great number, and had a great power, then
they would not suffer no^ tolerate the orthodox Ministers, but persecuted them,
and some were forced to fly (as in the stories of the Netherlands is at large
recorded,) And if ever the Independents by connivance or a toleration should
come to have a power and strength considerable, if they serve not us so, I am
much deceived: All Sectaries and erro^eous spirits who are but tolerated, and
not owned, will watch all advantages to set up their own way as chief, and
when they have a power will be impetuous and violent to effect it, as the
Anabaptists in Germany were, the Arminians in Holland, and the Antinomians and
Familists in New England: As women out of their weakness and fear when they
have power over any, are most cruel, so Sectaries out of their fear least a
State may one time or other cast them out and not tolerate them, will upon an
advantage suppress and destroy the orthodox, and stablish their own.

2. As for the matter it self contained in the close of your book, a
Toleration of Independent Churches and government, the scope and last end of
this Apology, whereunto tends all the artifice and fallacies in the composure
of it, I shall lay down some Reasons and grounds against it: I cannot stand to
handle the question at large about tolerations of different Religions or of
diverse Sects and opinions in one and the same Kingdom, (this answer being
already a great deal longer then I intended it.) I cannot now open the terms
and premise the distinctions, as distinguishing concerning the nature and kind
of errors, concerning the persons erring, concerning the kinds and degrees of
toleration and coaction, etc. I shall reserve the full handling of this point,
whether toleration be lawful, to a particular Tractate I intend upon that
subject: In the mean time upon occasion of what you present here to the
Parliament, I shall humbly submit to their considerations these following
particulars.

1. A Toleration of Independent Churches and government 1 Reason.
with their opinions and practice, is against the Magistrates duty laid down
in Scripture; but for Magistrates by good laws to command and require
obedience to the government and Reformation, upon good grounds judged to be
according to the word of God, and so established, is lawful and their duties:
For the clearing of which I premise two things, which I suppose must needs be
granted. 1. That the Magistrate is custos ac vinde^ utriusque Tabula, (as is
confessed by all orthodox Divines,) that the care of Religion belongs to him,
and that he is to look to it that the Church of God and the Government of it
be constituted and settled according to the Word, and that the people may lead a
peaceable Beza Confess. Fid. cap. 5. de Ecclesia spe^^. 44. de Christiani
Magistretus offici^.
and quiet life in all godliness and honesty, for which end Princes and
Magistrates are to make Laws for the observing of the Worship and Government
of Christ's Church, forbidding and punishing with religious severitie those
things which are practiced against the Word of God, but commanding what is
according to it, this is one of the great services they yield to Christ as they
are Magistrates; and I find Augustine and other Divines giving that sense of
Psalm. 2. 10, 11. of Kings and Judges serving the Lord with fear, and of Deuteronomy.
17. 19. of God commanding the King to read the book of the Law, that he may
learn to observe the things which are written in it, not only as private men
practicing these and ordering their lives according to the Word, but as Kings
they should order their Office by the Word, not only by living holily (for so
they serve God as men) but as Kings and Magistrates by making Laws for the
Worship of God, and prohibiting the contrary. 2. That the Reformation in
Worship, Government, etc. which shall be settled and established by the
Parliament is judged and taken for granted by them to be according to the mind
of Christ, else why have they called so many able, godly and learned Divines to
consult with for that purpose, and stood so much for a Reformation according to
the Word? and why else will they establish it, if there be any other more
agreeable to the Word? so that whatsoever other Government after all debates
and Reasonings is rejected and refused must be thought not to have such a
ground in the Word, for if it had, why was it not established and owned, but
comes to seek for a Toleration and Connivance? Now then by virtue of many
Scriptures both in the old and new Testament, the Examples of the Kings of
Judah in commanding and requiring all the people to yield to the Reformations
made by them (and in particular the Spirit of God commending Josiah for making
all Jerusalem and Benjamin to stand to the Covenant 2 Chronicles. 34. 3^, 3^.
which he had made with God) the fourth Commandment requiring of the Father of
the Family that he see all under his power and charge to worship God (upon
which learned Divines (as Zanchius) excellently show the duty of Magistrates
in reference to commanding and providing that their people shall worship God
according to his will) Romans 13. 4. Ephesians. 5. 11. 1 Timothy 5. 22. 2 John 11. v.
Revel. (...). 20. with many other places in Scripture of removing away of
evil, and of not consenting to evil, etc, the Parliament is bound to
establish, and to command obedience to that Reformation which is judged most
agreeable to the Word, and to suppress and hinder all other: It was
excellently done by the Parliament to call together so many able, godly, and
Orthodox Divines to debate and find out the mind and will of God, for Doctrine,
Worship, and Discipline, and to give liberty to men of different judgments to
bring in their grounds: and after all ways of enquiry and searching into
truth, and a Model drawn up for them upon good grounds being satisfied, it is
their duty by their power and authority to bind men to the decrees of the
Assembly, and not to tolerate any other Doctrines, Churches, Worship or
Government to be set up and exercised; you ought not to suffer the weak to be
destroyed, nor the people to be drawn away by every wind of doctrine, but when
once upon good grounds the Reformation is concluded, you must defend it against
troublesome and turbulent spirits, and in so doing God will be with you, and
subdue the people under you, whereas if to please some people you suffer them
to enjoy their own way, God will not be well pleased with it, neither can you
answer it unto God: You may lawfully, nay ye ought in that which is good to
compel men (though they pretend conscience) shall the errors of other men's
consciences hindr you from yielding that service which God requiteth of you?
may a Parliament displease God to please men? or may they be please^s of other
men's sins, and wink at evil to content some persons? No, Parliaments in making
laws for Religion must depend on the will of God ^led in his Word in the best
and (...) ways communicated to them, and not upon the consciences of some
people.

(...). The Toleration desired is against the solemn League and Covenant for
Reformation, taken by the Parliament, and the Kingdom ^on.
of England and Scotland, and (...) be co^ed to without (...) of that Oath and
Covenant, so that the Apology and motion for a Toleration comes ^o late, the
door is shut against it, the Kingdoms hands are bound, so that if such a
Toleration were not in it^ self unlawful, and against the duty of the
Magistrate, yet now because of the Oath and Covenant it is unlawful, so that
whatever might have been granted before, cannot now, lest the Kingdom should
be guilty before God of Covenantbreaking: Now a^ Toleration, and this moving
for a Toleration by the Apologists is expressly against these branches of the
Covenant: 1. Against that clause in the first branch of endeavoring the
Reformation, of Religion in the Kingdoms of England and Ixeland in Doctrine,
Worship, Government and Discipline, according to the Example of the best
Reformed Churches; now in this Petition to both Houses you would be exempted
from the Reformation of the best Reformed Churches, so that unless you
understand the Brownists, New England, or your own Churches to be the best
Reformed, you have broken your Covenant, but though you may understand it so,
and may be took the Covenant in that sense, yet I suppose you cannot think the
Pa^liament (whom you s^ to for a Toleration) took the best Reformed Churches in
that acception, but for the Reformed Churches so called and commonly known, as
of France, etc. so that their granting a Toleration would be against this
clause of the best Reformed Churches. (...) it is expressly against another
clause in the first branch. And shall endeavou^ to bring the Churches of God in
the three Kingdoms to the nearest Conjunction and Uniformity in Religion,
Confession of Faith, Form of Church Government. Directory so^ Worship and
Catechi^ing. Now if the Parliament has covenanted so, how can it grant a
Toleration of so different a Form of Church Government and Worship, as the
Independent way is from the Presbyteriall? and how can you be excused from
explicit formal breach of Covenant in this part of your Apology, having
sworn and sub^bed to endeavor by all means to bring the Churches of God in
these three Kingdoms to the nearest Conjunction and Uniformitie in Religion,
who in stead of so laboring and endeavoring or ever so much as trying whether
you with the rest of the Churches may not be brought into a near Conjunction
and Uniformitie, just before the time the Assembly was coming to fall upon
these points in difference to put out this Apology and to move for a
Toleration, before hearing what could be said to you for satisfaction, or ever
debating the points in the Assembly: Is this to endeavor by all means to
bring the Churches of God in the three Kingdoms to the nearest Conjunction and
Uniformitie in Religion etc. before so much as ever debating points to conclude
magisterially (as you do in pages 22. and 24.) against the Reformed Churches,
and to desire an exemption from Conjunction and Uniformitie with the rest of
the Churches in this Kingdom. 3. It Is against that clause in the second
branch, that we shall in like manner without respect of persons endeavor the
extirpation of schism, and whatever shall be found contrary to found doctrine
and the power of Godliness, lest we partake in other men's sins. Now that which
you move for is schism and contrary to sound Doctrine, the Church Way being a
schism, besides many of your Church Principles are against sound Doctrine, and
the power of Godliness, as that in your Apology about the subject of
Excommunication, as that of a few people having power to join together, and
set up a Church and choose what Ministers they will, as that of the
Independencie of particular Congregations from any Authenitative power, etc. so
that the Parliament in the midst of their Reformation and blessed Conjunction
according to the Word of God with the Reformed Churches should in allowing you
a Toleration suffer a formal schism, both in Worship and Government in the
midst of these Kingdoms. 4ly, This Toleration sued for is against a part of
the fourth branch, endeavoring the discovery of such as have been evil
Instruments by hindering Reformation of Religion, or making any faction or
parties amongst the people contrary to this League and Covenant: Now the
Parliament is bound by this against all persons and things which hinder the
Reformation, and makes any faction or parties amongst the people: now whether a
Toleration granted, yea but moved for would not hinder the Reformation of
Religion, and make Faction and parties amongst the people, let it be
considered: I confess I wonder how the Apologists ever took this Covenant, or
having taken it, that they should ever dream more of a Toleration, or think it
possible the Parliament should grant it, the Covenant being so direct against a
Toleration: Many of the Church Way and Communion have and do apprehend all
this, that taking the Covenant and a Toleration of Independencie cannot stand
together, and thereupon there are Ministers and people of that way had not
taken it (whatever they may of late. I have been told from a good hand that
some of the Apologists had much ado to bring themselves to take it, and that
it was a bitter pill to get down, and one of some quality assured me that Mr
Nigh told him in Scotland, that when the Covenant had passed there, and was to
be sent for England, he writ with all earnestness and possible Conjurements to
Mr Goodwin, Mr Bridge, etc. not to oppose it, or be against it, as much fearing
how it would go down. To conclude this Reason, For the Parliament to allow
such a latitude as a Toleration, it would be against the solemn Covenant: For
the Ministers to be silent, and not to witness against such a Toleration
desired would be in them a breach of the Covenant, and therefore in respect to
the Covenant I have taken, I here witness against Tolerations of different
sects and Churches: The people by virtue of their Covenant are by all ways and
means in their places and callings engaged to oppose such a Toleration, by
their prayers to God against it, etc. Lastly, our brethren of Scotland are
engaged with all their power and might in their places to oppose it: Now the
Apologists in petitioning for a Toleration have not only broken the Covenant
themselves, but they endeavor by all their wit and art in this Apology to
bring the Parliament and Kingdom into so great a guilt as the breach of this
solemn Covenant.

3. A Toleration is against the nature of Reformation, a Reformation 3 Reason.
and a Toleration are diametrally opposite; The commands of God given in his
Word for Reformation, with the Examples of Reforming Governors Civil and
Ecclesiastical do not admit of a Toleration, how many things might be
produced out of some Sermons and Lectures of the Apologists concerning the
nature of Reformation, and of the Magistrates duty in Reformation, which
cross and thwart Tolerations? and if the consciences of some men being
unsatisfied must be a dispensation against removing such a thing, or commanding
such a thing, there will never be no perfect nor thorough Reformation, for what
general Reformation can there be but will be against many men's consciences?
the takin^ away of what men have long enjoyed, and the bringing in of quite
other things will trouble many consciences, and if Magistrates or Ministers may
not settle things contrary to the consciences of many, but tolerate and allow
them wherein they plead Conscience, they shall never do Gods work: In King
Edwards and Queen Elizabeth's Reformations, how was it against the Consciences
of many taking away the Mass, Confession to the Priest, bringing in the Common
Prayer Book: In this present Reformation, how much is it against many men's
Consciences the taking away the Government of the Church by Bishops, the
present Lyturgie and establishing another Government and Form of public
Worship, who if they might be allowed a Toleration would not admit a
Reformation, must not the Assembly and Parliament proceed therefore in the
work of Reformation, because all men's consciences are not satisfied? if this
principle were once given way to, that nothing might be removed, nor nothing
brought in which offends consciences, but in such a case persons must have a
liberty and Toleration, men would still pretend conscience, and so nothing to
purpose should ever be reformed publicly, and all the Scripture speaks of
National and General Reformation by way of commanding and commending, it
should be just nothing, depending merely upon Tolerations, that is, there
shall be a Reformation unless men desire a Toleration, and the upshot of all
will be this, that so many of such a mind shall enjoy their way, and so many of
another mind their way, etc. and they who will yield to the Reformation by
Nehemiah and Ezra may, were there ever such Reformations read of in the
Scriptures?

4. A Toleration of men in their errors, this pretended Liberty of
conscience, is against the judgment of the greatest lights in the 4 Reason.
Church both ancient and modern. I might out of Ecclesiastical Histories, as
Theodoret, and^. relate the praises of those Emperors Theodosius, Arcadius,
etc. who would not suffer the meetings of the Heretioues, but did by positive
Laws amerce and banish them, as also the brands and blemishes cast upon those
Emperors who suffered the Arrians, and other Heretics: I might out of
Augustine, Ambrose, Calvin, Philip, Melancth^n, Peter, Marty, Zanchius,
Musculus, Bullinger, bring many sentences against Tolerations, and leaving men
to the liberty of their own consciences, and how by laws and Discipline
Magistrates may command obedience to the Worship of God established, and to
return into the Unity of the Church: But out of many I will give you the
Epist. ^8. Augustinus Vincentio ex ^resi R^gatiana doce^s se fuisse allquando
ejus sententiae, ^t arbitraretur cum haereticis nulla ^i, sed solo Dei verbo
^endum, verum aliorum sententiis and exempl^ superatum m^tasse sententiam.
judgment of two, Augustine and Beza: Augustine in his Epistle to Vincentius
writes to this purpose, declaring to him, though he was sometimes of that
opinion, that erroneous men should not be dealt with by force but only by the
Word of God, yet now by the arguments of others, and by the visible examples of
many being reduced from errors by that means he had changed his judgment,
and that therefore the Laws of Princes might be lawfully made use of against
errors. And for this coactive power he brings many grounds in that Epistle,
and he speaks thus: If we tolerate men in their errors, and nothing be
thought upon or done by us which may be likely to terrify and recover them, we
shall truly render evil for evil: If men be compelled and terrified, but not
instructed, this is a tyrannizing over them; but again, if they be ^aught and
not feared, they will move the slower to go in the way of life, not every one
who spares is a Friend, nor every one who chastises is an enemy: And do
thou think no force is to be used to a man that he may be delivered from the
per^itiousnesse of his error, when as we know God himself does so in many
Examples, and speaking on that point he says, it must not be so much
considered that a man is compelled, as what that is to which he is compelled:
In this Epistle the Father answers some objections brought against compelling
men, as that this does no good to ^ome, as that this is persecution, as that
these Heretics would not do so, etc. so he writes in his Augusti^ Bonisacio
viro militari de Caesaris co^. ^monstrans illi Donatistarum haeresi^ nih^
habere comm^ne cum Arria^, and qua modoratione per me^um leg^ imperialium
haeretici possu^ a^ ecclesiae sacieta^ red^.
50. Epistle to Boniface, and in his Augustinus Do^ presby^ (...), (...) (...)
(...) ^d (...), (...) (...) sibi vi^ infer, (...) ut reso^ perpe^ (...)*
(...) pra^ voluntatem recte cog^ ad ^iora.
204. Epist. to Donatus upon the same subject; And Augustinus Re^ct. lib. 2 cap
5. Quod vere ^unc (...) place^at, quia nondu^ expert^ e^am, vel qua^um ^ali
eoru^ auderet impunit^s, vel quantum iis in melius mutandis confer posset
diligenti^ (...).
in his Retractations he retracts this error which he sometimes held, and had
writ of, (...) it did not please him that schismatick^s should be compelled
(...) (...) to Communion by the force of any s^cular power, and gives his
reasons there of the change of his judgment from what he formerly held,
because now he had experience how much evil the Toleration and suffering of
them did, as also how much the diligence of Discipline would confer to the
making of them better. Minime ut haec quidem libert^ intelligitur, idest, ut
quo quisque mo lo volet Deum colat: Est enim hoc mere diabolicum dogma,
Sinendu^ esse unumquemque ut si volet perea^. and i^a est diabolica liber^s
quae Poloniam and Transylvaniam body ^ot pestib^ implevit, quas nullae alioqui
sub sole regiones tolerarent. Bezae epist. prima. Bezae epist 4o.
Beza in his Epistles and other writings speaks much against Tolerations and
the liberty of Conscience pleaded for, and answers to that, whether liberty
of Conscience is to be permitted? No, as this liberty is understood, that is,
that every man may worship God after what manner he will himself. For this is
a mere diabolical opinion, That every one is to be suffered that if he will
he may perish. And in the same Epistle he says of Tolerations, This is that
diabolical liberty which has filled Polonia and Transylvania with so many
plagues of opinions which otherwise else no countries under the Sun would have
tolerated. And in this Epistle he tells him to whom he writes, that which I
perceive you call liberty of conscience, but I on every side call an open
destruction and ruin: So in his Confession of Faith under that head of the
office of the Christian Magistrate he speaks thus. Bezae Consess. Fid. de Eccl,
ca. (...). sect. 44. de Christiani Magistratus officio.
His office is to preserve the public peace and quietness: now whereas that
cannot be rightly done, but the true worship of God must flourish in the first
place, from whence flows all happiness, it follows that nothing ought to be
more looked to by the Christian Magistrates the^ to have the Church ordered
according to the rule of Gods Word, whose authority they may defend and
vindicate against all contemners and disturbers: neither are they here to be
hearkened unto, who under the mask and color of false pity and mercy, and
not only by vain and foolish arguments, but arguments Bez. De Haereticis a
civili Maegistratu puniendis, advers^ Martini Bellii farraginem and novo^ (...)
s^ctam.
joined with a great deal of impiety do exempt false prophets and heretics
from the sword of Princes, when as on the contrary no kind of men are to be
compelled with greater severity, as the express word of God commands, and
religious Princes have always done: And upon that subject, that Heretics
ought to be punished by the Civil Magistrate, he has writ a book at large,
answering all the objections for Tolerations and pretended liberty of
conscience: And to the judgment of the Fathers, and the Modern Writers in
this point, I will add the judgment of the Divines of New England who are
against the Toleration of any Church Government and way but one: For the
Discipline appointed by Jesus Christ for his Churches is not arbitrary, that
Church Government and Church Covenant discussed, quaest. 31.
one Church may set up one and practice one form, and another another form,
as each one shall please, but is one and the same for all Churches and in all
the Essentials and Substantials of it unchangeable, and to be kept till the
appearing of Jesus Christ. And if that Discipline which we here practice be (as
we are persuaded of it) the same which Christ has appointed, and therefore
unalterable, we see not how another can be lawful. And so in New England they
will not suffer Brownists, Anabaptists, Antinomians. Mr Cotton pow^ng one of
the seven Vials, Vial 3. page 1^, 17, 21. Vial^ 4. page 1^.
Mr Cotton the greatest Divine in New England, and a precious man, is against
Tolerations, and holds that men may be punished for their consciences, as will
appear by his Letter to Mr Williams, and Mr Williams answer, (both printed)
and his Exposition on the Vials, wherein he answers an objection: But you will
say conscience should not be forced, etc. he answers, Why do you think
Heretics were not as conscionable in the old Testament as now? if any man had
a conscience to turn men from God, he would have men of as much conscience to
cut them off.

5. The Magistrates Toleration of errors and new opinions is a kind of
Invitation to them, a Temptation, and occasion of many 5 Reason.
falling, who otherwise never would, a snare to many, a stumbling block laid
before the weak, the leaving a pit or well uncovered, an opportunity for
Satan, a man's own corruption, or seducers to work upon, and to draw away by:
when men may broach opinions and vent them, hold and practice what they please
without any danger, nay with the leave and countenance of the Magistrate: what
advantage will not Satan and wanton witted men take by this? opportunity makes
many a thief, and impunitie makes many venture, and as it is a shroud
temptation to make many fall, so a Toleration is a means of confirmation in
the way of error, a great block to stop up the way of many who might be gained
for ever returning, when men know they may have their own way and are at their
liberty, they will go o^, the engagement of credit, etc. is much being in a
way to continue in it, they have no necessity of harkning to Council, or
waighing arguments: But the denial of a Toleration, and by positive Laws
commanding the contrary, as it is a great Preservative, so it is a Restorative,
and a means of recovering many; when men see they cannot have their wills, they
will consider a little better what they do, as also review their former
thoughts, and so may be reduced; yea, multitudes have blessed God they have not
been left to their own liberty, but that by severity of Discipline means
have been used: This evil of Tolerations, and good of Coactions by Laws has
been seen and approved of by long experience; Augustine that holy and learned
Father from the experience of this changed his judgment about Tolerations,
whereas it was his first judgment, and he had in a former Book writ, that it
did not please him that Schismatics should be compelled and forced to
communion by the force of any secular power, afterward he was of another mind,
and writes that the grounds of his change were these: 1. The great evil of
Tolerations, the great evil that impunitie made many run into. 2. The great
good compulsion conferred to the making of many better, which he saw by many
Examples of whole Cities converted from Donatisme, and coming to the Unity of
the Church. In the 48. Epistle formerly quoted, he writes thus to Vincentius,
That it was his opinion at first that no man was to be compelled to the Unity
of the Church, all was to be done by persuasion, we were to strive by
disputation, and to overcome by reason, lest we should make those fained
Catholics, whom we knew to be open Heretics; but this my opinion was
overcome, not by words, but by demonstrative examples, for first of all my own
city was brought to me for an Example, which being wholly for Donatus was
converted to the Catholic Unity by the fear of the Imperial Laws, so many
other cities were named and reckoned up to me, to these examples brought me by
my Colleagues I gave place: we see not (...) few men, but many cities who were
Donatists to be now Catholics, and vehemently to detest that diabolical
separation, and zealously to love unity: which persons were by the means and
occasion of this fear (which displeases you) made Catholics by the laws of
the Emperors from Constantine down to these present Emperors: How many did
therefore remain Donatists because they were there borne, and no men did
compel them to come out from them, and to go to the Catholic Church: The
terror of these Laws, in the promulgation of which the Kings of the earth
served the Lord, did so profit all these, that now others say, thanks be to God
who has broken our bonds, and has translated us to the bond of peace; others
sorry we did not know this to be the truth, neither would we have learned it, if
we had been left to our liberty, but fear made us attentive to know it:
Others say, we were terrified from entering in by false fears, which we should
never have known to have been false, but by entering in, neither should we have
entered in, unless we had been compelled. And so August. cont. Gaudent. Epist
lib. 2. cap. 17. Quod autem vobis vi^etur, invi^os ad veritatem non esse
cogendos: (...) nescientes Scripturas, neque virtutem Dei, qui eos volentes
^acit, dum coguntur inviti.
Augustine against Gaudentius speaks thus: Whereas you think none must be
forced to truth who are unwilling, you are deceived, not knowing the
Scriptures, nor the power of God, which makes those willing who when they were
compelled were unwilling. And in his books of August. Retract lib. 2. c 5.
Retractations he gives the experience of this fifth Reason as the ground of
retracting what he had formerly writ and held in this point. Bezae epist. 1^.
Taceo quod toties adversuo Donatistas and Circumcelliones Augustinus testatur
experientia ipsa edoctus, plerosque eo esse ingenio ut nulla re magis quam
severitate in officio contineantur: ad^ ut quod initio poenae formidine
vitarun^: id ipsum postea libentur ^ugiant, and asperitatem illam sibi
saluberrimam fuisse testentur.
Learned Beza observed it in his time, that Tolerations of sects, and Liberty
of conscience (as it was called) was the ground of filling Polonia and
Transylvania with so many pestilent opinions, which otherwise no people under
the Sun would have suffered, and that if the Magistrate had tried by all
means in Transylvania, etc. to have restrained that liberty, they had not
been brought to that condition which he judged no less miserable then
Mahumetisme it self: And he wishes that France had given Polonia an example of
this one thing, and shows the great difference between the peace and true
liberty of conscience enjoyed at Geneva, and in Polonia, one granting
Tolerations, the other none. So Beza de Haeret a Magistrpuniendis.
he shows the benefit and good of compulsion, I pass by that, Augustine being
taught by experience it self, witnessed so often against the Donatists, many
to be of that disposition that they are by nothing more kept in duty then by
severity of Discipline, so that what at first they left for fear of
punishment, afterward they willingly cast away, professing the sharpness used
to have been very profitable. We have seen also by our own experience in this
intermysticall season (though there has been no formal Toleration) yet for
want of Government settled, and people having been left to so great liberty,
multitudes are fallen, and do daily to Antinomianisme, Anabaptisme,
Independencie, yea to deny the Immortality of the Soul, and then no
expectation but many will fall more and more: Independents and all kind of
Sectaries (as long as they can have their liberty) snuff up the wind, will
not hearken to any way whereby they may receive satisfaction, but if once the
Magistrate declares, and by laws concludes one way of Church-worship and
Government, then it may be they will hear Reason: Men as long as they have any
hopes will stand out, who yet when they see no remedy, will examine and
consider: Now what account God will exact for his Name profaned, for the
Sacraments and Scriptures abused by the handling and administration of them who
are not called, and what answer must be made for the ruin of Souls, harvest
of sin, corruption of doctrine always following the public Toleration of
heresies and schisms, I humbly leave to be fully considered of, and wisely
prevented by the High Court of Parliament, who must think, that silence
provokes, and sufferance emboldens men to forsake Gods Truth and his Church,
even as in civil affairs the neglecting of justice maintains disorders.

6. A Toleration of one or more different ways of Churches and Church
Government, from the Church and Church Government 6 Reason.
established, will be to this Kingdom very mischievous, pernicious and
destructive, in regard of the effects and consequents of it; how fair soever a
Toleration may be pretended, and how small soever the differences, yet it is of
a vast and dreadful consequence to this Kingdom: Different Forms of Churches
and Church Government in one state must needs lay a foundation of strife and
division therein. It is the admitting of a seed of perpetual division within
its self, an opening a sluice to let in strife and contentions in all places
public and private, Church and Commonwealth, in Parliaments, Corporations,
among the Ministers, in Families: Now how great an evil this is all wise
states know, and can stand with no Christian policy, however it may agree with
Machiavillian: The different Interests and Principles of the Churches
established and tolerated with other things concurrent, especially in the
party tolerated apprehending themselves the weaker will be working in them to
watch all advantages to grow and increase, and to get into places and favor
with great men and Princes (as we see the Heretics did in Ecclesiastical
Histories, and the Arminians in the Netherlands with the Magistrates, and will
never rest working till they get the upper hand, and suppress the other.) But
besides the continual heart-burnings and divisions between the Ministers of
the different Churches, the people among themselves, the husband and wife with
the corruption of doctrine, a Toleration will be a likely means of producing
civil wars in this land, and whereas now we have a war between King and
Parliament, we may expect a war amongst the people, yea the Toleration
desired would prove a mighty advantage for the Court party to make use of those
sects, and by enlarging some favors to them (being the weaker party to gain
them) by their help to overthrow the Government established, and to advance the
Prerogative, the sad effects and mischiefs already (without any formal
Toleration) of the different Churches and Governments, do appear in the
jealousies, divisions, delays, laying down of places, in not being so active,
etc. whereby the Court party is strengthened, Reformation hindered, and the
good party weakened: Now considering the many dangerous effects and consequents
of a Toleration to this state, and considering the small differences between
the Apologists and the Presbyterians (as themselves say) and that they can for
a need come to our Churches, and partake in the Sacraments, hold Communion with
us as the Churches Apolog. Narrat. page 6.
of Christ, why should they have different Churches and Government allowed? The
Parliament upon so small a ground and needless a cause has the less cause to
give way to a Toleration, which would certainly produce so great mischiefs and
evils.

7. Independencie and the Church way besides the evil of it in its self
considered, (as being a schism in forsaking the reformed 7 Reason.
Churches and constituting new, the way of constituting Churches by the people,
the way of making their Ministers, the refusing of believers and their children
to the Sacraments (unless they be Church members) with many more, all slat
against the Primitive patterns) has ever been from first to last a fountain
of evil and a root of bitterness, of many bitter divisions and separations
amongst themselves, of manifold errors and other mischiefs in those Churches
and places where they lived, God having always witnesses against it, and never
blessing it with peace and truth. I shall not need to relate the histories of
the Anaptists (the highest form of Independencie and the Church way) what
evils they fell into, and the mischiefs they brought upon Germany, and how
God cursed and scattered them: As for the Brownists the middle form of
Independencie, the Apologists themselves confess they had fatal miscarriages
and shipwracks; And I could tell a sad story (but that it would be now too
long) even from Bolton and Brown the first and prime leaders down to the
present Brownists at Amsterdam, of the Apostasies, Heresies, Separations and
bitter divisions, with the untimely fearful ends which have fallen out
amongst them, but in respect my book so much exceeds the proportion intended,
I shall reserve that for a more distinct handling. And for the semi-Brownists
and Independents (so called by way of distinction) they have not been free; The
Churches of the Apologists have had their bitter divisions and fearful
miscarriages, as the Reader may remember in these pages of this present Answer,
page 35, 36, 37, 142, 143, 144. with some erroneous conceits fallen into and
preached in one of their Churches: So in the Churches of New England there have
been so many errors, differences and evils, that I believe had we but a true
impartial story of New England for the first seven or eight years (after
they were come to any number) we should have the strangest story (next that of
the Anabaptists and old Brownists) one of them in the world; in a word, they
were brought by their Independencie and Church principles next door to ruin
both spiritual and temporal, the sad experience of which has made them
wheel about of later years toward Presbyteriall government, and in stead of
that, not being yet formally come to it, to take aliquid analogum in the first
constituting of Churches, making Ministers, etc. which at first they did not,
and to give more power to Classes and Synods then they did many years ago, as
by comparing some Letters from thence in those times written by Ministers over
into England, and Mr Cottons late book will be evident. In a word, he that
will observe it shall find the end of Independencie infinite schisms,
separations, errors, inconstancy and uncertainty in judgment, yea barbarism
and confusion, and the Toleration of it by this State would be the opening of a
sloud-gate to many other errors and evils besides what evil is in that, being
a way all along wherein it ^iffers from the reformed Churches either beside or
against the word of God: And should the Parliament, which God forbid, and I
hope is far from their thoughts) give the Independents a Toleration of their
way and Churches, they should give they know no^ what, having never yet spoken
out all that they hold (this Apology containing but a little part of their
way) besides taking in their second great principle, page 10. Apolog, of not
making their present judgment and practice a binding law for the future, the
Parliament may grant gross Brownisme, Anabaptisme within a short time, many
falling off according their principles of new light, to cast off communion with
their own Churches, as some of Mr Sympsons have done; and let it be but
remembered what I now write, whether some of the Apologists (if they come not in
and join with the reformed Churches) do not within a few years go a great
way further, I think, had they staid together in Holland till this time,
without any hopes of a Toleration here, some of them had gone far by this
time of day: Anointing with oil was begun to be brought in, Hymns had been
moved for in one of their Churches, and if I may believe the report of a
religious Person in an open company affirming it again and again, when I
doubted it, that a member of the Church of A^nheim (who was also named to me)
related, that had they staid there a little longer, the ordinance of Hymns had
been practiced amongst them, one being chosen and agreed upon by the Church to
exercise that ordinance. And I am able to demonstrate it, that the Apologists
keeping but to their principles (besides the principle of a Reserve) must yet
go a great way further, and supposing the Parliament should make a proposition
to them, We will grant you this and this, and so (which be the present
principl^s you hold forth) but if you bring in any thing more or go farther,
then your Churches shall be dessolved, and we will recall what we granted you
(because we will be sure to know what we allow in matters of Religion, be at a
certainty for that,) I do not think the Apologists would accept of a
Toleration upon those terms, and such a condition: The beginnings of errors
commonly are most modest, but let alone some time, they exceed all bounds, how
far most of the Arminians proceeded beyond what Arminius held, or themselves
at first, the learned books of many Divines and experience shows, and if a
Toleration were granted to the Apologists and all those of their communion to
exercise their consciences, I fear before a year went about many would turn
Anabaptists, etc. but I desire rather to pray against a toleration, then to
prophecy of the evil of it: But supposing the best that can be, that the
State had an Assurance the Apologists and their Churches would not go one step
further then now they hold, the Toleration should not be made use of to any
further errors, yet the Parliament should not allow it, unless they would
grant a Toleratiod of Brownisme; and if Brownisme be a bitter error and way,
then the way of the Apologists is not very sweet, their way being but Browns
younger brother, agreeing with the Brownists in the nature and definition of
the visible Church, in the Independent power of a particular Congregation, in
the way of making Officers, in the way of their ordinanc^s, as Prophesying, in
the way of Forms of Prayer, in the Sacraments, none to be admitted but Church
members, cum multis alijs, and I desire the Apologists to give any material
difference (however their grounds are different, and they do not go so far
in consequences, nor are not so gross) between their Churches and the
Brownists: As for that of the power of the people and the Officers, in giving
the power to the Officers, but the Brownists to the people. I answer, however
the Apologists differ in that point from the Brownists, in words, phrases,
methods, and give us many fine words and flattering similitudes, going about,
yet the truth is they differ not in substance in their practice, but all comes
to one end and issue, and all is resolved into the body of the Congregation,
and their power from first to last amongst the Apologists as well as amongst
the Brownists, (though here it is carried in a fairer way, as fine wits must
do, and that they may have something to say, wherein they are not Brownists,)
but of this the Reader may see more in this Answer, page 204, 205, 206.

8. The Presbyteriall way, the order and governme^ of the reformed 8 Reason.
Churches has been countenanced from Heaven, and blessed from above with the
preservation of the truth and unity of Religion, against heresies and errors
in Doctrine, Idolatry and corruption in worship, and all sorts of sects and
^chisme, it has been free of those mischiefs and evils of errors and
divisions which the Independent Churches have swarmed with, and that through a
long tract of time and the experience of almost a hundred years together: In
reformed Churches where this government has been set up, and has had its free
way and exercise even where it has wanted the advantages of the Magistrate
being a member of the Church, and has had many disadvantages in regard of the
spirits and dispositions of the people with many temptations to errors, yet it
has in those places kept out errors and schisms, preserved purity of
doctrine and peace: For example, in the Churches of France, it is evident by
many years experiences (though their Princes be popish) and they live in the
midst of Papists, yet by Gods blessing upon their government and order, their
Churches have been and are pure in doctrine, few or none falling to Popery,
Arminianisme, or to sects and sch^smes, and when any errors do arise amongst
them, yet by means of that government they are Nec tamen quicquam eoru^
defuit quibu^ Satan facile Gallos ^eos ad quasvis turbas imp^ret, ingenita
videlicet bui^ genti viletas, ingenia ad subtilitatem and argutias prompta,
Ma^ratuum in boc attentu^ animus, ut quoquomodo Christian^ Ecclesiae intestinis
diss^s sem^tipsas destrue e t, adeo quidem ut nemo prodire po^uit tam
sceleratus, quem Pont^j modo no, ^ris a lver^tur, nonsoverint. Aggerem tamen
firm^ssi ^m Ecclesiastice disc^plinae perfringere nulium adhuc adversariorum
(...), ne in medijs quidem ^llorum tempestatibus potuit. Epi^.
soon suppressed, and prevented from spreading. It was the observation of Beza
in his time, of the French Churches, though France was grievously afflicted and
oppressed by many, yet for that which concerned Religion it was free from all
troubles and stirrs: And yet notwithstanding there was nothing wanting of all
those things by which Satan might easily draw and move the French to all kind
of troubles; for example, an inbred natural lightness in that Nation, wits
very ready for subtlety and ^iceties, the mind of the Magistrates intent also
upon it, that all manner of ways the Christian Churches might destroy
themselves with their inward dissentions: notwithstanding all this, no strength
of the adversaries hitherto, no not in the midst of all the tempests of war,
has been able to bear thorough the most strong bu^warke and wall of
Ecclesiastical discipline.

For the Church of Scotland, I have heard it often and that from good hands,
that during the free use and exercise of Presbyteriall government there, never
any heresy or schism took the third man, but by means of that government
it has been pulled up at first, and either the particular person broaching the
error recovered, or however prevented before three have been infected with
it: Geneva (absit verbo injuria) tempestates intestinas adversus religionem
comparatas vitavit potius quam sup^ravit, quatas nulla fortasse sub coelo
civitas: nulla unquam Pastorum in doctrina inter se dissidia sensit; ab
Anabaptistarum furoribus, a Libertinorum contagione, a Servetanorum and eorum
quibu^ hospitium magno vestro malo adbuc praebatis, blasphemijs immunis est,
civitas alioqui omnibus advenis patens as p^oinde Satanae infdijs valde
opportunas Debet id autem prosecto secundum Dei benignitatem, Ecclesiasticae,
non tyrannidi, ut ex^ructibus saltem apparet, sed diligenter observatae
d^sciplinae quae nunc etiam sacit ut omnes ex omnibus pene sub coelo sitis
gentibus collecti in pace and vera liberate conscientiae ultro conquiescam^.
Beza in his first Epistle gives a notable testimony to this government by the
blessing of God upon it in the City of Geneva: Geneva (be it spoken without
offense) has rather escaped then overcome all the inward tempests against
Religion, so great as no City perhaps under Heaven has done the like, it never
yet felt any differences nor contentions of the Pastors amongst themselves in
points of doctrine, it is free from the furies of the Anabaptists, the contagion
of the Libertines, the blasphemies of Servetians, a City otherwise open to all
strangers and comers, and for that cause very fit and subject to the wiles of
Satan. But truly it owes all this by Gods blessing to the Ecclesiastical
discipline duly and diligently observed, which also now causes that all sorts
almost out of all nations under Heaven there gathered together, in peace and in
true liberty of conscience, do willingly accord together.

The Commissioners of the Church of Scotland tell us, that this Reformat of Chapter
govern. in Scotland, p. 3.
government has made the Church of Christ terrible as an army with banners,
and like a strong and fenced City, against which the adversaries have despaired
to prevail, but by making a breach in this wall, and where they have gained
ground or gotten any advantage, either the wall has not been built, or being
built has been broken down, or not vigilantly kept by the watchmen.

But there will be objected against this a passage lately printed in a book of
Mr Simpsons, that there have been as great defections The Anatomist Anatomis^d.
both of Ministers and people unto errors under Presbyteriall government as
under any other: as it is clear in the Low Countries where so many Ministers
and people turned Arminians, Papists, Socinians: I have instanced in several
reformed Churches, and showed Gods blessing upon Presbyteriall government,
here is only one instance among all the reformed Churches brought against it,
and to that I shall give these three answers: Though the Churches in the
Low Countries are Presbyteriall, yet withal there is a Toleration of other
Churches and government there, which is one of the causes of it and hinders
Presbyteriall government: A Toleration will spoil any Church and government;
if Presbyteriall government be settled, and a Toleration given in this Land,
that will mar all; so that the Parliament may be pleased to take notice by
this, and observe the difference between those Churches which have no
Tolerations, as Scotland, Geneva, and the Low Countries which grant a
Toleration, the one are pure in doctrine, etc. the other makes Ministers and
people turn Arminians, Socinians, etc. 2 Answ. There Is another Reason why it
may so fall out in the Low Countries, because Presbyteriall government has not
its free course there in Synods, but it is much disturbed over it is in France,
Geneva, Scotland, whereas by their Canons and Constitutions in the Netherlands,
there should be a National Synod once in three years, they have not, nor
cannot procure one in twenty years and upwards; and whereas Provincial Synods
should be yearly, they have them in some Provinces but once in five and seven
years; besides there are other disturbances in Presbyteriall government which
hinders the free course of it in Holland, many encroachments are made upon the
rights of their Church due to them by virtue of their discipline, and
heretofore established: In a word, that Anabaptisticall and Familisticall
spirit in many, and that corrupt spirit and principles in others, with those
principles of Toleration, does much check and stop Presbyteriall government
from having its perfect work, and bringing forth its full effects. The true
Reason of so many Ministers and people turning Arminians and Socinians in the
Low Countries, was the want of Synods, which Arminius and his followers always
declined, and by flattering the Magistrates kept off for many years, in which
time so many fell, whereas if Presbyteriall government had had its course, and
a National Synod had been called, yea but a Provincial for the Arminians to
have answered in at first before it had so much spread, and they gained so many
of the Magistrates on their side, we should have found there would have been no
ground for Mr Simpson to write thus, As is clear in the Low Countries where so
many Ministers and people turned Arminians, Papists and Socinians? In a word,
till the calling of Synods, and the power of Presbyteriall government was
shaken, and some Arminians by flattery and policy wrought to put by
Ecclesiastical Assemblies, and appealed to the Magistrates, as Mr Simpson does
in this Apology from the Assembly, there was not so great a defection both of
Ministers and people unto errors, in turning Papists, Socinians, etc. 3. Though
Presbyteriall government has not its free course in the Low Countries as in
France, Geneva, Scotland, besides the Toleration there, yet there are
infinitely fewer miscarriages in censures, divisions, errors in the
Presbyteriall Churches then in the Independents, there having been more
contentions, miscarriag^s, falling into errors in one small Church of the
Independent way at Amsterdam, and that within less then one year, then in all
the Churches in some Provinces: I remember perfectly, I have read in Mr Pagetts
Arrow against Separation (a man who lived long in Holland, and much versed in
the Controversy) how he shows, that out of a few members in the Brownists
Churches more fall to Anabaptisme, etc. then out of many thousand members of
the Presbyteriall Churches amongst the Dutch, or out of all the English
Reformed Churches there. So that notwithstanding this new objection brought
against Presbyteriall government if the Parliament should please to settle it,
and that in the full power and free use of Classes and Synods, denying also a
Toleration for Independencie (unto which all erroneous and discontented spirits
upon all occasions would flow and gather) instead of opening a wide gate for
errors, divisions and many other mischiefs, they shall lay a sure foundation
for truth and peace in these Churches: And in the last words of the
Commissioners of the Church of Scotland I conclude this last Reason against a
Toleration: The Church of England which God has blessed with so much learning
and piety, by this Reformation and uniformity with other reformed Churches,
which all of us have solmnely sworn and subscribed to endeavor in our
several places and callings, should be a praise in the earth. Now did not
other occasions call me to take off my hand, besides the book it self swelled
already to such a number of sheets, I would have answered all the reasons
brought both for Tolerations in general, and particularly for the
Congregationall way, as that men are to be persuaded in matters of Religion and
not compelled, as that the Conscience is to be left free, as that the denial
of a Toleration will be a great persecution, as that this is the way to make
men hypocrites, as that Gods people are a willing people, etc. but reserving
this to another season, in the close of this Discourse I will propound these
following questions to the Apologists:

1. Whether the commanding of men by the power of Laws to do their duties, to
do the things which God requires of them, with the using of outward means to
work them to it when unwilling, be unlawful for the Magistrate, and against
Christian liberty, yea or no?

2. In your moving for a Toleration, do you desire it for you five only, with
those who are actually and will come in to be members of your Churches, or for
all the Churches who are of the same way and Communion, if for your selves and
Churches only (which would be more tolerable, a few then a great number, and
you being persons of more worth then most of the others) consider the solemn
League and Covenant is against it, That we shall without respect of persons
endeavor the extirpation of schism, and whatsoever shall be found contrary to
sound Doctrine; so that you cannot be tolerated more then others, besides if
that were granted, you being but five Ministers and making up but three or
four Churches, the Parliament would be never the nearer in giving
satisfaction, for what should become of all the rest of the Ministers and
Churches in City and Country, of Mr C. Mr B. Dr H. Mr L. Mr G. Mr W. etc. the
Parliament would be accounted partial and further off from giving content then
if they granted none at all. But if it be said you desire it for all Churches
of your constitution, I answer, express so much under your hands, and I will
then give you an answer.

3. Whether would you have a Toleration granted in the general, and
indifferently for all consciences, sects, and opinions; or only for some sort
of opinions; I suppose, being wise men you will not express your selves for a
Toleration in the first sense, but in the latter: I desire to know of you then
what limits and bounds you will set, and where the Parliament shall stop, and
what rules you will give for this, as first whether the limitation shall be a
Toleration only for all different forms of Church Government and order, so
long as they agree in Doctrine with the Church established, and are Orthodox;
but not of doctrine: Now if you hold so, then the Brownists, and the Bishops,
with those who are for the Hierarchy must be tolerated as well as you; many
Episcopal men being sounder in doctrine then some of your way, and if so, then
the simple Anabaptists, and that sort of simple Anabaptists called Dippers will
come in too, saying, that Baptism at such an age, and baptizing in rivers by
dipping, are but matters of order and time, and what if yet a new form of
Church Government, and way of external order in the Administration of Gods
Ordinances be set up by some, a way which has never yet been practiced by
any, must that be tolerated also? consider with your selves whether there may
not be a safer allowance of difference in some doctrines and opinions, then of
different governments, as also what you have expressed of the consequence of
Church Government and order, and then resolve me whether you will have all
forms of Church Government allowed, and in my Rejoinder I will apply my self
particularly to show you the danger of that, and how much hazard there is even
of the Doctrine from the Discipline and Order, if that be not right. Or
secondly, would you have a Toleration in points of Doctrine too, namely in
lesser differences, I desire to know what you will make the rule and measure of
those lesser differences? whether whatever may stand with saving grace, and is
not against the fundamentals of Doctrine and civil Government, or what else?
Now if you mean so, who shall determine and judge what may stand with saving
grace, etc. every Heretic, Socinian, etc. will plead his opinion may, and I
ask of you, whether many points and practices very bad and pernicious may not
stand with saving grace in some men, at least for a time, what say you to
Polygamie that has stood with saving grace, may that be tolerated? what think
you of many Arminian Tenets, some Lutheran opinions, Antinomian Doctrines, and
other dangerous points held by great Scholars, as by Brentius, Osiander,
Flaccius, Illyricus, may not some of these opinions stand with grace, and might
not some of these have grace, and must these now be allowed to be preached in a
Kingdom that has established Articles of Religion and a Confession of Faith?
and shall such preachers gather people into Churches? if all points may be
preached, and Churches allowed for all Doctrines that are not against
fundamentals, and that may stand with saving grace, there will be a strange
face of Protestant Reformed Churches, infinite novelties may be broached, and
great stirs caused in a Kingdom, I desire you in your Reply to state your
lesser differences, and to set down your Boundaries, what, and what not, and
accordingly I shall answer; In the mean time from these few hints, you and the
Reader may see, besides the unlawfulness, there is difficulty where to fasten
a Toleration. Now in the close of my discourse against Toleration, I take the
humble boldness to represent to the Honorable Houses of Parliament, that it is
the Magistrates duty not to suffer schisms, heresies, and other errors to
grow and increase in the Church; for as they are Magistrates they truly serve
God, whose Ministers they are, and kiss the Son, in revenging the injuries
wantonly committed against God and his truth, and in preserving the external
polity of Doctrine and manners: one of the great services Princes and
Parliament perform to Christ in reference to their great and high calling,
consists in making Laws for the observing the Worship and Government of his
House, and by Laws prohibiting all other worships and governments. And I
humbly beseech the Parliament seriously to consider the depths of Satan in this
design of a Toleration, how this is now his last plot and design, and by it
would undermine and frustrate the whole work of Reformation intended, it is his
Masterpiece for England, and for the effecting of it, he comes and moves not
in Prelates and Bishops, not in furious Anabaptists, etc. but in holy men,
excellent Preachers, moderate and fair men, not for a toleration of heresies
and gross opinions, but an allowance of a latitude to some lesser differences
with peaceablenesse, this is candidus ille Diabolus, as (...).
Luther speaks, and m^ridianus Di^bolus, as Johannes Gersonius, an^ B^
express it, coming under the merits of much suffering, and well deserving,
clad in the white garments of Innocence and Holiness: In a word, could the
devil effect a Toleration, he would think he had gained well by the
Reformation, and made a good exchange of the Hierarchy to have a Toleration
for it: I am con^ident of it upon serious thoughts and long searching into this
point of the evils and mischief of a Toleration, that if the devil had his
choice, whether the Hierarchy, Ceremonies and Lyturgie should be established
in this Kingdom, or a Toleration granted, he would choose and prefer a
Toleration before them, and would willingly part with, and give up all those
for a Toleration of diverse Sects and different Churches. To conclude, if the
way of Independencie be of God, and the Apologists can make that good, let it
be established by the Parliament, and let us all come to that; if it be not, why
then should it be tolerated? and why did the Apologists move for a Toleration
before that ever it came to be debated and argued in the Assembly. And now for
a conclusion and closing up this Answer to the Apologeticall Narration, I might
as some Authors do in answering Books gather together, and draw up into one
all the maine particulars of the Apology animadverted upon, and put them under
certain heads, and rank them in their several forms, and so present a
Synopsis of them to both Houses and the Reader, whereby they might have all in
their eye at once, see much in a little: As 1. all the expressions of the high
praises of themselves and their own party scattered up and down in the
Apology. 2. The Aspersions, Depressions, Insinuations both open and more
secret of the Reformed Churches, and of the Assembly. 3. The crossings and
interfearings of some passages in the book with others. 4. The plain and
manifest untruths expressed in many pages. 5. All the Reservations and
Concealments of matters both of opinions and practices in the Church Way. 6.
The double doubtful expressions both in words and matter. 7. The mistating of
the questions in difference both on their own side, and the Presbyterians,
stating their own differences with the lowest, and the Reformed Churches at
the highest. 8. The general expressions without coming down to (...) (...)
which being deducted and extracted from the Ap^ie, what remain^ behind (saving
some few argumen^s hinted) but a just testimo^ of the Parliament and Assembly,
with a (...) character of the people and multitude, and a brand upon the old
separation, which pa^* also of the Parliament, Assembly; People and Separation
(...) brought in, both the praise of (...), and the dispraise of the other, in
reference to the magnifying and commending the more the (...) and patience,
etc. of the Apologists, but I spare; the wise Reader may observe the passages,
and I have animadverted upon them all along in my Answer. I could have* made
one part of my Answer to this Apology (...) strange (though ^ue) paraphrase
upon it* and andin^ (...) have (...) the Narration of themselves for the most
part contrary: But I shall reserve that, with some other things I have yet to
say i^ matter of fact, till I put out my Rejoinder to their Reply: In (...)
mean (...) I shall conclude this Antapologie with ^rning my (...) by
dissolving your Churches, and coming in to us, and that you may repent and
recall this Apology, I will represent to you the greatness of your sin and
folly in making the Apology, and it stands in these particulars: 1. It was an
unseasonable disorderly work for the time and way of it. 2. It Is a Narration
full of mental Reservations, high praises of your selves, but censuring and
scandalizing the Reformed Churches of Christ. 3. There are many untruths in it,
and that not only where you make naked* relations o^ things, but where you make
professions before God and the world; yea, ^here you make serious Invocations
of God to a^est them, and men also, and all this is done publicly by printing,
and deliberately, and upon a design to take the more with the people, and to
make way the better for a ^oleration. 4. There is a breach of the solemn
Covenant subscribed by you, especially in that clause of the first branch, we
shall endeavor to bring the Churches of God in the three Kingdoms to the
nearest Conjunction and Uniformitie in Relegion, Confission of Faith, and Form
of Church Government, in stead of which before ever you ^o much as tried and
endeavored it, by debating* those matters of difference in the Assembly,
whereby it might be brought to an Uniformitie; you endeavor by this Apology a
Toleration, and sue for an exemption of Conjunction and Uniformitie in Church*
Government, which is strange you should desire, especially having cove^anted to
the contrary, which breach of covenant is aggravated also, that you do not
only do it your selves, but you labor to bring the Houses into it by moving
them to grant you a Toleration: Now if a simple and single untruth need
repentance, what repent^nce ought there to be for such a compounded aggravated
evil as yours ^s: And as I have represented it to your own consciences that
you may smite upon the thigh, so I turn you over to your Churches, whereof you
are Ministers, that they deal with you for your great sin, and either bring
you to Con^ion and Repentance, or else proceed to censure, did I know where
your Churches dwelt and where they meet, I might then come and complain to them
of your great sin, but in stead of coming, I send them this Answer, and hereby
give them notice, and (...) ready to satisfy any that shall desire further
proof, and in stead of declaring by letters the offense, I do by printing
declare it, and require of the Churches, especially Mr Sympsons Church, as they
will not be guilty of suffering known sin in the Church, as they would not
suffer sin to lie upon a brother, and as they would vindicate the glory and
honor of Christ, that they call Mr Sympson to an account and admonish him, and
bring him to public repentance for his public sin, or else upon impenitencie
and obstinacy that they cast him out of the Church; and I believe the sin he
is charged with will fall under the subject of that dreadful sentence
according to what sins your selves judge that sentence is to be put in
execution for, Apol. page 9. But if Mr Sympsons Church neglect, and will not
question this sin, then I desire the rest of the Churches of that Communion to
send to the Churches of the Apologists, and to charge them with their
countenancing of sin, and if the Churches will still bear and wink at sin, and
continue impenitent, that then the rest of the Churches, namely, Mr Lockiers,
Mr Carters, Dr Holmes, etc. do pronounce the heavy sentence of Non-communion
against the Apologists Churches, and further to declare and protest this with
the causes thereof to all other Churches of Christ, that they may do the like,
to send also to New England, and give notice to all the Churches of the
Separation, that they may Non-communion the Apologists Churches. But if the
particular Churches of the Apologists, and all the Churches of their own
Communion will all hold to favor sin, neither question the Apologists, nor
their Churches, then we shall have a clear instance of the partiality of
those Churches, and of their allowing of sin among themselves, and of the
insu^ticiencie of those Remedies of Submission, Non-Communion, Declaration and
Protestation.

FINIS.

