THE PARLIAMENTS RESOLUTION To the Citizens of London, concerning His Majesty's
proceedings.

Wherein they declare their full will and pleasure to unite themselves with the
Citizens of London, and to enter into a solemn Oath with God to defend the
Truth against the popish Army in this Kingdom.

Likewise joyful News from Winchester, being the truest Relation of the great
battle fought upon Thursday last by a great part of the Kings army, against the
said city and how by the assistance of Sir Will. Balfourd with 200 horse, the
Citisens obtained the victory, taking 500 horse, 7. pieces of ordnance, 25.
commanders, and 700. common soldiers, with loss of 50. men

Declaring also, how the Earl of Essex has sent Propositions to the Kings
Majesty for an Accommodation of peace.

Together with his Majesty's answer thereunto.

ORdered by the Lords and Commons assembled in parliment, that this Resolution
be forthwith printed and published, and read in all Churches and Chapels
within the Kingdom of England and Dominion of Wales, by the parsons, Vicars,
Cnrates of the same.

Io. Brown Cler. Parl,

December 17.

London, printed for Richard West. 1642.

THE RESOLVTION OF THE LORDS and COMMONS Assembled in PARLIAMENT Concerning
their uniting themselves with the well affected party of the City of London,
for the preservation of the Peace thereof, and the maintenance of Gods true
RELIGION.
WE the Lords and Commons in this present Parliament assembled, do in the
presence of Almighty God, for the satisfaction of our own Consciences, and
discharge of that great trust which lies upon us make this declaration to you.

And for the avoiding of blood, We directed the directed the Earl of Essex
Lord General, by him self or others in some safe and honorable way, to cause
to be delivered an humble Petition, wherein we do desire nothing from His
Majesty but that he would return in peace to His Parliament: And by their
faithful Counsel and advice compose the distempers and confusions abounding
in his Kingdoms, as he is bound to do, we therein professing in the sight of
Almighty God, which is the strongest obligation and assurance that any
Christian, and the most solemn public Faith which any such State, as a
Parliament can give, that we would receive him with all Honor, yield Him all
true obedience and subjection, and faithfully endeavor to defend his Person
and Estate from all danger, and to the uttermost of our power to establish to
him and to his people all the blessings of a glorious and happy Reign, as it
is more largely expressed in that Petition.

For the Delivery of which Petition, His Excellency has twice sent unto the
King, humbly desiring a safe conduct for those who should be employed therein,
but His Mtjesty refused to give any such safe Conduct, or to receive this
humble and dutiful Petition, by any address of the Earl of Essex, saying,
that if Justice had been done, the Gentleman which brought the second Message,
could not expect his Liberty.

By all which, and many other Evidences and Inducements, we are fully convinced
in our judgments and Belief, that the Kings Councels and Resolutions are so
eng^ged to the Popish party for the suppression and extirpation of the true
Religion, that all hopes of peace and protection are excluded, and that it is
fully intended to give satisfaction to the papists by alteration of Religion,
and to the Cavaleers and to the Cavaleers and other Soldiers, by exposing the
wealth of the good Subjects especially of this City of London, to be sacked
plundered and spoiled by them.

Also His Majesty being now grown stronger, and able as he conceives to make
good his own ends by Arms, his confidence in the papists does more clearly
appear, persons imprisond for priests and Jesuits have bin released out of the
Jail of Lancaster, professed papists have bin invited to rise and take up Arms.

We are also credibly informed, that diverse Jesuits in foreign parts, makes
great collection of money for the furthering of his Maj. designs, here against
the Parliament, And that great means are made to take up the differences
betwixt some Princes of the Roman Religion, that so they might unite their
strength for the extirpation of the Protestant Religion, wherein principally
this Kingdom and the Kingdom of Scotland are concerned, as making the
greatest body of the Reformed Religion in Christendom, and best able to defend
themselves, and succor other Churches. For which Reasons, we are resolved to
enter into a solemn Oath and Covenant with God, to give up our selves and
fortunes in his hands, and that we will to the uttermost of our power and
judgment maintain his Truth, and conform our selves to his will. That we will
defend this cause with the hazard of our lives against the Kings Army, and
against all that joins* with them in prosecution of this wicked design,
according to the form to be agreed upon by both Houses of Parl. to be
subscribed by our hands* And that we will for the same ends associate our
selves, and unite with all the well affected in the City of London, and other
parts of his Majesty's Dominions.

We do also expect our Brethren of Scotland, according to the Act of
Pacification, whereby the two Kingdoms are mutually bound to suppress all
debates and differences to the disturbance of the public Peace, That they
will help and assist us in defense of this cause, which if the Popish party
prevail, must needs either involve them in that alteration of Religion which
will be made here, or engage them in a War against this Kingdom, to defend
their own Religion and Liberty: And we doubt not but the God of Truth, and the
great Protector of his people, will assist and enable us in this our just
defense, to restrain the fury and malice of those that s^ek our Ruin, and to
procure end establish the safety of Religion, and fruition of our Laws and
Liberties in this, and all other his Majesty's Dominions; Which we do here
again profess before the ever-living God to be the chief end of all our
Counsels and Resolutions, without any intention or desire to hurt or iniure his
Majesty, either in his Person or just Power.

From Winchester it is signified by Letters to the house of Commons, that upon
Thursday last a great part of his Maj. Army commanded by the L. Herbert and
Digby, assaulted the aforesaid City, but the Townsmen having notice of their
coming, set their men in battle array, mounting their Ordnance, and placing
two pieces at each gats North, West, East and South, and when the enemy were
within half a mile of the City, they discharged two warning pieces at them, but
yet they adventured up to the Gates, and gave a desperate charge, placing their
Ordnance against the same, thinking to have beat them open by force; but the
bullets came so fast amongst them out of the city, that they soon retreated
from the Gates, and began to shoot very furiously on the west side of the city,
but before this bloody Skirmish was ended, Col. Hurrey and Sir VVil. Balfourd
came in with their Troops of Horse, and with most noble and discreet courage
fell on, fighting for the space of five hours, and at last won the victory,
taking about 500, horse, 7. pieces of Ordnance, 25. Commanders, and 700. common
sodliers, with the loss of 50. men: So great a victory with so little loss,
was Heaven pleased to confer on our Party: for which, due thanks be tendered to
the giver of all Conquests in the field.

ORdered by the Lords and Commons assembled in Parliament, that this
Declaration shall be forthwith printed and published, and read in all Churches
and Chapels within the Kingdom of England and Dominion of Wales, by the
Parsons, Vicars, or Curates of the same.

Jo. Brown Cler. parl.
Hen, Elsyng, Cler. parl. D. Com,


