THE Socinian Creed: OR, A Brief Account Of the Professed Tenants and Doctrines
OF THE Foreign and English Socinians.

Wherein is showed The Tendency of them TO Irreligion and Atheism. With Proper
Antidotes against them.

By JOHN EDWARDS, B. D. sometime Fellow of St. John's College in Cambridge.

2 Timothy iii. 9. They shall proceed no further: for their folly shall be
manifest unto all men.

LONDON, Printed for J. Robinson at the Golden-Lion, and J. Wyat at the Rose in
St. Paul's Churchyard, 1697.

TO THE Right Reverend Father in God EDWARD, Lord Bishop of Worcester.
MY LORD,
I Presumed to dedicate my former Writings to two Eminent Persons of your High
Order in the Church: and now this present Undertaking comes to find shelter
under your Lordships Patronage. Which I despair not of because you have let the
world sufficiently know how greatly you disapprove of the Sentiments of those
Men whose Character is offered in the following Treatise. It was observed that
even in your Early Years you chose to encounter the Pontifician and Racovian
Impostors; not unlike Hercules; that in his very Minority grappled with
Serpents and Monsters. Crellius felt the Strength of your Arm, and has laid a
Baffled and Prostrate Foe ever since, for there never yet appeared any thing
that had the face of an Answer to your Book.

And lately, when Socinus's followers began to take heart again, and to lift up
their bruised heads, your Lordship successfully struck at them, and publicly
vindicated the Mysteries of the Christian Faith from the bold and blasphemous
insults of these persons. In your former Attempts you were wont to exceed
Others, but now you outvied your self; such were the extraordinary Acuteness
and Sagacity of your Thoughts on this subject, such the inimitable Pregnancy of
your Reasons, such the matchless Weight and Nervousness of your Arguments, such
your close application of Scripture every where. Which the Adversaries were
sensible of, and accordingly (that they might not be thought to be Idle)
advanced some Feeble Considerations against your Lordship's Excellent
Discourse. Here, to support their Tattered Cause, they made a stir with
trifling sallies and excursions, with faint shows of Criticism, with Pedantick
flourishes of Wit, with mean and languid Efforts of Seeming Logic. But chiefly
these Socinian Sharpers endeavored to run down the Truth by their
unparalleled Confidence, and by treating your Lordship, as well as it, with
disrespect and disdain.

But so it is, they have showed themselves Rude to their immortal shame. And
yet at the same time, by attempting to Lessen your Worth and Deserved Fame they
have inhansed them; as all Envious and Malicious Persons do when they detract
from those of Great Merit. All the Learned World unanimously vote your Lordship
to be the Chief of this number: even those who disagree in all other things,
agree in your Lordships Praises. For without the least Show of Adulation it may
be most truly said, that your Name is now not so much the Name of a Person or
Family, as it is the Name of Profound Learning and Solid Religion.

But I shall offend against your Lordship's Modesty, and call forth Blushes
from those Reverend Cheeks, which have so boldly looked your Adversaries in the
face, if I proceed any further thus; wherefore I am forced here to a Period.
Only let me be permitted to add my Hearty Wishes and Prayers, viz. That the
Allmighty would vouchsafe to bless Your Lordship with Long Life, Health, and
Vigor, to accomplish those Great Things which You have designed against the
Church's Common Foes, Papists and Socinians; that You may be a Terror and
Scourge to Rome and Racovia; that You may give an effectual check to the Sly
pretenses of Deists, that You may bridle the Insolence of Atheists, and be
successful in mortifying all such Sworn Enemies of the Christian Faith and
Practice. So prays

Your Lordships most Humble and entire Servant and Honourer John Edwards.

THE PREFACE.
SOME Eminent Persons of our Church having been pleased to honor me with their
Approbation of what I have lately writ against the Socinians in defense of the
Orthodox Faith, I presume once more to assert and vindicate this Noble Cause.
And I am further animated and encouraged to such an Undertaking from what I
meet with in the Learned Bishop of Worcester 's Preface to his Discourse
concerning Christ's Satisfaction lately reprinted, where he directly charges
the Socinians with the promoting of Deism, and promises to make good his Charge
against them in a Discourse. And in the close of his Preface he tells us that
he will let the world know that he is no stranger to the Pamphlets of the
Modern Racovians. Thus we see the Cause does not die: nor indeed can it, when
so Able a Person is willing to uphold it, and has engaged himself to do it;
one whose Name is as terrible to the Socinians as that of Duke D'Alva
heretofore to the Dutch. Till this Great Champion shows himself anew, I will
make bold to enter the Lists, and to attack our Common Foe, and thereby prepare
the way for the Conquests of so Renowned a Pen.

But let me declare this, and that with the greatest sincerity imaginable, that
it is not from any pleasure I take in contending with any Party of Men, or from
a desire to provoke and exasperate them (for I bear a hearty Charity and Good
Will to all mankind, and especially I love and honor all Sincere and Good Men,
all that have the impressions of a Christian Spirit upon them) nor is it from
any other undue Principle, but wholly from a sense of my Duty, and that alone,
that I appear again in this Cause.

At first I purposely checked my self, and forbore to produce all those
Arguments and Proofs whereby I might have evinced the Inclinableness of the
Socinians to Irreligion and a spirit of Infidelity. And this I did for several
Reasons, partly to suit my self to the then present Juncture, partly to let the
world see that I was not Hasty and Forward in censuring any sort of persons,
and partly to allow my self time to enquire further into the matter, both to
satisfy my self and others. Because what I then suggested, was designed to be
in the way of an Essay or Introduction, I only offered some few Heads of my
Charge against them: but now I intend to give the Reader a Farther Account of
some of them; and likewise to superadd Several Articles to the former Charge
and Indictment. I will set before him Other Different-Demonstrations of that
Atheistick Tang, that Irreligious Genius which I taxed them with. So then, I
believe, they will have little occasion to say that Vindication of the
Reasonableness of Christianity, p. 3.
I mollify that in a Treatise, which was much more Harsh when preached in a
Sermon. Though I must profess to the world that I loath all Harshness and
Severity which are inconsistent with the Candor and Meekness of a Christian,
and which are not absolutely requisite for the vindicating of the indispensable
Truths of Religion.

Our Racovians may remember that they lately presented the world with a Paper
entitled. The Trinitarian Scheme of Religion: and now I hope they will not be
offended (I am sure they ought not) when I publish the Anti-Trinitarian Scheme
of Religion (if I may so call it,) or rather (to speak plainly and impartially)
of their Irreligious Opinions and Placits. They had no Credible Authors to
vouch their Scheme, but filled it up with what they thought fit. But I have
taken another course, and have all along annexed the Particular Authors whose
Assertions I mention, and I have set down the particular places in their
Writings. I have been very exact and faithful in rehearsing their words, that I
might neither wrong them nor the Truth. And in order to this I have perused the
Authors themselves, and have taken nothing on trust. Nor have I gathered their
Opinions from some few or dubious expressions in their Writings, or from some
Scraps and Sentences, but from the plain Tenor and Scope of what they write.
So that the Reader may absolutely depend upon what I offer to him concerning
their Sentiments. All the Socinian Writings (till some few of late) being in
Latin, the Learned can consult the places which I have cited when they please,
and bear witness to my faithfulness in alleging them. But I knew it would be
of no use to the mere English Reader to transcribe the quotations in that
Language: wherefore I chose rather to give him them in his own Tongue.

And besides, it is to be supposed that the Learned are not unacquainted with
these things: but because Others, who are the greatest numbers, are in great
measure ignorant of them, I thought it requisite to publish them to the world,
that it may be known what are the Wild and extravagant Notions which are wafted
over to us from Racovia. If I had not read their Books, I might peradventure
have entertained a more favorable opinion of them than I now have, says the
Preface to his Discourse concerning Christ's Satisfaction.
Excellent Bishop before mentioned. And so without doubt many others would have
entertained a tolerable opinion of these Gentlemen if they had not perused
their Writings, and found what a numerous train of Unsound Propositions are
there upheld, and if they had not observed that pernicious tendency and drift
of them. People hear Socinianism much talked of of late: and one or two of the
most Vulgar Points of it are partly known to them, and they are solicited
perhaps to give their assent to them. But if they had a discovery of all the
rest of their Opinions, it is probable they would be moved by them to
disapprove of those others. Most men may think perhaps that the Socinians fail
only in their disbelief of the Trinity, and particularly their disowning the
Deity of the Son of God, but that as to other Principles of Christianity they
believe and profess the same Divine Truths which are embraced by the generality
of Christians.

For as in the late Reign Popery was misrepresented, all its Doctrines were
dressed up in a very specious and plausible garb by the Bishops of Meaux and
Condom, and other dexterous Penmen, in so much that it did not seem to be what
it was said to be before, (for they knew that Popery truly represented would
never go down with us; therefore when the Roman Catholics had hopes of gaining
this Nation once again to their Church, it was thought requisite to set their
Religion before us in a wrong posture:) so has it fared lately with
Socinianism, the English Racovians have given us such a Character of it that it
appears to be quite different from what it was, yea and what it really is: they
have given it such a gloss and varnish that many are thence persuaded to have a
good opinion of it: for they were sensible that if it were set forth and known
in its true nature, few Wise and Considerate persons would embrace it:
therefore they found it necessary to give us a False Account of it, to render
it (if possible) plausible and acceptable. But if we narrowly look into it, we
shall find it to be another thing than it is pretended to be: we shall see that
it is a Dreadful Compound of Errors and Heterodoxies, a Detestable Farce of
Exploded Heresies, a Horrid Perverting of the Christian Faith, and the Nurse of
Irreligion and Profaneness. To be plainer yet, he that has any close thoughts
and remarks of things at this day must needs be sensible that the great
Indifferency and Skepticism which reign among us have opened a door to
Socinianism, which is a sure Project for Deism, and this for Atheism. For it is
apparent that the Atheists of our times politickly make use of this Engine to
compass their designs, that is, to banish the Deity and Religion out of the
world, and to introduce universal Licentiousness, Immorality and Debauchery. I
appeal to any Thoughtful, Serious and Observing Man whether this be not a true
and right View of our present affairs with relation to the matter in hand.

I apprehended therefore it would be good service to my Countrymen to
represent this Monster to them in its true and genuine Colors, in its native
and proper features; which will certainly acquaint them with its Deformity, and
(as the effect of that) render it Loathsome and Abominable, as it ought to be
to all that are concerned for Religion. This is the design of the following
Discourse, and the Holy and Blessed Trinity (whose Cause I defend) knows that
herein I intend not the aspersing of any sort of men, I aim not at the exposing
of or reflecting upon any Party: but my whole business is to assert and
vindicate the Truth which has been owned by the Catholic Church in all ages
of Christianity, and to obviate the growing Evil and Mischief of Socinianism.
In undertaking of this, I will suggest nothing out of heat and passion: I will
labor to refute, not to reproach our Adversaries: I will endeavor to approve
my self an Advocate for Truth without being an Enemy to Civility and Candor.
But yet I shall by the Divine Aid (which most heartily I implore, and beg the
Reader to join his earnest Devotions with mine) use that Freedom and Plainness
which become the Truth and an Unprejudiced Asserter of it. My faults in my
former book, it seems, were Wit and Eloquence, if he who wrote the P. 33:
Vindication of the late Treatise concerning the Reasonableness of Christianity
be a Judge of either. Now, I hope, I have mended these faults, or changed them
for two others, viz. Argument and Downright Language, which yet will be as
much disliked by that Gentleman and his Partisans. However, I will venture it,
and perhaps this Free and Open dealing may have some good effect even upon the
minds of our Adversaries, at least on some of those that are in part tinctured
with their Opinions: especially when they shall see that it is not my intention
to represent the Disciples of Socinus worse than they are (which as to some
things can hardly be done) but to give an Impartial Account of them in such
Particulars wherein it is plain and evident that they swerve from the Truth,
and profess such doctrines as have a direct tendency to Irreligion and Impiety.

Nor do I comprehend all Socinianized persons in this Character: I entertain
some hope that there are some Innocent and Well-meaning people among them, who
being inveigled by the plausible pretenses of their Leaders have taken up some
of their Notions, but are ready, upon a discovery of the Falsehood and
Perniciousness of them, to lay them down, and wholly to abandon them. Those
that are of this sober disposition, will, I question not, find this Present
Undertaking beneficial to them; and will be so far from censuring them, that
they will thankfully acknowledge my setting them Right in Persuasions of so
great moment and importance, such as are either of the Foundation of Religion,
or have a near alliance to it, or have a necessary influence on our Christian
Practice.

In short, when Principles and Truths of the Highest Nature are struck at by
bold Assailants, when the Main Doctrines of Religion are depraved and
perverted, and when Christianity it self is endangered, shall we sit still, and
not be concerned? * If these foundations be destroyed, if these Forts, these
Bulwarks, these Strongholds (as some render the word) be demolished, what can
the righteous do? if these Fundamental Principles be overthrown, what a
wretched state will Religion and the Professors of it be reduced to? Which is
the very thing which we may justly fear at this time, when we behold such a
great and signal Defection from the Truths of Christianity, from the Faith of
the Gospel, even in the Christian World. How few are there at this day that can
endure sound doctrine? how many are there that call themselves Protestants, and
yet grow weary of those Main Articles of Religion which have been owned ever
since the Reformation, and have been defended and vindicated by the Pens of the
Religious Psalm. 11. 3.
and Learned? And shall we silently and tamely permit this? No certainly, That
Charity which bears all things, endures all things, cannot suffer this. Yea,
it is the highest Charity in such a dangerous juncture to acquaint persons with
the true State of affairs, to discover the Methods and Artifices of Seducers,
to lay open before the world their Cheats and Delusions, and to show what
Errors they substitute in the place of Truth. And this is that which is
designed in my present Performance; wherein I have all along discovered the
Poison of our Adversaries Doctrines in the first place, and then I have been
careful to administer an Antidote.

ERRATA.
PAge 6. line 1. before is insert it, p. 29. l. penult. for to the first of r.
first to, p. 35. l. 10. place before Episcopius. p. 95. l. 13. f. of r. or. p.
103. l. 7. r. needs. p. 108. l. 13. r. deletion. p. 123. l. 14. r. strange. p.
125. l. 3. before it insert in. p. 126. l. 6. before And begin the parenthesis.
p. 183. l. 5. f. professed r. pretended. p. 184. l. 24. f. this r. that. p.
197. l. 16. after as insert to. p. 214. l. 13. r. Looks. p. 243. l. 5. after it
make).

THE TENDENCY OF THE Socinian Doctrines TO Irreligion and Atheism.
CHAP. I.
There is an obligation on the Author to give the World an account of the
Irreligious Sentiments of the Socinians. Their Abusing of the Holy Scriptures
is a proof of their Profane genius. They hold there are Mistakes and Errors in
the Bible as to lesser matters. They disparage the Books of Proverbs and
Ecclesiastes, the Epistle to the Hebrews, and the Writings of St. John. They
are wild and extravagant (though very crafty and subtle) in their interpreting
and expounding of Scripture. A particular instance of it in their
interpretation of I John 1, 2. Other instances of their false and perverse
dealing. Their notion of a Double Ascension of Christ confuted, and the Texts
which they allege for it explained. Their vilisying, wresting and perverting
of Scripture are tokens of their Irreligion.

I Am obliged to let the World see that I did not reproach and injure the
Socinians when I laid to their charge the favoring and promoting of Atheism,
and consequently that what I said of them was not (as they have suggested)
hastily and rashly spoken, or written without due premeditation: And thence it
will appear that I am not to be represented as a Censorious or Uncharitable
person, which are imputations which I always abhorred, and have carefully
labored to avoid.

Thus then I make good what I said, Some of this sort of men cannot well be
thought to have any true and right Sense of God and Religion, especially the
Christian, because they have in their Public Writings renounced some of the
most Considerable things relating to Doctrine, Worship, Discipline, and
Practice in the Church of Christ. These are the four General Heads of my
following Discourse.

I begin with the First. As to the Doctrinal part of Religion, these men are
very faulty, and upon examination will be found to be favorers of very
Irreligious and Profane Opinions. And here I will reduce what I have to say
unto these five Particulars, viz. Their Notions concerning the Scriptures,
concerning God, concerning the First Man, concerning the Future State, and
concerning Christianity it self.

First, It is no mean proof of their Profane genius that they delight to
vilify and abuse the Holy Scriptures. As to some lesser matters, and such as
are of small moment, the Bible has Repugnancies and Mistakes, says the Great
Socin. de Author. S. Script. cap. 1.
Founder of Socinianism, i. e. He from whom it takes its denomination. And
herein he is followed by De Vera Relig. l. 5. c. 5.
Volkelius, another Great and Admired Writer among those of the Racovian
persuasion. Smalcius grants Cat. Racov. de Scriptura cap. 1.
some depravation in Scripture as to things of no great moment. Institut.
Theolog. lib. 4.
Episcopius, (who is owned to be a Socinian by the A brief History of the
Unitarians.
Party themselves) tells us that the Penmen of the Scriptures were left to
their own humane frailty in delivering those things which appertain to
circumstances of Fact, as time and place, and the like. And in the same place
he attributes these Mistakes and Errors in the Bible to the want of Knowledge,
or weakness of Memory in the Writers. Where then is their Infallibility, which
has been owned by all Christian Churches? Or, can they be Infallible, and yet
Err? What is the difference between these Writers and others but this, that
they were Immediately Inspired by the Holy Ghost, and consequently are not
liable in the least to Mistakes and Misapprehensions? Those then that deny this
must needs deny the Writers of the Holy Scripture to have been Inspired, and to
have been Infallible, yea they must say that they were (like other men) faulty
and erroneous in their Writings. This, you will say (and that justly) is an Ill
Beginning, here is a Bad specimen of their Sentiments concerning the Doctrinal
part of Religion, of which our Right Conceptions concerning the Holy Scriptures
is a considerable Branch, not to say Root.

But this is but mean and inconsiderable in respect of what they further hold
and maintain. For they not only find fault with some passages here and there,
but they question the Authority of whole Books, and even vilify the Old
Testament it self. What think you of those words of the Socin. Epist. 2. ad
Dudith.
Ringleader of the Party? The Precepts of the Old Testament are for the most
part such, that it is hard to believe that they proceed from God, they are
either so Light, or Vain, or Superstitious, or even Foolish, and Ridiculous;
and, in sum, they seem not to be worthy of God. Is this the Language of one
that has a due respect and reverence for the Scriptures? And in an Explicat.
5. Mat. 4^.
other place you will find him particularly disparaging the Book of the
Proverbs of Solomon.

And Ostorodus in Institut. cap. 30.
one of his Friends declares, that when Solomon in his Proverbs speaks any
thing concerning Manners, if it be not expressly spoken, that is, either
commanded or forbid by Moses in the Law, is no more obligatory than the wise
advice and doctrine of any other man. What is this but bringing down this
Inspit'd Author to the same level with Plato and Seneca, or any other honest
Moralist? But would you know what is the true reason of their slighting and
undervaluing this Royal Penman who dictated all by an Infallible Spirit? It is
this without doubt, because there is in that Book so Remarkable a Confirmation
of the doctrine of Christ's Divinity, chap. 8. v. 22. to 32. where any
unprejudiced man cannot but see that by Wisdom is meant the Son of God Christ
Jesus, whose Eternal Being and Godhead are there in plain terms expressed. I
might observe how an Smalc. cont. Frantz.
other Celebrated Racovian disparages those Writings of Solomon which bear the
Title of Ecclesiastes, but I shall have occasion to mention this more
particularly afterward.

Then for the New Testament, we are rightly told by an Excellent Pen that
Bishop Stillingfleet's Pref. to the Discourse of Christ's Satisfaction.
our Unitarians undermine the Authority of these Books, and so introduce Deism
amongst us. There are some of these Writings either slily carp'd at, or more
positively called in question by them. The Subtilty of Enjedinus (an Overseer
of the Socinian Churches in Transylvania) is to be taken notice of in his
Explication of the Epistle to the Hebrews, who though he says he has an
esteem for this Book, and will not detract from the Authority of it, yet thus
speaks, It is to be known that this Epistle is very much suspected among the
most, nor has it obtained the same repute and dignity with the other Writings
of the New Testament. And then he assigns his Reasons why he questions the
Authority of this Epistle: one whereof is this, The things which this Author
writes concerning the Tabernacle, chap. 9. v. 1. may be confuted out of the Old
Testament. An other is, that he seems to use foolish Arguings, and to assert
some things which are manifestly false. And lastly, this Epistle seems to
favor certain Heretical and Erroneous Opinions. All this, and much more he
rehearses in contempt of the Divine Authority of this Epistle, and says not
one syllable to show his dislike of it, or to let the World see how these
Cavils may be confuted. The true reason is because this part of St. Paul's
Writings is such an Eminent and Illustrious Attestation of the Divinity of our
Savior, and of his making Satisfaction unto God the Father by the offering of
himself a Sacrifice upon the Cross for us.

Again, the Writings of St. John the Evangelist and Apostle have been struck
out of the Canon of Scripture by these men. It is the frank acknowledgment of
our New English Unitarians (as may be seen in one of their Considerations on
the Explications of the Doctrine of the Trinity, p. 49, 50.
late Prints) that the Ancient Unitarians generally disregarded the Gospel and
Epistles which are ascribed to this Author, and held that they were writ by
Cerinthus an Heretic in those days. But this must be said, they pitched upon a
very unlikely man to be the Author of those Writings; for this Cerinthus (as
Irenaeus, Eusebius, and others of the most Credible Writers of the Church
inform us) was the Chief Man in those days that opposed the Divinity of Christ,
and held him to be a Mere Man, whereupon St. John drew his Pen against him. Can
we think then that the Gospel of St. John was writ against Cerinthus, and yet
that Cerinthus writ it? Besides, it is easily proved that both the Gospel and
the First Epistle which bear this Apostle's name were universally held to be
Canonical Scripture, and written by him, as Eccles. Hist. l. 3. c. 24. lib. 5.
cap. 8.
Eusebius testifies: nay, a professed Sandius de Script. Eccles.
Unitarian Writer firmly vouches this. Wherefore it is probable that the only
reason why any of the Old Unitarians disallowed of St. John's Writings was
because there are such passages as these in them, In the beginning was the
Word, and the Word was with God, and the Word was God. The same was in the
beginning with God. All things were made by him, and without him was not any
thing made that was made. The Word was made flesh, and dwelt among us, and we
beheld his glory, the glory as of the only begotten of the Father. I and my
Father are one. He that has seen me, has seen the Father. I am in the Father,
and the Father in me. Whosoever denies the Son, the same has not the Father.
There are three that bear record in Heaven, the Father, the Word, and the Holy
Ghost, and these three are one. In brief, because these Writings assert the
Holy Trinity, and more especially the Divinity of Christ, thence they are
resolved to defame the authority of them: thence our very Considerations on the
Explications, etc. p. 49.
Modern Unitarians publicly declare that St. John makes use of certain terms
and phrases (as life, light, fullness, only begotten, etc.) by chance; and by
other crafty insinuations they would diminish the esteem of those Writings.

Nay, they endeavor to blast the Credit of All the Canonical Books, by telling
us that some have been modelling the Common Bibles far above twelve hundred
years. So says the Author of the Considerations on the Explications of the
Doctrine of the Trinity, and he speaks in the name of all the rest. Thus they
would make the World believe that the Whole Sacred Volume is corrupted, and
thereby our Religion and Faith are rendered Uncertain and Dubious, which is the
thing aimed at.

Moreover, their vilifying and abusing of the Holy Scripture are seen in their
Wild Interpretations of it, merely to evade plain Texts which are against them,
and to establish their own fond Principles. I deny not that some of them have
very laudable descants on several passages of the Bible. Faustus Socinus has
excellent Discourses and Commentaries on sundry Texts; he treats excellently of
the Authority of the Scriptures, and very admirably and judiciously of the
Truth of Christianity. But at other times he generally dodges and higgles, and
uses quirks and subterfuges to support his Cause. So true is that of our
Learned Stilling fleet, Preface to the Discourse of Christ's Satisfaction.
F. Socinus seeing the bent of the Scripture so much against him, sets himself
to the finding out ways to avoid the force of them. It is granted likewise that
some of Socinus's followers are very useful in their Expositions of the New
Testament. They settle the sense and scope of the words, and furnish the Reader
with several Criticisms of good use. He that denies this is to be suspected of
causeless Prejudice and ill will against them. But then, it must be said that
they too often pervert the native sense of the words, and force the Texts to
speak what they please: and generally the Arguments they offer are weak and
unmanly, groundless and precarious: but they have a way of shoving them on with
some craft and subtilty. They are all very dexterous at this, but Enjedinus,
Crellius, and Slichtingius's Comments on Texts are of this sort especially. It
would create wonder sometimes to see their Elaborate Sophistry in finding out
Trajections and Transpositions in several places, in altering the genuine and
obvious sense of Texts, in their subtle ways of perverting and wresting of
some clear passages of the Bible. It must be said they have exercised the
height of their Wit and Parts in this performance. But as it was said of old of
the Dice-player, the better he was at the Game, the worse he was; so here it is
most true, the more these men excel in this way of Cheating and Imposing upon
mankind, the more is their Badness discovered, and the greater is their Crime.

And our Domestic Socinians agree with the Foreigners in this, for they use
the same little Arts and Tricks to deprave the sense of Holy Writ, and to
render it serviceable for their turn. If I should instance only in their
strange and unaccountable interpreting of the first verses of the first Chapter
of St. John's Gospel, that would be sufficient to let us see what a marvelous
talent they have of misinterpreting and wresting the Holy Book. In the
beginning, say An Accurate Examination of the Principal Texts alleged for
Christ's Divinity, p. 24, 25, 26.
they, is as much as in the beginning of the Gospel, or the Gospel-state,
though there is not the least color for any such Gloss from the whole Context,
and though all Expositors both Ancient and Modern have understood it otherwise.
The Word was with God, i. e. when Christ ascended into Heaven, viz. some time
before his Public Ministry, though there is no foundation for any such
surmise, as I shall immediately show. And the Word was God, or a God, (for so
these nice Critics will have us read it, though it is well known to the
Learned that the omission of the Article is not argumentative) i. e. he was
appointed to be a kind of God, or God's Representative, as Magistrates are
called Gods. All things were made by him, i. e. all things were not made by
him, but only reformed and renewed. The world was made by him, i. e. it was new
modeled: or, the Spiritual World, the World of the Messiah was made by him.

From these and such like Conceits, which their Writings abound with, you may
discern the Air and Genius of these Men: you cannot but take notice that they
love to play upon words and phrases, they delight in coining sophistical
Evasions, they study artifice and shifts. By which they show themselves to be
no Spurious offspring, but the true Sons of Arius, who (as the Ecclesiastical
Historian acquaints us) (...). Socrat. hist. l. 1. c. 3.
was not unskilled in Logical Querks. And an Sulpit. lib. 2.
other of the Ancients observes that the Arian Cause was managed by Old Subtle
Disputants, such as had been bred up to Controversies, and knew how to make the
best of their Ill Arguments, and to Dissemble when they thought there was
occasion for it. Our late Revivers of the Cause are furnished with the same
Skill, and use it as advantageously. They will pretend to own Christ's
Divinity, they will say Christ is God, and True God; and yet if you come to the
trial, they wholly renounce it, and tell you An Answer to a Letter touching the
Trinity.
Christ is only God's Minister, his Messenger, his Ambassador. This is all you
can get from an other of their Writers, An Accurate Examination of the
principal Texts alleged for Christ's Divinity, chap. 5.
Only the Father, says he, is true God, and the Lord Christ is his Prophet,
his Ambassador, his Messenger: so that Christ is no more than what the Turks
confess Mahomet to be. Though our Blessed Savior be so often styled God and
Lord in the New Testament, yet the Antitrinitarians would needs persuade us
that the meaning of it is no other than this, that he was a Great and Eminent
Man: whence it follows, that they hold Christ to be Lord and God in the same
sense that the Papists talk of their Lord God the Pope.

So they will tell you that the Death of Christ is an Expiatory Sacrifice for
the sins of mankind, and yet, whatever they pretend, they really own no such
thing, as the Reverend Bishop Stillingfleet rightly remarks, and irrefragably
proves, beyond all Exceptions, in his Admirable Treatise against Crellius. And
in several other Instances it might be showed that they intolerably abuse and
deceive the world. In brief, never was Prejudice more rampant, never were
Fallacies so often placed in the room of Arguments, never was Reason so grossly
abused, never was Logic so ill employed, never were Grammar and Criticism so
scandalously thrown away as in the Writings of these men: and all is done to
distort the Word of God, to elude the meaning of the Holy Ghost, to plead
against the Lord of Life and Glory, and against the only way and means of their
Salvation.

Here, under this First Head, viz. their Abusing of Scripture, I will take
notice of One Particular Instance of it, which to the Common Reader perhaps may
be a Rarity. They thinking it necessary that Christ, being but a mere Man, (for
they hold him to be no other) should be extraordinarily instructed by God as to
his Office of the Messiah, and therefore it would be requisite that he should
(like St. Paul) be taken up into the third Heaven, and there be taught
particularly how to discharge his Office, and how to teach men upon Earth;
Accordingly they were to find out some Texts of Scripture which might be
strained to support this Fiction, viz. That Christ went up into Heaven in the
time of the forty days Fast, or some time before he began to Preach, that he
might receive Instructions from God concerning the Gospel Dispensation, and
concerning the things that he was to deliver upon earth. To this purpose they
pitch upon John 3. 13. No man has ascended up into Heaven, but he that came
down from Heaven, even the Son of Man who is in Heaven, and they would persuade
us that these words are spoken concerning that Ascension which they fancy. But
this meaning cannot be fastened upon them, because we are here plainly informed
that Christ came down from Heaven first, and then afterward ascended thither;
whereas it is their assertion that he first ascended, and then came down
thence. It is impossible therefore to stretch these words so as to make them
serviceable to the foresaid Conceit.

But they alledg another Text, What and if ye shall see the Son of Man ascended
up where he was before? John 6. 62. but this is as wide from their purpose as
the other, for these words were spoken after Christ began to preach, and
therefore cannot be understood of that Ascension which they dream of, because
they suppose that to have been before his Public Preaching, whereas our
Savior here speaks of something to come, What and if ye shall, etc. His
Ascension therefore was not past at that time. And further, our Savior
acquaints us here that he was in heaven before his Ascension thither, which is
a plain and undeniable proof of his Divinity: for he was not there before as to
his Humane Nature; that these Gentlemen themselves acknowledge, and consequently
the words must be meant of his being in heaven with his Father from all
eternity, and of having the same Glory which he had with him before the World
was, as he speaks himself, John 17. 5. And the other forecited place confirms
this, for it is expressly said he came down from heaven (and he could not do that
unless he were before in heaven) yea and is in heaven, which both passages are
meant of his Divine Eternal Nature, as to which he always was and is in heaven.
He is said to come down thence when he undertook to assume our human nature, to
be made flesh, and with this ascended a short time after his Resurrection, and
not before. Thus they have unwarily made choice of these Texts, from which the
very Deity of Christ is so plainly deduced, a doctrine which they cannot endure
to hear of. Besides, from what has been said it appears that these Texts are
nothing to that purpose for which they alledg them: and particularly this
latter is spoken of the Ascension of Christ which was then to come, and
therefore cannot be meant of that which they talk of.

Yet notwithstanding this the Socinian Writers hold a Double Ascension of our
Savior; and they had it from their Socin, in Catechesi.
Great Master, who was the first Inventor of this Figment. De Divin. Christi.
cip. 4. Cont. Frantz. Exam. cent. errorum.
Smalcius (a Racovian Minister, the Author of the Racovian Catechism,) In
Epist. ad Hebr. cap. 1. v. 6.
Crellius (a German, but resident at Racovia) Commentar. in Heb. 1. 6.
Slichtingius (a Polonian Knight) De V. R. l. 3. c. 5.
Volkelius and others publish it as a very Great Truth, nay they fancy it to be
the First Step to all Christ's Undertakings, and therefore must be of mighty
Concern. The New Set of Socinian Writers hold the same, Before Christ entered
on his office, he was taken up into heaven, say An Accurate Examination of the
principal texts alleged for Christ's Divinity. chap. 5.
they, to be fully instructed and informed in the nature and quality of his
Office, and of that whole charge which he was to deliver to men. Yet, this
Invention has nothing in the whole Evangelical History to favor it. If there
had been any such thing, the New Testament would not have been silent: it would
have been mentioned by the Evangelists, or one of them at least, as a very
considerable part of Christ's Transactions. Yea, the Apostles Creed without
doubt, which mentions his Ascension into heaven after his resurrection, would
have particularly mentioned this, if he had before ascended, it being (as they
say) of such eminent importance, viz. to fetch down from heaven a Religion for
us, as they are pleased to speak. This Ancient Symbol would have taken notice
that our Savior went up twice into heaven, once to take his Instructions from
God the Father, and afterward to sit at his right hand. But neither here, nor
in the whole Narrative of his Actions in the Gospels do we meet with any thing
concerning the former Ascension. If the Reader is desirous of a farther
confutation of this Antecedent or Preparatory Ascension, let him consult the
Admirable On the 2d Article of the Creed.
Bishop Pearson, who excellently shows the improbability, unreasonableness and
absurdity of it.

I will only add this as observable, that they confute their New Doctrine
themselves, for concerning the very Texts which they alledg for it, which speak
of Christ's being in heaven, and coming down from heaven a late Writer of the
Socinian Persuasion says thus, Considerations on the Explications of the
doctrine of the Trinity.
These Texts amount to no more than this, that the Lord Christ is a Messenger,
really come forth from God to Men: as much is true of every Prophet. And so
every Prophet ascended up to heaven as much as our Savior did. Thus they
baffle themselves: and they must needs do it, it cannot be helped because they
make use of Scripture to such evil purposes, because they study to pervert and
distort the sense of it. Their business is to bring the Bible to their
Sentiments and Opinions, and not to form these by that. Nay, if Scripture be so
express against them that they know not how to evade it, they abandon it rather
than they will quit their own Conceptions. This is the way of them all: and one
of them who was more open-hearted than the rest, lets us know by his own
practice what those of his Persuasion should do on the like occasion; Smalc.
Hom. 8. in cap. 1. Johan.
I would not, says he, believe that the Son of God was Incarnate, though I
should find it in express words in Scripture. And De Servatore. cap. 6.
Socinus has something like this concerning the Satisfaction of Christ: For my
part, says he, though it were extant in the Sacred Monuments of the Scripture,
and there written not only once, but many times, I would not for all that
believe it.

To sum up all then that has been said, I ask whether the Socinians asserting
of Repugnancies in the Holy Scripture, whether their questioning the Authority
of some of the Books, and representing the whole as depraved, whether the
wilful wresting of particular places to establish their own Opinions, whether
(I say) these be not plain Marks of Irreligion, and such as directly tend to
make men Atheists.

CHAP. II.
The Writings of some of the Socinians, as well as of Vaninus and Machiavel,
who seem to assert a God, prove them not to be no Atheists. They have a License
to Dissemble. Socinus allows not of the proof of a Deity either from any inward
dictates in a man's Mind, or from any outward operations in the World. Some of
the Chief of Gods Attributes are questioned, if not denied, by the Racovians.
They admit not of his Spirituality. The Absurdity of which Opinion is
discovered. They reject his Omnipresence. Which doctrine of theirs is showed to
be repugnant to Reason and Holy Writ. They deny his Foresight of future
Contingent Actions. Which Persuasion is evinced to be inconsistent with the
Nature of God, the discoveries made by the Inspired Writers, the Predictions
recorded in the Holy Scriptures, the Providence of God which extends to future
events which depend on the Free Will of man. Their notion concerning God's
Eternity is Unscriptural, and unworthy of his Excellent Nature. Therefore no
Learned Writer allows of a Successive Duration in God, properly and strictly
speaking.

SEcondly, we will see what their Opinions and Apprehensions are concerning
God, which is the next Particular I propounded to speak of. It is true, some of
them in their Writings have laudably asserted and maintained the Being of a
God. De Deo and Attributis.
Crellius is the only man among them that has professedly and designedly
undertaken this task, and he has done it learnedly and substantially, and I
verily believe heartily, for I count it an Injury to detract even from an
Adversary. But there is another sort of men who act under a Disguise, and
cunningly undermine that Cause which they seem to promote. An example of this
was Vaninus, who was an arrant Atheist, and was burnt for being so, and yet
writ for the Existence of a God, declaimed against the most Pestilent Sect of
Atheism, as he calls it in his Amphitheatrum Divinae Providentiae. Machiavel
often hints that there is a God, he talks very favorably in behalf of
Religion, he makes it the very basis and foundation of all Civil Government,
and the cause of all that Success and Prosperity which attend Commonwealths,
Disp. de Repub. l. 1. c. 11.
Where Religion is, says he, there good laws and good discipline take place,
from whence the fortunate and happy Events of things, especially in Warlike
Expeditions, proceed. As on the contrary, if you take away Religion, the
Commonwealth must needs sink, for where the fear of God is taken away, there
follows Impiety, and from that the ruin of Governments. And afterward he
professedly shows that it is necessary for the preservation and flourishing of
Kingdoms and Commonwealths that Religion and the Worship of God should be
maintained.

And yet hear what the foresaid Crellius says of this man, De Deo and Attrib.
cap. 5.
It appears from many passages in his Writings that, notwithstanding what he
seems to say sometimes, (for it was necessary to cover his Atheism in some
manner) he did not acknowledge any Religion at all. And again afterward thus,
Cap. 6.
He plainly enough shows that he really acknowledges that there is no God, and
(notwithstanding this) that he has no excuse to alledg why he does not
acknowledge a God. If a Socinian Author (and one of the Learnedest and Ablest of
them) thus censures this Writer, then there may be ground to suspect that some
of those of the Party who defend the Being of a God, are not sincere in doing
so, but make that a Pretext and Show to disguise the Badness of their other
Opinions: and it may be thought that as Machiavel and Socinus were Countrymen,
so in other respects they are more nearly allied. The Racovians will patiently
suffer a man to dissent, or seem to dissent from them in many things, if they
know him to be right as to the main. They will permit him to use his Pen
against some of their Beloved Doctrines, and yet at the same time they will own
him as theirs.

There is a plain proof of this in those two Eminent Persons, Grotius and
Episcopius. The former seemed to be a great Abhorrer of Socinianism, as appears
from an H. Grotii Pietas, ad Ordines Holland.
Oration which he pronounced before the States of Holland, where he calls it
the Poison of the Church and the Worst of Heresies, at the mentioning of which
all pious men are horribly afraid. And it is well known that he defended the
Satisfaction of Christ; and yet he is reckoned and acknowledged by the
Socinians to be of their Persuasion. The latter has in his Writings seemingly
opposed some of the Points which Socinus's followers adhere to, at least he
does not thoroughly comply with them, and yet our Modern Undertakers for the
Cause put him into the Catalogue of their Writers. Whence we may infer that the
Party have a License to Dissemble; their Words and Profession do not always
correspond with their Apprehensions; and consequently when some of them assert
a Divine Being, we cannot thence conclude their real Belief of it: or when they
seem to confute the contrary opinion, we cannot certainly infer that they are in
good earnest. Wierus, some say, was too well acquainted with Diabolical Magic,
though he writes against it, and defies it. Our Hopkins, the Witch-finder, some
think, was versed in the Black Art himself, and practiced it.

I would offer it to the consideration of Wise and Discerning Men whether
Socinus has not gratified the Atheists (not to say, that he has showed his
own inclination to be one) when he not only tells us that there is no proof of
a God from any innate apprehensions of his being and nature, (The notion of
God, Praelect. cap. 2.
says he, is not written in men's hearts, there is no inward principle in their
breasts whereby they can by the use of Reason come to the knowledge of God.) But
adds likewise that he cannot be proved from without, that is, from any of the
Works of the Creation; though these have been always voted by the Wisest Men
(both Pagans and Christians) to be a Sufficient Topic whence we may argue a
Deity. Yet he stiffly denies it, and will not admit of the Argument, nay though
his denial be a direct opposing of St. Paul's words, Romans 1. 20. The invisible
things of God, from the creation of the World, are clearly seen, being
understood by the things that are made, even his eternal power and godhead. The
Being and Attributes of God, though they are Invisible, are understood, and as
it were seen by the visible things of the Creation. This is the plain meaning
of the Text, and yet he will not by any means acknowledge it, but by an
unaccountable forcing of the words labors to pervert the Sense of them,
against all the evidence of Grammar, Criticism, Reason, the Context, etc. This
looks very ill, that we have no notice of a Divine Being from our own Natural
Reasons, nor from the Make and Structure of the World. Who but Faustus Socinus
would have believed this? and who but a Wellwiller to Atheism would have
broached it? Especially seeing it is so groundless and senseless an Opinion,
and so easily to be confuted, for if there be no inward impressions of the
being of God on Men's Minds, and no arguing from the outward and visible works
of the Creation, then it is certain no Pagans could have arrived to the notion
of a God, which yet we see they have, and there is no Man denies it. Wherefore
one would suspect that the foresaid Gentleman had a great Mind to maintain and
divulge a Paradox which he could not but be sensible would be very grateful to
the worst sort of Men, if Atheists are such.

But I wave this, and will consider the Socinian Opinions concerning God with
respect to the first of his Properties and Attributes, and after that to the
Trinity of Persons, and then particularly to the Godhead of Christ. I taxed
these Me^ (in my Discourse concerning the Causes (...) Occasions of Atheism)
with denying of the Self-existence, Spirituality, Omnipresence, and Omniscience
of God. As to the first, I know very well the Discipl^ of Socinus generally
uphold the Self-existence of the Deity, chiefly to make us^ of it for forming
of an Argument against the Divinity of our Savior, but the Considerations on
the Explications of the doctrine of the Trinity.
Author whom I cited was unmindful o^ that in his hot pursuit after his
Lordship of Worcester, and by the ambiguous matching of Self-existent with
Unoriginated labors to fetch his Lordship into the noose which he thought he
had prepared for him. But because this Modern Racovian may make some show of
evading my Charge by pretending his Words were spoken in another's Person, and
not his own, I will not any further insist upon it, because the Reader shall
thereby be made apprehensive that I am averse from contending in any dubious
matter.

I proceed therefore to the next Attribute, viz. the Spirituality of God, the
denial of which I taxed the Racovians with. And here I will first prove the
Charge, and then briefly represent the Unreasonableness and Absurdity of this
notion which the Socinians frame of God. For the sake of the English Reader I
will translate out of the Latin the very Words of one of their Principal
Authors, Crellius de Deo and Attribut. cap. 15.
When we (says he) name a Spirit, we understand a Substance void of all
Grossness, such as we behold in visible bodies. Thus we say that Angels are
SPIRITS, and so we call our Diviner Part (which Philosophers rather call a
SOUL) and the Air (though it lie open to some of our Senses, as the Touch) and
other bodies like to this: Every one of which has so much the more this name
(viz. SPIRIT) allotted to it by how much it is the more subtle. Again he
expresses it thus, Commentar. in Johan. 4. 24.
Spirit or Spiritual Essence is that which is opposed to that Essence which is
Corporeal, that is, which is Crass, viz. of such things which we behold with
our Eyes, especially of those that are Terrene. And a Comment. in 1. Epist. ad
Corinth. cap. 15. v. 45.
third time he vouches this, for he reckons God and Angels and the Souls of Men
in the same rank with Air and Subtle Bodies, telling us that these are Spirits
in the proper and strict sense. Our Home-Socinians think and speak the same, as
is apparent from Scripture. Catechism. Chap. 2.
J. Bidle, who openly declares that God is of a Visible and Corporeal Shape.
Thus it is plain that the Immaterial Nature of the Deity is discarded by them,
and the best Notion that they can frame of him is that he is a Thin Airy Body.
Which how disparaging it is to the Divine Being cannot but be conceived by
every Serious Thinking Man. For let Matter be never so fine and subtle, yet
still it is Matter. The Animal Spirits (as they are generally called) are
bodies as well as any others: and when they are never so Agile and Brisk, they
have still a Corporeal Nature: and being such they are Finite and
Circumscribable, which is unworthy of the Nature of the Supreme Being.
Therefore this was the rational dictate of Improved Minds that God is
Incorporeal: this was the sense of Plato (as Sine corpore ullo Deum vult esse,
ut Graeci dicunt, (...). De Not. Deor. l. 1.
Tully tells us) and of the all Ancient Philosophers, by whom he was
acknowledged to be an Incorporeal and Infinite Mind.

Again, all Matter of it self is Unactive and Dull, because it has no inward
Principle to act and inform it. Whatever motion and agitation it has is from
without first of all: all its Influence is put into it by another. Which to
conceive of God is the greatest Blasphemy, as well as Absurdity. Further, all
Matter or mere Body is in its own Nature void of Sense and Perception: and it
is not the Fineness and Agility of it that will make it Think and Apprehend.
The reason is, because Cogitation or Apprehension is another distinct thing,
and quite different from a Material Being: and therefore it is ridiculous to
imagine that what is merely Corporeal has a faculty of Thinking or Conceiving,
of Understanding or Willing. To be Cogitative is far different from being
Divisible or Extended: and the notion of Cogitation does not in the least
involve in it the notion of Division. There is such a disparity between the
Ideas of these things that no rational man can bring it into his thoughts that
Matter is capable of Perceiving or Performing the acts of the Mind. There is an
absolute necessity therefore of asserting God to be Incorporeal; we must be
forced to subscribe to what our Infallible Instructor (who was also God
himself) has taught us, that God is a Spirit, John 4. 24. Which Words, it is
observable, Tractat. breves de diversis materiis, etc.
Socinus most grossly depraves, merely to avoid the acknowledgment of this
Attribute. Because (...) is not in the Greek, he makes (...) the Accusative
Case, and will have it refer to (...) in the foregoing verse, as much as to
say, Go^ seeks a Spirit. This extravagant work does he make, although the words
are a plain Proposition, and the Grammar of them is easy and obvious. But I
have already taken notice of these men's palpable Abusing of Scripture for their
own Ends.

The next Attribute of God which Socinus's Scholars disallow of is his
Omnipresence. I had leisure only just to mention this before: now I will
produce some Evidence of what I said. It is not necessary to believe that the
Essence of God is Immense, says their Great Socin in Catechismo.
Patriarch. And he has these strange words in a Fragment of his Catechism,
[Though God's power and wisdom be not circumscribed by any limits, yet it
follows not thence that his Essence is infinite,] as if his Essence and
Attributes were not alike as to Infinity. He has more of this nature in
another place of his Catechism, and in other parts of his Writings. Cont.
Frantz. Disp. 1. de Trin.
Smalcius and De Deo and Attrib. cap. 27.
Crellius (two of his fast Friends) deny that God is present every where by his
Nature and Essence. Institut. l. 4. c. 13.
Vorstius limits the presence of God by absolutely denying the Ubiquity of his
Essence. And Episcopius (who is to be taken into the number of the Racovians,
as I observed before from their own words) enclines this way, telling us that
it is not necessary to believe that God is present every where as to his
substance and entity, and he proceeds to bring Arguments (such as they are) to
maintain what he says. And other Authors (not excepting the Bidle,
Scripture-Catechism. Chap. 2. The Exceptions of Mr. Edw. in his Causes of
Atheism examined. p. 18.
Moderns) might be alleged to the same purpose, but I think it will not be
required, because their Opinion in this case is so well known.

But how derogatory is it to the Excellent and Perfect Nature of the Deity? It
is no other than limiting and confining the Divine Being, and making that
Finite which is Infinite. If God's Ubiquity be denied, his Infiniteness must be
so too. And yet (which shows the Absurdity and Inconsistency of their notions)
these foresaid Writers pretend to acknowledge that his Wisdom and Power are
infinite, as if Infinite Perfections could be seated in a finite subject. Or
rather, these Perfections may be said to be God Himself, and therefore if they
be Infinite, the Nature of God must needs be such. His Transcendent Nature is
of that kind that it has no bounds, no dimensions; and what is so, is Every
where, and in all places, though not circumscribed by any. But they have such a
kind of notion concerning God as Pliny had of him, who denies the Universal
Presence of God in the World (as also his Concern for it) because, says he,
Plin. Not. Hist. l. c. 7.
the Divinity must needs be polluted by so base and manifold a Ministry. This
is the very reason which some of them assign why they refuse to acknowledge the
Divine Ubiquity. But it is the grossness of their conceptions that makes them
think thus, for the nature of God is such that he is incapable of being defiled
and polluted by being any where. The most filthy places cannot annoy his Person
and Essence. Wherefore here (as at some other times) they have very
unphilosophical apprehensions, and are palpably mistaken about the nature of
God.

I might show likewise how repugnant their Assertion is to that discovery of
the Divine Nature which we have from the Inspired Writings. The heaven, and
heaven of heavens cannot contain him, 1 Kings 8. 27. Whither shall I go from
thy Spirit? or whither shall I flee from thy presence? If I ascend up into
heaven, thou art there; if I make my bed in hell, behold, thou art there. If I
take the wings of the morning, and dwell in the uttermost parts of the sea,
even there shall thy hand lead me, and thy right hand shall hold me. Psalm. 139.
7. etc. Which excellent variety of expressions is made use of on purpose to
signify this grand Truth, that it is impossible to assign any place where God
is not present. And this necessarily results from his Infinite Nature, which is
without measure and quantity: yea, it is the very result of the Concessions of
the Socinians themselves, for seeing they grant the Power of God is inseparable
from his Essence, it must needs follow that this is Immense (and consequently
Omnipresent) as well as that. Notwithstanding this, the Socinians represent God
as confined, and, as the Epicureans did, shut him up in Heaven. If this in them
was counted an approach to Atheism, why may it not be reckoned as such in the
persons I am speaking of?

And is not the same Atheistick Tang discernible in their denying God's
Foreknowledge of future Contingencies? which was another thing I charged them
with; and now I stand ready to make it good against them. Cont. Frantz. Disp. 1
and 12.
Smalcius and De Deo and Attrib Cap. 24.
Crellius are peremptory in asserting that things of this nature cannot
possibly be foreknown, for they are not the object of Knowledge, therefore God
does not know them. The latter o^ these Authors designedly undertakes the
defense of this, and is very large upon it. And in his Comment on the Cap. 9.
11.
Epistl^ to the Romans he stands to this Proposition, that God has no
foresight of future Contingencies. This doctrine they borrow from their Socin.
Praelect. cap. 8, 9, 10.
Italian Instructor, who spends two whole Chapters in the asserting and
maintaining of it, and two more in taking off (as he thinks) the Objections
against it. Our English Writers of the Racovian Way are of this Strain, Witness
Bidle's Catechism, Chap. 2. and the Examiner of my Exceptions against the
Reasonableness of Christianity, p. 18. But does not any unprejudiced person see
that such a notion and belief are very injurious to the Deity, who by virtue of
the Excellency and Transcendency of his Nature cannot but know and foresee all
things? The Perfection of the Divine Understanding is such that it is able to
penetrate into the Wills of Men, be they never so free, and can infallibly
discern and foresee which way they will incline, yea which way they will
certainly turn. For the nature of all Futurities, whether they be Necessary or
whether they be Contingent, is the same as to God. Who can read those Words in
Deuteronomy. 31. 21. and not acknowledge this? Concerning the Israelites and their
future behavior thus God himself speaks, I know their imagination which they
go about, even now before I have brought them into the land which I swear.
Which is meant of Free and Voluntary Actions, as appears from what is said in
the foregoing Verse, When I have brought them into the land which I swear unto
their fathers, then will they turn unto other Gods, and serve them, and provoke
me, and break my Covenant. Whence it is evident that the most Contingent Events
are foreseen by God. Who can read that remarkable passage of the Psalmist, and
not believe this? Thou know my down-sitting and my up-rising, thou
understandest my thought afar off. Thou compassest my path, and my lying down,
and art acquainted with all my ways. For there is not a word in my tongue, but
lo, O Lord, thou know it altogether. Psalm. 139. 2, 3, 4. Here are the Ways
or Actions, here are the Words, here are the Thoughts of Men distinctly
specified; and they are all pronounced to be the object and matter of God's
Foreknowledg.

And I desire the Reader to observe this further, that this Holy Man owns the
doctrine of God's Omniscience though there were Difficulties in it, though he
could not reach the Manner of it. Such knowledge, says he, is too wonderful for
me: it is high, I cannot attain unto it, v. 6. As if he had said, How God
knows and foreseeth all that I think, speak, and act, I am not able to
determine: it is too sublime a matter for me to search into; I am not able to
give an account of it. But, however, I am satisfied concerning the truth and
reality of it, because God can do more than I can comprehend. But Socinus was
of another strain, he professedly declares that he disowns the Divine
Prescience because he sees unanswerable difficulties in it, and he cannot
understand how it is: and his Brethren speak after the same rate. But how can
they deny God's Prescience of Futurities when it is made the Peculiar Character
of the Deity? or otherwise we cannot make sense of those words Isa. 41. 22, 23.
Let them show us what shall happen, and declare us things to come: show the
things that are to come hereafter, that we may know that ye are Gods. This sort
of Knowledge, viz. of those things that depend on the free actions of men, of
which the Prophet here speaks (as appears from v. 25, etc.) distinguishes the
True God from false and counterfeit ones, whereas the knowledge of some other
Future things is vouchsafed to Men, to finite creatures. But this is here
propounded as an infallible Argument and Evidence of the Deity, and this is to
be found in Him alone. It is strange therefore that the Socinians should deny
that to be in God which is Proper to him only, which is His Sole Prerogative.
This certainly is a great eclipsing of the Divinity, and it can be resolved
into nothing but this that they have a design to impair and affront the
Essential Attributes of the Godhead as well as the Persons belonging to it.

But then, how wild a thing is it to assert that God can have no knowledge of
these things, when we plainly see it confuted by the manifold Predictions
concerning Future Contingencies which the Sacred Scripture has recorded? It is
to be wondered at that, notwithstanding this, these men should be so blind: it
is strange and unaccountable that they take no notice of their being baffled by
the Fulfilling of those Predictions. Likewise, who sees not that the Providence
of God extends it self to this sort of future actions and occurrences? for he
manages these for great and excellent ends in the world. But how can he do this
if he has no knwledg of them? Can his Care and Providence be exercised about
them, and yet he be wholly Ignorant of them? Thus it is evident that at the
same time that these men deny the Divine Prescience, they do also take away
Providence, for it is impossible that God should dispose, order and take care
of those actions and events which he knows nothing of. Which shows how absurd
and ridiculous that passage in Socinus is, viz. Praelect. cap. 8.
that this Prescience (which we assert to be in God) does in some part take
away and obscure that continual Care which he takes of humane affairs, and
renders him in a manner Idle. One would not imagine that such an Inconsistent
Thought should come into a man's head, and much less that it should be
propagated, as we see in Not. ad Disp. 5. de Deo.
Vorstius and others. If they had not a strong propension to diminish and
disparage the Divine Nature, and to foster Atheism, certainly they could not
thus discourse, certainly they could not maintain that God is ignorant of what
any Man will say, think or do the next moment, and that he has no notice at
all of such Future Occurrences as depend on the free will of man, till they
actually come to pass, i. e. when every intelligent creature has a knowledge of
them.

There is yet another Attribute of God, concerning which they have a very
unbecoming notion, and such as is inconsistent with the Perfection of the
Divine Nature. God's Eternity is represented by them to have in it a Succession
of Duration, as there is in Time. They are the very words of * Socinus and De
Deo. cap. 18.
Crellius. And the Considerations on the Explications of the doctrine of the
Trinity.
English Socinians show themselves to be of this mind, placing the nature of
Eternity in a Continual Succession. And as for the contrary notion, it is
laughed at by The Trinitarian Scheme of Religion. p. 4.
some of them as a Whimsical Paradox. But certainly this is no other than
confounding of Finite and Infinite, and making Time and Eternity the same.
Where there is a Succession there was a Beginning or First Moment, which
plainly demonstrates that there is no Succession in God's duration, because all
things are Together and at Once; those things which are past, present, and to
come are always coexistent and present with him. One day is with the Lord as a
thousand years, and a thousand years as one day. Psalm. 90. 4. Which denotes
that there are not in God those three differences of Time before Praelect. cap.
8.
mentioned, which are in the duration of other things; and consequently there
are no Parts, and no Succession in the Eternal Duration of God.

This I think no man will deny to be rational, that the Permanency of the
Existence of God should be differenced from that of Creatures, and accordingly
that he should not be measured by Time as they are, I go upon this ground, that
we ought to attribute the most Excellent things to God, and on the contrary
that we must not ascribe any thing to him that has the least Show of
Imperfection, and will diminish his Divine Nature. This is a safe and sound
bottom, and on this I build my Assertion, viz. that a Temporal and Successive
duration ought not to be attributed to God. If the persons I am now dealing
with had attended to this Rule, had built on this basis, they would not have
pronounced such strange things as they do concerning the Deity, they would have
had more reverent conceptions of him, they would not have vented such undue
Opinions and Surmises concerning the Divine Nature. But they, having taken up
these Persuasions, endeavor to defend them: and it has happened that some
persons of good Parts have undertaken the Cause, and have rendered it very
plausible to such as have not an eye to the Infinite and Superlative Excellency
of God, the Supreme Being.

I grant that there are some Learned Me^ that are no Socinians who seem to
allow (...) a Successive Duration in him, but if we duly weigh what they say we
shall find tha^ they chiefly set themselves against the nice speculations of
the Schoolmen concerning Succession, but they apply no^ this way of Duration in
a proper and strict manner unto God. They ow^ some kind of resemblance of it in
Eternity, but there is no such thing formally and really. The reason is,
because Succession implies in it Parts, Divisibility, Motion, and Change: but
an Eternal Undivide^ Being is not capable of these, and by consequence not of
such a Duration. Wherefore it follows that the Eternity of God is in a manner
denied by the Socinians. (...) leave it to the Reader to apply the Censure.

CHAP. III.
The Socinians renounce the doctrine of the Trinity, though it be attested by
the Scriptures and Fathers. They profanely ridicule it. They are demonstrated
to be Atheists from St. John's Words Epist. 1. chapter 2. v. 23. The Argument
thence is reduced into an unanswerable Syllogism. The doctrine of the Trinity
intended to be particularly treated of hereafter by the Author. Christ's own
words evince his Divinity. The Socinians denying him to be God, consequently
deny his Satisfaction. That Text Romans 3. 25. is urged against them. Whence are
inferred the Unreasonableness and Impiousness of their Cavils. Christ's
Satisfaction proved from Isai. 53. 5. etc. From those Texts which speak of
Reconciliation made by him. From other places which mention his Suffering and
Dying for us, his being a Propitiation, an Atonement, a Sacrifice, his
Redeeming us. Both the former and present Socinians agree in reviling, deriding
and blaspheming the Merits and Satisfaction of our Savior.

THUS far we have seen how defective they are in their Notions concerning God,
as he is considerd in respect of his Attributes. We will in the next place
observe how faulty they are in their Conceptions concerning Him as he is to be
considered in regard of the Persons contained in his Godhead. The Holy
Scriptures, especially of the New Testament, bear witness that though there is
but One Living and True God, yet in Unity of this Godhead there is a Trinity of
Persons, of one substance, majesty, power and glory, viz. the Father, the Son,
and the Holy Ghost, and that these are the very Eternal God. There is abundant
proof of this from a vast number of Plain and Obvious Texts: and yet the
Disciples of Socinus stubbornly disown this Clear Truth. They have but a Text
or two on which they pretend to build their belief of Christ's Ascending into
heaven before he preached the Gospel, and yet these (though distorted and
misapplied) they think a sufficient basis for that Conceit of theirs: but
behold, there are above forty Clear places of Scripture that express the
Plurality of Persons in the Deity, and yet they refuse to attend to them. Which
shows that their eyes are blinded, and that they wilfully give themseves up to
Mistakes. The Ancient Fathers and Writers of the Church (who may well be
supposed to have some knowledge and insight into this Catholic Doctrine)
unanimously assert the Distinction of Persons or Subsistencies in the Godhead.
Which is freely acknowledged by their Socin. cont. Wiek. cap. 9.
Great Master, who expressly tells us that the Fathers both before and after the
Nicene Council asserted the same doctrine that we do. And this has been the
constant profession of the Orthodox Churches of Christ in all ages. But
notwithstanding this, there have been Moscorov. cont. Smiglecium. Slichting.
cont. Meisnerum.
some since (unmindful of what their Master had acknowledged) that have
endeavored to make the Writings of those Ancients speak for them, therein both
contradicting Socinus and the Truth it self. Nay, even among the late Tracts
published by the Socinians there is a formal Collection of the Testimonies of
Greek and Latin Fathers against the Doctrine of the Trinity. So contradictory
are these men to one another.

There is no need of quoting any Particular Authors under this Head, for they
all appear in a full body against the doctrine of the Trinity. Here the whole
Posse of the Racovians show themselves, unanimously and without exception
declaring that there is but One Person, viz. the Father in the Deity, and that
the Son and Holy Ghost are not God. As for the Blessed Son of God, who is the
Word of the Father, begotten from everlasting by him, they affirm him to be no
other than a Man, dignified with the title of God. And as for the Holy Ghost,
who is co-essential with the Father, some of them (who adhere to Bidle) hold he
is an Angel or Messenger of God, and consequently a Person; but the rest of
them deny his Personality, and aver him to be only the Power or Influence of
God, and so is only a Quality or Operation: as if the Apostles were commanded
to baptize all Nations in the name of an Operation, and at the same time were
enjoined to baptize in the name of Two Persons. This is very harsh, yea it is
very inconsistent and absurd. However, these Gentlemen are resolved to adhere
to it, and they bid open defiance to the Contrary Doctrine. One of the New
Racovians tells us that the doctrine of the Trinity A Letter to the Clergy of
both Universities. p. 11.
has been partly the direct and necessary Cause, and partly the unhappy
occasion of diverse Scandalous and Hurtful Errors and Heresies. And in an P. 5.
other place he declares that this doctrine is as little consistent with Piety
toward God as it is with Reason. But this is very mild and gentle in respect
of what some other Unitarians belch forth. Lib. 1. de Trinit. Error.
Servetus, when he speaks of the Eternal Generation of the Son of God,
ridicules it in such blasphemous terms as are not to be mentioned; and he often
calls the Trinity the Three-headed Cerberus. Others of them style it a
Monstrous Idol, a Fiction of Antichrist, an Infernal Imposture.

Nay, our very Modern Socinians, our English Unitarians discover a very
Profane Spirit when they speak of this Sublime Point. The language of the
Church, say An Answer to a Letter touching the Trinity.
they, concerning the Trinity is BARBAROUS, the faith of it is Monstrous. And
how elegantly do they express themselves when they tell us that the doctrine of
the Trinity is A Postscript to the Answer to a Letter touching the Trinity.
a dry and empty notion, a bone without marrow or meat? What can be more
profane than their stiling the Three Divine Persons a Letter to the Clergy of
both Universities, p. 15.
Trinity of Ciphers, a P. 24.
Club or Cabal of Gods, a P. 26.
Council or Committee of Gods, where sometimes one is President, and sometimes
another is in the Chair? and in another place, a Of worshipping the Holy Ghost,
p. 12.
Castle in the air. Let any one peruse their late Prints, and observe the
freedom of their Style, and he will find it light and frothy (as one of their
late Converts expresses it,) he will find them irreverently deriding this
Profound Mystery, in such terms as I forbear to rehearse, because they are most
unworthy of Christian and Pious Ears: he will find that there was reason to tax
them with Irreligion and Profaneness, and that I did not reproach them when I
laid these to their Charge.

But more especially as to the imputation of Atheism (which is yet a more
Heinous Crime) I request the Reader to consider and weigh 1 John 2. 23.
Whosoever denies the Son, the same has not the Father. Take it thus with the
preceding verse, which will lead us to the true sense of it, Who is a liar but
he that denies that Jesus is the Christ? He is Antichrist that denies the
Father and the Son. As much as to say, if there ever was a Person that might be
truly called a Liar, if ever any one deserved that name, then certainly he that
gainsays so plain a Truth as this (that Jesus is the Messiah) is an egregious
Liar and Falsifier, and merits to be called so. Yea, to such a one belongs not
only the Title of a Liar but of Antichrist, because he is a direct Opposer of
Christ as he is the Son of God the Father, and therein he denies both the
Father and the Son. For it follows, Whosoever denies the Son, the same has
not the Father, i. e. he denies the Father as well as the Son: for not having
the Father is the same with denying him, as is most evident from the preceding
clause, where it is called the denying of the Father. Now, I suppose the
Socinians will grant that the denying of the Father is Atheism: wherefore they
must also acknowledge that the denying of the Son is Atheism, because in this is
included (according to these words of St. John) the denying of the Father.

This is a Text which it may be they never thought of, i. e. of the force and
influence of it: therefore I entreat them to ponder it now, and therein to see
a Character of themselves. There were, in St. John's days some of their
Persuasion, some that opposed the doctrine of the Trinity, and especially the
Deity of the Second Person: they labored to persuade the People (as their
Successors do in our days) that the Father only was God, and that the Son was
excluded wholly from the Divinity. Against these this Apostle writes, and lets
them know that the Son as well as the Father is God, and that he who has the
confidence to deny the Deity of the former, does also deny the Deity of the
latter. For such is the nature of the Godhead that one of these cannot be
Alone. The Father is not without the Son, neither can be, as this latter cannot
be without the other. They are so mutually joined together that they cannot be
separated. This Coherence is inviolable, and therefore he that denies the
Eternal Son of God, denies the Father: he that holds Christ is not the Son of
God by Eternal Generation, in effect disowns the Godhead of the Father: and if
he does so, he is an Atheist.

This is a Text that is not questioned by the Socinians, though the next clause
in the verse has been doubted of by them and some others. These are Words of
the Beloved Disciple, who lay in his Master's Bosom, and had extraordinary
communications of the Spirit, and was favored in a peculiar manner with Divine
Discoveries and Revelations. This is he that may be called the Great Eagle (and
that name was given him by the Ancient Christians, and much more deservedly
than Maimonides was called so by the Modern Jews) because he soared so high,
and was so quick-sighted in the Mysteries of the Gospel, and had so piercing
and sagacious judgment. Therefore on all these accounts I urge this Text upon
Socinus's followers, wishing them to be sensible of the force of it. The denial
of the Son, i. e. the denying of his Divinity, which consists in his being the
Eternal Son of God, is a denial of the Father also. They that deny the Deity of
the Second and Third Persons, in whom the Divinity as truly subsists as in the
First, deny the Deity of the First Person. Whence it irrefragably follows that
a Socinian is an Atheist.

He is so if this Syllogism will prove him to be one, He that denies the
existence of the True God is an Atheist, the Socinian does the former,
therefore he is the latter. The Major is the definition of an Atheist, and
therefore cannot be questioned. The Minor therefore must be proved, which is
easily done thus, He that denies Christ to be the True God, i. e. of the same
substance with the Father, denies the existence of the True God: but a Socinian
denies Christ to be the true God, i. e of the same substance with the Father,
Ergo. The Second Proposition will not be denied by these Gentlemen, therefore I
am to clear the Major, and that is soon done thus, If the denying of the
Divinity of the Son be the denying of the Divinity of the Father, then he that
denies Christ to be the True God, etc. denies the existence of the True God:
but the denying of the Divinity of the Son is the denying of the Divinity of
the Father, Ergo. The first Proposition will be yielded, I conceive therefore I
am to take care of the second, and that is soon done from the forecited Text,
which is the very substance of it, Whosoever denies the Son, the same has not
the Father. The Socinians do the former, therefore they are guilty of the
latter. There is such a Connection between these two, the Father and the Son,
they being Co-essential and Coeternal, that if you deny the Divinity of the
one, you deny that of the other. Therefore they are Atheists that deny the
Divinity of our Savior: therefore in the interpretation and accounts of the
Apostle St. John Socinians are such, for they deny the Divinity of Christ, and
in denying of that deny the Divinity of the Father. And this was the Sense of
the Primitive Christians, and Pious Professors of that Holy Religion, for we
find that Baptism is called (...). Greg. Naz. Orat: 32.
the renouncing of Atheism, and the acknowledgment of the Deity, because in the
Form of Baptism the Trinity is professed and owned, or the Deity as it contains
in it Three Distinct Persons. Those therefore who deny these are chargable with
Atheism; more especially according to the tenor of St. John's Words, and the
acception of the Gospel those are to be taxed with it who deny the Divinity of
our Savior.

Perhaps it may be expected here that I should maintain the contrary Truth, and
formally prove and defend the doctrine of the Blessed Trinity: but because
there have been so many Treatises lately published on this subject, and because
I design a Just Discourse upon it my self, among others which I intend to offer
to the world upon the Articles of the Creed, I will dismiss this Point at
present, after I have made this one request to the Reader, that he would
vouchsafe in the most serious manner to consult the Writings of the New
Testament, and studiously to compare those places together which refer to this
Sublime Matter; and then he will clearly discover the Truth and Reality of it.
Nay, he will be convinced of this from what our Savior himself says
concerning it: for though (for certain good reasons) he was not forward to
declare his Divine Nature and Dignity, yet he often uttered such words as
implied that he was the Eternal Son of God; as when he said, Before Abraham
was, I am, John 8. 58. I and my Father are one, John 10. 30. (which the Jews
well understood, when they laid this to his charge, Thou make thy self God,
v. 32, 33.) He that has seen me, has seen the Father, because we are but One.
John 14. 9. I am in the Father, and the Father in me, v. 10. And to the very
last he owned this, Mat. 26. 63, 64. Mark 14. 62. whereas the Socinians as
resolutely persevere in the denial of it.

And denying him to be God, they consequently disown his Satisfaction, which is
another Black Crime chargable upon them, and that very justly. They allow
Christ to be a Savior, but on this account only because Socin. de Servat. par.
1. c. 2, 3.
he shows us the way to Salvation, and will afterward bestow it upon us. As to
his death, they acknowledge that it was to confirm the New Covenant: by shedding
of his blood he ratified it, as before under the Law the Old Covenant was made
by effusion of blood. But that there was any thing Meritorious and properly
Expiatory in his Death, they stiffly deny: for it is the peremptory decision of
De Servat. par. 3. c. 5.
Socinus himself that Christ did not merit by any thing that he did; and De V.
R. l. 5. c. 20.
Volkelius expressly says the same. Nay, the former of these, to explain
himself, undertakes to show that Praelect. cap. 18.
Christ had nothing in him that was singular, and that he neither did or
suffered any thing that was so. And De Christo Servatore. par. 3. cap. 4.
elsewhere he has these very words, Whatsoever Christ suffered can have in it
no greater virtue than if any mere man whosoever had suffered the same. This is
the opinion they have of the Passion and Death of our Blessed Lord. And to
propagate this they endeavor by all means to vilify his Priesthood. They
manifestly confound his Cat. Racov. de Prophet. Christi munere.
Sacerdotal and Regal Office. And they would persuade us that his Socin. de
Servat. par. 2. c. 15. Praelect. cap. 24. Cat. Racov. c. 8. de Prophet. Christi
munere. Item, de munere Christi Sacerdotali. qu. 8.
Priestly Office did not commence here on Earth, but was first exerted in
heaven. And such like Inventions they have to evade the Satisfaction of Christ,
which they resolve never to admit of. Accordingly Socinus has no less than
fifteen Chapters against it in one Praelect. Theolog.
book: and the three first Parts of an De Christo Servat.
other Treatise are wholly spent on the same subject, and are indeed but a
Repetition of what he said before. And he again insists upon this in his
Disputation with Francken. His Smalc. de Satisfactione contr. Smiglec. Cat.
Racov. de Prophet. Christi mun. cap. 8. Crellius contr. Grotium.
Friends unanimously assert the same doctrine, and professedly declare that
Christ did not by his death satisfy the Divine Justice for our Sins, and
thereby reconcile God to us. And in the same places of their Writings where
they assert this, they also add that God remits the sins of men without any
Compensation to his offended Holiness and Justice, for this they say is
contradictory to the other. Nay, they tell us that Cat. Racov. cap. eod.
there is not in God that Justice whereby he is moved to punish Sin.

But shall we believe the Racovian Catechism or St. Paul's words? God set him
(i. e. Christ) forth to be a Propitiation, to declare his righteousness for the
remission of sins. Romans 3. 25. and in the next verse, to declare his
righteousness, that he might be just, i. e. to make it appear that God would
not pardon sin without Satisfaction made to his Justice. The Holiness and
Righteousness of God's nature, and the opposition of them to Sin oblige him to
animadvert upon it. Wherefore Sin cannot go unpunished, and consequently it
cannot be forgiven without Satisfaction; that is, either the guilty person must
suffer, or the fault and punishment must be transferred on another. And whereas
these Great Masters of Reason alledg that Christ could not be punished because
he was an Innocent Person (for it is injustice to punish the Innocent,) they
cannot deny this to be a Maxim of clear Reason that an Innocent Person may
voluntarily undertake to suffer for one that is Guilty as a man may take
another's Debt upon him, and oblige himself to discharge i^ for him. This is an
act of Mercy an^ Generosity. And much more such w^ Christ's undertaking to
discharge o^ debts, to expiate our sins by suffering for us. And seeing he gave
himself for (...) Tit. 2. 14. i. e. willingly offered himself seeing it was an
act of his Choice an^ Consent, we may conclude that the^ was no Injustice done
him when the gui^ of our sins was laid upon him, and when he bore the
Punishment which was primarily due to us. This is so plain a thin^ that any man
of correct thoughts m^ needs discern it. The Case then is thi^ God would not
pardon the sins of me^ committed against him without some Recompense and
Satisfaction: but we^ could not make Satisfaction for our selves therefore an
Other did it. Christ underwent the Punishment which we deserved, and which
should have been inflicted on us, and thereby he fully satisfied God's Justice,
which, as he is Absolute and Supreme Governor of all the world, requires that
Sin should be punished.

How unreasonably then do the Socinian Writers cry out against this Just and
Wise Dispensation of Heaven? Yea, how Irreligious and Profane are they in
exploding and scoffing at that which is the Only Way of Man's Salvation; I may
justly take up the words of an Ancient and Pious Father on the like occasion,
Theodoret. de Provid. Sermon. 6.
I doubt not but if God had taken another way to effect our Salvation, they
would also have found fault with that, for they are fastidious, and hard to
please, and are only skilled to Cavil at the Mysteries of the Divine
Dispensation. So far as we know, this Particular Method of Redeeming lost Man
was Necessary, because Satisfaction could not otherwise be made to the offended
Majesty of Heaven, nor could the Injury done to him be fully repaired. But we
are sure of this that this Satisfaction and Reparation were really made by
Christ the Son of God.

This is evident from those Texts of Scripture which acquaint us that he took
the Guilt of our Sins upon himself. He was wounded for our transgressions, he
was bruised for our iniquities: the chastisement of our peace was upon him, and
with his stripe^ we are healed. -- The Lord has laid o^ him the iniquity of us
all. -- For the transgression of my people was he stricken. Isai. 53. 5, 7, 8.
In which words it is as eviden^ as any thing possibly can be that the Penalty
which was due to us for our sins and transgressions was transferred on him, and
he thereby Satisfied for us. And this is the meaning of Heb. 9. 28. Christ was
once offered to bear the Sins of many: and of Gal. 3. 13. He was made (...)
Curse for us, he underwent the Punishment for sin which we in our own persons
should have undergone, and particularly he suffered that Cursed death of the
Cross.

His Satisfying for us is plainly denoted by the frequent mention of
Reconciliation, i. e. doing some Great thing whereby he purchased the favor of
God for us, when we were enemies to him. When we were enemies, we were
reconciled to God by the death of his Son, Romans 5. 10. God has reconciled us
to himself by Jesus Christ, 2 Cor. 5. 18. Or, in other terms, v. 19. God was in
Christ reconciling the world unto himself. It pleased the Father that in him
should all fullness dwell, and (having made peace through the blood of his
cross) by him to reconcile all things unto himself, Col. 1. 19, 20, 21. And
accordingly, you has he reconciled in the body of his flesh through death, v.
22. And in several other places this Reconciliation is expressly mentioned. And
whereas they acknowledge (being convicted by these plain Texts) that Christ
reconciled us unto God, but then object that it is not said, He reconciled God
to us, it is a vain and childish suggestion, and a mere playing upon words, and
therefore is not worthy of a serious man, for our being reconciled unto God and
his being reconciled to us amount to the same: one is included in the other, or
one at least follows upon the other. If we are reconciled to God, it is a
natural consequence that God is so to us: and therefore these Objectors show
themselves here (as they do upon several other occasions) to be very Triflers.

The Satisfaction made by our Savior is likewise manifest from those places of
the New Testament which make mention of his sufferings for us, dying for us,
laying down his life for us, Mat. 20. 28. John 10. 11, 15. Romans 5. 6. 2 Cor. 5.
14, 15. 1 Thessalonians. 5. 9, 10. Heb. 2. 9. 1 Pet. 2. ^1. 3. 18. and many other
places which inform us that Christ freely substituted himself in the room of
lost men, and suffered in their stead.

And this doctrine is undeniably proved from those Texts which represent Christ
as a real Romans 3. 25. 1 John 22. 4. 10.
Propitiation and Romans 5. 11.
Atonement for our sins, and consequently as a true and proper Expiation for
them, I say proper, because Socinus and his brethren are not backward to
acknowledge that he expiated for Sin, but then they mean it not in the proper
sense, i. e. that he delivered us from the guilt of Sin by the efficacy and
merit of his Blood. This likewise is plainly set forth to us in those Texts, 1
Cor. 5. 7. Christ our Passover (i. e. our Paschal Lamb) is sacrificed for us.
Ephesians. 5. 2. He has given himself for us an Offering and a Sacrifice for a
sweetsmelling savor: especially those in the Chap. 9. 26. 10. 10, 12. and
other places.
Epistle to the Hebrews, which speak of Christ's Offering himself, and being a
Sacrifice, and thereby making an Atonement unto God for us upon earth: which
destroys that Senseless Fiction of theirs, that he was not a Priest till he
came to Heaven. This is undeniable that where the Oblation of the Sacrifice is,
there is the Priest; now, it was here upon Earth that he was a Sacrifice, he
offered his own blood upon the Cross, and therefore he was a Priest upon Earth.
Therefore it is said, When he had by himself purged our sins (viz. here by his
blood) he sat down on the right hand of the Majesty on high, Heb. 1. 3. He
first offered himself a Propitiatory Sacrifice for us, and then appeared in
glory and triumph in heaven.

Other Texts speak of Christ's ransoming us, Mat. 20. 28. 1 Timothy 2. 6. and of
redeeming us, Romans 3. 24. 1 Cor. 1. 30. And this Redemption was by his Blood,
Ephesians. 1. 17. 1 Pet. 1. 18. called the Blood of God. Acts 20. 28. This was the
Price that was paid for us, and so it was a Proper Redemption. This Price was
paid to God's Justice, to free us from the Penalty which was due by the Law, to
rescue us from eternal wrath and misery.

This is the doctrine which the Holy Scripture teaches us, and this is the
faith of all who rightly understand those Writings, viz. that Christ suffered
and died to satisfy the Divine Justice in our stead, and thereby to expiate
for our sins, and to redeem us from death and hell, and to purchase life and
salvation for us. The Socinians deny this, and thereby subvert the whole
Gospel, turn Christianity upside down, ruin the very foundations of our
Religion, and pluck it up by the roots. According to the doctrine of these Men
we are yet in our sins, for there is no True Expiation for them; we are in a
State of Misery, we are overwhelmed with our own Guilt, we are hopeless
helpless creatures, and our condition is deplorate, for there is no
Satisfaction made to God for our transgressions.

Nay, they are not content barely to renounce the contrary doctrine, but they
explode it with great derision and reproach. First, as to Christ's Merits, we
are told by Cont. Frantz. Disp. 4.
Smalcius that it was taught by Socinus and Ostorodus that the opinion of those
is false, absurd and pernicious who have invented and feigned that there is any
such thing as Merit in Christ. And Smalcius himself is bold to call it Ibid.
the Fictitious Merit of Christ: and in another place, Disp. 6.
that Dream of Merit. Then, as to the Satisfaction it self, he is not afraid to
style it Homil. 4. in 1. Johan.
a Fiction that has its rise from the brains of curious men. And in his De
Morte Christi. qu. 12.
Catechism he has these reproachful words, Though now it is vulgarly thought
by Christians that Christ by his death merited Salvation for us, and fully
satisfied for our sins, yet it is a deceitful opinion, erroneous and very
pernicious. Yea, this doctrine of Christ's Satisfaction is termed Absurd and
Impious by De Servatore.
Socinus. I appeal now to the Reader whether I need prove that those who use
such language deserve the last of these Epithets themselves.

But are the English and Modern Gentlemen of the same opinion? Yes; as you may
see in Mr. Bidle's Scripture Catechism as he calls it, but very unjustly) Chap.
12. where he shamefully corrupts the sense of Scripture to render his Opinion
plausible. If you consult A Letter of Resolution concerning the doctrine of the
Trinity. p. 7.
one of their Later Writers you will find him in a deriding manner thus
representing the doctrine of the Trinitarians, viz. that God the Son being
incarnate in our nature fulfilled for us all obedience by his active
righteousness, and by his passive one he more than exhausted all that
Punishment that is or can be due to Sin. Whatever he did, was for us, and what
he suffered was in our stead: and one drop of his blood was sufficient to
ransom a thousand worlds from the demerit of their Sins. And then they labor
to show that the belief of such doctrine is of very ill consequence, it (...)
the cause of the decay of Piety, and it is tha^ which bolsters men up in their
wicked courses Afterward in way of derision they thus express the doctrine of
Christ's Satisfaction, Because they (i. e. the Trinitarians) pretend that God
was incarnate and suffered in our stead, they are forced to this conclusion,
that God hat^ freely pardoned, and yet was infinitely overpaid for all our
transgressions and sins; that of his mere Grace, the abundance and riches of
his grace (forsooth) he will pardon and save the peniten^ because he has
received for them ((...) you will believe it) a price of Redemption, etc. These
Tenants they scoff at a^ branches growing upon the Trinitarian Stock, these
they brand as scandalous, absurd, and heretical doctrines, p. 11. 12, 14. I^ an
The Antitrinitarian Scheme of Religion. p. 18.
other place they declare that the Oblation which Christ made of himself, was
not made to the Justice of God, or by way of a full reparation to it, but as
all other Sacrifices (of beasts) formerly were, an oblation or application to
the mercy of God, and (as it is added) by way of humble suit. In the same place
they represent Christ's Satisfaction as a Monster, and scoffingly call it the
Trinitarians Fetch-back, though presently after they seem to retract this
Jargon. In a pretended Chap. 6. and 8.
Letter to the Clergy of both Universities these New Racovians again ridicule
this doctrine, and so they do in some others of their late Pamphlets; which
makes their Character very wretched and dismal, and to be abhorred by all Good
Men and sincere Lovers of Christianity, for it is too manifest that Heb. 10. 29.
they tread under foot the Son of God, and count the blood of the Covenant an
unholy thing, and do despite unto the Spirit of grace. Thus you see how the
doctrine of Socinianism, as it respects God in general, and more particularly
the Persons of the Godhead, and in a more especial manner the Second Person or
Lord Christ Jesus and his Undertakings, you see (I say) how extremely vitiated
it is, and fitted to the conceptions and notions of Profane and Atheistical
Spirits.

CHAP. IV.
They maintain that the First Man was not created in a State of Uprightness;
notwithstanding the Writings of the Old and New Testament expressly assert the
contrary. Original Sin, though attested in the same Holy Writings, is
pronounced a Fable by them. Their groundless notion concerning the Spirit and
Divine Assistance. With the Pelagians they hold that Man's Natural Strength is
sufficient in order to faith and obedience. What are vain and lying words
according to Slichtingius. Their strange conceptions concerning the Future
State. It is their opinion that the Souls of the deceased are void of all
Perception and Sense; that they Live not, yea that they Exist not. Which
notions are proved to be contrary to Scripture and Reason. The Immortality of
humane Souls is shocked by these Men. Which shows their Irreligious and
Atheistical Propension. Some of them disbelieve the Resurrection of the Wicked.
They deny that the dead shall rise with the same Bodies. It is unreasonable to
deny this merely because of some Difficulties that attend it. Though we should
suppose an Annihilation of human^ bodies, yet God can raise them the same. Much
more may we conceive the same bodies to be raised out of something. The very
notion of Resurrection implies the rising again of the same Individual Body.
This doctrine is founded on the eviden^ testimony of Scripture. It is showed i^
what respects the contrary opinion is an argument of Impiety.

THirdly, I proceed to consider the Groundless and Irreligious Sentiments of
these Men concerning the First Man, and the State he was in at his first
Creation. They all agree in this, tha^ though Adam had a natural ability to do
what God enjoined him, yet he was not created in a State of Uprightness. He is
said, to be made upright, Eccl. 7. 29. because he was not created depraved, but
if we speak properly, he had no Natural Rectitude or Righteousness. So Pr^ct.
cap. 3.
Socinus. And therefore he gives us his judgment very decisively thus, Let us
conclude that Adam even before he transgressed the commandment of God, was not
truly Just. Instit. cap. 1.
Ostorodus has the very same thoughts of him: and another Smalc. contr.
Smiglec. de Dei filio. cap. 7.
Warm Gentleman (who is much applauded and admired by the Party) tells us
plainly, but in no very clean language, that it is an old, stinking Fable that
the first Man was adorned from his very creation with holiness and supernatural
gifts. But what if this Fable be in Scripture? Yes most certainly: that which
he in such vile terms represents as such, is the doctrine of the Old and New
Testament. God created man in his own image, Genesis 1. 27. And that we may be
more ascertained of it, it is repeated in the very same place, in the image of
God created he him. And that this Image consists in Holiness and Righteousness
is clear from Ephesians. 4. 24. and Col. 3. 10. where the Apostle speaking of the
Image of God in which man was at first created, places it in Righteousness and
true holiness, as well as knowledge. How then can it be said by these Writers
that the Image of God wherein our first Parents were created did not consist in
Sanctity and Righteousness? how can it with truth be said by them that there
was no Positive Moral Goodness and Rectitude in them? This is directly contrary
to what the Inspired Writers deliver concerning them. Let the Reader now judge
on which side the Fable is, and at the same time let him judge how impiously the
foresaid Writer represents the Word of God as an Old stinking Fable.

To proceed, There being according to these New Theologists no Original
Righteousness in the first Man, his posterity cannot be deprived of it, and
accordingly they deny Original Sin, i. e. though they hold man's nature is
corrupted and depraved, yet they say it was not at all derived from our First
Parents: there is no defect, blemish or depravity, propagated to their
posterity. Praelect. cap. 4. De Christo Servatore. par. 4. cap. 6. De Officio
viri Christiani, cap. 5.
Socinus frequently vouches this, and so do Volkelius de V. R. l. 5. c. 18.
Smalc. Disp. 4. de Justificat. De Pecc. Orig. disp. 2. De Poenitent. disp. 2.
Catech. Racov. de libero Arbit. qu. 2. Slichting. Comment. in Romans 5. 12, 13.
Comment. in Johan. 9. 3, 34. Episcop. Instit. l. 4.. 5. c. 2.
several of his Partisans, who appear in great throngs upon this occasion, and
with one consent profess that by Adam's Apostasy the nature of man is not
depraved: men are not born with a propension and inclination to that which is
Vicious by reason of that First Defection. The contrary opinion is according to
Socinus an arrant Cheat and Imposture, for these are his own words, Quod Regn.
Polon. etc. cap. 5.
Whatever evil effects in mankind the EVANGELICKS (i. e. the Protestants) and
PAPISTS attribute to the first sin of our First Parent, it must needs be that
they are Vain Fictions and Dreams of men. Whatever Divines dispute about
Original Sin, it is all of it clearly to be reckoned as the mere invention and
forgery of humane wit. And then he pretends in another place to trace its
Pedigree, and to give you the Rise of it, Di^g de Justificat.
That Device of Original Sin is a Jewish Fable, and brought into the Church
from Antichrist.

If this be true, then St. Paul's doctrine is fabulous, By one man sin entered
into the world, Romans 5. 12. By one man's disobedidience many were made Sinners,
v. 19. And this Great and Infallible Apostle himself must be reputed Judaical
and Antichristian when he adds that death entered by sin (i. e. by that One
Man's Sin spoken of before) and so death passed upon all men, for that all have
sinned, viz. in that first Man. And again, v. 17. By one man's offense death
reigned by one. Hence it is evident that Adam and his race became Mortal
because of this First Transgression. But Socinus is of another opinion, for it
is the first thing you meet with in his Pr^lections, that the first man before
his f^ was by nature mortal. De Div. Christi. cap. 7.
Smalcius will by no means grant that Adam was created in a state of
Immortality, but that he was naturally Mortal, and though he had not sinned,
yet he should have died. With whom agrees De V. R. l. 3. c. 11.
Volkelius, confidently asserting that Mortality is not the effect and
punishment of the Fall. And the rest of them hold that Adam's Sin endamaged
himself, but no body else: his posterity suffered not; they derived no
Infection, no Stain, no Depravity from him. But are the English Socinians of
this mind? Yes, for the Effects and Consequences which we ascribe to Adam's
Fall are flatly denied by Bidle in his Scripture-Catechism, chap. 3. And in The
Trinitarian Sche^e of Religion. p. 21, 22.
one of their late Prints the Natural Depravity of man, i. e. his propensity to
evil and his aversness to good are represented as false and absurd. And a
little before they peremptorily deny that Adam's race have any sin derived,
much less imputed to them, and that they are punished for it. God cannot
possibly do this, they say; yea they have the confidence to add these horrid
words, P. 11.
that this is the just character of an Almighty Devil. Accordingly they cry
down Original Sin as a mere Sham and Imposture.

And hence issue a great many Unsound Assertions, which are in great vogue with
all Socinians. If there be no Corruption conveyed to Adam's race, if they
received no hurt by his Fall, then they have (as he had) a natural power to do
all that God requires of them. They still have an ability by nature to embrace
all good, and to avoid all evil; which are the express terms used by their
Socin Praelect cap. 5. Smalc de Justific. disp. 4.
Writers. And hear what their De Prophet. Christi munere cap. 6. qu. and resp.
9.
Catechism says: Qu. Is there not need of the inward gift of the Holy Spirit
that we may believe the Gospel? A. Not at all. And the reason is assigned
afterward, namely because this is a gift that is conferred upon such as already
believe the Gospel. Here you see what is the Racovian Divinity, It is not the
Spirit of God that enlightens men's minds, and enables them to receive the
Truth: the Spirit of God is not the original of all Grace in us. This is clear
from that notion which they form concerning the Holy Spirit, by which is meant,
say Cat. Rac. de proph. Christi mun. c. 6. Resp. 8.
they, in the writings of the New Testament, first the Gospel, secondly a firm
and certain hope of eternal life. This is the only acception of the word Spirit
in the New Testament so far as we that are under the present dispensation of
the Gospel are concerned. As for the former, all Christians enjoy it; as to the
latter, it is given only to those that believe and obey the Gospel; whence it
necessarily follows that it is not requisite before our belief or obedience.
There is no such thing as the Spirit in order to these, i. e. in order to the
producing of them in our hearts and lives.

But though they thus in plain terms renounce the Spirit, is there not some
Divine Help necessarily requisite for the begetting of faith and holiness in
us? Yes, Ibid. cap. 10. qu. and (...). 8.
they grant there is an Outward Help vouchsafed, viz. the Promises and
Threatenings in the Scripture. And there is an Inward one, but what is that? It
is no other than this, Resp. 9.
God's sealing what he has promised, in the hearts of those that obey him:
which is the same with what was mentioned before, viz. a certain hope of
eternal life, and this is wrought in those that already believe and obey. So
that it is manifest when they speak of the Spirit and Divine help, they mean no
previous assistance or operation in order to believing and obeying. These
spiritual acts according to them are not the product of Divine Grace, and the
Help of the Spirit, for they do not follow these, but go before them. This is
the exact account of the Racovian Persuasion concerning this matter.

The present Set of Unitarians hold the same: they scoff at the particular aids
and efficacy of the Spirit in order to Conversion; Trinitarian Scheme of
Religion. p. 24.
they mock at the inward word which God speaks to the heart, whereby the word
written or preached is rendered effectual, whereby Sinners are first convinced,
and then reclaimed. They, with Nicodemus, profess that P. 26.
they know nothing of this mavelous doctrine, they cannot imagine what kind of
thing this inward word is. They will not by any means allow P. 21.
that all is done in Religion by the Grace of God and the assistance of the
Spirit, beginning, continuing and perfecting good actions in us. This was the
very Heresy of Pelagi^s; he and his abettors held it was in every man's
natural power to believe and repent, without any inward operation of the Grace
of God, or influence of the Holy Ghost. In this the Socinians agree with the
Old Pelagians, if the Writers of those times give us a true account of them.
These let us know that it was confidently affirmed by them that it is in the
power of man to choose spiritual good without the special assistance of God:
yea, that it is possible to keep the Commandments so strictly and exactly that
they shall not stand in need of Pardon: that they may arrive to such a
Perfection in this life that they shall be able to live without sin, as Epist.
ad Cresc.
St. Jerome and Lib. 2. de Peccat. Merit.
St. Augustine (who narrowly inquired into the Sentiments of these men) expressly
inform us. That the Socinians have a Touch of this last (to say no more) might
easily be proved from what is said by Cont. Frantz. disput. 12.
Smalcius and Eth. l. 2. c. 6.
Crellius, and Scripture. Catechism. chap. 16.
Bidle, and others of them; and indeed it partly follows from the abovesaid
Principle. But the falseness and impiety of it are discernible by those who
regulate their thoughts and apprehensions by the Holy Scriptures, and who
attend to that The 10th.
Article of our Church, The condition of man after the fall of Adam is such
that he cannot turn and prepare himself by his own natural strength and good
works to faith and calling upon God. Wherefore we have no power to do good
works pleasant and acceptable to God, without the grace of God by Christ
preventing us, that we may have a good will, and working with us when we have
that good will. There is nothing plainer and clearer in the New Testament than
this, that man can do nothing without the particular assistance of God that
will be available to his Salvation. And if any man asserts the contrary, he
makes void the Undertakings of Jesus Christ, for he came to redeem us and save
us because we were not able of our selves to effect any such thing. Wherefore
to say we that can of our selves and by our own natural strength do the things
that are acceptable to God, and will be conducible to our Eternal Salvation, is
to render the Redemption of Christ useless and unnecessary. And this is that
which the persons I am speaking of drive at, and thereby undermine Christianity
it self.

In brief, judge of the Doctrines of the Socinians from what we find in
Slichting. in Ephesians. 5. 6
one of the Heartiest Souls of them all, who in his Commentary on the Epistle
to the Ephesians reckons these following Particulars among Vain and Lying
Words, i. e. Groundless and False Doctrines, viz. Justification by the grace of
God, and not by good works; Christ's Obedience, and his dying for our sins,
Faith in Christ, Confession, Repentance, Remission of Sins, Baptism and the
other Sacrament. Also he reckons up among these the Fall of Adam, Divine
Predestination and Election, and afterward false opinions concerning God, and
Christ, and the Holy Spirit, i. e. (according to his meaning) the believing of
the Sacred Trinity. Need I now come with my old Charge? Do not these men talk
like Infidels?

Fourthly, I proceed to display their strange conceptions concerning the Future
State, and those things which relate to it; and to examine whether upon that
account they deserve the Character that was given them. I will reduce all to
these Four Heads, viz. their persuasions concerning the Souls of the deceased,
concerning the General Resurrection, concerning the Last Judgment, and
concerning the Punishment that follows it. And the Reader will soon perceive
that their apprehensions about all these speak them to be Irreligiously
disposed. Nay, it will be as plain and evident as any Demonstration in
Mathematics that these Writers promote the Cause of Atheists in the world.

First, As to the Souls of those that are dead, Epist. 5. ad Volkel.
Socinus holds that till the Resurrection they are devoid of all perception and
sensation. In these formal words he speaks, The Soul of Man, after this life
does not so subsist of it self as that it is sensible of any rewards or pains,
or that it is capable of feeling them. And he adds that this is his firm
opinion. And that we may not mistake him, he adjoyns this, It sufficiently
appears that my sentiment is this, viz. that the soul of man does not so live
after his death, as that of it self it is capable of rewards and punishments.
His friend Smalcius is more positive and downright, for these are his words,
Exam. cent. Errorum.
We firmly believe that the deceased Saints exist not: for (as he explains
himself) the body perishes, and the soul has no life and perception; therefore
it may be said that the Saints exist not at all (null^ modo.) In an De vero and
not. Dei filio cap. 6.
other place he asserts that Souls departed live not the life of Spirits, and
adds that it is contrary to Scripture to assert otherwise. And further, If
souls lived thus, it could not be said, that the dead ARE NOT, because they ARE
as is their chief part. If you would know the ground of this opinion, it is
this, The Soul (they say) cannot live without the Body, and therefore when this
dies, the other does so too. The foresaid Author expresses it thus, Cont.
Frantz. disp. 7. de extremo judicio
As the body without the spirit is a carkase, so the spirit without the body
can exert no actions, i. e. is as it were a carkase, is dead: and in an De Div.
Christi. cap. 13.
other place he is as peremptory. Comment. in (...) C^. 20.
Slichtingius labors to prove that humane souls live not on this side of the
last and general Resurrection, which appears from their not having a Sense of
any thing between the time after their departure hence and the Resurrection.
The dead are not sensible, says he, and accordingly Separate Souls having no
sense and perception are concluded to have no life. Again in an In Heb. 11. 40.
other place in his Commentary he says the Souls of the just are not sensible
of Happiness till after the Resurrection. De V. R. l. 3. c. (...)
Volkelius would seem at first to be a Trimmer, for he tells us the Soul
neither dies nor lives, it is neither mortal nor immortal. But when he comes to
explain himself, he lets us see that he is no dissenter from his brethren, but
concludes with them that the Souls of the departed are insensible of any thing
before their reunion with the bodies. Nay, as you shall hear afterward, he
improves this Insensibility into an Extinction. I will mention In Epist. 1
Petr. cap. 1. v. 5.
Crellius in the last place, though he is a Racovian of the first Rate; he
gives it us as his persuasion that the souls of the dead have no perception, no
knowledge of any thing. And in an In Epist. ad Hebr ^p. 11. v. 40.
other place he determines that the departed Saints enjoy not the Happiness of
Heaven before the End of the World. And In Epist. ad Hebr. cap. 12. v. 22.
afterward he undertakes the Proof of this, and produces Eight Arguments for
this purpose; but he generally founds it on this Hypothesis, that there is no
Perception without the Body, and therefore till there be a Reunion of soul and
body the deceased can have no feeling of Celestial Joys, they remain destitute
of all s^se. Thus they all agree that Humane Spirits after death have no Life
or Activeness (for one is synonymous with the other) no capacity of exerting
themselves.

But what can be more contrary to those discoveries which are made to us in the
Sacred and Inspired Writings? Our Blessed Savior says, God is not the God of
the dead, but of the living Mat. 22. 32. which words are spoken of Abraham,
Isaac and Jacob who are long since departed this life, wherefore it is
undeniably evident that these Patriarchs live. But they do not live as to their
bodies, therefore it must be meant of their Souls. The same Infallible
Instructor ascertains us that he who hears his word, and believes in him who
sent him, is passed from death to life, John 5. 24. Which words though they may
be interpreted concerning a state of spiritual death and spiritual life in this
world, yet they have a fuller meaning, and comprehend in them the passing of
believers at their death into a better life than they had before, viz. that
which is Everlasting, of which he speaks in the very same verse. And such are
said to be passed (as if it were already done, which is usual in the
Scripture-stile) because of the Certainty of the thing hereafter. But the
Socinian Theology runs counter to this, they say believers pass from life to
death, to a state that is wholly incapable of sense, life or action. Those
words of our Savior, this day shall thou be with me in paradise, Luke 23. 43.
prove that the Soul enjoys it self immediately after death, and is in a state
of Bliss and Happiness. The Apostle had a desire to depart, and to be with
Christ, Phil. 1. 23. and assigns this as a reason, which is far better, that
is, far better than to abide in the flesh, to continue in this world, which he
speaks of both before and after these words. But according to Socinus's
followers it is far worse, for after the Soul's departure from the body it has
no understanding, no perception at all of Christ, or any thing appertaining to
him.

Again, these men confront not only Scripture but reason: they show themselves
as bad Philosophers as Divines, for if they had a right apprehension of the
Nature of Humane Souls, they would not talk after this rate. Their notion
destroys the very Soul of man, for it deprives it of its Essential and
Inseparable Quality, which is Thinking. And besides, they grossly imagine that
the Body helps the Soul in its operations, yea that this cannot subsist without
the assistance of that; whereas according to the best notions we can form of
the body, as it is now corrupted, it is a hindrance to the operation of the
Soul. And as for the Soul, it is so far from being worsted by its Separation
that it is in a much better condition as to its actings than it was. Death is
but snuffing of this Candle (so it is called Prove. 20. 27.) it makes it shine
the brighter. When the Soul leaves the Body, it becomes more brisk and active
than ever, being freed from that fleshly clog and luggage which depressed it.
This is True Philosophizing, but the other is the very dregs of Epicurism. It
degrades the Rational Part of Man, especially that of Good Men, for all
Separate Souls according to them go to the same place, the wicked and the godly
are alike as to that, there is no difference between them till the Resurrection
and Last Judgment. Which is a great deal worse than the doctrine of the Church
of Rome, which assigns different Limbus's to the good and bad. And then, they
are all equal as to this, that they are Senseless, and incapable of knowing or
acting, or any ways exerting themselves. Though the Soul exists, yet it is as
if it were not, it has nothing of its True Nature, which is in a manner
thrusting the Rational Spirit out of its being. Who does not see that the
belief of the Insensibility and Inactivity of the Soul makes way for the belief
of its Non-subsistence after the death of the body? And so all Religion is
dampt, and the hopes of a Future State are quite laid in the dust.

The Socinian Writers verge upon this: thus from the pen of one of the Authors
before mentioned we have such words as these concerning the Soul, Volkel de V.
R. l. 3. c. 11.
Properly speaking, it neither dies nor lives, but only causes Life as long as
it is joined to the Body: wherefore properly speaking, it cannot be said to be
Immortal, for Immortality belongs only to those beings which themselves
actually live. And speaking another time concerning the Souls that are
separated from their bodies, he intimates their Nonexistence for a time, for
he applies those words to this purpose, Lib. 3. cap. 19.
for to be raised from the dead is no other than to exist again after a ceasing
to be. And you heard before what another of their Writers said, viz. that the
Saints departed exist not. Why is this said but to shake the belief of the
Soul's Immortality, and to make men stagger about this Important Point? It is
said that Servetus held the Soul to be Mortal, and Wolzogen in 6 Meditat.
M^phys. C^rtes.
One of their late Writers (a German Noble Man who left his Country, and came
over to Racovia, one that has a Great Encomium from the Party) makes way for
this Epicurean notion by publishing to the world that though it be easily
granted that the Soul is not made of bone or flesh or muscles, or nerves, etc.
yet it remains doubtful whether it be not a very Thin Body consisting of
Vapor, or Air, or Either diffused through this Crass Body. And indeed if God
himself be but a Finer Sort of Body (as these Racovian Writers represent him)
it is no wonder that they imagine the Soul of Man to be such, for why should
they exalt it above the nature of the Supreme Being? So the everlasting
subsistence both of God and of the Souls of Men is hereby shocked. As to the
latter of which I desire it may be observed that though Smalcius (one of their
Great Scribes) will by no means be thought to deny the Immortality of them,
because that may seem a little too gross, yet he industriously and purposely
evades, yea opposes (and so do some others of the Persuasion) those Texts of
Scripture which are made use of by Divines to prove the Soul's Immortality and
Subsistence after the death of the body.

This shows what they are inclinable to, this acquaints us that they have but
an indifferent opinion of the Immortality of Humane Souls, which the very Pagan
Philosophers with great earnestness and concern asserted. Is not here then
(...) great defect of Religious Principles? i^ not here a demonstration of the
Impio^ Disposition of their Minds? Do they no^ discover a tendency to that
received doctrine of the Atheists, that the Soul is of (...) perishing
condition, and survives not the funerals of the body? Which opens (...) broad
door to all Licentiousness and Profaneness.

Then as to the Resurrection, which i^ the next thing I am to speak of, the^
have been some of the Socinian Way tha^ absolutely denied the Resurrection of
the Wicked, and in order to that their subsisting after this life. Let any man
impartially scan what their Adored Epist. 6. ad Volkel.
Patriarch^ and what Instit. cap. 41.
Ostorodus says, and he will suspect them to have inclined this way. But it is
true the former of these professes himself unwilling Epist. praedict. ad Volkel.
to give offense to some, and therefore does not wholly deny that the Impious
shall rise at the last day. I confess I find not any of their Celebrated
Writers plainly and expressly asserting this; yea, one or two of them very
expressly declare against it. But this is that which may unexceptionably be laid
to their Charge, that though generally they own a future Rising from the dead
both of the just and unjust, yet they deny that they shall rise with the same
bodies. They are the express words of Smalcius, Exam. cent. ertorum.
We believe not that these bodies, which we now carry about us, shall rise
again, Volkelius expresses the sense of the rest when he tells us that our
bodies which shall be raised at the last day De V R. l. 3. c. 35.
shall have not only other qualities, but another matter of substance, and in
plainer terms, Other bodies shall be substituted in their room. And what is the
reason? because, says he, these bodies which we now have shall vanish, perish,
and consequently we shall never more have any thing to do with them.

These Great Pretenders to Reason cannot digest the Identity of the Dying and
Rising body, because they think it is a doctrine too hard to be conceived, it
contains many Difficulties in it which it is not easy to solve. But what then?
must it therefore be counted Unreasonable and Incredible? I deny the
Consequence, for there are many things which are hard to be understood, and yet
we freely give assent to the truth of them. We meet with several Occurrences,
of which we cannot give an exact and punctual account. Some Secrets in Nature
are inveloped with an impenetrable Veil. God has done more than we are in a
capacity to comprehend. He is pleased to reserve some things from our clear and
distinct knowledge, and yet every wise man believes the reality of them. It is
so here, a Christian man believes that the same flesh which was dissolved by
death shall be united to the soul at the last day, although he is not able to
assign the Manner and Way of it. But he looks upon the thing it self as very
Reasonable, because raising of the Same Flesh is possible with Him with whom
nothing is impossible. Suppose the bodies of the dead to be reduced to nothing;
notwithstanding this, he can bring them again into being, for this was the case
of all things at first: they were not, and afterward they were by God's
Almighty Power. Shall we then think it impossible for him to resuscitate the
same body, though we should grant it to have been for a time annihilated? It is
true, God cannot make the same body to be, and not to be at the same time,
because this is a plain Contradiction, but he can make the body to exist at the
last day which had lost its existence for a time. And so all the Objections
about humane bodies being eaten and devoured by men or beasts, and those beasts
eaten by Men, etc. are easily removed.

But we need not go so high to solve the Phoenomenon, for supposing no
Annihilation, it is sufficient to say that (...). Isidor. Pelus. Epist. l. 2.
He that made the body of nothing will much more raise it again when it is
something: or with another of the Ancients, Theodoret. de Provid. Orat. 9.
He that made all things with a Word can easily Restore Man's body, for it is
much easier to renew what is decayed than to make those things which are not,
without Materials. And, as another Primitive Writer argues, Difficilius est id
quod non sit incipere quam id quod fuetit iterate. Minut. Felix.
It is more difficult to begin that which is not, than to iterate that which
was. And again in the same place, that does not perish with God which is taken
out of our Sight. The body is changed this and that way, and seems to
disappear, but Deo elementorum custodi reservatur. Ibid.
it is kept safe by the Great Guardian of the Elements, he that takes care of
all bodies. And thence he concludes that there shall be a Resurrection of the
same individual body at the last day. And truly this is so Reasonable a thing
that, if we deny it, we deny the Resurrection it self, for if the raised bodies
at the last day shall not have the same substance that they now have, they will
not be Our Bodies, and consequently there is no Rising again of our bodies. For
nothing is raised but what fell or was laid down (for Rising answers to these,)
but that Matter which is supposed to be substituted in the room of our bodies
did not fall, was not laid down, therefore it cannot Rise, and consequently
there is no Rising again at all. This Argument is thus represented by a Bishop
Pearson on 11th. Article of the Creed.
Great Man, The Identity of the body raised from death is so necessary, that
the very name of the Resurrection does include or suppose it; so that when I
say, there shall be a Resurrection of the dead, I must intend thus much, that
the bodies of Men which lived and are dead, shall revive and rise again. For at
the death of man nothing falls but his Body: the spirit goes upward, and no
other body falls but his own; and therefore the body, and no other but that
body, must rise again, to make a Resurrection. So that it follows hence that
those who disbelieve the Resurrection of the same body, in effect deny the
Article of the Resurrection of the body, for the same body must rise, or none
at all.

This is evident from 2 Cor. 5. 10. We must all appear before the judgment seat
of Christ, that every one may receive the things done in his body. The same
individual body that died must revive, that the same bodies wherein sin was
committed may be punished for sinning. And who can resist the force of those
plain words, Rev. 20. 13. which are spoken of the general Resurrection at the
last day? The sea shall give up the dead that are in it, and death and the
grave deliver up the dead which are in them. What means this giving and
delivering up the dead in those places, unless the very same bodies that fell
are to rise? For bodies might be made and shaped out of matter in any other
Places, if the dead were not to appear at the day of Judgment in their own
bodies, in the very bodies they laid down in the grave, or in the sea, or any
other Place. It is true, they shall not be the same as to their condition and
quality, for this corruptible must put on incorruption, and this mortal
immortality, but their identity shall be preserved in respect of their nature
and substance, these being the same that they were at their fall. This doctrine
(says that Excellent Writer before named) is most agreeable to the language of
the Scriptures, to the Principles of Religion, to the constant Profession of
the Church. And being so, it is no wonder that it is disrelish'd by the Persons
I am speaking of, who are wont to disregard the Sacred Writings, to subvert the
Principles of Christianity, and to slight the suffrage of the Universal Church.

In all which they manifest an Irreligious temper: and more especially in
disbelieving and opposing this Explication of the Article of the Creed they
have showed an Atheistical Spirit, which always disgusts that Truth which flows
from the Scriptures, and is revealed to us by the Holy Spirit in them; for
herein they let us see that they are backward to give credit to the Supreme
Truth God himself. And besides, there is a farther Tang of Impiety in this
Opinion of theirs, because it bereaves God of the Glory of his Infinite Power
in reuniting the same bodies to the same souls at the last day: it eclipses the
honor of his Mercy in rewarding believers in the same flesh wherein they
served and worshipped him in this life: it obscures his Justice in punishing
sinners in those very fleshly Vehicles which they had here on earth, and
wherein they did so much mischief in the world. And lastly, it being such a
Diminishment of the doctrine of the Resurrection, it is to be feared it will
have too great an influence on the lives and conversations of men. They being
dissetled as to the full belief of this, they will waver in their Faith of the
Future State, they will be regardless of that Mighty Concern, and they will be
backward to fit themselves for it. Thus the Racovian doctrine is an impediment
to Religion, and a nourisher of Vice and Ungodliness.

CHAP. V.
Their false apprehensions concerning the Last Judgment are detected. They are
not consentaneous to the design of that Great Transaction. They are contrary to
that Description which is given of it in Scripture. They are a gratification to
Atheists. It is their belief and profession that the Ungodly after the
Resurrection shall not suffer Torment, but shall be Annihilated. This is
disproved from Luke 10. 14. Mat. 18. 8. Mark 9. 44. 2 Cor. 5. 10. An Objection
answered. The Perniciousness of this doctrine, and its tendendency to Atheism
on several accounts. I^ is no wonder that Socinianism, for the sake of this
doctrine, is plausible. Nevertheless the doctrine is irrational and groundless,
and exploded by some of the Wisest Pagans.

THIS will be further discovered in their notion concerning the Last Judgment:
which, say they, consists not in any Trial or Judging of the World, in any
calling them to Account, but only in assigning them their different lots and
conditions. To be judged, says In Heb. 9. 27.
Slichtingius, is to be rewarded or punished. De V. R. l. 3. c. 33.
Volkelius makes no distinction between the Judging and Punishing of the
wicked. The Judge knows who are to be saved, and who to be damned, and therefore
need not use any Formal Citation, or lay open men's lives. But those who talk
thus should remember that human actions are to be exposed at that day, not
because God has not a perfect knowledge of them, but because it is his Pleasure
that Men should be acquainted with them, that the Good Actions of the righteous
may be applauded, and that the Evil ones of the unrighteous may be condemned in
the face of the whole World. That this is the will of God we learn from the
Sacred Writ: and where can it be learnt but there? Therefore for these men to
Argue, and reason the matter, notwithstanding the express will and appointment
of God, is a sign of a very perverse and irreligious frame of mind. Is not the
Transaction of the Last day represented to us as a Formal Judiciary Process?
Does not the Scripture speak of the Judge, Acts 10. 42. 2 Timothy 4. 8. Heb. 12.
23. Jam. 5. 9. of the Judgment Seat, Romans 14. 10. 2 Cor. 5. 10. or the Throne
or Tribunal for Judgment, Rev. 20. 11? and yet will there be no Judging? Is it
not said with particular respect to that day, that God will bring to light the
hidden things of darkness, and make manifest the counsels of the hearts? 1 Cor.
4. 5. Is it not said, he will bring every work into Judgment, with every secret
thing, whether it be good, or whether it be evil? Eccl. 12. 14. And do we
question then whether there will be this Judicial Action, which we properly
call Judging or Trying? I^ there shall be this Manifestation of the Hearts and
Actions of Men, can we imagine that rewarding and punishing at that day are the
very same with Judging?

Further, it is said expressly that then Men shall give an Account, viz. of
their words and actions, Mat. 12. 36. Heb. 13. 17. 1 Pet. 4. 5. and can any but
Volkelius imagine that De V. R. l. 3. c. 34.
this Form of Speech signifies that they shall be punished, if they be guilty
of such and such Crimes? Again, in the Description of the General Resurrection
and Last Judgment it is said, The Books were opened, and the dead were judged
out of those things that were written in the books, Rev. 20. 12. which imports
that there shall be a Scanning of their Lives; their Thoughts, words and deeds
shall be plainly Discovered: these as well as the Persons of Men shall appear
before the Judgment Seat of Christ, they shall be manifested and laid open.
Thus the Socinian Error, as it is repugnant to Good Reason and Common Sense, so
it contradicts the Holy Book of God, and the Revelation made to us there.

But this is not all, can there be a greater Gratification (excepting what I
shall mention next) to all Atheists than this, that none of their actions shall
be accounted for? Let men blaspheme, curse God and Man, abjure Religion,
persecute the faithful Professors of it, give themselves up to all manner of
Debauchery and Immorality, and live and die in the commission of all that is
impious and execrable: yet they shall never hold up their hands for this at the
Last Bar, there shall be no particular Account given or taken of any thing of
this nature. Yea, let Men live all their Days in a course of Dissembling, in a
mere form of Godliness, in an external Show of Religion, whilst they inwardly
abhor all that is Good and Virtuous: nay, let them be guilty of the most horrid
villainies and impieties in secret, let them privily commit murder, adultery,
incest, and whatever fact is Horrid and Detestable, and let them descend into
the grave with the guilt of these upon them, without the least motions of Godly
Sorrow and Repentance; yet be it known to them that they shall never be
Examined concerning any of these past actions, no not concerning the most
secret of them. Whatever Enormities they have been guilty of here, they shall
be passed by in silence hereafter, and never be mentioned to their Shame and
reproach. Surely this doctrine was calculated for the Meridian of those whom I
before named. Surely none but persons of Atheistical Principles could, o^ would
vent such Conceptions as these, and none but those who are Lovers of them can
embrace them.

The last thing which I propounded to speak of under this Head of my Discourse
is the Punishment which is awarded at that Final Close of the world. And here I
shall show that the Socinians have wretchedly perverted the Holy Scriptures,
and have thereby gratified those persons who live without God in the world, and
make their Lusts the only Rule of their actions. Though they generally grant
that the Ungodly shall rise at the last day, yet they tell us that immediately
after that they shall be Annihilated, or, which is the same thing, they shall
utterly cease, and eternally perish, In Johan. 1 11.
as Socinus expressly says. This Perishing of the wicked was at first but
hinted by this Writer, and therefore a Bishop Pearson on the 12 Article of the
Creed.
Judicious Author calls it the Covert Doctrine of the Socinian: but afterward
Resp. ad defens. Puc. cap. 8.
he and others were plain and open enough: for according to him the Punishment
of the wicked is a Total and Eternal Dissolution; not a Perpetual Torment, but
a perpetual Extinction. Cont. Meisner.
Smalcius interprets Mat. 10. 28. where Christ threatens destruction both of
soul and body in hell, of the utter Perdition of them, and not of the
Tormenting of them. Disp. de Baptismo. Disp. 7. de Extremo Judicio.
He propounds it as credible that Ungodly Men, as well as Devils, are to be
utterly destroyed and annihilated, and that the Righteous only shall survive.
And if he did not believe it, why did he make Reply to those places of
Scripture which are produced to prove the contrary, as you may see in his
Disputation concerning the Last Judgment? In the Cont. Frantz. disp. 7. de
extremo judicio.
same place he has these words, The Soul or Spirit cannot be cast into hell,
because according to Solomon it returns unto God. In Hebr. 10. 27.
Slichtingius is positive that all the future Punishment of the Reprobate is
that they shall be eternally destroyed or consumed. According to Comment. in 1
Cor. 15.
Crellius the punishment of Christ's Enemies after the day of Judgment ends in
the Delection of them. I Will mention Wolzogen Comment. in 25. chap. Matthew. v. 46.
one Writer more, whose words are these, God will inflict upon (...) man a
Punishment that is greater than his Demerits: now, there can be no Sins so
grievous as to equal Eternal Torments. Eternity is a long time, and this is the
Greatest Punishment that can be to be deprived for ever of eternal happiness,
and to perish for ever. As for the English Socinians, they are presumed to
write after the Copy of their J. Bidle. Script. Catech. chap. last.
Countryman, who has publicly told the world that all the Wicked are to be
burnt up, and to perish eternally, and never to be any more. And I have lately
received it from a Professed Friend of the Gentleman whom I have had to do with
about the One Article, that he has sometime expressed his thoughts to this
purpose concerning the Eternity of Hell Torments, when it has been propounded
to him: but he knows best whether he has given occasion for such a Report.

It is certain that this is a doctrine disallowed of by the Church of Christ in
all ages, and therefore disallowed because repugnant to those discoveries of
God's will which we have in the infallible Writings of the Evangelists and
Apostles. Our Savior told the inhabitants of Cho^azin and Bethsaida that it
should be more tolerable for those of Tire and Sidon in the day of judgment
than for them, Luke 10. 14. And again, he says, It shall be more tolerable for
Sodom and Gomorrain that day than for that city which received not his
Apostles, Mat. 10. 15 But could he thus speak if the Racovian Position be true,
that the Punishment allotted to the wicked at the last day is their Utter
Dissolution? Can the condition of some persons be more tolerable than that of
others, if their Punishment be the very Same? And must it not be the same if it
be Annihilation? This makes the punishment of all Equal, for one cannot be more
Annihilated than another, and consequently it cannot be more tolerable for one
than another. But if we embrace the other Assertion, viz. that the Wicked being
raised to life at the last day shall be continued i^ that life for ever, that
thereby they may suffer that Torment which they deserve for their Sins, then we
may understand what our Savior says, then we may apprehend how it shall be
more tolerable for some than others at the day of Judgment: that is, the Misery
of the damned shall be proportioned to the^ Crimes, they shall be punished
according to the Heinousness of their Enormities mighty men shall be mightily
tormented. But there can be no such thing as this, if there be an utter
Extinction of the wicked at the last day; If their very persons perish, they
are incapable of any Punishment; and if that be true, it cannot be said it shall
be more tolerable for one than another, which yet is the determination of our
Savior himself.

Again, is it reasonable to believe that the Reprobate shall perish and be
extinct when the Holy Scriptures assure us that they shall be cast into
everlasting fire? Mat. 18. 8. which is called Hellfire in the next verse; and
when we are ascertained they shall at the last day depart into everlasting
fire, Mat. 25. 41. which in the last verse of that chapter is called
everlasting punishment; Is it the meaning of this Direful Doom that they shall
cease to be; and sink into Nothing? Is it the punishment of the Cursed at that
day that they shall be void of all sense of pain and misery, i. e. that they
shall be incapable of any Punishment? yes, this is the interpretation which the
Socinians put upon the words. Particularly Cont. Frantz. disp. 7.
Smalcius and Comment. in 1 Cor. 15.
Crellius urge this notion of Everlasting Fire, and make it to be of the same
signification with Eternal Perdition, Destruction, or Annihilation. But how
absurdly is this done, when this Everlasting Fire, to confirm us in the belief
of the Endless Perpetuity of it, is in other places of the Gospel termed
Unquenchable fire, as in Mat. 3. 12. and in 43, 44, 45, 46, 48.
five verses (which is exceeding remarkable) in Mark 9. it is called the fire
that is not quenched, and that never shall be quenched. I argue then thus, That
Fire which is unquenchable, which shall never be extinguished is of Endless
duration: but Hellfire is such, therefore it is of endless duration. It is
impossible to withstand the force of this Argument. I do not say it is
impossible for a Whiffling Disputer, one that delights in Cavelling, to raise
an Objection against it, for what Truth is there (though never so Great) which
the Wit and Sophistry of wrangling heads cannot suggest something against? But
this I say, it is impossible that any one who is serious and in good earnest,
and has a reverence for the Holy Scriptures should not acknowledge that the
Eternity of the Infernal Torments is fully declared and confirmed by this
foresaid expression of Unquenchable Fin. And we are to reckon all the
forementioned Texts as so many different and distinct Proofs of the eternal
duration of that Punishment which the wicked shall undergo.

And this is called not only fire that is not, and shall not be quenched, but
the Worm that dies not, Mark 9. 44, 46. which cannot with any show of sense or
reason be synonymous with Annihilation. Shall these men then be called Rational
(tho I know none call them so but themselves and their Admirers) who assert the
contrary? Do they not show themselves Masters of Great Reason when they tell us
that the Worm which dies not, is that which utterly ceases to be, when they
hold that not to be at all is being in everlasting fire or punishment? Those
that can assent to these Propositions are Reasonable Men indeed: Yes, in their
own esteem, but not otherwise. Whence perhaps it was that Volkelius (who in
other matters sticks close to the Racovians) by reason of the gross
Inconsistency of this Opinion was offended at it, as appears from Socinus's
Sixth Epistle to him: and we do not find in his Writings (as is noted by On the
11th. Article of the Creed.
Bishop Pearson) that he ever assented to it.

I might alledg 2 Cor. 5. 10, a place which not only shows that the same body
rises (for which I made mention of it before) but also that the wicked shall be
punished afterward in their bodies, for the receiving the things in their
bodies (the word done being not in the Original, nor need it be in the
Translation) is their being dealt with in way of Punishment or Reward as to
their bodies, which cannot be unless they subsist both in body and soul, to
endure that Punishment, or to enjoy that Reward. This I conceive is very clear,
and it is impossible to reconcile it with their being reduced to Nothing, with
their perishing for ever.

But it is Objected that in the Scripture it is often said of the Wicked, that
they shall be destroyed, they shall perish, they shall die, which is as much as
to say, they shall be Annihilated, they shall be deprived of their Essence. I
Answer briefly, they mistake the meaning of those expressions, for it is plain
and manifest from what has been premised that these terms, destruction,
perdition, death denote not the Privation of Existence, but of the former state
and condition which they were in, and their Changing it for one that is
eternally Miserable. To an unprejudiced and discerning eye, and that attends to
the Style of Scripture, it is evident that these expressions signify the utter
Separation of the damned from God; and the undergoing of his Wrath to eternity;
and consequently they imply Pain and Torment, yea the never-ceasing infliction
of them unto endless ages. This is that which is meant by the second death
threatened to the Wicked, Rev. 20. 14, 15. 21. 8. for in those places we find
that the lake of Fire and the second death are synonymous, which shows that the
death of the Damned is no other than their Everlasting Punishment, their being
tormented in the flames of the everlasting fire before mentioned.

But notwithstanding this, the Socinians persist in their Opinion, and flatly
deny the Perpetuity of Hell Torments. Which is that which the Atheist would
have, that which he constantly professes as his belief, that after death the
Soul perishes; or if it chances to hold out in its Subsistence some time, yet
at last it will vanish into a Nonentity. There cannot be a more Pernicious
Doctrine than this, for first it diminishes the Guilt of Sin, as if it did not
deserve Eternal Torments, as if these were above the demerits of the Greatest
Sins and Enormities, for so the Racovian Writers speak. Again, this gives Men
occasion to deny the Wisdom and Justice of God, which is a considerable Step to
Atheism. To what end and purpose do Reprobates rise again, and are brought to
Judgment, if there shall immediately follow an utter Extinction of them? Does
the Great Ruler of the world show himself Just if they be neither punished in
this life (as often it happens) nor in another? Shall not the Judge of all the
World do right? And can he do so if they that have done all the Mischief
imaginable to others, shall feel none themselves here or hereafter?

Moreover, this encourages men in the commission of Sin, for they cheer
themselves with this that they shall presently have an end of their Misery,
there shall be a speedy release from their Pains, their Torments (if there be
any) shall quickly have an end, for they are told by Socinus's disciples that
Everlasting Fire will soon be extinguished, that the Worm which never dies is
Mortal. This, I say, mu^ needs animate men in their sinful and vicious
enterprises: for they will not be backward to make such Conclusions as these,
we may venture to live as we list seeing there will be no Penalty inflicted
upon us that will last long, seeing the Punishment of our sins will soon have a
period. Indeed such an Inference from the Doctrine is genuine, and no other
could be expected to be made by these persons. Wherefore as long as the
Premises are entertained, we must look for no other Deductions. It is true, it
has happened sometimes that their own Principles and Maxims have not had an
immediate influence upon them in their Acting, they do not follow the natural
conduct of them. But this is certain, the nature of their principles promotes a
vicious life: these are in themselves apt to excite men to all sin and
wickedness. As on the contrary, the belief of the Endless Punishment which is
denounced against Impenitent Sinners quickens men in their Repentance, is an
Effectual Motive to them to forsake their Sins, is a Powerful Incitement to the
performance of all Christian Offices, and whatever is pleasing unto God. Take
away this, and what a Damp is there to Virtue and Religion? Shall the worst and
vilest men live here in splendour and in a fruition of all things according to
their hearts desire, and shall they afterward meet with no Penalty for all
their cursed actions? Must they only be deprived of their beings, and at the
same time of the sense of all that is painful or hurtful? In short, shall they
neither be punished here, nor hereafter? Or is this all their Punishment, not
to suffer any? Then Hell is but a Fable (as some of the Poets represented it,)
then Damnation is but a Fiction. And who will not add, that this is the high
Road to Atheism? These are the things that make Socinianism so plausible at
this day, this makes all men of Atheistical Principles and Debauched Lives cry
it up, for it quenches the flames of Hellfire, which men have been so much
affrighted with.

Hence we may guess that Racovianism will be a Fashionable Doctrine, if there
be no Check put to it. It is no wonder that so many persons favor it, that
those who defend it are Applauded. The reason of this is plain, They present
them with such a Scheme of Religion (for it is likely they will call it so) as is
grateful to their Vicious Inclinations, and assures them of Impunity after all
the most heinous and enormous actions of their lives. These men truly are to be
pitied, for they can discourse and argue very well if they please; some of them
have a good Talent that way, only they abuse it. They are great Admirers of
Reason, and yet they are so far misled as to imbibe such an irrational and
groundless notion as this, that not only the bodies but the souls of all the
Wicked shall perish and be annihilated. Some of the Wise Pagans expressed their
belief of the Immortal State even of the Worst Men: but these Rationalists
absolutely renounce it, and thereby show themselves worse than Pagans, (and
which is worst of all) miserably plunge themselves and others into that lake of
everlasting fire which they scoff at.

CHAP. VI.
These men have dangerous assertions concerning Christianity, as 1. That there
is but One Single Article of Christian Faith necessarily requisite to be
believed, viz. that Jesus is the Messiah. Some Reflections on the Writer that
lately maintained this Opinion. Remarks upon those that applaud his sentiments.
His unhappy enterprise briefly described and condemned. He and his friends by
their Public Silence confess their Inability to return an Answer. But yet they
are heard to rage, and thereby discover an impotent Passion, which argues
Guilt. 2. They hold that all doctrines in Christianity are to be subject to the
strictest Test of Humane Reason. This showed to be the Sense of the very
English Socinians. How the Rule of Reason is to be applied. What the Foreign
and English Unitarians assert at one time, they deny at another. Thereby they
give proof of their Changeableness. At the same time they betray their Cause,
and against their wills befriend the Truth. 3. They hold that there are no
Mysteries in Christianity. The late Asserter of this Opinion reflected on. It
is against Reason and Scripture. Some Exceptions answered. Christianity (...)
self is endangered by this doctrine.

FIfthly, their notions concerning Chr^anity it self are very unsafe and
dangerous. I will take notice here of three of them: The first is an Assertion
lately vented, or rather lately furbush'd up, and in some formality presented
to the world by one that is a Well-willer to the Racovian way. I mean Mr. Lock:
for now it is the Catholic belief and vogue of his very Friends and Favorers
that he is the Author of the late Treatise concerning the Reasonableness of
Christianity. And seeing his own Friends and Admirers call it by his name, I
hope it is no offense in me to do so. The Sum of it is this, that in all the
books of the NEW TESTAMENT there is but One Single Article of Christian Faith
necessarily requisite to be believed and assented to by us: and this Article is
no other than this, that JESUS IS THE MESSIAH. I have elsewhere proved this to
be a Socinian doctrine: and it is well known that a Professed Unitarian (of a
considerable standing in the world) has publicly asserted this Proposition in
terminis, and has labored to defend it, and dedicates his undertakings to Mr.
Lock. They both confidently aver that the sole believing of this constitutes a
Christian, and a Member of Christ; and there is no necessity, in order to
salvation, that any thing more should be the object of our belief. This is the
doctrine which they industriously maintain: but how Unreasonable and Groundless
it is, I have made evident in another place (to which I refer the Reader) where
I have showed that this is one way to extirpate the Christian Religion out of
the world, and to introduce Infidelity. Only at present I insert it here to
make up the Socinian Farce. It was not proper to leave it out of the Rhapsody
of Heretical Opinions which those men are Professors of. Having spoken so
largly of it already. I will now only make two or three Reflections on it and
its Author, and so dismiss it.

It may be observed that In his Treatise of Humane Understanding, book 1.
he began first to deny the Natural Notions and Principles that Men's Minds
furnish them with: and this was an Introduction to his late enterprise. He by
no means allows of Connate Idea's, those Treasuries of all Natural Knowledge. It
is remarkable that he that is so much against the Scholastic Way, and Systems,
yet maintains the Old Maxim of the Schools, that the Understanding is a mere
Blank, with nothing written in it. Where it might be noted further that herein
he exactly agrees with Praelect. cap. 2.
Socinus, whose words I quoted before. Though these Natural Impressions in all
men's minds are the foundation of Religion, and the Standard of Truth as well as
of Morality, yet he wholly renounces them. But if this Gentleman had followed
Socinus in nothing but this, or matters of the like nature, I should never have
mentioned it, for though it is my persuasion that there are these Innate
Notices and Idea's in humane souls, yet I censure no man for his mere
dissenting from me in this Speculative Point. That which I only observe now is
that from his laying aside those Natural Principles he proceeds to slight the
Christian ones, to curtail the Articles of our Faith, to ravish Christianity it
self from us.

And whereas he tells us he designed his Book for Novices and Weak Christians,
he cannot but be ashamed of such an Evasion; for whether Christians be weak or
strong, the Necessary and Indispensable doctrines of Christianity must not be
concealed from them, much less must they be denied for their sake. This were to
make a Double Christianity, which is a strong and unaccountable representation
of it, not unlike the Conceit of some Jewish Doctors, who say there is a
Messiah the Son of Joseph, and a Messiah the Son of David, a humble and poor
Messiah, and a glorious or pompous one. Surely the Gentleman cannot forbear
blushing at such pitiful Inventions as these, which are so like his own. I know
nothing can excuse him but what his own Pen has suggested in another place,
where he cries out Essay of Humane Understanding, book 4. chap. 4.
Is there any thing so extravagant as the imaginations of men's brains? where
is the head that has no Chimaera's in it?

Here I would observe likewise what sort of people admire his Notions, and
applaud his late enterprise about One Article of Christianity only. There is
very much to be gathered from this, viz. what kind of persons are eager to
embrace his Sentiments, and to commend them to the world. The Author of a late
little Piece, entitled a Letter to the Deists, declares that P. 151.
all that Jesus Christ made essential to Christianity is evidently a^
improvement of Natural Religion, in which words he comprises the Sum of Deism,
and consequently lets us know what he is, and that he writ that Letter to
himself. To give us a farther insight into his own Character, he falls upon
Preachers, and styles their Sermons pedantick forms of Pulpit-speeches, Page
133. and in the same place talks of tricking the Priests out of their Trade
which is so much complained against. And then, within a few pages after comes
Mr. Lock's Encomium, page 136, etc. Though the Priests and Pulpit-men of this
age be so intolerable, yet Mr. Lock makes amends for their defect. This Great
Figure compounds for those Ciphers. Wherefore in a religious fit (as it were)
he blesses God for this Writer's Reasonableness of Christianity, and professes
he finds it an evidence that he is not able to resist, because (poor Gentleman)
he is not willing. Then he rehearses Mr. Lock's beloved Proposition, and
vouches it, viz. that P. 149, 150.
Nothing but this alone, namely that [Jesus Christ is the Messias] is required
absolutely to denote and characterize a man a Christian. And this Zealous
Proselyte adds further that all are Sectaries that offer other notions than Mr.
Lock has in that book, that draught of Christianity, as he calls it. Thus we
see who are Mr. Lock's Admirers. Deism and an Antipathy against Priests (i. e.
all Professed Ministers and Guides in Religion) are necessary qualifications in
order to being his Converts.

An See Miscellaneous Letters for the Month of September, 1695. page 465.
other Writer compares him to David, Good King David (so he words it) and me to
Shimei, as if the Reasons I had offered against his late writings had been no
other than Cursing of him. But would you know what manner of man this is that
is such an Abettor of the Author of the late Reasonableness of Christianity,
and so severe upon the Animadverter on it? You may partly learn it from this
Position which he publicly maintains, that in the beginning of the book of Job
there are odd, if not impossible passages told of Satan and the sons of God, of
Job himself, his wife, his children and friends. And he determines it to be a
mere F^k made by some idle Jew: and afterward he calls it a Monstrous Story.
And abundance of such like impious stuff you may me^ with in the Pamphlet he
has published to the world. This may in some p^ satisfy the Reader what kind
of men they are that defend and patronize Mr. Loc^ late Assertions. A man may
for the most part make a judgment of an Author by those that approve of and
extremely magnify his undertakings. And generally those that publish them are
of the like kidney. If these be for Divine Machiavel, it is probable the Writer
proves so too.

I am apt to think well of the Gentleman himself who was the Collector of the
Reasonableness of Christianity, but I pity him for his unhappy choice of his
Notion, and his more unhappy and successless defending it, wherein he strains
upon his Reason and Conscience, to support his Cause: otherwise he would not
have used such Arguments as he does, and repeated them. He had got some credit
by his former attempts concerning Humane Understanding and Education; and now
his Name being up, he is further tempted to show his Parts, and to discover his
great antipathy against Systems, which he every where strikes at; the design of
which is to establish one of his own, or to foster Skepticism by beating down
all others. He unfortunately ingages in a Province above his capacity, and
boldly attempting to correct and amend Christianity, overthrows it. He makes
our Savior a Coward, he turns the Epistles of the Apostles into wast paper, he
perverts the plain words of the Gospels, and he misrepresents and doubts of the
most Fundamental Articles of the Christian Religion. One would wonder that such
wild conceptions should possess any thinking head. It is strange that any
serious man can believe these things, and frame such thoughts of Christianity.
It is true, the Fundamental Articles of our Belief are few; but there is a
difference between a few and but one only, which is the thing that this Writer
maintains, even with the hazard of his judgment, and the forfeiture of his
formerly acquired reputation.

But he and his Friends (the One-Article-men) seem to have made Satisfaction by
their profound Silence lately, whereby they acknowledge to the world that they
have Nothing to say in reply to what I lately laid to their charge, and fully
proved against them, both with relation to this Gentleman in particular, and to
the Professed Socinians in common. Some of them faintly give out that I have
mistaken Mr. Lock; If so, then they would oblige the world by showing the
Mistake, and letting men see wherein and in what instances I have
misapprehended his sense and meaning. He that pretends to bear such a Love to
the bulk of mankind, should now show it: and so he would, if he could. If their
case had not been desperate, I should have heard from them before this, for
it is well known that our Modern Unitarians court all opportunities of setting
the Press on work. And they had time to do it before his Majesty's Injunctions
were published: not to say, that some of them have ventured to the Press since.
Besides, these Injunctions, I conceive, debar them not not from clearing
themselves (if they could) from those substantial Objections and Exceptions
which have been made against their Assertions. Wherefore I take it to be an
unquestionable verity, that these men, who were voted such Champions by the
Party, are vanquished, and that they have not Answered because they could not.

But from all hands I hear that their more retired language and countenances
speak their extraordinary disturbance and disorder of Mind. It is observed that
some of them cannot conceal their great Regret and Passion, but in a Raving
Manner express their dislike of what I have writ. Which I take to be an
Infallible Argument that they are baffled, that they are wounded under the
fifth rib. For they having no supports from Reason and Arguments, therefore
they fly to downright Raillery. Thus they let their Cause die, because they
cannot keep it alive. And indeed, as it is observed of less perfect Animals,
which are hastily formed and produced, that they are shortlived; so fares it
with Opinions that are defective and imperfect, and found out of a sudden, they
are generally exploded in a short time, and scarcely survive their Chief
Authors. This, it is probable, will be the fate of the foresaid Deficient and
Maimed Opinion about One Article: this Mushrom Notion that has no root and
foundation, will soon decay and come to nothing.

Another Dangerous Notion relating to the Christian Religion is, that every
thing in it is to be submitted to the exactness of Reason, and what will not
bear that Test, is no part of Christianity. Socinianism was first of all
founded on this basis, this was the main thing that was insisted upon. Socinus
makes it his business to destroy the doctrines of Original Sin, of the Holy
Trinity, of Christ's Satisfaction, of Baptism, etc. by force of Reason.
Demonstrations are to be required in all things that concern our Salvation,
says Refut. lib. de Verbo Incarnato. cap. 3.
Smalcius. And even at this day this Suggestion of theirs is as useful to the
New Socinians as the Rain-deers of Lapland to the inhabitants of that Country,
which serve them for all uses. They can evade plain places of Scripture, they
can overturn the foundations of Religion, they can settle their own Opinions,
they can impose upon the belief of mankind by this one Artifice. It is but
setting up this Idol, and then presently they sacrifice all the Great Mysteries
and Truths of Christianity to it. When the Trinitarians assert the doctrine of
Christ's Divinity, when they maintain the Incarnation of the Son of God, when
they affirm that there are Three Personalities or Subsistencies in the Deity,
and when they profess their assent to other the like Articles of the Christian
Faith, they are cried out against because they are not level to humane
conceptions, no Idea can be formed of them, they contradict our Natural
Notions; and for this reason alone they are laid aside by them as
Contradictions, Absurdities, Impossibilities, Pure Nonsense, for so they are
wont to express themselves in their late Writings. They boast that History of
the Unitarians, page 24.
theirs is an Accountable and Reasonable Faith, when they deny the Trinity. In
an A Defense of the brief History of the Unitarians.
other place they reject this doctrine because it is against the dictate of
Reason: and they argue from this against the Incarnation, or the Union of the
Two Natures in Christ. At an Some Thoughts upon Dr. Sherlock's Vindication of
the Trinity.
other time they are for reducing all things to Common Sense. And lastly, they
peremptorily determine that Letter to the Clergy of both Universities. chap. 10.
what is above our Reason to apprehend, is also above our belief; and
consequently because the doctrine of the Trinity (as well as some other sublime
Points) is above their Reason, it staggers their belief, nay (which is more) it
is utterly renounced by them.

I thought fit to add these passages (out of their Modern Prints) to those
which I had occasion to mention before in my Discourse concerning the Causes of
Atheism, that it may appear, whatever the Late Unitarians pretend, that they
own this Maxim, that every thing in Religion is to be submitted to the searches
of Reason. But certainly this is a Principle that destroys Christianity, for a
great part of this is founded on mere Revelation, and the discoveries of God's
will which transcend our reasonings: and therefore it is a vanity to think that
Reason must determine all in the Christian Religion. It is true, Natural Reason
was placed in us by Him who is the Father of Lights, and we must not attempt to
extinguish it: but neither must this Candle presume to take upon it the office
of the Sun, to act beyond its proper strength and power. Reason is like the
Rule with which we measure things: to know the length or breadth of them we
apply the Rule to them, and so find out the just dimensions of them. But then
we undertake to measure Bodies, which are of a certain length and breadth, such
as our Rule will serve to measure: else there is no use of the Rule. In a
resembling sort, what we would measure and comprehend by the Rule of Reason
must be Finite, i. e. proportioned to our Reason. The things which are Infinite
and Immense are not to be measured by this Scanty Rule; such are the Divine
Nature, the Sacred Trinity, the Union of God and Man, etc. Reason must act
according to its due Measures, and be employed according to the Strengths which
are allowed it. It must not determine in those things which are not of its
cognizance, and such are Supernatural and Divine Mysteries. There are no
Demonstrative Arguments in things of this nature, neither are they necessary.
We are to acquiesce in God's Word: that is sufficient Reason. And accordingly
all the Great and Wise Men of this age, (as well as of former ones) all persons
of the most penetrating judgment, of the most extraordinary sagacity rest in
this, and are satisfied. But the New Disciples of Socinus pretend to be men of
greater sense and understanding, and demand of us to make out every thing in
the Christian Religion, even the profoundest matters of it, by strict rules of
Reason and Logic. Thus (as I had occasion not long since to observe) they join
with the Deists to root out Christianity, and use the same methods and art that
they do. They irrationally extol humane Reason, and extravagantly oppose it to
Revealed Religion, so as to exclude this latter, and to vilify the Author of
it. And thus it will appear at last that Atheism lurks under the refined name
of Deism.

This very Notion of the excessive sway of Natural Reason in matters of
Religion, has had a great and malignant influence upon some Others, who are
not Professed Socinians, as a Dr. Owen, of Apostasy.
Learned Writer (though of a different persuasion from the Church of England)
has observed, In pursuit (says he) of the same Principles with those of the
men of this way, not a few begin absolutely to submit the Scripture and every
thing contained in it to the judgment and sentence of their own Reason, which
is the true Form and Spirit of Socinianism visibly acting it self with some
more than ordinary confidence. What is suited unto their Reason they will
receive; and what is not so, let it be affirmed an hundred times in the
Scripture, they will reject with the same ease and confidence as if they were
Imaginations of men like themselves. Both books that are written to this
purpose, and the common discourses of many do fully testify this advance of
the Pride of the minds of men. And he is careless about these things who sees
not, that the next Stage is downright Atheism. This is that Dunghill which such
blazing exhalations of Pride at last fall into. It seems there are Others,
besides me, that have had an apprehension that Socinianism tends directly to
Atheism.

But see the mighty Prevalency of Truth! It will forcibly make its way, even
from the mouths of its professed Adversaries. The Old and New Socinians (as you
heard before) agreed in this that Reason is the sole Judge in matters of Faith,
and that what is above Reason is not the object of our belief. And yet both
these sorts of men at other times abjure these Propositions as false and
erroneous, and thereby palpaby contradict themselves, Refut. lib. de Verbo
incarnato. cap. 9.
Smalcius expressly avers that Faith is above (though not contrary) to Reason.
And in his De via salut. cap. 1. Qu. and Resp. 7.
Catechism he lets us know the knowledge of the way to immortal life and
happiness far exceeds humane Reason; and he quotes 1 Cor. 2. 14. for it. Again,
he grants that Refut. lib. de V. J. cap. 8.
there are things which we ought to believe, though we cannot render any
reasons of them. And in the Margin, things expressly written are to be believed,
although the reasons of them appear not. And more fully yet, in the name of the
Racovian Brethren he makes this Confession, Cont. Frantz. disp. 3. de Sacrament.
We freely acknowledge that there are many things in the Christian Religion
which surpass Reason, but yet they are of necessity to be believed by us, on
this very consideration, that though they exceed Reason, yet they are delivered
in Sacred Scripture, and they are very agreeable to that Reason which they
exceed.

But how do our late Penmen approve of this? Very well, for they declare that A
Letter of Resolution concerning the doctrine of the Trinity. p. 1.
Revelation is to be preferred before the clearest Demonstration of our Reason.
Whence it appears that the Unitarians deny what they have in other places
affirmed, they disown what at other times they assert. And so they betray their
own Cause, and patronize ours: so Truth discovers and defends it self, though
for a while stifled or disguised. And thus it is manifest that We are in the
right, even our Enemies themselves being judges.

Only here it is worth observing how fli^ting, how shifting, how changeable
Sozzo's Pupils are. Are they not to be deemed very slippery Gentlemen when they
thus say, and unsay? They have altered the Racovian Catechism more than once,
and they may do it again when they see occasion. And it is visible how our
English Socinians vary their Note, and affect to differ from themselves.
Whereby they let us know that they are unmindful of the Jewish Proverb, When
occasion serves we may gainsay others, but at no time must a man contradict
himself.

The Third Beloved Conceit of theirs concerning Christianity is, that there are
no Mysteries in it. Which indeed follows upon the former Opinion, for if
nothing is to be believed in the Christian Religion but what is made out by
Exact Reason, then there is nothing Mystical and Obscure in it. This is a Point
mightily urged of late by our homebred Racovians and their Adherents, who have
published a small Essay entitled [An Impartial Account of the word Mystery as
it is taken in the Holy Scripture,] where they cantingly tell us that MYSTERY
is the Tutelar God of the New Systems framed by Worldly Christians: and it is
the Vail of Absurdities, and such like foolish representations they make of it;
and think themselves very Witty and Piquant when they call the Trinitarians
Mystery-men, as does the Examiner of the Exceptions against Mr. L's
Reasonableness, etc. But (which is far worse) they pervert the meaning of the
Sacred Writ, and wilfully (I fear) represent the word Mystery otherwise than it
is used in the New Testament, of which I hope to give the Reader an account
some other time, and to settle the true sense and import of the word as it is
applied in those Holy Writings.

All that I will say at present is that True and Substantial Reason informs us,
if we attend to it, that God's bare Word is sufficient to determine our assent
and belief: and the Holy Scriptures acquaint us that there are Unsearchable
Mat. 13. 11. 1 Cor. 2. 7. Ephesians. 6. 19. Col. 2. 2. 1 Timothy 3. 16.
Mysteries in the Christian Religion; that there is hidden wisdom, 1 Cor. 2. 7.
that there are deep things of God, v. 10. that there are things hard to be
understood, 2 Pet. 3. 16. that we know in part, and see through a glass darkly,
1 Cor. 13. All which, and many other passages in Sacred Writ assure us that
there are Unfathomable Depths, Unconceivable Abstrusities in Christianity, and
that it is out of our ken and reach to apprehend them. Therefore we are obliged
to believe some things which are unaccountable to our knowledge and reason. Yea
indeed, the proper matter of Faith are those things which we cannot have any
notice of by the mere natural exercise of our faculties. Revelation here is
enough, as was said before, and we ought (and that with the greatest Reason) to
depend upon it entirely, because we know it is Infallible.

But because I intend at another time to insist particularly on the proof of
this Proposition, that Christianity not only was, but is a Great Mystery, I
will not prevent my self here. Let it only suffice at present that I have
cautioned the Reader against our Adversary's groundless Assertion, that there
is nothing dark and obscure in the Christian doctrines, that there is no such
thing as Mystery in any of the Articles belonging to this Holy Institution.
They pretend to oblige the world by divulging and laying all open to the
Vulgar. Others are dark, intricate, perplexed and muddy, but they only are the
Authors that are Clear and Bright, and write with shining Japan Ink. In brief,
they and the Deists talk much of the Oracles of Reason, and brag of their
making all things out by these, though generally they prove as vain and idle as
the Reasons of Etymologists, and the common Rationale's of the Roman Service
and Rites.

But here perhaps it will be Objected that I have in this and the foregoing
particular misrepresented these men, for it will be said that in one of their
Writings it is positively asserted that An Impartial Account of the word
Mystery, etc.
there are some Mysteries and incomprehensible Secrets in Religion. To which I
answer, This Author explains his meaning afterward, and thereby shows what he
holds, for this is one of his Propositions, that we must not give the name of
Mystery to those doctrines which are contrary to the light of Nature or Reason,
and he means by these doctrines all those Divine Truths in the Gospel which are
above our Natural Reason, and which we cannot comprehend and discern by the
light of Nature; and so it appears that this Writer, though he seems to allow
of Mysteries, yet in reality he disowns them, which is no infrequent thing with
them.

But it will be said that another of their Authors is of opinion that
Considerations on the Explications of the doctrine of the Trinity.
there are some things to be believed which we cannot comprehend. I answer 1.
Whatever he and some of late assert, it is certain that it was a received and
acknowledged opinion among the Socinians heretofore that nothing is to be
believed but what we can comprehend. It was a Standing Principle with them all,
Not to admit any Article into their Creed but what they could make out by exact
Reason; and therefore it is well known that they rejected the doctrine of the
Trinity and other Great Articles of the Christian Faith because they could not
fathom them by Reason. This was the approved Notion in Socinus's days, and in
Crellius's (as has been showed in another place). 2. I answer that this very
Author himself in that place where he throws off this Old Socinian doctrine,
takes it up again, and falls to proving that there is nothing in Religion, be
it never so high, but may be comprehended; he is so bold and confident as to
say that we have as clear, distinct and adequate a conception of what is
Infinite and Unbounded as of a spire of Grass, and that the nature of one is as
comprehensible as the other. 3. I add this, that though this Writer and some
others of the Party endeavor at other times to shift off that foresaid
Principle, yet it is plain that it is Good Socinianism at this very day, as I
have proved from some express Some Thoughts concerning the Causes of Atheism p.
71, 72.
quotations out of the Writings of the New English Racovians.

But it will be said again, that the same Author tells us that the men of his
Party deny the Articles of the Trinity and Incarnation of Christ, etc. not
because they are Mysteries, or because they do not comprehend them, but because
they are Contradictions, Impossibilities, and pure Nonsense. But who sees not
that Mysteries and Contradictions, etc. are the same with these persons, and
that therefore they call them by that former name, because (as they would make
us believe) they cannot comprehend them, they have no idea, no notion of them
(as they speak at other times:) and what is this but to say, They are
Mysteries? only they choose to cloth it in a more bold and profane sort of
language, calling them Nonsense, Contradictions, etc. Thus it is evident that
they impose upon the world, and whilst they cry out of Contradictions, are
guilty of them themselves, and whilst they make a show of believing some things
above Reason, are really of another persuasion. It is plain then that it is
their business to lift up Reason, so as to depress Christianity: it is to be
feared that some of them are very eager against Mysteries, thereby to extirpate
that which is deservedly styled by the Apostle the Mystery of Godliness:
especially they are enraged against the main branch of it; God manifest in the
flesh. One who is no Over-valuer of Mysteries, no not of that he treats of,
tells us that Some Considerations concerning the Trinity. p. 7.
he has no small reason to believe there are several who strike at
Christianity it self, under the pretense of bringing down the value of
Mysteries: much more than by the downright denying of all Mysteries in
Christianity. By this Polonian Stratagem they undermine all Religion, yea, the
Being, Nature and Attributes of God himself, which contain great Abstrusities,
depths, and mysteries in them: and so in the sequel of this their Opinion which
they so warmly defend and stickle for there is a strong biass to Atheism.

CHAP. VII.
The Foreign Unitarians hold that Divine Worship may be given to a Creature.
The English ones do in effect assert the same, though they pretend the
contrary. Reason and Scripture are against them. They cannot blame either Pagan
or Popish Idolatry, being Idolaters themselves. Their Idolatry is absurd and
contradictious. They deny Prayer to have been a part of God's Worship commanded
under the Old Testament. The contrary proved from the Writings of the Old
Testament. Their Evasions and Objections particularly answered, and found to
savor of Impiety. The Observation of the Lord's day is held by them to be a
Ceremonious Rite, and therefore abolished. And yet they allow of the keeping it
as lawful. The observing of the Seventh day is in some respect Moral. The
Lord's day is of Evangelical Institution, and therefore we are obliged to
celebrate it. The Sacraments were appointed to be Signs and Helps of some
spiritual good things. The Socinians oppose this, and most Abusively treat
those Sacred Ordinances. Whence we are not to wonder at their deriding and
renouncing of other parts of Christianity. Water Baptism (as they call it) is
voted by them to be unlawful. Yet they hold it not unlawful to retain the
practice of it in the Church. This argues a Double Irreligion.

AND now I come to the next General Head of this present Discourse, viz. to
give an account of the Socinian Worship. We found their Doctrines to be very
bad: I believe I shall make it appear that they are as faulty as to their
apprehension concerning Religious Service and Adoration. For they deny the
Divinity of Christ, and yet they assert that he is to have the same Honor and
Worship given to him that ought to be given to the Father, the Eternal,
Allmighty, All-Wise and Infinite God. It is said in the P. 33.
Brief History of the Unitarians that the Socinians generally not only grant,
but earnestly contend that Christ is to be worshipped and prayed to. The
Polonian Unitarians were so zealous in this matter that they excommunicated and
deposed from their Ministry such of their own party as denied that Christ might
be prayed to, and worshipped with divine worship. Socinus (de Invocatione
Christi) peremptorily asserts the Invoking and Worshipping of Christ, though he
be a created thing, as he speaks. In an Respons. ad Johan. Nievojev.
other place he largely defends the lawfulness and necessity of it. And so he
does more amply yet in his Answer to Francis David's Defense of the contrary
opinion. In 3. ad Radec.
one of his Epistles he contends that our Savior should be worshipped with
Divine and Religious Worship, and that for this Reason, because such Worship
may be given to an other besides God: Nay, not only to an other Person, but to
an other Thing, for his opinion is that Examinat. Argument. pro Trino and Uno
Deo.
God may command a Log or a Stone to be worshipped if he pleases: and if he
commands these to be worshipped, he is ready to do it. He defends this Disp.
cont. Francken and Wiek.
again with great zeal and earnestness against his Adversaries that wrote
against this doctrine. And to render this the more plausible, he blesses the
world with this strange notion, that Disp. praedict.
the First Commandment concerning Worshipping of God and him alone, does not
take away from God the Power of commanding us to worship some other besides
himself, but it only forbids us to do so of our own heads: And again in the
same place, he has the confidence to aver that the Commandment concerning
worshipping of God only was Temporary, and belonged only to the times of the Old
Testament. This is the sum of Socinus's Divinity, concerning Divine Worship,
and certainly it cannot but create Astonishment in any sober Reader.

De V. R. lib. 5. c. 29.
Volkelius agrees with him in both the latter Propositions, but a Man may from
that (as well as from other Passages in his Book) gather that he had little
cause to entitle that Book [Of the True Religion.] An Smalc Exam. cent. error.
other of Socinus's Abettors tells us that he may be worshipped for a God. i. e.
with divine worship, who by nature or Essence is not God; and particularly that
God can command that any man (even Socinus himself) shall be acknowledged as
God, and worshipped as such. And he adds that such a one is a True God. He
largely insists on this, that there may be more Gods worshipped than One. And at
an De Errorib. Arianorum.
other time he undertakes the Defense of this again. Nay, he advances thus far,
Exam. cent. error.
It is possible for a created being to be equal to God, nor does it imply any
contradiction and absurdity, yea it is most worthy of God: and consequently the
power of a created thing may be equal to that of God, and so there is no
infinite disproportion between the power of God and the power of a creature.
These are the Extravagancies he runs himself into. And this he and others of
the Party are forced to do, that they may maintain their worshipping of Christ,
notwithstanding he is but a Creature.

It is true, one of the Considerations on the Explications of the doctrine of
the Trinity.
Modern Prints says, They have not these seven years in any book professed
that the like or the same honor is to be given to Christ as to God. But this
New Gang of Unitarians is not the Standard of Socinianism. There Is no reason to
listen to these Upstart Pretenders in this present case, for we know that all
the Arians, and all the followers of Socinus have held it lawful, nay necessary
to worship Christ with Divine Worship. Nay the Gentleman himself, whom I have
quoted, soon after confesses that there is a Classis of Unitarians at this day
who pay Divine Honor to our Savior, who put up their Prayers to him: and
Prayer is a signal act of Divine Worship. And a Christianity not Mysterious.
late Writer who very well knows what the Socinians are, and what they hold,
finds fault with them for this at least, that they worship a Creature-God,
which he condemns (and that justly) as not reconcilable to Reason. And hear
what a professed Unitarian of this Age writ about two or three years ago, An
Accurate Examination of the Principal Texts alleged for Christ's Divinity,
chap. 10.
That our Lord Christ is to be worshipped, was never made a question by the
Unitarians. The question is concerning the kind or sort of Worship:
Trinitarians say, he is to be worshipped as God: we say, he is to be worshipped
as one whom God has exalted to be a Priest and a Savior, one whom God has
given to be head over all things to the Church. This distinction is to no
purpose, for even the New Socinians hold that Christ is God (and they will not
stick to say, truly God) as he is thus exalted, and as he is the Head over all
things; therefore according to them he is to be worshipped as he is truly God.
This is very plain, and though they may make use of their shifts and
subterfuges to evade it, yet any Discerning Man may discover the vanity of
their attempt. An Of Worshipping the Holy Ghost, etc.
other of their late Writers asserts the Worshipping of Christ with Religious
Worship, and particularly tells us that P. 7.
the Father has given Christ authority and dominion which makes him a fit
object of worship. This is the same that the other Gentleman said, he is made a
God by his being exalted; by his being Head over all things he is constituted a
God, and is truly so, and as such is to be worshipped by all Christian Men. Thus
the Old and New Socinians agree, though these latter pretend to dissent from
the former about this Point.

I will here add what an A Confession of Faith touching the Holy Trinity
according to the Scriptures, p. 12.
other of their Moderns says, Christ is our God by reason of his Divine
Sovereignty over us, and Worship due to such Sovereignty. They are the very
words of one of the late Prints, which was first extant in the year 1648, but
was reprinted in 1691, and therefore vouched by this present Set of Socinians.
Their reprinting it is a plain owning of it, and yet they say they have not
been of this Opinion these seven years. It seems these men are not acquainted
with their own Authors, and know not what their own People say. It was
unadvisedly said that they had not, for so long a time professed a Parity of
Worship due to the Father and the Son, for it is evident that they in effect
own it. But from that saying of theirs they would hint this, that once in seven
years or thereabouts Socinianism changes, and we must expect some new
discoveries. This is to prepare us against the next Climacterical Year of it,
when it is likely they will agree to present us with more refined notion
concerning the Worshipping of Christ. For truly this which comes down from the
Old Unitarians is very gross and inconsistent.

It is very strange and surprising that Persons who lay claim to a greater
share of Reason than the rest of mankind, should assert that a Creature is the
proper object of Divine Adoration, that Christ is to be worshipped with Sacred
and Religious Worship, and yet that he is not a God. These are unaccountable
Positions, and such as destroy the very nature of the Deity, for God is to be
worshipped because of his Transcendent Nature, which is such that no Creature,
no Finite being has it communicated to it. This makes God the sole object of
Divine Worship; according to what we read, Mat. 4. 10. Thou shall worship the
Lord thy God, and him only shall thou serve. It is expressed exclusively:
therefore a mere man cannot be exalted to the honor and worship which are due
only to God. And consequently the foregoing Assertions null the nature of God,
and make the Creatures equal with him. We find that when Cornelius fell down at
Peter's feet and worshipped him, Peter took him up, saying, Stand up, I my self
also am a Man, Acts 10. 25, 26. Which one place vacates all their Adoration of
Christ, for if Peter would not let Cornelius worship him because he was but a
Man, as himself was, then neither ought any one to worship Christ if he be but
a Man. The Reason is the fame here that it was there. Or if he had an Angelick
Nature, that does not make him capable of being worshipped, for as St. Peter
forbids Cornelius, so the Angel would not suffer St. John to give this Divine
Honor to him: See that thou do it not, Rev. 19. 10. Though he was God's
Minister and Messenger, and was a God in the very same sense that these men say
Christ is God, yet he was not to be worshipped. It appears hence that Adoration
is founded only in Divinity, and that what is but Humane or Angelical is not
Adorable.

Are these the men that talk and write against the Superstition and Idolatry of
the Church of Rome as well as that of Pagans? Yes, some of them have done so,
but can it be believed that it was in good earnest, when it is one of their
Grand Articles that the Divine Honor which is due to God may be derived to
another who is not God? According to this Principle neither Pagan nor Popish
Idolatry can be condemned, nay they must be allowed of. If Creatures may have
Divine Adoration given them, then Angels and Saints, and the Images of these
latter may be adored, which is the doctrine and practice of the Roman
Catholics, and then that Text, I will not give my glory to another, Isa. 42.
8, which all the Protestant Writers make use of against the Papists to prove
their foresaid practice unlawful, is to no purpose. And why then do the persons
I am speaking of, whilst they follow the Example of the Romanists, seem to
condemn them? They give Divine Worship to one whom they acknowledge not to be
God, strictly and properly speaking: and the Papists do no other. These may as
well adore the Saints and Angels as the Socinians do Christ, if he be but a
fellow creature, as they assert him to be. This was the sense of the Ancient
Fathers, who charged the Arians with Idolatry. And there is the same, nay
greater reason (as I could easily demonstrate, because the Arians exalted the
nature of Christ to a higher pitch) to tax Socinus and his followers with this
Crime, seeing they assert and defend the giving of Divine Worship to Christ,
though he be not God, i. e. the Infinite Eternal Omnipotent Being, but only a
God by Office and Institution, by Place and Dignity, as Kings are said to be
Gods. It is plain then that whilst the Socinians stigmatize the Papists as
Idolaters, they cannot shift off the charge of Idolatry themselves: for how
that Worship which is peculiar to God can be given to a Creature (i. e. one
that is acknowledged to be so) and yet no Idolatry be committed, is impossible
to reconcile. Wherefore we conclude that the Socinian Worshipers are Idolaters.

This is another proof of their justly lying under the imputation of
Irreligion, yea and such as is mixed with those Absurdities that can never be
enough exploded. They first deny Christ to be God, and then they pay the
Adoration to him which is due only to God. They abjure his Divinity, and
degrade him into the state of a Creature; and then, to make amends as it were,
worship him as a Creator. They destroy his Deity, and then think to repair it
by this means. Orestes was not half so wild when he killed his Mother
Clytemnestra, and then celebrated a Feast in her honor. What strange
Contradiction is this, to reckon our Savior as a Fictitious God, and yet to
pretend to venerate him as a True one? One would scarcely imagine that such
Extravagancies should be entertained by men that boast of their faculty of
Reasoning. But they having once admitted so Great an Error as the denial of
Christ's Divinity, it is no wonder that they plunge themselves into innumerable
others, it is no wonder that they run themselves into Idolatry it self, that
most hateful and abominable Enormity, that worst of Prophanations, which by
degrees will extinguish the notion of the True God, and bring in direct
Atheism. Surely then here is more than a smack of Irreligion, more than an
Atheistick Tincture.

Prayer is an eminent act and part of Divine Worship, and therefore it is
proper under this Second General Head of my Discourse, where I treat of
Worship, to observe what thoughts the Gentlemen have concerning this. They are
agreed that the First Table of the DECALOGUE, which prescribes the Worship of
God, requires not PRAYER, and that in no part of the Old Testament this act of
Worship is mentioned as a Duty, but that it was added afterward by Christ, and
not till then. These are the express terms of Explicat cap. 5. Matthew.
Socinus, of De V. R. l. 4. c. 9.
Volkelius, of De Divin. Christi.
Smalcius, and of his De Prophet. Christi mun. cap. 1.
Racovian Catechism. But can any man that forms right thoughts concerning the
Jewish Dispensation, and their Religion of which God was the immediate Author,
think that it contained not in it the Precept of Prayer, which is so natural a
part of Religion and Worship? Was not that First Commandment Thou shall have no
other Gods but me, and that Comment upon it Thou shall fear the Lord thy God,
and serve him, Deuteronomy. 6. 13. a General Precept for God's Worship, and can any
man conceive that Prayer, which is so signal a part of it, and appropriated
only to God (though it seems the Socinians are not of that mind) is not
comprehended in it? Can we think it is not necessarily included, though it be
not expressed? Nay, Who can imagine that there were not Particular and Plain
Injunctions for Praying when the Public Worship of the Jews and their
Sacrificing was always attended with this part of Devotion? as is clear from 2 Chronicles. 6. 19. 7. 12. Prove. 15. 8. Luke 1. 10. But they will say, their meaning
is that there is no Express Command for Praying in the Old Testament. If this
be it that they mean, then lo an Express Confutation in Psalm. 50. 15. Call upon
me in the day of trouble, and I will deliver thee, and thou shall glorify me.
Here is not only Invocation but Thanksgiving or Praising of God (which is an
other part of Prayer) in plain and explicit terms commanded.

But have they nothing to reply? Yes, for they never want some Evasion. But
certainly there never was any so silly, so impertinent, so foreign as that
which one of their Great Penmen makes use of. Volkel. de V. R. l. 4. c. 9.
He flies to Socinus's (I might have said to Bellarmine's) distinction of
Counsels and Precepts, and has the boldness to tell us that these words of the
Psalmist, or rather indeed of God himself, are only a Persuasion or Counsel,
but not a Command. You will think, I suppose, he was put hard to it when he was
forced to give such an answer as this, which is not only founded on a Gross
Conceit of the Romanists, but is no way applicable to the present purpose, for
the foresaid words concern all men at one time or other, but Counsels have
respect only to some particular persons, and some peculiar emergencies. It is
true, this Author adds concerning this passage of the Psalmist, that if it be
not admitted that it contains a Counsel only, then he is willing to grant that
a Command is comprehended in it, but with this Proviso, that the Command be not
counted Equal with the other Precepts contained in the Law. Which is as bad an
Exposition as the former, and shows what sorry apprehensions they have
concerning the Great and Solemn Office of Prayer, as if this were not of equal
importance with the rest of the Precepts of the Law, or (which is yet worse,
and yet is implied in his words) that some Precepts of the Divine Law comprised
in Holy Scripture are to be observed, but others may be dispensed with, as not
being of equal Authority with the rest. This favors of Impiety as well as the
other Evasion before mentioned.

But let us hear what Other Reasons these Men pretend to give of that which
they thus fondly dream of, viz. that there was no Precept for Praying under the
Law. First, they tell us that Smalc. de Div. Christi cap. 5.
whatever good things the Israelites had and enjoyed, were due to them by
Right, because they were promised them by the Law, and therefore there was no
need that they should pray for them. It seems it was superfluous to Ask those
mercies and blessings of God, which he was Bound to give them. They were a
Debt, and therefore were to be Claimed without any Imploring of God. Is not
here again a plain siding with the Roman Doctors, and their Device of Merit and
Perfection? for they suppose that the blessings which those people enjoyed were
the Deserved Wages of their Work, and might be demanded of God as their Right,
not asked as a Favor: and also this is supposed that they perfectly and
without the least defect and fault obeyed all the Divine Laws; otherwise their
very Imperfection and Failing would have been cause sufficient why they should
Pray unto God for pardon and forgiveness. But it seems they wanted not these,
and therefore it was needless to make their Addresses to him. These are the
Rare Notions of the Racovian Divines: or, to speak more plainly, these are the
Profane Sentiments of these persons.

Another Reason assigned in the same place is to this effect, Those who were
under the Old Law had no Precept given about Praying, because those Duties
which the Law prescribed them and required of them were of that nature that
they might be performed without any singular help and assistance from God: why
therefore should they invoke the Divine Aid? And an other of their Writers
joins with him, The Commandments (says he) that were in the Law did not in
themselves surpass humane strength: and the Earthly Happiness which was
promised was not so great that there was need of Prayers to obtain it. The
former Reason was ill enough, but this is much worse, and has more than a Tang
of that which I objected to them. It is indeed the common and frequent usage of
these Writers to admire and cry up the Natural Strength and Abilities of Man,
asserting him to be such a Creature as can do all his work of himself, and by
his own Native Power. Nay, under the Law it seems (when man had not those helps
and Volkel. l. 4. c. 9.
advantages which he has now) he was able to keep all God's laws, and entirely
and perfectly obey all his Commandments without the Divine Aid, for God gave no
Precept about Praying to him and asking his assistance. And if there was no
Precept then there was no Obligation upon them to do any such thing (nay, as
some of these Gentlemen seem to confess, it had been a Sin to pray to God,
because there was no Law or Command for it.) Consequently since they were
commanded to observe all the Divine Precepts and Rules, they had power enough
of themselves, without any assistance from God, to do it fully. Therefore
Prayer was an idle impertinent piece of Devotion; and when Abraham, Isaac and
Jacob, Ezra, Nehemiah, David, and the other Holy Men whom we read of in the Old
Testament, poured out Prayers and Petitions unto God, it was more than they
need have done, more than they were obliged to, because there was no Command
for it.

What shall we think of these Socinian Writers that discourse after this rate?
Can it be believed that they have any great Reverence for the Scriptures, that
they have a sense of the Weighty and Important Duty of Prayer, that they have
due thoughts concerning the Weakness and Imperfection of Man's Nature, that
they have becoming apprehensions concerning the Divine Help and Power? In a
word, can it be thought that they speak and think of God as if they had a real
belief of him?

Unto Worship without doubt belongs the Solemn Time appointed by God himself
for his Service. Wherefore let us see what the judgment of the Unitarians or
Socinians is concerning this matter. The Observation of a Seventh Day is not of
Divine Right, neither is it to be celebrated as such by Christians, say Lib. 4
c. 14.
Volkelius and the Author of the De Prophet. Christi mun. cap. 1.
Racovian Catechism. And the latter of these adds that it is a Ceremonial
Observance, and therefore not obligatory under the Gospel, for the Religion of
Christ, says he, as it utterly takes away all Ceremonies, so the choice of
Days, for which he quotes Col. 2. 16. And yet see how consistent these Men are
with themselves: though this and all Ceremonious Observances are quite
abolished by an express Command and Authority, yet in the next clause they are
pleased to be so indulgent as to suffer the observation of the Lord's day,
Since it was celebrated of old by Christians, we grant the same Liberty to all
Christians. It is very graciously done of them to grant that which they before
asserted to be contrary to the Word of God, for if it be utterly taken away by
that Word, it is now contrary to it, and is no longer to be permitted. Whence
then have these Men Authority to suffer the observation of the Lord's day,
since they themselves vouch the utter Abolishing of it? They are very great
folks, you must know, and can do what they please. They have a Power, a
Prerogative above others, and by virtue of this they can give a License to
observe that Day which St. Paul in the forenamed place, they say, utterly
condemned. Who knows where to have this People? First, they pronounce the
keeping of this day to be unlawful, and then they tell us it is lawful to keep
it. It is evident from this Contradiction that they have nothing of solidity
and consistency to alledg in behalf of their Opinion.

To vote the Seventh Day to be Part of the Ceremonial Law is ridiculous,
because the observing of it was practiced before the Ceremonial Law was given,
and therefore is none of that Law. It has a Generally Moral and Perpetual
Foundation, because Right Reason (which is in all Men, and is immutable)
dictates the Celebration of it, in as much as it is Reasonable that we should
imitate God in whatever he commands us. He resting from the works of the
Creation on the seventh day, thereupon instituted a Cessation of all worldly
labor and business among all mankind on that day, and so dedicated it to his
honor and worship, Genesis 2. 2, 3. whereby the observance of it becomes, on that
account, and in that respect Moral. It is not strictly Moral, but because the
devoting some Certain and Peculiar Time to God's Service is Moral, therefore so
far the observing of a Seventh Day is Moral. And as for that particular seventh
day, or that one day in Seven which we now keep, it was separated and hallowed
by the Apostles (who had Authority from Christ to do it,) and so it became an
Evangelical Institution, and consequently is more than Moral. Wherefore the
Socinians who, with the Quakers and some other High-flown Sects, hold that
Barclay's Apology.
there is no obligation to keep the first day of the week more than any other,
despise the Gospel. Institution, profane the Time which was particularly
destined to the Service of God, and more especially of the Eternal Son of God,
our Blessed Savior and Redeemer, who by his Miraculous Resurrection
consecrated this day, and set it apart for holy and religious duties. He
therefore that accounts it not a Holy Day, and keeps it not as such, plainly
manifests a spirit of Impiety and Profaneness.

It is not to be questioned that the Evangelical Sacraments of Baptism and the
Lord's Supper appertain to Religious Worship. Therefore in the next place we
are to examine how piously the Racovians express themselves with regard to
these Divine Institutions. It has been, and is the general belief of the
Orthodox Professors of Christianity that the Sacraments ordained of Christ (as
Article 25.
Our Church well expresses it) are not only badges or tokens of Christian men's
profession, but that they are certain sure witnesses and effectual signs of
grace and God's good will toward us, by which he does work invisibly in us, and
does not only quicken, but also strengthen and confirm our Faith in him. And
particularly, as to Baptism, they agree with Article 2^.
our Church, that it is not only a sign of profession and mark of difference,
whereby Christian Men are discerned from others, but whereby, as by an
Instrument, they that receive Baptism rightly, are grafted into the Church. The
promises of the forgiveness of Sin, and of our adoption to be sons of God, by
the Holy Ghost, are visibly signed and sealed, faith is confirmed, and grace
increased by virtue of Prayer unto God. And indeed this has been the constant
persuasion of all Understanding and Religious Men: this has been their firm
and grounded belief concerning the Sacraments, that these Ordinances were
appointed for Great and Excellent Purposes, viz. that they should be, when
rightly and effectually administered, Channels of Grace and of the Holy Spirit,
Pledges of God's good will in the Gospel, and Signs of the Remission of our
sins: and more particularly that the Sacrament of the Eucharist should be a
help to our Faith and all our other Graces, and a solemn Seal and Assurance of
the Divine Favor to us, as well as a Memorial of the Death of our Savior.

But the Gentlemen whom we are now giving an account of are of another mind,
for Socin. in Paraenesi cap. 4. Epist. 3. ad Radec. Volkel. l. 4. c. 12. l. 6.
c. 14. Smalc. cont. Frantz. disp. 5. de Ministr. Eccles. Item, Disp. 9. de
Hypocr. Item, Disp. 3. de Sacramentis.
they with one consent declare that there is no collation of any Grace, no
Confirmation of our Faith, no bestowing of any Spiritual Blessing in the use of
the Sacraments. And generally they hold with Lib. 4. c. 22.
Volkelius that there is no other end of instituting the Sacrament of the
Lord's Supper but Thankfulness. The De Coena, qu. 5.
Racovian Catechism teaches that this Sacrament is of no use to ratify and
seal the Benefits purchased for us by our Savior; yea that it is not useful to
put us in mind of his Death, notwithstanding his own words, Do this in
remembrance of me. An Wolzogen Comment. in Mat. 26. 26.
other Writer peremptorily determines that there is no other use of the Lord's
Supper but to stir up our Thankfulness for Christ's Death. It is falsely said
(says he) that it is a Seal of Grace and Divine Favor, a Confirmation of the
Promises and of our faith in them. It is erroneously said that it was
instituted to be a Memorial of Christ's Death: though he had in express terms
said a little before, There is no other end of this Sacrament than that the
remembrance of Christ together with giving of thanks and setting forth his
cruel death should perpetually remain in the Church. Whereby it appears he had
forgot what he had said: but he was not forgetful to disparage this Sacrament.

But can we be so uncharitable as to think that the Unitarians of our times are
guilty of this? Verily it is no breach of Charity to think so of them since
they have expressly declared as much. First, they tell us * they like not the
word [Sacraments] because it is no Scripture-word, for which profound reason
some of them have professed that they dislike the word Trinity: then they
declare that neither of the Sacraments work ought in us, and particularly as
for the effects and consequences ascribed to the right partaking of the Lord's
Supper, they can Trinitarian Scheme of Religion. p. 25, 26.
find them no where but in the Books and Sermons of the Superstitious admirers
or idolaters of External things, i. e. the Books and Sermons of all
Protestants. And here it will not be amiss to take notice how both the
Sacraments are most Abusively treated by these English Socinians, which will
further evince that they have a right to the Character which I have given them.
Their language is as follows, p. 24. Let a man in black sprinkle you with some
of the Church's Water, or give you a bit of Bread, or a sup of Wine, over which
he has pronounced the Wonder-working words prescribed in Mother Church's
Ritual; though by nature you are as bad as the Devil, you shall presently be
inclined to as much good as will save you from Hell, and qualify you for
Heaven. And this no less certainly, if you are one of the Elect (for else the
Churches Incantation produces only a momentary effect and a false appearance of
good) no less certainly, I say, than by tying the Norman Knot you may gain the
love of the person you desire, or by other Devices recorded in the learned
books of Magic you may cause Hatred, raise Winds, and do a thousand other
Feats which have no more natural and real agreement with those Causes that are
said to produce them, than Faith and Obedience have with a bit of Bread or with
a sprinkling of water.

It cannot be said he speaks this of the way of administering Baptism and the
Eucharist in the Church of Rome, for in this place he is designedly speaking of
the Protestants, and especially of the Church of England in her Prayers and
Offices of the Service Book, and in her Articles and Homilies: so that it is
plain he means the celebration of both Sacraments according to the custom and
manner of Reformed Churches, and more particularly of Ours. And that he makes
himself merry with the Protestant, not Popish manner of administering the Lord's
Supper is evident further from this, that he mentions not only the giving a bit
of Bread, but a sup of Wine, which latter is not given to the People in the
Church of Rome, as is well known, and this Author knows as well as any man.
Wherefore he must of necessity speak of the Sacraments as they are administered
in the Protestant Churches, and you see what jolly work he makes of it.
Mother Church is with him a term for any Eminent Reformed Church: as it is
indeed the Style of these men, they in their late Writings usually call any
Church of Note that differs from them, Mother Church. The Lawful Minister that
attends on the Sacred Institutions of Baptism and the Lord's Supper has no
better Title with them than the man in black. Baptism forsooth is the Churches
Water, and the other Sacrament cannot be more decently expressed by him than by
a bit of Bread and a sup of Wine: and the words of Institution pronounced by
our Savior himself are scoffingly called the wonder-working words, and (which
is yet more profane and impious) an Incantation, a Charm, a Spell. Then he
scandalously uses the terms of Devil, Hell and Heaven, as if he believed no
such things: and to confirm us in this persuasion concerning him he proceeds
(after he had jeered the Elect) to compare the Solemn and Evangelical
Ordinances of Baptism and the Lord's Supper to the Lewdest, Vilest, and most
profane things imaginable, yea to the Feats of Magic Art.

It is no wonder that the most Sacred matters of our Religion are derided by
this sort of men, who by such passages as these discover themselves to be of a
very unsanctified temper. It is no wonder that those who give themselves up to
this wild and profane way of talking, blaspheme even the Son of God and the
Holy Ghost, vilifying the blessed undertaking of the former, and disregarding
the powerful assistance and aids of the latter, and denying the Divinity of
both. It is no wonder that they abuse and debauch Christianity, and all the
Excellent Principles of it, when they give themselves this Liberty, and let fly
against all that is Sacred and Venerable. Who will not say (and that on just
grounds) that here is more than a Vergency to that cursed genius which I have
before mentioned?

But let us go on, and enquire more particularly into their apprehensions about
Baptism. Concerning this they have espoused this groundless conceit, that now
among Christians it is an Insignificant Rite. The determination of their Socin.
2 Epist. ad Radec.
Great Master is this, Baptism was prescribed to none but Heathens: among those
who make public profession of Christianity there is no need of it: at this
time it does not concern the Church at all, but is a mere indifferent thing.
Most of his followers represent it after the like manner, and say Volkel. l. 6.
c. 10, 14, 19. Smalc. Disp. de baptismo.
there was no Command for Water Baptism, as they call it. Baptism is ceased,
says Lib. 3. cap. 9.
Volkelius, it belonging only to those First Times. And if you urge the express
words of the Institution of it, Mat. 28. 19. Go teach all nations, baptizing
them, De Baptismo aquae, cap. 2.
Socinus answers that it is not meant of the Baptism of Water. And in the same
place he undertakes to prove that this was not enjoined by Christ, but was only
freely taken up by the Apostles, and was a Temporary Rite. To which their Chief
Volkel. l. 6. c. 14. Smalc. disp. de Baptismo.
Doctors say Amen. And if you ask the Reason why it is not obligatory now, they
will put you off by saying, the Christian Religion is Internal and Spiritual,
and admits not of such an external and corporal Ceremony as Baptism. And yet
these Sons of Reason apply not this to the Other Sacrament, but acknowledge it
to be perpetual in the Christian Church, though it be an Outward Sensible Rite:
this interferes not with the Spirituality of the Christian Religion. Which lets
us see how Partial they are in their Arguing.

Further, let us mark the inconsistency of these men: notwithstanding there is
no Precept for this Sacrament, notwithstanding it is a mere Ceremonial Rite,
notwithstanding it is abolished (for all this they hold and maintain) yet they
defend the Lawfulness of retaining it. It may be used, they say, in the
Christian Church, especially when they have any Turkish or Jewish Proselytes
(for Socin. de Baptismo aquae. Volkel. l. 6. c. 14. Ostorod. Instit. cap. 39.
they mention these particularly) for because they are come over to the Turks
in the point of the Trinity, they expect I suppose that some of them will
return the kindness, and be Converts to some parts of their Religion. So, it
seems, the Sacrament of Baptism is kept up only for the sake of some Mahometans
and Jews, who are expected to honor Socinianism with their Conversion.

But though Baptism, as it has respect to Adult Persons, is in some sort
tolerated by these men, yet the Baptizing of Infants is utterly condemned by
them Socin. de Bapt. aquae. Smalc. cont. Frantz. Cat. Racov. de Prophet.
Christi munere. cap. 4. Moscorov. de Baptismo. Slichting. cont. Meisner.
all, as a practice founded on no Precept or Example. They agree with the Old
Pelagians and Anabaptists that Children have nothing to do with this Rite, and
they give the same Reasons (if we may call them so) for their Tenent that they
did, as appears from the very words of the De Proph. Mun. Christi. cap. 4, qu.
2.
Racovian Catechism, which excludes Infants because they cannot themselves, by
reason of their age, acknowledge Christ for their Savior. And Slichting.
Comment. in 1 Pet. 3. 21.
one of their Chief Rabbis determines in brief thus, Infants not knowing what
they do, or what is done to them, are not to be baptized. And therefore an
Wolzogen Compend. Relig. Christianae.
other calls it a Vain and Childish action. And he thinks he is facetious when
a little after he styles it the Childish Baptism of Children. And this is the
sense of the Unitarians of the last Edition, The Baptists or Anabaptists, say
Of Worcester shiping the Holy Ghost. p. 5.
they, worthily labor in the vindicating of Baptism to those that are capable
of it, from those that are incapable of it. Trinitarian Scheme of Religion.
They determine that Baptism was appointed by Christ to initiate Jews and
Heathens into the Christian Church, and consequently none but these are to be
entered into the Church by this Rite: herein exactly following their Master De
Baptismo aquae.
Socinus, who tells us that if any heretofore left their Judaism or Paganism,
they were to be baptized; but those that are born of Christian Parents are not
to be baptized. Then they add (in the same place) that no person is capable of
baptism but such as can profess and intend the thing signified by Baptism, viz.
a clean conscience and a new life: consequently all Infants are excluded.

And now who would not think that Paedobaptism were wholly discarded by the
Socinians, and that they cannot with a safe Conscience allow of it? But behold
yet a farther proof of their Repugnancies, of their jarring with themselves as
well as with the Truth, of their contradicting their own sentiments as well as
those of the Christian Church. Though they have spoken so contemptibly of this
Sacred Institution, though they openly confess that Children are not capable of
it, though they publish to the world that there is neither Command nor Practice
for it, yet some of their Authors whom I have mentioned hold it may be
practiced in the Church. What therefore is it that these men will not say or
do, if they have a mind to it? The whole Sect of Anabaptists are against
Paedobaptism, and so far they are to be commended that they approve not of that
in others which they are persuaded is unlawful in it self. But here is a sort
of Religionists that cry down the Baptising of Children as an empty and
childish Ceremony, as void of all Allowance from Scripture, and unreasonable
and absurd in it self, and yet the practice of it is not unlawful in the
Church. He that has a Talent of solving Contrarieties, let him use it here,
for here is great occasion for it.

But this must be said indeed, that Lib. Ministrorum Transylvan. de unius Dei
cognitione.
some of the High-fliers among them, who are most consistent with themselves
and their own principles, cry out against the Baptising of Children as
Antichristian, and not to be tolerated by any means in the Christian Church:
for truly if it be of that nature which we have heard it represented to be,
there is no reason it should be suffered any longer. Wherefore those of the
Party before mentioned are guilty of a double Irreligion, first in slandering
this Sacrament, in profanely scoffing at this Institution, this Evangelical
Rite ordained by our Lord himself; Secondly in allowing the administering of it
in the Church, notwithstanding they have thus reproached it, and represented it
as a thing utterly unlawful. What will the Impious Despisers of Religion, what
will the Atheists say to this? Are they not hereby confirmed in their dislike
and contempt of what is Sacred? Are they not taught to open their mouths
against God and whatever is Religious, and yet (notwithstanding that) to make
some show of outward allowing them? Is not here an Example set them for this
purpose, and do we not see it daily followed? Thus it appears that these men
strike at Religion, yea strike it down, and then would pretend to raise it up
as it were: but this is only adding Dissimulation to their gross Impiety, which
renders their Guilt the greater, and mightily aggravates their Crime.

CHAP. VIII.
The Socinians deny that there is any Distinct Order of men in the Christian
Church. This is disproved from the Evangelical Writings. Though they are for
Gathered Churches, yet they contradict this in their practice. They can give no
account of this, and of their censuring other Congregations. Their Indifferency
in Religion is inferred from their having no Public Assemblies. As also from
their concealing their Names and Persons. Something worse than Cowardice is
taken notice of in them. They hold Officious Lies to be lawful. The ground of
this Opinion is showed to be unreasonable. Socinus's Explication of Mat. 5. 28.
justly censured. They assert that Immodesty, Intemperance, Wantonness, Impure
Desires and Lusts were not forbid under the Law: The Badness of this assertion
laid open. They are enemies to the Civil Powers. They will not permit them to
punish any Offenders (no not Murderers) with death. Herein they oppose
themselves to the authority of the Old and New Testament. The reason guess^d at
why they take the Sword out of the Magistrates hand. They condemn all going to
War as unchristian and unlawful.

HAving dispatched Two of the General Heads which I propounded, I pass to the
Third, viz. Ecclesiastical Discipline or Government. The Socinians deny that
there is any Distinct Order of Men in the Church, to whom it peculiarly and
solely belongs to preach the Word and administer the Sacraments. Epist. 2. ad
Radec.
Socinus indeed grants that one Man may be chosen out of the rest to preach the
Word of God, and he sees no reason to the contrary, he says. But neither he
nor his followers admit of any Call or Mission requisite in order to this. The
Racovian Catechism positively determines it so: for though it seems to grant
that it is more fitting and decent that professed and set Ministers should
perform the public offices in the Church, De Ecclesia. cap. 2. qu. 15.
and the Primitive Churches they grant observed this, yet they assert that it
is not Necessary, because the Scripture does not require it. Cont. Frantz.
Disp. de Ministr. Eccles. Item, Disp. de Ord. Eccles.
Smalcius expressly maintains this. Lib. 4. cap. 22.
Volkelius gives us his judgment in these words, That the Pastor or Minister
should dispense to the rest the Supper of the Lord, is wholly an indifferent
thing, seeing it is not commanded us by Christ, nor can there be any reason
given why it ought to be done at all. It cannot be proved, says an Ostorod.
Instit. cap. 42.
Other, that it is lawful for no man to do those things (which he mentioned
just before, viz. preaching, baptizing, administering the Lord's Supper) unless
he be called, and sent for that purpose, and he endeavors to prove it by
alleging several Arguments. The De Coen. Dom. qu. 2.
Racovian Catechism hints that the Eucharist may be administered by the hands of
Private Christians, and such as are not devoted to the Ministry. And what says
their famous Master? Socin. Epist. 2. ad Radec.
As to the Lord's Supper, there is no reason why we should suspect that it may
not be celebrated by any one that professes the Name of Christ. And again,
Tractat. de Ecc^esia.
Any Christian Man may exercise the office of Preaching and administering the
Sacraments. And the rest of them agree with him that there is not a necessity
of a Distinct Order of persons in the Church, and that a Layman may administer
the Sacraments. What their opinion concerning Preaching is, may be learnt from
the Racovian De Eccles. cap. 11.
Catechism, which tells us that there is no use of it since the Conversion of
the Gentiles, and since Christianity is settled in the world. There is no
Necessity of it, says an Episcop. Disp. 28. par. 3.
other Friend of theirs.

And yet in the Evangelical Writings (which are the infallible Rule we are to
direct our selves by, and whence we are to learn what Ecclesiastical
Constitutions are to take place) we find that the Distinction and Peculiarity
of the Ministerial Office, and its Peculiar Function are settled, 1 Cor. 12.
28, 29. Ephesians. 4. 11, 12. A peculiar Mission is expressly required, Romans 10. 15. 1 Timothy 5. 5. Tit. 1. 5. A Particular Call is made necessary, Acts 14. 23. Heb. 5.
4. Upon which that Article of our Church is grounded, It is Art. the 23.
not lawful for any man to take upon him the office of Public Preaching or
Ministering the Sacraments in the Congregation, before he is lawfully called and
sent to execute the same. But this is disregarded by our New Modellers of
Religion. And who could expect any other thing? for they who have so abused and
perverted Christianity it self, would not fail to treat the Ministers of it
with contempt and disgrace, yea wholly to make void their Office and Charge.
This is a fresh evidence of the truth and reality of what I formely taxed them
with.

One thing further I will observe that according to the Socinian Writers there
is a See Socin. Epist. 3. ad Radec.
Necessity of openly adhering to some Congregation professing Christ's
discipline; and that Congregation must be such as they think to be purer than
the rest. This is the whole design and subject of Socinus's book De Officio
hominis Christiani, to show that they must be of some Church, and particularly
of those who were then called Arians or Ebionites. That is in plain terms,
those who are of the Anti-Trinitarian persuasion must have a Gathered Church,
and there make public profession of their belief, and openly teach those
Doctrines which they are persuaded to be true. And yet I offer it to be taken
notice of that though this be professed in their Writings to be an
Indispensable Point of Religion, etc. yet they regard not the practicing of it.
None of our English Socinians have any Set Meetings for the propagating of
their doctrine, as men of other persuasions have at this day. We cannot but
take notice that all Parties who think their Way to be True and Good hold
distinct Congregations on the Lord's day, or at other Solemn times, and then
make profession of their particular Way and Worship. It is well known that this
is the usage and practice of all the different Parties of Religion. They did it
even when they had a Prohibition from the Government, but now much more openly
when they are not restrained by Public Authority. But there is not so much as
one single Meeting in the way of Religion and Worship upheld by the Socinians,
tho it is certain that their way of worship differs from that of all Other
Parties, because the very Object of Worship is different, I mean as to their
consideration of it, for they look upon our Savior as a Creature, and no
other. Which one thing should make them assemble together in a distinct place
and manner from all other Professors of Religion. They should, if they acted
according to their own Principles, have a peculiar Church, and openly preach up
their Persuasions, and declare against the false and Idolatrous Worship of all
Professors of Christianity but themselves, for so it seems they esteem it.

Thus, I say, they are obliged to do, if they will be consistent to themselves.

They must form an Assembly of their own, and if they want Members, they know
where to have them: it is but sending for some more of their brethren in
Transylvania, Poland, etc. and so they may be stocked. I do not see how they
can possibly omit the Meeting together as a Church, suppose in London or some
other convenient place, for their Principles of Ecclesiastical Government or
Discipline oblige them to this. If they say that some Prudential Considerations
prevail with them to do otherwise, then it is clear that their Prudence is of
such a sort that it outweighs, yea wholly excludes their Duty: and surely men
of their Reason and Judgment will not boast much of such a Prudence. Besides,
if they pretend Discretion and Prudence for their not Assembling together, then
in so doing they tax all the Meetings and Congregations of other Persuasions as
herds of Imprudent and Impolitick Men: and whether such a Charge as this
savours of Prudence I leave it to themselves to judge.

To say the truth, these Gentlemen can be as smart upon the Dissenters (when
they think fit) as upon Churchmen: we are told in the P. ^8.
Trinitarian Scheme of Religion that the former have separated from the Church
of England for small and inconsiderable causes. And in an Of worshipping the
Holy Ghost. p. 4, 5.
other of their late Essays they rattle all Dissenters at a high rate, charging
them with great inconsistency to themselves and their own principles: and
afterward they call them Wi^-Worshippers, telling them that their worship is
without any warrant of Scripture, either by precept, or so much as one example,
nay against the full current of Scripture-Worship. Then they add, their Worship
i^, of their own invention, and soon after they call it, a Popish Invention.
Now, one would think that these men who thus condemn all Dissenters, and
declare for^ Purer Congregation and Worship than other men, should have
Particular and Distinct Assemblies of their own: but they have not, they mix
with others, and particularly sometimes with the Churches of the Conformists:
yea, some of them have been, and are still professed Members of the Church of
England, joining in that Service (particularly the Li^any where the Three
Persons of the Godhead are invoked, and the Doxology which is so frequently
repeated) wherein the Deity not only of the Father, but of the Son and of the
Holy Ghost is publicly professed and owned. Socinus had other thoughts when he
endeavored to prove that Lib. de Officio hominis Christiani.
the people of the kingdom of Poland and of the Great Duchy of Lithuania ought
to join themselves to the Assemblies of those that were called Arians, that is,
those who professed Socinus's doctrine. Now, will not any rational and
considerate man infer hence that our English Socinians are very cold and
unconcerned in their Religion? for though according to the Scheme of their
Church Government they ought to Meet together in a visible and solemn manner,
yet they are so Indifferent that they will not, or so Cowardly that they dare
not do it. Which breeds a suspicion of them that they only act a Part, and that
at another time they will be at something else.

Which appears from this likewise that, tho they under hand manage their Cause,
and write in defense of it, yet they conceal their Names and Persons. They are
against Mysteries, but they keep in the Clouds, and will not let the world know
who they are. This evidently convinces us how Indifferent they are, for if they
were verily persuaded that their doctrine is really True, and that it contains
in it Substantial and Necessary Points of Faith and Religion, they would not,
they could not act thus under a disguise; but they would be sensible that it is
absolutely requisite to discover themselves, and to deal above board, and to be
plain and free in their owning of the Cause; for if they be Verities of
Necessary Concern in Religion (as they sometimes pretend) then they are worth
the Public owning, and these persons may glory in the defense of them. But we
see they dare not (even in this Juncture when Liberty was allowed them, and
they might safely speak their minds) appear with open face, and set their Names
before their Writings. This shows that they have no true Zeal for their Cause,
yea that at the bottom they are but little or not at all concerned. And if they
be not deeply concerned for that which is their Darling Point, what can we
think of them as to the rest?

But it is not only Cowardice, but something of a worse nature that makes them
thus mask themselves. These Knights Errant (who come not like those of old to
do kindnesses to the distressed) will not vouchsafe to lift up the beavers of
their helmets, and let us see who they are, because by this concealment they
are abler to do the greater mischief. They lie hid, and publish not their
Names, that thereby they may have the advantage of saying what they please, and
aspersing whom they will with their audacious pens; that by this means they may
have free liberty to disturb the world, to unsettle men in their Opinions, to
beget Disputes and Wranglings, to bring in Skepticism and Indifferency in
Religion, and at last Atheism.

I could moreover add, under this Third General Head, their unscriptural Notion
concerning the Church, viz. that, like other Societies, it may be extinct.
Whereas it has been the constant profession of all Protestants (as well as
those of the Roman Communion) that the Church of God is perpetual, and shall
never be wholly extirpated, these men vouch that there is no necessity of
asserting any such thing. So V. R. l. 5. c. 4.
Volkelius and Inst. cap. 42.
Ostorodus: and Smalcius against Frantzius holds the same: and the reason they
give is because it is in every man's power to Apostatize and deny the Faith,
and consequently it may so happen that there may be no Church in being in the
world. As much as to say, God's Word, and his Faithfulness on which it is
founded can be superseded by Man's will and pleasure. We are ascertained of the
contrary from such expres^ and direct Promises as these, God is i^ the midst of
her, she shall not be moved, Psalm. 46. 5. God will establish her for ever,
Psalm. 48. 8. The gates of hell shall not prevail against it, Mat. 16. 18. I am
with you always even unto the end of the world, Mat. 28. 20. From these and
several other plain passages in the Writings of the Old and New Testament it is
evident that this is a Truth impregnable, that the True Church of Christ shall
never fail, that God's special Providence attends it, that it has been and
shall be preserved in all Ages, and that it shall endure to the World's End.
But their contrary persuasion shows us what a mean esteem they have of what is
delivered in the Holy Scriptures, and how Indifferent they are as to the
duration or extinction of the Church of Christ.

Fourthly and Lastly, I come to consider what their Sentiments are in reference
to Practice and Morality. But I sincerely declare I intend not here any
reflection upon their Persons or Actions, for I am a perfect stranger to them:
I know nothing of the Gentlemen but their Books: or if I knew any thing that
were a blemish in their Conversation, if I were able to rake up materials to
represent them blameable in point of Morals, I should think it an unworthy act
so much as to mention it, for those are Weak and Feeble Arguers who make use of
such Methods. It is irrational to judge of Opinions from the Personal
miscarriages of any men. My business at present is to set before the Reader the
thoughts and apprehensions of some of their Chief Writers concerning some
Points of Morality.

Officious Lies were never forbidden either by Moses or Christ in the Old or
New Testament, and consequently are lawful says De V. R. cap. 19.
Volkelius. And he adds this reason, because they are profitable to some: as if
that would render them Lawful, when the Apostle has instructed us in the
contrary, Romans 3. 8. We are not to be induced to do evil, that good may come of
it. The consideration of Advantage and Profit cannot render that lawful which
is otherwise in it self, as all Lying is; and the reason is because it is a
Transgression of the Divine Law. To prove that this Profitable Lying is not
unlawful, they allege Examples out of the Old Testament; but we may observe
that at other times they make nothing of Examples thence, because (say they)
the Gospel requires of persons greater perfection than the Law did, as their
Gloss upon Mat. 5. evidences. But now, though they must not swear at all, yet
they may lie, i. e. if it be in an officious and serviceable way,
notwithstanding those General Prohibitions of all Lying, Exodus 23. 7. Lev. 19.
11. Prove. 6. 17. 12. 22. 13. 5. Ephesians. 4. 25. Col. 3. 9. If this Doctrine were
generally preached (as it is by these men) it would have a pernicious effect in
the world, and all Lies would be reckoned some way or other Officious, and
Truth and Sincerity would soon leave the earth.

I might mention Socinus's Explication of Mat. 5. 28. Whosoever looks on a
Woman to lust after her, has committed adultery already with her in his heart;
which he restrains to looking on a Married woman, not on any other: and he
favorably speaks of the motions of Concupiscence, even when he is discoursing
of the Perfection of the Christian Law above that of Moses, which looks very
strange. And besides, he strikes in with the Doctors of the Church of Rome who
determine Concupiscence to be no Sin. Ostorod. Instit. cap. 4. Smalc. contra
Frantz.
Some of them hold that Polygamy and Concubinate were not forbid by the Divine
Law, whereas the contrary is evident from our Saviors words, Mat. 19. 8. From
the beginning it was not so; for the Institution of God in the beginning was
this, They two shall be one flesh, Genesis 2. 24. by which Primitive Law is
condemned the Plurality of Wives. Bernardinus Ochinus and David George, both of
them fierce Anti-Trinitarians, held Polygamy under the Gospel lawful. But I
will not make use of their Opinion against the main body of the
Anti-Trinitarians, because I verily believe they approve not of it: and some of
them have particularly showed their dislike and abhorrence of it.

What their thoughts are as to some other Acts of Immorality, we may learn from
Ostorod. Instit. cap. 30.
one of their Writers, God commanded nothing, says he, at all by Moses that
concerns Modesty, Temperance or Sobriety, but granted them leave to seek out
pleasures in meat and drink, in apparel and the like. And again, The Law did
not forbid unprofitable words, jests, gibes, no nor lying, swearing, railing.
This he says notwithstanding what we read in Prove. 23. 31. Look not thou upon
the Wine when it is red, etc. and in Isa. 5. 11. Woe to them that rise up early
in the morning to follow strong drink etc. Explicat. cap. 6. Matthew.
Socinus himself avers that Drunkenness was not forbid under the Old Testament,
nor was it punishable by God on its own account. And (that you may know what
thoughts these men have concerning the Penmen of Holy Scripture) a Smalc. cont.
Frantz. disp. 7.
famous Unitarian pronounces thus concerning Ecclesiastes, It is too certain
that he does not only in his way permit those things which belong to the
pleasures of the flesh, but he also in a manner exhorts to them. And he further
adds in the same place his opinion concerning this and other Writers of the Old
Testament, Whatever precepts appertaining to Morality are alleged out of
Ecclesiastes and other such like books (as the Psalms, the Proverbs, etc.) they
indeed belong to the making of a well-moraliz'd and religious man, but no
person under the Law was necessarily bound to observe them, nor did he lose the
name of a Worshipper of God who observed them not. This is the mean and low
esteem they have of the Sacred Writings of the Old Testament: it was, according
to them, indifferent whether what they enjoined, was observed or not: and
particularly Sobriety and Moderation were no Set Virtues under the Law. This is
the doctrine of an D^ Volkel. l. 4. c. 17.
other of them, Obscene words, says he, revelling, luxury, excess in eating
and drinking mere tolerated, and permitted to the Israelites. And he further
adds that the Patriarchs of old, the Jews, and all the people under the Old
Testament, sinned not in living licentiously, in indulging of all manner of
Riot, Gluttony, Drunkenness, Wantonness, Turpitude, all but downright Adultery
and Fornication. The Law did not forbid these, for Christ, he says, was the
first that by his law forbad them. Therefore they might indulge themselves in
all beastly pleasures of the body, and impure desires and lusts, and all
immoderation in eating and drinking, and the greatest provocatives of the most
filthy lusts. These are his very words, and it would scarcely be thought that
they could fall from the pen of a Writer who professedly treats of the True
Religion.

But when we consider that it is the Socinian Religion (whatever he calls it)
which he means, our wonder may cease. And yet it will rise again when we
remember what show of Piety and Exactness in Religion these men make, and would
have us believe that they are a perfecter sort of Christians than others. Yet
they are not ashamed to give this account of the Religion of the Holy
Patriarchs and Saints till the coming of Christ. How high an affront is this to
the Divine Majesty, that he should allow and approve of these Impurities and
Immoralities? for this they must necessarily hold because they declare that
these were no Sins, nor were they disliked by God, otherwise he would have
forbid the practice of them. If I have any understanding in Theology, these are
vile notions, and vented to corrupt the minds and manners of men. Though the
very law of Nature and Reason forbids these gross Enormities, yet they have the
face to assert that they were not Sins under the Law. Under Gentilism they were
Vices (as appears from their being inveighed against by the Pagan Moralists)
but not under the Old Testament. Men's Natural Consciences condemn these
flagitious practices, but God does not. This is the Divinity of the Socinians,
and who can expect any Moral Truths from them when they discourse after this
manner? when they vouch the most Immoral actions to have been lawful all the
time till our Savior's coming? when those very things which were judged to be
Vices by the Pagans (their very natural Reason dictating so much to them) are
said to be Lawful practices among God's own people? Certainly these men's
Notions which are so corrupted as to Natural Religion, must needs be very
Unsound as to that which is Revealed. If their Ethics be so depraved, what can
we think of their Christianity? We can think nothing less than this that the
former Charge is to be renewed here, and that with very great and apparent
reason.

To their persuasions referring to Practice I will here annex what they say
concerning the Civil Power, and the executing of it. It is true, Sli^htingius
is of opinion that Magistracy is lawful, and he speaks of it with some respect
and deference, as you may see in his Questions concerning Magistracy. But
others express themselves in a different strain and style, representing the
Civil Powers as unlawful under the Gospel. No Christian can with a good
conscience be a Magistrate, says Instructi^ ad utilem lection. N. T. cap. 7.
Wolzogen. It is not to be tolerated in the kingdom of Christ that one should
rule ov^ others, and exercise power and dominion. This he pursues with great
warmth. And in an Commen^, in Mat. 5.
other place he tells us that the Magistrate's Office is Useless; which he
backs with diverse Arguments, and accordingly explodes that Punishing and
Rewarding which are generally annexed to the Magistratick Office. And Comment.
in Mat. 20.
again, he asserts and defends that Christ in those words, Mat. 20. 26. It
shall not be so among you, etc. condemns all Earthly Dominion and Superiority:
and he labors to prove from this place that all Civil Power is utterly forbid
under the Gospel.

Others indeed are not so rigid and fierce, they do not hold Magistracy to be
altogether unlawful and unchristian; but yet that which is really a great part
of it is voted to be so by them, for it belongs not to the Higher Powers, they
say, to punish any Offenders with death. Epist. ad Arcisse^ium.
Socinus asserts this without any limitation. It is not lawful in the times of
the Gospel for a Magistrate to shed any man's blood, and bereave him of life,
says an Smalc. cont. Frantz. Disp. (...) de robus civilibus.
Other. The Magistrate ought not to use any Capital or Deadly Punishment, says
a Ostorod. Instit. cap. 28.
third. And a Wolzogen Instruct. ad util. lection. N. T. cap. 4.
fourth designedly undertakes to prove that according to Christ's laws no
Malefactors, no not Murderers, are to be punished with loss of Life. Would you
know the Reason of it? Smal^ disp. 6. de rebus civilibus.
One of the forementioned Authors assigns it in these words, It is now a time
of grace: the most perfect love toward our neighbor is commanded. He that
does not see that it manifestly follows hence that it is not lawful to take
away the life of Criminals, that man is blinded by his own flesh, or by the
spirit of Antichrist, and (...) long accustoming himself to do evil. But if we
consult what this Author says a little before, we shall find that he was blind
himself, for he says, It is not lawful for a Christian Magistrate to shed
blood, and to deprive any of life, but by some other ways which are more severe
to restrain and punish them. Observe it, he would prescribe a more severe
penalty, yet he rejects the other way because it is so severe and harsh, and
because the Gospel Dispensation is loving and gentle. If these be not
Contradictions, tell me what are.

But I will briefly show that both Socinus and these his followers herein
oppose themselves to the Authority of the Holy Scriptures, and the Appointment
of the Universal Lawgiver of the world, which is no mean Instance of their
Irreligious inclination. That Ancient Law, Gen 9. 6. Whosoever sheddeth man's
blood, by man shall his blood be shed, is not abrogated, and therefore is still
in force. The Magistrate has here a Commission to put to death persons for
Murder. Here is a Divine Warrant for this Bloody Execution. And our Savior's
words have been applied this way by very Judicious Interpreters, They that take
the sword, shall perish with the sword, Mat. 26. 52. i. e. they that use the
sword unlawfully, they that unjustly shed humane blood, are worthy of Death,
and this generally is their portion. St. Paul's words to the Roman Governor,
Acts 25. 11. show plainly that it is lawful for Magistrates to put to death
those whose Crimes deserve it. If I be an Offender, says the Apostle, or have
committed any thing worthy of death, I refuse not to die. Both Capital
Judicatures and Punishments are authorized by the same Apostle, Romans 13. 4.
where speaking of the Magistrate, he says, He bears not the sword in vain,
i. e. he bears it so as strike with it, to do execution with it, when there
is occasion. So ridiculous is that Exposition of the place which Smalc. cont.
Frantz. disp. de rebus civisib.
One of the Socinian Writers gives, viz. It is said, He bears the sword, but
yet he must not use it. It is evident from this Text (as well as from those
before mentioned) that God himself has put this Weapon into the Magistrate's
hand, and why then should any presume to disarm him?

I acknowledge a Christian Ruler ought to be very Cautious and Tender in the
point of men's Lives, and perhaps it would be better to be sparing of them in
some cases, where generally according to the Laws, as they are now in force,
there is a forfeiture of Life. It was very rare heretofore among our Ancestors
to inflict death for some of those Crimes which now are made Capital. The
Executioner had not so much work when Banishment and Confiscations were more in
use. But it is certain that there are such flagitious enormities, such heinous
and detestable villainies as require no less a recompense than Death it self.
Especially in the case of Bloodshedding a Retaliation is due, for blood calls
for blood. This fatal Retribution is founded not only on the forementioned
Positive Law given to the Patriarchs, and never since repealed, and also on the
Allowance of the New Testament (as you have heard) but on the Common Law of
Equity and justice. Wherefore the Magistrate has authority, when public
Justice and Necessity require it, to take away men's lives. Which our Church
thought fit to make The 37th.
one of her Articles. The Laws of the Realm may punish Christian Men with death
for heinous and grievous offenses. Nay, the Public Ministers of Justice are so
far from offending in doing this, that they are extraordinarily guilty if they
omit it, especially if they suffer Murderers to go thus unpunished, for
bloodshed is the way by Gods appointment for the avenging of willful homicide
and murder.

I mention these things that we may see how injurious the Unitarians are both
to the Ecclesiastical and Civil Ministers. They not only null the function and
Jurisdiction of the former (as I showed you) but they rob the latter of a great
and considerable part of their Office. They will not allow them a power to
punish Offenders, especially Capitally. With the Donatists of old and some
Anabaptists afterward they agree to defend this Proposition, that no man ought
to be put to death, let his Crime be never so black and bloody: they hold that
the Effusion of humane blood is in all cases unlawful. They had this
immediately from the Italian Innovator, who knew it would serve his followers
to very considerable purposes. For it was convenient to begin first with the
Magistrate, l^st he should have begun with them. They take away his Punitive
Power, and then they know he cannot hurt them. They are against all Capital
Inflictions, lest they should taste of them themselves. The design of these
Opposers of Magistracy is that they may have a License to vent what Doctrines
they please, that they may even expel out of the world some of the Fundamental
Truths which have been embraced in all ages of the Church. It is to be feared
that the design at the bottom is that all Magistrates should throw away their
Swords, divest themselves of their power to Punish, that hereby there may be a
Liberty to do what they please; and then at last it is likely they will usurp
the Sword, and take upon them that Office which they denied to the Magistate.
Though they despoil the Praetor of his Axe as well as Rods, yet they will make
use of them themselves.

Here I might let you see likewise that it is their opinion that Socin. Epist.
7. ad Lublin.
it is not lawful for a Christian Man to go to war. Thus their Great Casuist
determines, and in Quod regni Polon. etc. cap. 3. Them. 24. de Offic. Christi.
other places he says We may not repel force with force by taking up Arms,
though we are justly assaulted. And he is backed by Disp. 6. de reb. civilib.
Smalcius, who peremptorily asserts the same. But I believe the Reader would
think it loss of time to insist here, and to show the unreasonableness of this
Opinion, and therefore I dismiss it.

CHAP. IX.
The Socinians agree with the Papists in the doctrine of Evangelical Counsels,
and several other Tenants. The Author's designed Brevity. The Socinian Creed
summed up, and faithfully represented in its several Articles. An Objection
Answered. Another Objection more particularly and distinctly answered.

THUS I have gone through the Several Particulars and Members which make up the
Body of Socinianism: and I have now only this further to adjoyn, that both as
to some of the Instances before mentioned, and as to one or two which I have
not yet taken notice of, they apparently symbolize with the Papists. They join
hands with them in asserting Evangelical Counsels, as we may satisfy our
selves from what their Great Doctor and Dictator says on Mat. 5. 43, 44. It is
true, in his Explication of v. 17. of that Chapter he rejects the Popish
Distinction of Precepts and Counsels, as it is there on that occasion applied.
But behold his shifting! In this place he makes out his Opinion by using that
Distinction, only he disguises it under the term of Monitions, instead of
Counsels. He holds that of Solomon, Prove. 25. 21. If thine enemy be hungry,
give him bread to eat, etc. to be of this sort; it is an Advice which we may
follow, or not, as we please: it is not a Command, no man is enjoined to do
this. But after this rate any of the Plain Commands in Holy Scripture may be
evaded, for we may alledg this which Socinus here starts that though the words
are propounded in the way of a Precept, yet they have not the force of one, but
only are Admonitions or Counsels, which a man may observe if he thinks fit,
else not. And so in other Particulars I have hinted their Correspondence with
Rome, as in their vilifying of the Scriptures, and holding them to be
Corrupted: likewise in their notion of Divine Worship, which they say is not
proper and peculiar to God; the Papists excuse the Worship which is paid by
them to Angels and Saints by alleging that this Honor may be communicated to
others besides the Deity; and so does Socinus stiffly maintain that this Divine
Honor is not appropriated to him that is by nature God. Both parties agree in
the doctrines of Merit and Perfection. Both accord in this likewise that the
Magistrate must not meddle with the Church, that he has no Authority to punish
Offenders in point of Religion.

Moreover, they agree in the distinction of Venial and Mortal Sins. See
Crellius, Eth. l. c. 5. and Volkelius, l. 4. c. 23. Cont. Frantz. disp. 9. de
Hypocr.
Smalcius peremptorily asserts that those are Venial Sins which do not merit
eternal death, and that there are such sins. But the rest only say God has not
constituted Eternal Punishment as the just recompense of all Sins. Lib. 4. cap.
23.
Volkelius's express words are, Venial Sins are those for which God has not
appointed the penalty of eternal death, so that of themselves they deprive no
man of eternal life. But this contradicts the Apostle, who speaks without any
reserve and limitation, The wages of sin is death, Romans 6. 23. And you may be
satisfied that even Eternal Death is included in that general term, for death
in this former clause of the verse is directly opposed to eternal life in the
latter one. That they symbolize in the doctrine of Praying for the dead may be
gathered from what a Great Man among them says, Slichting Comment. in 2 Timothy
1. 16.
It is no wonder that those who believe no middle state of the dead, pray not
for them. But those that believe this, do well in praying for them. He adds,
There is a much more certain succor and aid in the prayers of the living for
the dead, than in the prayers of the dead for the living. They affect the way
of the Church of Rome in the manner of excusing their worshipping the Son of
God, although they hold him not to be God, but a Creature: for as the Romanists
palliate their Idolatrous Worship in praying to Saints and Angels, etc. by
saying that this Adoration is paid ultimately to God himself, so not only the
Old but the New Socinians use the same language, telling us that Of worshipping
the Holy Gh^st, etc. p. 8.
the worshipping of the Son is not terminated in him as its utmost scope, but
passes by and through him to the Father. Lastly, I might add that the Author of
the Considerations on the Explications of the doctrine of the Trinity speaks
favorably of Transubstantiation. All these things evidence that there is no
such great gulf fixed between the Papists and Socinians but that they can hold
commerce with one another, and in time, if there be occasion, come closer
together. I charge not these latter with any formed intentions of promoting the
Roman Cause; but they may be Factors for Rome, though perhaps they know it not.
However, I desire it may be considered how Inconsistent these men are when they
make a show sometimes of being great Enemies to the Roman Religion, and yet at
other times abet and befriend it. Would not a Thinking Man be induced to
believe that they are at the bottom Favorers of the Pontifician Interest?
Lastly, I appeal to any considerate man whether this be not more probable than
what the Socinians charge the Trinitarians with, viz. that A Letter of
Resolution concerning the Trinity. p. 1^.
they are the Causes and Occasions of those Errors and Heresies which compose
the gross body of Popery.

Thus I have offered a Brief Scheme of the Anti-Trinitarian and Socinian
Doctrines. These things might have been further enlarged upon, but I was
willing to bring all into a narrow compass, for the sake of the Meanest
Readers, such as have not time and leisure to peruse Great Volumes, or are not
able to purchase them. I hear that there is a Reverend and Worthy Person of my
Name, of the University of Oxford, who has undertaken to give a Larger Account
of matters referring to this subject; but for my own part, I purposely designed
Brevity, for the reasons aforesaid, and because I have other work of Greater
Importance upon my hands; for though the handling of the foregoing Points be of
great use (otherwise I should not have employed my self about them) yet I give
Practical Theology the precedence to them. That the Reader may have a Summary
View together of all the preceding doctrines of the Socinians, I will be yet
briefer, and couch the whole in a Narrower Draught, which you may call, if you
please, the Creed of a Socinian. It may be drawn up in this Form and Manner:

I believe concerning the Scripture that there are Errors, Mistakes and
Contradictions in some places of it: that the Authority of some of its books is
questionable, yea that the Whole Bible has been tampered with, and may be
suspected to be Corrupted.

I believe concerning God that he is not a Spirit, properly speaking, i. e.
Immaterial and Incorporeal, but that he is such another sort of Body as Air or
Either is: that he is not Immense and Infinite, and every where Present, but is
confined to certain places: that he has no Knowledge of such future events as
depend on the free will of man, and that it is impossible that these things
should be foreknown by him: that there is a Succession in God's Eternal
Duration as well as there is in Time, which is the measure of that Duration
which belongs to Finite beings.

I believe further concerning God, that there is no distinction of Persons or
Subsistencies in him, and that the Son and Holy Ghost are not God, the former
of these being only a Man, and the latter no other than the Power or Operation
of God: that there was nothing of Merit in what Christ did or suffered; that
therefore he could not make Satisfaction for the sins of the world: and the
contrary Assertion is deceitful, erroneous and pernicious.

I believe concerning the First Man that he was not created in a state of
Uprightness, that the Image of God in which he was made, consisted not in
Righteousness and Holiness, and consequently that he did not lose these by his
Fall, for he could not lose what he had not: that Adam's Posterity have
received no hurt, have had no stain or blemish derived to them by his Apostasy,
and the contrary Opinion is a fable, a dream, a fiction of Antichrist: that
Mankind (having received no damage by the fall of our First Parents) have still
an ability by nature to desire and embrace all Spiritual Good, and to avoid all
that is Sinful and Vicious: that therefore there is no need of the help of the
Holy Spirit, and that men may believe and repent and perform all religious acts
without his operation and influence (yea indeed the Spirit is but an Operation
it self:) that men are counted righteous before God, not for the Merit of
Christ Jesus (for he had no Merit) but for their own good works.

I believe concerning the Future State that the Souls of the deceased have no
knowledge, no perception of any thing, they are not sensible of any rewards or
pains, neither are they capable of feeling them, so that in a manner they may
be said not to Exist, for their life, activity and sensibleness are vanished,
and their very Nature is absorpt. I believe that we shall not rise with the
Same Bodies, which we have now, at the last day, but that another Matter or
Substance shall be substituted in their place. I believe that men shall not at
the day of Judgment be required to give an Account of their actions: the most
Flagitious Sinners shall not be Examined concerning any thing of their past
life, they shall not be Tried or Judged. Only they shall be Punished, and their
Punishment is this, To utterly eease and perish for ever: the Unquenchable Fire
is nothing but Annihilation. I believe, as to Christianity it self, that every
thing in it is to be submitted to the dictates of Humane Reason, and what
cannot be explained and made out by this is no part of the Christian Religion:
and consequently that there are no doctrines appertaining to it which are
Mysterious and Superior to our Reason.

I believe, as to Divine Worship, that it may be given to another besides God,
that a Creature may (if God thinks fit) be the object of Adoration, and
consequently Christ (who is but a Creature) may be worshipped with Divine
Worship, even the same that is paid to God the Father. I believe that Prayer
(as eminent an act of Worship as it is) was not required in the Old Testament,
for God's people had no need of Praying then, they were able to do all that was
commanded them in their Religion without the Divine Assistance, and therefore
the Invoking of God became not a Duty till Christ's time. I believe the Lord's
day (commonly so called) is a Ceremonious Observance, and abolished by the
Gospel, which takes away all Choice of Days. I believe that there is no
Spiritual Blessing conveyed or conferred in the use of the Sacraments; and
particularly that Baptism is an useless Rite which the Christian Church under
the Gospel has nothing to do with, but more especially the Baptizing of
Children is insignificant, vain and childish, and has neither Precept nor
Example to commend it to us. I believe there is no Distinct Function or Office
of Ministers in the Christian Church, and that the Lord's Supper it self may be
administered by any private Christian or Brother.

As to Moral Points I believe that Officious Lies are lawful, that the Motions
of Concupiscence are not Vicious, that idle or obscene words, gluttony,
drunkenness, riot, luxury, and all impure desires and lusts were not forbidden
till Christ's time, and consequently were no Sins.

I believe, concerning Magistrates, that they have no power of Life and Death,
it is not lawful for them now under the Gospel to inflict Capital Punishments
on any Offenders or Malefactors, no not Murderers and Cutthroats.

Concerning some other Articles, I believe as the Church believes, I mean the
Church of Rome, for we symbolize with them in several points of doctrine.

Lastly, after all I believe that though the foresaid Articles are necessary to
make a man a Socinian, yet the belief of only One is enough to make a Man a
Christian: and that One Article is, that Jesus is the Messiah; in which it is
not included whether he be God or Man, whether he satisfied the Divine Justice
for our sins, and by virtue of his Death purchased Life for us. But when I say,
I believe Jesus is the Messiah, I mean only this that such a Man of Nazareth
was Anointed, Ordained, and Sent of God to be a Savior, and that this is He
who was foretold and promised to be sent by God. This is all I believe, and
there is no Necessity of believing any thing more.

This is the Socinian Creed, and I have faithfully drawn it up out of their own
Admired and Applauded Writers. I know it will be said here that some besides
professed Socinians hold some of these things. To which I answer, I made it not
my present business to observe what Others say, but to represent what that body
of men, who are known by the name of Socinians, profess and own. Again, it is
not one of these Opinions alone (excepting that concerning the Blessed Trinity)
which can give the denomination of Socinian: it is the Complication of them
that must do it. Therefore Iinsist not on any one Single Opinion of lesser
importance. Those that bear upon them the General and Complex Characters which
I have laid down in the preceding Discourse are the Persons that I designed. In
short, I write not (and never will by God's assistance) to humor and gratify
any Party of Men, but to assert and vindicate the Truth, which is pleasing to
all Good Men. And therefore if any sort of persons shall censure my freedom, I
shall have recourse to my own Innocence and Integrity, that is, my hearty
designs and endeavors to advance that Cause which I verily believe has Truth
on its side, because it has the Scriptures on its side.

If they shall say (and what will they not say)? that the English Socinians
give not their suffrage to all these Particulars, which I have produced and
named, and therefore my Charge against the Foreigners does not reach them, I
desire these following things may be considered, and then this Evasion will be
found to be very weak and useless, and nothing to their purpose: and it will
appear that this Scheme of Socinianism belongs to them as well as to the rest.

First, we are not sure that some of those who go under the name of English
Socinians are not Foreigners. Is not Crellius's Stock somewhere harbored among
them? Have there not been seen strange Outlandish Books at the Press of late?
May we not suspect some Transylvanians and Polanders employed in the work
lately? Are we not sure that there are some Irish as well as English engaged in
the service? Why then are we nice in distinguishing, when they are not
differenced as to their work and design?

Secondly, as for our very English and Native Socinians, they borrowed their
Opinions from those Foreigners, they fetched them from those Writers, and they
maintain them by the same Arguments that they did. They use the very same
Texts, and urge them after the same manner: they follow them step by step,
vouch their Reasonings, applaud their Discoursings; only they dress up their
notions in an English garb, and give them a more Modish Turn than they had
before. That Is all the difference between those Authors and these of late in
England.

Thirdly, though some of the Moderns are so politic as to be silent about some
of the Points that I have mentioned, yet we have no reason to gather thence
that they are not inclined to embrace them. It is a remarkable hint of a very
Dr. Wallis. 4th. Letter concerning the Trinity. p. 5.
Observing Person, There is reason to suspect (says he) that the Socinians
have some other odd Tenants; which they think fit rather to conceal than to
deny. For we must consider this, that they would first gain their Main Point,
the overthrow of the Trinity, and all the Maxims that relate to that. This is
the Leading Card with them, and therefore they chiefly insist on this,
intending (we may suppose) to urge the rest afterward. For it would be too
much to undertake at one time to defend all the other doctrines. And besides,
it would be too odious to reject so many received Propositions at once.
Therefore they go not this way to work, lest they should be universally cried
down. It is their cunning to proceed gradually, and to undermine Christianity
by steps. That is the reason they have not in their Writings touched upon some
of the foresaid Opinions. But it is not to be questioned but that they have a
good esteem of them, and will in time (when they have dispatched their Main
Business) betake themselves to the hearty defense of them.

But, fourthly, if I were to give a Scheme of the Roman or Popish Religion,
should I not discharge that Province sufficiently if I gave a true account of
it from the Writings of the generality of Divines of that Communion and
Profession in other Countries, though I had not consulted every individual
Papist in England about the Points? Yes surely. And so it is here, Socinianism
was not begot in Britain, it is of Foreign Breed, and therefore the Writings of
those Foreigners who were professed Socinians are to be consulted and produced
when we are to give a True Pourtraiture of Socinianism, and accordingly this
Method I have taken. It was not necessary to ask every Little Pretender or
Retainer to it in every corner of this Country whether he was exactly of the
same Cut with the Outlandish Writers in every thing, as if Socinianism were to
be measured altogether by their sentiments and persuasions. No: Socinianism is
not to be defined by what one or two Upstart Writers dictate: this, as Popery,
is to be judged and estimated according to the Generality of the persons that
profess it. And that is it which I have been doing, I have been giving an
estimation of it according to the Greatest Numbers of those who own themselves
to be Socinians. In this I have dealt fairly, and no man can blame me for it.

Nay, fifthly, I have deciphered Socinianism not only according to the judgment
of the Most who own and profess it, but of the Chiefest and Learnedest. I have
not only brought upon the Stage the Opinions which are held by the Main Body of
them, but I have consulted the Choicest Writers on the several subjects. There
are other Socinian Writers, whom I have not mentioned, as Goslavius, Voidovius,
Gittichius, etc. but I chose out those that are renowned among them. I could
have produced the Assertions which are to be found in Servetus, Valentinus
Gentilis, Bernardinus Ochinus, Franciscus Davidis, Sommerus, Georgius
Blandrata, who made way for the reception of Socinus's doctrine against the
Holy Trinity. I could have quoted a later Author, one Pr^ovius who in his
Cogitata Sacra Varii Tractatus.
Writings has said something concerning most of the Points before mentioned.
Yea, this Volume of his is ordered by the Party to be adjoined to the
Bibliotheca Patrum Polonorum. And besides, the Reprinting of it in the year
1692 shows that it is Authentic among the Modern Socinians. But I have omitted
this Polonian Knight (for such they tell us he was) he being not so well known
to the world as the rest that I have named. I chose rather to make use of those
Names which are of general Repute and Credit among the Unitarians, and whose
Writings they have a great and universal regard for, so great and universal
that they take all they say from them. If I had always listened to the Majority
of Voices, to only what the Biggest part of them say, (though that were
sufficient) it is likely they would have blamed me: but now seeing I have
likewise attended to the determination of those who are reckoned the most
Eminent among them, I Am sure they can have nothing to object against me. They
must not think to shuffle us off by saying the Foreign and English Unitarians
are not the same, for you see that these latter are included in the former, and
both of them make up One Body of Men who are known by the name of Socinians,
and who are all of them professed and sworn Opposers of the Sacred Trinity.
Thus, I suppose, I have fully answered what was Objected, and it is manifest
that our own Countrymen no less than Foreigners are concerned in the Character
which I have given of these men.

CHAP. X.
The Author concludes with Inferences from the whole, viz. 1. Socinianism is a
Complication of Old and New Errors. Quakers and Muggletonians sprang thence. 2.
It is strange boldness in the Socinians to pretend to ground their Opinions on
Scripture. 3. What has been said gives us a right Idea of these persons. It
appears they are no Christians: but great favorers of Judaism and Turcism,
especially of the latter. 4. We must entertain none of their Principles. 5. We
are to take notice of the tendency of them to Irreligion and Atheism. Socinians
and Atheists at this day friendly agree. Yet the former have the confidence to
charge the Trinitarians with Idolatry and Atheism. The Author writes nothing in
way of Recrimination, but from a sense of the Reality of the things themselves.
He appeals to the judgment of the Sober and Religious. He thinks not himself
concerned to take notice of every scurrilous or trifling Opponent.

NOw from the whole I will make some brief Remarks and Reflections, and so
conclude. First, see how faulty, how erroneous, how dangerous, how pernicious
the Theology of the Socinians is. It fails not in one or two Points only, but
in a vast number, as I have let you see. It is patched up of several different
Opinions fetched from sundry quarters, it is a Fardle of mixed and disagreeing
Notions, it is a Nest of Heterodoxies, a Gallimafrey of Old and New Errors, a
Medley of Heresies taken from Ebion and Cerint^us, the Sabellians,
Samosatenians, Arians, Photinians, Macedonians, who corrupted the doctrine of
the Holy Trinity. They join with Jews, Pagans and Mahometans in disowning and
denying this Great Mystery of Religion. Other false opinions they have borrowed
from the Pelagians, (a sort of Ancient Heretics) concerning Adam's fall, and
the Effect of it, and man's Natural strength and ability in spiritual matters:
so that these men deal in Brokers ware, Old Opinions trimmed up anew. Again,
They comply with the Papists (as I have showed) in several of their sentiments
and persuasions: and if there be any Idolatry in the Church of Rome, it is
certain the Socinians cannot clear themselves of that crime. They tread in the
steps of the Old Sadducees, and of the Epicureans, and of several Ancient and
Modern Libertines about the nature of Spirits, of Separate Souls, of the
Resurrection of humane bodies, of the Last Judgment, and of Hell.

They espouse the cause of Anabaptists, they follow those Enthusiasts who
disallow of the solemnizing of any special Time, particularly the Lord's day,
who disbelieve the benefit and use of the Sacraments, and deride the Office and
Call of Ministers in the Church. It is observable that in their late Pamphlets
they with great rudeness and incivility speak of Preaching. In one place, I
remember Schoolboys and Preachers Rhetoric are joined together by them: and
in five or six other places they have a fling at the Pulpit, which they mention
with great disdain. It seems the Professed Instructors of the people are very
much out of their favor. They laugh at the Orthodox (as they call them) for
thundering it from their Pulpits, that matters of Faith are above Reason. So the
Letter to the Clergy of both Universities, chap. 10. And those that will not
reject the Trinity and other doctrines exploded by the Socinians are
Priest-ridden. Letter of Resolution, p. 19.

They adhere to other Enthusiastic Spirits as to their mistaken conceits
concerning Magistracy and the Secular Sword. They perfectly accord with the
Quakers in their opinions about the Trinity, Christ's Satisfaction, Original
Corruption, concerning the Ministerial Function and Mission, concerning
Infant Baptism, the Observation of the Christian Sabbath, going to War, etc. So
that any considerate man may observe that Quakerism is the spawn of Socinianism.

Nay, they seem to have given rise to the wild Sect of Muggletonians, who from
them have learnt to hold but One Person in the Godhead, viz. God the Father,
and to call the Trinity or a God of Three Persons (as they speak) a Monster (as
our Gentlemen are pleased also to express themselves.) They have been taught
from them to renounce the Power of the Christian Magistrate, and the Office of
a Christian Minister: they are instructed by them in their Tenants concerning
the Spirits or Souls of men, viz. that they cannot act without the body, and
that therefore they are extinct as soon as they are separated from it. They are
the very words of this late Party, and they are taken from the Racovians. An
other detachment is that the Bodies of the deceased, wherein they lived and
died, shall not rise again, shall not appear any more. This is their language:
whence it is evident that Reeve and Muggleton sucked their Principle from
Faustus Socinus and his Adherents. And thus you see that as the Socinians
borrow from several Sects, so they set up others: they receive and distribute
Poison, and thereby doubly endanger mankind. Lastly, it is apparent that they
borrow from Deists and Atheists, and thereby yet further bring mischief upon
the world.

And from the whole it is evident that these persons are corrupted not only in
some matters of lesser moment, but in those that are of the highest concern:
not only in merely Speculative doctrines, but such as immediately relate to
Practice: not only in some Principles that respect the Circumstances of
Christianity, but in those that are Substantial and Fundamental, those that are
of the very Essence of the Christian Faith. Let this be seriously thought of,
that we may have a true apprehension of the mischief of Socinianism.

Secondly, Observe the strange boldness, as well as falsehood, of these men.
They are often in their Writings insinuating into their Readers that they build
all their Assertions on the Scriptures, and thence they require their assent to
what they deliver. But from the several Particulars which I have insisted upon
it is clear that they have no ground to require or claim it upon that account,
for I have manifestly discovered the opposition of their Tenants to the plain
dictates of the Holy Spirit in the Bible. There they are condemned as spurious
and adulterate Notions, there they are rejected as Pernicious and Poisonous
doctrines. And yet they have the confidence to ground these on the authority of
the Inspired Writings, the Sacred Oracles of Truth, yea J. Bidle in the Pref.
to his Scripture-Catechism.
One of them tells the world that he was brought to these Persuasions by
reading the Scripture; that hereby they may the more effectually impose upon
the minds of men, who they think will be ready to attend to that which they
pretend is bottomed on the Word of God.

Thirdly, These things which have been suggested may be serviceable to give us
a Right Idea of the persons I have been dealing with. Surely those who have
thus mangled and abused Religion, cannot be thought to have a Good Intention in
the work which they are about at this day, yea they must be thought to have a
very Bad one. We may argue thus, It is no wonder that they that pervert and
deprave so many doctrines of Religion, do more especially enervate the Mystery
of the Blessed Trinity. If it were only on the account of all their other wild
notions, we might have reason to suspect, yea to condemn their blasphemous
Opinion concerning our Lord Jesus Christ, viz. their flat denial of his
Godhead, and of his Satisfaction, etc. It is not to be marvel'd at that they
proceed thus far, having done so much besides, having in other Points of
Christianity showed what a faculty they have of perverting and distorting the
Truths of the Gospel.

What I have said therefore will be useful to enlighten the Reader, that he may
understand what manner of persons these are; that (to speak plainly) he may be
convinced that they are no Christians. Whatever pretenses they make to that
Title, it is impossible they should with reason lay claim to it, for they
neither are baptized into the Christian Faith, nor do they make Profession of
it, as you have heard: but on the contrary they subvert Christianity it self,
and deny the Divine Author of it. How then can these men challenge the name of
Christians? Nay, I could observe that they industriously comply with Jews and
Turks, in opposition to and defiance of all Sober Christians. To gratify the
former, they think fit to renounce the avowed Principles of the latter. Herein
they follow their Old Friend Servetus, who had conversed a long time with Jews
and Mahometans, and had espoused many of their Opinions, and was a great
Admirer of them. Especially he declared his approbation of the Alcoran, and
thought it reconcilable with the New Testament, if the doctrine of the Trinity
were laid aside. It is often mentioned by Socinus and other Racovian Writers
that this doctrine and that of the Incarnation hinders Jews and Turks from
embracing the Christian Religion. And even the A Letter of Resolution
concerning the Trinity, p. 17, 18.
late Socinian Penmen in their New Tractates talk much of this, that the
doctrine of the Trinity puts a stop to the conversion of Jews, Mahometans, and
Heathens: and thereupon they are very earnest with their Readers to abandon
this Great Point of Christianity, in mere complacency with those Infidels.

And more particularly it is observable how favorably they speak of Mahometism
or Turcism: they profess themselves forward to believe that The same Letter, p.
18.
Mahomet had no other design in pretending himself to be a Prophet, but to
restore the belief of the Unity of God, which at that time was extirpated among
the Eastern Christians by the doctrines of the Trinity and Incarnation. Mahomet
meant not his Religion should be esteemed a New Religion, but only the
Restitution of the true Intent of the Christian Religion. Therefore the
Mohammedan Learned men call themselves the True Disciples of the Messiah. They
further (in the same place) insinuate their approbation of the Mohammedan
Religion above that of Christianity, they magnify the Alcoran, and the more
plausible Sect of Mahomet, as the Saracens called it; and at the same time they
represent the Modern Christianity (which professes the doctrines of Christ's
Incarnation and the Trinity) no better or other than a sort of Paganism and
Heathenism. These are their very terms, P. 19. and they are answerable to what
was said by them before, viz. that the Trinitarian doctrines are of Heathen
descent and original, P. 15. and afterward (to vary the phrase) of Paganick
Extraction, P. 16. I appeal now to the Reader whether this be not right
Sclavonian, whether it be not the very language and dialect of the Polonian
Divines; which shows that these are identified with the English Unitarians as
to this matter; and at the same time it yields us a true Pourtraiture of the
persons I have been representing to the Reader.

Fourthly, we should be very careful that we entertain none of their foresaid
Opinions. I question not but the Reader would have made this Inference, though
I had not. But this I request of him, that he would out of Choice and Judgment
do this, as being thoroughly apprehensive of that Evil and Danger which attend
those Principles. For this purpose I have displayed them, and I hope that
Special Hand of Providence (for I cannot but acknowledge it as such) which
directed me to it, will back it with a Blessing.

Fifthly and lastly, see the tendency of the Unitarians, and of the whole mass
of the Socinian Points to Atheism. They vilify the Scipture, they adulterate
the true Meaning of it, they introduce unbecoming sentiments concerning God and
Religion, they decry the great and necessary Truths of the Gospel, they baffle
the apprehensions which we ought to have of a Future State: and what does all
this drive at but the undermining of Religion, yea and Divinity it self? So
fitly was this Question inserted by a In his Introduction for the reading of
History.
Learned Man, above sixty years ago, among his other Enquiries at the end of
his Compendium of Ecclesiastical History, Whether Socinianism be not an
Introduction to Atheism? So truly was it said lately by an Observing Pen,
Bishop of Sarum's Letter to Dr. Williams.
In several respects our Socinians seem to be serving the designs of the
Atheists. I wish the Christian world would open their eyes, and see this
betimes, and thereby prevent the unexpressible Danger which otherwise will
unavoidably follow. I offer it to be taken notice of that the Socinian and
Atheistical party join hand in hand at this time, and agree together in a very
friendly manner to laugh at and defy the Fundamental Principles of Religion.
Such a Reflection methinks should be dismal to those of the Modern Penmen of
the Socinian Persuasion who are sober and considerate. They write (whether they
know it or no) to please and humor the Wild Gallants, those in city and
country that are of Lewd Principles, or of none at all. Nothing is more
evident at this day than that the Socinian Writings are highly acceptable to
those that espouse the Cause of Atheism, to the profes^edly Profane and
Irreligious. These are the men that applaud them, and cry them up, and think
they are fraught with great Wit, Argument and Reason. I appeal to Impartial
Judges whether this does not show the near Affinity, if not Identity between
these persons and those I am mentioning. He that does not see this, sees
nothing.

To conclude, if what I have said sound harsh in these Gentlemen's ears, I
request them to call to mind how severe they have been in censuring the
Trinitarians, and particularly in charging them with Idolatry. Though
Slichtingius and one or two more are unwilling to say in express terms that we
are Idolaters, yet both he and all the party assert that which is equivalent,
for they say we worship a mere Figment, a Fancy of our own (for so they
blasphemously style the Holy Trinity) we set up an Idol of our own brain for an
object of Divine Worship. But our Homebred Unitarians are yet bolder, and
speak it out without any mincing that A Letter to the Clergy of both
Universities.
the Trinitarians are Idolaters, and Pagans, and much worse, and this they
often inculcate. But certainly, to tax us with Idolatry when they themselves
professedly worship a Creature (as has been observed before) is the wildest
Conceit that ever entered into any man's head: the Boldness, Inconsistency and
Nonsense of it are so great that we cannot sufficiently stand amazed at it.

Nay, not only Idolatry but Atheism is laid to our charge. I find that De
Trinit Erroribus.
Servetus calls the Trinitarians Atheists very frequently. And even the Modern
Unitarians in their late writings expressly fix this Crime upon them, for their
words are these concerning the doctrine of the Trinity, A Letter of Resolution
concerning the Trinity. p. 17.
By its natural absurdity and impossibility it did not only at first give a
check and stop to the progress of the Gospel, but ever since it has served to
propagate Deism and Atheism. The doctrine it self cannot do this without its
being urged and managed by those that assert it: therefore it is as much as if
they had said, Those who defend the Trinity propagate Atheism. Now, it will not
be denied, I think, that those who propagate Atheism are Atheists. Wherefore
according to these men a Trinitarian is an Atheist. In an Trinitarian Scheme of
Religion.
other place they say, he may be justly suspected of Atheism, and they mention
on what account. Others of them tell us that A Letter to the Clergy of both
Universities. cap. 6.
Whatever Zeal the Trinitarians may pretend to have for Religion, they take the
right way to make men Scepticks and Atheists. And the last man that wrote in
defense of the Socinian Cause complains of us, that The Exceptions of Mr. E.
etc. examined. p. 43.
we make that a Fundamental of Religion which contradicts the best reasonings
of mankind whereby they prove the existence of God. -- Thence loose men deny
there is any God at all. Thus you see what the Socinian Charge is against us.

Whence you may perceive that Mine is but a Counter-Charge, and therefore they
have no reason to find fault with the foregoing Retaliation, especially when
with the utmost Sincerity I declare that my Charge against them was not founded
upon theirs, or occasioned by it, for it was since the time that I drew up mine
against them that I found this Accusation in some of their Papers. Which may
convince any unprejudiced person that what I have said with reference to the
Anti-Trinitarians is not in way of Recrimination, for I did not know that their
Writings had any thing of that nature against those that defend the Trinity.
But it was and is from a sense and persuasion of the truth of the thing it
self, and that alone that I have, and do at present thus tax them, and turn
their Obloquy upon themselves. And truly I have done it with a sensible
compassion all the while, for I cannot rejoice (as some seem to do) at finding
an occasion of Censuring and Blaming others. I submit what I have said to the
Consciences of all Sober, Faithful and Judicious Men, all Sincere Lovers of God
and Religion. Let these judge between us and our Adversaries.

And now, to shut up all, if any one with calmness and sobriety, laying aside
all levity and scurrility, all artifice and sophistry, shall offer any thing as
substantial in way of Reply to what I have said, I shall not be backward to
meet him with a Rejoinder. Otherwise I shall not think my self concerned to
attend to what he says. If he appears like a Generous Man of War, I will
engage him: but if I see him come on in a Privateering way, I tell him before
hand, I will make off from him. I will not refuse to encounter any Fair
Adversary, but if any man shall make it his business to cavil and raise
trifling Objections against what I have said, I will take no other notice of
him than to despise him.

He must not think that I will throw away my Time and Arguments upon every
Squib that is flirted. I have something else to do than to mind the wagging of
every Goose-quill. In a word, I think not my self obliged to write a
Vindication every time a Perverse Scribler will be dashing Ink against me.

A POSTSCRIPT: BEING Brief Reflections On a late Book Entitled, [A short
Discourse of the True Knowledge of Christ Jesus, With Animadversions on Mr.
Edwards 's Reflections on the Reasonableness of Christianity, and on his book
entitled, Socinianism Unmasked. By S. Bold, Rector of Steeple, Dorset.]
REFLECTIONS ON Mr. Bold's SERMON.
WHEN half of the sheets of my foregoing Discourse were printed off, my
Bookseller sent me a little Piece with Mr. Bold's name to it: but I presently
cast my eye upon the bottom of the Titlepage, and there saw that these Papers
came from the lower end of Paternoster Row, and thence I gathered who had a
hand in them. I found that the Manager of the Reasonableness of Christianity
had prevailed with a Gentleman to make a Sermon (I thank him for doing me that
honor) upon my Refutation of that Treatise and the Vindication of it. Indeed
it was a great Masterpiece of Procuration, and we cannot but think that that
Man must speak the Truth, and defend it very impartially and substantially who
is thus brought on to undertake the Cause.

But truly I am exceedingly obliged to the Penman for the course he has taken,
for he has saved me the labor of a Formal Confutation in Mode and Figure, he
having himself contradicted the very Proposition which he lays down, viz. that
there is but One Point or Article necessary to be believed for the making a Man
a Christian. This he pretends to maintain as an undeniable Truth, and yet he
declares that Other Points are necessary to be believed. Sermon. page 32. And
again, There are Many Points (besides this) which Jesus Christ has taught and
revealed, and which every sincere Christian is indispensably obliged to
endeavor to understand. p. 29. And afterward, There are particular Points and
Articles, which, being known to be revealed by Christ, Christians must
indispensably assent to. p. 33. And he reckons up several of these Articles and
Propositions, which are the very same which I had mentioned in my The Causes of
Atheism. Socinianism unmasked.
Discourses against the Conceit of One Article. Now, if there be Other Points
and Particular Articles, and those Many, which a sincere Christian is obliged,
and that necessarily and indispensably to understand and believe and assent to,
then this Writer does in effect yield to that Proposition which I maintained,
viz. that the belief of One Article is not sufficient to make a Man a
Christian, and consequently he runs counter to the Proposition which he had
laid down. For I bring the business to this issue, If the believing of one
single Article be enough to constitute a Man a Christian, yea a Sincere
Christian, then the belief of something more is not Necessary and
Indispensable, for though the knowing or believing of more may be some ornament
and embelishment to him, yet it cannot be said that it is Necessary and
Indispensable, because nothing is so in Christianity but what contributes to
the making a Man a Christian, a Sincere Christian. Wherefore it undeniably
follows that when this Gentleman acknowledges that there are More Articles,
than this One, proposed to be believed, and that Necessarily and Indispensably,
he must needs grant that those Articles, which are thus necessary and
indispensable, are necessary to make a Man a Christian, and consequently the
assenting to that Single Article Jesus is the Messiah, does not constitute a
man a Member of Christ, or a True Christian. For if More Propositions and
Articles are Necessary, Indispensably Necessary, then that One is not
sufficient. This is a plain case, and none but such as are mastered with
Prejudice can possibly resist the evidence of it.

He goes on still to confute himself, saying, A True Christian must assent unto
this, that Christ Jesus is God, p. 35. Observe it, he MUST, he owns here that
there is an absolute Necessity of this belief. Whereupon I ask him, is this
belief necessary to make a Man a Christian, or not? He cannot say it is not,
because to believe Him to be God who really is so is no indifferent thing in
Christianity, it is absolutely requisite to constitute a Man a Christian, a
True Christian, for a Man cannot be such unless he has a knowledge of Him that
is True God. This surely none will undertake to deny. Hence then it inevitably
follows that this Author must hold that the assenting to this Proposition, that
Christ Jesus is God, is necessary to make a Man a Christian. And if this be
necessary, then something else besides the believing of Jesus to be the Messiah
(as the Author of the Reasonableness of Christianity and ^his Abettors
understand and explain that Proposition, for they include not the Divinity of
Christ in it) is absolutely necessary to make a Man a Christian. Which is the
thing that Mr. Bold denies, and yet we see it is a natural and unavoidable
Consequence from what he asserts in his Sermon. So that in effect he positively
says, The believing of more than that One Article before mentioned is
absolutely requisite to make a Man a Christian.

In another place speaking of the account which the Scripture gives of the Holy
Spirit, viz. that he is God, he adds that a true Christian is as much obliged
to believe this as to believe that Jesus is the Christ, p. 40. See here the
force and energy of Truth, it will make its way through the teeth of those that
oppose it. He that had professedly asserted and maintained that the knowledge of
this One Point, that Jesus is the Christ, constitutes a person a Christian, now
as plainly and professedly contradicts this Position, by declaring that we are
as MUCH obliged to give assent to this, viz. that the Holy Spirit is the True
God, as to that One Point. For this is the case, if a True Christian be as MUCH
obliged to believe one as the other, then it is certain that Christianity is as
much concerned in the belief of one as of the other: and if so, then a Man
cannot be a Christian without this belief; whence it irrefragably follows that
the One Point he speaks of is not sufficient to make a Man a Christian: unless
he will submit to this Nonsense that a man can be a Christian, a True Christian
though he believe not those things without which he cannot be a Christian.

This is sufficient, I suppose, to give you a taste of Mr. Bold's
Self-Contradiction, and at the same time of the Unreasonableness and
Groundlessness of the Notion which the Author of the Reasonableness of
Christianity has published to the world. I wish for the sake of this our
present Penman, who seems to be a Man that has some relish of Religion and
Piety, that he had not thus exposed himself and his Friend together.

There has been a Pair of Advocates for this Conceit of a Christian of One
Article: the one a Layman, the other a Churchman: the first a Professed
Socinian, and, having little to say for his Friend, stuffed his Pamphlet with
what Crellius afforded him: the latter, you see, (after great study and
deliberation) has made as inconsiderable advances in the Cause; and though he
appears in the form of a Preacher, yet he has said nothing answerable to the
Specious Title of his Sermon, The true Knowledge of Christ Jesus; but on the
contrary has said very ill things, to the lessening and impairing, yea to the
defaming of that knowledge and belief of our Savior, and of the Articles of
Christianity which are necessarily required of us. From what he has delivered
we may infer that there has been one Vain Effort more in the world than there
was before. And this is his just and deserved Character that he has betrayed
the Cause he undertook, and has dispatched himself and it with his own Weapons
unwarily handled.

But let me address my self to this Gentleman a little more closely (if I can
speak more closely than I have already:) Verily, Sir, it is strange that a Man
of your Sobriety and Temper should be thus easily drawn off, that you should so
far debase your self and the Post you are in, as to be Mr. L's Journeyman, (he
having himself it seems, given over working at the Trade) that you should
accept of the Office of an Under-Puller for Racovianism. Was it not enough that
the Author of the Reasonableness of Christianity had been publicly defended by
Deists and Scepticks, that he had been approved of and vindicated by the
professed Votaries and Disciples of Socinus, that he had the good word of all
the Indifferent and Neuters in Religion, that he was caressed and admired by
the Men of Wit about the Town who make it their business to banter
Christianity, and (in a word) that he was cried up by the Atheistical and
Debauched, who as concernedly railly all Religion as the late Field-Officer
does Priests; was it not enough, I say, that the Rationalist found all these to
be his Patrons, but must Mr. Bold strike in with this Company, and vote this
Writer to be the Christianissimo (next to LOUIS) of this Age?

Not that I would be thought to detract in the least from the Gentleman's
Worth, for (to give him his due) it is most readily granted that he has
a'great share of Metaphysics (as his first book he published sufficiently
demonstrates) and of Oeconomicks (as his next book testifies) and of Politics,
as some late Papers assure us, wherein he has abundantly showed how acute and
ingenious a Projector he is in the point of Trade and Money, especially
Guinea's and the Lowering of them. But I am not obliged to think that his
Talent lies so advantagiously toward Theology, especially Christianity. I
cannot approve of his introducing a Clipped Christianity, and thrusting upon us a
False Coin, a Counterfeit Stamp in Religion. I cannot (and never will) conceal
my dislike of his teaching the men of this too Giddy Age to truck their Old
Christianity for a New Notion or Fancy of the pretended Reasonableness of that
Christianity which he shapes to himself.

And yet, Sir, you are pleased to take part here, and that with no common Zeal.
Which strange behavior, or rather unaccountable Fascination has staggered not
a few of your Friends and Admirers, who (with my self) own that you have done
much Good by your former Writings, but fear now that you will do as much Harm.
The Devout and Pious had other apprehensions of you when they looked into your
Practical Sermons, Invitations, and Meditations; and therefore they stand
amazed since they have perused your late Productions, and observing there that
you are come to the Necessity of but One Article of Faith, they expect that you
may in time hold that None is Necessary, which is the scope and design (whether
you take notice of it or no) of those that have lately influenced upon you. Let
me be free with you, and tell you that it is the sense of your Friends that, if
your Pen runs for the future in this strain, you will write rather like a
Turkish Spy than a Christian Preacher. I beseech you therefore, Sir, by all
that is good and sacred, and by that Repute which you have heretofore gained
among the Religious and Pious, that you would not dissemble with your self, and
choke your inward Persuasions, and abuse your self and the world too. I wish
with all my heart that you would account with your self for this late
Backsliding, and consider how scandalous it will be when your Auditors and
Readers shall find that you are sailing to Racovia with a side-wind. I beg of
you by the bonds of our most Holy Christianity that you would, whilst it is
time, prevent a final Apostasy. Wear not the detestable Character of a
Renegade. Sir, I most passionately request you to ponder that smart and
upbraiding Query which our Blessed Savior used to some of his Disciples, when
he saw that they went back, Will Ye also go away? John 6. 67. Remember, Good
Sir, that going away ended in Betraying.

REFLECTIONS ON THE Animadversions.
LET us come next to the Animadversions which are tacked to the Sermon. And
truly I am inclined to clear the Gentleman under whose name this Pamphlet goes
from being the Composer of this part of the book. I can scarcely believe that
Mr. Bold would offer such a Crude and Shallow thing to the public: but I am
partly of the mind that these Animadversions were transmitted to him, and he
was desired to publish them as his own, that it might be said (which was never
said before) that a Man with a Name, and with Open face, that one without a
Vizour warranted the late Author of the Reasonableness of Christianity; that it
might be said that a Clergyman, the Reverend Rector of Steeple vouched these
strange notions.

But I must needs say I do not take him to be the Animadverter: one reason of
which Conjecture is because I have heard that these very Objections and Cavils
which are here used were made use of by the Party, and therefore it is probable
that though they appear under the name of S. B. yet they might more truly have
had J. L. or A. and J. C. (who took care to send them) prefixed to them.

I will likewise offer other probable Reasons which may induce any Considering
man to think that the person who made the Sermon was not the Author of the
Animadversions: for first I appeal to any man that knows the Difference of
Styles, whether this be not observable in these two Pieces. Indeed when
Different matters are treated of by the same Writer, there may be a great
inequality in the Strain, but it is never or very rarely observed when the same
Subject is handled by the same Author, as is pretended in the present case.
Secondly, There is this Mark to distinguish the first part of the book from the
latter, the one is printed in two different Characters, all along the words and
sentences which Mr. B. thought were more Emphatick or Remarkable than the rest
are put in a Letter which distinguishes them from the other words and sentences
in his Discourse. But you may observe that there is not this Distinction in the
Animadversions, they (like the Reasonableness of Christianity and its
Vindication) are (excepting a very few places) all in the same Character. It is
not the way of that Author in his Writings to distinguish words, or express
their Emphasis by the difference of Letters. This to me is no inconsiderable
thing, for you scarcely find any Author of late that writes after that manner.
However, we may be almost sure that this part of the book is not Mr. Bold's,
for the same Author in the same book would not Vary as to this thing we are
speaking of, as we see here done.

Again, Thirdly, you cannot but take notice that the Animadversions are printed
in a Larger and Fairer Character than the Sermon: which thing you will seldom
or never find in the same book, written by the same Author, and upon the same
Subject, and printed together. This discovers Mr. B to have no title to the
latter part of this Undertaking, and it likewise discovers the Imprudence of
the Publisher who would suffer those Papers to come into the world with such
apparent marks whereby they may be known to be composed by two different
persons, and yet at the same time would have but One Author's Name to the whole.

Add to all this that unsufferable Blunder in the Epistle to the Reader before
the Animadversions (which we may suppose was made for Mr. B.) When the book
against the Reasonableness of Christianity fell into my hands (faith this
Writer) I thereby came to be furnished with a truer and more just notion of the
main design of my own Treatise or Sermon than I had upon my looking over it
cursory (I suppose he would have said cursorily) presently after it was
published: as if the design of his own Treatise could be made known to him by
an other Man's Writings. Which carries that Inconsistency and even Nonsense
with it which I believe Mr. B. will not own himself to be the Author of, and
therefore I cannot but impute it to that Jumble of two Writers in this Volume,
which confounded the Epistolizer's notions, and made him discover, before he
was aware, that Mr. Bold was not the True Parent of this offspring to which
the Epistle is prefixed. No, no: he that drew up this Epistle had some
acquaintance with the King of Ham. Here is strong Fancying and Personating,
here is direct Counterfeiting and Falsifying. They have made a Tool of Mr. B.
and under the shelter of a Clergyman's Name have imposed their notions upon the
Reader.

But whoever was the Author of the Animadversions, I will make a few Remarks
upon them, and with that Calmness of Temper which the Epistolizer acknowledges
to be in my former productions, but insinuates is wanting in my latter ones. As
to which I have only this to say to him, I can be Deemed to be too warm a
writer by none but such as are too Cold and Phlegmatic. The The Animadverter
hints that I give vent to something to which he will not adventure to assign a
proper name p. 32: but though he will not do this latter, I will, that is, I
sincerely protest to him and the Reader that I intend to give vent to Truth
(and that only) which has been smothered and stiffled by him in his late
undertakings for the One Article. My business shall be to show in brief by what
Weak and Impertinent Methods he has done this.

The Proposition which he would be thought to patronize is this, that Jesus and
his Apostles did not teach any thing as necessary to be believed to make a man
a Christian but only this One Proposition, that Jesus of Nazareth was the
Christ or the Messiah. Animadv. p. 1. but he maintains this Post with as little
success as the forementioned Gentleman did, for afterward he declares it his
opinion, that a Convert to Christianity (i. e. a Christian, as he explains it
in another place) must necessarily believe as many Articles as he shall attain
to know that Christ Jesus has taught. p. 21. which wholly invalidates what he
had said before, for if a Christian must give assent to all the Articles taught
by our Savior in the Gospel, and that necessarily, then all those Propositions
reckoned up in my late Discourse, being taught by Christ or his Apostles, are
necessarily to be blieved, and consequenly One Point only is not necessary. But
he will say, the belief of those Propositions makes not a man a Christian. Then
I say, they are not necessary and (as the other Gentleman adds) Indispensable:
they may be said to be Useful and Convenient, but he cannot pronounce them
Necessary and Indispensable, for what is of absolute Necessity in Christianity
is absolutely requisite to make a Man a Christian. Whence it is evident, and
that from his own words, that there is no foundation for this Proposition,
Jesus and his Apostles taught nothing as necessary to be believed to make a Man
a Christian, but only this One Article that Jesus was the Christ: and therefore
this Animadverter contradicts himself. And who can expect any other, when he
takes no care of what he says himself, and minds not what others suggest in
this matter. It is worth the Readersobserving that notwithstanding I had in In
Socinianism Unmasked.
twelve pages together (viz. from the 8th to the 20th) proved that Several
Propositions are necessary to be believed by us in order to our being
Christians, yet this Sham-Animadverter attends not to any one of the
Particulars which I had mentioned, nor offers any thing against them, but only
in a Lumping way dooms them all in these Magisterial Words, I do not see any
Proof he produces, p. 21. This is his wonderful way of Confuting me, by
pretending that he cannot see any Argument or Proof in what I alledg; and all
the world must be led by his Eyes.

Thus, though I had in five or six pages together evinced this Truth, that the
Son of God, and the Messiah are not terms of the very same signification, nay
that among the Jews they were not reckoned so (as I made appear from several
Texts; especially Acts 8. 37.) yet after all I have this for my pains, I do not
perceive, says he, that he (meaning me) pretends to offer the least proof that
these Terms were not synonymous among the Jews, p. 47. yet he does not so much
as offer one syllable to disprove what I had delivered and closely urged on
that head through the greatest part of a Chapter. This is the guise of our
Sagacious Animadverter. He out-doth the famous Gladiator (whom Olaus Magnus
tells us of) that was wont to blunt the Edg of all his Adversaries Weapons only
with looking upon them, but this Marvelous Fencer does it without seeing or
perceiving.

So when I had reduced the sum of my Discourse into a Syllogism, he tells me I
there stop, whereas I should have proceeded to prove that Jesus Christ or his
Apostles taught that no Man can be a Christian, or shall be saved unless he
has an explicit knowledge of all those things which have immediate respect to
the Occasion, Author, Way, Means and Issue of our Salvation, and which are
necessary for our knowing the true nature and design of it, p. 23, 24. And yet
the Reader may satisfy himself that this is the very thing that I had been
proving just before, and indeed all along in the foregoing Chapter: and
therefore it was not necessary to add any Farther Medium, and to proceed to
another Syllogism, I having secured my Proposition before. Yet the heedless
Gentleman tells me, I here stop: which may convince the Intelligent Reader that
he ears not what he says.

It may be guessed from what he has the confidence to say p. 31, viz. There is
no enquiry in the Reasonableness of Christianity concerning Faith subjectively
considered, but only objectively, namely, with what sort of Faith the Articles
of Christianity are to be believed, I say it may be guessed from this what a
Liberty this Writer takes to assert what he pleases; for let any man consult p.
191, 192 in that Treatise, and he shall find that the Subjective Faith is
spoken of (though not there called Subjective) but it is very much mistaken and
perverted. Again, how can this Animadverter come off with peremptorily
declaring that subjective faith is not inquired into in the Treatise of the
Reasonableness of Christianity when in another place p. 35, 36 he avers that
Christian Faith and Christianity considered subjectively are the same.

What a Mighty Arguer does he show himself to be when, to what I said and fully
proved in my fourth Chapter of Socinianism Unmasked, he most gravely and
profoundly replies, I think it needless for me to say any thing to it. p. 30.
And further this Great Disputant shows his Parts in another very clever way
that he has of dealing with me, and that is this, when he finds something that
he dares not Object against, he thus shifts me off, His Reasoning is to me,
says he, so ^ouded by his way of expressing himself, that I am too Dull to
perceive what his Reasons are, and wherein the Strength of them does lie, p. 9.
And again, concerning a whole Chapter he thus pronounces, I shall say no more
of it, says he, but that my Dullness is such I cannot discern the least
appearance of reasoning in it, p. 49. Here is nothing tolerable or excuseable
in all this but this one thing, his Truth and Modesty in confessing himself to
be Dull, which yet the Reader was convinced of before this Acknowledgment.

The Reader cannot but take notice that in the other parts of this Author's
Animadversions he makes it his whole business either merely to Repeat what he
pleases in the Reasonableness of Christianity or the Vindication of it, and to
vouch it with much confidence, or else when he alleges any thing that I have
asserted to throw it off by barely denying what I say. This is the great
Excellency which this Gentleman is admirable for.

Thus you see the genius of this Writer, you see what weak and sorry Stuff (to
return him his own words) he troubles the Press with. He does not make any
offers of Reason, there is not the least shadow of an Argument; he scorns to
pretend to any thing of that nature. One would think a man might be ashamed to
appear in the world with such Poor Tackling. As if he were only hired to say
something against me, tho not at all to the purpose. And truly any Man may
discern a Mercenary Stroke all along.

I seriously advise him (whoever he is) not to enter the Lists again unless he
be better provided: for I find that persons are more confirmed than ever in the
Truth of what I have writ, since such Dablers as himself, set on by a parcel of
Polonian Squires and a few Town-Sparks, have attempted to oppose my Assertions.
If a Score of such Easy Writers as this were all upon me at once, I could bear
it very well. A Man need not fear being hurt by such Feeble Scribes, who make
it their main business to confute themselves, not me. And hereby (we thank
them) they promote our Cause (which is that of Truth) and even with their own
Pens baffle those Errors which they are the Authors of, as Scorpions and Vipers
afford Antidotes against the mischiefs they cause.

It may not be amiss to take notice of some things in the Close of the
Animadversions, for here seems to be a parting blow of Wit in our Author; which
being a mighty Rarity (i. e. in the style of Paternoster Row a Black Swan)
with this sort of Writers, it must not be omitted. And out of respect to Mr. B.
I will the rather take notice of it, because though this Reverend Author was
not the Compiler of the Animadversions, yet it is probable (they coming into
his hands) he might prick in here and there a fine flower. The Reasonableness
of Christianity, says he, will as certainly be the cause of much mischief as
Tenterton-Steeple was the cause of Goodwin Sands, p. 49. Look you what a dainty
piece of Ingenuity is borrowed from an Old Threadbare Saw. But it is quite
spoilt when I have told him that it is an Other Steeple (that in Dorsetshire)
from whence we may justly fear such Sands and Shelfs on which the Christian
Faith will be endangered to be shipwrackt.

But there is another Ingenious Touch, p. 52. The Men of Art in all the Parties
are agreed not to speak favorably of the Reasonableness of Christianity. But
who are these Men of Art? Ay, there lies the Conceit. Not to hold the Reader in
suspense, these Men of Art (written in Letters different from the rest, and
thence we may guess the Author of the Sermon, which is marked and distinguished
after this manner, had a hand in it) are University Men, or Men of
University-Education, whom a late Writer exposes because they are not adjusted
to his, P. 145, 158, 162, 164.
Thoughts of Education. Again, These Men of Art are the General Body of the
Clergy of this Nation, and they are the far Greatest Part of those that dissent
from our Church in the point of Discipline and Ceremonies. They are all the
Sober Heads of both these Persuasions, who unite in the Main Articles of
Religion professed and subscribed to by the Church of England. Nay, they are
the Whole Body of the Protestant and Reformed Churches abroad as well as at
home. These are the Men of Art, who by this Gentleman's friends are at other
times called Systematick-Men, and sometimes Mystery-Men, and by way of derision
Orthodox. These are the Men of Art who are also so called you must know in
Contradistinction to the Plain Fellows, for so the Racovians style themselves
in their Treatise of the Trinitarian Scheme of Religion. But when this writer
says these men of Art are in an Evil Conspiracy, what is the meaning of that?
It is no other than this, that they jointly agree to disallow of and condemn a
late upstart Conceit, viz. that the belief of One sole Article of Christianity
is sufficient not only to denominate but to constitute any Man a Christian.
Now, would not a Considerate Man persuade himself that this Unanimous
Concurrence of all the Learned, Wise, Sober and Religious in this matter is
rather to be deemed a Happy Union than a Conspiracy, and that an Evil one?

And whereas this Writer tells us that the book of the Reasonableness of
Christianity is of eminent use to overthrow and ruin Faction, p. 51, I must
needs declare that I Am of the contrary opinion, and I conceive I have
abundantly proved, in a late Socinianism Unmasked.
Discourse I published, that the Notions which the Treatise of the
Reasonableness of Christianity is fraught with administer to Faction, and
something Worse amongst us, which I have been warning the Reader of in the
preceding Discourse.

The short is, this Gentleman and I cannot agree about Mr. L.'s Book, for he at
least says (for we are not certain of his Thoughts) and that without any
Proof, that it is one of the best books that has been published for at least
these sixteen hundred years, p. 52: but I Am of opinion, and I Am sure I have
Proved it, that it is one of the Worst that has appeared in the world since
the date of Christianity.

FINIS.

