A Farther ENQUIRY INTO Several Remarkable TEXTS OF THE Old and New TESTAMENT
Which contain Some Difficulty in them: WITH A Probable Resolution of them.

By John Edwards B. D. sometime Fellow of St. John's College in Cambridge.

1 Cor. 13. 9. We know in part, and we Prophecy in part.

LONDON, Printed for I. Robinson at the Golden Lion in St. Paul's Churchyard,
I. Everingham at the Star in Ludgate Street, and I. Wyat at the Rose in St.
Paul's Churchyard, 1692.

Cantabrigiae, Iulii 21. 1692.
Imprimatur.

Academi^^ Can^abrigiensis Liber



Gabr. Quadring, Procan. Io. Beaumont. S. Blithe. Io. Covel. C. Roderick.


TO THE Right Reverend Father in God SIMON Lord Bishop of ELY.
My Lord,
WHEN I was lately venturing a little Book into the World, I fully designed to
make choice of no other Person than Your Lordship for my Patron: But I soon
found my self unable to pursue my Resolves, and I let fall my Design on this
single thought, that I being a Stranger to your Lordship, my Application would
be d^emed Rude and Impertinent. But I have since conquered that Modesty, and am
grown up to a greater Confidence; and now having another Piece ready (^f the
like nature with the former) I here lay my self and that at your Lordships
Feet. It is Presumption to offer such a mean Present to a Person of your Worth;
and a greater Presumption it is to expose these Papers to so Severe a Critic,
so Judicious and Celebrated a Writer, so Classick an Author as your Lordship.
But I take Courage by considering that your Candor is as eminent as your
Judgment, and that I may have the Happiness to share in it as well as others.
Besides, I have hereby an Opportunity of Expressing my Sense and Esteem of your
Known Worth, which is the Universal Theme of the World. Why should not I join
with the rest of Mankind in acknowledging and declaring that by your Excellent
Discourses and Writings you have enlightened the Christian World, and that by
your Unreprovable Example you have most effectually commended to it the
Practice of Virtue and Religion? Likewise, I take here the welcome occasion of
congratulating your Lordships Accession to the Episcopal Dignity in our Church,
which your Merits alone have exalted you to.

That your Lordship may Rule in this High Station with inflamed Zeal for Gods
Glory and the Churches Welfare, and with a perpetual Blessing from the Chief
Shepherd and Bishop of Souls, is the Hearty Prayer of,

My Lord, Your Lordships Most Dutiful Son and Servant John Edwards.

THE PREFACE.
LET me not incur the Imputation of Arrogance, if I tell the Reader, that when
I presented my former Critical Essay to the View and Censure of a Great Man,
(who for his Profound Knowledge and Profession of Divinity embelished with an
Unparalleled Eloquence, has most justly been esteemed above four Lusters of
Years the Oracle of the Schools, the Glory of the Chair, the Life and Soul of
the University, and the Astonishment of the whole Learned World,) He, after he
had vouchsafed to express his Approbation of it in such favorable Terms which
it becomes me not to impart, was pleased to encourage me to a Second Attempt of
the like nature. Which I being animated by so Great (but so Candid) a Judge,
have now finished, and here offer to the Public, and submit to the Censure of
the Learned.

I will not present the Reader with the Particulars of my Undertaking (as I did
in the Entrance to my former Exercitations,) but I shall only acquaint him with
this in general, that I have for the most part observed this Course in these
Papers, viz. I have first propounded the Opinions embraced by the Learned: And
I have fairly represented them, letting all Men see what may be said for them.
Secondly, I have showed how far they are Defective, and for what Reasons I
recede from them; for I never leave any received Opinion without some just
Cause. Thirdly, I offer some more Probable Account of my own, and I make it my
work to establish my Hypothesis as well as I can. In all these three I have
been very Sincere and Impartial: And I have not studied to Amuse, but to
Satisfy the Reader. Whilst I have endeavored to refute an Opinion, I have
taken care not to reproach the Owner: And whilst I have propounded my own, I
have not excluded the Sentiments of more Judicious Enquirers.

I must needs confess that I accustom my self to a Freedom of Thoughts, and I
like it in others as well as I practice it my self: Wherefore as I have taken
the liberty to reflect on the Assertions of others, so any Man is welcome to
examine mine with the same Freedom. I know some Men are wont even in these
Critical Subjects to write very Imperiously, as if (according to the different
Acception of the Shebe^, Penna Scribarum, Jud. 5. 14. Sceptrum, Genesis 49. 10
Hebrew word) their Pens were Scepters, and they must needs Domineer when they
write. But I have labored to avoid this Excess, by not affecting to be
Categorical and Positive in every Notion I propound: I do not in those matters
which relate merely to Criticism, determine any thing Peremptorily, but I only
desire to be heard as well as others, and crave leave I may offer my
Conjectures; and then I sit down, and submit my self to the more mature
Judgments of the Learned.

This I must needs say, I have all along endeavored to avoid Obscurity, and to
express my self in such easy and intelligible Terms, that I am sure I shall
not deserve the Character and Censure which St. Jerome bestowed on some
Expositors, viz. Epist. 139 ad Cypr.
That it was more difficult to understand their Expositions, than the Texts
which they undertook to explain. I have been careful to deliver my thoughts and
meaning very plainly, that, whatever other entertainment they may meet with,
they may at least be rightly understood, and that I may not be mistaken and
misrepresented in what I say.

I have only this to add, that whereas I once intended to publish a Third Part
of these Critical Remarks and Observations on places of Holy Scripture (of
which I have a considerable number by me,) I have altered my purpose, and do
intend to insert them into some other Treatises and Discourses, where I shall
have occasion to consider those Texts, and examine the meaning of them. The
greatest part of them I reserve to be made use of in a Discourse of the
Authority, Style, etc. of the Holy Scriptures, which I shall hereafter expose
to the view of the World, and therein offer my Interpretation of those places
which I think have been mistaken by Expositors.

An Account of the Texts enquired into and resolved in the following
Exercitations.
Genesis 49. 10.
THE Scepter shall not depart from Judah, nor a Lawgiver from between his
feet, until Shiloh come. Page 1
Exodus 28. 30.
Thou shall put in the Breast Plate of Judgment the Vrim and Thummim. P. 45
Judges 11. 30, 31.
Jephthah vowed a Vow unto the Lord, and said, If thou shall, etc. P. 81
Dan. 9. 24, 25.
Seventy Weeks are determined upon thy People, and upon thy holy City, etc. P.
113
Matt. 27. 5.
Judas departed, and went and hanged himself. Compared with Acts 1. 18. P. 141
1 Cor. 16. 22.
If any Man love not the Lord Jesus Christ, let him be Anathema Maran-atha. P.
169
Col. 2. 8.
Beware lest any man spoil you through Philosophy and vain deceit, etc. P. 193
To which is added,
A Discourse on 1 John 3. 8. wherein is showed what are the works of the Devil
P. 285
AN ENQUIRY INTO Several Remarkable TEXTS OF THE Old and New Testament, etc.
The first Text Enquired into, viz. Genesis XLIX. 10. The Scepter shall not depart
from Judah, nor a Lawgiver from between his feet, until Shiloh come.
I Begin with this Famous Prophecy concerning the Time of our Blessed
Savior's coming into the World: And my Design is, briefly to represent the
general Glosses of the Learned upon this Verse, with short Reflection's on some
of them; but more especially to choose out such an Interpretation of the word
Shiloh, the celebrated Title of the Messiah, as I conceive to be most genuine
and proper; which I will somewhat largely insist upon by showing the great
Agreeableness and Reasonableness of it; and consequently the Preference of it
to all other Interpretations. This noble Prediction is no other than the
remarkable words of the Patriarch Jacob Blessing his Children; and among the
rest his Son Judah a little before his Death. He intimates that the
Primogeniture, and with it the Ruling Power was taken from Reuben, when he
says of him, He shall not excel, v. 4. And from Reuben this Dominion is
transferred to Judah; for it is said, His Fathers Children (of whom Reuben was
the chief of them) shall bow down before him, v. 8. i. e. The Kingdom and
Government shall commence here, and so remain among the Jews many Generations,
even until a certain Period appointed by God, viz. The Arrival of the Messiah,
who is here called Shiloh. Till that time the Jewish Government and Polity
shall be kept up, The Scepter shall not depart: But upon the coming of the
Messiah, who is Christ, their Ruling Power shall cease, their State and
Government shall be abolished, and in a little time after there shall be no
Footsteps left of their Kingdom and Dominion. Let us take this Prophecy
asunder, and Comment on the several words, and then set them together again,
and show you how signal a Proof they are of Christ's being come.

First, The Hebrew word which we translate the Scepter, has different
significations, and accordingly is sometimes rendered a Lev. 27. 32. Ps. 2. 9.
Rod or Staff, sometimes a Ps. 31. 13.
Stroke, Plague or Punishment, and at other times a Judges 5. 14.
Quill or Pen to write with. I meet with no Exposito^s that think any of these
to be the Acception of the word in this place. But there are two other
Acceptions which bid fair for it: The word sometimes signifies a Tribe, and
that in this Chapter v. 28. and the reason why the same word signifies a Rod
and a Tribe, may be because the Tribes of Israel were distinguished by Rods or
Wands, Number. 17. 2, 3. Accordingly Julius and Tremellius render this place thus,
The Tribe shall not depart from Judah: And they make the Sense of the whole
Text to be this, Judah shall not cease to be a Tribe till the coming of Christ,
but then it shall. And so indeed it did; for when Christ came, and was rejected
by the Jews, the Romans by Gods just Judgment scattered them abroad, and the
Tribe of Judah could not be distinguished from the other Tribes. This
Interpretation confirms the Truth of this Prophecy, and sufficiently baffles
and confounds the Jews. But there is yet behind another more eminent Acception
of the word, for you will find that it often signifies a Scepter. And that the
same word which before signified a Rod, should also denote a Scepter, is not to
be wondered at, because a Rod or Staff was the Ancient Ensign of Royalty and
Dominion, Amos 1. 5. This was born by Kings, as a Badge of their Power and
Authority. By the Scepter then is meant here Kingly Power and Authority, or the
Supreme Government of what Name or Form soever. This signification of the word
in this place, is owned and approved of by the Jewish Doctors and Rabbis
themselves, and the three Targums agree in it, and it is acknowledged and
allowed of by the Ancient Greek Versions of the Seventy, who render it (...),
the Prince or Governor. This Prince or Governor, this Government or Scepter,
shall not depart (which are the next words) i. e. There shall be a continual
Succession of Kings and Rulers, the Civil Power and Polity shall constantly
remain, these shall not be removed, shall not wholly be destroyed; they may for
a time be clouded and eclipsed, they may be interrupted for a while, but there
shall not be a Final and Total Cessation of them. The Scepter shall not quite
depart, it shall Non auferetur. Vulg. Lat.
not be taken away from Judah.

But what is meant by Judah here? First, It is not to be taken in a Restrained
Sense for the Patriarch Judah, but for the Tribe of Judah. As the Priesthood
was consigned to Levi, i. e. not his Person, but his Tribe and Posterity; so
Judah had the Scepter, the Government conferred on him, not his Person (for he
had no Rule) but his Tribe, as distinct from the other Tribes. The meaning then
is, that there shall be some of that Tribe who shall Reign till Christ comes,
and no longer: For as the Kingdom and Government shall begin in this Tribe (as
it did in David) and be continued in it, so it shall end with it. When that
Tribe affords no more Kings, then Kingship shall cease among the Jews; though
Foreigners may be set up, yet they shall have no more Kings of their own; which
shall be a certain Indication of the Coming of the Messiah. Secondly, Judah
must be taken comprehensively for the Twelve Tribes, for the State, Government
and Polity of the whole Nation called Jews, from the Patriarch Judah. Some
shrink this Prophecy into a narrow compass; but I think it ought to be taken
largely, and to be applied to Judah, not only as it signifies a particular
Tribe of that name, but as it takes in all the Jewish People, the whole Body of
the Jews. For these Prophetical Blessings which Jacob here utters, are of a
large Extent; and this especially relating to a higher matter than any of the
rest, is not to be confined and restrained to a Person or Tribe; but it is most
reasonable to believe, that it reaches to the whole Nation and Polity of the
Jews, who are here called Judah, as they are (...) innumerable places of
Scrip^^^. (...)

(...) [nor a Lawgiver from be^^^^ (...) is feet,] this Mechokek is the same
with Shebet, the Lawgiver is of the same Importance with the Scepter or Kingly
Power; for this and making Laws went together, the Regal and Judicial or
Legislative Authority did reside in the Jewish Kings. And this Prince or
Lawgiver is said to be from between Judah' s feet; which some learned Men have
thought is an Allusion to the Custom of Courts, where the Scribe or Lawyer used
to sit at the Feet of the Judge or Governor, and there take his Opinion. But
this is a Mistake, and arises from the want of considering the difference
between those two Expressions at the feet and from between the feet. These have
no Affinity with one another: As to the latter then, from between his feet, i.
e. the Feet of Judah; it is as much as, of the Seed or Race of Judah (as you
will find those words signify in Deuteronomy. 28. 57.) and brought up by him (as
Children are said to be brought up upon their Parents Knees, Genesis 50. 23.) This
is the plain and unforced meaning of this Hebrew Phrase or Expression; when it
is said then, that a Lawgiver from between his feet, shall not depart from
him; the meaning is, that there shall always be some who shall be born of the
Posterity and Race of Judah, and brought up and educated by them that shall
sway the Scepter, and give Laws in Israel. This shall last till Shiloh come,
which is the next and main thing to be explained. There are various
Interpretations of this word given by Expositors, but they all agree in this,
that it refers to the Messiah.

I. Some think that the Seventy Interpreters did read it not Shilo but Shello,
as if it were an Abbreviature of (...) ille cujus or cui, like the Arabic
Allah, from the Article Al, ^, and the Pronoun lah, ei or cui, for God is He of
whom, and through whom, and to whom, and for whom are all things, Romans 11. 36.
Heb. 2. 10. So here the Messi^s, of whom Jacob Prophesies, is (...) ille cujus,
which is rendered by the Sept^agint (...), he for whom is laid up, namely the
Kingdom: Or (...), the things that are laid up for him: Or (...), for whom they
are laid up: For there is this Variety of Readings in different Copies. And a
Simon. Critic. Hist. l* 2.
learned Critic has lately attempted to give us the reason why Shello comes
to be read Shiloh, because (says he) before Points were used in the Hebrew
Text, the Letter Iod served instead of the Vowels I and E, but after the
finding out of the Points, the Transcribers of the Bible still kept in the
letter Iod in the Text, which has made the Sense of this place difficult,
says he. But this account (as ingenious as it is, and like its Author) falls
to the ground, and is of no value at all, if the Hebrew Points were co-existent
with the Letters, which will appear to be the most probable opinion to those
who impartially weigh the Arguments brought for it, but especially that of the
Truth and Certainty of the Scriptures of the Old Testament which depend upon
it. And as for the Version of the Seventy, which seems to favor those who
think Shelo to be the true Original word; I wonder that wise Men will rely upon
this Greek Translation, which it is evident is in innumerable places false and
^orrupted, that is, it was either so at first, by reason of the Mistakes which
the Seventy Interpreters committed, or else it was depraved afterward, whether
wilfully (to disguise the Truth) or through negligence, or by the fault of the
Copies they then had, I will not stand to dispute. This corrupting of
Scripture, and particularly the altering of this Text in the Greek, was long
ago objected to Trypho against his Brethren the Jews by Justin Martyr. But that
the Seventy Elders read the Hebrew amiss in this place, and that this was the
cause of their mistake, is very likely, it being (as I have suggested, and as
all impartial Men will acknowledge) their common practice, and therefore not to
be wondered at here.

And yet I am not so positive here, as I find some Writers are, for there is a
way of salving this Greek Translation, without charging them with mistaking the
Hebrew; for I conceive the Seventy might read it Shiloh, as we have it now; but
they took it to be as much as asher lo, ille cujus or cui, He for whom the
Scepter, mentioned just before, was laid up, or to whom it belonged, and thence
they rendered it (...). So that although the Jewish Interpreters mistake the
Hebrew words in other places (as it is certain they do) yet there is no
necessity of asserting that they do so here. Perhaps they did read it right,
though they mistook the true meaning of the word (of which I shall give you an
account afterward) and instead of understanding it to be the Name of the
Messiah, thought the (...) to be the same with (...), and (...) ^o be a
Pronoun, and so they concluded that Shilo was of the same signification with
Shelo. But this is a sorry Interpretation of the word, and the very Jews
themselves (excepting R. Solomon.
one single Rabby) are ashamed of it; for it unnecessarily confounds and
jumbles two words together, and at the same time mangles one of them, and
substitutes a Van in the place of a He, and strikes out a Iod, and after all
this leaves the sense of the Prophecy lame and imperfect, uncertain and
arbitrary, for these words [he to whom] assert and determine nothing at all.

II. The Vulgar Latin Version furnishes us with another Interpretation of this
word, rendering it qui mittendus est; for it seems these Translators read it not
Shiloh but Shiloah or Shilluach, i. e. missus, which here is as much as
mittendus, the Praeterit being put for the Future, after the manner of the
Prophetic Writers. Some think that this is one of the Messias's Names in Isa.
8. 6. and that this Text which we are now treating of, was, among several
others, corrupted by the Jews, they changing Shiloah into Shiloh: But there is
not the least show of reason to assert either of these, for in that place in
Isaiah, Shiloah barely signifies a Fountain or Spring of that name, which rose
at the foot of Mount Sion: And it is a mistake that the Jews corrupted this
Text by turning Shiloah into Shiloh, for it was to no purpose to do it, the
word Shiloh (as you shall hear anon) being as expressive, yea much more, of the
Messi^s, than that other could be. Without all Controversy, the Text is entire
and uncorrupted; and as for these Surmises, they arise only from attending to
the Vulgar Latin Version. The short is, the Authors of this Interpretation
mistook a (...) for a (...), which they might easily do, by reason of the
likeness of these L^tters: And besides, in the Hebrew Copy which they ^sed, the
Pathah under the (...) was omitted, and so they thought the word was Shiloach,
and not Shiloh. There ne^ds no more to be said than this, for the Refutation of
this Exposition of the word.

III. Others tell us that Shiloh is derived from Shil, which signifies the
Secundine, the Membrane which the Infant is wrapped in when it comes into the
World. And because this accompanies the Child, it is taken for it, as in Deuteronomy.
28. 57. and by a Metonymy signifies as much as foetus, filius; and consequently
(say they) Shiloh is the same with Beno, filius ejus, his Son or Offspring,
viz. Judah's. But though this be the Interpretation of some of the noted ^. D.
Ki^chi, Aben Ezra, R. ^^chai.
Jewish Rabbis, and though these he followed by several Gala^i^^s, Calvin,
^^nius and Tre^elli^^, (...).
Writers of the Christian Persuasion, yet there is good reason to question, yea
to reject this opinion, for there is no such Hebrew word as Shil in the Bible,
nor any where else. These Writers have deceived themselves one after another,
by trusting to what a circumcised Doctor had told them. They read in R. Kimchi,
that Shil is secundina or fo^tus in the forementioned place in Deuteronomy; but
if we consult it, we shall find that it is Shiljah, not Shil. However, they
made Shil out of Shiljah, and then fancied that Shil was comprehended in the
word Shiloh, and that this has the like signification with that. B^t we must
remember that there is no such word as Shil; and as for the word Shiljah, it is
once taken in a strained sense for proles or filius; but who can thence gather,
that this is the Acception of the word Shiloh? No Man certainly that knows how
to make rational Deductions from things. Moreover, they add a Vau to Shil to
make it Shilo, which is extravagantly done to no purpose, for it is Shiloh, not
Shilo in the Original. They throw away the Letter (...) as superfluous and
redundant, as a useless Affix to the word; but we must remind them that the He
is not of that nature, but that it is a substantial and radical Letter
belonging to the word, for the word is the proper Name of the Messiah, as I
shall now proceed to show.

IV. Vatablus, Fagius, Castalio, Shindler, Avenarius, Hotger, Mede.
Others of great Learning and Judgment* derive Shiloh from the Verb Shalah: And
this I take to be the most genuine Derivation of the word, the three radical
Letters of the Verb Shala^ being in it. What can be said or desired more? Some
hundreds of Derivative words have but two, and yet none questions their
Production from the Root. Much less then can we do^bt of the Extraction of
(...) from (...) when it has the full number of Letters belonging to the
Radix. And as for the Iod in the Derivative, it is common and frequent to
insert that between the Radical Letters, as the Learned very well know. So that
in short, Shiloh from Shalah is d^duced without the least strain upon the word.
But I do not find that any of those learned Persons, whose Names you see in the
Margin, have taken notice of, and represented to us the Wonderful Suitableness
of this Appellation. I never met with any Writer that has showed the peculiar
Contrivance of this word, and how it is particularly framed, to express the
Glorious Nature and Attributes of the Son of God, the Redeemer of the World.
That therefore is the thing which I will now undertake, and consequently I
shall demonstrate, that there is no Name imaginable that can be more properly
and fitly applied to him than this. We must take notice then, that there are
three Significations of the word Shalah whence Shiloh comes. First, Shalah is
Th^nce Merce^ (...) A^e^arius, and other E^^^ologists, d^rive this L^tin word
Salvare from the H^brew Verb Sh^la^, or the Noun Shal^ah.
salvavit, salvus fuit, as is clear from Job 3. 26. where this word is used in
this sense. It imports Safety or Salvavation, and so Shiloh, Lo Shala^^i, I was
(...) Sa^ety.
which is derived from this Verb, is as much as Savior. Secondly, Shalah is of
the same signification with Shalam quievit, pacificavit; qui^^us, pacifi^us
fuit, Psalm 122. 6. I^shlaiu, ^^ieti er^nt Mon^an.
which is rendered (...) frequently by the Septuagint. It denotes Peace, and
consequently Shiloh is the same with Peaceable. The third and next Denotation
of the word Shalah (which also follows naturally from the two former
significations) is Psalm. 30. 6. Ier. 1^. 1. Lam. 1. 5.
felicem, fortunatum, prosperum esse, and accordingly is rendered by the Seventy
(...), prospero successu uti. Therefore Shiloh is as much as the Happy, the
Fortunate, the Prosperer.

Here then you cannot but see already the great Mystery contained, and also
discovered in this Remarkable Word. It has its undoubted and immediate
Original from a Verb which signifies to save, and also to be at Peace, and
(because these are the Blessings which conduce to the Felicity of Man) to be
Happy. Whence we cannot but acknowledge that this Title Shiloh is most s^itably
applied here to the Messiah, who is Jesus, i. e. a Savior and Deliverer, who
is also our great Peacemaker, and who is the Author of all our Happiness both
in this World and in another. This admirable and singular Make of the Wo^d, is
little less than an Assurance and Demonstration to me, that I have pitched upon
the right and only true Derivation of it. Therefore this invites me to stay
here a while, and to ponder the Virtue and Weight of this Marvelous Name given
to the Messiah. Indeed these great things comprehended in this glorious Title,
are worthy to be insisted upon, that we may thereby be thoroughly convinced, how
fit an Epithet this is for our Blessed Lord: And I shall do this the rather,
because (as I have intimated already) I have not found the Extensive Meaning of
this Glorious Name displayed by those who have purposely undertaken to explain
and comment upon this ancient Prophecy concerning the Coming of Christ.

I. This Title contains in it the welcome notice of that most Ravishing Name
JESUS, the Name given him by the particular direction of an Angel from Heaven,
Matt. 1. 21. and which being interpreted, is no other than a Savior. Wherefore
you find both joined together by St. Paul, Acts 13. 23, a Savior, Jesus, the
one being expressive of the other. The word (...), which the Apostle here
uses, is of mighty sense and import, and accordingly Tully tells us, that Hoc
quantum est? ita magnum ut Latino un^ verbo ex primi non possit, l. 4. contra
Verrem.
this word cannot be expressed by any single one in Latin. It is certain that
Servator (which was a word then in use) came short of it; therefore Salvator
has been used by the Latin Fathers as a suller word, and this has generally
obtained in the Church. De Resurrect. carn. c. 47. Adv. Mar^ion. l. ^
Tertullian is pleased to render it Salu^ificator, thinking this to be a more
significant word. But In Matt. 1. 21.
Grotius comes and produces another word, and makes bold to correct Tully (as
good a judge of Latin as he was) and averreth that the single word Sospitator
is of the same import with (...), and is as full. I think truly this great Man
has outdone the Orator in his own Tongue: For from Tully's own account of the
word Is est nimirum (...) qui salutem dedit. ibid.
(...), we may gather that this Latin word fully answers to that Greek one,
which implies not only a Saving or Preserving from being destroyed but a
Restoring to that Safety which was lost: So that it is a conferring of some
positive Benefit on a Person. This is the very import of Sospitator, it
properly relates to those things or Persons that were lost and undone. It
respects the Condition of Men in Mis^ry, and it signifies a restoring them to
their former ha^py State, and so is exactly applicable to the Redemption
wrought for us by Jesus Christ. Thus the Ti^le of (...) Savior, is very
expressive and emphatical. But to come to p^rticulars beho^d how our Shiloh,
our Savior, merits that name by all the ways imaginable. He was a Bodily
Savior, miraculously rescuing distressed People from their Diseases and Pains
which they labored under, compassionately preserving many Thousands from
perishing by Hunger, powerfully ejecting the evil Spirit out of those that were
possessed and tormented by him. Yea, he was infinitely beneficial and
advantageous to the whole Race of Mankind, by conferring on them all Temporal,
and offering all Spiritual Mercies to them, so that he is most truly called 1 Timothy 4. 10.
the Savior of all Men. But especially of those that believe in him, and
conform their Lives to his Holy Laws, He is a Savior, and that in a more
eminent manner, viz. Mat. 1. 21.
To save them from their sins, which is the grand reason assigned why this Name
was given him. Acts 5. 31.
Him has God exalted to be a Prince and a Savior, to give Repentance and
Forgiveness of sins, to save us from the Prince of Darkness, and to bruise
Satan under our feet: For this Shiloh is the Seed of the Woman foretold in Genesis
3. 15. that was to break the Serpents head. This Blessed Shiloh 1 Thessalonians. 1. 10.
delivers us from the Wrath to come, and frees us fom eternal Death, which is
the just Wages of sin. And lastly, he actually confers all Good upon us both
here and hereafter. He freely purchases for us the Favor of God, he bestows
Life and Happiness, and is Heb. 5. 9.
the Author of eternal Salvation unto all them that obey him.

Thus he merits the Name of Shiloh or Savior, and therefore most justly ought
we to value and reverence this Name. The Jews indeed call our Lord by the Name
Jesus, but with some Diminution of it; for (as we are informed by Elias Le^i^a
Thi^b.
one that was well acquainted with the Jewi^h Writers) instead of (...) they
style him (...), by which curtailing of the word, they let us understand that
they do not own him (as the Christians do) for a Savior. But let us be
sensible that this is the True Jesus, the Savior, and that there is none else;
let us adore him as a Complete and Perfect Savior. It is true, we read in the
In Pinda to, Sophocle, Aeschilo.
Greek Poets and Iul. Poll. Onom^st. l. 6 c. 16. Atbenae. l. 45. c. 20.
others, that (...) was Jupiter's Epithet: And the Temple of Jupiter Servator
is mentioned by Not. Hist. ^. 34.
Pliny. Bacchus likewise had this Title, for Pausanias mentions an Altar to him
with this Inscription. And the Dioscuri were particularly called Aelian. var.
Hist. l. 1. c. 36.
(...), because they were thought to deliver and save Men in Tempests at Sea.
And not only the Gods, but great Men and Benefactors were honored with this
Appellation. Thus Joseph. Antiq. Iud. l. 11. c. 6.
Ahashuerus (whom Josephus names Artaxerxes) caused Mordecai the Jew, who had
detected the Conspiracy of the Eunuchs against him, to be proclaimed (...), his
Savior and Deliverer. So Antiochus Epiphanes had this Title given him in
Flattery by the Samaritans, says the Joseph. Antiq. Iud. l. 12. c. 7.
same Author. And this very Name was bestowed upon Demetrius one of the Grecian
Monarchs. But to go back to the times long before, Genesis 41. 49
Zaphnath Paaneah, Savior of the World, (as St. Ierom interprets it, who had
been in Egypt, and had, it is likely, learnt the Interpretation of that
Egyptian Name) was the Title conferred on Joseph by Pharaoh, because he had
saved not only Egypt, but other Countries from perishing by Famine. But it is
our Jesus, our Shiloh alone that i^ worthy of that Name in the full extent of
it, and accordingly he is styled the Savior of the World, 1 John 4. 14. And
you may observe, that this Appellative is given him by the Samaritans that came
to him, John 4. 42, We know, say they, that this is indeed the Christ, the
Savior of the World: Which Title they had learnt, I conceive, from this very
Prophecy concerning the Messiah, where he is called Shiloh. For the Samaritans
owned the Pentateuch, in which this Prediction of the Holy Patriarch Jacob was
very eminent, and much observed by them: Wherefore they could not but enquire
into the true meaning of this Name, and they found it to signify a Savior,
and thence knew and were assured that Christ was the Savior of the World. Thus
you see the reason why this good Patriarch gave the N^me Shiloh to the Messiah,
viz. Because it is of the same import with JESUS or Savior. But,

II. This Title of the Messiah signifies not only Salvation, but Peace. And
indeed these two are nearly allied to one another, and accordingly are joined
together by the Apostle, Romans 5. 8, etc. While we were yet sinners Christ died
for us: Much more being now justified by his blood, we shall be saved from
wrath through him. For if when we were Enemies we were reconciled to God by the
death of his Son: Much more being reconciled, we shall be saved by his Life.
These two, Salvation and Reconciliation, are inseparable, and they are both
purchased by the Blood of Jesus, who is our Shiloh, i. e. both our Savior and
our Peacemaker. Hear how the meaning of this Blessed Name was proclaimed by
the Inspi^ed Writers of Old. Dan. 9. 24
He shall make Reconciliation for Iniquity, says the Prophet Daniel: And
others foretell, that Mic. 5. 5.
This Man shall be the Peace, and that Zech. 6. 13
The Council of Peace shall be between them both, viz. Between the Lord and the
Branch spoken of in the foregoing Verse: For an Eternal Council was held
between the Father and the Son, concerning the Redemption and Salvation of
Mankind, and this was a Council of Peace, i. e. of Reconciliation toward lost*
Sinners. This was the Effect of that Blessed Consult from Eternity: The Son of
God was to be an Expiatory Sacrifice for the Sins of the World, and thereby to
pacify the Divine Justice, and so to become our Shiloh. But this was more
especially the Glorious Theme of the New Testament, where we are abundantly
assured, that Col. 1. 20.
he made Peace through the Blood of his C^oss, and that the great Design and
End of his being Incarnate, was to make Peace between God and Man, to reconcile
Heaven and Earth. Ephesians. 2. 14.
He is ou^ Peace, who has made both one, and has broken down the mid^le wall
of Partition between us, having abolished in his flesh the Enmity, so making
Peace; and that he might reco^cile both unto God in one Body by the Cross,
having slain the Enmity thereby: An^ came and preached Peace to you which were
afar off, and to them that were nigh, i. e. both to Gentiles and Jews. This 1
Ti^. 2 5.
is the Mediator between God and Man, the Man Christ Jesus, that Middle Person
who interposed between us and the Offended Majesty, and by his powerful
Mediation reconciled us unto God. Therefore even the Hebrew Masters and
Cabalists called the Messiah (...)
a Man between, one who undertakes to appease the difference between God and
Man. Jacob's Shiloh is the same with this Mediator, this Reconciler, this
Peacemaker. This was his Office, and his Name is suitable to it.

Again, Aben Ezra and other Rabbis grant, that this Name Shiloh is given to
the Messiah, because he is Peaceable, and the Author of Peace to Mankind. This
is the very Character of our JESUS, our Savior; and this (viz. Peaceableness)
is the very Genius and proper Nature of that Holy Religion which he founded and
established in the World. The Principles of Christianity do most effectually
conduce to the promoting of Peace among Men, it strictly commanding them to
forgive them that trespass against them, to put away all Bitterness, and Wrath,
and Anger, to choose in some cases to take wrong without looking for Redress,
to study to be quiet, and to follow peace with all Men. And to commend and
encourage this excellent Temper our Lord has pronounced the Peacemakers
Blessed. If there be Quarrels and Dissentions, Animosities and Persecutions
amongst Christians (and who sees not that these too frequently abound?) they
are not the fault of Christianity, but of the Evil Dispositions, Lusts and
Corruptions of Men. Christ is not the Author of these, neither is Christianity
it self to be blamed, that any such thing happens in the World; for the design
of Christ's Kingdom was Peace, as the Prophet sets forth the times of the
Gospel, Isa. 2. 4, 5.
They shall beat their Swords into Plow-shares, and their Spears into
Pruning Hooks. Nation shall not lift up Sword against Nation, neither shall
they learn War any more. It is one grand end of the Evangelical Institution, to
remove all quarrelsome Distinctions and Antipathies between the different
People of the Earth, that in Christ Jesus there may be neither Jew nor Gentile*
neither Greek nor Barbarian, neither Bond nor Free, but that all may become one
in Christ Jesus; and that a ^eriod being put to all their former Grudges and
Dissentions, they may be perfectly joined together in brotherly Affection, that
universal Peace and Amity may take place, and that the Royal Law of Love may
prevail in the World. This is the design and work of our Shiloh, our Peaceable
Messiah; he has purchased the means conducing to it, and we may be in
possession of it if we will. Farther, to evince the Truth and Efficacy of this
Name, let us reflect on the remarkable time of our Savior's visiting the
World, which was a Time of Universal Peace. I grant this is a common
Observation, and generally known; but here in our present Subject it is very
considerable, and more than ordinarily to be taken notice of and applied,
because it will let us into the true Notion of this great and comprehensive
Name Shiloh. The noise of Wars and Battles was ceased, all was calm and hushed,
a Catholic Peace possessed the World at Christ's appearing in it; for he was
born in the Reign of a Mild and Peaceable Prince, who after five Civil Wars,
and after infinite Slaughter and Bloodshed accompanying them all, reigned
peaceably many Years. At this time it was, that the Parthians, and several
Nations which before had continually infested the Roman Empire with their Arms,
came and humbly besought its Friendship, and tamely restored those Banners and
other Ensigns of War which they had formerly taken from the Romans in Battle,
and laid them down at Augustus's Feet. When thus this Emperor had vanquished
the World, and settled the Nations, and all Kingdoms were brought under his
Dominion, when he as well as the whole Earth was at Peace (of which the
shutting of the Gates of Ianus's Temple, as it were shutting up Peace there,
was a visible Token, and whereof there was very rarely an Example, as In vit.
Nu^ae.
Plutarch observes, till this time) then, and not till then, our Savior chose
to bless the World with his presence, to make it appear, that he was indeed the
Shiloh, the Prince of Peace, (as the Isa, 9. 6.
Evangelical Prophet had styled him) the True Solomon, the Pacifick King, who
brought Peace with him into the World, and brought a Religion with him which is
the greatest Friend and Advancer of Peace.

III. This Appellation given to the Messiah by the ancient Prophet Jacob,
denotes not only Salvation and Peace, but Prosperity. Shiloh, h. e. Ille
fortunatus. Ave^^^. Lexic.
Shiloh is as much as Prosperous, Happy, Triumphant; which is yet a farther
Accession to the Glory of this Name. Therefore it immediately follows after the
mentioning of Shiloh in this Prophecy, Unto him shall the gathering of the
People be, all Nations shall own his Authority and Power, and submit to his
Empire: The People shall be obedient unto him, as Onkelos's Targum renders it:
All the Kings of the Earth shall be subject to him, as the Ierusalem-Paraphrase
has it. And from both we are acquainted, that this is a fit Epithet of the
Messiah, who is Rev. 1. 5.
the Prince of the Kings of the Earth, and Luke 1. 32, 33.
shall be great, and shall reign for ever, and of whose Kingdom there shall be
no end. This is the King foretold in, Ier. 23. 5. that shall reign and prosper,
that shall be Victorious and Triumphant, that shall be both a Savior and a
Conqueror. And therefore to this purpose that is very observable which we read,
concerning our Savior's Matt. 21.
riding in state into Jerusalem upon an Ass, for in Palestine even their Judge.
10. 4
Princes and Nobles rid upon As^es. It is said the officious People Mat. 21. 8.
spread their Garments in the way, which was a Testimony of Subjection to
Kings, 2 Kings 9. 13. There was the like Custom used among the Gentiles, as
their Plutarch. in Catone Vtic. Aeschil. in Agamemn.
Writers assure us. And some of this transported Multitude V. 9.
cut down branches from the Trees, and strowed them in the way: And other
Branches without doubt they carried in their hands, as an Emblem of Victory and
Triumph, for this was an usual Practice among several Nations. The Evangelist
St. John relating this passage, tells us, That they took Branches of
Palm Trees, and went forth to meet him, chapter 12. v. 13. For it was the Custom on
such an Occasion, to make use especially of the Boughs of this particular Tree,
because it was generally held to be a Symbol of Victory, of which L. 3. c. 6.
Aulus Gellius and Sympos. l. 8. c. 5.
Plutarch pretended to give the reasons, viz. Because this is a firm and
durable Tree, and had Leaves always green (whence you read of Ps. 92. 12.
flourishing like the Palm Tree) and from a Vulgar Error that prevailed about
this Tree, i. e. That the more weights are laid on it, the higher it rises.
Whence Palma among the Latins signifies Victory and the Reward of it: And it is
certain that the Branches of this Tree were used in Triumphs both among the
Greeks and Romans, and were the Recompense of Conquerors. Accordingly the Jews
here (who in many things followed the Usages of other Nations) to express their
Triumphal Joy at the Arrival of the Blessed Jesus, took Branches of Palm Trees,
and went forth to welcome him to Jerusalem. Yea, it is no wonder that the Jews
in particular, who were used to this Solemnity, and did yearly carry and hold
up Boughs of Trees Neh. 8. 15
on their Feast of Tabernacles; it is no wonder, I say, that these Jews, when
they saw Jesus coming, made use of this Ceremony, and cried Hosanna to him (as
you read they did) for at that Feast they used to sing (...), and for shortness
(...) Hosanna: And the Talmud informs us, that these very Boughs and Branches
of Trees which they lifted up, were called Hosanna's by them. Here then it is
worth our observing, that at our Savior's Triumphal C^valcade through the
Streets of Jerusalem, they received him with this particular Acclamation and
Applause, and that they bore their Hosanna's in their Hands, and brought them
to the Son of David, and acknowledged him by this Gratulation to be their
Messiah and Savior, for the English of Hosanna is Save us now. And thus this
Gratulatory Acclamation exactly agrees to him who is the Jesus, the Savior,
the Deliverer, and who is the Shiloh, the Prosperous, the Triumphant. Therefore
I take it to have been by a particular Direction of Heaven, that our Blessed
Lord, at his entrance into Jerusalem in Triumph, was received with repeated
Hosanna's from the People; for Saving and Triumphing go together. I find the
concurrence of these two in Zechary's Prediction of our Savior in chapter 9. v. 9.
(a Prophetical Passage which all the ancient Jews understood of the Messiah,
but it is needless to produce their words or give you their names, this being
so amply and satisfactorily performed by a Bochart. de Animal. Sacr. l. 2. c.
17.
worthy Writer of this last Age) Behold, thy King comes unto thee: He is just,
and having Salvation, lowly (meek in himself, but) riding upon an Ass, and upon
a Colt the Foal of an Ass, as a King in Joy and Triumph. Thus he was a Savior
and a Triumphant King; and if he had not been the former, it was impossible he
should have been the latter.

It is true, he was pleased to submit to Death, and the Horrors of the Grave,
but he soon rescued himself from them, and ascended Triumphantly to Heaven.
Acts 2. 36.
God made that same Jesus who was crucified, both Lord and Christ, and Ephesians. 1.
^0, etc.
has set him at his own right hand in the heavenly places, far above all
Principality and Power, and Might, and Dominion, and every name that is named,
not only in this World, but also in that which is to come: And has put all
things under his feet, and gave him to be the Head over all things to the
Church. We might here also recount the wonderful Success of the Christian
Religion in the World, how it was planted and propagated even against the
powerful Inclinations and most inveterate Customs of Mankind, how it broke all
their Measures, and made its way through all Difficulties; how it thrived and
flourished when it was most opposed and persecuted: In a word, how it
miraculously prevailed maugre all the Force and Power, all the Wit and Policy
of its malicious Adversaries. From this one Consideration alone we might
demonstrate the Virtue of this Name Shiloh, and give undeniable proofs, that
our Lord most deservedly had this Title, i. e. That he was Prosperous and
Successful. And when at last he shall take to himself his most Absolute Power
and Sovereignty, and reign in the Christian Church as Rev. 19. 16.
King of Kings, and Lord of Lords, when in those Halcyon days* in that Glorious
Jubilee of the World, Rev. 11. 15.
The Kingdoms of the Earth shall become the Kingdoms of our Lord, and of his
Christ* then we shall with rejoicing and Exaltation proclaim, admire and extol
this Name Shiloh; we shall then with gladsome Experience acknowledge that He
and his Cause alone prosper upon the Earth; we shall confess that all his
Blessed Enterprises for his Church are Succes^ful: Briefly, we shall adore him
as our Complete Shiloh, our Savior, our Peacemaker, our Prosperous Messiah.

Thus I have been large in interpreting and explaining this Ancient Name of the
Messiah, and you see what an Illustrious and Glorious Title it is. I have this
yet farther to observe, that in some of the most notable and eminent Prophesies
in the Old Testament concerning Christ, these three things which are
comprehended in the Name Shiloh, are particularly and distinctly mentioned and
are all found together. Thus in Psalm 72. which is a clear Prediction
concerning the Messiah, (as the Hebrew Scholiast upon it, and some of the old
Rabbis acknowledge, and as the Application of some passages in this Psalm to
Christ, in the Writings of the New Testament plainly shows.) This Name Shiloh
is as it were commented upon. For you find him here first represented as a
Savior, He shall ^ave the Children of the needy, v. 4. He shall deliver the
needy when he cries; the poor also, and him that has no helper. He shall
spare the Poor and Needy, and shall save the Souls of the Needy, v. 12, 13.
Nothing could be more expressive than this of the Salvation wrought by Christ
Jesus for poor, distressed, helpless Sinners. Secondly, He is described as a
Peacemaker, The Mountains (those places which used to be haunted with Robbers
and wild Beasts) shall bring Peace to the People, v. 3. This Blessing shall be
conferred on those places where it was wholly a Stranger before, and therefore
shall be the more welcome. And in v. 7. you read of abundance of Peace in his
days; and the Duration of it is answerable to its Plenty, for it shall last
till there be no Moon, (as the Hebrew has it) till the Heavens and Earth, and
the whole Fabric of the World be dissolved. In the third place, to complete
his Character, it is added, that he shall be Prosperous and Happy, He shall
break in pieces the Oppressor, v. 4. He shall be a great Victor, and Triumph
over all his Enemies, especially over Satan the Great and Unsufferable
Oppressor of Mankind. This is also signified in that Metaphorical Language, v.
6. He shall come down like rain upon the mowen Grass, as showers that water the
Earth: i. e. in plainer terms, The Subjects of his Kingdom shall grow and
increase, thrive and flourish: Therefore it follows immediately, In his days
shall the Righteous flourish, v. 7. And then in several Verses together you
have the Prosperity and Happiness of his Kingdom decyphered, He shall have
Dominion from Sea to Sea: They that dwell in the Wilderness shall bow before
him, and his Enemies shall lick the Dust. All Kings shall fall down before him:
All Nations shall serve him. And he shall live, i. e. (according to the 2 Samuel
16. 16. 1 Kings 1. 31.
Eastern style) he shall prosper; and Men shall be blessed in him: All Nations
shall call him blessed.

Likewise in that other noted and famous Prediction concerning Christ, in the
53 Chapter of Isaiah, all these three significations of the word Shiloh meet
together. The Prophet recounting the admirable Benefits and Advantages of our
Saviors Passion (for that it is spoken of Him is evident from Matt. 8. 17. and
Acts 8. 32, 35.) tells us, That he has born our Griefs and carried our
Sorrows, v. 4. i. e. He underwent the Punishment which we should have suffered
which is farther expressed in the next Verse, He was wounded for our
Transgressions, he was bruised for our Iniquities. Whereas we should have been
wounded and bruised, punished and tormented for our Sins, He was pleased, out
of infinite Kindness, to take the Recompense of our Sins upon himself, and to
bear them on the Cross, and thereby to free us not only from the Guilt of Sin,
but from all the Miseries which were consequent upon it. What is this but to be
a Savior? Wherefore it is added, With his stripes we are healed, v. 5. By the
Sufferings of Christ Sanati sumus. Vulg. Lat.
we are made whole, and saved. Thus he was a Savior. But the same Inspired
Prophet acquaints us in the same Verse, that he was a Peacemaker, the
Chastisement of our Peace was upon him, i. e. by his Meritorious Sufferings our
Peace with God was purchased, our Reconciliation with the incensed Majesty of
Heaven was procured. Yea, it is not unworthy of our notice, that the Hebrew
word which we render Peace, is in the plural Number, to intimate to u^, that
whatever Pleas and Accusations are against us, they are all (though never so
many) silenced by Christ our Advocate, our Mediator, our Reconciler, our
Peacemaker. Farther, the Peaceable Nature of Christ is set forth in those
words, As a Sheep before her Shearers is dumb, so he opened not his mouth, v.
7. He bore all Hardships, Reproaches, Injuries, yea and the Cross it self, with
a humble Silence and Submission. Isa. 42. 2.
He did not cry, nor lift up, nor cause his Voice to be heard in the Street.
This is the Character of the Mild, the Gentle, the Peaceable Jesus. In the next
place, he is represented as Prosperous, When thou shall make his Soul an
Offering for sin, he shall see his Seed, he shall prolong his days, and the
pleasure of the Lord shall prosper in his hand, v. 10. That is, his whole
Design and Undertaking for the Salvation and Redemption of Mankind (for this is
the Pleasure of the Lord) shall be Successful: There shall be a Happy Effect
and Issue of all that he has done and suffered, he shall see and rejoice in
his Seed, that numerous Race of Holy Converts, of Believers and Regenerate
Persons who are added to the Church. He shall see of the Travel of his Soul,
and shall be satisfied, v. 11. He shall delight himself in the Blessed Effect
of his Labors, he shall acquiesce in the Fruit of his Sufferings, viz. The
Salvation of his Chosen. Therefore will I divide him a Portion with the great,
etc. v. 12. Which is a Comparison taken from the Practice of Great Conquer^rs,
who after the Victory is over, share in the Rich Spoil: So that this expresses
the Complete Victory and Triumph of Christ over all his Enemies. Thus he is
every ways the True Shiloh; for Salvation, Peace and Prosperity (which are all
contained in that Appellation) belong to him.

Whence we may gather, that this One Title comprehends in it All the Glorious
Names that are given to Christ, either in the Old or New Testament, together
with all his (...), and all the Admirable Effects (...) his Passion. These all
center in this One Name, which the Holy Ghost has made choice of on purpose,
as the most Comprehensive Word to express the Glorious Nature and Properties of
the Messiah. Yea, I doubt not but the Holy Patriarch Jacob had this Name
revealed unto him from Heaven, and being immediately inspired by the Holy
Ghost, he divulged it to the World. You see then that I had great reason to
prefer this Derivation of the word Shiloh (viz. from Shalah) before any others,
and to commend it as the True and Native Signification. And because the Extent
and Latitude of this word have not been observed by Expositors, there was a
necessity of my insisting and enlarging upon it, that I might thereby display
the full Import of the word designed here by the Holy Spirit, and that it might
plainly appear, that this Name which God has given his Son, is a Name above
every Name.

But after all that I have said, concerning this so remarkable E^ymology and
Denotation of the word, I leave every one to his liberty. It may be some do not
apprehend the Singularity and Fitness of this Derivation which I have offered.
However, it is sufficient for my general Purpose in this Discourse, that the
Ti^^e Shiloh* (whether we embrace this or the other Derivations) is agreeable
to the Messiah, and belongs to Him and none other. This is the unanimous
Opinion and Suffrage of the most Learned Jews themselves, I say of the most
Learned, for though there be some Jews, who by Shiloh understand
Ne^uchadnezzar, others Jeroboam, others David, and some the City Shiloh, where
Saul was elected King; and though there be some other wild and fanciful
Opinions of the Rabbis concerning the Interpretation of this word; yet all the
wise and sober Writers among the Jews, all those who are of greatest Learning
and Judgment, deride these Conjectures, and ingenuously profess that Shiloh is
the Messias's Name. The three Chala^ee Paraphrases interpret the word thus, and
so R. Solomon, and all the ancient Rabbis understand the place. In several
places of the Sanhedr. c. 11. Nedarim. c. 4. Pesachim. c. 3.
Talmud it is clear, that the Hebrew Doctors thought (...) was one of the Names
of the Messiah, and they quote this Text for it. The Author of Bereshith Rabba
(an ancient Piece) asserts the same in express terms, viz. Shiloh is the
Messiah. Aben Ezra, Kimchi, Bechai, later Doctors hold the same. Still, though
there be different Derivations of the word, they all agree in this, that it is
meant of the M^ssias. If then all the Ancient, and some of the Moder^ Hebrews
of the greatest Note and Learning acknowledge Shiloh to be the Name of the
Messiah or Christ, I think no Man of the Christian Persuasion will be averse
from acknowledging it, but will rather admire and magnify the Divine
Providence in affording such a clear and notable Testimony from the Mouths and
Pens of our professed Adversaries.

It being thus universally agreed, who is meant by Shiloh in this famous
Prophecy, let us now sum up the plain meaning of the whole* The Scepter shall
not depart, etc. that is, the Government of the ^ewish Nation shall ever reside
in the Posterity of Judah till a greater Governor comes, till He that was the
Desire of all Nations, He that is the MESSIAH, the Deliverer and Savior, the
Peaceable, the Prosperous, blesses the World with his arrival. ^hen, and not
before, the Jewish Government shall depart, and so depart, that it shall never
return again. This is the meaning of (...); and this we must carefully observ^
(...) ^he expounding of this Proph^^^^. For I find that most Authors have
stretched this Prophecy too far, and have thereby made themselves justly
liable to the Objections of the Jews. And indeed they can never maintain this
Prediction against them upon the grounds on which they proceed, viz. That the
Scepter is to be taken in these words precisely for the Kingly Power, and that
the departing of this Scepter from Judah is meant of any departing, though it
were but for a little time. This cannot be the meaning of the words, for then
the Scepter may be said to have departed from Judah, when the Jewish Nation was
carried Captive into Babylon, when the Dignity of the Kingly Majesty was taken
away by Nebuchadnezzar, about five hundred years before Christ* And after it,
under the Kings of Persia, and after the Ruin of that Empire, under Alexander's
Successors there was a kind of departing of the Scepter. But it was not
properly a Departing; it was rather an Interruption, and a Cessation for a
time, but that is not the thing spoken of in this Prophecy. The Text is not
meant of a Departing for a Time, of an Interregnum, or partial Failing, but of
a full and total Departure; which happened not in the foresaid Instances. Nay,
it is certain that all that while the Administration of the Jewish Commonwealth
remained in those who were of the Line of Judah, viz. the Seventy Elders, who
had the Power in their hands: These (as the Jews tell us) failed not to be of
the Race of Judah and David. But the Asmonaei, who were the last Set of
Governors among the Jews, were no^ of the Tribe of Judah, but of Levi, they
being Priests. Wherefore we must freely acknowledge that the Jewish Government
was not tied to the Tribe of Judah, and consequently we must not restrain this
Prophecy as some do, as if the Scepter should not in the least be removed from
the Tribe of Judah before Christ came. For it is certain that the Scepter did
not continue in this Tribe all the while, and therefore in my opinion Helvicus
might have saved all his pains in endeavoring to demonstrate that there was a
Continuation of the Scepter in Judah's Tribe: Which thing indeed he has with
great Learning and Skill in History, attempted to make good, and he has said
as much toward the proof of it as any Man upon Earth could have done; but
still all of it falls short of what he undertook, because the matter it self
would not bear it, and he went upon a wrong Hypothesis, viz. That the word
Judah in this Prophecy is to be restrained to the Particular Tribe of Judah.
Whereas it is to be taken in a larger Sense, (as is most frequent in Scripture)
i. e. for the Jewish Race or People. The Scepter, the Supreme Power and
Authority, continued in the Race and Line of the Jewish People, till the Coming
of Christ. And even in those times when the Scepter, or Royal Dignity, failed
for a Season; yet the Lawgiver (if we will take it in the strictest Sense)
never failed at all; for the Jews had their own Laws and Customs. And neither
the Scepter nor Law departed wholly from the Jewish Nation in any of those
Times before mentioned: It departed not in Zedekiah, the last King of the House
of David, nor in Zorobabel, nor in the Failure of the Maccabean Family: I say,
it departed not wholly, though it is granted, that for a time, and in some part,
it was taken away. Yea, when Iehoiakim broke his Oath and Covenant, and
rebelled against the King of Babylon, the Scepter departed from Judah for a
time, as Ezekiel observes on that Event, so that Judah has no strong rod to be
a Scepter to rule, chapter 19. l. v. But when Shiloh the Messiah came, it remained
no longer, it was wholly cut off and ceased, so as not to be any more. Now was
the Determinate Time come; for that is implied in these words [ till Shiloh
come] which signify a Set Period of time.

It remains then, that I show you that This was the Time of our Savior's
Coming, and that it was the Precise Time. The Scepter, i. e. the Jewish
Government was not totally abolished till Christ our Blessed Lord came; but at
that very time when he came, i. e. when he was born, the Jewish Polity was
utterly destroyed and nulled, so as never to be recovered again. Yet this we
are to note, that the departing of the Scepter was by degrees; it began some
time before our Savior's Birth, and was in a short time completed. I say,
before Christ's coming in the Flesh the departing of the Jewish Government had
its Beginning: For it is evident from unquestionable Writers, that Antipater,
an Idumaean, was set over the Jews by Julius Caesar, and Antigonus (who was the
last of the Jewish Kings, and of Jewish Race) was deposed. Now it might be said
that the Scepter departed from Judah, viz. when a Person, not by Birth a Jew,
but a mere Alien, was forced upon them, and usurped the Jewish Government. Till
this time their Governors were always Jews, but now ever afterward all the
rest were Strangers and Gentiles. This was the first step of the Total
Departure of the Scepter, but it more signally and eminently departed quite
from that Nation, when Herod, the Son of this Antipater, was set over them: For
he, upon the Death of Caesar, hastened to Rome, and by complaining to the Roman
Senate, and by Anthony's means (whom he had bribed) was made King of Judea.
Whereupon, at his return, he endeavored to ex^i^pate all the Blood Royal, he
put to death (...) and Hircanus, the right Heirs of the Crown, he killed all of
the Tribe of Judah, and of the Family of the Asmonaei, whom he feared might
contend with him for the Kingdom, and he reigned at Jerusalem as King of Judea,
but without the Jews consent. He was a considerable time a great Scourge and
Plague to the Jews, who would by no means acknowledge a Stranger for their
King. But he, to oblige and win them, embraced their Religion, and rebuilt
their Temple; which had this Effect upon them, that at last they voluntarily
resigned the Right of the Kingdom to him, and owned him for their King, and
swore Fealty to him. This was in the two and thirtieth Year of his Reign; in
which Year likewise Christ was born. So that the Prophecy was exactly
fulfilled; when the Jewish Kingdom had changed its True Owner, and the Scepter
was actually departed from Judah, and that with the Consent of the Jews (which
never was before) then Christ came. This was in the Two and fortieth Year of
Augustus, when Cyrenius was the Prefect of Syria, Luke 2. 2. And that it may
appear that the Scepter was (...) from Judah, it is signally recorded that
Augustus taxed Judea, 1, 3, 4, Verses of that Chapter. Herod paid Tribute to
Caesar, the whole Land was subject to the Empire, and the Jews had no Dominion
of their own. Thus, till this Herod the Great's time, the Kingly Government
continued in the Tribe of Judah, and the Royal Scepter did not depart till this
Stranger reigned over them, for he was the first Jewish King of strange Blood
and Descent.

It is unreasonable to attend to what Scaliger, Casaubon.
some allege, that he was not an Alien, but one of the Israelitish Nation, and
a Jew by Birth. Which mistake they have run into because they read that Herod
was a Jew, and was circumcised; which was only to please the Jews, and to
settle himself in the Kingdom; but this proves not that he was a Jew by Birth.
The contrary appears from the best St. Ierom, Eusebius, Epiphanius, and other
Fathers.
Records: Yea, Josephus the Jew tells us expressly, that he was by his Father an
Idumean, and by his Mother an Arabian. Africanus and others derive his Pedegre
otherwise, but all make him a Foreigner and Stranger: And they all agree, that
the Jews owned him for their King, and that he was the first Stranger whom they
admitted to sway the Scepter over them, and consequently that in Him this
Divine Oracle began to be fulfilled, viz. That the Scepter should depart from
Judah. And when our Savior conversed here on Earth, this Prophecy was still
accomplished more and more: For we find that the Jewish Sanhedrim had lost
their Judicial Power of Life and Death, and in all things truckled to the Roman
Governors that were set over them. And at last, at the Destruction of
Jerusalem, their whole Power was quite Extinct, and the Scepter and Lawgiver
totally and finally departed from them. Then the Government of every sort, the
Priesthood and the Magistracy, the Making of Laws, and the Executing them, the
State and Religion, the Commonwealth and the Church, were destroyed together,
and so this Sacred Prediction was completely fulfilled. You see then that there
were Degrees of it, and therefore it is Vain and Idle to interpret this
Prophecy of a Moment of time. A punctual Designation of a certain Minute
Season is unreasonable, for the Government and Authority of the Jews decayed
gradually, till there was at length a final departing of them.

This then is the Grand thing represented in this Prophecy, that at or about
Christ's Coming, the Scepter departed from the Nation of the Jews. Which is as
much as we desire, to prove the Real Fulfilling of this Ancient Prediction, and
from thence the Truth of Christianity. For thus we argue, the Jewish Scepter
was to depart when Christ came: It is manifest and undeniable, that that
Scepter is departed; therefore Christ is come. The Overthrow of the Jewish
Polity, Magistracy and Government, is a certain Sign, Proof and Demonstration,
that our Jesus is the Christ, and that this Christ is come. It is true, there
was heretofore an Interruption of the Scepter, but the Jews returned to their
Land and Rule again: But now for above Sixteen hundred Years, there has been
no show at all of a Scepter and Kingdom; which is an undeniable Argument, that
the Scepter is quite departed. Therefore the Talmud often says, that this
Prediction refers to the Particular Case of the Jews; so that when Magistracy
ceased in Ierusal^m, and the Kingdom and Jurisdiction were cast off, they ought
presently to expect the Messiah. And those are Remarkable words of R. David
Kimchi on Hos. 3. 4, The Children of Israel shall abide many days without a
King, and without a Prince, and without a Sacrifice, etc. These (says he) are
the times of Exile in which we are at this day, we have neither a King, nor a
Prince of the Stock of Israel, but we are under the Power of the Gentiles, and
under the Power of the Kings and Princes of the Gentiles. Which is as much as
to confess, that this Prophecy which I have been commenting upon, is
accomplished, That the Scepter is departed from Judah, and that the Messiah,
who is the Blessed Jesus, the True Shiloh, (the Savior, the Peacemaker, the
Prosperer) is come.

The second Text enquired into, viz. Exodus XXVIII. 30. Thou shall put in the
Breast Plate of Judgment the Urim and the Thummim.
THis Renowned Oracle of the Jews, has employed the Thoughts and Studies of
many Learned Persons, both Jews and Christians, but the Result of their
Enquiries has been very different. For some after all their Searches have
brought in an Ignoramus: Thus R. David Kimchi expressly averreth, In libr. Radic.
It is not known to us what the Urim and Thummim are: And several other Writers
(as you shall hear afterward) speak the same despairing Language on this Theme.

Origin in Ex. 21. Hom. 9. Cy^il. Alex* de Adorat. in Spir and ^erit. l. 11.
Others seem to be Allegorical, and by the Urim and Thummim understand that
Spiritual Light and Knowledge, that Divine Truth and Wisdom, with which God
inspired the Heart or Breast of the High Priest, as aften as he wore the
Rationale on that part. But after this rate, a Man may Allegorize away half the
Bible; and then when the Literal or Historical Sense is wholly swallowed up of
the Mystical, we may give up our Reason and Religion together, and profess we
know not what either of them means. Besides, it is impertinent and ridiculous
to interpret these words of any thing that God infused into the High Priests
Heart, because they are spoken to Moses, as appears from the first Verse of the
Chapter: So that it is evident they mention not what God, but what Moses was to
do. It is He that is here commanded to put the Urim and Thummim into Aaron's
Breast Plate, and therefore it is unreasonable and absurd to understand these
words of Gods infusing Light or Wisdom into Aaron's Heart. This be sure is not
the Primary and Literal Sense, though (as I shall show in the close of this
Discourse) it may be contained in the Mystical and Highest Meaning of the Words.

I might in the next place mention (and truly it is enough barely to mention)
the wild Fancy of the Brethren of the Rosy Cross, who pretend to make and
prepare the Urim and Thummim, and therefore would persuade us that they know
very well what it is, viz. That it is an Artificial or Chemical Preparation of
Light, answerable to the Subterranean Lamps, or it is such a Splendour made by
Art, as Noah prepared for the Ark, Genesis 6. 16. for by what we translate a
Window, there is meant, say they, some Greater thing: And what is that but this
Spagyrick Splendour, the True Urim and Thummim of the World? But leaving these
Fanciful Urim and Thummim-makers, I proceed to acquaint you with the Sentiments
of the more Sober.

I. Some of these hold that the Name of God was written, and put into the
Breast Plate, and that this was the Urim and Thummim. In locum.
R. Selomoh Iarchi says expressly, that it was the Name Jehovah inserted into
the Foldings of the High Priest's Pectoral. This is also avouched by Eugubinus,
Vatablus, and P. Fagius, the last whereof has these words, In locum.
The Writing which contained the Name of God with four Letters, was called the
Urim and Thummim. And Avenarius is partly of this Opinion; for though he holds
that the Urim and Thummim are the Twelve Precious Stones shining in the
Breast Plate, yet he joins to them the Shem Hamphorash, as the Jewish Doctors
style the Name Jehovah. But for my part I cannot conceive how these Persons
came to take up this Opinion, there being no Foundation at all for this
Particular Word or Name. They might as well have assigned any other Name of
God, yea any other Word whatsoever that was reputed Sacred and Venerable.
Wherefore others take another course, and understand by the Urim and Thummim
something of a far different Nature, viz. some Curious Piece of Work, either
framed by the Hand of some Skillful Artist, or immediately wrought by God
himself, and given by him to Moses when he was on the Mount. Accordingly,

II. Some are of opinion, that the Urim and Thummim were the Precious Stones in
the High Priest's Breast Plate, those Twelve Stones on which the Names of the
Tribes were engraven. This is the received Doctrine of the Talmudists, and the
Generality of the Jewish Doctors, to whom our Learned Lightfoot, and several
other Christian Writers adhere. And they labor to prove this Assertion from
Exodus 39. 8, etc. where the making of the Breast Plate, with all its Ornaments,
is set down, and yet the Urim and Thummim are not expressly mentioned there:
Whence they conclude, that these Stones are the Urim and Thummim, and that
Moses mentioning those, did as good as mention these. These, therefore, say
they, are nothing else but those Stones. But this is confuted from this Exodus
28. where Aaron's Garments and Habiliments are most distinctly set down: Here
you read of the Breast Plate with Twelve Precious Stones, v. 15, etc. and then
in v. 30. the Urim and Thummim are mentioned by themselves, Thou shall put,
etc. Therefore These are things really different from the Stones which were
distinctly named before, and particularly described from v. 15. to 22. This I
think is very plain and convincing; and as for the place before produced, the
answer is, that the mentioning of the Urim and Thummim is omitted there, where
the Design was particularly to insist upon those Habiliments which were Rich
and Costly, and required great Art and Preparation, but the Urim and Thummim
are not of that nature, but a plain easy thing, as I shall show afterward.
The Talmudical Doctors go on, and tell us, that by the Stones shining more than
ordinarily Answer was given to what was asked by the Holy Priest. Which also is
asserted by some Late Writers, who confidently tell us, that the Stones in the
Breast Plate were called Urim, because they sent forth a light in great
abundance, and especially that a Pair of these Gemms shone forth with
extraordinary Brightness, when the Answer of God was Acceptable and Welcome;
but when it was not, they looked very Dim and Dull. But some say (and with as
much reason as the former) that the Answer was given, not by the Unusual Luster
of the Stones, but by the Letters of the Names Engraven in them, which raised
themselves higher, and stood more out, and so made up certain Words out of the
Alphabet, contained in the Names of the Twelve Tribes. When any one came to
enquire at this O^acle, the High Priest looked on the Letters which were
Engraven on the Stones of his Breast Plate, and there read what God's Pleasure
was. But this is a mere Conjecture: Besides, we are certain that Long Answers
(and such there were sometimes) could not be given in this way. Antiq. Iud. l.
3. c. 9.
Josephus affirms, that the Stones in the High Priest's Breast Plate, fore
signified what was to be by the Change of their Color. Others have other
Fancies, as Suidas quotes an Author, who averred that the Stones turned Red if
there was any Answer of War, and that they turned Black if Death was denounced,
and other Divinations and Answers were signified by other Colors: All which is
mere Surmise and Conceit: Wherefore it is needless to insist upon the Refutation
of it.

III. Others hold that the Urim and Thummim were Two Precious Stones given by
God to Moses, distinct from the Twelve Gemms or Stones before mentioned. I find
that Procopius of old inclined to this Opinion, and among the Moderns Arias
Montanus asserts it. But because they merely assert it, and assign no reason or
ground of it (as indeed it is impossible they should) I will take no farther
notice of it, but pass to the next Opinion.

IV. Others will have the Urim and Thummim to be a sort of Small Images
belonging to the Breast Plate. But there is a Disagreement among those that are
of this Opinion, for some hold that the Urim and Thummim are one and the same
thing, others that they are two different things.

Those that hold the Urim and Thummim were the Same thing, tell us, That they
were two Little Images finely wrought, which the High Priest wore within the
Fouldings of his Pectoral, and by these God gave Answer when there was
occasion. This is the Opinion of Christopherus a Castr^, who adds also, That
they are the same with the Teraphim, which were Statues, Figures, or Images
used in Divining: The Talisman were of the like nature. So De Dis Sir. Syntag.
1.
Mr. Seldom thinks, and adds, That the Teraphim, among the Idolaters,
answered to the Urim and Thummim among the Jews. The Learned Mr. Gregory agrees
with him, and says likewise, That the Teraphim were Puppets made of Wax in
shape of a Man, and that they were framed under a certain Constellation, and
thence had power to foretell future things. But in another place he says, They
were the Heads of Firstborn Males cut off, and Magically ordered, and then
being Consulted, they spoke.

There are others, who assert that the Urim and Thummim were things of
Different Natures. To such I would propound that passage in Numb. 27. 21.
Eleazar the Priest shall ask Counsel for him (i. e. Joshua) after the Judgment
of Urim before the Lord. Here is no mention of Thummim, but Urim alone is put
for both, or rather it is implied, that they are the same. So we read in 1 Samuel
28. 6. That when Saul enquired of the Lord, he answered him not, neither by
Dreams, nor by Urim, nor by Prophets: Whence it seems to be evident, that Urim
includes the Thummim, and consequently the difference which some Persons make
between them is taken away; they are the same Oracle, though not the same
Words. Mr. Mede seems to be of another Opinion, and makes them two Distinct
Oracles: By Urim (says he) the Jews were ascertained of the Council and Will
of God, by Thummim of his Favor and Good Acceptance. The Learned Dr. Spencer
likewise has in a whole Treatise attempted to prove, that the Urim is a quite
different thing from the Thummim, and that it was to another end and purpose.
As to his Notion concerning the Urim, it is the same in the main, with that of
Christopherus a Castro, but he with Great Wit and Extraordinary Learning has
embellished and improved it. The Urim, says he, was one or two, or more Little
Images, or Hollow Instruments which the High Priest had in the Foldings of his
Breast Plate. They were the same with Teraphim, often mentioned in the Old
Testament. And Teraphim, by an usual change of S into T is for Seraphim, which
Hebrew word signifies Urentes: So that Urim and Teraphim agree in the Name, for
Urim properly signifies Ignes. Now Seraphim is a word in the Old Testament to
signify Angels, Isa. 6. 6. it was the first and antientest Name for those
Glorious Messengers of Heaven. And they often appearing in the first Ages of
the World, and God holding Correspondence with Mankind by them, it was grown
into a Custom to make Little Images and Representations of them in Wax; and at
last the Images were called by their Names; as the Images of Angels in the Holy
of Holies were called Cherubim, so the Images of Angels which the High Priest
had in his Rationale were called Seraphim or Teraphim, and Urim. This Oracle
was from the High Priest's Breast, as the Oracle in the Temple was from the
Ark, and from between the Cherubims, which were of the same Nature. In short,
the Urim were of Pagan Extraction, they being the same with the Teraphim, which
are taken in Scripture in a good and a bad Sense, for they might be used
lawfully or unlawfully, Devils and Impure Spirits might give answer by these as
well as Good Spirits. The Teraphim then, which were a piece of Gentile
Superstition at first, were by Gods leave tolerated among the Jews, because of
the Hardness of their Hearts, and to comply with their obstinate Temper.
Accordingly God ordered those to be placed within the doubling of the High
Priest's Breast Plate, and thence he gave answers by them. This is the Learned
Doctor's Notion of the Urim, and he quotes Philo the Jew and Aben Ezra as the
Patrons of it.

But I presume to offer one thing against this Excellent Person's Opinion, and
more particularly against the Foundation of it, which is this, that the word
Teraphim is of a middle Signification in Scripture and is taken sometimes in a
good, and other times in a bad Sense; sometimes for Cherubims and other Lawful
Representations, and at other times for Unlawful Images and Idols. This I
conceive is a mistake, for I find that the word Teraphim is always to be
understood in the latter Sense. Thus Laban had these Teraphim, Genesis 31. 19.
which the generality of Learned Expositors interpret concerning Magical and
Telesmatical Images, by which it was usual among the Gentiles to foresee and
foretell future Events. Therefore Rachel took them from her Father, that he
might not, by consulting them, know which way she traveled: Or, it may be she
retained something of his Superstition, and took these Tutelar Gods with her to
direct her in her Journey. So we read that Micah had got him a House of Gods
and a Teraphim, Judge. 17. 5. but whether these were Lawful Implements, and
becoming True Worshippers, you may gather from the next Verse, In those days
there was no King in Israel, but every Man did that which was right in his own
eye. And even when the Israelites had a King, and a more composed Government,
this corrupt Practice was not soon worn off, for Michal, David's Wife, kept
this piece of Idolatry in her House, to consult with upon occasion, 1 Samuel 19.
13. But when a Reformation was set on foot in good earnest, these Idolatrous
Images immediately vanished: Thus we read that when King Josiah reformed
Israel, he put away from among them the workers with familiar Spirits, and the
Wizards, and the Images (or Teraphim, as it is in the Original) and the Idols,
and all the Abominations that were spied in the land. I think it will not be
questioned whether Teraphim are to be taken here in a bad Sense. And that these
were noted Instruments of Idolatry is clear from Ezekiel. 21. 21. where we read
that the King of Babylon being about to use Divination consulted with the
Teraphim, which shows plainly what they were. But it may be objected that the
Ephod and Teraphim go together, as in the forenamed place, Judge. 17. 5. where
it is said Micah made an Ephod and a Teraphim: And in Hos. 3. 4. it is
prophesied that the Israelites should be without an Ephod and a Teraphim,
whence some infer that the former being a thing Lawful, the latter is so too;
the Ephod belonged to the True Worshippers, therefore the Teraphim did. I
answer first, it may be both of these were Unlawful and Idolatrous, for it was
the Custom of False Worshippers to imitate the True ones in some things: And
because God appointed his Priests an Ephod, they likewise aped that Holy
Garment, and had a certain Vestment not unlike to it, which they used in their
Idolatrous Services. This went along with their Teraphim which was a Device of
their own, and had no reference (that we know of) to any thing made use of by
Gods People. If we consult Judges 8. 27, we shall see a proof of this: Ephod is
not here meant of a Holy Garment, but of Gideon's Idolatrous Vestment, in
imitation of the High Priest's Ephod. So in Judge. 18. 14. an Ephod and Teraphim
are joined together as things of the same Quality and Kind, i. e. as
Idolatrous, yea and thrice more they are mentioned together, viz. in v. 17, 18,
20. In all which places you may observe, that either molten or graven Images
are joined with them, to convince us yet farther of what nature they are.

Or Secondly, Suppose that by Ephod in the latter place, viz. in Hosea, be
meant a Lawful Garment, even the same which the High Priest wore by Gods
Appointment, yet it does not follow from this that the other thing mentioned
with it, viz. the Teraphim was lawful. For in these words of Hosea this double
thing is foretold, namely, That the time will come when God will take away from
the Jews, not only the True Worship but the Idolatrous one, which used to be so
delightful to them. The Prophet tells them, That they shall not only be without
an Ephod, i. e. The Mosaic Priesthood and Service, but they shall be without
an Image, i. e. a Standing Image or Statue (as the word signifies) such as the
Golden Calf, or the Calves in Dan and Bethel, and that they shall be without
Teraphim, i. e. Images for Divination: They shall be debarred the Profane and
Idolatrous way of Worshipping, which was so dear to them. And this is the very
case of that People at this day, they neither worship the True God after the
Mosaic Appointment (for they are out of a Capacity of doing it in their
present Circumstances) nor do they serve Idols and fall down to Images. They
have no Ephod, and they have no Teraphim, they are without the Mosaic Worship,
and also without the Idolatrous and Superstitious Rites to which they were
heretofore accustomed, and in which they took so great delight. This seems to
be the plain and obvious Sense of the Words, and any Man may see how directly
it Confronts the Learned Doctor's Opinion.

I might add, that it is improbable God would make use of the Teraphim (which
are the same with the Urim according to this Worthy Person) as a Divine Oracle,
seeing they are originally Superstitious and Idolatrous things, and no other
than the common Instruments of Divination among the Pagans. I know this Learned
Author salves the Improbability of this, by adding that this was done wholly in
Compliance with the peevish and hard-hearted Jews, who were to be humoured and
pleased at that time. But I crave leave to dissent from this Learned Man here,
because I question whether it was worthy of God to indulge the Israelites in
these Heathen Superstitions. I refer the Reader to Arguments of another sort in
a very Dr. Pocock Comment. on Hos. 3. 4.
Learned Writer, who has largely confuted this mistake of the Teraphim being
the same with the Urim.

I pass now to this Reverend Author's Notion of Thummim, which he holds to be a
thing really different from the Urim. He has this particular and singular
Apprehension of it, that as Urim was fetched from Serapis an Egyptian Image, so
Thummim is of the like Original, for it was an Image made of Precious Stones,
which the High Priests of Egypt wore about their Necks, having (...) written on
it, and therefore it was called Truth, as Diodorus Siculus, Aelian, and others
relate. Accordingly the Jewish Thummim is styled Truth by the Septuagint.
Against which most ingenious and plausible Conjecture, which the Author of it
has adorned with infinite Reading and Criticism, I make bold to offer a few
things, begging first his pardon for daring to shake so admirably contrived a
Notion. And truly I am apt to think my self already absolved by a Person of
that famed Ingenuity and Candor, who as he has thought fit to depart from
other Writers on this Subject, and has worthily established a Sentiment of his
own, so he will forgive the Freedom of this Critical Essay which ventures to
dissent from that so Celebrated Hypothesis of his. Briefly then, whereas he
parallels the Thummim with the Egyptian Ornament, because, like that, it hung
down by a Golden Chain, I humbly conceive that Text which is alleged in favor
of it, is no positive Proof, viz. Exodus 28. 22, etc. for though it appears
thence that the Breast Plate of the Jewish High Priest was fastened to the
Shoulder-pieces of the Ephod by Chains and Rings of Gold, yet there is not a
word of the Thummim being fastened to or hanging by any thing; but it is only
said in that Chapter that Moses shall put in the Breast Plate the Thummim. And
this likewise I offer from these express words, if the Thummim was put in the
Breast Plate, and lapt up within it, how could it be a Pendent Image, and how
could it be seen hanging without? Then besides, if this Image or Jewel called
Thummim hung dangling on the High Priest's Breast, it could not but cover (in
part at least) the Rich Gemms in the Rationale, and hinder them and their
Curious Engravings from being seen. I only modestly query whether this be
allowable. And this too is to be thought of, that if the Thummim hung down by a
Chain, there is the same reason to assert that the Urim did so too, for the
Text speaks of both alike, and so the Images which were supposed to be shut up
in the warm Folding of the Pectoral must be taken out, and exposed to the Air,
and both they and the Egyptian Image must hang together on the High Priest's
Breast.

Lastly, If this Excellent Writer will give me leave to utter my thoughts
freely, This is another reason why I dissent from him, viz. because his
Assertion concerning the Thummim (as well as the Urim) supposes that God
himself imitated the Idolatrous Nations; for the most Sacred Thummim, according
to him, was borrowed from the Egyptians, and particularly from their Priests;
which to me seems to be not only unworthy of the Divine Majesty, but of his
High Priest, and of the Religion instituted by him. Therefore the Admirable
Grotius declares that it is most likely that the Egyptians in this (as in other
things) imitated the Jews. And the Learned Isaac Vossius acknowledges that the
Egyptians took this Ornament and the Name of it from the Hebrews, as they did
many other things. And he adds that the Egyptians consulted this Precious Stone
of the High Priest as an Oracle, wherein also they emulated the Hebrews. But
the contrary, viz. That the Jews, nay that God himself, and in a Matter so
Solemn and Sacred, followed the Example of the Idolatrous Egyptians seems to me
very improbable. We read in the Infallible History, that the Israelites
borrowed of the Egyptians Jewels of Silver and Gold, and Raiment; but that the
High Priest of Israel borrowed his Pontifical and particularly his Oracular
Habit from them I find no where attested: But I read that God strictly forbad
the Jews to use the Rites of the Pagan Nations, and to follow their Customs,
After the doings of the Land of Egypt, wherein ye dwelt, shall ye not do: And
after the doings of the Land of Canaan, whither I bring you, ye shall not do,
neither shall ye walk in their Ordinances, Lev. 18. 3. And it is the Confession
of one of the most Understanding Rabbis, even that Moses of whom the Jews say,
that from Moses the Great Lawgiver to this Moses there never was such another
of that Name: (I say) it is his Confession and Acknowledgment, That the Jewish
Rites prescribed that People by God were not in imitation of the Pagan Rites,
but were in absolute opposition to them. Thus the Famous Rambam, who was
celebrated for his profound Skill in the Jewish Laws and Constitutions. This is
all that I have at present to offer in way of Exception to the Learned Doctor's
Opinion. But though I cannot yield to be his Proselyte in this Point, yet I
deny not that Others of great Sagacity and Judgment may see farther into and
acquiesce in so Noble a Discovery: And as for my own part, I acknowledge most
frankly that I pay a great Veneration to this Excellent Person, who has with
so great an Amassement of Learning and Variety of Reading, framed so Delicate a
Notion. I admire the Incomparable Artificer, though I cannot altogether
subscribe to his Work.

You see what have been the Different Opinions of Writers concerning the Urim
and Thummim: I will now after all propound that which I conceive is more
eligible than any of those already named. The High Priest, the Chief Minister
of the Jewish Church, had eight distinct Garments wherewith he was adorned,
whence he was called the Priest (...)
of many Garments, to distinguish him from the other Priests. But of all these
Vestments the Ephod was the most considerable, and was worn over all the rest:
This had a hole or opening in the forepart of it, where was fastened a piece of
Cloth of the same work with the Ephod, very richly embroidered and mixed with
Gold. This Cloth being doubled was Apiece; it was a Span in length, and of
the same Dimension in breadth, Exodus 28. 15, etc. This Quadrangular Piece is
called the High Priests Pectoral or Breast Plate, and it was set with four Rows
of Precious Stones, three in a Row, i. e. twelve Stones in all; and on each of
these Stones was engraved one of the Names of the Sons of Israel, from whom the
Twelve Tribes took their Denominations. And this Square Breast Plate, this Rich
Stomacher of the High Priest was Famous not only for these Precious Stones and
the Ingravings on them, but also for the Urim and Thummim which were placed
here also. Now (to come to the matter) these were no such Fine and Rare things
as some talk of: Nay, let me add, they were no Things at all, but only Words. I
take them to be no other than these two bare words (...) and (...) written or
engraven upon the Breast plate. After all the various Sentiments, Disputes,
Opinions and Conjectures about this so Famous and so much Controverted Oracle,
I apprehend this to be the short, plain and easy account of it. It was only
these two Hebrew Dissyllables URIM and THUMMIM (of great Significancy and
Importance, as you shall hear afterward) placed upon the High Priests
Pectoral. This was all. And that this Account of the Urim and Thummim is as
Probable and Reasonable as it is Plain, I will make appear from these following
Particulars.

1. There was no room for a pair of Images or more in the Breast Plate, for it
was but a Span in length and breadth, so that you cannot conveniently lodge
these little Flying Seraphims in so narrow a compass, you will endanger their
Wings, or hurt some of their Tender Members by trussing them up in so
Contracted a Room. Besides, we must remember, that according to the foresaid
Opinion the Urim were Images of Wax: Now, it was not safe to lodge these little
Waxen Tools in that Close Folding next the warm and zealous Breast of the
Priest; for by this means there might be danger of dissolving these Little
Cherubims. But this is prevented by our Assertion that the Urim and Thummim
were not Things but Words.

2. The Terms whereby it is expressed in Scripture will bear this
Interpretation very well; for concerning the Urim and Thummim it is said, Thou
shall put them in the Breast Plate; or according to the Version of the Seventy,
(...).
Thou shall put them upon it. And when Moses had clothed Aaron with the Ephod
and Breast Plate, it is said he (...).
put upon the Rationale or Breast Plate the Urim and Thummim, Lev. 8. 8. Now
this without the least Straining may signify to us the Writing of these words
Urim and Thummim upon the Breast Plate. It is a general Term, and so may
include that Particular way and manner of Putting those words upon the
Pectoral, viz by Writing or Ingraving them. Nay, if we go to the Original, we
shall find that that is as fair for us, for Thou shall give in the
Breast Plate, etc. (which is the Exact Version according to the Hebrew) may as
well be understood of Writing as any other way. Nay, you may observe that the
word giving is used with reference to Writing, in Esther 3. 14. The Copy of the
Writing for a Commandment to be given is as much this, Summa Epistolarum h^c
fuit. Vulg. Lat.
The Sum of the Writing was, that there should be written such a Command or
Decree. Given is of the same import here with written, or engrossed. Another
place I will produce, to confirm this Notion which I offer, viz. Ier. 31. 33. I
will put (or according to the Hebrew) I will give my Law in their inward parts,
and write it in their Heart: Where you see Nathan and Katab are the same: I
will give or put, and I will write, are Synonimous Terms; and so in the Greek
of the Seventy, and the Heb. 8. 10. 10. 16.
New Testament (where this place of Jeremiah is quoted) (...) answers to (...)
and (...). Thus you see that according to the Idiom of the Holy Language
putting or giving is understood and interpreted of Writing. To farther this
Notion, I could add, that Giving has the same Acception in other Tongues, as
in the Greek (besides what has been said already) (...) is equivalent to
Scribere according to that of Demosthenes, (...), to prefer a Bill or Writing
against one. And in the Latin it is well known that dare literas is meant of
writing Epistles or Letters: And in our own Language dated or given is the same
with written. However, it is certain that the Hebrew word Nathan is of a very
large Extent in Scripture, and is no less applicable to Writing than to many
other things. Thus in the Text, Thou shall give in the Breast Plate the Urim
and Thummim, may well be rendered, Thou shall write them in the Breast Plate,
this being one way of giving; for in Writing there is something put or given
into the Writing-Table, Paper, or Book, or whatever else the Writing is in.

3. We read that This very thing was done in the Pontifical Habiliments:
Certain Words were Written or Put upon some part of the Holy Garments, Exodus
28. 36, Thou shall make a plate of pure Gold, and grave upon it HOLINESS TO THE
LORD. Observe here, These words HOLINESS TO THE LORD were writ on a Plate, and
put on Aaron's Forehead. Why then might not these words URIM and THUMMIM be
written on something, and put in the Breast Plate of Aaron? One Writing is a
Pattern of the other; the words URIM and THUMMIM in the Breast Plate answered
to Those HOLINESS TO THE LORD in the Head-plate or Mitre. And though they are
not said to be Graven, yet it is said they were Put upon, which is a large
term, and comprehends the other.

4. We have a Parallel place in Zach. 14. 20, In that day shall there be upon
the Bells of the Horses HOLINESS UNTO THE LORD. The Prophet here speaks of the
Glorious days of the Gospel, when True Holiness (which was shadowed forth by
the Mosaic Purifications and Cleansings) shall take place in the Church, when
Men shall universally turn to God, and dedicate themselves wholly to Him and
his Service. True Sanctity shall then be the Ornament and Luster of their
Lives: Yea, their very secular and inferior Employments shall be devoted and
made Serviceable to Holiness. In that day shall there be upon the Bells or the
Bridles (so the Hebrew word signifies likewise) of the very Horse, Holiness
unto the Lord: Instead of their Curious Harness and Trappings, there shall as
it were be written or Engraven upon them these words, Holiness unto the Lord,
the very words which were commanded to be written in the Front of the High
Priest's Mitre. This shall be their Ornament and Bravery. I do not think (nor
does any Man else, I suppose) that these words shall be really written on the
Horses Bells or Bridles, but I allege this place for this, that it is spoken
and expressed as if such words were written, because they were so in effect.
The manner of expressing the thing is that which I observe here as pertinent to
our purpose. Mark! It is not said there shall be written or engraven, but there
shall be upon the Bells of the Horses: And it is not said there shall be these
words, but plainly and simply there shall be Holiness to the Lord. So here it
is not said, thou shall write, but thou shall put; and it is not said, thou
shall put these words, but thou shall put the Urim and Thummim. Yet as in the
former place Writing and Ingraving is understood, so it is here: These
Individual Words Urim and Thummim are to be written or Engraven on the High
Priests Breast Plate as the words Kodesh Laihovah (i. e. Holiness to the Lord)
were to be seen in effect written or engraven on the Trappings of the Horses.

5. There is another place of Scripture to illustrate this, and to let us see
that it is probable the words Urim and Thummim were to be Written, though it is
not said so in express terms. The King of Babylon stood at the parting of the
way to use Divination, he consulted with Teraphim. Hebr.
Images; at his right hand was the Divination for Jerusalem, Ezekiel. 21. 21, 22.
The Preposition [for] is not in the Hebrew Text, but only Jerusalem; for here
is described the Pagan way of Di^ination, and particularly how the King of
Babylon undertook by his Heathen Art to predestine the Slaughter and
Destruction of Jerusalem; namely, as Haman cast Lots in his Divining way, to
know what days were fittest and best for the Slaughter of the Jews. He
commanded Pur (i. e. the Lot) to be cast from day to day, Esther 3. 7. This
sort of Divining Lottery is used here by the King of Babylon, who had a Scheme
before him (as was the Custom in these cases) of what he intended to enquire
about, and accordingly in his right hand was the Divination Jerusalem (so it is
in the Hebrew) i. e. Jerusalem was the Word which was written on that part of
the Lots. The meaning then is, that the Magical Divination or Lottery went
clearly against Jerusalem, that City was to be destroyed. This is the short way
of Scripture Expression, At his right hand was the Divination, Jerusalem, which
more largely should have been expressed thus, At his right hand was the
Divination which respected Jerusalem, and to distinguish it from the rest, the
word [Jerusalem] was written upon it. So here, the like Abbreviating style is
used, Thou shall put the Urim and Thummim in the Breast Plate, i. e. Thou shall
distinctly write down these two words Urim and Thummim, and then place them
conveniently in that part of the Ephod.

6. Let this be considered, That the Inspired Penman of the Book of Exodus, is
very Exact and Particular about all the Habiliments and Ornaments of the High
Priest, in the 28th Chapter. How Punctual is he about the two Great Onyx stones
on the Shoulders of the Ephod, from the ninth to the thirteenth Verse? And the
setting of the twelve Precious Stones in the Breast Plate is precisely
described from the seventeenth to the thir^ieth Verse. But when he comes to
speak of the Urim and Thummim, he uses no Description at all, but only mentions
the Bare Names Urim and Thummim; whence any Observing Man may perceive that
these were some Easy and Plain thing, which needed no Explaining and
Enlarging. If it were not so, we should have the manner of the putting of the
Urim and Thummim into the Rationale, particularly set down, as you see other
things in that Chapter are punctually described. He that has any Ingenuity
must needs acknowledge that this makes exceedingly for my Assertion.

Let me add this, That you read not of any Directions for preparing the Urim
and Thummim, which is another Argument that they were mere Names or Words, that
they were something Written only. If they had been to be made with Art, viz. by
Ingraving or Carving, or some other way (as Authors have supposed) we should
have had the Materials and the Manner of it set down, at least in the general,
as we read of the Manner of preparing several things belonging to the
Tabernacle and the Mosaic Worship. But we read of no such thing relating to
the Urim and Thummim: There is no more said than barely this, Thou shall put
them in the Breast Plate. What reason then is there to fancy any other thing
than the mere Writing of them?

8. I offer this to be considered, That Josephus has not a word of Urim and
Thummim, though he has a whole Chapter (viz. The Eighth in his Third Book of
Antiquities) of the Priests and High Priests Garments. His business was in this
place to describe the Pontifical and Sacerdotal Ornaments, and therefore if
this had been any Great and Considerable thing, he would not have passed i^* by
in silence, especially throughout a whole Chapter, which is one of the longest
he has in the Book. Nay afterward, when in the next Chapter he falls upon
mentioning a certain Miracle of the Stones on the High Priest's Breast; he
says not a Syllable of this Matter, but only relates how Answer was given (as
he thought) by the extraordinary shining of those Stones. Nay further, this
Author had a fair Opportunity again to mention the Urim and Thummim if they had
been any Notable thing, for in his sixth Book of the Jewish War, chap. 6. he
particularly and distinctly enumerates all the Garments of the High Priest, and
more especially the Rich Gemms in his Breast Plate; but he says nothing at all
of Urim and Thummim, yea he does not so much as name them. Whence it is to be
presumed that these were rather Words than Things, i. e. That they were these
two words written, and nothing else. If the Urim and Thummim had been some
Great and Wondrous thing, or if they had been like any of those things which
have been presented to us before, this Excellent Man as a Faithful Historian
would not have omitted it, and as he was a Jew would not have passed it by for
the Glory of the Nation, and much more as a Priest he would not have done it
for the Honor of his Order.

9. From the Learned Dr. Spencer's Notion of Thummim I may confirm my own,
though a contrary one. He maintains that the Jewish Thummim was borrowed from
the Egyptian High Priest who had a rich Sapphire hanging by a Golden Chain at
his Breast, and because the word Truth was Engraven on it, therefore the Image
it self was called Truth. This gives a fair hint of what I assert, that the
Thummim (as well as the Urim) was something written, especially if we invert
what that Worthy Person says, and with Mr. Seldom and others hold, That the
Egyptians borrowed this Ornament from the Jews. Hence we may learn the true
Nature and Quality of it* for their imitating the Jews in this matter acquaints
us that the Thummim was only a written or ingraved word: This usage of the
Egyptian High Priest, viz. of wearing a Jewel at his Breast, in which (...) was
written, shows plainly that the Jewish High Priest (from whom this usage was
taken) wore in the same place something written or engraven. And this was the
Hebrew word Thummim (together with the other word Urim) which was thought to
signify Truth, and accordingly the Seventy Interpreters render it (...). Thus
we may partly gather what the Nature of the Thummim among the Jews was, from
the Egyptian imitation of it. Their having the word Truth written and made use
of by their Chief Minister of Religion, lets us know that it was but a Copy of
the Hebrew Original, and that the Thummim was no other than that very word
inscribed in the Breast Plate.

10. The probability of this Opinion is confirmed from what was said in the
entrance into this Discourse, viz. That several of the most Learned and
Inquisitive Writers have professed their Ignorance as to the matter which is
before us. This seems to me to be no contemptible Consideration, but to be
something toward a proof of what I assert. Besides R. Kimchi before mentioned,
there are other Hebrew Doctors that declare they cannot tell what the Urim and
Thummim are. In locum.
Aben Ezra is of this mind, and so is R. Abraham Seba, and if I had leisure to
search into Writers upon this Subject, I might produce others among the
Circumcised Doctors. These are followed by many of the Christian Profession, as
Cardinal Cajetan, a Man of great Search and Curiosity, who ingenuously
professes he knows nothing of the Urim and Thummim. Quales fuerint
resneminimortaliu^^ constat. In Ex. 28. 30.
Munster acknowledges the same, and so does Exercitat. cap. 2.
Buxtorf, and a Dr. Gellon Lev. 8. 8.
Learned Man of our own has these words, To define what the Urim and Thummim
were is none of my business, nor indeed dare I attempt that which has puzzled
all the Learned Men in the W^rld. This makes for my Opinion, for it is plain
that these Learned Writers were not able to make any Considerable Matter of the
Urim and Thummim. If they could, it is certain they would have told us of it;
If These had been any Great Thing, they would not have been silent, but would
have laid it open before us. But in the mean time they overlooked that which
was Plain and Obvious, they would not take notice of that which was a mere
Writing, and no more, as it is most probable these Urim and Thummim were. These
very Words were written, and put upon or into the Breast Plate, and that was
all, if I mistake not.

11. That they were something written has been a Notion not unacceptable to
some Understanding Men, both Jews and Christians, as you have already heard:
And particularly they thought the Tetragrammaton was the Name that was written;
but there is no reason given why that Name should be called the Urim and
Thummim. However, thus far I will make use of it, to let you see it was not
thought Improbable and Unreasonable, that some Writing was here meant;
otherwise they would not have talked of the Tetragrammaton. This is a good
Foundation for my Hypothesis, which I conceive I have built upon with Probable
Arguments already, and am proceeding to add more.

12. That passage of Cyril Bishop of Alexandria is very remarkable, who
speaking of the Urim and Thummim mentioned by Moses, has these words, (...).
11. de Adorat. (...) Spir. and verit.
He (i. e. Moses) has not plainly showed whether they were Stones, or whether
he commanded that Inscription to be made as it were in a small Table. Again he
says, (...). Ibid.
Whether they were Stones, or whether those Words were written down as it were
in a Golden Table, I will not be too Curious in enquiring after. You see the
Learned Father was inclinable to believe that the Vrim and Thummim were only
those two words written in some small Table, and so deposited within the Breast
plate. And the words of this Pious Writer are the more Considerable, because he
is wont to be very Sagacious in finding out of Mysteries in the Holy Bible, and
if he had thought the Vrim and Thummim had been any Mystical and Wonderful
thing, he would certainly have enlarged upon it; whereas you see he is not
averse to the Assertion I am maintaining, that These Bare Words were committed
to Writing, and lodged in the Square-piece of the Ephod (when there was
occasion to consult them as an Oracle; otherwise they were not put into it) and
that is all.

13. This Opinion was hinted of old by Quaest. 117 in Exodus
St. Augustine; it was obscurely glanced at by In Isai.
Procopius, and by De vita Mos. l. 3.
Philo the Jew; and I find that others of late, as Salianus, Bellarmine, Hay,
somewhat incline this way, though they are loath to speak out. But ^ornelius a
Lapide seems to be the most positive, though he says very little in defense of
the Opinion. He in a manner stands alone in this Cause, and that without
Supporters: Wherefore I have in this Discourse endeavored to hold him up, of
the Success of which, let the Reader judge.

Lastly, This Opinion may justly merit our Reception upon this account, That
hereby are avoided all the Inconveniences, Absurdities, Incongruities,
Inconsistencies, which accompany some of the Opinions which I have named, and
which are commonly received.

Now, if it be said that the Hebrew Doctors and Talmudists are the best Judges
in this Controversy, and that they maintain quite another thing, the Answer is
ready, viz. That some of them maintain nothing at all in this matter (as you
have heard) but proclaim their Ignorance concerning it: And as for the rest, we
have no reason to look upon them as Able Judges in this Affair, for any one
that has conversed with the Rabbis, knows full well that they are the most
Fanciful Creatures in Nature. Though as to some peculiar things they may be
profitably consulted, yet in most they are very Deceitful, and betray Men to
gross Errors and Falsehoods. Maimonides was the only Man among the Jewish
Rabbis that began to leave off trif^ng and playing the Fool, says a Seldom de
Dis Sir. Syntag. 2.
Great Admirer of Jewish Learning, and Scaliger and Causabon
others had said it before him. It is certain that the Generality of this Tribe
are the most Fabulous, Conceited and Superstitious Writers under Heaven. Their
way is to invent and feign, and to impose upon the World: And besides, they
monstrously affect Obscurities, and dote on Mysteries, and indeed care not for
any thing that is Plain: So that their Opinion is not to be relied upon.

If any shall blast the former Assertion as Novel, it must be remembered that
Antiquity is not always a Badge of Truth. Besides, you may perceive by what I
have said, that some of the Ancients, both Christians and Jews, were in a fair
way to receive this Opinion; but the commonly received Notion did so biass
them, that they became averse to the espousing of This which is more Probable
and Accountable. Interpreters and Commentators on this place have been always
busy to discover some Great and Wonderful things in these words, they (as was
suggested before) looked for some Strange and Mysterious Matter here, and that
made them pass by this Plain and Ordinary thing, viz. That these bare words
Vrim and Thummim were written and deposited in the Breastplate, which is a true
account of the thing, though there were no Antiquity to vouch it.

Now, if you ask how these words Vrim and Thummim were witten, whether upon two
Precious Stones distinct from the Twelve, or on a little Table of thin Gold, or
some other matter, and whether they were placed in the middle or sides of the
Rationale, I declare I have nothing to say to these Queries, I pretend not to
decide them. It is sufficient that there was room enough for them in that
place. And if you ask how the Answers were made by these written Words, how
Affirmative or Negative Responses were given by them, I am not Solicitous to
resolve you. The Learned Dr. Spencer has not told you how the Little Images
gave Answer, or how the Greater Pendant-Image did its work: As to the Manner of
the Responses he leaves it Uncertain. And I may be excused if I undertake not
to acquaint you, How by these Written Words God gave Answer to those who asked
Counsel of him. We are sure He did give Answer by them, and let that suffice.

But I have not done yet; I am now to show you what These Hebrew Words Vrim and
Thummim signify; and here we shall find something worthy of our Remark. The
Chaldee Paraphrase and the Samaritan retain These Original Words; so do Iunius
and Tremellius, the French Bible, and our Last English Translation. The Syriac
Verson renders them Lucid and Perfect, the Arabic Dilucidations and
Certitudes, the Septuagint (...).
Manifestation and Truth, St. Ierom and the Vulgar Latin Doctrine and Truth,
Castellio Clearness and Integrity, Coverdale Light and Perfectness. The Syriac
Version and these two last give us the Trust Meaning of the words Urim and
Thummim; but the Most Exact rendering of all is that of Pagnine, Illuminations
and Perfections, for the Hebrew words are in the Plural Number. First, The
proper Signification of from (...) illuxit.
Vrim is Lights or Illuminations. Now Light is in the Sacred Scripture put for
Knowledge, and therefore God is called the Father of Lights, because Reason and
Understanding, and the Product of these Knowledge (as well as other good and
Perfect Gifts) come down from Him. The Soul is illuminated with Divine
Knowledge, the Will of God is taught and manifested by this, and so this is
reconcilable both with the Septuagint and Vulgar Version, [Manifestation and
Doctrin] for this Light manifests and teaches. Secondly, The most proper and
genuine rendering of Thummim (being in the Plural also) is Perfections or
Integrities; for both these meet in one, and are denoted by that Original Word,
as the Greek word (...) signifies both Perfect and Upright. This is the True
account of the Hebrew words Vrim and Thummim.

Now let us see what these relate to: It is certain that there is a Spiritual
Meaning in most of the Mosaical Appointments and Rites. Is there not Reason
then to think that These Words which were commanded to be put into the High
Priests Breast Plate, that these Sacred Characters which were written at first
with Gods own hand (it is probable) as the Moral Law was, represent unto us
something that is Spiritual and Mystical? First then, These relate to the High
Priest and the Holy Function of the Ministry. Those who are appointed to this
Office are the Lights of the World: And they must be (as it was said of John
the Baptist) Burning and Shining (...) vel (...) uro, luceo.
Lights. They must with Zeal Inform and Instruct the People, they must
Enlighten, and at the same time Warm Men's Minds. And the Thummim must be the
individual Companion of Vrim, i. e. They must be Men of Integrity and
Vprightness, Faithfulness and Sincerity, which are also called Truth, and so
the Translation of the Seventy is very Agreeable, who render Thummim Truth. The
short is, That those who are employed in the Sacred Ministry, must speak as the
Oracles of God, 1 Pet. 4. 11. They must deliver Gods Word Plainly, Impartially,
Faithfully, Truly, and they must add Integrity of Life and Manners, which make
them in some measure Perfect. Secondly, These words relate to the Law of God,
which is so often called a Light. Thy word (says the Psalmist) is a Lamp to my
feet, and a Light unto my path, Psalm. 119. 105. The Commandment is a Lamp, and
the Law is Light, says Solomon, Prove. 6. 23. Therefore it is said, The
Commandment of the Lord enlightens the Eyes, Psalm. 19. 8. And in Psalm. 119.
130. It gives Light. The same Inspired Person tells us, That the Law of the
Lord is Perfect, Psalm. 19. 7. And it is This Divine Law which the Psalmist
calls the Truth, Psalm. 119. 142. So that you see the Urim and Thummim may
relate to This. Yea, as they refer to this Law or Will of God, the Revelation
of it may be signified by Light, and the Effecting and Accomplishing of it may
be signified by Perfection. Thirdly, They have respect to a Higher Matter, they
represent and set forth Christ Jesus our High Priest. He is the True Light
which lights every Man that comes into the World, John 1. 9. and therefore
he calls himself The Light of the World, John 8. 12. When this arose the
Shadows fled away, Darkness and Night vanished, and all became Clear and
Bright. This Sacred Oracle, which was represented by That in Aaron's Pectoral,
did not speak Ambiguously, but Plainly and Distinctly, we are by it taught what
we must believe, and what we must do. He is Truth it self as well as Light; he
is of such Faithfulness and Integrity that he will not deceive us. In this
Infallible Oracle Doctrine and Truth, Light and Integrity, Illumination and
Perfection meet together. The Jewish Vrim and Thummim were lost at the
Captivity of Babylon, and wanting at the Peoples Return, Ezra 2. 63. neither do
we find that God answered by them any more. But Christ, the Word, is a
Never^failing Oracle, and shall endure for ever. In him dwells all the
fullness of the Godhead bodily: And we also are complete in him who is the
head, Col. 2. 9, 10. Thus the Vrim and Thummim were a Type of our Lord Jesus
Christ the Great High Priest, who is truly our Light and our Perfection.

You see then how Significant these Two Words are, and by consequence how
worthy they were to be written by the Finger of God himself, and placed on the
High Priest's Heart. It was impossible to couch more in two single words than
you see is here comprehended. Whence we may conclude, That the Writing or
Ingraving of these was all that Moses here meant, and consequently that those
Writers have mistaken the Text, who have imagined that some Precious Stones or
Images, or some such things were put into the High Priest Pectoral, and that
they are here called Urim and Thummim.

Thus I have given you an Account of the Different Opinions of the Learned
concerning this Extraordinary way of Revelation styled Urim and Thummim: And I
have presented you with my Own Thoughts, which (as I conceive) are the most
plain, natural and simple account of this Divine Oracle: I have likewise
endeavored to inform you what was the Higher and Spiritual Meaning intended by
the Holy Ghost.

The third Text enquired into, viz. Judges XI. 30, 31. And Jephthah vowed a Vow
unto the Lord, and said, If thou shall without fail deliver the Children of
Ammon into my hands, Then it shall be, that whatsoever comes forth of the
doors of my House to meet me, when I return in Peace from the Children of
Ammon, shall surely be the Lord's, and I will offer it up for a Burnt-offering.
THis Remarkable Vow of Iephthah, and the Manner of the performing of it, have
frequently employed the Thoughts and Pens of the Learned, who according to
their different Apprehensions of the Words, have decided this Controversy in a
different manner. Some confidently assert, that Iephthah did not Sacrifice his
Daughter, but others on the contrary maintain that he did. And besides this,
there is another Question on supposal that he did Sacrifice her, viz. Whether
it was well done of him or no? These are the Particulars which will fall under
our Enquiry at present, but especially I shall entertain the Reader with the
latter of them, and there endeavor to show what was the Rise of this Inhumane
and Extravagant Action, and what Reason may be given why this Generous
Commander, this Noble Warrior was so eager of shedding the Blood even of his
own Daughter, yea when it was so absolutely contrary to the Law which this
Great Man could scarcely be ignorant of. Here I hope to give some light to this
Controverted Cause, by assigning the True Spring of that Strange Action, and by
discovering what was the Overruling Design of Providence in it, which has not
been enquired into by others (that I have met with) on this Subject.

But first, Let us hear what those say who embrace the Negative, viz. That
Iephthah did not Sacrifice his Daughter. To make this good, they hold that
there are two distinct parts of the Vow: 1. Whatsoever comes forth of the
doors of my House to meet me, shall surely be the Lords. 2. I will offer it up
for a Burnt-offering. And they put them together thus, Whatsoever comes, etc.
shall surely be the Lords, or I will offer it up, etc. They read Or instead of
And, for the Copulative Vau (they say) is sometimes Disjunctive in Scripture,
and so it is here in this Vow, the Hebrew Particle which is here translated and
should be rendered or; for Iephtha's words are to be taken Disjunctively, and
his Vow was no other than this, Whatever I first meet with coming out of my
House, shall either be dedicated to the Lord, or I will Sacrifice it for a
Burnt-offering. It was a Conditional Vow, i. e. If it were a thing fit to be
Sacrificed he would Sacrifice it, otherwise not, he would Dedicate and
Consecrate it to God, or something in the lieu of it. If a Dog or an Ass had
been first met by him, he was not engaged to Sacrifice them. Neither if he met
with a Man or a Woman, was he bound to offer them in Sacrifice; but only he was
to act according as the Creature was which he met with. Now Iephthah, they say,
performed the first part of his Vow, and that was sufficient. He offered and
Consecrated his Daughter to the Lord, he devoted her to a Virgin-State all her
Life, which appears from the Connection of those words, He did according to his
Vow; and she knew not a Man, v. 39. One is Exegetical of the other; which
shows that Iephthah kept his Vow in separating his Daughter to a single Life
for ever. She was not Properly, but Metaphorically Offered and Slain, i. e. she
was to keep her Virginity perpetually. This Civil Death passed upon her. Which
is confirmed by what you read in v. 40. The Daughters of Israel went yearly to
Letannoth, ad lament andum, a tanan lamentari, R. Iarchi and Chald. Paraphr.
lament (or, as others render it, to Ad confabulandum, a tanah narrare,
confab^l^ri. R. ^imchi, Iun. and Trem. Buxto^s.
talk with) the Daughter of Jephthah. Whence they gather that Iephthah did not
Sacrifice his Daughter, but only made her a kind of a Nun; in some solitary
place he secluded her from all Society, excepting that the Daughters of Israel
were permitted to go and spend three or four days in a Year in Lamenting and
Condoling her perpetual Virginity, and in Talking and Conferring with her, and
in Comforting her concerning her Solitary Condition, and her being kept from
Marriage. Thus her Life was spared, she fell not a Sacrifice, but was
Consecrated to God and his Service, she was devoted to a single Life, and was
to remain a Recluse all her days. This was the opinion of R. Kimchi and some
other Jewish Expositors; and they are followed not only by some of the Arias
Montanus, Pagnin, Vatabl^s, Estius.
Pontificians (who perhaps might think of Celibacy and a Nuns Life) but by
Iunius, Lud. de Dieu, Broughton, Perkins Drusius, Grotius, Heinsius, Seldom.
several of the Reformed Churches.

Secondly, Others, and with more reason, are for the Affirmative, viz. That
Iephthah really sacrificed his Daughter. For what is, or can be more plain,
than that in v. 39. He did with her according to his Vow which he had vowed?
What was this Vow? There is all the Difficulty. And yet, if you enquire
narrowly into it, you will find that the Difficulty vanishes; for the Vow is
very plain and intelligible, Whatsoever comes forth of the doors of my House
to meet me, shall surely be the Lords, and I will offer it up for a
Burnt-offering. He says whatsoever, which shows that it was no Conditional
Vow, (as those of the other side pretend) but an Absolute one. He unadvisedly
made a Vow to Sacrifice whatsoever he met in his return from the Battle, if he
proved a Victor. When the Vow is thus Large and General, it is ridiculous to
think or say the contrary, viz. That it was a Conditional Vow, and it is as
irrational to distinguish between a Copulative and a Disjunctive Vau in this
place; though it is granted that in some other Texts it is allowable, because
the very Sense and Meaning of the words direct us, yea constrain us to it; but
here is no occasion for it in the least. Wherefore this nice distinguishing
between one Vau and the other, and between Offering to the Lord and
Sacrificing, is altogether groundless, and you may see it cashiered by what is
expressly mentioned in the following Narrative in this History, for it is
positively said, that Iephthah upon his return home and meeting his Daughter V.
35.
Rent his Clothes. What was the reason of this? If his Vow had been Conditional
or Disjunctive, (as some would have it) there was no ground at all for this his
Behavior; there was no occasion of Sorrow and Distraction if the Sacrificing
his Daughter were not included in his Vow, if it were in his choice to offer
her to the Lord (i. e. to dedicate her to him) or to Sacrifice her on the
A^^ar; yea if he were at liberty by virtue of his Vow to kill a Beast instead
of his own Child. If the case was thus, he had no reason to lament and rend his
Clothes, to vex and mortify himself, which we find him doing here. But it is
plain by this Action of his, that things were otherwise with him, and that he
had some Dreadful and Fatal Tidings to impart to his Daughter which were real
matrer of Lamentation, and that the Contents of his Vow which so nearly
concerned her Life, were the cause of his Trouble and Sorrow. This appears from
what follows, V. 35.
Alas, my Daughter (says he) thou have brought me very low, and thou are one
of them that trouble me: And then he communicates the direful News to her, I
have opened my mouth unto the Lord, and I cannot go back. It happens indeed
to be a very Sad and Deplorable Vow which I made, but I am engaged to keep it,
and I am fully resolved that I will. Whereupon his Submissive Child uttered
these words, V. 36.
My Father, if thou have opened thy mouth unto the Lord, do to me according to
that which has proceeded out of thy mouth: Seeing thou are returned in Safety,
and with Victory over thy Enemies, I am willing to be offered a Sacrifice of
Thanksgiving to the God of Heaven, who mercifully covered thy Head in the day
of Battle, and delivered thy Enemies into thy hand. But this Obedient Damosel
had one thing to request of her Father before she left the World. V. 37.
Let this be done for me (says she) let me alone t^o months, that I may go up
and down upon the Mountains, and bewail my Virginity, I and my Fellows. As much
as if she had said, Seeing thou, O my Father, have determined that I shall be
offered up unto the Lord for a Burnt-offering according to the Tenor of the Vow
which thou made in the day of the Distress, I beg but this one thing of thee,
that thou would vouchsafe to respite me for a little time, I desire only
that I may be permitted to retire with a few of my Female Acquaintance into
some Solitary place, that I and they may join together in Mourning, and lament
this unhappy Allotment of mine, viz. That I must not live to be acquainted with
the Joys of a Conjugal State, nor be a Joyful Mother of Children, (as I have
sometimes wished, because Barrenness is accounted a Curse) but that I must
Expire a Virgin, and die Ingloriously, and leave no Offspring behind me.
Iephthah, as soon as she made known this her request to him, most willingly
granted it, and wished with all his heart he could have granted her more. V. 38.
He said, Go, and he sent her away for two Months: And she went with her
Companions, and bewailed her Virginity on the Mountains. And then the History
immediately after this tells us, That V. 39.
at the end of two Months she returned to her Father, who did with her
according to his Vow which he had vowed: That is, he of^ered her up unto the
Lord for a Burnt-offering, for that was his Vow.

One would think now that there should be no Dispute whether Iephthah
Sacrificed his Daughter; for what reason can Men have to oppose the express
words of the Text? These are so plain that it cannot but create some wonder,
why Expositors should vary in the Interpretation of them. Or, suppose there be
some Ambiguous Words in the Relation, which seem to disagree with what is here
said; yet for that very reason, because they are Doubtful and Ambiguous, we are
not to make use of them to confront a Plain Text. It is true, it is added in
the last mentioned Verse, She knew no Man: And indeed how could she when she
was taken out of the Land of the Living? Observe the Connection, He did with
his Daughter according to his Vow, and she knew no Man: That is, She was so
Unhappy as to leave the World in her Youth before she had the Knowledge of a
Man. Hereupon it immediately follows, (which verifies and confirms this
Interpretation) It was a custom in Israel, that the Daughters of Israel went
yearly to lament the Daughter of Jephthah four days in a year. This does not
imply that she was Alive, and that they went duly to give her a Visit in the
Mountains. No, These words plainly relate the Behavior of her Surviving
Companions; they brought it into a Custom and Constant Practice among the
Daughters of Israel, to go yearly and lament her Memory in that very place
where she chose to bewail her Condition before her Death. Or, if they went to
talk and confer (as it may be rendered according to the Acception of the Hebrew
word) the Sense is the same, for the meaning is not that they talked with Her,
but with one another; they discoursed among themselves of that Deplorable
Matter, of that Unfortunate Occurrence. I join both the Senses of the word
together thus, At that Anniversary Meeting they talked of and lamented, they
lamented and talked of the Sad Fate of that Royal Virgin, who was snatched away
in her Prime, and denied the Blessing of Marriage, and of bearing Children.
This was the Compliment of Condoleance which was performed upon her Death. This
is the plain History without wresting it; and nothing is more clear from the
whole than this, that Iephthah slew his Daughter, and offered her for a
Burnt-offering, and that it was the True and Real Import of his Vow that he
would do so. He vowed that he would Sacrifice to the Lord whatsoever he met
coming out of his House: He met his Daughter, and accordingly he did with her
according to his Vow, i. e. he Sacrificed her. The Famous Joseph. Ant. Iud. l.
5. c. 9.
Jewish Historian gives his Suffrage to this, and all the Old Jews were of the
same Opinion, expressly asserting that Iephthah vowed to Sacrifice his Daughter,
and that he did so. This is the general Persuasion of the Justin Mart. Quaest.
99. Tertull. cont. Marc. 3. 4. Hieronym. Epist. 34. ad Julian. chrysostom. hom.
de Iephtha. Ambros. de Offic. Nazian^. Orat. 6. de Maccab. Augustine. de civ.
Dei. l. 1. c. 21.
Ancient Fathers both Greek and Latin, and their Agreement herein is very
considerable. A numerous Company of Luther, Peter Mar^r, Salianus, Serarius,
Menochius, a Lapide, Lud. Cappellus, etc.
Moderns of great Learning and Judgment, both of the Roman and Protestant
Persuasion hold the same: And our Dr. Light^oot in his Chronicle of the T^nes
of the Old Testament.
Great Christian Rabbi, who had been once of another mind, was induced by a
farther Enquiry into the Reasons of this Opinion, to change his thoughts, and
to declare expressly that Iephthah's performing of his Vow, is to be understood
in the plain and literal meaning of it, viz. The real and actual Sacrificing of
his Daughter.

The next Question is, Whether Iephthah did well or ill in so doing: Or, which
amounts to the same, Whether it was lawful to Sacrifice his Daughter? Some
think (and what will not they think?) that it was a Good and Lawful Deed, and
to this purpose they allege Lev. 27. 28, 29. Notwithstanding, no devoted thing
that a man shall devote unto the Lord, of all that he has, both of man and
beast, and of the field of his possession, shall be sold or redeemed: every
devoted thing is most holy to the Lord. None devoted, which shall be devoted of
men, shall be redeemed: but shall surely be put to death. Iephthah's Vow, say
they, was of this sort, and he could not possibly Redeem his Daughter, but was
necessitated to Sacrifice her. That known Critic Diatrib. de Voto Iepht.
Lewis Cappel runs altogether upon this, viz. That it was lawful by the Law of
Cherem to Sacrifice this Innocent Maid: But this Learned Man was never so
overseen and mistaken as in this Cause, for it is certain that Cherem, which is
the word here used, always signifies either Persons devoted to Slaughter,
destined to Death for their Execrable Wickedness (as the Amalekites, and those
other People and Nations which the Israelites were commanded to put to death)
or it signifies Things destined to utter Destruction, as Jericho and Ai, etc.
with all the Substance that was found in them, excepting some particular things
which God ordered to be spared. And these Things were thus destined for the
sake of the Persons to whom they appertained, who were extremely Wicked and
Abominable in the Eyes of God. This is the true Notion of Cherem (of which I
shall give you a farther account in a following Discourse.) And as for the Law
of Cherem, which is set down in that forecited place in Leviticus, it speaks
only of that Irrevocable Vow of Destining Persons or Cities to utter
Destruction (as in Numb. 21. 32. Deuteronomy. 13. 15. 25. 19. Josh. 6. 17, 18. 1 Samuel
15. 3.) for their horrid Crimes, and because indeed there was the particular
command of God for it. Now let any Man judge whether this has any reference to
Iephthah's Innocent and Harmless Daughter. The Law says, no Person or thing
devoted of Men (i. e. by Men) shall be redeemed, but shall surely be put to
Death, or be destroyed. But then let it be remembered that no Men can devote any
Persons to Death, unless they deserve it for their Excessive Impiety; nor can
they devote any Thing to Destruction, unless it be on the account of such
Persons. This therefore does no ways concern our present Business. Iephthah
could not lawfully Vow the Death of any one who deserved not to be put to
death. Therefore his Daughter was no Cherem, no Execration, no Devoted Wretch.
This Law of Cherem or Anathema gave the Jews no License to turn Assassines and
Cutthroats, and to take away the Lives of their own Children: Of which De Iure
Not. and Gent. l. 4. c. 11.
Mr. Seldom and other Learned Men were so convinced, that upon this very
account they assert (and think they prove) that Iephthah did not offer up his
Devoted Daughter in Sacrifice. But, by their leave, all that they prove hence
is this, that he should not have done it. Besides, this sort of Vows called
Cherems, was to be made by particular Warrant from God, who is Lord and
Disposer of Life and Death, and can Sentence and Devote to D^struction whom and
what he pleases: But we read of no Warrant that Iephthah had to Vow the Death
of his Daughter, much less to proceed to Execution; therefore it was direct
Murder to put her to Death. And particularly as to Sacrificing her, that was a
most Inhumane, Horrid and Barbarous Act, and expressly forbid of God, and hated
by him. Thou shall not do so unto the Lord thy God, thou shall not burn thy
Sons and thy Daughters in the fire, as the Heathens used to do to their Gods:
For every abomination to the Lord which he hates, have they done, Deuteronomy. 12.
31. For Iephthah then to Vow the Sacrificing of his Daughter, was so far from
being according to the Law, and Acceptable to God, that it was an Abomination
to him.

Yea, some of the very Pagans themselves thought such-an Act as this to be
Unlawful: Thus In vit. Pelopidae.
Plutarch tells us that Agesilaus being commanded in a Dream to Sacrifice his
Daughter, refused to do it; and that when Pelopidas in a Vision was bid to
Sacrifice a Virgin, he looked on it as a Severe and Impious Command. Agamemnon,
it is true, Sacrificed his own Daughter, but even a Profane and Atheistical
Poet could blame him for it, crying out against his Tantum religio potuit
suadere malorum Lucret. l. 1.
Superstitious Religion, as the ill Motive which prompted him to so vile a
Practice. Yea it is probable that This is the very Instance which I am now
treating of: Iphigenia was Iephthah's Daughter, for the Greeks mistook
Iphigenia for Iephthigenia, which plainly signifies the Daughter of Jephthah:
And Agamemnon was mistaken for Iephthah, for he being a known Man in the Trojan
Wars, which were in Iephthah's time (as the Masters of Chronology have agreed)
it was easy for the Poets to take one Warlikeman or Great Captain for another,
and to represent the History of Iephthah under the Name of Agamemnon (as I
shall show at another time, it was the common use of the Poets, to disguise
Passages of Sacred History with Fables and Profane Names,) particularly as for
this Sacrificing of his Daughter, it being so Remarkable but yet so Infamous an
Act, it is certain that it was spread abroad and known among the Nations, and
could not but be abhorred by all Persons of Sobriety and Reason: So far is it
from being allowed by a Particular Law of God, as some pretend.

Again, There are Others, who that they may effectually prove the Lawfulness of
this Fact, tell us, it was done by the particular Instinct of the Holy Spirit,
that Iephthah was immediately stirred up by God to Atchieve this singular
Enterprise, which in others would have been unlawful. Epist. ad Julian.
St. Ierom of old seemed to be of this mind and Peter Martyr afterward was
inclined to think the same, but he presently corrected himself. And truly no
less could be expected from him, for it is a very near approach to Blasphemy,
to say that so Wicked a Perpetration was by favorable Instinct from God
himself, especially when he has so particularly forbidden it, as you heard in
the former particular. Indeed from what I delivered there, this Bold Opinion is
sufficiently confuted, for if Sacrificing his Daughter was downright Murder,
and was a Breach of Moses's Law, and of the Law of Nature, then it is
intolerable Folly and Presumption to plead for the Lawfulness of it. Moreover,
if there had been here a Divine Impulse, or a Particular Command from Heaven
(as in the Example of Abraham, who was bid to do what he did, and that for
Trial only) he would not have rent his Clothes and been troubled, but he would
have likewise checked his Daughters Sorrow (as well as his own) by declaring
that his Resolution to Sacrifice her was from a particular Dictate which he
received from Heaven: Thus we have reason to reject the Opinion of those Men
who hold that Iephthah sinned not in Sacrificing his Daughter, for neither of
the Arguments which they allege have any Truth and Reality in them; there was
no Express Law of God, nor any Divine Instinct in the case. Wherefore we may
safely and confidently aver with the Great Jewish Antiquary before cited, That
Antiq. Iud. l. 5. c. 9.
the Sacrifice which ^ephthah offered was not lawful, nor acceptable to God,
but that on the contrary it was Unlawful and Sinful. And so most of the Ancient
Fathers of the Church, who have spoken of this, do assert.

But here we may be thought to be reduced to a great straight in maintaining
this Post; for if all Humane Slaughter was forbid by God, and is against
Nature, and is utterly Unlawful and Vicious, how came Iephthah to commit this
Fact? What made him act so Strangely? What could be the Motive to so Horrid an
Enterprise? If it was so Gross an Enormity, how can we think this Great Man,
this Judge with his High Priest and Priests about him, yea and the whole
Sanhedrim to advise him, could be guilty of such a Vile and Notorious Crime as
this?

Here then I am to give an Account why and whence it was that Iephthah acted
thus Extravagantly and (as it may seem) profligately; and I hope it will not be
offensive, if I take liberty to dissent from the generality of Writers in this
matter: For though I agree with those who hold that Iephthah sacrificed his
Daughter, and that he did very ill in it, yet I differ from them in the Ground
and Occasion of it; which is the thing I will now insist upon, and for which I
chiefly designed this Discourse.

They attribute it to the Corruption of that Age, telling us that very Strange
and Exorbitant things were done in those days, as the Book of Judges expressly
relates. And moreover they add that Iephthah herein followed the Examples that
had been before him, for Humane Sacrifices were commonly offered by the
Heathens that dwelt in Palestine, Deuteronomy. 12. 31. Their Sons and their Daughters
they burned in the fire to their Gods, and particularly we read that the
Ammonites offered their Children to Moloch in the Flames. Nay it cannot be
denied that this Horrid and Bloody Idolatry was practiced by some of the
Israelites a little before Iephthah's time, Judges 1. 21. compared with Psalm
106. 37. Much less can it be denied, that afterward there were frequent
Examples of this Effusion of Humane Blood, and Sacrificing of Men and Women, of
which I shall speak in another place. But though Example is strong, and has a
very great Empire over our Minds, yet I cannot be induced to believe that this
was the Ground of Iephthah's Sacrificing his Daughter. This Good and Virtuous
Man (for he is signally represented to future Ages as such by St. Paul) would
not be led to this Flagitious Action by the Example of some Wild Insidels, or a
few Besotted Israelites, who were forsaken of God, and became professed
Votaries to the Infernal Demons, and having given Themselves, proceeded to
offer their Children (who were parts of them) to these Hellish Ghosts. I cannot
think therefore that this was the reason of Iephthah's committing this worst
kind of Homicide: This was not, this could not be Motive strong enough to
prevail upon this Worthy Man, this Noble Hero; he would easily have baffled
such a Scandalous and Horrid Temptation as this. As bad as those times were, as
degenerate as Israel was in those days, it is not credible that such a Person,
and in such Circumstances (which could not but make him willing to be
disengaged from his Vow, if it were possible) would tamely follow the Example
of the most Accursed Idolaters, of the worst and vilest Miscreants in the
World, and inhumanely Massacre his only Child. This must not, this cannot enter
into our thoughts, unless at the same time we banish thence all sober Reason.

But they likewise impute it to the Ignonorance of that Age. The Priests, say
they, were Strangers to their own Law, and knew it not. Hence it was that they
thought that by the Law in Lev. 27. 28. Iephthah's Daughter was a devoted
Person, and so could not be redeemed, but must be put to Death. I do not wholly
exclude the Ignorance of that Age, which was an attendant (if not a Cause in
part) of their General Corruption: But it is highly improbable that none of the
Sacred Function should understand this Case that was before them, as Dr.
Lightfoot represents it, The Sanhedrim was now sitting, and there was the
Priesthood attending on the Ark at Shiloh, and yet is Israel now so little
acquainted with the Law, that neither the Sanhedrim nor the Priests can resolve
Jephthah that his Vow might have been redeemed. I cannot persuade my self that
they could All of them err so grossly, and that in so plain a Matter, wherein
they were directed not only by the Positive Law of God, but by that of Nature
and Reason. But I rather think that there was more of Neglience than Ignorance
in the present Miscarriage: The Priests of that degenerate Age were grown
Careless and Unconcerned: They were not Solicitous to instruct this Prince
aright, and to conduct his Conscience by right and steady Measures in this
present Case of the Vow which he had made. They could not (as I conceive) be
ignorant of the Unlawfulness of this Vow, and of the Greater Unlawf^lness of
putting his Daughter to Death: But herein they were most shamefully defective,
that they neglected to inform this Doubting and Misguided Man, and to convince
him of the Unreasonableness of his too forward Zeal.

Which brings me to that which I intend more largely to insist upon, viz. The
True Source and Original of this Extravagant and Bloody Act of our Renowned
Iephthah. It was, as I apprehend, his too Forward Zeal that pushed him on to
this unhappy Undertaking. To make good this Assertion, I must tell you that I
have this Idea of-him, That he was a Man of a very Religious and Pious
Disposition; which manifested it self at his first public appearing for his
Countrymen; for I observe that he then applied himself to ask Council of God,
Judges 10. 17. 11. 11. When he undertook to fight their Battles, this was the
first thing he did. He opened the Campaign well, for he began with God.
Likewise I take notice that he showed himself very Conscientious in his Treaty
with and offers of Peace to the Ammonites before he proceeded to any Acts of
Hostility, Chap. 11. 12, etc. He was pleased to give them some account of his
marching against them, though he needed not have done it: He labored to
convince them that it was a Just and Lawful War which he was undertaking, and
accordingly he sacredly appeals to the Lord as Judge in this Quarrel, v. 27.
When he had thus quitted himself like a Religious and Just Man, it is expressly
said, The Spirit of the Lord came upon him, v. 29. That is, he was
extraordinarily stirred up by God, and animated to engage the Enemy, and to
reduce them to Obedience and Submission. A Person of so Holy and Pious
Inclinations was assisted and blessed by God in a signal and eminent manner.
But behold yet another Argument and Demonstration of his Godly Mind, viz. His
Solemn Vow that he made; for this proceeded purely from a Good and Religious
Heart, from an ardent Desire and Intention of giving Honor to God upon his
obtaining a Victory. All these Instances are Proofs of what I asserted, That
this Mighty Man of War (as he is Chapter 11. 1.
called) was a Man of as great Religion and Goodness. Which is farther
confirmed by the Testimony of the Infallible Heb. 11. 32
Apostle, who reckons this Iephthah among the Holy Patriarchs, Prophets and
Eminent Servants of God, whose Faith had made them known and Famous in the
World.

Having thus laid my Foundation (which is grounded on the History of Iephthah
both in the Old and New Testament) I am to raise my Superstructure, which is
this, This Conscientious and Good Man having with a Pious Intention made a Vow,
but having been Rash and Indiscreet in the Wording and Framing of it, was
unhappily drawn into a Snare, and his own Religious Temper and Active Zeal
hastened him into it: And this I take to be the true Spring and Motive of his
strange Acting, i. e. Of his bereaving his Daughter of her Life. He being a
Person of a very Sensible Conscience, of a Soft and Tender Spirit, thought
verily that he ought to perform his Vow, and accordingly did so. In this he
showed a very Singular Zeal, but not according to knowledge: So that we have
reason to conclude, that he sinned out of Blind Zeal to perform his Promise and
Vow which he had solemnly made to God. This was a great Fault, an heinous
Error, but it was one on the right hand, and therefore the more excusable. This
invites me to mention his Name and Memory with Honor, and to remember that he
was one of those who are righteous overmuch (as the Wise Man speaks:) He was
too Zealous in pursuit of his Vow, although it was a Rash and unadvised one as
to the manner of it, and hereupon his Innocent Daughter became a Victim, viz.
for the sake of his Vow. Indeed his case was to be pitied and lamented, for his
Fault was the product of his Wellmeaning, and of his Great Care to keep a Good
Conscience. He saw it was usual with Good Men to Genesis 28. 20. Number. ^^. 2.
make Vows, and in a mistaken Imitation of them he turned a Solemn Votary, and
in the sight and hearing of all Persons that were about him, as well as before
the All seeing God, promised the Sacrificing of his Daughter, for it was so in
effect, she being included in whatsoever comes forth of the doors of his House
to meet him. The Sense of this most Solemn Act of Religion (for such a Vow is,
which is a Promissory Oath made unto God) was so vigorous on his mind, that he
could not possibly divert the thoughts of it, nor persuade himself that he
could any ways be excused from acting according to what he had vowed. This is
to be imputed to the Reverence of an Oath, which has ever been very Great and
Awful.

We see in that Noted Instance of the Gibeonites what was thought concerning
this kind of Obligation, though it was by Craft and Imposture: We have sworn
unto them by the Lord God of Israel: Now therefore we may not touch them,
Joshua 9. 19. It is not improbable that Iephthah bore this very Instance in his
mind, and indiscreetly made use of it on this occasion which I am now speaking
of: He thence confirmed himself in the Apprehensions he had of that Inviolable
Tie he was under by reason of his Vow. He thought it was so far from being a
Sin to keep his Promise made to God, that he reckoned it his indispensable
Duty: And this false Persuasion hurried him on to this vile Act. So in other
Examples in the Sacred History, we see what a Regard and Reverence Men had of
an Oath or Vow, yea though it was in it self unlawful: Thus Saul having rashly
but solemnly vowed in the day of Battle, that the Person should die who tasted
any Food before the Pursuit was quite over; his own Son Jonathan, who had so
signalized his Valor at that time, by vanquishing Threescore thousand
Philistines, had like to have been a Sacrifice (as Iephthah's Daughter here)
after the Victory, because Saul was so Religious and Austere (for so he would
be thought to be) in observing his Oath, notwithstanding he was so plainly
excused from the Obligation of it, as to his Son Jonathan, by reason of his
known Circumstances, which were his Ignorance of his Fathers Oath, and the
Necessity which he then lay under of taking some small Portion of Food to
support him when he was so Faint and Hungry. The like Erroneous and
Superstitious Conceit of an Oath, the Jews, but especially the Pharisees, had
in our Savior's time, who therefore sharply reproves them, Mark 7. 11. They
imagined that their Vow of Corban extinguished their Obligation to other
Commands, as Honoring their Parents, and the like. So we read that Herod, by a
lavish Oath, promised Herodias to grant her whatever she would ask, and
therefore forsooth Mat. 14. 9.
for his Oaths sake he must needs kill St. John. This, though it was a mere
Pretense in Herod, shows that a Vow or Oath has always been held Sacred; else
he could not have made use of this Pretense, viz. That he was bound by his
Oath, and therefore could not be loosed from it. This has in all Ages been
held a most Sacred Tie; especially Vows, which are Oaths more immediately made
to God, have been esteemed such. Whence we find that the Best and Holiest Men
have always been very observant of the Religious Obligation of a Vow, and have
been exceeding careful to pay God their Vows which their Lips have uttered. It
is no wonder then that Iephthah, a Person so Religiously disposed was very
careful, yea even to an Excess, to do the same. He had read in the Law, Deuteronomy.
23. 21.
When thou shall vow a Vow unto the Lord thy God, thou shall not slack to pay
it: And he was sensible that the willful Neglect of this is a Crime of a very
heinous Nature, and that God is a severe Exactor of Vows, and is wont to avenge
the Breach of them, by inflicting the greatest Judgments and Plagues
imaginable. He knew that the Violation of Vows was no other than a Mocking of
God, a Dissembling with Heaven, and an Act of Injustice and Unfaithfulness
toward our Maker.

Wherefore it is likely he thus argued with himself, though I know that the
performing of my Vow will be accompanied with Murder: Yet I consider likewise,
that the not performing it will be attended with downright Perjury. Seeing
then there is a Necessity of Sinning one way or other, I resolve to choose the
former, for though that be an Injury to my Daughter, yet the latter is a plain
Affront to God. My Child is dear to me, but my God, my Father, is much more
dear: Therefore it is be^^er to be Cruel than Impious, to be Guilty of
blood^^ed, than to be Perjured and False to the Lord of Heaven and Earth. I
have opened my mouth unto the Lord, and I cannot go back, I must not reverse, I
dare not revoke the Sacred Promise which I have made to the Almighty, but my
firm and unshaken purpose is to perform it. Thus the mistaken Sense of the
Indissoluble Obligation which his Vow had laid upon him, ran him upon this
fatal Rock. Iephthah could not but know, if he had seriously considered, that
no Vow is Obligatory where the matter of it is unlawful; that what we Vow must
be Honest, and in our Power, whereas this of killing his Daughter was neither;
That the Force of that Obligation which goes along with a Vow or Oath, is from
the Lawfulness of that thing which is vowed or Sworn; and therefore that he
could not oblige himself to lay violent Hands on his Dear Relative, but that he
having vowed it, and it being Unlawful in it self, he was obliged not to
perform the Vow; besides that the Law of Natural Reason and Equity was a prior
Obligation upon him. He should have considered that an Unlawful thing cannot
possibly be made Lawful by the Interposition of a Vow; yea That it is a Double
Sin to act unlawfully by virtue of a Vow, for there is not only the Sinful Vow,
but the Sinful Act that follows it. But so blind and partial is good Men's Zeal
sometimes, that they are not in a Capacity to attend to, at least not to
regulate themselves by the most Rational Principles that are offered ^^em. This
was the Lot of our Unhappy Prince and Warrior, he had conquered the Ammonites,
but could not vanquish his own Erroneous Conceptions, his Mistaken Zeal, his
Misguided Conscience. He knew that the Law forbad Humane Sacrifices, but he was
so deluded as to believe that the Religion of a Vow superseded that
Prohibition. Wherefore he goes on perversely in the Prosecution of his Rash
Oath, and commands the Poor Reprieved Virgin to be brought to the Altar, and
there be offered up a Burnt-offering to the Lord.

Yea, I am inclined to believe he Sacrificed her with his own Hand; for it is
not probable that the Priests would comply with him in so Extravagant and
Inhumane a Demand as this, of Sacrificing his Daughter: And besides, he that
was so Precise to keep his Vow according to the very Exact Wording of it, would
not think himself excused from acting this part himself, seeing he had expressly
vowed the doing of it in his own Person, if you rigorously interpret the Words:
I will offer it up, says he, for a Burnt-Sacrifice. By which Words this
Curious Man might really think he was obliged to be the Sacrificer himself.
Which could not but be a great Aggravation of his Fault, because he was a
Father, and so acted Unnaturally; because she was his Daughter, nay, because he
had V. 34.
no other Child but her, which made it yet more Unnatural and Cruel, because he
was a Layman, and so plainly usurped on the Office of the Priest. But mention
none of these things to me, says he, say not I am her Father, and she my
Child, say not I am no Priest, and that I invade the Sacred Function: I have
opened my mouth unto the Lord, I have Sacredly engaged to offer up for a
Burnt-offering whatsoever comes forth of the doors of my House to meet me, and
lo! this my Daughter met me, and therefore must be offered up by my hand. Who
knows not that the Regal and Priestly Power have resided in the same Person? As
I am a Ruler and Magistrate, I have Authority to use the Sword: And why may I
not make use of it to slay a Sacrifice as well as to cut off Offenders,
especially when I have sacredly promised to do the former? My Vow makes me a
Priest: I need no other Ordination than this: This alone Capacitates me, nay
Necessitates me to discharge this part of the Sacerdotal Office. Thus our
wellmeaning Bigot is Punctual in pursuing his Solemn Vow, this he urges and
insisteth upon, and the thoughts of it are so Rampant in his Breast, that he
will not be beaten off from it. Though he had V. 38. 39.
two months time to consider of this Case, yet he remained inflexible, and
would by no means be prevailed with to call back his Rash Vow, but he broke
through all to keep it. The Cause of it was no other than what I have often
suggested, namely, too Nice and Curious a Conscience: This thrust him on to act
against the undeniable Laws of his Religion. Lest he should violate his Sacred
Promise to God, he puts off the Nature and Pity of a Man. To make good his
single Vow, he disregarded all the other Obligations of Reason and Religion.
Such, such is the impetuous Force of a Misguided Mind, of a Disordered Zeal.

Having thus discovered the True Spring and Motive of Iephthah's Sacrificing
his Daughter, I will offer something concerning the Design of Providence, which
ruled in this, as in all other Events and Actions, seem they never so Strange;
and I will suggest what I think is the Proper Use that is to be made of this
Extraordinary and Surprising Occurrence. Though this Great Judge and Prince of
Israel behaved himself thus unworthily, and no ways suitably to his Character,
yet God was pleased to suffer this for Ends not unworthy of his Divine Wisdom
and Holiness. For by this Remarkable Example he thought fit to admonish us
concerning our making of Vows, that if at any time we enter upon this Solemn
Act of Religion, we be careful to do it with great Circumspection and
Consideration. God permitted Iephthah's Daughter to be Sacrificed, says an
Ancient Pious Father, (...). Just. Mart. Quaest. and Resp. ad Orthod.
To teach Men for the future, not to make Vows to God indefinitely, as you
remember Iephthah's Vow ran. These Large, Unlimited and General Vows are
dangerous, and prove a Snare unto us: Wherefore in this respect we ought to use
great Caution and Prudence. With this agrees that of Theodoret, God (says he)
to remind others to be careful of their Vows, and to teach them to make them
Discreetly, hindered not Jephthah from putting his Daughter to death. By this
Notable Instance in Sacred Story, he would condemn all Precipitancy and
Temerity in Vowing and Swearing, and in making Solemn Promises before him: And
he would warn the future Ages of the World to perform these Acts of Religion
with previous Consultation and serious Premeditation. For here he shows us
what is the Punishment of Rash Oaths, and Undue and Unlawful Vows, that we may
learn to avoid them. Here we see that the Fault of Iephthah's Rash Vowing was
punished in the Untimely Death of his Daughter.

And as we are by this Example taught to avoid all Rash and Unlawful Oaths and
Vows, so, when we have made them, not to keep them. There is a great deal of
Iephthah's Blind Zeal in the World, too Nice a Conscience in some things, and
too Rash and Bold in others. Nothing is more Sacred than an Oath, and yet there
may be a Superstitious and Undue Reverence of it. This appears plainly in Men's
fondly pretending the indispensible Obligation of some Oaths, whilst at the
same time they have no regard to others which are certainly Obligatory to them.
They speak the same Language that Iephthah did, telling us that they have
opened their mouths unto the Lord, and they cannot go back, i. e. They plead
the Force of their Solemn Engagements and Ties, and refuse to unbind themselves
(though it be in their Power) and thereby plunge themselves into Mischief, and
endanger not only their own, but (with our Resolute, yet Nice Iephthah) other
Persons Lives and Fortunes. This Rash Iuror speaks to us all to take warning by
his Fatal Circumstances, and to be at great Pains to enlighten our Minds, but
especially to invoke the Divine Light and Aid: He calls to us not to Debauch
our Consciences by entertaining False Notions and Conceptions of a Vow. He
remains an Example on Record of an Imprudent and Unlawful Votary, and likewise
of the Dismal Effects of his being so. He not only reminds us that we ought to
be extremely careful not to make any Rash Vows or Unlawful Oaths, but that we
ought not to think our selves tied by them when we have made them. He is a
constant Monitor to teach Men that their Unlawful Oaths and Promises oblige
them only to break them, and that this is acceptable to God, and just and
equitable in it self.

Lastly, This Notable Instance informs us that Real Virtue and Goodness do not
always exempt Men from doing some very ill things. Sometimes we shall see
Virtuous Persons undertake and pursue with great Warmness what their
Misinformed Consciences have put them upon, though it contradicts the Laws of
God and Men. What Iephthah did was out of Simplicity and an Honest Mind, and
therefore it was not inconsistent with Faith, which we find him praised for in
the Catalogue of the Ancient and Famous Worthies by the Author of the Epistle
to the Hebrews: And truly there are other Great Offenders besides our Iephthah
mentioned in that Panegyric. So it is, the Sacred History acquaints us by
enumerating sundry Instances that Persons beloved of God, and of the greatest
Integrity, have been guilty of the most heinous Miscarriages. Especially it may
be observed of those that are very Active and Warm in their Religion, that they
sometimes are subject to some Unwarrantable Bigotry, which unhappily leads or
rather drives them to something worse. Particularly we see this in the Example
before us, and let us mind the Design of Heaven in it. This Renowned Warrior
and Judge was suffered by the most Wise Disposer of all Events to c^mmit this
great Folly, that we may be convinced of the Insufficiency of Humane Strength,
that we may see that the Best Men egregiously offend in some things, that they
are a Compound of Spirit and Flesh, half Angel and half Brute, and that it may
appear to the World that there is no Perfect and Consummate Virtue in this
Life. This is the Conception I have of Iephthah's Case; but every one is left
to his Liberty to frame what other Notions of it he pleases.

The fourth Text enquired into, viz. Dan. IX. 24, 25. Seventy weeks are
determined upon thy People, and upon thy Holy City, to finish the
Transgression, etc.
THIS is another Famous Prophecy concerning the Time of our Lords Coming, but
more especially (as I shall show in the sequel of this Exercitation) concerning
the Time of his Passion and leaving the World. My design in treating on these
Words is to offer what I conceive is most Observable in them, to assign what is
most proper and pertinent toward the leading us into the true Meaning of this
Noble Prediction, to remove the Difficulties and Obscurities that lie either in
the Text or Context, to correct the Mistakes of some Writers upon both, to
render the Words Clear, Plain and Intelligible (as to which most Expositors
have been Deficient,) to present you with a Particular Computation, or
Chronological Calculation of the Years contained in the Seventy Weeks, and in
the whole Attempt to let you see that this Prophecy was spoken of our Lord and
Savior Jesus Christ, the True Messiah, that it is really fulfilled, and that
this fulfilling of it is a Demonstration of Christ's being come, and
consequently of the Truth and Certainty of the Christian Religion.

In this Chapter you read that the Holy Prophet Daniel foreseeing V. 1, 2.
in the first Year of Darius, that the Seventy Years Captivity was now coming
to an end, V. 16.
prayed for the Restoration of Jerusalem: And whilst he was directing his
Prayers to Heaven, V. 20, 21.
the Angel Gabriel (the same Divine Messenger, as you may observe, who appeared
afterward to the Virgin Mary, and told her that the Time of the Messias's
Coming was accomplished) came and informed him concerning that Important
Matter, and told him, That as the Israelites had been Captives Seventy Years,
and were now to be delivered, so within Seventy Weeks of Years the M^ssias
should come, and be a Deliverer and Savior. This I conceive is the reason of
this Mystical way of speaking, and describing the Time: It alludes to the
Captivity of Babylon, which was to last Seventy Years. That was the determinate
Space of the Captivity, after which they were to be delivered, and to return
back to their own Land. So in like manner the time of the Administration of
things until the Redemption from the Captivity of Sin and Satan's Tyranny in
the World, is circumscribed in a Number that answers to that, viz. Seventy
Weeks of Years, instead of Seventy Years. Seventy Weeks are determined upon thy
People, and upon thy Holy City, to finish the Transgression, and to make an end
of sins, and to make Reconciliation for Iniquity, and to bring in everlasting
Righteousness, and to seal up the vision and Prophecy, and to anoint the most
Holy. It has been intimated already that by Seventy Weeks here are to be
understood not Seventy Weeks of days, but of Years; each day for a Year; which
Seventy being multiplied by Seven (every Week consisting of Seven days) make
490. Now that it is usual in Scripture to signify Years by Days, I need not be
very laborious in proving. Life is measured by Days; Years are meant when Days
are expressed, as in Genesis 5. 5. All the days that Adam lived were nine hundred
and thirty Years: And so of Seth, v. 8. and Enos, v. II. and Gainan, v. 14. and
Enoch, v. 2^. And that a Day is put for a Year, and consequently that a Week is
taken for a Sep^enary of Years, or the space of Seven Years, is most evident
from Lev. 25. 8. Thou shall number Seven Sabbaths (or Weeks) of years unto
thee, i. e. Forty nine Years. So in Genesis 29. 27. a Week is interpreted Seven
years in the same Verse. But we need not be very S^licitous here, because as to
this there is no Controversy between us and the Jews, who are the Persons we
are concerned with in this Prophecy. Seder Olam, R. Solomon in cap. 9. Dan.
They willingly grant that Weeks not of Days or Months, but of Years are here
meant, and that the Seventy Weeks are seven times Seventy Years, that is, 490
Years.

It is said, Seventy weeks are determined upon thy People, and upon thy Holy
City, i. e. There is a Certain Determinate Time set, viz. Four hundred and
ninety Years, within which Period the Jewish People and Nation, and the City of
Jerusalem in a special manner shall experience very Strange Alterations: Within
that space of time the M^ssias shall come, and the Wonderful Effects and Fruits
of his Coming shall be such as These: 1. There shall be the finis^ing of
Transgression, and the making an end of sins: By the Light of the Gospel which
shall be preached at his Coming, Men shall see the Error of their ways, and be
convinced of their Sins, and shall leave off their former Evil Courses. 2.
There shall be a making of Reconciliation for Iniquity: The Blood of Christ
shall make an Atonement for the Sins of the World. 3. Everlasting Righteousness
shall be brought in: The Legal and Mosaical Services shall cease, and a more
Pure and Spiritual Worship shall take place, and continue for ever. 4. There
shall be the Sealing (or the finishing, for '^is the same Hebrew word which was
used before in this Verse, and was translated making an end of) the Vision and
Prophecy, i. e. When these things before mentioned shall come to pass, there
shall be a Fulfilling and Accomplishing of the Prophesies concerning the
Messiah and his Kingdom: Then it shall appear to the World, that they are
Ratified and Verified: The Seal is set upon them. 5. There shall be the
anointing of the most Holy: Then shall be set up an Eternal Priesthood,
excelling that of the Law, then Christ Jesus shall be the High Priest, and he
shall be solemnly Appointed and Consecrated to that work and Office. The
Messiah, the Anointed One is meant here, and that by the Confession of the Jews
themselves. Thus far, I think, we have made all very plain.

It follows v. 25, 26, 27. Know therefore and understand, that from the going
forth of the Commandment to restore and to build Jeru^alem unto the Messiah,
the Prince shall be Seventy weeks: And threescore and two weeks the street
shall be built again, and the wall, even in troublous times. And after the
threescore and t^o weeks shall Messiah be cut off, but not for himself: And the
People of the Prince that shall come shall destroy the City and the Sanctuary,
and the end thereof shall be with a Flood: And unto the end of the War
Desolations are determined. And he shall confirm the Covenant with many for one
week* and in the midst of the week he shall cause the Sacrifice and the
Oblation to cease, and for the overspreading of Abominations he shall make it
desolate, even until the Consummation, and that determined shall be poured on
the desolate. Here, before I Paraphrase on these words, I am to observe to you
that the Angel divides the Seventy weeks into three parts, viz. Seven weeks,
and sixty two weeks, and one week; which he does to give a more Distinct
Account of what was to happen in that Period of time. The Seven weeks of Years
(i. e. 49 Years) were fulfilled when the Building of the City of Jerusalem was
completed: The Sixty two weeks of Years were fulfilled in the space of time
between the finishing of the City and Christ's Manifestation at his Baptism: In
the one Week, viz. The last Week of the Seventy Christ was put to Death. Thus
the Time is reckoned by Parts, as it is usual among the Hebrews to express a
Number by parts which might be done altogether in whole: Twenty Shekels, five
and twenty Shekels, and fifteen Shekels shall be your Maneh (or Mina) Ezekiel. 45.
12. So here in the Weeks of Daniel, the Seventy Weeks or former Sum of 490
Years, is divided into Seven weeks (i. e. 49 Years) and into Sixty two Weeks
(i. e. 434 Years) and into one week (i. e. Seven Years) in all Seventy Weeks or
490 Years. Having premised this, I will briefly descant on the words, From the
going forth of the Commandment to restore and to build ^erusalem, i. e. From
the going forth of the Word of God, or of the Edict of the Persian Princes
concerning the rebuilding of Jerusalem, and the Finishing of it unto the
Messiah the Prince (i. e. To the time when Christ will manifest himself, and
show himself to be the Prince, Lord, and Head of the Church) the Savior and
Redeemer of the World by his Dying for it, shall be seven weeks (i. e. Forty
nine Years, in which time the Jews rebuilded their City and Temple peaceably:
For to this must those words in this Verse be referred; The street shall be
built again, and the wall, even in troublesome times) and threescore and two
weeks (which make in all 69 Weeks, or 483 Years.) And after the threescore and
two Weeks (which immediately succeeded the Seven Weeks; that is, after 69
Weeks, viz. in the Seventieth Week, being 484 after the Restoring of the
Temple) shall the Messiah be cut off, (he shall suffer Death upon the Cross)
but not for himself (which Clause plainly testifies that this is spoken of
Christ, who suffered and died not on his own account, but for us, that he might
deliver us from Death and Damnation.) And the People of the Prince that shall
come shall destroy the City, etc. Which is a brief Description of the miserable
condition of the Jews, when Titus Vespasian the Roman Prince came with his
terrible Army and besieged Jerusalem, and took it, and utterly destroyed it:
Which was the Fruit of their putting to Death the Lord of Life. And he shall
confirm the Covenant (the new Covenant spoken of by the Prophet Jeremiah) with
many, even with all true Israelites who believe in him. And this he shall do
for one Week, or in one Week, viz. in the remaining Week, which is the
Seventieth in Number. Then in a more signal manner the Gospel Covenant shall be
ratified and confirmed. And in the midst of the week he shall cause the
Sacrifice and Oblation to cease, i. e. In the last Week, and in the fourth Year
of that Week (which may be called the middle of it) all Sacrifices and
Oblations shall be abolished and nulled by Christ his once Offering up Himself
on the Cross, for in the midst of this last Prophetic Week Christ made the
Oblation of himself. And in the next words, For the overspreading of
Abominations he shall make it ^^esolate, etc. There is set forth (as in the
former Verse) the dismal Cons^quence of the Jews putting Christ to Death, viz.
The Besieging and Sacking of Jerusalem by the Roman Armies which were
Abominable and Detestable, and are called by our Savior (with Allusion to this
place without doubt) the Abomination of Desolation, Matt. 24. 15.

This is a brief and plain Exposition of the Text and Context. And from the
several particulars here mentioned, any unprejudiced Man may see that Christ,
and none else is meant here. It is impossible with any show of reason to apply
the words to any other, though some Jewish Writers have attempted it, but in a
very sorry and ridiculous manner, as you may briefly see in Demonstrat. Evang.
Prop. 9.
Huetius. It is certain that this Prophecy directly points at Christ, and his
Coming and Manifestation, and lets us know that there shall be Four hundred and
ninety Years between the going forth of the Commandment to rebuild Jerusalem,
and his full Manifestation in the World.

But now Great Disputes arise about the True and Exact Beginning and Ending of
these 490 Years, which for the Satisfaction of the Curious, I will undertake to
give some account of. The Greatest Dispute is about the Beginning; for there
were several Orders and Commands about building Jerusalem; hence it is
Difficult to tell from which of them we must date our Account. We know that the
Seventy (...) begin from the going forth of the Commandment (or Word) to
restore or build Jerusalem. But the Word or Commandment concerning that matter
was both Divine and Humane, from God and from the Persian Kings. Which of these
is meant here? As for the Word of God touching the building of Jerusalem, That
was at several and very different times. You have the Divine Promise about it
from the Mouth of Isaiah, chapter 44. 26. and 45. 13. and of Baruch the second and
fourth Chapters, and of Jeremiah 25. 12. and 29. 10, etc. From this latter
Promise especially Lyranus, Vatablus, Galatinus, and many of the Hebrews.
some have dated the Seventy Weeks, but therein are much mistaken, for they go
back too far. Baruch and Jeremiah prophesied six hundred, and Isaiah above
seven hundred Years before Christ; so that it cannot be that the Seventy Weeks
should begin from their Prophesies, because these were long before that Time
can be fixed. Therefore it is impossible these Divine Predictions and Promises
should be meant here. Others look to that Divine Word from the Mouth of the
Angel to Daniel, At the beginning of thy Supplications the Commandment came
forth, Dan. 9. 23. These Supplications were made in the Dan. 9. 1*
first Year of Darius the King of Babylon: Therefore the Commandment went forth
in the first Year of this Darius, which was just about the end of the
Captivity, and consequently the Seventy Weeks began at the end of the Seventy
Years Captivity, when the Angel brought that Message to Daniel in the entrance
of Darius's Reign. Hence Calvin confide^tly averreth, That those Seventy Years
and the Seventy Weeks are joined together. If we interpret the going forth of
the Commandment concerning a Divine Word, this is a very probable Opinion; but
if you compare Verse 23 and 25. you will find that they speak of two Different
things. The Commandment that came forth, in the former place, is not the same
with the going forth of the Command^ent to restore and to build Jerusalem, in
the latter place. The first only signifies that a Word or Message from God came
to the Angel, and that He was to discover it to Daniel, as it follows in that
Verse, I am come to show thee, I am come to tell thee that Word and Commandment
which I have from God. But the second speaks of something which was to be
afterward, in pursuance of the foregoing Message. There should be within the
compass of a few Years a Formal Command or Decree for the re-edifying of
Jerusalem, and from that time (and that only) the Seventy Weeks were to take
their Rise. It is probable then that the Word of Man, i. e. The Command or
Edict of some Prince is here to be understood by the going forth of the
Commandment. Now there were several Edicts of Princes which went forth for the
restoring of Jerusalem, and that at different Times. There are no less than
four Edicts mentioned by Ezra and Nehemiah; we will enquire to which of these
the Inchoation of the Seventy Weeks belongs.

The first Edict we read of, is that of Cyrus, the first Emperor of the second
Monarchy, in the first Year of his Reign, when he set forth a Proclamation for
the ^ews Return under their Commanders Zorobabel and Io^hua, 2 Chronicles. 36. 22,
23. 1 Ezra 1, 2, etc. 5. 13. 6. 3. which is confirmed by the Apocryphal
Writings of 1 Ezra 2. 2, 3, 4. Accordingly Origin, Cl^me^s Alexandrinus,
Tertullian, Calvin, L' Emper^ur, Beroaldus, Broughton, Will^t, Light^oot.
some begin the Edict, or Going forth of the Commandment, from the first Year
of Cyrus, i. e. of his Reign in Babylon, for he had reigned near Thirty Years
before in Persia. But the beginning of his Reign in Babylon was contemporary
with the end of the Seventy Years Captivity. The second Edict was made by
Darius, in the second Year of his Reign, Ezra 6. 1, 2, etc. Hag. 1. 1. For
Cyrus being employed abroad in the Wars, and at last treacherously out off by
the Scythians (against whom he then warred) and the Enemies of the Church being
very vigorous at home, the Work was stopped for a time: But this King renewed
it, and set it forward by his Decree; therefore S^ali^^r, Per^rius, Petavius,
Mede.
some begin the Number of Daniel's Weeks from this. But here it is disputed by
some, whether this Darius was Darius Hystaspis or Darius Nothus: Eusebius,
Cyril of Ierusal^m, Pererius, Petaviu^, Li^^ly, Usher.
Some hold it was the former, and Severus Sulpitius, Scaliger, Helvicus,
Dr^sius, Iunius, Mede.
some contend it was the latter. For there is a great Controversy among
Historians, about the placing of these Persian Kings, their Names being so
often confounded by those that write of them. But the former of these Opinions
bids fairest for the Truth. Yea indeed it will be found upon a strict Search,
that Darius called Nothus was not Emperor of Persia till a considerable time
after, for there were 140 Years from Cyrus to this Darius, whereas the Temple
was built in less than a third part of that time: Whence we may conclude, that
this Darius spoken of by Ezra, was not, nay could not be Darius Nothus. The
third Edict or Decree was of Artaxerxes, in the seventh Year of his Reign. This
is the Subject of the whole seventh Chapter of Ezra; therefore some are of the
Opinion that the Computation of Daniel's Weeks commenceth from this time. There
is some Dispute whether this Artaxerxes was Artaxerxes Mnemon or Longimanus,
but it goes generally among the E^sebius, ^osil, Funeci^s, a Lapide, Ludo^icus
Capillus, etc.
Learned for the latter, and there is good reason for it, because this
Artaxerxes Mnemon did not reign till several Years afterward. The fourth and
last Edict went forth in the Twentieth Year of the Reign of this Artaxerxes
Longimanus, when he gave Nebemiah a Commission to build and repair Jerusalem
with Gates and Walls, Nehem. 2. 1. to v. 9. Accordingly Chrysosto^, Theodoret,
^ulius A. fricanus, Zonaras, Bid, Salianus, Vorstius, Pererius, ^ Lapide,
Bishop Montague, Pe avius, Bish* V^her.
some take the beginning of the Calculation of the Seventy Weeks from the
twentieth Year of the Reign of Artaxerxes Longimanus.

Now of these four Opinions concerning the Beginning of the Seventy Weeks or
490 Years, this last seems to be the most probable, yea it is more than
probable, for this is the thing which I offer here to be noted, that the Rise
of the Seventy Weeks is to be taken precisely from that Royal Decree, and no
other, wherein 'twas ordered that the City Jerusalem should be built. This one
thing being attended to, will lead us to a right understanding of the true and
only Epoche of Daniel's Weeks. Indeed the main reason why the Expositors, who
have undertaken to give an account of these Prophetic Weeks have been
mistaken, is because they overlooked this. They saw they were to take their
beginning from the going forth of the Commandment, but they were not solicitous
to observe which of the Commandments or Decrees it was. They did not take
notice that the Seventy Weeks were to begin from the going forth of the
Commandment to restore and build Jerusalem. As for the other Decrees, viz. In
the Reign of Cyrus and Darius, and in the seventh Year of Artaxerxes
Longimanus, they were for rebuilding the Temple only, not the City, and
therefore cannot be meant here. Consult the Book of Ezra, and you will find
that the first Edict of Cyrus, was only for the Jews to go back, and to build
the House of the Lord. And afterward Darius renewed the Grant for building the
Temple only, and no more. And it is said expressly, That Artaxerxes in his
seventh Year gave leave to the Jews to take care of whatsoever was needful for
the House of their God, Ezra 7. 20. There is not a word in these three
Commissions, concerning the building of the City, the Street and the Wall:
Therefore I infer that the last Commission is meant here, which was expressly for
rebuilding the City, and the Walls, and Gates. Accordingly Nehemiah, to whom
the Commission was given, raised the Walls, and set up Gates, and so finished
the Building of the City, which was in the twentieth Year of Artaxerxes. This
has not been taken notice of by several Learned Men, and has caused them to
mistake the True Era of this Prophecy. But certainly this is a very useful
and necessary Key for the opening of the Text. You see plainly that the
Prohesie begins from that time when Nehemiah was sent to effect this, and not
before; for there was not before this Time any License or Power given to the
Jews to restore and build the City. Artaxerxes, and he only, was the Prince
that did this; he gave order in the Twentieth Year of his Reign, for the
Restoring and Re-edifying of Jerusalem, and setting up the very Walls of it,
which was the last thing to be done: Therefore in the Twentieth Year of this
Artaxerxes was the Beginning of the Seventy Weeks of Daniel. I think this
matter is very evident in it self. And besides, as to the forementioned Edicts,
the first of them, viz. That of Cyrus cannot be the beginning of the Seventy
Weeks, because there are above 560 Years from Cyrus to Christ's Death; for
Cyrus's Edict was about the Sixtieth O^ympiad, and Christ's Death was about 202
Olympiad. And the three other Epoches are also too much backward to be thought
to be the times when the Seventy Weeks began.

There are Isaac Vossius, De la Hay.
some that hold they commenced from the Completing and Finishing of the
Building of Jerusalem, which was in the Three and twentieth Year of the Reign
of Artaxerxes Longimanus, when Nehemiah made a Feast of Dedication of the New
City, Ne^em. 12. 27, etc. which is called the Sacrifice of Dedication and of
Finishing the Temple, 2 Macc. 2. 9. That this was in the Three and twentieth
Year of Artaxerxes may be gathered also from Josephus in his Lib. 11. c. ^
Antiquities. At that time all was completed, the Work was at an end; and to
this purpose the Authors of this Opinion understand the going forth of the
Commandment in a Sense far different from what was represented in the foregoing
Opinions. They maintain that (...) v. 25. is the going out or ending of the
word, and accordingly is translated (...) by the Septuagint, and by the Vulgar
Latin Exitus, and so signifies the Fulfilling and Accomplishing of the
Commandment or Edict concerning Building Jerusalem: Or this Motza d^bar is
Exitus rei, the finishing of the Thing (for a word instead of a thing, is an
usual Idiom in the Hebrew and in other Oriental Languages) and so the meaning
is, that from the Actual and Real Completing of the Building of the City unto
the Messiah shall be Seventy Weeks; therefore from that time the Weeks begin.
But this is but a Critical Noti^n, and has no considerable weight in it,
especially if you remember that this Phrase [the going forth of the
Commandment] was used once or twice before in this Chapter. I ask then the
Authors of this Opinion, whether it is to be understood so then as well as now:
If they say not, then they must give a reason why it should be understood so
here, and not before; which I believe they are not able to give an account of,
neither did they think of this when they espoused the former Notion. But if it
be understood here as before, then there is this palpable Absurdity to be
granted, that the thing was finished in the Twentieth Year of Artaxerxes's
Reign, and yet that it was not finished till the Twenty third Year of his
Reign, whereas there can be but one finishing. To which I add, That it is
evident from other places of Scripture, that Motza dabar is no other than the
Promulgation of the Command or Decree, for so this going forth signifies in
Dan. 2. 13. and Esther 1. 19. When the Edict is published and made known, then
it is said to go forth. Wherefore the foresaid Opinion is a mere straining and
perverting of the Hebrew Phrase. So much for the Beginning of Daniel's Seventy
Weeks: It is most clear and evident that they began from the Decree of
Artaxerxes Longimanus in the Twentieth Year of his Reign. For this must be
rembred, That the Edict here spoken of, is meant of the rebuilding of
Jerusalem, the Streets and the Walls, but mentions not the rebuilding of the
Temple. I grant that the City was begun to be built before this Edict came
forth, as may be gathered from Ezra 4. 12. but there was no Royal Command and
Authority for this; only the Jews were necessitated to build some part of the
City, that they might have a Habitation and Shelter to be in whilst they were
erecting the Temple. But afterward Nehemiah came with Authority from
Artaxerxes, and with a particular Order and Express Command to build what was
wanting in Jerusalem* to erect the Walls, and effectually to finish the whole
Work. There was no Edict for doing this, but this Particular one in the
Twentieth Year of Artaxerxes's Reign.

In the next place I am to speak of the End and Period of these Weeks.
Hippolytus the Ma^tyr placed it in the Birth of Christ, others in his Bap^ism,
and some in his Preaching, but Asri^anas, Bid, L^r^, Burg^nsis, M^rcator,
Funccius, Bucboltz^r, Lansb^rgius, Pererius, Beroaldus, ^acob. and Lud.
Capellus, Eroughton, Will^t, Lightfoot.
most terminate the Seventy Weeks in his Death; for then those things were
fulfilled which the Prophecy mentions, viz. Finishing the Transgression,
making Reconciliation for Iniquity, etc. These were the proper Fruits of the
Passion and Death of Christ, and therefore it is most reasonable to believe
that the Seventy Weeks or Four hundred and ninety Years expired with our
Savior on the Cross. But though this in the Latitude of speaking be very true,
yet if we would be Exact, we must say that the Four hundred and ninety Years
ended not just at Christ's Death, but Three Years and a half or thereabouts
after it. This I will make evident to you thus, The Angel expressly says, That
after the Threescore and two Weeks, joyn^d to the Seven mentioned immediately
before (which together make Threescore and nine Weeks) shall Messiah be cut
off: Whence it is plain, that Christ's Death falls within the Seventieth Week,
for if it be after the Threescore and nine Weeks, it must necessarily be in the
Seventieth Week, when there are no more reckoned beyond that, as is the present
case. This Seventieth or last Week, may be divided into three parts; and we
have ground for this Division in the Prophecy it self, which mentions the
midst of the Week. If there be a Middle, there is also a Beginning and an End.
In the beginning of this Prophetic Week (which you know consists of Seven
Years) the Messiah confirmed the Covenant, i. e. The New Testament by his Holy
Doctrine, Life, Laws and Miracles, and now his Apostles preached the Covenant
of the Gospel. The Week began with his Baptism, Three Years and a half before
his Passion, in the fifteenth Year of Tiberius; at which time Sixty nine Weeks,
or Four hundred and eighty three Years were accomplished, and the Seventieth
Week succeeded. The Beginning or Former part of this Week consisted of above
Three Years, and it is distinguished into four Passovers. The first Passover of
Christ's Public Ministry is mentioned in John 2. 13. from whence begins the
first Year of the Seventieth and last Hebdomade of Daniel: The second Passover
you find in John 5. 1. compared with John 4. 35. Here begins the second Year of
the Seventieth Week. The third Passover, whence the third Year of Daniel's last
Week takes its Rise, is in John 6. 4. The fourth Passover, when Christ our
Passover was slain, about three Years and a half after his Baptism, produced
the fourth Year of the last of Daniel's Weeks. This is that which is called the
Midst of the Week (as you have heard,) in the midst of the week he shall cause
the Sacrifices and Oblations to cease. This was verified when the Messiah by
his Death abolished the Old Law and Covenant, when the Sacrifices ceased by
this High Priests making an Oblation of himself on the Altar of the Cross.
Though the Middle in the Style of Scripture be not always properly and exactly
taken, yet here in this Prophecy it is to be understood in the Strict and most
Proper Sense, for Christ Suffered and Died in the fourth Year of this
Prophetic Week, which is the very Middle of Seven, yea in the Middle of that
fourth Year, which is yet more Exact and Precise. Now if Christ was put to
Death in the Middle of the last Week (as the Angel foretold) then the Seventy
Weeks cannot be terminated in Christ's Death, because there were but Sixty nine
Weeks and a half completed at that time. And if there was half a Week behind
(for the Middle part of the Week was but short, Christ's Death taking up but
little time) then the Latter part or End of the Week must contain in it Three
Years and a half, or thereabouts, and consequently the Seventy Weeks or Four
hundred and ninety Years ended not just at our Savior's Death, but about Three
Years and a half after it; which was the thing to be proved. This is the most
Exact Account that I can offer to you.

I know there are Tr^ullian, Chrysostom, Sulp^tius Se^^ru^, Drusius, Sc^liger,
Calvisius.
Learned Writers and Chronologers who extend the Period of the Seventy Weeks to
the Destruction of Jerusalem by Titus Vespasian, but they were unwarily drawn
into this Opinion by fixing their Minds on those words in the Prophecy, The
People of the Prince that shall come, shall dest^oy the City and Sanctuary, and
the end thereof shall be with a Flood, and unto the end of the War Desolations
are determined: And again, For the overspreading of Abominations he shall make
it desolate: Which without doubt are a Prediction of the Overthrow of the
Temple and City of Jerusalem by the Roman Armies: And because this is joined
with the Seventy Weeks, those Persons think that the Weeks end at this time.
But this is no necessary Consequence, because here is only mentioned what shall
follow upon the expiring of the Seventy Weeks, the direful Recompense of the
Jews cutting off the Messiah is foretold. This horrible Devastation shall
happen not long after the 490 Years are completed; but you cannot conclude
thence that these Years were just fulfilled at the Devastation and Ruin of
Jerusalem in the second Year of Vespasian.

It remains now that I give you the Particular and Distinct Computation of
these 490 Years; which yet it is something difficult to do, by reason of the
Uncertainty in Chronology, as must be confessed by all Persons that have
consulted variety of Authors, (and those that have not done so are no Competent
Judges here) but the Disagreement among these Writers is not so great, as
wholly to discourage us. I have laid their Calculations together, and have duly
compared them, and upon an impartial ballancing of the whole difference among
Chronologers in computing these Years, I settle the Account thus, The Twentieth
Year of Artaxerxes's Reign was in the Year of the Worlds Creation 3497, at the
end of the 81 Olympiad; and the time of Christ's Passion was in the Year of the
World 3983, at the beginning of the 203 Olympiad, and consequently the fourth
Year after Christ's Passion was A. M. 3987, and the beginning of 204 Olympiad.
This Calculation is indifferently fixed, and will be agreed to by all Parties
that are moderate. Now, if you reckon the Years that were between these two
Periods, viz. between 3497 and 3987, you will satisfy your selves that they
were just 490 Years, and no more, which is the very Number that the Seventy
Weeks amount to; and consequently from the Twentieth Year of Artaxerxes to the
time of our Savior's Passion were no more, nor no less than 490 Years. This
might be particularly made good from the Distinct Aera's between these Great
Periods, and which are of note among Chronologers; but I think it is
superfluous to undertake this, seeing in Helvicus and other Chronological
Tables they are very plain.

But I will go another way to work for the satisfaction of the Reader, I will
trace these 490 Years through the several Reigns of the Kings that were in
those times, and thence I will demonstrate, that from the Twentieth Year of
Artaxerxes's Reign (at which time the Decree came forth for the Rebuilding of
Jerusalem, as has been sufficiently proved) to our Savior's Passion were 490
Years, or according to Daniel's Sacred Arithmetic Seventy Weeks. Take it thus,
Artaxerxes reigned Twenty Years after his sending Nehemiah to build the City
and Walls: Then succeeded Xerxes and Sogdianus* two Brethren, Artaxerxes his
Sons, but it seems they were of no account at all, and are therefore omitted by
some Historians; but others own them, and say they reigned a very short time:
We may allow them (as Writers generally do) a Year. After these Darius Nothus
sat on the Throne Twenty three Years, then Artaxerxes Mnemon reigned fifty
Years. Some say more, but I embrace their Opinion who say he reigned but fifty,
because I have before exceeded some Men's Account when I set down Twenty three
Years for Darius Nothus, whereas some assign him but Nineteen. Then reigned
Darius Ochus Twenty six Years, Arses or Arsanes Four, and Darius Codomannus
Six: So that the whole time of the Reign of these Persian Kings was 130 Years
from the time of the Decree to rebuild Jerusalem. Upon the Death of Darius (the
last Persian Monarch) Alexander the Great succeeded in the Monarchy, and
reigned six Years: After whose Death reigned the Ptolomees or Lagidae in Egypt
(for I will trace the remaining Years by this Line, and not by that of the
Kings of Syria or Macedon, these being more intricate) in this order,
Ptolomaeus Lagi Forty Years, Ptolomaeus Philadelphus Thirty four, Ptolomaeus
Euergetes Twenty five, Ptolomaeus Philapator Sixteen, Ptolomaeus Epiphanes
Twenty four, Ptolomaeus Philometor Thirty five, Ptolomaeus Eurgetes Twenty
nine, Ptolomaeus Physcon Seventeen, another Ptolomee Ten, another called Soter
Eight, Ptolom. Dionysius Thirty, Cleopatra Twenty two, at which time the Greek
Monarchy ended, after it had held out 296 Years. After her Death Augustus (who
was properly the first Emperor of Rome, and began the Roman Monarchy) reigned
43 Years, whom succeeded Tiberius, in whose Eighteenth Year our Blessed Lord
suffered; which two Numbers, viz. Eighteen and Forty three put together make
Sixty one Years. Now then, reckon all these Sums, viz. 130 Years of the
Persian Kings Reigns, 296 Years of the Successors of Alexander, 61 Years of
Augustus and Tiberius, and you will find that they amount to 487 Years, which
wants Three Years of the Complete Sum, viz. 490 Years or Seventy Weeks.
Wherefore to supply this, we must remember that Christ suffered (as the
Prophecy expressly says) in the midst of the last Week, and so by adding Three
Years we shall make the 490 Years complete.

I cannot say this Calculation of the Years of the Kings is Exact, nor can any
Man say that any other is; for there is no little Obscurity in the History
relating to those Monarchs, and the right Order and Succession, the true Number
and Names of them, and the time of their Reign. Wherefore the Account must be
taken and fixed with some Latitude, and we must be content with this, because
we can attain to no other. But from what I have offered, we are as to the main
certain of the Truth of this Prophecy, and we cannot doubt of the Evidence of
the Account in general. It is most plain that the Seventy Weeks are to be
reckoned from the Twentieth Year of the Reign of King Artaxerxes Lo^gimanus, in
which Year (and not before) the Royal Decree came forth to restore and build
the City, and to finish the Temple which Zerobabel had begun; and it is as
plain that these Seventy Weeks had their Expiration about the time of our
Savior's Passion and Death: Or if we exactly and precisely make the
Computation, we must say that his Death fell in the middle of the last Week.

After all this, I must freely declare that we need not be Dogmatical and
Punctual in the Interpreting this Prophecy. Though I offer that Calculation
before specified, as the most Probable; yet this is certain, that if you take
the Beginning of the Seventy Weeks according to some of those other Opinions,
and fix them to their respective Endings, you will find that they do not fall
much amiss; they do not considerably come short of Seventy Weeks of Years, nor
are they much redundant. Which truly is as much as we can rationally expect in
the Present Case, considering that the Chronology of that time is Difficult and
Intricate, and Historians hugely differ in the Account of the Years of those
Monarchs. Therefore Hi^ronym, in loc. Augustine. de Civ. Dei, l. 18.
some of the Ancient Fathers shun the Question about the Beginning and Ending
of the Seventy Weeks, and hold it too Difficult to solve. Yea, a Modern Father
of the Protestant Churches abroad declares, that here is place only for
Co^jectu^a utendum e^t. Calvin.
Conjecture, and accordingly he propounds his. But this is too Loose and
Lavish. And much more is that of another Reinold. Praelect. 1^8.
Writer, who absurdly imagines that the Seventy Weeks are to be taken
indefinitely, as if a certain Number were here put for an Uncertain one. This
no Man of deliberate Thoughts can swallow down, because this great Number is
afterward divided into lesser and more distinct Portions, as much as to assure
us that a Determinate Number was meant, for if the parts of the Number be
definite and determined, if they be fixed for such particular Transactions,
then it must undeniably follow, that the whole Number is definite and fixed
also. But yet it must be acknowledged that it is very Difficult to determine
the Exact Beginning and Punctual Ending of these Prophetic Weeks. I have
(after the Attempts of many others) propounded that way which seems to me most
probable, and I submit it to the Censure and Judgment of the Reader. Some take
the beginning of the Calculation from one thing, and others from another, but
the general Reason of them all is the same, for at that Time they think the
word went forth for the Restoration of Jerusalem. But I having fixed the going
forth of the word, i. e. The Royal Commandment or Decree, I having by
unquestionable Arguments determined this, I hope there is no farther occasion
of disputing about the True Beginning or Epoche of the Seventy Weeks. And
having gained this Point, we have secured the next also, for the End of these
Weeks depends upon their Beginning, and must be regulated and determined by it;
when we know one, we are not to seek for the other.

However, though some place the End of this Computation at one time, and some
at another, yet they all agree in the Main, that is, they all confess that the
Seventy Weeks are placed in some Period between the Return from Babylon and the
last Overthrow of Jerusalem: And consequently they agree in this, that these
Seventy Weeks are long since past and gone.

And that our Savior is meant by Messiah in this Prophecy, no Man can have
any reason to doubt in the least; for who can these Descriptions and Characters
which you meet with here agree to but to Christ? The Messiah was to be cut off
for the sins of others, which can be understood only of Christ Jesus, who was
the Lamb of God that came to take away the sins of the World. So likewise the
making of Reconciliation for Iniquity is the alone Office of Christ, our
Messiah: And therefore the Old Jews used to say the Messiah should be Ish
caphar a Man of Propitiation, a Man that should make Atonement and Satisfaction
for Sin. To Christ alone belong the bringing in and confirming the Covenant,
the New Law and Religion of the Gospel. And the causing the Sacrifices to
cease, i. e. The Abolishing of all the Mosaic Rites and Ceremonies can be
meant of none but Him. Particularly as to the last of these, it is plain that
Christ was to come whilst the Jewish Temple stood, and whilst Sacrifices were
offered, for he could not make them to cease unless they were in being. Now
then the Sacrifices being ceased, it follows that the Messiah is come. This is
an unanswerable Conclusion, and this is the grand thing I urge, viz* That from
this Prophecy of the Seventy Weeks it is undeniably evident that the time of
the Messias's Coming is past. Yea, whenever you begin these Seventy Weeks, it
is plain that they (...) expired. That is enough to Baffle and Confute the
Jews: That is enough to prove that the Prophecy is fulfilled, which is the
Principal thing I designed.

The fifth Text enquired into, viz. Matthew XXVII. 5. He departed, and went and
hanged himself.Compared with Acts I. 18. Falling headlong, he burst asunder in
the midst, and all his Bowels gushed out.
WHen I take notice of the Dimensions of Iudas's Sin and Guilt, when I consider
what he was, and what he did, I am apt to think that his Punishment was
answerable to his Horrid Fact. Of all the Great and Notorious Sinners mentioned
in the Bible or in any other History from the beginning of the World to this
time there is none like him, and therefore I am inclined to believe that as his
Crime was unparallelled, so the Recompense of it was of a resembling Nature.
Judas the worst and vilest of Traitors became his own Executioner, but not in a
way that was Usual and Ordinary, but such as was as Remarkable as his Damnable
Treachery. The Consideration of this has invited me to enquire into the Manner
of his Death, and to find out of what Particular Kind it was; whereby I hope to
Reconcile these two places of Scripture, which have not a little exercised the
Brains of Interpreters, because they seem to be Different, if not Contrary
Relations of the Fatal Exit of this Cursed Traitor and Apostate. From St.
Matthew we are ascertained that he went and hanged himself: By St. Luke we are
no less assured that he falling headlong, burst asunder in the midst, and all
his Bowels gushed out. Both these passages I will examine, and compare
together, that by this means we may the better understand what Kind, or rather
Kinds of Death justly happened to this Execrable Wretch, and also that hereby
the Inconsistency of the Relations concerning the Death of Judas, may not be
alleged (among other things) by Atheistical Men to disparage the Holy
Scripture, and the Authority of it.

First, The word (...) may signify to us that he choked and stifled himself
with immoderate Grief and Anguish of Mind, as the word (...) denotes among the
Best and most Authentic Wri^ers; and there is the same signification of the
simple Verbs (...) and (...), from whence the La^in ango is derived, and both
of them from the Hebrew (...) suspiravit, gemuit cum angore cordis, with which
the Verb (...) strangulavit, suffocavit has Affinity. Here then in the first
place we are told by the Evangelist, that this Vile Wretch went and macerated
himself with Grief and Melancholy, which was partly mentioned before in the
word (...) v. 3. for (...) is post factum angi, to be very much grieved and
troubled in mind for what is done; and the Devil, who had entered into him,
followed this close, and made it a Prologue to something more Tragical. For
though it was his own Act, yet he was hurried to it by the special Instigation
of the Devil, who was now become his intimate Guest. Such a Devilish Distemper,
but not in so great an Excess, King Saul labored under, says Philocal.
Origin, when he was forsaken of God. This was the Evil Spirit that came upon
him, and strangely disturbed him in his Body, insomuch that he seemed, says
Autiq. ^^d. l. 6. ^. 9
Io sephus, to be choked and strangled. Exercitat. Sacr. in M^t. 27.
Heinsius (with whom agree Grotius and Ham mond) understands (...) of this
sudden Suffocation: Judas was choked or strangled, i. e. says he, He was
struck with a sudden Disease in his Throat, he died of an Angina Squinancy, or
some such Violent Distemper that unavoidably stopped his Breath; so that being
swelled within by the Air or Spirits shut up, he fell down, and broke his
Belly, and the Bowels gushed out. So this Excellent Critic, He thinks Judas
expired, as A (...) Sep^uagint. (...) 2 Samuel 17 23.
Achitophel is said by some of the Jews to have done, viz. Of some Suffocating
Disease that was bred by some great Grief of Mind, which is implied (say they)
in the word Chanak which is there used. This Suffocation or Stifling of the
Spirits, is that Machanac which the Hebrew Doctors talk of, viz. That sudden
stopping of the Breath which is caused by an inward Oppression of the Mind,
that sudden Death which Job was tempted to wish for, Job 7. 15. My Soul, says
he, chooses strangling, i. e. In the height of my Temptations I could even
desire to be utterly bereaved of Breath and Life by this Suffocating Melancholy
which my Miseries bring me into. This was Iudas's Distemper at present, when he
had reflected on what he had done, he was swallowed up of Sorrow and Remorse,
he was oppressed with the Load of Guilt, he labored under the Pangs and
Horrors of Conscience, he was terrified with the Dismal Apprehensions of the
Divine Nemesis, and thereby his Spirits even stifled, his Breath obstructed,
and himself in a manner Strangulat inclusus dolor -- Ovid.
Strangled and Suffocated. I subscribe then to those Learned Critics thus far,
that (...) is meant of a Melancholy Suffocation, but I cannot go with them so
far as to grant that this only is here meant, and tha: Judas died of this
Suffocation, which is ^he thing that Heinsius and Grotius assert; for as for
our Learned Annotator he leaves them here, and is inclinable to attribu^e
Iudas's Death to something else, as you shall hear presently. And truly Grotius
likewise, though he follows Heinsius in his Interpretation, that by (...) is
meant Grief of Mind, adds this of his own, that Judas had a sudden dangerous
Fall, and therewith burst him self. I grant that this Suffocation was a
Preparatory Death, this made way for the Halter and all that followed it: But
that which I assert here is, That this Suffocation here spoken of, was not to
that Excess that he immediately died of it; for it is Idle to think that this
Suffocating Grief alone was the cause of his Death, when we read of his falling
down headlong, and of all his Bowels gushing out. These are never known to be
Concomitants of that Distemper; no History gives us any Instance of this
Nature. And therefore it is fond and groundless to imagine that this
Suffocating Passion was his Fatal End, that this was it which dispatched him.

What then did? You will say. I answer, his hanging himself, i. e. His
Strangling himself with a Halter or some such thing, and his falling headlong
from the place where he hung, and thereby bursting asunder. Some indee^ tell
us, That that which dispatched him was his fall from a Precipice; for being
Melancholic and Vexed, he took the Course which such Persons are commonly wont
to do, i. e. He threw himself down from a Rock, or some such place, and so
ended his Life; and upon this fall his Bowels gushed out. The Critics who run
this way (the chief whereof are Pricaeus, Vossius and Dr. Hammond) endeavor to
prove our of several Writers, that Persons overwhelmed with Grief and Despair
chose this way of Dying, viz. Casting themselves down from some Precipice. This
is freely granted, and moreover no Man, I believe, will question that upon this
precipitating themselves their Bowels were broken. This is no Wonder, but it
would be one indeed, if their Members were not broken and shattered with such a
Descent. Well, but then what shall we do with the word (...)? How could Judas
go and hang himself, and also throw himself down from a Rock, or craggy Hill,
or some place of this kind? I suppose no Man will say he did this before he
hanged himself: And I scarcely think any Man will say he did it after; neither
was it possible for him to do it at the very time when he cast himself down:
Therefore I conclude that he did it not at all. But the abovesaid Critics
evade this by understanding (...) in another Sense wholly; one of them
interprets it of Melancholy Suffocation only, as you have heard; and the other
tells us that (...) is as much as mori cupere or mori velle, to be w^^ry of
Life, and from a consciousness of Guilt to be restless till we are rid of it.
But this Great and Worthy Writer assigns a Sense of this word which was never
heard of before, and he does not so much as attempt to show, that this word is
taken so in any Author. A great Oversight certainly! To say the Truth, these
Professed and Resolved Critics have all of them at one time or other
this-Fate, they deliver things without any ground; being warm in the Notion
they have taken up, and having a great Opinion of their own Authority, they
think it is enough to vouch the matter; or being in Prosecution of father
Notions depending on it, they wholly forget to establish what they have
asserted.

As for the Rise of this Mistake in these Learned Men, I conceive it was from
this, That they found in Authors (whom they plentifully quote to this purpose)
that it was usual with Discontented and Melancholic Persons, to put an end to
their Days by throwing themselves down from Precipices, and they taking Judas
to be such a one in the highest degree, conclude that he dispatched himself
after this manner, and that this is the meaning of his falling headlong
mentioned by St. Luke. Especially when they read that all his Bowels gushed
out, they think there is good reason to affirm, That this was caused by his
falling from some high place. But all this is mere Conjecture, and has no
ground to support it, for if Judas had procured his Death by throwing himself
down from a Precipice, as Melancholists have been wont to do, then surely
instead of bursting asunder, and his Bowels gushing out, we should rather hear
of broken Bones and Limbs, which are the most usual Consequences and natural
Effects of such a Precipitation (for these Commentators speak only of such.) So
I^ Trachin.
Sophocles expresses Lichas's throwing himself from a Rock into the Sea, and
so Precipitation is generally described in Authors. Wherefore seeing we read of
something else, which is not commonly mentioned as the Effect of a Great Fall,
we may be induced to infer that some other thing is intended and meant.
Besides, there is nothing here mentioned, nay there is nothing implied or
hinted concerning Iudas's dispatching himself from a Precipice, unless it be in
the word (...). But it is well observed by Heinsius (for we must make use of
one Critic to confute another) that Praeceps is not the genuine or primary
Import of this word, but that it ought rather to be interpreted Pronus.
However, this is sufficient to invalidate the aforesaid Opinion, that we cannot
infer from the word (...) a volutnary Precipitation, which is the thing that
Author contends for. But on the contrary, (...) being joined here with (...),
shows that Judas did not throw himself down, but that he was altogether Passive
as to this thing, and consequently that this place of St. Luke is not to be
understood of a wilful flinging himself down from the brow of a Hill, or the
top of a Rock, as the old Melancholic Desperadoes used to do.

The Truth is, the word (...) is of an ambiguous use, and may be rendered not
only praeceps but pronus (and it is likely this Latin word came from that Greek
one) and so we may take it here; for I am for interpreting words in their
greatest Latitude, because by this means we shall find out the full Sense of
the Scripture. Though Judas did not cast himself from a Precipice, yet he was
precipitated, and he was in a prone posture: Both these, but the latter
especially, seem to be signified here by (...): being in a prone posture
leaning forward, bending downward (that is the primary Denotation of the word)
he fell to the Earth, and this declining Posture that he was in contributed to
it. This word then gives us some light into the manner of his Death; it fairly
intimates to us, that (after he had immersed himself in most profound Grief and
Anguish of Mind, whereby he choked and stifled his Spiri^s) he hanged himself,
i. e. he wilfully intercepted his Breath by Strangling himself. For this prone
Situation, this bending of his Head and Face, and this pressing down of his
whole Body were caused by this way of dispatching himself. This gives us
sufficient ground to believe that this perplexed and despairing Wretch ended
his Life with a Halter, for this was the very Posture which his Hanging himself
put him into. (...), being with his Face downward or forward, stooping and
declining with his Head, was as fitly and properly said of such a Person, viz.
One that hanged himself, as could have been, and accordingly it is very
observable, that (...) is rendered sus^ensus by the Vulgar Latin; which Version,
although it does not take in the full Extent and Latitude of the words, yet it
confirms the Inrerpretation which I am now insisting upon, viz. That Hanging,
and not voluntary Precipitaition, is here meant.

For the Proof of this we need only allege the Greek word (...) used by St.
Matthew, which signifies this particular way of Dying, and answers to the
Hebrew Chanak, which is to kill with Strangling, and is used after the same
manner that Talah suspendere is, which is rendered by the Septuagint (...) and
(...). It is acknowledged by In locum.
Grotius, that (...) is the word commonly used in Greek Authors, to signify a
Persons Killing himself by Hanging himself. And the words (...) and (...) are
of the same import, from whence comes our English word to Hang. It is true,
this word (...) bears another Sense likewise, as I have said before, but that
does not exclude this, but is very consistent with it, which is the thing that
I desire may be observed here. It seems good therefore to the Holy Ghost, in
this place to make use of an Ambiguous word, which may be taken either or both
ways. Our Translation is very well, he hanged himself; but the word in the
Greek is of a larger meaning, and signifies Strangling or Choking, which may
be either by a Man's being Stifled and Choked with Grief, or by his Hanging
himself, in the more strict way of speaking. Let it not then be wondered at,
that I take the word in both Senses in this place: I am induced to do so by the
different signification of the word which the Evangelist uses; and therefore I
advise that it be translated thus, He strangled himself, for this takes in both
Senses of the Greek word. For in this, as in several other things, the Holy
Scripture differs from other Writers, it has sometimes a double Sense couched
in it, yea a double literal Sense; such is the Pregnancy of the Sacred Style
above all others. Therefore seeing this Inspired Writer has here used such a
word, I see no reason why I may not interpret it in the double meaning which it
carries: And accordingly I understand by it, that this Vile Despairing Traitor
first choked his Vitals with Grief, and then to ease himself of that
intolerable Pressure, wholly stifled them by hanging himself. This latter Sense
is that which I am now treating of, and you will find it acknowledged and
embraced by several Origin, contr. Cells. l. 2. Epiphanius contr. Haeres. l. 1.
Haeres. 38. Chrys^stom. Augustine, Bid, Sed^^ius, Iuvencus, Arator.
Ancient Fathers, and other Writers of the Church. An (...). Ignat. Epist. ad
Philipp.
Eminent Primitive Martyr is very positive in it: And St. Ierom (from whom the
Vulgar Latin has it) renders the Greek word thus, Laqueo se suspendit. These
thought it reasonable to understand (...) in this Sense, viz. for Suffocation
by Suspension, and thence conclude that Judas laid violent hands on himself,
and strangled himself with a Ro^e or Halter, or something that was (...) that
purpose. If you ask what Tree he hung himself upon, Hist. Evangl. l. 4.
Iuvencus will tell you that it was a Fig Tree; but the more Vulgar Tradition
is, that this was done on an Eldern^tree^ whence the Fungus S^mbucinus Auricula
Iudae.
Excrescencies about the Root of it bear the Name of Jews or Iudas's ^ars, and
are a Vulgar Medicine against Squinancies and Sore Throats, as if it had some
reference to that Traytor's Strangling himself in that part. But this we may
allow to have little weight in it, and no more able to evince that he hanged
himself on that Tree than Veniat illi laqueus in Psalm 35. 8. (which some make
use of) proves the manner of his Death before spoken of. But this use may be
made of this Fabulous Report (as some account it) that we may thence gather it
was the general Belief of old, that Judas hanged himself, (for why should they
talk of a Tree and a certain Tree, on which he did it, if he did not do it at
all?) which questionless was grounded on this Record of the Evangelist
concerning him, [he went and hanged himself.] For the word (...) both among
Herodot. T^^^ydid. Pausa^. Ae^ian, P^lybius.
Historians and A^i^^^h. T^^o^rit. E^igram.
Poets (as well as other Writers) commonly signifies the applying a String or
some such thing to the Neck, and therewith compressing that part, and stopping
the Breath.

But how shall we reconcile this with his falling headlong, and bursting
asunder in the midst, and his bowels gushing out? How are these consistent with
his Fatal Suspension? If he fastened himself to a Beam, or a Tree (or whatever
else it was I am not solicitous) how came he to fall thence, and upon that Fall
to break in pieces? The answer is easy, it was the Will of Heaven that the
Punishment of this Notorious Varlet should be Remarkable, and that we might see
in the Strangeness of his Death the Extraordinary Judgment of God upon him. He
thought to deprive himself of his weary Life by Hanging himself: But it
happened, and that by Divine Disposal, that the Fatal String wherewith he did
this, was not strong enough to hold him any considerable time, and thereupon
his cursed Body fell to the Ground. This is a plain and easy Resolution, and
without this it is impossible (whatever some have enterprized) to reconcile St.
Matthew and St. Luke, the first who says Judas hanged himself, the latter who
tells us that falling headlong he burst asunder, etc. Nor is this without good
Authority; Oecumenius acquaints us that it was received as a true Narrative
from Papias and others that lived near the Apostles times that Judas hanged
himself, and that the String or Cord with which he did that Execution broke
asunder, and so he dropped down, and was run over by a Cart or Wagon that came
by at that time, which crushed his Guts out of their place. And you will find
Theophylact also asserting his Suspension, only with some Variation as to
Circum^tances, for he is of opinion that the Tree whereon he hung did bend or
break, and thence this Cur^ed Man fell to the Ground. I cannot be positive
here, only this I suggest, that either the Fatal Instrument of his Execution,
or that on which it was fastened might slip, or break, or some other ways be
loosned; and then he falling upon a Stone, or a sharp piece of Timber (as we
may suppose) unless we will admit of the other Conjecture before named, it is
not to be admired that his swollen Belly did burst, and that his Entrails came
forth. Here is nothing difficult or improbable, nothing harsh or strained. We
may easily assent to what I here offer, without the least Violence to our
Faculties. The Proposal is reasonable in it self, and it has the Suffrage and
Approbation of those Writers who have treated of the Particular Manner of
Iudas's Death. Nor must we think it strange that some Writers of the Church are
silent as to this, for they did not concern themselves in the giving a
particular Relation of this Fact, and the Manner and Events of it. And what
though Papias and others lard the Story of Iudas's hanging himself with several
Fictions, as that of the Cart, and his Hydropick Swelling, etc. These we are to
^light and disregard, but the plain Truth we must retain, viz. That he ended
his Life by that Fall which was occasioned by the breaking of the String or
Noose with which he had thought to dispatch himself. This has been believed by
the Ancients (as we have said) and is embraced by several of the Isaac
Casaubon. Gerhard. Calixt. Di^t^ric. etc.
Moderns; though of late some have gone another way, and have invented new
Opinions of their own.

So then the full Meaning of both the Texts put together is this (as I
conceive) Judas, after he had thrown down his Money, the Cursed Reward of his
Treachery departed and went (both which words are very observable but are not
sufficiently distinguished by our Translators) (...) he retired into some
solitary place (for so the word is used in Matt. 14. 13. John 6. 15. and in
other places, and it is the frequent Denotation of the word in Profane
Authors) thus he departed, or rather (as it should be rendered) went apart, he
betook himself to Solitariness, as is the Custom of deep Melancholists; and
then (...) is added to signify his Wicked Design, he went, i. e. he went away
with a Design and Purpose of putting a Period to his Life, and accordingly
first he pined himself with Excessive Grief and Melancholy, and thereby fell
into such Fits of Suffocation as had like to have proved Mortal to him. In the
next place he betook himself to a Halter, as an infallible Remedy of his Grief
and Anguish; but the Load and Pressure of his swelled Body soon gave him a
Release from his Noose, and he fell headlong to the Ground, or rather on
something that lay between that and him: And thus his remaining Breath was
quite beaten out of his Body by its violent dashing on that which lay in the
way; and at the same time by that wide Rupture whereby his Entrails were poured
forth, his wretched Soul made its way, that it might go to its own place, i. e.
To the Infernal Regions of the Damned, and there have its Portion without Hope
and Possibility of a Redress: For I think there is no Man in his Wits will give
heed to what is mentioned by (...) ^rigen in ^tt. tract. Theophy^^ in Mat. 27.
Theophan. homil. 27. Zonar. Epist. 56.
some, that Judas knowing Christ would shortly descend into Hell, and deliver
all Persons thence, went and hanged himself before our Savior's Death, that he
might be sure to be in Hell when he came thither, and thereby have the Benefit
of being saved by him.

This is the Complete Interpretation of the words which I offer, wherein I not
only take in the full Sense of both Texts (which I see most Expositors are
Defective in) but I put an end to most of the Disputes that have been raised
about the Interpreting of these words. For it has been warmly controverted,
whether Iudas's Death was by Grief, or Suspension, or by a Precipice: Some have
held the first, some the second only, and others defend the last as most
accountable. But I maintaining that his Death was procured by all these three,
(for in the way that I have explained them, they are all three very consistent)
I do hereby silence the particular Quarrels and Pretenses of Critics against
one another on these places of Scripture. The word (...) which St. Matthew
uses, having a double meaning, has rendered the Manner of Iudas's Death
uncertain among these Authors, but I have made use of the Ambiguity of that
word to another end, viz. To suggest to me that the double Sense of the word is
to be attended to here, i. e. We are hereby informed that this Wretched Caitiff
was first suffocated with Fits of Despairing Sorrow, and soon after attempted
to end his days with a Halter: But as he hung and pressed himself down, this
cracked or otherwise was unfastned, and so he came tumbling from his height.
Then, to this Suffocation, Suspension and Precipitation (for it may be called
so, though it was not that Precipitation which some, as you have heard, fancied
he expired of) was added a Rupture and Effusion of his Bowels (the last Act of
this Tragedy) for by being thrown down he so wounded and tore his Body, that
these Entrails soon found a passage by which they came forth. This is the
Exposition which I give of the words, and you see it is consistent with it self
(which cannot be said of some of the Interpretations which have been mentioned)
and it is fully adjusted to the Grammar and Criticism of the words; it is also
comprehensive of the full meaning of the Relation which we have of Iudas's
Death, and is effectual to the silencing of those Quarrels that are among
Interpreters. But chiefly it may merit the Preference to all other
Interpretations: Because,

1. Hereby, and not by any other way St. Matthew and St. Luke (or St. Peter
rather, for it is he that gives that Relation in the Acts concerning Judas) are
thoroughly reconciled. For the first says he hanged himself, i. e. by an
inward Grief and an outward Application he strangled himself: The second says
he fell headlong, and burst asunder, i. e. His swollen Corpse by its mighty
Pressure and Gravity got loose from the place where it was tru^^ed up, and by
its violent fall broke asunder. Here is nothing contradictory in both these
Passages, for in the one is set down what Judas wilfully attempted and did
toward the procuring of his Death: The other acquaints us what was the direful
Sequel of it: The former relates the beginning of this Fatal Tragedy, the
latter the end and Catastrophe of it. Thus both these Inspired Authors agree:
But if you understand the words either wholly of Precipitation properly so
called, or of Melancholic Suffocation, you set these Writers at Variance, and
you will never be able to bring them to an Agreement: Yea, you make them say
that which was never so much as thought of. For as for Iudas's flinging himself
from a Precipice, there is not a single Syllable in the Relation given by these
Holy Men that looks that way, or gives the least Hint of it. Besides, hanging
himself is expressly mentioned in one of the Texts, and we are sure that this is
inconsistent with casting himself down from a Precipice. And as for Melancholy
Suffocation, it was never heard that this alone produced a Total Rupture of the
Body, and an Exclusion of all the Bowels: These must undoubtedly be the Effect
of another Cause. That Tho. G^idot, M. D.
Physician who pretended to solve this by the Instance of a Bur^ten Child,
whose Malady is caused by keeping in the Breath, whereby the Diaphragm is born
down, and so by that violent Depression the Entrails are broken and displaced,
was as wide from the purpose as Bath is from Jerusalem. What is this to the
bursting asunder in the midst, and all the Bowels gushing out, and that by
falling head long? Was it ever known that the stopping of the Breath, the mere
hindering of Respiration procured such an Effect as this, viz. A total
Exenteration? No. It is to be ascribed to another Cause, and I have assigned
what it is. Thus the seemingly different Accounts of Iudas's Death are
reconciled, which could not possibly be done in that way which Expositors
generally have taken.

2. This Exposition which I have presented you with is an undeniable Proof and
Demonstration of that which I suggested in the entrance into this Discourse,
viz. The Remar^ab^eness and Singularity of this Execrable Traytor's End. Of all
the Criminals Recorded either in Sacred or Profane Story, there is none equal
to this Judas, and therefore it was fitting that the Recompense of his black
and foul Demerit should be as Matchless as that it self: And this we see
accomplished in the Wonderful Manner of his Death. Or rather, it was not a
Single Death, but a Complicated one, which is the thing that makes it so
Strange and Observable. The first thing he attempted, was to abandon himself to
excessive Melancholy. When he reflected on his Fact, he was overwhelmed with
Vexation and Despair. It is impossible to relate, or to imagine the Horrors of
his Soul, and the Tortures of his Conscience, which he underwent on this
occasion. This only we can say, That this Load was so Great and Pressing, that
it even choked and smothered his Vitals, it strangled and stifled his Spirits,
and almost bereaved him of Life. To complete this fully, he proceeded yet
farther, and wilfully hanged himself, that he might be freed from his present
Misery, although this did but let him into greater. The Memory of this more
effectual Strangling of himself (the everlasting Badge, and Infamous Memorial
of his Guilt) remains still in his Name From Iscarab Strangulatio. Lud. de Dieu
in Matt. 10. 4. Dr. Lightfoot, Hor. Hebraic. in eund. loc.
Iscariot, which was given him (as our Learned English Rabbi thinks) after his
Death, or (as others Conjecture) before it, with a Prospect of this direful
Fact.

It is farther remarkable in this Singular Instance of Gods Vengeance, that
this Traytor's hanging himself, was not, as he intended it, his last
Punishment: This Miserable Criminal fell headlong, before he was altogether
deprived of Life and Sense, from the place of his Suspension, and his almost
Breathless Carcass shook out his loathed Soul and his Bowels together by a
Fall. This Evisceration is very remarkable, for it is emphatically said, his
Bowels, yea all his Bowels gushed out. St. Luke speaks here like a Physician,
as he was, and means by (...)* Hesych.
(...), in the usual Acception of that word among those of that Faculty, all
the Viscera of the middle and lower Ventricles, the Heart and all the other
Inwards belonging to both these. This sets forth the Rarity and Wonderfulness
of this Judgment, this calls upon us to take special notice of i^. Let me
observe to you, that in his being thus wholly disbowelled, we may plainly read
the Punishment of a Traitor: For not only with us, but other Nations,
Eviscerating has been part of the just Penalty inflicted on such Malefactors.

Moreover, I might take notice of St. Luke's other word [(...)] which we have
not fully translated when we English it [he burst asunder] for it properly
signifies such a Rupture as is accompanied with a Noise, and therefore in the
Vulgar Latin Version it is rightly rendered crepuit. This Terrible Crack which
attended Iudas's Fall, was so loud, that it was heard at a great distance: And
accordingly we read in the next Verse, That this was known unto all the
Dwellers in Jerusalem. It is no wonder, says our H^^. H^b^, in (...)
Christian Rabbi, that this sudden and violent Explosion of all his Entrails,
made such a mighty and horrid Sound, for the Devil, who had entered Bodily into
him, and had inhabited there three days, now broke forth: And upon this violent
Eruption of that Evil Spirit, a great and amazing Noise was heard, such as must
needs affright the Neighborhood. For though ^ do not approve of the Learned
Doctor's Interpretation of the word (...), which he takes in a Passive
Signification wholly, and tells us that Judas was snatched up by the Devil into
the Air, and there strangled by him, (whereas it is expressly said he went, which
is an Active word, and shows that what immediately follows, was a proper act of
his own; whence I have reason to gather, that he strangled and hanged himself,
that he was a Felon of himself, that he wilfully procured his own Death) yet I
do verily believe that the other Act of the Tragedy was immediately by the
Devil's Procurement. This Infernal Demon struck him down to the Earth and Hell
together, whither his Body was enclining. And truly he might justly have his
last and fatal end from the Devil's own Hand, who was immediately stirred up by
this Diabolick Spirit to commit that cursed Fact.

Thus all the Circumstances of this Miserable Caitiff's End make it
Stupendous; that we may be convinced of this Great Truth, that this was a
Notorious and Exemplary Punishment, and designed by God to be Peculiar and
Remarkable. Here were several Deaths met together in this One Horrid Example,
that we may be invited to observe and admire the Extraordinary Hand of
Providence in it, and that we may take notice how God has inflicted a Judgment
worthy of such a Miscreant, that this Unusual and Unheard of Manner of his
Death, may appear to be the just Desert of his unparallelled Villainy, namely,
his Betraying of Innocent Blood, even that of the Lord of Life and Glory. One
way of Death was not thought sufficient for him, and therefore his cursed Life
was torn from him by many, viz. by Macerating Grief, by Violent Hanging and
Strangling himself, by a sudden Precipitation, by a Disruption of his whole
Body, and by an Effusion of all his Entrails.

As to what is suggested by a Gronov. Exercit. Academ.
late Writer, that he was not buried but cast into the place destined for the
Carcasses of Beasts and all manner of Filth and Dung, and that the throwing his
Dead Body into this Barathrum, where he was burst asunder, is meant by his
falling head long, I cannot apprehend any ground for this Conjecture, and
therefore I cannot insert it as a Remarkable Attendant of his Death, and as
part of that Severe Judgment which befell him here. I have gone as far as the
words of the Evangelists have authorized me, in explaining of which, I have
fully set forth the Tragical End of this Hypocritical Actor in Religion, this
Mock-Disciple, this Apostle in Masquerade, this Execrable Deserter and Vile
Betrayer of his Master.

But I have not yet done, for I am to add, that as the Just Judgment of God
upon him here, was Signal and Remarkable, so the same Divine Vengeance pursued
him to another World, and made his Fate there as Singular and Observable. This
is that which I conceive is the true meaning of those words in Verse 25. of the
first Chapter of the Acts, That he might go to his own place. I know some
interpret this of Death or the Grave, but very improperly, for this is not
(...) a proper place, but a Common one, and therefore is rightly called so by
(...)
Plautus, and Dying is going to that place which is Common to all, which is the
Recepta^le of all Mankind. Others understand this place of Hell, that being
(say they) Judas his own place: But, so far as I apprehend, this Acception of
the word for Hell in a general Notion is not the meaning of the Text, because
Hell was not so Iudas's own place, as that it was proper to him alone, and none
else, for Hell is the Common place for all the Damned. But though I am ready to
grant that Hell is meant here, yet I take leave to understand it in a more
Emphatick way than it is usually taken: For (...) his own place is his peculiar
place, the place in Hell proper to him, and no other. This I am persuaded is
the true and full Import of the words. Judas went to his own place, i. e. That
Individual Peculiar Place in the Regions of Hell, which was particularly
allotted for him, and him alone. All Impenitent Sinners have their Portion in
that Infernal Lake, but this Cursed Traitor and Apostate was con^ined to his
own Apartment to his proper and peculiar place in that Universal Receptacle of
the Damned. To establish this Opinion, and to confirm the Sense of the words on
which I ground it, I desire it may be considered, that as it is generally
acknowledged by Divines, that there are Degrees of Happiness in Heaven, so it is
also granted, that there are Degrees of Torment in Hell. This is the general
Ground and Foundation of my interpreting these words in this Sense. In the
Kingdom of Heaven are John 14. 2
(...) many Mansions, and in the Infern^l Kingdom are (...) proper distinct
places, singular and peculiar Torments according to the Quality of Sinners, and
consequently Judas was consigned to his; he had, and he has, and shall ever
have a Peculiar Proper Punishment, distinct from that of other Sinners. Again,
I find that there is a Particular Individual Wo^ denounced against that Man by
whom the Son of Man was betrayed, Matt. 26. 24. Iud^s is (...).
that Man, remarkably set forth, and distinguished from all other Men, by that
inimitable Fact of his, the Betraying the Son of Man, which assures us of the
Peculiarity of the Woeful Curse here affixed to him. This is as proper to him as
his Crime. Moreover, to strengthen this Assertion, I might take notice that he
is emphatically styled the Son of Perdition by our Lord, John 17. 12. which
signifies not only that he is inevitably Lost and Damned, for this is true of
every profligate Man that dies in his Sins, but it must necessarily include
something else in it, something Greater and Higher, viz. That he is Lost and
Damned, and consequently that he is the Son of Perdition in a Sense different
from all other Persons, that his Punishment in Hell is Singular, his Place or
State of Torment is his own, it is proper to him, and different from that of
all others. Lastly, I desire you to observe the particular wording of this
Text: St. Luke says not that he went (...), (as Number. 24. 25. 70 Interpr.
Baalam is said to do,) but he uses the word (...) instead of (...), to let us
know that this place which he went to was so his, that it was no Bodies else:
For this is the true import of (...). Nor does this su^fice, he inserts here
the Demonstrative Article (...): twice, he went (...); which remarkable
Duplication of the Article fixes and appropriates the Sense, and undeniably
proves that the place and State allotted to this Arch-Traytor in the Regions of
the Damned, were his in a peculiar manner, i. e. They were so his, that they
were not common to any others. This is (...). And thus I have given you the
Reasons of my Exposition of these words in that way which I have propounded. I
do not find that Commentators interpret them in this Sense, but yet I think
that from what I have offered, it is evident that this is the true and genuine
Acception of that Expression. All the Criminals recorded in the Old and New
Testament, are but Puny Sinners, if compared with Judas, especially if we
consider that he was placed in so high a Rank, and was so highly favored by
his Lord, that he was one of the Sacred College of Apostles, and Blessed with
Extraordinary and Miraculous Gifts, and admitted to the Holy Sacrament of the
Eucharist with the rest of his Brethren. It will not seem Strange and
Wonderful, that this Ungrateful and Per^idious Parricide, who acted so contrary
to his Profession and Privileges, and betrayed his Master with a Faithless
Kiss, was rewarded with a proper place of Torment, a peculiar State of
Damnation, not common to him with others. It was ^itting that his Future
Penalty should be answerable to that here, (of which we have sully treated in
this Discourse) namely, That it should be Singular and Unparallelled, and
differing from all others. It was ^itting that as no Man ever committed such a
Crime, so no Man should have the same Punishment with him, either in this or in
the other World.

The sixth Text enquired into, viz. I Cor. XVI. 22. If any Man love not the
Lord Jesus Christ, let him be Anat^ema Maranatha.
THE Task which I set my self at present, is to make enquiry into the true
Sense and Signi^ication of the word Anathema, that understanding the right
import of it, we may grasp the meaning of this Dread^ul Execration of the
Apo^^le, Let him be Anathema: For as for the ensuin^ word, or rather words
Maran-atha, I shall offer but little about them, which shall be in the close of
all. That we may have a true N^tion of this word (...), I must in the first
place take ^otice of a great Mistake among some A^^hors, which is this, They
are wont to con^ound these two words (...) and (...), whereas they are really
distinct, and of diffe^ent Significations. This we are (...) observe before we
proceed any farther, that we may form right Apprehensions of the word, as well
as of the thing which is before us. The former of these, which is the word in
the Te^e, is al^ays taken in a bad Sense, but the lat^^er is generally
understood in a good and (...) one, and simply and (...) any thing that is set
apart, dedicated to a Deity, devoted to the Honor of God, or of the Gods, for
this word is used by Profane as well as Sacred Writers. As this is the
Acception of the word in the best Classical Authors, (which none will deny that
are acquainted with them) so this is the use of it in St. Luke 21. 5. Some
spoke of the Temple, how it was adorned with goodly Stones and Gifts, (...), i.
e. with Presents and Oblations brought to that Holy Building, and there
bestowed toward the Beautifying and Enriching of it, not without some Relation
certainly of Devotion and Reverence to the Lord of that House. And all Gifts
and Presents whatsoever that are consecrated to God, are called by this name,
and accordingly the usual rendering of (...) is donarium or donum, a Gift
consecrated to God; for (...) or (...) is reponere, sursum ponere, attollere,
suspendere, and thence is very appositely applied to these Sacred Gifts, which
being Inde apud Platon. Polit. 2. (...) and apud Herodian. (...).
offered to God were laid up, and hung up in the Temple for the Service and
Honor of the Numen to which they were dedicated.

And here let me have leave to offer my Conjecture, which is this, That the
Greeks giving that name (...) to those Gifts which were thus Consecrated, is an
Allusion to the Hebrew name which that kind of Holy Presents has in the Old
Testament, and which was given to it by God himself, as in many things it might
be proved, that the Pro phane Grecians borrowed from the Sacred Book. This sort
of Gifts was styled Terumah, from (...) elevatus, exaltatus fuit, which we
translate an Numb. 15. 19. 18. 24.
Heave Offering, because it was heaved or lifted up before the Lord. And with
this is joined Tenuphah, another Holy Oblation which owes its Original to the
Verb (...) which signifies to shake and move to and fro, as well as to elevate,
and thence that sort of Present is called a Lev. 7. 30. 8. 27.
Wave-offering, it being the particular usage it seems at the tendering of it,
not only to lift it up (which was the main thing) but to wave it. Now, to this
lifting up (whence Terumah more signally had its name, and was properly an
Oblation lifted up) (...) among the Greeks exactly answers, and according to
the forementioned Theme whence it is derived, may be rightly rendered donum
elevatum or suspensum. In the Pagan Devotions (...) were such Presents as were
bestowed on the Gods, and set up on some high and eminent place, as generally
upon the Walls and Pillars of their Temples. This is well observed by a Salmas.
in Solinum.
Learned Critic who tells us that Not all those Gifts which were dedicated to
the Gods were called by the Grecians (...), but those only which could be hung
up, or set upon some high and conspicuous place. And this is the true and
simple Acception of this word (...), which is different from (...) with an
Epsilon, although you will find that several Writers observe not this difference.
But it is certain that (...) is of a quite contrary signification to (...), this
latter denoting a Holy, the former an Unholy thing or Person; this signifying
some thing or Person Consecrated to God, that on the contrary some thing or
Person Gursed of God and Man, and destined to be destroyed, yea sometimes it
signifies the very Cursing it self, as you shall hear afterward.

But here it is objected that the Septuagint use the word in a good sense, to
signify that which is Holy to God, and dedicated to his Service, as in Lev.
27. 28. where the (...) or devoted thing is said to be Holy unto the Lord. So
in Ios. 6. 19. we read that all the Silver and Gold, and Vessels of Brass and
Iron that the Israelites should find in Jericho, when they took it, were to be
consecrated, or as it is in the Original) to be Holiness unto the Lord, which
very things have the name of (...) given them in v. 18. whence some infer that
the word with an ^ as well as with an ^ is taken in a good sense, and signifies
a Sacred Gift offered to God. But this is a palpable Mistake, for if you
consult the place in Leviticus, you will find that it speaks of the Cherem
properly so called, the thing or Person that was devoted to utter Destruction,
and therefore could not be redeemed, as you read there. How then could this be
a Gift to God, how could it be an Offering consecrated to God, and separated to
Sacred Uses when it was utt^rly destroyed? But yet it may be said to be Holy to
God in this sense, viz. That the Destruction of it, which was appointed and
commanded by God himself, was for his Glory and Honor. The cursing of the
Canaanites, the devoting them to Ruin, yea and the actual Destroying of them
redounded to the Honor of God, whilst thereby he showed himself the Sovereign
and Absolute Disposer of the World, and at the same time gave undeniable proof
of his irreconcilable Hatred of all Idolatry and Idolaters. Thus the Persons
and things devoted to Destruction were Holy to the Lord. This is the true and
genuine meaning of this place, and no Man that looks into it and considers it
well, can interpret it otherwise. And hence perhaps it is, that in a remote
Sense the Verb Charam (and consequently the Noun Cherem) may be taken, as in
Mic. 4. 13. to signify Consecrating or Holy Dedication. Not that the word has
any such genuine signification, for it is not Charam but Kadash that is the
word constantly used to denote Sanctifying or Consecrating, i. e. setting a
thing or Person apart to a Pious use, to Gods peculiar Honor and Service. I
say Kadash is the proper word for this every where in the Old Testament; yet
because even Cursing of things or Persons is to Gods Glory, and so may be said
to be Holy to the Lord, hence Charam and Cherem, and accordingly Anathema come
to have that Sense sometimes, but in a very improper and forced manner.

The other Text in Joshua speaks not of things that were to be destroyed, but
to be preserved, and therefore it is added there, they shall come into the
Treasury of the Lord, and consequently they are said to be Holiness unto the
Lord. But this is Foreign to the present Business, for we are speaking now of
the Primary and Proper Meaning of the world, not of any Improper and Secondary
one. I grant that (...) is improperly and as it were at a distance applied to
the things which are consecrated to God, and are reserved for his particular
Use and Service: But thence to infer that this is the First, Genuine, and
Native Signification of the word is Unreasonable and Illogical. The things
spoken of in the forenamed place, viz. The City Jericho, and all that was in
it, are called (...) in the Seventy's Translation, not because they were to be
reserved for the use of the Temple, or because they were consecrated to the
Lord: No, this is another Consideration of the things, and is nothing at all to
the true import of the word, for this consecrating to the Lord, refers to some
particular individual things only, and not to the rest spoken of in that place.
For observe what is there said, v. 17. The City shall be (Anathema) accursed,
even it, and all that are therein, all things as well as Persons, for (...)
takes in both, and the Seventy Interpreters particularly restrain it to things,
(...), etc. Now, that by (...) or being accursed to the Lord, is meant here
that they shall be destroyed to the Glory of God, is evident from the words
immediately ensuing, Only Rahab the Harlot shall live, she, and all that are
with her in the House. These particularly are excepted from the general
Anathema or Curse which was to end in Destruction: Therefore it is undeniably
true, that all other Persons and things were cursed by God, and destined to
Destruction. The whole City, and every Person and thing in it, were thus an
Anathema, yet so as God was pleased to spare the Silver and Gold, the Brass and
Iron for the Service of the Tabernacle. But still these are included in the
general Notion of (...) or Accursed things, and so are called in v. 18. because
they did belong to that accursed City Jericho, and should have been involved in
the actual Curse and Destruction, if God had not in a peculiar manner exempted
them, and thought good to reserve them for Holy and Religious Uses, and thereby
to cut off as it were the Curse entailed upon them. But if we consider the
things in themselves, i. e. as they appertained to that City, which was devoted
by God to Perdition, they are (...) Accursed things, and are so styled, as you
have heard. The words in v. 18. run thus, Keep your selves from the accursed
thing (viz. The Gold and Silver, etc. mentioned in the next Verse) lest you
make your selves accursed when ye take of the accursed thing, and make the Camp
of Israel a Curse. Or, you may read it according to the Septuagint thus, Keep
your selves from the Anathema, lest you make your selves Anathema, when ye take
of the Anathema, and make the Camp of Israel an Anathema. Here is you see
nothing contained in the Primitive and Genuine Sense of the word (...) but a
Curse, and a devoting or being devoted to Mischief and Perdition, for there is
no color at all of reason to take (...) here in contrary Senses, but all Men
must acknowledge, that the general Sense is the same in every Clause of this
Verse, or else it is impossible to make any Sense of it. Which shows us what is
the true import of the word, viz. A being set apart and destined by a Solemn
Curse to Destruction, and consequently that the word is not to be taken in a
good Sense, but the contrary, viz. for something Execrable and Detestable, and
(as the consequent of this) that it is far different from (...), yea is another
word, which is the thing I was to prove.

But notwithstanding this, we shall find that some Writers are very defective
here, and mistake one word for another, and thence they tell us, that (...) are
things dedicated to God. Thus Resp. 21. ad Ort^od.
Justin Martyr confounds the words, and so does Homil. 16. in Epist. ad Romans
Chrysostom, whatever a late Suicer. T^esaur. Eccles.
Writer suggests to the contrary. Nor do In cap. 13. Esai. and in cap. 9. a^
Rom^n.
Theodoret or In 23 cap. Act.
Oecumenius distinguish between them, as appears from some part of their
Writings. And Balsamon and Zonaras often confound the words (...) and (...) in
their Comments on the Councils. The same is done by some Modern Commentators,
as In Rev. 22. 3.
Cotterius, In Gal. 1. 8.
Gomarus, and others. But you may observe that all the Exact Masters of Grammar
and Criticism make a real Discrimination between these two: Thus according to
Hesychius (...), maledictus, excommunicatus: But (...) is (...) donarium,
ornamentum templi. The like Distinction is made by Suidas and Pollux, and other
Grammarians. Annota^ in Pande^t.
Bud^eus, a sufficient Judge in this case, asserts this difference, and by no
means suffers them to be confounded. In Romans 9. 3.
Estius, that Judicious Commentator, tells us that it is most certain the
Ancient Greeks made a Distinction between (...) and (...) Exercitat. Sac. in
cap. 4. ad Romans
Heinsius wonders that any have asserted the promiscuous use of these words,
for they are (says he) not only diverse but contrary. The Learned Exercitat.
in Solin. p. 1089.
Salmasius agrees with him, and makes a real difference between these words. So
Hofman in his In Verbo Anathema p. 99.
Universal Lexicon carefully fixes the Distinction between them.

If it be asked what was the reason, or occasion rather of the forementioned
Mistake about these words, whence was it that the forenamed Authors, and
several others whom I might have produced, confound these two, I answer I
conceive this is the ground of it, namely because Offerings and Gifts are
sometimes consecrated to God with the addition of a Curse: As Darius's Decree
for Building and Dedicating the Temple ends with an Execration, Ezra 6. 12.
Thence perhaps Anathema has been used to signify a Gift dedicated to a
Temple, and an Accursed thing, or such a one as has a Curse laid on it, viz. a
Curse to him that shall meddle with it to alienate it. Thence Anathemata were
said to be those Gifts that were consecrated to God, and which 'twas not lawful
to convert to another use, because the Consecration was under pain of a Curse
to those that altered the Property of them. And it is indeed generally said by
the Jewish Doctors, that one sort of their Cherems were so set apart from
common use, that there was implied, and sometimes expressed a Cursing of them
who should attemp^ to alienate them. I conjecture it is on this account (viz.
because of this Execration annexed to the Donation) that these words have had a
promiscuous use, and have been thought by some to signify things consecrated
to Holy uses, and also those that are destined to Destruction. Hence, as I
suppose, Anathema, with a little Variation in the Writing, and sometimes
without it, is of an ambiguous meaning, and has been taken by some in a good
and a bad Sense, namely for the Gifts and Offerings which Religious Votaries
present to the Deity, and appropriate to Sacred Uses, and likewise for such
things and Persons as are wholly aliena^ed from God, and are devoted to
Destruction by him. But the former Acception is secondar^ and improper, and the
Rise of that Promiscuousness of the words which we have obferved, is only from
that Curse which is sometimes annexed to the Con^ecration. Hence it is that the
Primitive mea^ing of the wor^s (...) and (...) is perverted; as we see there
are many Instances of the like nature. For there are some good words (as (...),
etc.) which afterward are used in a bad Sense, and on the contrary some words
of ill meaning (^s (...), etc. become good sometim^s. Thus it is here in the
words before us, they are distorted from their proper Sense and Primitive use,
and one is made to signify the same with the other, whereas they really differ
in themselves, and are of a contrary Signification.

Having thus cleared the way to what I intended, by showing the Difference
between these two words (...) and (...), I come now to speak particularly of
this latter, and to offer a more distinct account of the genuine meaning of it.
We must know then that (...) has its original from the same Greek word that
(...) had, yet with this difference, that (...) or (...) signifies here
separare, removere, auferre, as also renuntiare, rejicere (for these are the
known significations of the Greek word in good See Constantine's Lexicon, which
in many places outdoeth all others.
Classick Authors.) And consequently as (...) properly signifies that which is
kept or laid up in some eminent place, so (...) properly denotes that which is
separated, removed, taken away and rejected: Briefly, as the former signifies
the Preserving of a thing, so this latter imports the utter Destroying and
Consuming of it. But not to rely wholly upon the Etymology (which I know
generally is but an uncertain proof,) I will make this good from other
Considerations, and offer the reasons why I fix this Interpretation on the
word. First, Let it be remembered that our Apostle often alludes and refers to
the Old Testament, and makes use of several Words, Phrases and Expressions
which he finds there. Those that are conversant in the Style of this Hebraizing
Writer will not show any Averseness to acknowledge this, and therefore I need
not insist upon it. Now, it is probable that he does the like here, i. e. That
he refers to that noted word (...) so often mentioned in the Old Testament,
which has this very Signification, and is applied in the same manner that this
word is: So that any discerning Person may perceive that this Greek word (...)
answers exactly to the Hebrew Cherem, and that the Apostle has respect to it
in this place. Secondly, This is made more probable from the Famous Version of
the Seventy Interpreters, who constantly render the word Cherem by this word
which the Apostle here uses, viz. (...), and from them without doubt this word
was taken by this Sacred Writer, who in above a hundred places (as might easily
be showed) has borrowed words from those Greek Interpreters, and applied them
in the same Sense and Meaning that they do. Wherefore it is reasonable to think
that he does the like here. Thirdly and lastly, This may be called an
Ecclesiastic word, because it is most used by the Fathers and Church-Writers,
and from their rendering and explaining of the word, we may infer that it runs
parallel with Cherem.

Here then we are concerned to look into the true import of this word Cherem,
because upon this depends the right understanding of the word (...). First, we
shall find that the more general significations of the Verb (...), whence this
Noun comes, is separavit, excommunicavit, and con^equently Cherem is a Cherem,
privatio vel separatio plenaria. Avenar. lib. Radic.
Separation, or the Sentence of Excommunication whereby Persons are separated
and cut off from Holy Communion. This is the usual meaning of the word in
Jewish Writers, they understand by it an Ecclesiastical Punishment, or a Solemn
Interdiction or Proscription whereby Contumacious Offenders are forbid the use
of Holy things, and debarred the Communion of the Church, and the Benefits of
it. But in the next place, the more particular import of the word is Separating
with a Curse. For devovere, execrari is the usual signification of the Verb
Charam in Scripture, as in 1 Kings 20. 42. Isa. 34. 5. and other places; whence
Cherem is not only a Cursed thing or Person, but the Cursing of them. This is
that which is threatened by God to the Jews, if they reject the Messiah, and is
the Conclusion of the Old Testament, That he will come and smite them with a
Curse, Mal. 4. 6. Cherem is the word, and thence (...) is frequently used to
denote a Curse, and (...) and (...), as in Acts 23. 12. signify to Curse, or
to Swear with the Addition of a Curse. It is a Separating and Devoting of
things or Persons by a Solemn Execration; it is a Vowing, Wishing and
Pronouncing their Destruction and Perdition. Therefore thirdly, Charam among
the Hebrews is desolavit, destruxit; and Cherem is desolatio, destruction,
perditio omnimoda. As to the Verb, it is acknowledged by all, that there are
great Numbers of Texts, wherein it signifies to destroy utterly, as in Ex. 22.
20. Deuteronomy. 2. 34. where the word can have no other Sense than this, and
therefore is rendered by the Seventy (...) and (...). So in Isa. 11. 15. it
cannot possibly signify any thing else (as is plain from the words themselves,
and from the Context) and therefore (...) devastare, desolare is the Version of
the Septuagint. Again, in Ier. 51. 3. and Dan. 11. 44. it cannot be understood
otherwise than thus, and accordingly it is rendered in both places (...),
abolere. And I question not but this is the meaning of the word in Ezra 10. 8.
though we transla^e it to forfeit; but the plain Sense and rendering of it is
this, [his Substance shall be destroyed,] as in the case of Achan; wherefore
(...) is the word used here by the Greek Interpreters, because (...) answers to
Cherem, the proper meaning of which word is Destruction.

And we may farther learn and be ascertained of the true and genuine meaning of
this word from the Law of Cherem, set down in Lev. 27. 28, 29. which there
signifies a thing or Person devoted to Destruction, and also from the
particular Instances of this Cherem, as those Idolatrous Cities mentioned in
Deuteronomy. 13. 15, 16. Which were to be utterly destroyed, and all that was in them.
Neither Inhabitants nor Cattle were to be spared, nay all the Spoil of them was
to be gathered into the midst of their Streets, and both City and Spoil to be
burnt to A^hes. The Cities shall be a heap for ever, they shall never be built
again, and there shall cleave naught of the accursed thing (the Anathema) to
thy hand, v. 17. Jericho was a Cherem, Cursed and Destined to Destruction: So
A^alek was devoted to be a Cherem, 1 Samuel 15. 3. Utterly destroy all that they
have, and spare them not, but s^ay both Man and Woman, etc. Charam and (...)
are the words here used. And hence perhaps were the (...) and Devota capita
among the Greeks and Romans: For (as I have said before) it was not unusual
with the Gentiles to borrow some Practices from the Jews. They had a report
among them, it is likely, of this Remarkable Usage, viz. The Devoting of
certain Cities, and the Inhabitants of them, to Slaughter and Destruction, and
that this was executed by the special Command of God: Whence it is not
improbable that in an Apish and Superstitious manner they took up such a
Practice as this, and devoted certain Men to Death and Destruction, to please
their Gods. And this is the more probable, because the very word (...), homines
quorum ca^ita di^s in^eris devota ^unt. Constant^n. Lexic. and B^daeus.
(...) was used by the Ancient Greeks to signify those Execrable Wretches who
were chosen out to be put to Death, and to be devoted to the Infernal Demons.
The (...) answer to the Jewish Cherem, i. e. Things or Persons devoted to utter
Destruction, for the word Cherem retains the Sense of the Verb Charam, which
signifies utterly to destroy, and that without Mercy: Whence the Critical
Hebrews tell us, that Charam is directly opposite to the Verb Racham misereri.

From Charam the word Chormah derives its Pedigree, and so should be translated
Destruction in Numb. 14. 45. though you find it otherwise, for the Vulgar Latin
keeps the Hebrew word it self, and our English Translators follow it, rendering
the place thus, The Amalekite discomfited them even unto Hormah, whereas I
conceive Hormah or Chormah denotes not a place, but Death and Destruction, and
the words should be rendered thus, The Amalekite discomfited, or P^rsecutus st.
Vu^g. Lat.
pursued them even unto utter destruction, i. e. Death. Those Pagan Victors
pu^h'd on their Conquest even to the utmo^t Ex^remity, according to what Moses
had foretold, v. 43. that the Israelites should fall by the Sword. Thus they
were destroyed, as you expressly read in Deuteronomy. 1. 44. where this same passage is
related again. And from such a Fatal Event as this (but upon the contrary
Party, the Israelites afterward overthrowing the Canaanites) the place where
the Execution was done was called Hormah, and not before. Numb. 21. 3. They
utterly destroyed them ((...) is the word used by the Septuagint) and their
Cities, and called the name of the place Chormah, or (according to the Greek
Translation) Anathema: So it is as much as Cherem, you see. But in the other
Text before mentioned Hormah is no Proper Name, but an Appellative; which is
farther evident from this, that there is an (...) before it, whereas there are
no Prefixes to Proper Names. I am inclined to think that Harmageddon, Rev. 16.
16. (a word that has much exercised the Critical Wits) is of the same
Derivation, Charmah denoting Destruction, and Gad or Geddon an Army, and so it
signifies the Destruction and Fatal Overthrow of that Army of Antichrist which
was to Rendezvouze in that place: It takes its name from the Event which you
read in v. 19. This I conceive is preferable to the other Derivations that are
usually assigned of the word Harmageddon.

I will also observe to you, that this word Cherem in a Metaphorical way
signifies a Net, in which Fishes are taken to be killed and eaten, i. e.
destroyed, Ezekiel. 32. 3. Mic. 7. 2. Hab. 1. 15. All which I allege, to show you
that Cherem, if you respect the word from whence it is extracted, or the words
that are of near Cognation with it, denotes killing and destroying. This is the
proper signification of it (for as to the Catechrestick Acception of it, I have
nothing to do with it here,) yea, this is its Brixia^. Thesaur. Linguae S.
Avenar. lib. Radic.
First and Original signification. By Cherem we are principally to understand
Utter Destruction and Perdition, Final Extirpation and Excision, and withal
the Wishing, Vowing and Denouncing of these. Thus (...) in the New Testament is
borrowed from Cherem in the Old, and answers exactly to it. I know some Authors
have taken notice of the Reference of the one to the other, but I thought fit
to superadd a full and distinct account of the Remarkable Agreement that is
between them, and this I have done by laying open the Origination of the words,
and the particular use of them. (...) is as much as (...) let him be a Cherem,
that is to say in the full meaning of it, Let him be a Person separated,
cursed, destroyed.

So that by this I have conducted you to the true and complete meaning of the
Apostle's words: Here is a Triple Judgment denounced against those that love
not the Lord Jesus Christ, those who are so far from loving him, that they
disown and deny him. For it is certain here is a Meiosis, less is expressed than
is intended; by not loving is meant hating and renouncing of the Lord Jesus
Christ. Let him that is guilty of this horrid Sin be Anathema, says the
Apostle, that is,

1. Let him be separated. In which these two things are included; First, That
he be separated from Christ's Church, that he be excluded from being a Member
of that Body. (...) answering to Cherem, is rightly understood, as that was, of
Excommunication, which is a Prohibition of Communion with the Church, and a
cutting a Person off from the Benefits which accrue from it. Thus our Apostle
in Holy Zeal for the Jews his Countrymen and Kinsmen, professes he could be
content to be for their sakes Romans 9. 3.
an Anathema from Christ, i. e. to be separated from Christ's Church, and the
Communion of Saints: He could even wish himself excommu^icated from the
Assemblies of the Faithful, if this might any ways redound to the good of his
Brethren. So here, the least Punishment that can be inflicted on him who loves
not the Lord Jesus Christ, is that he be deprived of the Fellowship of the
Church, of which he professed himself to be a Member. As he renounceth Christ,
so it is but just he should be cast off by the Church, and debarred of all
Society with it. So St. Chrysostom understands this place, Let him be Anathema,
that is, says he, (...). Ho^il 16 in Ep^st ^d Rom
Let him be separated from all, let him be estranged from all, (...) In loc.
Let him be a stranger to the common Body of the Church, says Theodoret. (...)
I^ Romans 9 3.
Anathema is Separation or Alienation, says Theophylact. And indeed among
Christian and Ecclesiastical Writers it has this peculiar Denotation, and is
used to signify Excommunication. And as he deserves to be separated from the
Church, so likewise from Christ Himself. Secondly therefore Let him be
Anathema, i. e. Let him be separated from Christ, let him have no part in
Jesus. So indeed the Apostle's words before mentioned may be farther meant, I
could wish that my self were Anathema from Christ, i. e. separated from Christ
himself. If it were p^ssible (for it is but a Supposition, and a strain of
passionate Love and Indearment,) if it might any ways promote my Brethrens
Welfare, I could willingly be excluded from all Benefit by our Lord jesus
Christ. I could methinks endure any loss, part with Gods Favor and my own
Bliss for their sakes. But what the Apostle here utters only in a high strain
of Affection to express his Great Concern for his Kindred (for you must look
upon it as no other,) he most truly and directly wishes and denounces against
all those that wilfully and obstinately renounce Christ, that fall from the
Faith they once professed, and abjure the Holy Jesus. Let such a one never in
this World enjoy his Favor, or share in any Advantage by his Blessed
Undertakings for Mankind.

2. Let him be a Person Accursed of God and Men, for that (as I have showed) is
contained in the Notion of Cherem, and consequently of Anathema; and thence
among the Writers of the Church, to Anathematize is to Curse, or to denounce
Accursed. If any Man love not, i. e. hate the Lord Jesus Christ, it is a most
equal Recompense of that his Hatred, that he himself be detested and abhorred,
and that he be Cursed upon Earth. If he calls Christ Anathema (1 Cor. 12. 3) i.
e. looks upon him and speaks of him as an Abominable Execrable Person, he
certainly himself ought to be an Anathema, an Execration, a Malediction. As he
is justly banished from the Communion of the Church (which we spoke of before,)
so moreover he is to be delivered to Satan, which in the Apostles times
accompanied Excommunication, 1 Cor. 5. 5. 1 Timothy 1. 20. This is a farther
Punishment of the Apostate here spoken of. He is to be accounted a Devoted
Person, he is to be consigned over to the Evil Spirit as a most Detestable and
Cursed Wretch, forsaken of God, and destined to Destruction. Which is the

Third thing contained in this word. Let him be Anathema, i. e. let him be
destroyed; for that also is comprehended in the Notion of Cherem, yea is the
primary import of it, as we have fully proved. Now, this Destruction includes
in it both the Temporal and Eternal Punishment which are entailed on these
cursed Miscreants, the Haters of Christ. First, it is probable the Apostle
means here those Temporal Inflictions, as Sicknesses, Diseases and Torments of
Body which attended Excommunication and Delivering to Satan in those days, and
which are called the Destruction of the Flesh, 1 Cor. 5. 5. which also may be
included in the Apostle's Wish before mentioned, That himself were an Anathema
from Christ, i. e. That (besides what has been said before) he might feel all
those Corporal Punishments which usually were inflicted on Sinners when they
were delivered to Satan. I could be content, says he, out of his Excess of
Affection and Kindness, to undergo all those Severities and outward Hardships
of Body, on condition that I might be really Beneficial to the Souls of my
Brethren, and reclaim them from their Unbelief and Impenitence. This the
Learned Dr. Hammond (as well as G^otius) takes to be the Anathema of the Text
which is before us; it refers to the Primitive Discipline of Anathematizing or
Excommunicating, which was followed with most dismal Effects, particularly with
remarkable Judgments on their outward Man, which are called by Ignatius (...)
The Plagues which the Devil inflicted. Let these Execrable Sinners, who
renounce their Lord and Savior be plagued with all those bodily Maladies;
being thrown out of the Communion of the Church, and debarred of Spiritual
Benefits, let them suffer all the Temporal Evils and Calamities of this Life.

Secondly, A future Eternal Punishment in another World is here implied; which
makes this Denunciation of the Apostle to be most Astonishing and Dreadful. If
any Man love not the Lord Jesus Christ, and persists in this vile Temper and
Practice, let a Curse pursue him into the next World to his Everlasting
Perdition and Confusion. This is the highest Sense of this Anathema, this
Cherem, this is a devoting to Death and utter and final Destruction. So then in
brief the meaning of the words in their full Latitude is this, If any Man love
not the Lord Jesus Christ, so as not to confess him, but to renounce and deny
him, especially in time of Persecution (as some at that time, the Gnostics
says our Annotator, affirmed it lawful to do) if any Man hate and vilify the
Lord Jesus Christ, and disown and reject that Faith which he once embraced, let
his Reward be to be separated and cut off from Christ Jesus the Head, and from
his Body the Church, let him be Accursed in Body and Soul, and be given up to
the Prince of Darkness, and suffer all Evils in this World and in the next, let
him be destined to Eternal Misery, and perish Everlastingly without remedy.

Thus Spiritual, Temporal and Eternal Evils, but more especially these last,
are comprehended in this Apostolical Execration; therefore to this Anathema the
Apostle adds Maran-atha, which is thought by some to answer to the Third kind
of Excommunication among the Jews, the Severest and Dreadfullest of all, which
they styled Shammatha, a final S^paration from the Church without hopes of
returning. And some that embrace this Opinion tell us that Maran atha is a
Talmudick word, and frequent in the Rabbis, and that the greatest and most
fearful Excommunication among the Jews was called by this name from the first
words of the Writing or Instrument of Excommunication. But our great Christi^n
Rabbi gains^ys this, Hor. Hebraic.
That this (says he) is a Form of the highest Excommunication, and is the same
wi^h Shammatha (which some assert) is utterly without the Warrant of any Jewi^h
Antiquity at all. Nay, the words Maran-atha are not to be met with in the
Jewish Writings. I believe we may take it upon the Doctor's word (who knew as
well as any Man) tha^ they are not there. However, this is certain that if we
look into both those words [Shammatha and Maranatha] we shall find that they
are of the same signification, for Sham or Shem is nomen, which in ordinary
Speech among the Jews signifies God, and atha is venit, and so the compound
word is to be resolved into this, God comes; which is the same with
Maran-atha, for Maran in the Syriack and other Eastern Tongues signifies
Dominus (and thence, as Grotius observes, the Syrian Maronites have their name,
because they call Christ Marani, i. e. our Lord) and atha, as was said before,
is rendered venit, he comes; and so both Shammata and Maran-atha exactly answer
to that direful Menace of Enoch, Jud. v. 14.
The Lord comes, which was a Prophecy as well as an Execration, that was very
Famous in the Church of the Jews, and from this (it is very probable) those
Forms of Execration were taken. Behold, the Lord comes with ten thousands of
his Saints, to execute Judgment upon all, especially on such wicked and
profligate Sinners that deny the Lord who bought them, and shamefully renounce
the Christian Faith and Profession. These are they that love not the Lord Jesus
Christ.

Here then all that I will remark is this, that this Dreadful Execration which
the Apostle here uses, has peculiar reference to Gods Final Judging the
World, and his executing Eternal Vengeance on the Wicked. For though we may
grant with the Learned Lightfoot, that the Apostle here primarily speaks to the
Unbelieving Jews, and accordingly expresses himself in the very Language which
they used at that time, viz. Syriack, (whereas in Hebrew it should have been
Adonenu ba, not Maran-atha, which, Hor. Hebr.
says he, evidently shows that this Speech refers more especially to the
Jewish Nation) and though we may grant that the words have some reference to
our Lords coming to destroy Jerusalem and the Jewish Polity, yet (as this
Worthy Doctor afterward acknowledges) they may have a larger Sense, as many
other passages in Scripture have, and be understood more signally and eminently
of the Last Doom and Curse which shall be pronounced not only against the
Unbelieving Jews, but all those that love not the Lord Jesus Christ of what
Nation soever. This shall be at the General Judgment of the World, which (we
know) is by way of eminence called the Lords coming in the Sacred Style of the
New Testament: And we read that in that day Go ye Cursed is the particular
Language used toward those miserable Creatures. To this therefore I am of
opinion that St. Paul's Execration in the Text does more particularly and
especially refer. The short is, those that love not the Lord Jesus Christ,
those who wilfully hate and oppose him and his Laws, are Accu^sed Persons in
this Life, and are devoted to Destruction; and likewise when our Lord shall
come to judge the World, they shall be Cursed more openly and solemnly; when
they shall stand before that Impartial Judge of the World, they shall receive
from his infallible Mouth a Final Malediction, an Irreversible Execration,
which shall immediately be succeeded with the Eternal Punishment of Hell.

The Seventh Text enquired into, VIZ. Coloss. II. 8. Beware lest any Man spoil
you through Philosophy and vain Deceit, after the Tradition of Men, after the
Rudiments of the World, and not after Christ.
THough this whole Verse requires an Explication, which I shall briefly offer;
yet the main thing which seems difficult in it is this, This St. Paul here
enters a Caveat against Philosophy, and joins it with vain Deceit, whereas he
that is acquainted with the Apostle's Education and Accomplishments cannot
imagine he would speak any thing to the Disparagement of true and s^und
Philosophy, which is the Guide of our Faculties, the great Improver of our
Reason, the main Conduct of all rational and considerate Minds, and that which
teaches us the right Knowledge of God as it arises from the Nature of things in
the World. To Moses's Honor it is recorded by St. Luke, and related by the
holy Martyr St. Stephen, (in which he was directed by the Holy Ghost* that he
was Act. 7. 22.
learned in all the Wisdom of the Egyptians, bred up in their Mystic
Hieroglyphics, and acquainted with the natural Magic of their wife Men. And
therefore tho it is one of the Documents of a Jewish Rabbi to his Disciples,
(...) R. Judah Ben. Behera.
Suffer not your Children to learn Logic: and tho some of the Tert^llian,
Augustine, Greg. Nyssen and Nazianzen, Basil.
Christian Fathers have spoken freely against Logic and Philosophy, (and
particularly St. Ambrose on the 118th Psalm is taken notice of for his nihil
nobis cum Philosophia) because they observed that a sophistical way of
Reasoning and Logic was made use of by Heretics, and because the Study of
Philosophy had introduced innumerable Contentions and Quarrels, as also because
it sometimes meddled with and incroached upon Divinity, (for which cause a Greg.
Naz. Orat. de modo in disput.
Learned Father gives no better name to Philosophy, than that of Egyptian
Plagues, and Augustine. de conv. december Praecept. c. 2.
another calls them the Egyptian Frogs that have crept into the Church;) tho, I
say, for these Reasons the Fathers sometimes thus inveighed against Logic and
Philosophy, yet at other times they show the Usefulness and Necessity of both;
and that the Sophistries of Heretics cannot be confuted without them. Clemens
of Alexandria Strom. l. 1.
proves that Philosophy and Human Arts are from God, and are useful in
Divinity. (...). Strom. l* 6.
It is not absurd (he says) to assert that Philosophy is the Gift of Divine
Providence, and was designed to prepare Men for the perfect Doctrine of the
Gospel. Accordingly he tells us that Philosophy was given to the Greeks to be
the Foundation of Christianity. As the Law and the Prophets were to the Jews,
so (says he) was Philosophy to the Greeks, viz. to fit and dispose them for
the preaching of the Gospel, (...). Strom. l. 7.
to purge and prepare their Souls for the Reception of the Christian Faith. A
Proof of this we have in that great and learned Platonist, Justin Martyr, who
(in his Apology for the Christians) acquaints us, that by reading a Sentence in
Plato's Works he was excited to leave Paganism, and to embrace Christianity.
Theodoret, another Greek Father, in that known Treatise of his wherein he
addresses himself to the Grecians, makes it evident to them that the
Evangelical Truth is consonant to and may be confirmed by the Gentile
Philosophy in some parts of it. St. Jerome, a Latin Father, although once in a
Dream he thought he was beaten for reading Tully and such like Authors, yet in
his Epistle to Magnus a Roman Orator, after he had showed what Allowance Human
Learning has in Sacred Scripture, sets down in order the Fathers who made use
of the Writings of the Gentiles in confuting their Errors: and in his 84th
Epistle he gives an account why he himself in his Writings made use of secular
Learning. And as I related before, how Justin was guided to Christianity by a
Sentence in his Master Plato, so you may be certified from St. Augustine
himself, Confession. l. 8. c. 7.
that he was very much helped forward toward embracing the Christian Faith, by
reading one of Tully (that great Philosopher) his Dialogues, which is put out
in Hortensius his Name.

These things thus alleged represent to us the Usefulness and Serviceableness
of true and sober Philosophy. This certainly is a great Help to Religion, yea,
a part of it. For a Philosopher (as Tully defines him* and not amiss)
Philosophus is est qui omnium rerum divinarum atque humanarum naturam causasque
noscit, and omnem been vivendi rationem tenet ac prosequitur. De Oratore 1.
Is one that enquires into, and is acquainted with the Nature and Causes of all
things relating to God and Man, ( i. e. so far as Natural Reason will conduct
him) and he is one that both knows and pursues all the ways of living well. Or
take the Description of the rectified Philosophy in the words of Maximus
Tyrius, (...). Disserta^. 15.
It is (says he) such an accurate knowledge of Divine and Human Things, as
leads to Virtue, and conduces to excellent Reasonings, and causes a Melody and
apt Proportion in a Man's Life, and teaches us Moderation and Right Conduct of
our Manners. Hierocles is short, but very full, (...).
Philosophy is the Purgation and Perfection of Man's Life. This clears the Mind
of Pollution, this enlightens and consummates Human Nature: This I may call the
Vrim and Thummim of the Heathen Moralists, the Light and Perfection which they
attained to. Philo's Definition of Philosophy agrees with this, but advances
it yet higher, (...). De Opi^. Mundi.
It is that (says he) by which Man, tho he be mortal, attains to Immortality.
And that is a high Flight of Cicero, who, as it were, speaking to Philosophy,
says thus, Est unus dies been and ex praeceptis tuis actus, pecca^ti
immortalitati anteponendus. Tusc. qu. 2.
One single day well spent in the Observance of thy Dictates and Rules, is to
be preferred before an Eternity of living after the vicious way of the World.
But if we should speak moderately, certainly what the Apostle says of the Law,
is the least that can be said of true Philosophy, viz. It is good if a Man use
it lawfully. It may be serviceable to excellent Ends and Purposes if it be
rightly made use of, and in a way subordinate to the revealed Truth of
Scripture. We may be assured thereof, that St. Paul here condemns not
Philosophy and Human Learning as they are considered in themselves, but only
with respect to the Abuse and Corruption of them. St. Paul himself was bred up
first at Tarsus, a noted School of Learning, and afterward sat at the feet of
a famous Doctor of the Law, who was Nephew of Hillel Prince of the Sanhedrim,
and was (if we may credit our learned Antiquary) created by him a Jewish Elder,
and a Member of that venerable Council. He was the greatest Master of Logic
and Reason of all the Apostles, a profound and accurate Disputant, and one no
less seen in the Syriack, Greek, and Latin Tongues, than in the Hebrew
Traditions and Jewish Constitutions. His citing of the Greek Poets* assures us
of his Skill in that sort of Learning. And who now will believe that he wholly
neglected the Philosophers? none surely who considers that he was signally
called to be the Apostle of the Gentiles, and that he chiefly repaired to those
Countries where there was the greatest number of these, (as St. Peter most of
all applied himself to the Jews) our Apostle being the fittest Person to preach
to them who were Professors of Reason, and Lovers of Arts and Ingenuity: Among
these he would by no means inveigh against Philosophy as it was pure and
innocent; but finding it to be miserably corrupted and perverted, and to have
espoused many fond and absurd Principles, and to have abetted many undue
Practices, there was Reason he should declare against it. And indeed this
Corruption had been of a long date, insomuch that in the days of the Asmonaeans
Grotius in locum.
it was decreed, That that Parent should be pronounced accursed, who taught his
Son the Philosophy of the Greeks. Now if the Jews thought it would corrupt and
debauch their Children, it is no wonder that St. Paul saw it would be injurious
to the Christian Proselytes, and undermine the Principles of the Gospel. Yea,
it is very probable, that at this time when the Apostle writ to the Colossians,
the Christians began to mix their Christian Divinity with the Subtilties of
Philosophy, and so to corrupt the Mysteries of Christianity with those
Sophistries, and by that means to bring in Heresies. Thereupon the Apostle
remonstrates against this Abuse of Philosophy, as a thing of very dangerous
Consequence, such as would pervert the Minds of Christians, and prove hazardous
even to Christianity it self. Wherefore he warns his Christian Converts of
Coloss against this corrupt way of Philosophizing. Beware (says he) lest any
Man spoil you through Philosophy and vain Deceit.

Observe the Apostle's manner of expressing himself, Lest any Man spoil you.
The Greek word (...) is a Military Term, and sometimes is used in the Imperial
Laws, particularly concerning Reprisals. More generally it signifies Praedam
abigere, to carry off the Prey or Booty, either at Land or Sea. The Apostle
then does very emphatically express his meaning, when he says, Beware lest any
one spoil you, i. e. take from you by Force, prey upon you, make a Prize of
you, rob you of your Christianity through Philosophy and vain Deceit, i. e.
through the vain deceit of Philosophy, or the Philosophy which is both vain and
deceitful. This is a common Figure, not only used by our Apostle, but by other
accurate W^iters. The Apostle proceeds in the latter part of the Text, to tell
us the Rise of the Grecian Philosophy, which was so vain and deceitful. It is
after the Tradition of Men, i. e. it is the result of Humane Wit only, it is
the mere Institution of Man, and has nothing Divine and Heavenly (i. e. of
supernatural Revelation) in it: And therefore this Clause cannot be understood
(as it is by most Expositors) of the Legal and Mosaical Ceremonies, which we
know were instituted by God himself. The Apostle adds, that it is after the
Rudiments of the World, i. e. it is a mere do^ing on the Custom and
Prescription of the Men of the World: It is an adhering to the Opinions of the
chief part of Mankind, who are pleased with the Philosophy as well as the
Religion of their Country. It is true, the Rudiments of the World, in 2 Cor. 2.
20. and in Gal. 4. 3. are the Ceremonial Law, which was as the first Rudiments
or Alphabet in which the World was instructed at first, and trained up, and
taught a Religion, which was to make way for a more perfect One. Or the Jewish
Rites and Ceremonies are called the Elements, or Rudiments of the World, says
In Galat. 4. 3.
Grotius, because the chief of those Ceremonies, viz. Temples, Altars,
Sacrifices, First Fruits, etc. were common to all the World. But though the
Rudiments of the World are to be understood in those forenamed places of the
Jewish Ceremonies, yet it does not follow thence that those Expressions are to
be understood so here; for the same words may be diversely taken, according to
the different Matter they are applied to. It is probable that the Rudiments of
the World, mentioned in the 20 and 22 Verses of this Chapter wherein this Text
is, are meant of the upstart Doctrines of some Heretical Christians. If ye be
dead with Christ from the Rudiments of the World, (i. e. if you have no regard
to Errors and false Opinions, which worldly Men hold in opposition to Christ's
true Doctrine) Why do ye dogmatize (so it is in the Greek) after the
Commandments and Doctrines of Men? The Mosaical Ordinances seem not to be
intended here, (as our Translators import) for the things which the Apostle
speaks of are (...).
Doctrines of Men. This cannot be applied to the Ordinances and Rites appointed
by God from Heaven, as the Judaical Ceremonies were. Therefore the Rudiments of
the World here, are the Inventions of worldly-minded Heretics, who were at
that time crept into the Church; and the Apostle smartly demands of the
Colossians, Why some among them did so stiffly and dogmatically adhere to the
Opinions of those Seducers, who bid them touch not, taste not, handle not? i.
e. superstitiously forbad them to eat certain Meats, and persuaded them to
abstain from Marriage as a thing unlawful.

And as Heretical Opinions are referred to in this place, so something else may
be meant by these words in another, and particularly in the Text, where it is
plain, that the Rudiments or Elements of the World, refer to the Philosophy
just before mentioned, the Apostle seeming to allude to the (...), the four
Elements of the World, those simple Bodies of which all mundane Things consist,
and which are generally the Subject of Philosophers. And thus the wo^d (...) is
taken in Wisd. 7. 17. where you read that Wisdom teaches Men the knowledge of
the (...), the Composition of the World, and the Operation of the Elements. It
is likely then that the Apostle has an Eye here to the Mundane Philosophy, or
to the Philosophers who doted on the several Elements (as Thales on Water,
another on Fire, and the rest on the other Elements) as the first Principles of
all things. Thus you see how reasonable it is to apply the Rudiments of the
World to the Philosophy here spoken of, and not to the Mosaical Ceremonies, as
Expositors generally have done. So that Ancient and Learned Father Clemens
Alexandrinus declares that Philosophy, and the Rudiments of the World, are in
this place the same. But he gives this Reason why the Apostle (...).
calls it the Elements of the World, viz. because it teaches the First
Elements, and is but a preparatory Discipline to Truth. These first Rudiments
and Elements are weak and beggarly, as the Gal. 4. 9.
Apostle says of the Jewish Institutions; they are weak, because they cannot
thoroughly purge the Soul of Vice, and teach it to master its evil Habits: they
ar^ poor and beggarly, because they cannot enrich the Soul with any of those
Graces which are requisite to Eternal Happiness. In this respect they are not
after Christ, (as it is said here) i. e. they are not like the Excellent
Doctrine of Christ which was from Heaven, and is ever accompanied with
extraordinary Efficacy.

The Apostle goes on in the Verses after the Text to give the Reason of his
Caution against Philosophy. V. 9.
For in Him (i. e. in Christ) (says he) dwells all the Fullness of the
Godhead bodily. As if he had said, Let no Man impose upon you by a lame and
imperfect Philosophy, for now there is introduced an absolute and complete
Doctrine, namely, that of our Lord Jesus, who has the Fullness of all Wisdom
incorporated into him. Or, the dwelling of the Fullness of the Godhead bodily in
him, may signify the perfect Glory and Majesty of the Divine Nature displayed
in the Flesh, when the Word became Incarnate, when God was made Man. Bodily
denotes the Hypostatical Union, whereby the Divine Nature is united to the
Humane, and both concur to make up one Person. The Godhead dwells in Christ,
not only Spiritually, (as in all Saints and Believers) but so that the Divine
and Humane Nature are joined by a Personal Union. Or, you may consider that of
our Dr. Ha^mond.
Learned Annotator, who tells us that the word Essentia, substantia, res ipsa,
idem ipse, identitas.
Gnetzem, which is the Hebrew word for Body, signifies oftentimes no more than
Being or Essence, and imports the Existence and Reality of the thing spoken of.
And accordingly he says, that the Body of Sin, and the Body of Death,
mentioned in the New Testament, are no more than Sin and Death; the real Being*
of them is denoted, and nothing else. Thus here also the Greek word (...)
answers to the Hebrew one, and is a kind of Expletive, for nothing but the real
Being of the thing here spoken of is to be understood by it. But I conceive
there is something more than this meant by the word Bodily, for it signi^ies
not only the Real, but Substantial and Solid Fullness of Christ. The greatest
Masters of Humane Wisdom attained to the Shadow* only, but he is the Body, the
Substance.

And so it follows, Ver. 10.
Ye are complete in him, says the Apostle, you have all Things by Christ;
there is nothing wanting and defective in the Christian Doctrine, it is an
exact Model of Moral and Divine Wisdom. But the Philosophy which is now in
vogue in the World, is another kind of thing; it is weak and imperfect, short
and deficient; and as it is at this time abused and corrupted, has nothing of
solidity and substance in it. St. Paul had often cautioned against the Legal
and Jewish Institution, and bid the Christians beware that none spoil them by
that.

Now he comes to direct his Caveat against the Impostors of Philosophy. He had
without doubt repeated and inculcated that of our Savior, Except your
Righteousness exceed the Righteousness of the Scribes and Pharisees, (the most
exact Observers of the Mosaic Law) ye can in no wise enter into the Kingdom of
Heaven. Now he thinks fit to urge this upon them also, That unless they go
beyond the Bounds of the most improved Wisdom among the Gentiles, they are
never like to arrive at that place of Happiness. Neither the Ceremonious
Precepts of the Jews, nor the Dogma's of Philosophers, were able to conduct
them thither. All the Men of Tradition could not effect it, the numerous
Rabbis, and the Families of Hillel and Shammeai were defective,
notwithstanding all their peculiar Dictates and Will-worships. And here and
elsewhere, the Sons of Reason, the great Searchers into the Law of Nature, are
charged by the Apostle with the same Deficiency. Their Philosophy, which they
brag so much of, and value themselves so much upon, if it be rightly scanned,
is but (...); Philosophy and vain Deceit, are but Terms convertible. As
Christianity outdoth the Law of Moses, so it outstrips that of Nature and
Morality, especially as it is depraved and corrupted by the Grecian
Philosophers and others, as it is made up of Fallacies and seeming shows of
Arguing, but really void of solid Reason.

Against these the Christians of Ephesus were warned, Let no Man deceive you
(says the Apostle) with vain words, Chap. 5. v. 6. These (...), exactly answer
to the (...), and they both strike at the fallacious and deceitful Mode of
Philosophizing in St. Paul's days, who was the first that planted the Gospel at
Ephesus, (the Metropolis of all Asia) but it seems, in his absence from that
place, some attempted to pervert his Converts, by pressing upon them the Jewish
Rites; and others endeavored to debauch them by Philosophy, either that of
Heraclit^s who was an Ephesian, or of Pythagoras who had many Followers there.
This coming to St. Paul's ear, who was then in Bonds at Rome, he presently
dispatched away his Epistle to the Ephesians, wherein he undertaketh to show
them, that the Gospel far exceeds both Judaism and Philosophy, and that
Christ's Doctrine is more Sublime and Heavenly, more Powerful and Efficacious
than eit^er of them. In most Divine and exalted Language he extolls the
Evangelical Doctrine, and convinces them, that all Learning and Wisdom are mean
and vile in comparison of it. And this Epistle to the Colossians was written,
it is likely, at the same time with that to the Ephesians, even whilst the
things he wrote to them were fresh in his Memory: for you will find that it is
of the same strain and tenor with that, and the very Phrase and Expression are
the same, as I might show you in several Particulars besides that in these
words. The Argument and Design is the same in both, viz. to oppose the
Gospel-Wisdom not only to the Jewish Dispensation, but to the Accomplishments
of the Gentile Knowledge so celebrated at that time in Greece and Asia. Of this
latter it is that St. Paul speaks in the Text, and in that parallel place to
the Corinthians, 1 Epist. 3. Chapter 18. v. (and it is well known that Corinth was
famous for Philosophy, one Periander.
of the seven Wise Men fell to their share, and Diogenes lived and conversed
there. Let us hear then what the Apostle says to these Men of Corinth); Let no
Man deceive himself, (where the deceitfulness of Humane Philosophy is no less
asserted than it is in the Text) upon which Grotius makes this Gloss, Omnis
Philosophia humana Evangelio repugnans Deceptio est. I^ loc.
All Humane Philosophy which is repugnant to the Doctrine of Christ in the
Gospel, is a mere Cheat and Delusion. Let therefore no Man deceive and gull
himself with it. But (as it follows) if any Man seem to be wise in this
World, ((...), i. e. according to the Wisdom of this World; if he thinks
himself to be a great Philosopher) let him become a Fool (renounce those
deceitful Principles, and embrace the Gospel, which is accounted Folly) that he
may be Wise, (really so, i. e. wise to Salvation); for the Wisdom of this World
(i. e. Humane Reason and Philosophy abstracted from Revelation) is Foolishness
with God, i. e. it is reckoned by God, what it is really in it self, a weak and
shallow Thing, blind and imperfect, and unable to conduct a Man to Bliss and
Happiness. Mark here how the Pretenders to Wisdom are shamefully baffled, and
their perverse Judgment is here justly retaliated. As the Gospel is no other
than Foolishness in the Accounts of the Men of the World, so their Wisdom is
esteemed no better than Folly by God. And this it must needs be likewise in the
esteem of all truly wise Men, who, with St. Paul, making a right Judgment of
Things, discern that Vanity and Deceit are entailed upon it.

And these are the two Heads that will ingross my Discourses on these words: 1.
The common Philosophy of the Greeks and others then in request in the Apostles
days, was Vain and Empty. 2. It was Fallacious and Deceitful. It was Vain,
because it profited nothing to Piety, and making them better. It was Deceitful,
because it hazarded their Souls, and robbed them of Happiness. The Philosophy
at that time in force had these bad Qualities. It was in all things short and
imperfect; in many erroneous and vicious. It was not only defective, but
corrupted; whereas the sacred and inspired Doctrine of the Apostles was
complete and sound, fraught with infallible Truth, and the exactest Rules of
living well.

I betake my self to the first Part of the Task propounded, i. e. to show you
that the Philosophy of which St. Paul here speaks, was Vain and Empty. Which I
shall evince, by letting you see that it was, 1. Uncertain. 2. (Which was the
Effect of the former) Quarrelsome. And, 3. (which made it yet vainer) it was
Trifling.

1. The Pagan Philosophy was dark and Uncertain. The Title which Aristophanes
gives his Comedy, wherein he lasheth the Philosophers, may agree to the
Philosophy it self. (...) might be prefixed to it, it was mere Clouds and
Obscurity. The Philosophers spoke as doubtfully and ambiguously as their
Delphick Oracles. The Ephesian Philosopher was called (...), and it might as
well be fixed on some others of the Philosophic Tribe, for they are
wonderfully dark and dubious. It is confessed, they light upon many things true
and excellent, but they only guessed at them; and their Conclusions of them
were fickle and unsteady. A short perusal of Stobaeus, and of Plutarch's
Treatise of the Placits of Philosophy, or Diogenes Laertius of their Lives, are
sufficient, I think, to satisfy any Man of the Uncertainty, both of their
Physics and Ethics. It fares with Philosophers, as it did with those
Mutineirs at Ephesus, some cry one thing, and some another. Varro reckons 188
Opinions of the Summum Bonum, or the chief Good of Man: and their Opinions of
other things labored under vast Uncertainties. The World surely had very
mistaken and disordered Conceptions of things, when every thing was a God with
them when (as the Apostle observes of that strange way of Metamorphosis which
their Idolatrous Fancy led them to) Romans 1* 22, 23.
they changed the Glory of the Incorruptible God, into an Image made like to
Corruptible Man, and to Birds, and four footed Beasts, and creeping things, and
any thing else which their wild Imagination suggested. The Learned may satisfy
themselves how uncertain Notions they had of their Gods, from the diverse
Accounts which Plutarch (who was one of the most intelligent Persons among
them) gives of the Egyptian Deities Isis and Osiris. And if they were in the
Dark about their Gods, it is no wonder they had so little Light in other
things. This made Hermias, the old Christian Philosopher (in his Piece which he
Entitled the (...).
Irrision of the Gentile Philosophers) cry out at last, (...).
Truth has left the World, and the so much Celebrated Philosophy hunts rather
after Shadows, than lays hold on any true knowled^ of things. And again thus,
(in very fine words) (...).
All this that the Philosophers talk of, is but the Darkness of Ignorance, and
black Fraud, and endless Error, and imperfect Imagination, and incomprehensible
Ignorance. Indeed the first and best Enquirers into the Knowledge of things were
sensible of this; particularly Pythagoras, notwithstanding the seven Celebrated
Men of Greece went under the Name of Wise Men, assumed to himself only the Name
of a Lover of Wisdom. To him the Philosophers owe that Modest Name, whereby
they tell the World that they are only Well-willers to Wisdom, not perfect
Masters of it. And Socrates (who was voted by the Oracle the wisest Man of his
Age) was yet more self-denying, when he sincerely professed (for why should we
take it as a Complement?) that all that he knew was this, that he knew Nothing.

The Reasons of this Ignorance and Darkness in Philosophy, I take to be these
two especially; 1. Because Humane Reason was corrupted and vitiated, loaded
with Prejudices and Prepossessions, darkened with Sensuality, and perverted in
many by a constant course of Sinning. Hence it was disabled from framing right
Apprehensions of things, and from directing Men into a certain knowledge of God,
and of Themselves, and of their Duty. 2. Because they wanted Supernatural
Revelation, which is absolutely necessary to give Men a clear Discovery of the
Nature of God, and a full Representation of all the Offices of Religion. This
was another Reason of Philosophic Darkness and Uncertainty. And on the
contrary, that which renders the Christian Laws so certain and indubitable is
this, that they are derived from the immediate Inspiration of the Holy Ghost;
this is the Foundation of that Institution which we are honored with. This
makes our Religion unquestionable and infallible, and such as we can
confidently rely upon. For Divine Testimony commands Assent, and forces an
Acknowledgment, and will not suffer our Minds to hang in uncertain Doubtings
and Hesitations: This is the Excellency of Christianity. Whereas the corrupted
Philosophy of the Gentiles discovered its Vanity in its great Obscurity and
Uncertainty.

2. Another Instance of the Emptiness and Vnsatisfactoriness of the Gentile
Wisdom is, that it was intolerably quarrelsome and vexatious. And this is the
Result of the former; for it was Uncertainty among the Philosophers which made
so many Sects among them. The two capital ones were Diog. Laert. in Proaemio.
the Italick and Ionick; of the former Pythagoras (who after his Travels
philosophized in Italy) is recknoned the chief, and next to him Democritus and
Epicurus. Of the latter Thales was the first Author and Institutor; and this
was divided into several Sects, as, 1. The Socratick, of which Socrates was the
Head. 2. The Platonic, which took its Rise as well as Name from Plato; tho the
Retainers to it were also called Academicks. 3. The Peripatetick, of which
Aristotle was the Founder. 4. That of the Cynicks, of whom Antisthenes was the
Father. 5. That of the Stoics, which was set up by Zeno and Chrysippus. And to
these we may add the Scepticks (if they may be thought to deserve the Name of
Philosophers who questioned, and in a manner denied all Philosophy) who were
also called Aporeticks, i. e. Doubters, and Zeteticks, or Seekers, of whom
Pyrrho was the Head. I am not now to speak of and relate the Opinions of the
Barbarick Philosophers, as the Magi among the Persians, the Chasdim, or
Chaldees among the Assyrians, the Gymnosophists among the Indians, the Druides
among the old Galls and Celtae, for (besides that the account of these is
imperfect and dark) it is certain, that all that was eminent in their
Philosophy was translated into that of the Greeks, and reduced into some form,
and made more intelligible, for which reason, I suppose, it is concluded by
Laertius in his Proem to the Lives of the Philosophers, that Philosophy had its
beginning from the Greeks, and not from the Barbarians. Wherefore I will wholly
speak of the former, only I will make bold to insert the Epicureans (named so
from their Master Epicurus) tho their Philosophy most properly belongs to the
Italick: but even this may be called part of the Greek Philosophy, because the
Founders of it were Grecians.

These were the several Sects of the Greek Philosophy, which as they differed
in Names, so in Opinions. Nay, they fought with themselves as well as with one
another. Tully is observed to be sometimes of one Sect, and another time of
another: He often delights in the Academick (...), but when he speaks his own
Mind, he defends Plato's Opinions; yet so that he favors the Peripateticks,
and he is also a Friend of the Stoics when he pleases, witness his Paradoxes.
There was a perpetual squabling among these Philosophers about their diverse
Placits and Opinions; they grew angry and waspish, they made it their business
to brawl and wrangle, to cavil and scuffle, to start Objections, and to make
everlasting Repartees. Socrates, who was one of the best of them, was called
(...), one that acted a part, that dissembled and prevaricated. He affected all
his Life Ironical Dissimulation. This was his way of Rhetoric, and his
Philosophy was tainted with it, for you may observe that his disputing was in
the way of Dialogue, or Interrogations, which savoured of a Mind disposed to
bickering and contending. The old Academicks, who imitated Plato and Socrates,
their first Founders, used a Problematick way of philosophizing, and made a
Trade of disputing Pro and Con, and were unsufferably litigious: so that
Socrates's Philosophy seemed to bear the Character of his Xantippe, i. e. to be
clamorous and brawling. The Stoics and Cynicks (who were the stiffest and most
peremptory sort of Men, yet) were given to snarling and contradicting. It was
observed of the Stoics by a Plutarch. adv. Stoicos.
grave Man, that they were so given to Contradiction, that they exercised it on
themselves, they oftentimes ran from their own Notions. And he writ a (...).
Treatise on purpose to show the Repugnancies of these men; especially his Work
there is to run through all Chrysippus's Writings (which were many) and to show
how he confutes himself, and speaks Contradictories. Who knows not that the
Writings of the Stoics are full of singular Strains, Wonders, Nice Sayings,
and Riddles? (and Lucian very wittily jears them on this account). It was a
sign they affected to maintain Paradoxes, to weather out Difficult Cases, and
to dissent from the rest of Mankind.

But the Aristotelians (of which Tribe there was plenty in Greece) were the
most Disputing People of all, they were never at a Nonplus, but had always
something to say. The great Stagirite, who was the Founder of them, set up in
the World by refuting the Doctrine of all that went before him: Like one of the
Race of the Ottomans, he thought he could not reign safely except in the first
place he slew all his Brethren Philosophers. And he could not but look for the
same fate himself, and so it happened, for he was dealt with after the same
rate that he treated his Predecessors and Competitors. And as for the New
Academicks* they disputed of course, and were for and against all things; nay,
they held an universal (...), an Incomprehension; or, as some of them styled
it, an (...), an utter Suspension, which is as much as to say, they held
nothing. So that it seems Dubitation was the first Principle of their
Philosophy, as of Des Carts his. This was called by others (...), which
according to Sextus Empiricus is an (...).
Equilibrum between believing and dissenting. Falsehood and Truth were equally
probable; for which Lucian deservedly derides the Philosophers in his Balance,
where he brings them in weighing Truth and Falsehood, and making them of equal
Poize. At last out of the different Disputes and Contentions of Philosophers
sprung up the Scepticks, those Schismatics in Philosophy, who held no
Communion at all with the Assemblies of Philosophers, but doubted of, or denied
whatever they said. Indeed these Scepticks were but a bolder sort of
Academicks, or we may say, these set up first the Doctrine of Indifferency and
Acatalepsy, and the others improved it. Their Assertion was that nothing can be
defined and determined concerning any Object, that to incline to one part or
other, or to affirm or deny any thing, is unphilosophical, and that all is mere
Appearance only. Pyrrhonism was a Calumny to the whole Profession of
Philosophers, a baffling of all Science and Argument. They professed a Liberty
of Enquiry, and, as they thought fit, rejected the Arguments of all Men by
virtue of that Liberty. Some of these Pretenders to Philosophic Modesty and
Self-denial reasoned themselves out of their Senses. Some Philosophers denied
Motion whilst their Tongues wagg'd. Nay, there was an odd Fellow (Anaxagoras
they called him) who professedly gave the Lie to any one who said Snow was
white, for he was pleased to maintain that it was as black as Soot. Now
certainly Tully's words prove true, Nihil tam absurdum quod non dixerit aliquis
Philosophorum. De Not. Deor. l. 3.
that there is nothing so absurd but one Philosopher or other asserted it. And
that brief Character which Tertullian gave of the Philosophers is verified,
that Quidvis struere ac destruere eruditi. De Anim. c. 3.
they had a Gift of setting up or pulling down what they pleased. This was the
best of it, seeing nothing was asserted by any of them but some one would stand
and oppose it, by this means Falsehood was opposed as well as Truth. But this
was not to be attributed to any good design in them, but it proceeded wholly
from their love of dispute and quarelling. This is that which an observing
Historian takes notice of concerning the Philosophy of the Grecians, (...).
Diodor. Sic. l. 2.
If any one (says he) examines the most famous Sects of Philosophers, he shall
find that they very much disagree with one another, and in the greatest Points
are clearly contradictory. This Theodoret expresses in few words, saying,
(...) De Cur. Graec. Aff^ct. Sermon. 1.
Among the Greek Philosophers was always a great Contention and an implacable
fight of words. And he that will consult the 14th and 15th Books of Eusebius's
Evangelick Preparation, shall find this abundantly proved, viz. that the
Gentile Philosophers all fight with one another, and there is no Consent and
Harmony amongst them. But if we had all the Books and Writings of the
Philosophers which Diogenes Laertius particularly mentions, we should see this
much more evidenced.

But see now how Christianity runs counter to all this. It openly declares
against Disputes and Wranglings, and enjoineth us to speak all the same things
(i. e. to agree in all matters of Faith) and that there be no Schisms and
Divisions in the Church, but that all be perfectly joined together in the same
Mind and in the same Judgment, i. e. that we believe, approve of, and profess
the same necessary Truths. The same Apostle bids us avoid foolish and unlearned
Questions, knowing that they gender Strife; and the Servant of the Lord must
not strive. Some have observed that when the Pharisees sought out our Savior
to wrangle and contend with him about what he had done, * he slipped aside in
the Throng, and purposely evaded them. The design of the Gospel is to put a
period to Contests and Debates, which it happily effects by taking away the
occasion of all Uncertainty. The Apostle assigns this to be the end of Christ's
ascending to Heaven and giving Gifts to Men, and constituting Pastors and
Teachers in the Church, Ephesians. 4.
that we henceforth be no more Children tossed to and fro, and carried about
with every Wind of Doctrine, by the ^light of Men and cunning Craftiness,
whereby they lie in wait to deceive (to which belongs the Vain Deceit in the
Text) but speaking the Truth in Love (i. e. agreeing together unanimously to
profess and maintain the same things) we may grow up unto him in all things,
which is the Head, even Christ. This is the Noble Design of the Evangelical
Dispensation, it aims at Agreement and Concord, it banisheth fruitless Disputes
and Controversies, it is void of Sophistical wrangling and caviling. This is
the true and natural, the real and proper Effect of Christianity considered in
it self, and in its excellent Principles: but if we see something else in
Christendom (as with great Regret we may) it is not to be attributed to the
Nature and Genius of the Gospel, or of those that are the true and genuine
Professors of it. Whereas the Philosophers were naturally contentious and
brawling; they delighted to amuze and puzzle the World, they dealt in Sophistry
and Fallacies, and were conversant in Shiftings and Windings, like those sort
of Combatants in the Roman Spectacles, whose aim was to catch their Adversaries
in a Not. These Men too studied to entangle; which was no small Argument of the
Vanity and Emptiness of their Philosophy.

3. Their Philosophy was Idle and Trifling. Had their Controversies been about
great and weighty Matters, they might have met with some Excuse; but that which
stigmatizeth them for foolish and vain Persons was this, that they jangled
about mean and worthless Propositions, they were at Daggers-drawing about idle
and useless things, and such as were not for the real Profit of the World,
conducing nothing to the bettering their Minds or Manners, to the advancing any
solid Truth, or the reforming of Men's Lives. The Apostle observes of them that
they Romans 1. 21.
became vain in their Imaginations, (...), in their Reasons and Arguings (so it
may be rendered). These were of no use, their Discourses were childish and
foolish, they were conceited and capricious, they affected Curiosities and
Niceties, they pursued Shadows, and neglected substantial and useful
Inquisitions. This Humor of the Gnostics, who were considerable Retainers to
Philosophy, was charged upon them by St. Paul in his first Epistle to Timothy
Chapter 6. v. 4. where he deciphers them to be proud, knowing nothing (tho they so
much affected to be esteemed knowing Men, and accordingly had their Name from
their monopolizing of Knowledge and Wisdom to themselves) doting about Questions
and strifes of Words ((...), they were sick about Questions, as the Greek word
imports, they were not well till they were disputing) whereof comes Envy,
Strife, Railings, perverse Disputings, (...). was the word to express their
Diog. La^rt. in Aristippo.
Philosophical Exercitations: And the perverse and sinister use of those
Disputes and Exercises is signified by the Preposition (...). They had unworthy
Conflicts and Scuffles among their Dissertations: therefore the Apostle gives
them their own Word with a little altering, to denote the perverse fondness of
their Disputes, which in the same Chapter he styles (...) vain Bablings, which
is part of the (...) in the Text, the vain and trifling way wherein they
pursued their Delusions. An Ancient Author had made this Remark betimes of the
Greek Philosophy, (...). Tri^megist.
It is, says he, but a mere noise and clatter of Words. This was it which
Lucian in his (...).
Sale of the Philosophers, (where he sets them to be sold) jears all the
Philosophers for. And not only scoffing Lucian, who had a Pique against them,
derides them for this Folly, but the serious Plutarch. Maxima pars S^oicarum
disputationum circa Nomina consumi^ur.
Cicero observed it of the Stoics, (who were the gravest and manliest Sect)
that the greatest part of their Disputes was spent about mere Names and Words.
Their Philosophy was a Heap of Impertinencies. In pursuance of this Hierocles
writ a Book of Philosophical Jests, where he gives a Catalogue of Philosophical
Bulls, or Absurdities, and lashes them for it. They were contemptible and
ridiculous for this at last; and a Philosopher (as Epictetus says) was (...).
Arrian. ^issert.
a Creature that all Men laughed at. Of these was true what my Lord Bacon says
of the Schoolmen, that by their petty and childish Questions, they marred the
solidity of all Sciences. Their Philosophy was made up of idle and useless
Disquisitions, of verbal Contests, of unedifying Disputes, They puzzled their
Auditors, and perplexed themselves with unnecessary Subtilties and vain
Curiosities: they contented themselves with dry and sapless Notio^s, with
jejune and frigid Speculations.

But these are unworthy of a Christian, whose Religion forbids all foolish
Bickerings and Degladiations about Mean and Inconsiderable Matters. This
Laborious Idleness, this Solemn Trifling becomes him not. We are blessed under
the Christian Dispensation with solid and substantial Truths, we are
entertained with things that are Material and Weighty, and which are worthy of
a Rational Enquiry. All the Evangelical Discoveries are useful and profitable,
of vast Concern and Necessity. We are not put off with Trifles, but are invited
to study and converse with serious and manly Doctrines, such as are fraught
with Great Sense, with High Matter, with Discoveries of vast Moment and
Importance: which cannot be said of the Philosophy which the Apostle speaks of,
which I have proved to be Light and Vain, as well as Uncertain and Quarrelsom.

The second Part of the Task I undertake is to convince you of the
Deceitfulness of the Gentile Philosophy; for the Apostle acquaints us, that it
is not only Vain, but that there is a Deceit in it also. I will make it appear
then that the Pagan Philosophers deceived and deluded Men, by instilling into
their Minds Erroneous Principles, and by promoting Vicious Practices in their
Lives. Error and Vice, Unsound Maxims and Evil Manners, Falsity and Immorality
were the issue of that Philosophy which our Apostle here cautions the
Colossions against. And, that I may touch at the Particular Sects which he here
intends, I shall ransack the Principles, 1. Of the Pythagoreans and Platonists,
whom the Gnostics affected. 2. Of the Epicureans. 3. Of the Stoics. 4. Of
these and other Philosophers together: For after I have enquired into these
distinctly and separately, I will consider them all jointly.

First, I begin with the Philosophy of the Pythagoreans and Platonists, which
was at that time taken up by the Gnostics, who by the confession of all were
Philosophically disposed, and gave no small Trouble on that account to our
Apostle and others to convince and refute them. And indeed the Learned Hammond
understands the Text wholly of the corrupt Doctrine of Simon Magus, the
Simonians and ^nosticks, who borrowed their Wild Notions from the Pythagorean
Philosophy, and withal Judaized in imposing the Observation of the Mosaic Law,
which that Learned Person thinks is meant by the Rudiments of the World. They
made a Medley of Philosophy and Divinity, a strange Rhapsody of the Jewish
Cabala, and the Platonical and Pythagorean Conceits. They affected to introduce
the Theology of Orpheus and Hesiod into Christianity. But a Particular Instance
of the Deceit of their Philosophy is mentioned in the 18th Verse of this
Chapter. Let no Man beguile you of your Reward in a voluntary Humility, (or,
more exactly according to the Greek, pleasing himself in Humility) and
worshipping of Angels. For it seems these Gnostics were disposed to worship
Angels, and thought it no little Specimen of their Humility and Modesty to do
so. They would not be so bold as to offer Prayers to God immediately, but they
begged of the Angels to present them to him. It is certain that Celsus, and
other Pagan Philosophers used to defend their Polytheism this way. And it is
plain that it was a spice of Gentilism, because the Heathens had their Dii
Medioxumi, Spirits that were Mediators between the Supreme Deity and Men, whose
Office was to offer the Prayers and Oblations of Mortals to the Gods. To this
questionless the Apostle refers in his (...), worshipping of Angels. This part
of the Gentiles Theology concerning Demons or inferior Deities, whose Office
was to Mediate between the Sovereign Gods and Mortal Men, is that Philosophy
which the Apostle admonishes the Colossians to take heed of. To this purpose
Mr. Mede interprets that Prophecy in 1 Timothy 4. 1. The Spirit speaks expressly,
that in the latter days some shall depart from the Faith, giving heed to
seducing Spirits, and Doctrines of Devils. By these (...), Doctrines of Devils
are not meant, (says In his Apostasy of the latter Times.
he) such Doctrines as sprang from the Devil, or from Devilish Teachers and
Impostors, but the Doctrines about Demons or deceased Spirits. And he explains
this by a like Speech, in Acts 13. 12. (...), the Doctrine of the Lord, i. e.
the Doctrine about the Lord. So that, according to this Learned Man, here is
meant that Paganish and Idolatrous Doctrine of worshipping Demons or departed
Heroes. And this part of the Gentile Theology the Apostle foretells shall creep
into the Church, and be received among Christians, i. e. worshipping and
invocating of Saints (who answer to the Pagan Heroes) shall be practiced among
some of them, (as it was by the Gnostics): And that it is in use among the
Papists is evident to all the World, and there are few of that Church that are
very sollicitous to deny it. This worshipping of Saints and Angels, though it
was reckoned a piece of Modesty, was (as the Apostle tells us in the next
words) a singular Instance of Boldness and Impudence; for the Man who
worshippeth them intrudes into those things which he has not seen, vainly
puffed up by his fleshly Mind. He sawcily presumes to determine of Matters not
known; he peremptorily asserts what he pleases of the Orders and Ranks of
Angels, whose Economy is not discovered to us below. His Humility therefore
which he talks of is but a Pretense: as meager and lank as he seems to be, he
is really swelled and pufft up: Whiles he pretends Humility, he has nothing of
it; or if he has any such thing, he is proud even of that. The Gnostick
Philosophy then is deservedly styled Knowledge falsely so called, it makes a show
of being Humble, and at the same time dictates the highest Arrogance. Their
Disputes therefore are called profane Ianglings, because they savor only of
their own insolent Humor, and proceed without any ground of Revelation. For
this is it we are to rely upon in this Matter, namely, That there is but one
Mediator between God and Man, even the Man Christ Jesus. Invocation and Worship
are proper to God only, and Christ is the only Intercessor to the Father, and
therefore to apply our Addresses to Saints or Angels, is an absolute dishonor
to the Merits and Intercession of our Savior. From whence you may take notice
how abominable the Doctrine and Practice of the Papists are. They blaspheme
whilst they pretend to Worship, they are grossly Idolatrous in attributing that
to the Creature, which is due only to the Creator.

And thus you see how the Gnostics, (from whom the Church of Rome borrowed her
Doctrine as to this Particular) by Pretenses to a higher and sublimer Knowledge
than others had attained to, corrupted and spoiled Men's Minds, and by their
bold and daring Notions adulterated the Simplicity of the Gospel. Of which the
Apostle was justly Jealous, when he said, I fear lest by any means, as the
Serpent beguiled Eve through his subtilty, so their Minds should be corrupted
from the simplicity that is in Christ, 2 Cor. 11. 3. And this is that which, it
is likely, the Apostle speaks of in his Epistles to Timothy and Titus, where,
by Fables and endless Genealogies he means the idle and fabulous Pedegrees of
Angels, which under the Name of Aeones the Gnostics talked so much of, which
they partly borrowed from the Platonists and Pythagoreans, of which you may
read a particular Account in Irenaeus, Tertullian and Epiphanius. They will
satisfy you, that the Gnostick Heretics received these things from those
Philosophers who were Adorers of Demons and Angels, and made them Mediators
between God and Man. I will quote only one Passage out of Plato for the
satisfaction of the Learned, (...). Sympos.
God (says he) is not mingled with Man, (i. e. has no converse and
intercourse with him): therefore by these is held all that Communication and
Intercourse which is between God and Men, these carry Men's Prayers to God, and
God's Commands to Men. Therefore Plutarch representing this Philosopher's
Opinions, tells us, that he held it to be the Office of Demons, i. e. Angels
(...). De Osir. and Isid.
to convey Men's Petitions to Heaven.

And here by the by it might be observed, that many Old Heresies rose from
Philosophy, especially from the Platonic Philosophy in the three first
Centuries, as the Heresies of Simon Magus, and of the Valentinians, and of the
Marcionites, and of the Manichees, as the Fathers who confute these Heretics
let us see, and complain of it often. Tertullian De Praescript. Haeretic.
particularly shows, that many Heresies in Christianity came from Philosophy,
particularly the Doctrine of the Aeones and Forms came from Valentinus who was
a Platonist* and so other Errors from Marcion who was a Stoic, and others from
the Epicureans, etc. All these (says he) are made up of the Fables and Fancies
of Philosophers Athens and Jerusalem were blended, the Academy and the Church
were unhappily mixed: there was a Stoical and Platonical Christianity. Hence he
says that Apol. c. 47.
Heretics are begot of the Seed of Philosophers, and that Adv. Hermogen. c. 8.
Philosophers are the Patriarchs of Heretics. Nay I might farther remark, that
not only the Theology of some of the Heretics, but likewise of some of the
learnedest Fathers was almost spoiled by Philosophy, and particularly by that
of the Platonists. I might instance in Origin, Justin, Martyr, and Clemen^
Alexandrinus, about the Doctrine of the Eternal (...): they spoke as
Heraclitus, Plato and Socrates did, and thereby gave scope for the Arian
Heresy. More especially it may be observed, that Origin borrowed his Divinity
from Plato, and that corrupted him, as Ga^d^ntius proves in several
Particulars. It was from his following of Plato that he propagated the Opinion
of the ceasing of Hell Torments. Though this, I must say, we learn rather from
other Fathers than from the Works of Origin himself: but we have no reason to
disbelieve so many Fathers, and to think that they represent him falsely,
especially when we know that Origin was a great Platonist, and in other things
followed his steps. So likewise he borrowed the preexistence of Souls from
Plato's School, and therefore one said rightly, (...). Harmenopul. de Sect. 9.
He taught according to the Greeks (meaning the Platonists) that Souls did
exist before their Bodies. The Reason of this is well known, Origin, Justin,
Clemens, and other Fathers, were Platonic Philosophers before they were
converted to Christianity, and therefore it is no wonder that they brought some
of their Philosophical Errors into Christianity. I need not tell you that the
Church in its first Times explained and defended its Principles of Religion by
the way of Plato's Philosophy: besides that I might suggest this (which is a
great Truth) that Platonism of all the Sects of Philosophy, came nearest to
Christianity. Hence the Platonist who read the first Verses of the first
Chapter of St. John's Gospel said that Barbarian had stolen from his Master.
Yea, I could add what Clemens of Alexandria in his Stromata tells us, that they
made the Christian Divinity as like Gentile Philosophy as they well could, and
they caused the Holy Doctrine of Christ to approach to the received Notions of
Philosophers, and made the Holy Scriptures speak Platonism, that they might by
that means gain Proselytes to the Christian Religion. I appeal to you now upon
these things, whether these good Men were not in danger of being spoiled
through Philosophy.

Secondly, Leaving the Platonists, I come to examine the false and pernicious
Principles of the Epicureans, with whom we are Acts 17. 18.
informed our Apostle encountered. Their Philosophical Deceits were such as
these.

1. They held that Chance and Fortune were the Rise of this World, and of all
things in it: That the World was not made or created by an Understanding Being,
but commenced by a strong Juncto of Atoms, which clubb'd together (though
without Counsel and Intelligence) to erect this great and stately Fabric.
These Men had no Notion at all of a Creation, for their old Saw was, (...).
Laert. in Epicuro.
Nothing is made of Nothing: and therefore (according to their Masters,
Democritus and Epieurus) they agreed to give the World its Date from those
capering (...). Laert. in Democrito.
Atoms, as if that would solve the Business. But indeed according to their
Hypothesis it had no Date at all, for all this Atomick Bustle was from
Eternity. As the Platonists held the World was Eternal by Necessity, so the
Epicureans asserted its Eternity, but said it was by Chance. The World,
according to them, was a strange By-blow of Nature, begot by mere Fortune.
These were the wild Conceits they took up, rather than they would be beholden
to God for the production of the World; that is, rather than they would
acknowledge a Wise Omnipotent Being that was the Author of it, rather then they
would own the Principle of the World's Beginning, and that by a Power Divine.
As for their Notion, it is so poor and precarious, that no Man of any
consistency of Thoughts can give credit to it. So excellent Order and
Composition as we see in the World and all the Parts of it, could never arise
from a fortuitous Confluence, from a casual jumble of Matter and Motion without
any Guide, but must needs be concluded to be the Contrivance of Infinite and
Superlative Wisdom. That thin and subtle Particles blindly tilting against one
another, (without any Mover to set them on work) should at last jump into so
exact an Order, is an Assertion unworthy even of a Rational Pagan, and fit only
for such a Christian Philosopher as he of Malmsbury. Not to speak of the
monstrous Absurdities which follow upon asserting the Eternal Existence of
Matter* Nay, not to speak of the utter Impossibility of the thing it self; for
what is made cannot be from Eternity, i. e. cannot be without a beginning, for
its being made, necessarily supposes one that made it to have been before it;
and if he was before it, then it was not from Eternity, for there is nothing
has the priority of Eternity. But it is enough that this Epicurean Doctrine is
confronted by the Christian Philosophy. Through Faith we understand that the
Worlds were framed by the Word of ^od, so that things which are seen were not
made of things which do appear, Heb. 11. 3. And, as the same inspi^ed Author
argues in another place, Every House is built by some Man, but he that built
all things is God, Heb. 3. ^* As much as to say, there is as great Reason, nay
greater, to be persuaded that this vast Structure of the Universe was built and
erected by a Divine Hand, than that we should believe that the stately
Habitations and Palaces which we see, were made by some Artists. The World is
the Fabric of Divinity, the Temple of God, -- Mundi magnum and versatile
Templum. So far Lucretius went, but we may go farther. It is a wonderful System
contrived by an All-wise and Omnipotent Being. It is a TEMPLE made by GOD, and
dedicated to him. As the World had a Beginning, so it had its Beginning of
existing from God. In the beginning God created the Heaven and the Earth: in
the Beginning, therefore the World was not from Eternity; God created,
therefore it was not by Chance.

2. As the Epicureans affirmed the World was by chance, so (consistently enough
with that Principle) they held it was left to shift for it self. And truly this
was no absurd Consequence from the former Assertion: for if the World made it
self, it might as well be thought to look after it self. These Men in their
most sober Determinations would not suffer God to intermeddle with the
Government of the World: they complemented the Godhead out of its Jurisdiction
over Mankind and things here below, by saying he should not give himself the
Trouble of having any Resentments of things on Earth, and taking care of Human
Affairs. Epicurus his God (as De Benefic. l. 4.
Seneca describes him) was reserved and careless, he turned his Back on the
World, and took no notice of it; he either did something else, or was wholly
idle. And therefore he afterward calls such Gods as these Surda numina,
inefficaces D^os.
deaf Deities, Gods of no Virtue and Power. Thus Tully tells us of those
Philosophers who Qui Deum nihil habere negotii dicunt, and nihil exhi^^re
alteri.
held, that God had nothing to do himself, and that he set no others on work.
Not unlike to these were those absurd Atheistical People in Zech. 1. 12. who
said, The Lord will not do good, neither will he do evil. The Reason of this
was that (...), which the Epicureans say is in God; he is at quiet in himself,
and it would Si in ipso Mundo ^^us inest aliquis qui (...), qui gubernet, --
nae ille est implicatus molestis negotiis and operosis. Cic. (...) not. deor.
l. 1.
disturb him to provide for the World. The Being which is happy (say they)
(...), etc. Laert. in Epicuro.
has no Employ of its own, and it creates no Business to others; for Business
and Care would distract, and render unhappy. They yet more blasphemously add,
that Quis non timeat omnia providentem, and cogitantem, and animadvertentem,
and ommia ad se pertinere putantem, curiosum, and plenum negotii Deum? Cic. de
Not. Deor. l. 1.
such a busy God would cause perpetual Dread in the Minds of Men, and they must
always stand in awe of him if he constantly took notice of them and their
Actions. These were the vile Blasphemies of the Epicurcan Philosophy. But
Christianity has rendered it clear and undeniable, that God has an Inspection
into all Human Actions, and disposes and directs all Occurrences to his own
Glory. At his Beck and Command are all Men and Devils, glorified Angles and
departed Souls: nothing comes to pass in Heaven or Earth, or Hell it self,
without his Cognizance and Control. Like a prudent Master of a Family he
suffers nothing to be done by any Member of it withaut his License or
Permission. Providence is spread as wide as the Universe; nor is there any
thing, be it never so little and mean, exempted from its Tuition, no not the
fall of a Sparrow, nor of a Hair of the Head, as our Great and Infallible
Instructor has ascertained us. Well therefore does Octavius (who represents
the Christian in Minutius Felix) in answer to Caeciliu's Objection against
Providence (viz. that God is in Heaven, and cannot see all things below) well
does he assert, That Ubique non tantum nobis proximus, sed infusus est; non
tantum su^ illo agimus sed cum illo (ut prope dixerim) vivivimus. -- Non so^um
in oculis ejus (...) and in Sinu vivimus.
all things are full of God; that he is not only most near to us, but in^used
into us: we not only act under him, but live with him; we are not only in his
Eye, but in his Bosom. This was the rate of the old Christianity, as it was
derived from the Prophets and holy Men, and particularly from our Apostle, who
excellently asserts the Providence of God, saying, He is not far from every one
of us; for in him we live, and move, and have our ^eing, as he tells the
Athenian Philosophers, Acts 17. 27. intending thereby directly to confront the
Doctrine of the Epicureans, with whom he encountered at that time. All that I
will add under this Head is this, that the Epicureans exempting God from all
Employment and Administration of things was suitable enough to their known
Hypothesis of an idle, lazy and pleasurable Life. They thought it a happy thing
to be free from Cares and Business, and to indulge themselves in all Pleasure;
and accordingly they attributed the same Happiness to God which they desired
and liked themselves. And this reminds me of the

3d Deceitful Opinion of the Epic^reans, which was this, That Happiness
consisted in Pleasure. Clemens Alexandrinus speaking of these words, Beware
lest any Man spoil you through ^hilosophy, says, the Apostle meant them of the
Epicurean Philosophy, and especially, that part of it which denies Providence,
and deifies Pleasure. These Men's avowed Principle was, that sensual Delight is
(...). Athenae. Deipnosoph. 1.
the source of all Good, and the Sovereign Blessedness of Mankind. Tho I must
needs say, it is very strange, yea even prodigious, that there should be such a
Sect, that any Men pretending to Philsophy, or the study and love of Wisdom,
should espouse such a monstrous Opinion, that Persons of Reason and Knowledge
should make the Body, which is the worst part of Man, his best and only part;
and that the Animal and Sensual Life, which is so base and grovelling in
comparison of the Rational one, should be thought to be the chief and leading
Principle of Man. There are not transmitted to us the Names of many that held
this wild Opinion. As for Epicurus himself, Diog. Laert. in Epicuro.
he that gives us an account of his Life, tells us, that some represented him a
very abstinent and mortified Man, others as great a Glutton and Drunkard. But
from what he farther adds (when he distinctly sets down his Principles and
Persuasions) it is evident that this Philosopher placed not Happiness in bodily
Pleasure, i. e. not in that only, for his avowed Opinion was, that (...). Ibid.
Happiness consisted both in Mind and Body, in the Peace and Tranquillity of
the former, and in the Ease and Health of the latter. H^ held, that the
Pleasure which arises from both these is the beginning and end of a Happy Life.
But that he might not be misconstrued, he adds farther, (...), etc.
When we say (says he) that Pleasure is the End and Happiness of a Man, we do
not mean the Pleasures of the luxurious, and such as are placed in the fruition
of Worldly Delights (as some ignorantly or maliciously interpret our words) but
we say this Pleasure consists in an absence of bodily Pain and Perturbation of
Mind. Nay, he goes on further, and declares, That (...).
Virtue alone, abstracted from bodily Pleasure, is never separated from
Pleasure. And many other Excellent Notions he has, which discover him to have
been a Good Man, considering he was but a Heathen. Which may induce us to
think, that some of those other things, which he is reported to have held, are
not a just Representation of his own Opinions, but rather of what some of his
deluded Followers took up. But if I may guess at the Reason of his being thus
misrepresented, I conceive it was this, because he was singular and different
from the rest of the Philosophers, as to his School or place of philosophizing,
which was a pleasant Garden. Some might think that this had some Influence on
his Studies and Opinions, and that he was a light Airy Man, addicted to bodily
Pleasure, and that he placed Man's Happiness in it, especially when it was his
real Opinion and Profession, that Happiness consisted in Pleasure. This
Philosopher's case methinks was like that of Nicolas the Deacon, who though he
was himself of a pure and blameless Life, yet from him the filthy and dissolute
Nicolaitans took their Name. So though Epicurus himself might be a Man of
Abstinence and Sobriety, yet it is certain that his Followers, i. e. those who
called themselves after his Name, did roundly maintain, that sensual and bo^ily
Pleasure was the only Good to be sought after, and passionately prosecuted by
all Men. By Brutes they should have said, for Corporeal Pleasure is all the
Happiness that those Creatures are capable of, or concern themselves for. But
Man's chief part is his Soul, which was made and designed for nobler Pleasures,
and cannot find any solid Satisfaction but in them, and therefore God has
provided him such to be his Chief Entertainment. The Apostle takes notice of
that Epicurean Strain 1 Cor. 15. 32.
[Let us eat, and drink, for to morrow we die] and replies to it, 1. With an
Intimation of the vain Deceit of these Swinish Philosophers, Be not deceived.
2. With a sober Check borrowed from one of their Poets, Evil Communications
corrupt good Manners. And 3dly, He answers yet more Apostolically in the words
following, Awake to Righteousness and sin not, for some have not the Knowledge
of God. These Men (says he) are downright Atheists, devoid of the true
Knowledge and Sense of a Deity, and of another Life. Which brings me to the

4th Pernicious Opinion of the Epicureans, viz. That there is no Life after
this, that there is no future Existence or State of Souls to be expected. And
herein again these Men are consistent with themselves; this is a natural
Consequence of their former Assertion. If sensual and bodily Pleasure be all
the Happiness which is the Portion of Mankind, then there can be little or no
Entertainment for the Soul if it should be separated from the Body, and
therefore it is fit to believe that the Soul perishes with the Body, and there
is no future State after this. De Placit. Philos. l. 4.
Plutarch testifies concerning Epicurus, that he asserted all human Souls to be
mortal. And another assures us that it was his Opinion, that Men vainly trouble
themselves with the fear of some (...). L^ert. in Epicuro.
terrible thing in another and everlasting State, as if there were any thing
after Death. Therefore when the Resurrection was preached to the Epicureans by
St. Paul, which implies a future Life, they were startled at it, and looked
upon it as a new and strange Doctrine, Acts 17. 19. All is concluded, said
they, in this World, and therefore they made much of themselves whilst they
were here, and lived as they listed, not looking at all for any Punishments or
Rewards hereafter. But this is so diametrically opposite to the natural Notions
and Dictates of rectified Minds, which are not debauched with Prejudice and
Sensuality, and so fully baffled by the Principles of the Christian Religion,
that it will be but lost Labor to offer at the Confutation of it. I shall only
desire you to reflect upon this and the other dangerous Sentiments of the
Epicurean Philosophy, and to consider how reasonable and necessary it was that
the Apostle should caution his Followers against it, and intimate to them that
this was a Philosophy by which they would certainly be spoiled and ruined if
they adhered to it.

Thirdly; I will present to your view the Deceitful Ethics of the Stoics, who
were another sort of Antagonists our Certain Philosophers of the Epicureans and
of the Stoics incountred ^im. Acts 17. 18.
Apostle grappled with. From what Topics he disputed with them may be gathered
from the Knowledge of those things which that Sect was most considerable for.
And we read they were noted for the Notion of Fatal Necessity, for their Proud
and Conceited Humor, and for their Doctrine of Apathy.

Their First beloved Notion was that of Fatality; they held that God and all
things are tied up by Fate, that the same irrevocable Necessity hampers all
Beings, Divine and Human, and that particularly Men are so restrained by the
Destinies that they cannot act freely, but all their Actions, whether internal
or external, are forced. Yea, Chrysippus openly professed that Pl^t. de
Contradict. Stoic.
there is no Intemperance, no Fraud, no Sin whatsoever of which I^piter is not
the Architect. All comes from him of Necessity, without any Design or
Intention. All Events are to be attributed to the Necessary Make and
Constitution of the World. Hence it is that God distribut^s Poverty and
Adversity to good Men, and Prosperity to the bad. It must be so, says Seneca,
for Non potest Artifex mutare materiam. ^e Provid. ca^. 5.
the great Artificer cannot change the Matter he works upon; and therefore
things must needs be thus, and he cannot help it. This was the Opinion of the
severest sort of Stoics, which cramps all Religion, and enervates all the
Attempts and Enterprises of Virtue, and robs Man of his Rational Nature, and
indeed makes him a Stock rather than a Man, and therefore is a Doctrine
unworthy of Mankind, and consequently of the Christian Institution, which is no
ways repugnant to the Reasonable Nature of Man. Why therefore may not this be
thought to be part of this Deceitful Philosophy which the Apostle speaks
against? But to do the Stoics Right, this was the Sentiment but of some of
them, and as for the more Intelligent and Sober sort of them, they were of
another Persuasion: or rather, to speak more impartially, they ran counter to
their own Persuasions. Hence (...) no less than (...) were cried up by them.
Seneca, Antoninus, Epictetus, who everywhere inculcate Fate, yet defend the
Liberty of the Will, And Phys. Stoic. l. 1. Dissertat. 12.
Lipsius (who was well acquainted with those Men's Writings and Notions)
declares that the Stoics Fate is no more than the Immutability of the Divine
Decrees, which takes not away the Freedom of Man's Will, or the Contingency of
Events as to Us. Thus Fate and Freedom were Reconciled, and there was no Hurt
done to Christianity. And by the by, this Doctrine of the Stoics Fatal
Necessity and Free Will being Consistent, may teach us to Moderate our
Disputes, and to Reconcile the Divine Decree with the Freedom of Man. It was no
Absurd Doctrine among them, and I do not see why it should be among Us at this
Day. But I cannot so easily acquit the Stoics of the

Second Thing they were Noted for, viz. Their Pride and Arrogance, their
insufferable Insolence and Ostentation. Three Instances, among others, I will
give of their Proud and Haughty Spirit, (reserving the Philosophical Pride to
be spoken of more generally afterward, but now I will confine my self to the
Stoic^s Pride.) Their Morality exceedingly administered to This Vice, and this
was it which made these Men, of all Sects, the most averse to the Christian
Religion, which is Humble, and Meek, and Self-denying.

1. They held that their Wise Man was not indebted to God for any Virtue or
worthy Accomplishment which he was Master of, but that he was furnished out of
his own Stock. He was beholden to himself only that he was Good and Virtuous.
The Stoics Wise Man was Upright and Just of himself, and stood not in need of
others Helps: his Happiness was all from what he had by his own Power and Will.
Let us observe a little how he boasts and vaunteth: -- Sapiens uno minor est
Jove, Dives,
Liber, Honoratus, Pulcher, Rex denique regum.
Their Wise Man is the only Possessor of Riches, Freedom, Honor, Beauty: he is
a Prince Paramount, and Commands all the Kings and Monarchs of the Earth: he is
inferior only to Jupiter. But this Description of the Poet is Low and
Grovelling, and a mere Degrading of the Stoic. For Seneca in Severe Prose tells
you concerning himself, that Hoc est quod Philosophia mihi promittit ut me
parem Deo faciat. Epist. 49.
This is the thing which is promised him by Philosophy, to be made Equal to
God. Which though I am very willing to understand in the Best Sense, as if he
meant no more than this, that he expected to be made Like unto God by the
Principles of Moral Philosophy, yet I find that he explaineth himself in
another Meaning in an Epistle of his where he has these words, Sapiens cum
Diis ex pari vivit. Epist. 59.
The Gods and Good Men are Fellows. And in an Hoc est Summum Bonum, quod si
occupas, incipis Deorum socius esse, non supplex. Epist. 31.
other place he tells his Wise and Happy Man that he is a Companion of the
Gods, not a Suitor to them. But other Stoics indulged this way of Talking,
this vain Rhodomontade. It is quoted by Eclog. Physic.
Stobeus and De commun. Notionib.
Plutarch as a Saying of Chrysippus, (a Man that was in High Esteem among that
Sect of Philosophers, as being one of their Founders) (...).
Jupiter did not exceed Dion (a Wise Man of theirs) in Virtue, (which is yet
better and more smartly expressed with an Equivoke in the Greek;) yea, Jupiter
and he were equally helpful to one another. And that of Epictetus is something
like it; (...). Arian. Dissertat. 1. cap. 12.
If thou art a Wise Man, thou art not inferior to the Gods in point of
Understanding and Reason. And Seneca relates the like Huff, among others, of a
Chief Man of that Persuasion, (and of whose Writings, I remember, he says
somewhere, Vivit, viget, Liber est, supra hominem est). It was a usual saying
of Sextius, says he, (that was his Name) Solebat Sextius dicere, ^ovem plus
non posse qu^m bonum virum. Jupiter quo antecedit bonum virum? Diutius bonus
est. Epist. 73.
Jupiter cannot do more than a Good Man. Jupiter excells a Good Man only in
this, that his Goodness is of a Longer Date and Duration. And Seneca himself is
as Presmuptuous and Daring, as may be gathered from that Passage of his, Bonus
Tempore tantum a Deo differt. De Provid. c. 1.
A Good Man differs from God only as to Time. And again, God surpasses not a
Wis^ Man in Happiness, Deus non vincit Sapientem felicitate, etiamsi vincat
aetate. Ibid. Epist. 73.
though he does in Age. Which amounts to this Blasphemy, that God has
Pre-eminence of Man only as to his Existence before him. This is also asserted
by Cicero E virtutibus vita beata existit, pa^ and similis Deorum, nulla re
nisi Immortalitate, quae nihil ad been vivendum pertinet, cedens Coelestibus.
De Not. Deor. I. 2.
, who not only in his Paradoxes, but in other Places of his Writings, is
pleased to play the Stoic. But the Demure Stoic, before cited, blasphemes at
a higher rate, when he says, Est aliquid quo Sapiens antecedat Deum. Ille
naturae beneficio, non suo, sapiens est. Epist. 53.
There is something wherein a Wise Man excels God: God is Wise by Nature, and
cannot help it, but the other is so by his own Power and Industry. What think
you now of Seneca, does he not show himself a right Spaniard? Or rather, has
not that Haughty Nation learned to speak big, to huff, to rant, and blasphem^
from this their Haughty Countryman? What think you now of these Stoics? Can
there be more manifest proof of their unmeasurable Arrogance and Elation of
Mind? Are not they as well as the Epicureans horribly profane and blasphemous,
though in a different way? The one denies a God and Providence, the other makes
his God to come short of his Wise Man; or, which is the same, he makes his Wise
Man much better than his God. Some indeed have thought that Seneca retracts
what he said, when he tells us that Bonus vir sine Deo nemo est. Epist. 41.
No Man is virtuous without God: But perhaps by God he means the Conscience,
for this he calls a God in another Deus in humano corpore hospitans. Epist. 31.
place; and it is usual with the Stoics and Platonists to style (...). Sext.
Empir. adv. Mathemat.
the Mind a God. We have no reason then to think that Seneca corrected himself,
but rather to be persuaded that this was the inseparable Genius of that Sect,
viz. to be guilty of those Impious Boastings, and to break out into horrid and
impudent Blasphemies. You see therefore how reasonable it was that our Apostle
should caution against this Sect of Philosophy, lest the Minds of Men should be
perverted by it. This is the Philosophy that will spoil a Man, or else there is
none in the World that will do it. The Christian Religion therefor is in
direct opposition to it. Those Arrogant and Blasphemous Boastings are repugnant
to the Christian Simplicity and the Tenor of the Gospel, which everywhere
beats down all High and Lofty Thoughts, and bids us Pray and Entreat, and
Humbly Sue for the Divine Assistance, and be thoroughly Sensible of our own
Weakness and Disability. This acquaints us that every good and perfect Gift is
from Above, and that there is nothing which we have that was not received
thence, that we cannot think, nor speak, much less act any thing that is Good
without the Assistance of the Divine Power; that we are constantly beholden to
God; that we depend upon him for all things, especially as to Grace and
Goodness. These are wholly derived from him, and we are ever to acknowledge that
he is the Author and Finisher of them in us. The Contrary Doctrine to this I
have the more largely showed to be the Sentiment of the Stoics, because this
is the Chiefest and most Dangerous Indication of their Pride and Arrogance. I
will be the more brief in the other Instances of it.

2. They held that it was below a Man to do any Good Act, with any respect to a
Reward to be received for the doing of it. These Soaring Souls would needs
maintain that Virtue is to be loved, and Good to be done merely for its own
sake: they declared that the foresight of a Recompense did not influence upon
them at all in what they Did or Suffered: and that no Good Man ought to make
any thing a Motive to Virtue and Goodness, but these themselves. Seneca,
Epictetus, Arianus, Antoninus and other Stoics will furnish you with Passages
to this purpose. But Christianity (which is the Sublimest Doctrine in the
World) is not of this strain, if we may credit one of the greatest Professors
of it, who freely declares, that if in this Life only we have hope, 1 Cor. 15.
19.
we are of all Men most miserable. From whence it appears that there must be an
expectation of another Life, there must be the assurance of a Future Recompense
joined with the Pleasure and Intrinsic Goodness of a Holy Life. It is true, it
is Servile to fix the Eye altogether on the Wages: but it is Disingenuous and
Ungrateful not to take notice of the Reward which God has purposely set before
us. True Love is destroyed if God and Holiness be not embraced for themselves:
But then on the other hand Christian Hope (which is also an Emiment Grace) is
annulled if the Opinion of the Stoics be valid. It is clear therefore that
their Doctrine is False and Erroneous, and is the Result of their Vain Thoughts
of Themselves, and of a counterfeit Zeal to Virtue, and a mere show and
ostentation of it. For if we could examine things truly and fully, it may be
there would be found no such thing under Heaven as a Virtue wholly and
perfectly Disinteressed, such as has no Advantage, no Benefit, no Emolument
belonging to it, or so much as supposed to be consequent of it. Therefore when
these Men tell us that Virtutum Omnium pretium in ipsis est. Sen. Epist 81.
no Reward is to be looked after, when like the Love-Pharisees (called so in
the Sota. c. 1.
Talmud) they pretend to obey the Law merely and only out of Love of Virtue,
without the least respect to a Future State, we may reasonably conclude that in
this, as in other things, they affect Chimaera's and Fictions, and are ready on
all Occasions to give proof of their Self-Conceit and Haughty Imaginations.

3. To give another Instance of these Men's unsufferable Pride, they grew up to
such a pitch of it, that they were inclined to throw off Magistracy and
Government, and to withdraw themselves and others from the Jurisdiction of the
Powers they lived under. Their Wise Man was a King, nay King of Kings (as you
heard before), and thence they would infer that he was Above all Allegiance and
Subjection to Authority. This Notion made them so Domineering and Imperious,
that they broke out into Tumults and Seditions, as Tacitus observes of them in
his Annals. It went against the Philosophic Grain to be Subjects and Servants.
But this is contrary to St. Paul's Politics, Let every Soul be subject to the
Higher Powers; and to his Oeconomicks, Art thou called a Servant? mind it not,
i. e. do not think that That Condition renders thee the worse in the sight of
God: serve God and thy Master at once, and therein thou will show thy self a
Good Christian. So much of the Stoics Pride.

The Third Thing they were taken Notice of for, and which was a piece of
Singularity in these Philosophers, was their Apathy, as In Zenone.
Laertius acquaints us. And we are told by Plin. lib. 7. c. 19.
another that Diogenes the Cynick (for you must know the Cynicks were but
overgrown Stoics) was a great Maintainer of it. This put an unnecessary
Restraint and Violence upon the Natural Affections of Mankind, and would not
allow Humane Nature either to laugh or weep. Their Wise Man that they made was
but a Statue, (and so indeed he was as good as some of their Gods): he was
stupid and senseless upon occasion: he was not permitted to resent the
Occurrences of the World, were they never so surprising and admirable. He was
to be silent upon the Rack; and when the Stone or Gout tortured him, he was to
force a Smile: and it was a Mortal Sin (for you must remember all Sins were
alike with these Gentlemen) to wax pale at the sight or feeling of the
Incision-Knife. He was to Play with Torments, and to Sport with Pain and
Misery. Thus they believed the Sense of Morality was to devour all Sense of
Humanity. But this was the Doctrine of some only of that Rigid Sect. The
Soberest of them did neither speak nor think thus: the Apathy or Indolency
which they maintained was a very Laudable and Innocent thing. Let Seneca speak
for them, Non educo saplentem ex hominum numero, etc. Epist. 71.
I do not (says he) draw out a Wise Man from amongst Mankind, and place him
out of the Number of Men; for he that is Senseless is no Man. And this
Philosopher's Practice was suitable to this Principle, for we find him in his
Writings often resenting the Evils which befell the World, Himself, or his
Relations. So Antoninus Surnamed the Philosopher, shed Tears upon occasion of a
Friend's Death; and his Father Antoninus Pius (for he was his Son by Adoption)
excused him, saying, Permit him to be a Man. Arian^s L. 3. c. 2.
prosessedly declares against that Apathy which takes away Natural Affection.
It becomes a Man (says he) not to be Senseless and Immovable, but to keep and
preserve his Natural and Acquired Affections and Relations, as a Father, a Son,
a Brother, a Citizen. The Affections are not to be Eradicated and Expelled, but
the best way is (...). Plut. de Curios.
to Change them and Turn about, and Fit them for our Purpose, and so make them
Easy and Advantageous to us. Reason, and Nature, and Christianity approve of
the Emotions of our Affections so far as they are Instrumental to Virtue, and
are restrained within their Due Limits. The Passions are not wholly to be
Rooted up, but to be Diverted; they are not to be Banished, but to be Curbed
and kept under. These Gibeonites are not to be Killed, but to be made
Serviceable, and kept in Obedience. Jesus wep^ over the Grave of his Friend,
and thereby for ever Hallowed all Tears, and Consecrated all Natural and Humane
Affections. It is certain that the Passions are of great use in Religion, and
may be subservient to the noblest Ends and Purposes of it. Therefore our
Apostle might justly enter his Caveat here against those Hard and Flinty
Philosophers, who talked of an utter Dispassion, and would make Men to be Iron
and Stones.

Thus I have acquainted you what were the Opinions and Practices of the
Epicurean and Stoic Philosophers with whom St. Paul grappled. Thence you may
guess what the Apostle and they disputed about, and thence you may gather
likewise what the Apostle means when he warns the Christian Colossians that
they be not spoled through Philosophy and Vain Deceit. I will only make this
Remark or Reflection in the Close, that these Epicureans and Stoics among the
Pagans Answer to the Sadduces and Pharisees among the Jews. There is a Great
Affinity between these two sorts of Antagonists. The Epicureans, like the
Sadduces, placed all their Hopes in this Life, and therefore would be very
Merry and Frolic: The Stoics, like the Pharisees, were Demure, and great
pretenders to Austerity and Sublime Virtues, though they came but little short
of the others in point of True Morality. And this indeed might be observed
further, that when Men are not Masters of True and Solid Virtue, when they are
not really Changed and Mended in their Minds, they pretend to greater things
than usual, to make Men admire and applaud them, to be thought Singular
Proficients in Religion: they pretend to do more than others, when they are
Conscious to themselves that they do not so much. This is the very Guise of our
Quak^rs, (those Modern Stoics and Pharisees) they make as if they were
exceeding great Observers of Morality, and had attained to a Higher and more
Spiritual way of Christianity than Others, yet these People, of all the Sects
that we know, are the most Defective in Religion, and have run the farthest off
from the Principles of Morality and Christianity.

I have hitherto showed the Deceitful Opinions which were peculiar and proper
to those particular Sects of Philosopers I have named. Now in the next place, I
will set before you those gross and mistaken Notions, which for the most part
were common to them all. I will discover the Deceitfulness of the Pagan
Philosophy, by instancing in some Principles and Practices which were not only
maintained by the particular Sects above named, but also by all the rest of the
Philosophers. I will reduce them to these two Heads, 1. Their deceitful
Opinions and Practices relating to some particular Vices and Virtues. 2. Their
false Sentiments concerning Happiness.

In pursuance of the first, I shall present you with their Pride, their
Revenge, their Self-Murder, their Lewdeness, and other Mistakes in their Morals.

1. Pride was the Catholic Blemish, the general Stain of all the Philosophers:
Yea, it seemed even to be congenial to them to be immoderately proud of their
Seize. There could not be a more visible Discovery of this than their
desire of Applause and Acclamations. By their Subtilty and Sophistry they
thought to conciliate a great Fame and Honor, than which nothing was dearer to
them, even when they seemed to shun them. Excellently to this purpose Plutarch
observes that the Author of that Saying, (...), live retiredly and unknown,
would not lie hid himself: He would be known by that Motto; whilst he affected
an Obscurity, he reached at Fame. Those that give such Precepts (says he)
(...). Plut. de occult^ videndo.
follow after Glory, and yet at the same time seem to turn away from it: Whilst
they look full at it, they pretend to look another way. Some of them, even
whilst they writ against Glory, ambitioned it. Our own Philosophers (says
Tully) Tusc. Quaest.
set their Names to those Books which treat of despising of Glory. And the same
Observation you meet with in Valerius Maximu^, Gloria ne ab his quidem qui
contemptum ejus introducere conantur, negligitur: quoniam quidem ipsis
voluminibus nomina sua diligenter adjiciunt. lib. 8. c. 14.
Glory is not despis^d* no not of those who (...) to introduce the Contem^^ of
it; for we see they (...) careful to affix their Names to their very Books that
they put forth. A P^ilosopher, says Tertullian, is a Animal Gloriae. De Anima
cap. 1.
vain glorious Animal; and St* (...) says the very same of him, and adds,
that he is a Gloriae Animal, and venale rumorum mancipium. Epist. ad Pammach.

Popularis aurae vile mancipium. Epist. ad Julian.


Mercenary Slave of Applause. Tertullian, speaking of the Philosophers in
another place, says they were Negotiatores famae. Apolog. cap. 46.
Traders for Fame, and this was the Commodity they were most eager to purchase.
Another time he says they Homines Gloriae libidinosi.
were Men that lusted after Glory, and made Fame their Mistress. This was the
noted Badg of the best of them, to hunt after Glory with too great an
Impatience; and they would do any base and servile thing to get a Name. We may
truly say of them that they lived upon Applause; and if Fame did not trumpet
them, they could not breath. But to instance in the arrogant Humor of those
who were thought the modestest and most Self-denying Philosophers, viz. the
Cynicks, their daily business was to decry the Pride of others. But whilst they
did so, and professed to be Masters of the greatest Humility, they were the
boldest and proudest Fellows imaginable: Tho they were the greatest Censors of
Pride, yet they were certainly most haughty, and under the very Garb of
Humility there lurked an intolerable Arrogance. They were rudely clothed, to
witness outwardly a Contempt of the World; but yet if a Man looked narrowly
into them, he might observe they were very proud of what they wore, tho 'twas
never so coarse. Their Beards and their sullen Looks, their affected Gestures
and Grimaces were Ensigns not of their Gravity, but Singularity. This made them
harden their Bodies against all Injuries of Weather, this made some of them beg
of Statues, and provoke common Women to rail with them, which were Instances of
Affectation, not Humility. Diogenes in a frosty Morning stood naked in the
Marketplace, to show (as he pretended) his Patience; it happened that Plato
passed by at that time, and knowing his vainglorious Humor, spoke to the
People that came about him to leave him alone, and then my Cynick would soon
retire, for he was buoyed up only by the Peoples Applause. Diog^nes another
time thought to be even with Plato for this, (for you must know they understood
one another well enough, tho they deceived the People) and trampled upon a Neat
Couch, or some such Trim Furniture which Plato had in his House, and cried out,
I trample on Plato' s Pride; to which Plato adjoined, but with greater Pride.
Thus they were conscious to themselves of the Dis^e^^er which they so much
labored under. As for the Academicks, who openly pro^e^^ed they knew nothing;
it is too evident from their Carriage and wild Contrasts that they were
conceited they had an Insight into all things; for those that undertake to
dispute against every one, do thereby proclaim their Universal Knowledge. The
supercilious Temper of the Stoics I have partly given you an acco^nt of
before, and I might here further do it by showing you how they (above all
Sects) delighted in high Strains and Paradoxes, which is an an Argument that
their Philosophy was starched and formal, that it was more for Show and
Ostentation, than to cherish in Men's Minds sound and profitable Truths.

The Arrogant and Vainglorious Spirit of the rest of the Philosophers, and of
all the Men of Parts and Worth among the Gentiles, is sufficiently obvious. --
Volito vivus per ora virum, is Ennius's Rant. D^mosthenes declared himself
mightily pleased with what he heard from an Ordinary Woman, a Tankardbearer, as
he passed by her, (...), There goes the great Demosthenes, said she. And his
Brother Orator and Philosopher may seem to have been a great Aff^ctor of
popular Glory, when Tusc. Quaest.
he claimed Kindred with Servi^s T^llius, the sixth King of Rome; he calls him
his Cousin merely because he was his Namesake, but he was nothing akin to
him. The famous Pliny, who was a Philosophical Man, and a grave Magistrate and
Consul in Trajan's days, has left a whole Epist. 23. lib. 9.
Epistle to tell the World that he was infinitely transported with Applause;
particularly (among other Instances which he there mentions) when one pointed
at him, and said, That is Pliny, he professes he was never so well pleased in
his Life. After these Grave Men it is no wonder to hear of Martial's Sed toto
l^gor orb frequens, and dicitur Hic est. And in another place, his Ille ego
sum nulli, etc. And of Ovid's Iamque opus ex^gi, etc. And Horace his Exegi
monumentum aere perennius, And his -- Monstror digito praeter^untium Romanae
fidicen lyrae. All which show that they were tickled with Applause, and
impatiently thirsted after Fame and Repute. But Christianity allows not of
this, it permits us not to gasp insatiably after the Acclamations of Men. I do
not say it is simply unlawful and against the Rules of Christianity to desire
or accept of Honor and Praise; for it is certain that he who does virtuously,
cannot hate the Reward of doing so. But to look after these chiefly, and in the
first place, and to make them the great End of our Actions, is altogether
blamable and vicious. To love the Praise of Men more than the Praise of God; to
do good Acts not for the Acts sake, but only for the Applause that follows
them, is immoral as well as unchristian. Our chief End must be to contribute
toward the Honor and Glory of God in the World, to be beneficial to Mankind,
and to promote the design of our Master upon Earth. If whilst we are doing
this, Repute and a Good Name accrue to us, it becomes us not to be averse to
them, but to receive them as the due Attendant of Virtue; yea as that Reward of
it which God himself has pleased to annex to it. Moreover, Christianity
acquaints us that it is a sign of a mean and vulgar Spirit to act only out of a
desire to be commended, and that it is truly noble and generous to despise the
World, and to glory in the Cross, and to look for the Euge's of Angels, and the
Applause of Heaven: This is a worthy Ambition. The Advice of our Apostle is,
Let nothing be done through vain Glory: and again, Be not desirous of vain
Glory. Christianity leads Men to a true Knowledge of themselves, and that is the
only Spring of Humility, and of sober and becoming Thoughts. Whereas it is the
nature of all other Knowledge (as the Apostle observes) to puff up them that are
Possessors of it, to swell them into high Conceits of themselves. And this was
the very case of the philosophizing Gentiles, they grew big, and were ready to
burst with this Tumor, or rather this Poison. Their Carriage was observed to
be most absurdly proud and lo^ty: Fame and vain Glory principled all of them,
and the aggrandizing their Names was the main thing they looked after.

2. Their insatiable desire of Revenge, and their Aversness to forgive
Injuries, was another deceitful and unsound Principle that they had imbibed.
Their very Philosophers too often spoke the Language of the Poet, -- No^ haec
patiemur inulti? Must we suffer such Affronts, must we undergo such Wrongs, and
yet not revenge our selves? Vim vi repellere, was accounted good Morality: But
it was held the Mark of a low Spirit to pass by Injuries and Wrongs. It is a
servile and slavish thing, when we are used contumeliously, to suffer it
without making Returns. (...). Ad Nicomach. l. 4. c. 2.
This was the Sense of Aristotle. And that Tully, the great Master of Moral
Offices, places not Forgiveness amongst them, and that he reckons it not among
natural Dictates, Grotius De Verit. Christ. Relig.
will inform you in three or four Quotations out of that Philosopher, tho
certainly it is a Dictate of right and unbiased Reason. Nay, you will find
that this famous Moralist De Invent. 2.
reckons Revenge in the number of those things which belong to the Law of
Nature. He does but invite Persons to the commission of a new Offense, who
passes by an old one, was a Veterem ferendo injuriam invitas novam. Terent.
Pagan Maxim. It was thought the best way to defend themselves against Injuries
for the future, to take Revenge on those that were past. And hear what a great
Moralist says, (...). Isocrat.
Think it as base a thing to be outdone by thy Enemi^s in ill turns, as by thy
Friends in good ones. I know this is not the constant Language of the Pagan
Philosophers; they have better Apprehensions of this thing at other times, and
speak very laudably. But you see how easily their Sentiments are altered and
perverted, and to what corrupt Maxims their unstable Philosophy betrayed them.
But Christianity on the contrary inculcates nothing more than Patience and
Self-denial, and a free forgiving of Injuries. We are bid by Christ to Luke 17.
4.
forgive not seven times, but seventy times seven, i. e. to make it our
constant and usual Practice to forgive Offenses. We are enjoined by the
Christian Morals to overcome our Enemies with Patience, or (which is more
heroical) by Obligations and Courtesies. Romans 12. 20.
When they hunger, we are bid to feed them, and when they thirst, to give them
Drink; that by so doing we may heap Coals of Fire on their Heads; that we may,
if it be possible, soften and melt them, tame and charm them by our Tenderness
and Benevolence; that we may by the Flames of Charity in our own Breasts,
kindle a resembling one in theirs. Our Master has commanded us to Luke 6. 37.
forgive, that we may be forgiven; to pardon others, as we hope to find Pardon
and Mercy at the Hands of our offended God. It is truly Christian to imitate
Him, who makes his Sun to shine on the evil and on the good, and sends. Rain
on the just and on the unjust; who lets the greatest Delinquents share in his
Favor, and communicates his Mercies and Blessings to the vilest Sinners. In
short, it is the excellent and generous Nature of Christianity, to forgive
Offenses when the Criminal acknowledges them: i^ is yet a greater degree and
height of it to take no notice of them, where the Community is not concerned,
but to pass them by as not worth our observing: but the greatest and highest
Glory of it, is to love our Enemies, to pray for them that persecute us, to
return Good for their Evil, and to be kind and obliging even to the worst of
Men.

3. Self-Murder (which is a Notorious Affront and Injury to Humane Nature) was
defended by the Chiefest Philosophers of them all. They held that a Man need
not ask Leave before he went out of the World, that when they saw themselves in
Danger, they might be as cruel to themselves as the Gods were, yea that it was
Religious to dispatch that Life which the Gods were resolved to destroy. It was
determined by the Stoics, that a Man might Kill himself rather than endure
Servitude, Reproach, or Long and Grievous Diseases: And this Cato defends, if
Tully does not belie him, as we have no reason to think he does. That Stoic it
seems was a Severe Commonwealth's Man, and could not fit himself to the Turn
of the Times. The Gods must give him a Reason why Caesar vanquished Pompey: and
because they would not, he fell upon his own Sword, and dispatched himself.
This the Great Roman Philosopher approves of, and thinks it was not without
God's Leave that he departed hence. He expressly says, Tusc. Quaest.
God gave him a just Occasion of dying, as he d^d Socrates: and he reckons him
among those who are discharged and dismissed by God. Some others of the most
Philosophical Men, either directly slew themselves, or were wilfully accessory
to their own Deaths. Thus Lycurgus, the Great and Renowned Lawgiver of Sparta,
pined himself to death; which Fact In vita Lycurg.
Plutarch approves and applauds with a Jest, viz. that he made an end of
himself by a total abstinence from Meat, to teach his Countrymen Temperance.
Cic. Tusc. Quest. l. 1.
Cleombrotus a Platonist, having read Plato's Ph^do, where Socrates being about
to die, discourses of the Immortality of the Soul, went and threw himself down
headlong into the Sea. And other Great Men of Morals, as Empedocles,
Demosthenes, Anaxagoras, Chrysippus, yea and Zeno the Father of Stoicism, were
Felons of themselves. Those who pretended to be great Despisers of Pains and
Sufferings, ran away from them as soon as they felt the Anguish of them.
Observe it, the very Stoics, who were such Unpassionate and Immovable
Moralists, were for leaving the World before their Time. This they called
Withdrawing themselves, and a fair Retiring out of the World. And the Famous
Seneca, in no fewer than Four Epistles, maintains this Practice. In one of
which he plainly tells us, (whatever he had said at other times concerning the
Great Extremities which might put a Man upon killing himself) that Nec hoc
tanti^m in necessitate ultima facit, sed cum primum illi coeperit suspecta esse
fortuna, etc. Epist. 70.
his Wise Man need not stay till Extreme Necessity urges him to such a violent
Action, but as soon as his Fortune begins to be suspected, as soon as he
perceives there is some likelihood of his being brought into ill Circumstances,
he may prevent them all by going aside. He has this leave given him by the
Stoics, as well as by the Platonists and other Philosophers.

But Reason and Christianity (and some of the Philosophers too in a better
Mood) oppose it as a Rash and Foolish Attempt, nay as a vile and wicked
Enterprise. It is an usurping on God's proper Right and Authority, who only
has Power to dispose of Man's Life. When God calls for our Lives, then we are
to part with them submissively and willingly, but not before. In the mean time
we must entertain Poverty, Sickness, Disgrace, or whatever Crosses befall us,
with invincible Patience and Resolution. We must not shamefully relinguish our
Stations, and like imprudent Pilots quit the Guidance of the Vessel in the
midst of a Storm. We must bear up undauntedly against the briskest Assaults,
and resolve to grapple with all sorts of Hazards and Extremities. We must
prepare our selves to look new Dangers in the face, and by the Divine
Assistance make way through the thickest Troops of Opposition. When we are
assaulted with Sufferings, we must not crouch and sneak, and fly like Cowards,
but we must resolve to maintain our Post, and weather out our Miseries with a
Courage becoming Christianity. Be the Way we pass through rough or smooth,
difficult or easy, it is the Divine Appointment, and God has not made any
Calamity insupportable; it may soon wear off of it self, however Time will take
it away. But we must be careful that we do not by any means put an end to it by
doing so to our Lives. This is a high Offense against God, against the
Community (of which we are a part) and against our selves, and Humane Nature it
self. This is a manifest token of base Fear and Cowardice, and Abjection of
Mind; it argues unmanly Precipitancy and Unadvisedness, a distrust of
Providence, a defect of Faith, and Hope, and Christian Courage, and even black
Despair it self. But how brave and noble is it, after all our hard Service to
go off honorably, with the Comfort of having fought a good Fight, and finished
our Course, and kept the Faith, and of having persevered in our Duty to the
end, maugre all Discouragements and Hardships? This is true Christian
Philosophy.

4. Lewdness, i. e. Immodest and Obscene Speeches, Ribaldry and loose Talk,
with Lascivious Gesture and Behavior, with Lewd and Filthy Practice, were
countenanced by the greatest Pretenders to Deep Notions and Morality; yea, and
were not thought contrary to the Principles of Philosophy. As for the Stoics,
they professedly held that there is no Obscenity in Words. And Chrysippus more
particularly is named by Sextus Empiricus as the chief Assertor of this:
Chrysippus, who was the very Prop and Buttress of the Stoics Porch (as Tully
tells us) was a Great Defender of this Opinion, and propagated it among his
Disciples. They were wont (as the same Author says) Suo quamque rem nomine
appellare. Cic. Epist. l. 9. Ep. 22.
to call every thing by its Name, hereby excusing and palliating their
Obscenity; and he seems to take their part, Ibid.
calling this Lewdness of Speech Libertatem loquendi, a Liberty of speaking.
From tolerating of Obscene Words they proceeded to license the Lewdest Actions,
and therein were justified by the concurrent Practice of other Philosophers. He
that rifles Plato's Politics, shall find that Plurality of Wives, and even a
Community of Women are allowed by him. The wisest Philosopher shows himself
here most absurd, for thus he argues: (...), sue de Republic^, l. 5.
Because all things in a Commonwealth are to relate to the Common Good and
Public Advantage, therefore to have all things in common does so, yea, to have
the promiscuous use of Women. We are Laert. in Zenone.
told that Diogenes, Zeno and Chrysippus (topping Men among their Parties) were
of the same Mind. Adultery was allowed Plutarch. in vit. Lycurgi.
the Lacedaemonians by the sober Lycurgus. Common Whores were permitted Idem in
vit. Solon.
to the Athenians by the wise Solon. We are told that the Cynicks blushed not
to act openly the most uncomely and lewd things.

Yea, Sodomy was approved of and practiced by the greatest Pretenders to Wisdom
among the Pagans. Ille etiam Thracum Populis fuit auctor, amorem
In teneros trans^^rre mares.
Ovid. Metam. l. 10.


Orpheus, who was the Head and Prince of them all, taught the Thracians this:
and Socrates is taxed of this unnatural Vice, not only by Iuvenal and others in
Railery, but by Authors of Great Gravity and Good Credit, as Plutarch, Diodorus
Siculus, Minutius Felix, Apolog. c. 46.
Tertullian, Deipnosoph. I. 13.
Athenaeus. I know some are inclined to think that this Charge against Socrates
is a Slander, and that he was clear and innocent as to this matter, and that
these Authors were too rash in borrowing such a Report from some Poets and
light Heads. And truly I am not averse to think so too, since I have made some
Enquiry into the Business. I conceive this may be given as the fairest and
truest Account of this B^ave Man, that he was taken with the Society of
ingenious and sweet-natur'd Young Men. Their Intellectual Beauty was that which
was courted and loved by him; and this is that Manly Beauty which some of his
Dialogues (as Philaebus and Phaedo) commend. He having made choice of the
Spritliest Youths he could meet with, took great Pains with them to ripen and
improve those Seeds of Virtue which he saw in them, and to fit them for the
Service of their Country. Among many others, an Example of this was Alcibiades,
a Young Nobleman of Athens, who was shaped and formed in his Manners by this
Philosopher, and owed the Excellent Conduct of his whole Life to the Early
Instructions of so wise a Master. Hence some took occasion to tax him as guilty
of Unnatural Lust toward this and other Young Men, and of corrupting (in the
worst sense that can be thought) the Youth of Athens. Some were conscious to
themselves of their own Guilt, and knew that (...) was the Vice of the Country;
and therefore concluded Socrates to be like themselves, and that he made no
other use of Young Men's Company than they did. Aristophanes was the Chief Man
that set this on foot, who wrote his Comedy called the Clouds, only to abuse
Socrates: You must know then (as the True Ground of this) that Socrates
inveighed against the Sophists and Mock-Philosophers of that Age, Men who had
nothing in them of True and Sober Philosophy, but were a Disgrace and Reproach
to it. Hereupon these Men got him jeared by Aristophanes in that Play of his
before-named. Besides, Socrates had disobliged all the Poetic Tribe by that
part of the Model of his Commonwealth, wherein he would have all Poets
banished: Whence it is no wonder that the Poets were set against him. Indeed
they were these who had the greatest hand in the Impeachment of Socrates,
especially the Comedians, because Socrates had a more particular Dislike of the
Comic Poetry: for he being grave and composed, disrelished that Light Humor
of the Stage, which was Vain and Drolling, but at that time most taking. Yea,
Socrates was sometimes present at, and applauded the Tragedies of Euripides,
but would not honor with his Presence Aristophanes's Comedies. Whereupon this
Poet-Laureat of that Age conceived a Displeasure against the Philosopher, and
seeing he would not approve of the Comic Way, he must fall under its Lash, to
make the People Sport. Now Socrates is everywhere laughed at; now Virulent
Tongues say any thing of him; now they report he used the Company of Young Men
to Vicious and Lewd Purposes. But that would not suffice; a Formal Indictment
was drawn up against him. The Poets take to them Melitus and Anytus, and other
Conspirators, who, because out of Extreme Hatred to the Philosopher, they
sought his Death; insisted not much on the former Accusation, as not Criminal
enough, but accused him for perverting the Laws, by introducing new Gods and a
New Religion. If you look into the (...). Laert. in Socrate.
Story, you will find that Socrates had the Honor to be impeached upon the
same Athenian Law that St. (...). Acts 17. 18.
Paul was when he was convented before the Areopagites, viz. that the Ancient
Gods were to be worshipped, and no new ones to be introduced contrary to the
Custom of the Country. It was the breaking of this Law which procured his
Death; he had discovered the Unreasonableness of the Pagan Idolatry, and the
Shameful Deities which were set up among the Athenians. This proved fatal to
him, though to make him doubly guilty, they inserted the (...). Laert. in Socr.
Accusation beforementioned, which no Man believed, who knew either Socrates,
or his Enemies Malice. It was this which at last bereaved him of his Life,
after they had robbed him of his good Name by fixing the Crime of Unnatural
Lust upon him.

But tho Socrates for the Reasons above alleged, may be thought not to be
guilty of that Foul Vice, yet some other Philosophers of Great Name cannot be
so cleared. I am loath to think that Plato was one of that number, but Diogenes
Laertius says he was, and that he disguised this Vice, calling it (...).
Aristotle, the Prince of the Peripateticks, was guilty, says Athenaeus, so was
Zeno the Father of the Stoics, who, as both Athenaeus and Diogenes Laertius
testify, had a Male Sweetheart whose Name was Cremonides: And this was so
frequent among the Philosophers, that Dialog. Amor.
L^cian would have this Love of Boys left wholly to that sort of Men. But
Graver Authors may be alleged (besides those already mentioned) as Pyrrh. Hyp.
I. 3. c. 24.
Sextus Empiricus, who proves that this Filthy Practice was looked upon as a
thing lawful, at least indifferent, among the Men of the greatest Philosophy.
Theodoret De Cur. Graec. Affect. I. 9.
says it was approved of by Lycurgus's Laws: tho I know some are of Opinion
that Sparta was not stained with this Foul Enormity. But the Truth is this,
there was at one time a Law (...).
against this Lewd Practice, but this was soon abrogated by common Consent.
Thus there was a Time when there was a Law Aeschin. Orat. contr. Timarchum.
Demosthenes and Lysias, in Orationibus.
at Athens against prostituting of Boys if they were free, and against hiring
them to filthy Purposes. But it is not to be doubted that the Athenians
afterward (as well as before) were generally guilty in this kind, and the Law
of that place allowed it. This is expressly testified by Plutarch, who was well
acquainted with the Laws and Constitutions of that Country. He In vit. Solon.
Aeschin. Orat. contr. Timarch.
reports that Solon, their Great Lawgiver, tolerated by Law that Unnatural kind
of Lust, that he indulged it to all but Slaves; as much as to say, it was fit
only for Freemen, and those of Quality. Yea, this Plutarch himself (as Grave
an Author as he is, and famed for his Moral Writings) has writ shamefully
(...) and (...).
on this Subject. And in his Piece of the Education of Children, he seems to
allow of it in Plato and other Philosophers. Other Credible Authors vouch this
(...). Xenoph. de Repub. Lacedaem.
for a known Truth, that the Laws of most Cities in Greece did not suppress
that Libidinous Usage. And St. Paul's Testimony may be added to all these, in
Romans 1. 27. The Men, leaving the natural use of the Woman, burned in their Lust
one toward another, Men with Men, working that which is unseemly. Which words
are meant of that Filthy and Preposterous Lust, and are spoken of the Wise Men
and Philosophers among the Pagans: which is a farther Proof and Confirmation of
this Head of my Discourse, that the Gentile Philosophy patronized Obscenity and
Lewdness, and even Unnatural Acts of Lusts. Thus I am glad I have rid my Hands
of this Ill Subject, which yet it was requisite to stay a while upon in
pursu^nce of my Undertaking on these Words, which was to show the Corruption of
the Pagan Philosophy, together with that of Philosophical Men. And you see the
Apostle himself thought fit to make particular mention of this flagitious Usage
among them, and at the same time to reprove and condemn it, as he does likewise
in 1 Cor. 6. 9. For our most Holy Religion forbids even the least Tendencies to
Lewdness, and the least Indications of it; Col. 3. 5.
In^rdinate Affection, Evil Concupiscence, Lascivious Thoughts and Desires are
criminal by the Evangelical Laws. We are ascertained by our Savior himself,
that an Unchaste Eye, a Mat. 5. 28.
Lustful Look is Adultery. All Words and Speeches that savor of Lust, all
Ephesians. 4. 29.
Corrupt Communications and Discourse are condemned by the Apostle. And the
same Inspired Writer, who knew very well what was Vice, and what was Virtue,
and who fully understood the nature of the Christian Religion, and what it
allows, and what it forbids, strictly commands us that we 1 Pet. 2. 11.
abstain from fleshly Lusts, that we Romans 13. 14.
make not Provision for the Flesh, to fulfill the Lusts thereof; that 1 Cor. 6.
18.
we flee Fornication; assuring us of the Everlasting Penalty which is to be
awarded against those that act contrary to these Prohibitions; Heb. 13. 4.
Whoremongers and Adulterers God will judge. Those Wanton and Lascivious Flames
shall certainly end in those that are Eternal.

I might proceed, and instance in other Allowances incorporated into the Body
of those Morals which are left us by Philosophers, as the destroying of the
Child in the Mother's Womb (if it be safe and possible for her) when she thinks
she has had a full and sufficient number of Children; this you will find
suggested by Polit. l. 7. c. 16.
Aristotle. And the exposing of Children is another Allowance. Plato would have
this done whenever Parents have exceeded the Bounds of getting Children, and
when they grow too numerous. Aristotle is of Opinion (...). Ibid.
that a Child which is lame or blind, or any ways deformed, may be cast out,
and without Pity or Care exposed to the wide World: And he says it would be
well if there were a Law to forbid the bringing up of Children that are any way
maimed and imperfect. Thus two of the greatest Philosophers that ever were,
taught People to be cruel to the Fruit of their own Loins, to be brutish and
unnatural to their own Flesh (nay, the worst of Brutes are seldom found to do
so). The Practice of the Pagans was according to this Doctrine, as several
Writers inform us. Thus Philo De Legib. Specialib.
the Jew tells us, That exposing of Infants was usually among many Nations.
Herodotus relates L. 2. c. 35.
that the Parents in some Countries were not bound to bring up their Children
if they did not like it. The Indian Brachmans, tho great Pretenders to
Philosophy, cast off their Children if they did not like their Humors and
Conditions. It was lawful according to the Athenian Laws Petit. in Leges
A^tic^s.
, for Parents to expose their newborn Infants, to cast them out of the Family,
and to deny them Food. Hence among the Greeks and Latin Comedians, Teren^.
Heautontim. Act. 4. Scen. 1. Aristophan, Ranae.
when they represent the Manners of the Athenians, the exposing of Infants is
commonly brought in. This Custom has spread it self into many Regions of the
World, insomuch that the People of Madagascar throw off, and never have to do
with any of their Children that are born on a Friday. Nay, this exposing was
heretofore accompanied with downright Murder; for the Lacedaemonians had an
Unnatural Custom (and it was by the Decree of Lycurgus) Plutarch. vit. Lycurgi.
that if Children were deformed and unhealthful, they should be cast into a
deep Cavern of the Earth near the Mountain Taygetus. This People (who were the
Civilest of all Greece) erected an Office on purpose for this; they appointed
so many Searchers, whose business it was to examine every Infant as soon as it
was born, to see its Limbs, whether they are strong and firm, to make
Inspection into the several Parts, and to satisfy themselves whether there was
any Lameness, Blindness, or any other Deformity. If there was, they presently
ordered them to be thrown into the Barathrum beforementioned; or else those
Children that were at a very great distance from that place, were to be carried
and left in Woods, or exposed on Rivers in Baskets, and so to be left to the
Providence of Heaven. And Plutarch who relates this, approves of this their
mu^de^ing their Infants; for he says (in the close of their Constitutions and
Laws which he sets down) that he does not see any thing amiss in them. I could
observe to you also, that Theft was approved of by that wise Lawgiver Lycurg^s,
who allowed it to the Spartans on condition they could keep it close. It was
tolerated (says the forenamed Author) yea (...). Plut.
enjoined by the Law to Steal, but it was looked on as a base and dishonest
thing to be found guilty of it: The being taken was criminal, the not stealing
cunningly was the thing that was faulty. Lastly, Lying had the Approbation of
the Chief Philosopher among the Pagans. It is lawful to Lie for the Good of the
Commonwealth, says Socrates, as he is quoted by his Scholar De Repub. l. 2.
Plato. Thus you see what were the Corrupt Ethics of the Heathen World: for
tho many of these things which I have mentioned are repugnant to True
Philosophy, yet being maintained, and sometimes practiced by the Masters of
Philosophy, they are justly reckoned among the Deceits of Philosophy. However,
if these latter Instances be not so home to the purpose, it is certain that no
Man can pronounce so concerning the others beforementioned, which were some of
the chief Ingredients and Principles of the Gentile Philosophy.

But tho I have given you this Large Account of their Mistakes in Morality, yet
I will pursue this Matter a little farther, and (according to what I
propounded) show you in the next place, that the Philosophy the Apostle speaks
of was Deceitful, in that it was grossly mistaken about the Happiness of Man. It
was mistaken, and consequently deceived Men as to this Grand Point. 1. By not
assuring them of a Future Life. 2. By giving no notice of the Eternal Duration
of it. 3. By not determining wherein True Happiness consists. 4. By not
directing them to the Right Way to it.

1. It deceived them by not assuring them of a Future Life. The Future
Existence of the Soul (tho it was a Notion dictated by the Light of Nature and
Reason, and sometimes positively and plainly asserted by some of the
Philosophers, yet it) was disputed and doubted of among them at other times by
reason of false Principles which they had wilfully taken up, and thereby
clouded their Reasons and the Natural Dictates of their Minds, as also because
of Interest and Sensual Pleasure which stifled the Rational Actings of their
Souls. Upon these accounts a Future State was hardly believed by some of the
Philsophers, and wholly opposed by others. The Epicureans (as you have heard)
flatly denied it: And it is no wonder, seeing their Language was after this
rate, (...). La^rt. in Epicuro.
We can have no Notion of an Incorporeal Thing, unless it be a Vacuum: (...).
Ibid.
They therefore that say the Soul is Incorporeal, talk vainly and idly. De
Placit. Philosoph. l. 4.
Plutarch attests that Democritus held the Soul to be corruptible, and that it
perished together with the Body. It is true, the Pythagor^ans and Platonists
asserted that the Soul went on Pilgrimage, and flitted from one Man to another:
Yea, they held, that Men's Souls passed into Brutes as well as into other Men;
and he that was a Man a while ago, is now an Ass, a Wolf, a Dog, or some other
Animal: But this is vain Philosophy indeed, and all that we can build upon it
(if it were true) is this, That the same Man is often begot, and as often born,
and dies: Indeed Plato In Phaedone, seu de Animo.
brings in Socrates before his Death, treating of the Immortality of the Soul;
he makes him speak some things that are Admirable, Excellent, and Divine, but
other things are Poor, Mean and Frigid; he presents him as dubious and
uncertain, wavering, and inconsistent with himself. That Socrates doubted of a
Future State and the Soul's Immortality, may be gathered from that Passage of
his, which Plato inserts, (...). Plat. Apologia Socratis.
If these things we speak of be true. Again, Socrates says, Ibid.
One of these two is absolutely necessary, either Death utterly deprives us of
all Sense, or we pass from hence to another place. It seems he looked upon
Death either as a Sound Sleep, or a Long Journey, but he could not certainly
tell which. Plutarch De Consolatione ad Apollon.
had this very Notion of it, and on that account concludes that Death is not
Evil. After this wavering manner speaks the Great Roman Philosopher, Si
supremus ille dies non extincti^nem, sed commutationem a^^ert loci, quid
optabilius? Si autem perimit ac delet omnino, quid melius quam in mediis vitae
laboribus obdormiscere, and i^a conniventem somno consopiri sempiterno? Cic.
Tusc. Qu. l. 1.
If the day of Death be accompanied with the Change of Place only, and not an
utter Extinction, What can be more desirable than Death? Or, if it makes an end
of us, and quite annihilates us, What is better than when we are wearied with
the Labors of this Life, to fall asleep, and never to wake again? In like
manner Seneca, Mors nos aut consumit aut emittit: emissis meliora restant,
onere detracto; consumptis nihil restat. Epist. 24.
Death does either consume, or sends us out of this World into another: if the
latter be true, there are better things remain for us when we are sent out
hence, and have laid aside our Terrestrial Clog and Burden; but if the former
be true, then there is nothing remaining for us, being utterly consumed, and
consequently no Hurt can befall us; that is our Comfort. Again, he thus faintly
and ambiguously talks, Fortasse si modo sapientum vera fama est, recipitque nos
locus aliquis. Epist. 63.
Perhaps if the Report of Wise Men be true, and if there be any such thing as a
place hereafter to receive us, etc. Thus Antonine (the Royal Philosopher)
cannot tell whether Death be (...) or (...), an Extinction, or a Translation;
whether it be an Annihilation, or a Change of our Condition. And many -- Siquis
modo extinctis sensus inest. Val. Max. l. 4. c. 6.
others have thus expressed their Doubtfulness about another Life. But most
remarkable is that Passage of Xenophon in the Life of Cyrus, whom that Wise
Historian represents as a Great Hero, and Singular Pattern of Virtue. We must
expect therefore that he will make him speak like a Brave Prince, furnished
with true and sound Notions of things. He tells us that this Great Man lying on
his Deathbed, and having certain Presages of his approaching Departure out of
the World, commanded his Courtiers to come to him, and called his Sons and
Friends together, and spoke to them to this purpose, (...), etc. Instit. Cyr.
l. 8.
You ought not to think you know certainly that I shall be nothing after I
cease to live here. For let me tell you, the Soul whilst it is in this Mortal
Body, does not live, tho it gives Life to the Body; but when it leaves the
Body, then it properly lives, then it acts, and is truly knowing and wise. The
Tortures and Punishments inflicted on Murderers by Souls thrust out of their
Bodies, and the Honor and Rewards of Good and Innocent Minds, prove that Souls
still subsist. When Man is dissolved, it is not probable that all things
belonging to him go to their particular Kind except the Soul only. You may
observe that nothing is more like Death than Sleep: but even in Sleep the Soul
discovers its Divinity, and never more than then, for it has a prospect of
things to come, the Soul being at that time more free than ever. If these
things be so, reverence my Soul when I am dead, and do according to my
Commands. But if these things be not so, but the Soul perishes with the Body,
yet reverence the Gods who are Immortal. And a little after, he says, Call all
the Persians and my Fellow Soldiers to my Funerals, that they may congratulate
with me (...)
that I am got to a sa^e Place and State, wherein no Evil can befall me, whether
it shall be my lot to be with God, or whether to be reduced to nothing. A fair
Speech indeed! This was the faint Result of all the Knowledge which his Wise
Tutor could let him have of another State. He had not determined whether after
Death he should be taken to the Gods, or be annihilated. Thus Philosophy, as it
was corrupted and depraved, was unsteady and doubtful about a Future Life and
Happiness. Much less,

2. Had they any notice of the Eternal Duration of them. Those of them who held
that the Soul was long-lived, had no firm Apprehension of its being Immortal.
But especially the Stoics failed here; Zeno, the Master of that Sect, (...).
Diog. Laert* in Zenone.
expressly asserted that the Soul remains after Death, but at length is
corrupted. The Generality of this Sect went so far as to say, the Soul survives
the Body a good while. But if you ask, How long? They tell you it is only till
the Conflagration of the World. Yet here they were divided, for there were some
among them who held, that the weaker sort of Souls (viz. of the unlearned)
perish with the Body; but the stronger ones (viz. of Wise Men) hold out till
the Conflagration. And with this agrees that Account which Diu mansuros aiunt
animos; semper, negant. Tusc. Qu. l. 1.
Cicero gives of them; and Seneca relates the very same of this Sect of
Philosophers. But the certain Knowledge and Assurance of the Endless Duration of
Souls, and the Eternal Reward of Virtue, is the Purchase only of Christ's
Appearing, who has brought Life and Immortality, i. e. Immortal Life, to light
by the Gospel. There was but a faint shadow of it before; the Discoveries were
dark and obscure, but by the arising of the Sun of Righteousness, this Darkness
is dispelled, and we have gained a clear Manifestation of the Everlasting
Subsistence of our Spirits in another World. For Christ Jesus, whose Soul was
of the same nature with ours, commended his into God's Hands, and so did the
Holy Martyr St. Stephen in imitation of Him; which assures us that the Souls of
the Righteous are taken into God's Custody at their departure out of the Body.
This, together with the Resurrection of* our Savior and his ascending into
Heaven, gives us an absolute Assurance and Demonstration of our rising again,
and living immortally in another World.

3. Their Philosophy proved Deceitful in not determining wherein the True
Happiness of Man consists. The Different Notions of the diverse Schools of
Philosophy about the Chief Good, proclaim aloud that they only guessed at it,
and were not able to tell wherein it was placed. Their Mistakes were never so
numerous and (which is worse) so dangerous as here. It is of infinite
Consequence to understand what is the Chief Felicity of Man, what is the
perfect State of Bliss, what is the Principal and Last End of Man, wherein
there remains nothing further to be desired. Now, He only can acquaint us with
our True Happiness who is the Author of it, the Lord of Bliss and Glory, who
purchased Immortal Life for us, and is Himself the True, Sovereign, Chief Good,
the Ultimate Object of our Wishes and Desires, Studies and Endeavors, the only
Rest and Center of our Minds. This is Life Eternal to know, and in knowing to
enjoy the only True God, and Jesus Christ whom he has sent. It is the Utmost
Happiness of Man to have, in the discharge of his proper Duty, the Favor of
God, to know and love him, and to be loved of him. This is the highest Felicity
our Nature is capable of, and it is no where fully discovered but in the Holy
Scriptures.

4. Philosophy was mistaken, and thereby proved Deceitful in not discovering
the True Certain Way to this Happiness. And indeed how could it? It was
impossible for the Philosophers to know how to regain the Favor of Heaven
whilst they understood not how they lost it. They could not come to the full
understanding of the true Cause of the Degenerate Condition of Mankind. Whence
should they know that Man was at first created pure and holy, spotless and
innocent, able to serve God with an unwearied Obedience, and that he
voluntarily abused his Power and Freedom, and disobeyed the Command of his
Maker, and so by an Act of his own Will apostatized from God, and plunged
himself into unspeakable Misery? They could not reach this by their Natural
Light and Moral Reason. The most Philosophical and Inquisitive Brains, tho they
have made some guesses about the Corruption of Mankind, were not able to arrive
to a clear account of this matter. They were apprehensive that Nature was
vitiated; they perceived a strange Disorder, a horrible Shatter, but they were
ignorant of the Original Spring and Source of it. And thus not knowing the
Cause of Human Corruption and Depravation, it is no wonder that they light not
on the Right Remedy of them. In the Gospel alone is set forth the Way for the
recovery of lapsed and degenerate Souls; here is discovered the certain Method
of obtaining the Pardon of our Sins, and the Assurance of God's Favor, and our
Everlasting Welfare. The Contrivance of Man's Redemption by the Blood of Jesus
was too high a Flight for the most improved Reason, and Light of Nature. And
when it was revealed to some of the most knowing Pagans, they were loath to
truckle to so low and mean a Dispensation as the Gospel, which teaches us to
trust and rely upon another's Merits. They all agreed in this, Unum bonum est,
quod beatae vitae causa and firmamentum est, sibi fidere. Sen. Epist. 31.
that there is this one good thing which is the Cause and Foundation of
Happiness, viz. a Man's trusting to himself, and resting upon what he can do by
his own Power. These lofty Sons of Reason counted it absurd to be beholden to
another's Undertakings for their Felicity; especially it sounded as the most
ridiculous thing ever heard of, to hope for Life and Happiness by the Death of
another. St. Augustin's Complaint of Tully's Works may be the ^ust Impeachment
of all the voluminous Discourses of Philosophers, that the Name of Christ is
not to be found there. There is nothing in them of the exalted Morals of our
Great and Perfect Lawgiver, of the great Mystery of Godliness manifested by a
Redeemer, and of the Knowledge of Jesus Christ, and him crucified. Yea, in the
account which the Philosophers give of the ordinary Moral Virtues and Vices,
they are very wavering and uncertain. He that is acquainted with the Writings
of the Chief Moralists among them, knows that they frequently confute
themselves: their way is to set up their Wise Man, and then soon after to pull
him down; which made an understanding Person declare that the Stoics Wise Man
(...). Plutarch. de Contradict. S^oicorum.
is no where to be found upon Earth; yea, and that he never was in being. He is
a Chimera, a Fiction, made up wholly of Paradoxes, Riddles and Impossibilities;
so that there is nothing real in their Description of him but their Pride and
Conceit. The false and erroneous Conceptions which these and other Moralists
had concerning Virtue and Vice, we have in several Particulars laid open in the
preceding part of this Discourse; and it is that which De vero cultu, cap. 17.
Lactantius long ago has very largely proved, viz. that the Philosophers
mistook Virtue for Vice, and Vice for Virtue. I remember the excellent Praefat.
ad Ethic.
Des Carts compares the Moral Writings of the Heathens to Splendid and
Magnificent Palaces built upon Mud and Sand. They extol, says he, Virtue to
the Skies, and prefer it before all other things, but do not sufficiently
explain to us the True Nature of it, or lay the ground of it right: nay,
oftentimes that which is called Virtue by them, ought rather to be styled Vice.
Now, these ill Foundations cannot but be followed with as bad Superstructures;
and both of them will promote vicious Practices in Men's Lives. So that upon
this account we might conclude the Pagan Philosophers were very defective in
showing the way to Happiness; for how could they do this, so long as they were
not able to build Men up in True Godliness, and to make them really better?

But their greatest Blemish was that which I have already mentioned, viz. their
Ignorance of the way of Life and Salvation by Jesus Christ. They knew not that
there is no other Name under Heaven given among Men whereby they must be saved.
They understood not that in the great and universal Deluge of Mankind, this is
the only Ark we can be safe in. They were unacquainted with the Mystery of
Faith and Justification, and the absolute necessity of the Assistance of the
Holy Spirit, and other such Divine and Saving Truths, the Discovery of which is
peculiar to the Christian Religion, which is the only true Philosophy. For this
Name you may observe it bears in the Writings of the Ancient Fathers: Thus
Justin Martyr, speaking of the Christian Institution, has these words
concerning it, (...). Dialog. cu^ Tryph.
Philosophy truly is the greatest Good and most acceptable to God, it being
that alone which leads us and commends us to him: and they are really holy, who
apply their Minds to this Philosophy. And he tells us that he found this to be
(...). Ibid.
the only certain and useful Philosophy. So the Barbarous Philosophy with
Clemens Alexandrinus, is the Christian Religion, or the New Testament composed
by those whom the Greeks styled Barbarians. This according to Isidore is (...).
Epist. l. 4.
the New and Evangelical Philosophy; and sometimes it is called by him the
(...). Epist. l. 5.
Heavenly Philosophy. And in several other Fathers this is the word for
Christianity; and the Doctors and Eminent Professors of the Christian Church
are styled Sozomen. Eccl. Hist. l. 5. c. 12.
Philosophers, in opposition without doubt to those among the Pagans who
boasted of this Title.

Thus I have attempted to show how the Apostle's words are to be understood; I
have let you see what those things are which were blameable in the Greek
Philosophy, and why the Apostle cautions against it. I have particularly
discovered how this Philosophy was abused of old, and thereby became most
prejudicial to Christianity, and how the Professors of it did (...) (which is
the word here used) forcibly carry away, and make a Prey and Booty of too great
a part of the World by it. Whence it is that the Apostle here couples
Philosophy and Vain-Deceit together.

A Discourse on 1 S. John Chapter 3. v. 8. -- For this purpose the Son of God was
manifested, that he might destroy the Works of the Devil.
Wherein is showed what the Works of the Devil are.
I Will enquire into these words, not that they contain any Difficulty in them,
but because I would lay open the full and complete Meaning of them: for though
I grant that by the Devil's Works is in the general meant all Sin and Vice, (as
is evident from the foregoing Verse, He that commits Sin is of the Devil)
yet I conceive there is something more Particular intended here by these words.
Some Particular Works are to be understood, wherein the Power, Subtilty, or
Malice of that Evil Spirit are more signally exerted, and therefore are
Emphatically here called the Works of the Devil. And this is that which I now
design to offer; and I will be the larger in insisting on it, because it is of
very Great Moment, and is not like some other Subjects which I have treated of
before, (that are Controversial and Disputable) and likewise because I see this
is not taken notice of by Commentators.

First, Superstition is a remarkable Work of the Devil, and without doubt is
meant here. This is a Reverencing and Adoring at a venture, as those
Religionists at Athens did, who erected an Altar to an Unknown God: It is a
yielding of unreasonable and groundless Homage, and (to define it more
generally) it is attributing in a religious way, more than is due to Things or
Persons. It is in this large sense, a vain and groundless Fear where no Fear
(i. e. no true cause of Fear) is. And on the other hand, it is a fond and
unwarrantable Expectation of those things from created Beings which they cannot
afford us, and which they were never designed for. The Evil Spirit took care to
employ the Minds of Pagans about these Matters, that he might thereby divert
them from Objects of a better Nature, and take off their Thoughts from True
Religion, and the Divine Author of it, and that he might hold them in a
constant dependence on himself, whilst he persuaded them that these Foolish
Fears and Hopes should be of singular use and advantage to them. Hence of Old
they had their Lucky and Unlucky Days, on which they made superstitious and
fond Remarks. The Observer of Times mentioned by Moses, Deuteronomy. 18. 10. and
joined with him that uses Divination was, I conceive, of this sort: his proper
Talent was to tell what Days were Fortunate and what Unfortunate, what Events
should happen on such Seasons, and what on others, and which of them should be
Successful. And thus R. David Kimchi understands the place. The Persians of old
had this Notion of the distinction of Days, as appears from their casting Lot
from Day to Day, and from Month to Month, (Esth. 3. 7.) when the Design was on
foot of Massacring the Jews. They were sollicitous to enquire what Lucky Days
and Months of the Year would happen to favor that Bloody Conspiracy. From
those first Ages of the World, this Superstitious Practice was derived to the
Greeks and Romans; the former of whom (as Hes^od, Pythagoras, and others
acquaint us) were very Great Observers of Days, critically dividing them into
Good and Bad ones, and calling one kind of them (...). Hesiod. (...).
Mothers, and the other Stepdames. Hence we have Hesiod's Days, which he styles
so, because he treats there of the Difference of Days, some whereof are Good,
others Bad, and a third sort of a middle Nature. And the latter ( i. e. the
Romans) outdid the ^recians in this vain Observation of Days, marking the Lucky
ones (as they took them to be) with White Characters, and the Unlucky ones with
Black, to signify the different Nature of them. They grew at last so observant
of these Distinct Times, that (as Macrobius and others relate) they dared not
keep Court, or engage in Battle, or so much as invite their Friends to Supper,
or do any thing else in the course of their Lives, upon those Times which they
had fondly marked out as Unfortunate.

To this were added many other Superstitious Usages, as Ariolation, Omens,
Auguries, and a vast number of other kinds of South-sayings and Divinations. A
very remarkable and ancient Instance we have of these in King Nebuchadnezzar,
who when he would be determined whether he should go against the Jews or the
Ammonites, and be prosperous in either Expedition, betook himself to the known
and usual practice of Divination, (for they generally used before the Wars to
divine about the Manner of it: they writ down the Names of the Countries or
Cities which they designed to invade and make War against; and according as the
Divination directed them, they fell upon such a particular place): E^ek. 21. 21.
The King of Babylon stood at the parting of the way, at the head of the two
ways to use Divination: he made his Arrows bright, he consulted with Images, he
looked in the Liver. Where we see that (according to what we read in Profane
Authors, who speak of the manner of Divination and Enchantment) he is careful
of that Circumstance so much observed by that sort of Men, viz. to choose a
place where two or three ways meet, and there to go about their Business, for
they thought this was very advantageous to their Designs. Having thus made
choice of a convenient Post, he falls to the work of Divining; and that he may
be sure to speed well, he uses three sorts of Divination, that by one of them
at least (if the other two should fail) he might arrive to a fore-knowledg of
the future Occurence he was prying into. First, He made his Arrows bright: from
whence some would gather, that the Chaldean Kings had a way of exercising their
Magic Skill upon their Weapons before they went out to Battle, to give them
Edg and Force when they came to fight. But this is a gross Mistake, because
this place in Ezekiel represents only the Chaldeans way of Divining, and
therefore the Arrows are not mentioned here with any respect to the Battle, but
only they are used in order to Divination: Which was thus, according to St.
Ierom on the place; They put several Arrows into a Quiver written with the
Names of those things which they consulted about, and that Arrow which was
taken out first, was the Lot; and they determined by this which City to Besiege
or Invade. Which comes near the Divination in use among the Live. lib. 1.
Romans, by certain Letters and by Rods. But I rather think that the Chaldee
Version affords us a better Interpretation, which renders that Clause thus,
Iacet Sagittas, he casts, he throws, he shoots hi^ Arrows up into the Air,
(where they are seen bright and glittering, and therefore are said to be made
bright, which the other Account, given by St. Ierom, takes no notice of) to see
which way they would fall, and thence to know which way to lead his Army. This
I take to be the (...) used by Nebuchadnezzar before he went out to War: He
stood in bivio, at the parting of the two Ways, (as was the custom of Diviners)
intently observing toward which of them the Arrows fell, that he might know
thereby whether the Ammonites or the Jews were to be fought with good Success.
This was the very same mode of Divination which was used by the Greeks and
Romans, this was the very (...) the divining by a Rod or Staff, so frequent, of
old, for (...) is a large Word and Sign; a Rod of Iron or Steel, or Wood, or
any such slender thing like a Wand, or Staff, or Arrow. The Jews (who at one
time or other imitated all the Pagan Follies in the World) took up this
Soothsaying, Their Staff declared unto them, Hos. 4. 12. i. e. they made use of
this Rhabdomancy which was so frequent among the Pagans, and thereby they
prognosticated concerning things to come. The Arabians of old (as Christopherus
a Castro tells us) consulted their Gods by Arrows or Staves: and (if I may be
permitted to offer my Conjecture) this practice among them and others was
borrowed, either from the Egyptian Magicians Rods, Exodus 7. 12. or from the
Rods mentioned Numb. 17. where the Israelites were commanded to write the Names
of the Princes of their Tribes. The Gentiles it may be, in a fond imitation of
this Ceremony, (which without doubt was grown famous, and spread abroad in the
World) made use of Rods or Staves in Divination. This I propound in way of
Conjecture and Probability, it being undeniable that the Gentiles aped the
Israelites in several things, as I shall have occasion at another time to make
good in abundance of Instances, and those perhaps not hitherto taken notice of.

Secondly, He consulted with Images, or (as it is in the Hebrew) with Teraphim,
so often spoken of in the Old Testament, which are no other than Images for
Divination, to foretell future Events. These were a sort of Magical Images (for
you must know that Divination (of which I am now speaking) and Magic (of which
afterward) generally went together) used by the Gentiles; the Egyptians and
Arabians especially, called by these latter Talisman Seldom de Dis Sir. 1.
Syntag.
, made at a certain time when they knew such Stars and Constellations were most
active. The Diabolick Spirits entered at such a time into these Images, these
Teraphim, and possessed them as they used to take possession of Humane Bodies,
and by them and in them they spoke, and moved and acted, and did strange Feats,
and gave Answers to those that enquired of them, so that they may be said to be
the Devil's Oracles. These Images were very early in the World, if we may
credit the Zoar* etc.
Jewish Writers, who tell us that they were used by the profligate Sinners that
lived about the time of the Flood, and afterward by the Babel-builders. But
this we are sure of, that these Magical Instruments were made use of by the
King of Babylon, and that they were consulted by him in the way of Divination,
under which Notion I have considered them at present.

Thirdly, He looked into the Liver, or the Heart, (for the word Cabed signifies
both) and thence this sort of Augur is styled Roeh baccabed by the Jewish
Masters, an Inspector into those parts of Animals: whereby we are to understand
that common kind of Divination used by all the Pagans, especially the Romans,
(who perhaps had it from the Chaldeans) viz. the looking into the Entrails of
Beasts that were to be sacrificed, and from that Critical Inspection, guessing
at what should come to pass.

These were the three sorts of Divination which Nebuchadnezzar applied himself
to upon so great an Emergency; and besides these, there was an incredible
number more which the Pagan Nations (i. e. almost all the World) addicted
themselves to. But indeed the Divination by the Fowls of the Air was of the
greatest account, for it was believed by the Vulgar, that -- Nam Dis, ut
proxima quaeque,
Nunc penna veros, nunc datis ore sonos.
Ovid. Fast. l. 5.
these were well acquainted with the Gods, and knew their Minds better than
other Creatures, by reason of their greater nearness to them. I will produce
some particular Instances of this their Superstition, which consisted in
Auguries and Auspicies, i. e. (taking those words strictly) divining by Birds,
foretelling by the flying, or sitting, or feeding, or by the Voices of these
Creatures, things that should happen afterward. Thus Homer. 11. (...)
Calchas from the number of Sparrows which he saw, foretold how many Years the
Trojan War was to last. The Swallows that were seen by Darius when he was in
his Expedition against the Scythians, were looked upon as an Unlucky Auspice,
and presaged his Death. Alexander the Great was assured by his Augur of a
Victory before the Battle from the flight of an Eagle. Varro, Ennius.
Vectius (a famous Augur) from the Vultures that appeared to Romulus, gathered,
that the Roman Empire should last twelve hundred Years. Plin. Not. Hist. l. 10.
c. 21.
The crowing of Cocks was Auspicious, and presaged Victory to the Boetii
against the Lacedaemonians. So likewise Themistocles's Army were assured of
Conquest by the fortunate Crowing of those Animals. But the fightings of Cocks,
it seems, were an ill Omen, and (...). Artemidor. l. 3. c. 5.
foretold Seditions and Civil Wars. The Bees that were seen on the Altar before
the Fight at Pharsalia, were reckoned Unfortunate, and portended Pompey's fatal
Overthrow. Several other Signs and Omens, Good and Bad (as they accounted them,
and verily believed them to be) were frequent among the Heathens and they were
strangely affrighted or encouraged by them, both in their Journeys, and at
Home. Augustus Caesar was a Great Observer of these, as a Sue^on. in O^tavio,
cap. 92.
Credible Author informs us, and therefore I will mention one pretty Passage
that concerns him: Idem. cap. 96.
When he was upon his March to Actium, and prepared to engage the Enemy, there
met him an Ass with the Owner of it: the Name of the former (for it seems Asses
had their Names then) was Nicon, which signified a Conqueror; and the latter's
Name was Eutychus, the import of which was Fortunate. Hereupon the Emperor took
the Omen to be good, and promised himself Victory; and after the Victory he
called the Place Nicopolis, and the Image of an Ass was set up in the Temple
there in remembrance of the Happy Omen.

I might add that Sneezing was accounted a Sacred Sign, and was called so by
some of the Hom. Odyss. 6. Aristot. de Hist. Not. Plutarch. vit. Homeri.
best Pagan Writers, and that it was held one of the Greatest Omens (either for
Good or Evil, according to its Circumstances) by the generality of the deluded
World. Thus forsooth Sneezing Plin. Not. Hist. l. 28. c. 2.
in the Morning was held Unlucky, but at Noon or afterward it was thought to
be of another Nature. If it was heard from the left hand, it was doomed
Unfortunate, but not so on the Right: wherefore from this latter it was that
Themistocles and Xenophon, two great Warriors, took their Omen of Success; the
Plut. in vitaa Themistoel.
one was encouraged by it to fight the Enemy, the Xenoph. Hist. l. 6.
other was chosen Commander of the Army by it.

To speak more generally, viz. of the whole Set of Pagan Divinations and
Auguries, they were looked upon as Certain and Undoubted Prognostics of Future
Occurrences. Whenever they busied themselves about the flight, and chattering,
and the pecking of Birds, and made inquiry into the Intrails of slain Beasts,
or used any other way of Divining, they were so besotted as to think, that they
could thence infallibly foretell Futurities. To which purpose there was a
particular Office and College of Augurs, who (though their Name be from one
Species only) were skilful in the whole Art of Divination, and interpreted all
the Signs of the Gods, as they called them. So great Reverence was paid to this
Art, that Ne quid inaugurato faciunto. Lex Papir. Auspiciis hanc urbem conditam
esse, auspiciis bello ac pace, domi militiaeque omnia geri, quis est qui
ignoret? Live. lib. 6. c. 41.
nothing was done at Home or Abroad without it. The old Romans could neither
create Magistrates, nor make Laws without the Presence and Approbation of the
Augurs, as is clear from Tully's Books of Laws. Ave sinistra populi magister
esto, was a Law of the Twelve Tables, by virtue of which all Offices and Places
were disposed by Augury. Hence we are told that some A. Gell. l. 13. c. 14.
Magistrates were reputed and styled Greater, and some Lesser, because the one
was created with Greater, and the other with Lesser Auguries. We read likewise
that the Lacedemonian Kings admitted Augurs into their Councils, and constantly
advised with them. Yea, among the Persians and Parthians of old, their Kings
and Greatest Princes were skilled in Augury, for they thought it was a
necessary Qualification of a King to Divine. The noblest and choicest Citizens
of Rome, were preferred to this Priesthood, (for so it was styled by them); of
the Authority and Dignity of which Tully discourses in his Books of
Divination, and therefore in the beginning prefaceth to them in excuse of what
he was to say, because he was an Augur himself. There he reckons up the several
sorts of Divination used by the Gentiles, some of which I have rehearsed here:
And from the whole we may observe, (which is the thing designed by me in
mustering up these Pagan Follies) that Satan bore a great sway in the Minds of
Men, and deluded them after a strange manner, to that purpose making use of all
sorts of Creatures (as well as the Serpent of old) to deceive Mankind. Satan, I
say, did this, for I suppose the Conceit of those Persons who think he had no
hand in these things, will be exploded by Considerate and Wise Men, who cannot
but see how greatly his Cause is promoted by these Pagan Superstitions. It is
evident that whilst the Minds of the Gentiles were detained and busied with
these gross Vanities, a Habit of Superstition was contracted, the Great
Disposer and Over-ruler of all Occurrences and Events was forgotten, Divine
Providence was banished out of the World, groundless Fears and Jealousies were
created, and all the true and ^ound Principles of Religion were destroyed.
Whence it is reasonable to conclude, that the Hellish Damo^s had a hand in all
this, and that from them these Auguries had their Original, (as De D^ct.
Christian. l. ^.
St. Augustine long since determined); and, in a word, that these were the Noted
and Signal Works of the Devil. He took care to have these spread over the whole
World, that his Dominion and Power might be thereby enlarged. Every where it
was the custom to consult their Gods, as they called it, i. e. in plainer and
truer terms, to enquire of the Devil, by applying themselves to the Arts of
Divination and Soothsaying. This is represented by (...). Sympos.
Xenophon as the general practice of the Pagan World; and so it is by Quae est
autem gens, aut quae civitas quae non aut extis pecudum, aut augurum, aut
^or^ium praedictione moveatur? De Divina^. l. 1.
Tully. In all Places (as has been suggested already) Auguries were used
whenever any thing of Consequence was to be undertaken and done, that thereby
they might know (as they fancied) whether it should prove Successful. And as
for the rest of the Omens and Signs styled Lucky and Unlucky; the use of them
was as Catholic, and (which is worse yet) they were in esteem even among some
Persons of no mean Understanding. Thus In Problem.
Plutarch, as serious a Man as he was, is of Opinion that there were really
Good and Evil Auguries: And Not. Hist. l. 28. c. 2.
Pliny asserts (which is very strange, if we consider the Genius of the Man)
such Divinations to be valid. And we shall find that Caras, Orpheus,
Amphiaraus, Tiresias, Amphiction, Melampus, and others, were the Great Authors
and Promoters of all sorts of Omens among the Credulous Gentiles.

Yet we may take notice of this also, that the most Noble and Generous Spirits,
though not enlightened with Christianity, slighted these things, and looked upon
them as Delusions. Thus we read how the Gallant Hector answered Polydamas, who
was inclined to put off the Battle, because of some Ill Omen he had received
from the Augurs; he plainly told him. That (...).
the only best Augury, and that which was of Divine Authority, was to fight
valiantly for his Country. It was a memorable Speech of M. Varro, a most Wise
Roman, who, perceiving the Errors and Forgeries of the Augurs Divinations, from
their inspection into the Entrails of Beasts, freely said upon this Occasion,
That the Gods were both Idle and Sordid, in lapping up their Counsels in the
unsavory Bowels of Brutes, to be raked out thence by the mad Priests. Eusebius
relates out of Hecataeus, an old Greek Historian, that when one Mossolanus, (or
as others, Mysonianus) a Great and Notable Captain under Alexander the Great,
and Eminent for his Skill in discharging the Warlike Bow, advanced with the
Army near the Red Sea; a Soothsayer bid him stop, and make an Halt: Whereupon
the Captain made bold to ask him, What was the Matter? and why they were not
suffered to March? The Officious Augur presently pointed at a Bird on the Way,
and told them, It was necessary to consult that Animal, and to see which way it
would fly, that so they might follow her flight by marching that way; or if she
flew back, that they might return too. The Warrier being thus hindered on his
March by the Augur's trifling stay, to divine about the Success of the War by
that Fowl that sat on the Way, silently drew his Bow and shot it dead upon the
spot; and when he had done so, he uttered such words as these, How was it
possible that silly Creature could read us our Fortune, when (you see) she
could not foretell her own? How could that Animal which foresaw nothing of the
Arrow, foretell us any thing of our Journey? If she had known Futurities, she
had not come in the way to be killed by Mysonianus. And so he marched on, and
we do not read that he was e're the less successful for this Attempt. In
relation to this, I remember Q. Curtius, in the Life of Alexander the Great,
condemns that Prince for his Vanity, in minding the Superstitious Observations
and Omens of the Augurs. The Sentiment of Cato in this Matter is well known; It
was a Wonder to him if one Soothsayer did not fall a laughing when he saw
another, they being all of them such a Cheating Tribe, and designing purposely
to abuse the People. Cicero, who was an Augur himself, and one of the chief of
that Worshipful College, sometimes seriously con^utes the Follies of these
Divinations, and at other times makes himself merry with them, and laughs at
those fond Men who direct their Lives by the chattering of a Crow, by the
Entrails of a Sheep, by Oracles, by Dreams, by Lots, and by Fantastic
Prodigies: This is the Task of that Great Wit, in his Second Book of
Divination. Thus among the Wisest Men, the Folly of Sooth-saying was despised
and rejected, and the Augurs themselves were looked upon no other than
Impostors; and many of the other Pagan Superstitions began to be disesteemed
and laid aside.

Now, if this was done by those that made free use of their Reasons and
Judgments, it is no wonder that it was backed by the Author of the Christian
Religion, whose Design it was to rectify and improve those Faculties. We cannot
but observe therefore, that what was hitherto said and done, was far short of
what was afterward effected toward the Time of our Savior's Coming into the
World. This Day Star from on High, even before it actually visited us, and
blessed our Horizon, darted such a Light into the World, that they were enabled
to discern, tho in an imperfect manner, the gross Fooleries of that
Superstitious Religion which was among them. And when the Glorious Light of a
Savior and Redeemer shined forth unto a perfect Day, when the Son of God
manifested himself in the Flesh, then the dark and dismal Night of Superstition
wholly vanished in many parts of the World, and the Follies which they once
embraced, grew odious and abominable. And it is most certain that the
Principles and Maxims of Christianity do eminently overthrow the fond Surmises
and frightful Observations of Superstitious Men. Nothing indeed could do it so
effectually as the Gospel: for now under the Evangelical Economy and Christian
Dispensation, our Adoration is confined and determined, and we know whom we
Worship; and therefore the (...) of the Gentiles can have no footing here. And
as for the Dread of Future Occurrences, Christianity has utterly removed it by
the Right Apprehensions of things which it blesses us with, and by teaching us
to place Religion in that which is truly Religion. It effectually extirpates
all Superstition, by stifling the Principles of Enthusiasm and Fanaticism, by
suppressing False Fears, and Childish and Groundless Terrors, by superseding
all Fantastic Devotion, by putting an end to all Foolish Rites and Idle
Ceremonies, all Superfluous and Needless Observances, which proceed from a
Causless Timorousness in Religion, and from False Representations of God and
his Worship. All this we owe to the Truth and Doctrine revealed by Jesus
Christ: For though considerable Discoveries were made by some Wise and Serious
Persons among the Heathens, as well as Jews, yet this was nothing in comparison
of what followed, when the Laws of Christ prevailed in the World. And
particularly as for Divinations and Sooth-sayings, (wherein a great part of the
Gentile Religion consisted) as they were reckoned to be Fanciful and Groundless
things, and not founded on any True Reason and Bottom, even by some of the
Pagans themselves, (as you have heard) so they are much more rejected, confuted
and bafled by Christianity which is our Reasonable Service, and requires
nothing of us but what is just and accountable, and every way correspondent to
the Dictates of our Rational Nature. This acquaints us, that all those
Superstitious Omens are really what some of them were called by the Pagans
themselves, Bruta Fulmina, Insignificant Flashes, mere Mormoes to fright
Children and Fools, things that have no other Existence than Imagination,
actuated by the Devil the Author of Delusion, especially of all Superstitious
Cheats, which Christ Jesus came to discover and destroy.

Secondly, It is reasonable to understand by the Works of the Devil, the Pagan
Oracles which were so famous of old at Delphos, and in other parts of Greece,
as the Trophonian Oracles at Thebes and Lebadia, (both in Boeotia); and those
other more remote ones in Lybia and Egypt, and other Countries, where were
these Habitations of the Devils, those Dens of Satan, who loved to be enquired
of and courted by the ignorant and besotted Pagans. I know there are some who
think there was nothing of the Diabolical Spirit in these Oracles, but that
they were only for Gain. Caelius Rhodiginus professes himself to be of this
Opinion; but yet before he ends the Chapter (where he asserts it) he
ingenuously confesses, That Lect. Antiq. l. 2. c. 12.
this Business was not altogether managed without some correspondence with and
help from the Devil. And there is a Sir Tho. P. B's Essays.
Gentleman of late very much concerned and moved, because we attribute it to
him: The setting up of Oracles, says he, was merely for the Interest of the
Priests, and that was all. They were a Iuggle to get Money and Repute,
especially among the reat Men and Princes: Therefore he concludes, That they
are Superstitious Christians who think they were from the Devil. But who sees
not the Vanity of such an Inference as this, as if the Oracles could not be
from the Devil, and yet for the Priests Interest too? These are no ways
inconsistent, and therefore whilst this Gentleman makes one exclude the other,
he uses a Fallacy, but no Argument. I deny not but there was Interest in the
case, yea, double Interest, that of the Devil, as well as the other of the
Priests. I grant him that Oracles were a Iuggle, but a devilish one; and he
must acknowledge the same, if he pleases to remember that there were sometimes
such things foretold by them as could not possibly be foreseen and known by
Humane Skill. But the Knowledge and Sagacity of the Evil Angels might reach
them; because these Invisible and Active Spirits can fly up and down the World
with infinite swiftness, and inform themselves of all Occurrences whatsoever,
and are present at the most private Consults, and have learned, by long
Experience and Observation, to dive into the Designs of Men, and to see the
very Disposition and Tendency of Causes before they begin to act: Besides that,
they are always caballing together, and holding Correspondence with one
another, so that it is probable what one of them knows, the whole Herd of them
is acquainted with, and that in a few Moments time. Hence, hence it is that the
Oracles spoke such shrewd things sometimes, which it is impossible to give an
account of, unless we assert that this Office was set up and maintained by
those Invisible Demons: for it is certain, that the most Cunning and Subtilest
Priest of them all could never have foretold those things. Again, there is
ground to believe that these Ill Spirits were Managers here, because we are
ascertained from those who describe the Manner and Circumstances of the
delivery of the Oracles, that there was something more than Man in it. The
Place was filled with amazing Noise and Horror, loud Shrieks and Howlings were
heard, and sometimes the Temples were torn with Thunderclaps; the Earth
trembled and quaked, and so did the Priests: these now appeared with erected
Hair, with distorted Eyes, with foaming Mouths, and unusual but frightful
Voices; they beat and knocked their Breasts with an Inhumane Fury; they raged
and raved, and ran about like possessed Persons, as indeed they were. The
Subterraneous Demons, whom they consulted and dealt with, put both the Earth
and their Bodies into this Motion and Disorder. This looks like the truest
Cause of them, and therefore we have good reason to assert, that those Pagan
Priests were acted by those Evil Spirits, who generally brought them their
Intelligence, and helped them to give Answers. And this was done (if I may be
permitted to offer my Conjecture) in imitation of the Celebrated Oracle of Vrim
and Thummim, and of the Divine Inspirations and true Prophetic Spirit which
the Holy Scripture speaks of: for it is certain that the Infernal Spirits did in
many Particulars emulate the things and practices which were in use among the
People of God the Jews, and which are recorded in the Sacred W^itings.

From what has been said, I think we may cross the Learned Gentleman's
Assertion, and with Confidence, as well as Reason aver, That they are no
Superstitious Christi^ns, who think the Pagan Oracles were from the Devil: For
we find apparent Marks and Signs of his acting in them, we see those things
done which we cannot impute to any other Cause, and therefore here is no reason
to cry out of Superstition. But on the other side, we may suspect there is
something worse, and that those who so briskly oppose the Devil's acting in the
Heathen Oracles, are persuaded there are no such Beings as Devils. However,
it is certain, that these Persons show themselves ignorant of the Devices of
these Diabolical Spirits, whose Business it is, by all Arts and Methods
imaginable, to hurt and mischief Mankind: and this of their Oracles was none of
the least effectual to this purpose. For hereby they eclipsed the Glory of the
Divine Maje^^y, setting up an Infallibility to con^ront (...), out of a proud
and ^a^cy Emulation of the True God, and an insolent Ambition of being like
him: They obscured the Knowledge of the True Religion, they erected a False
Worship in the World, they confirmed Men in their Er^o^s and Superstitious
Persuasions, they ex^inguish'd the Sense and Remembrance of their Duty, by
nourishing in them False Fears and Fond Credulity, yea, a Diffidence in God's
Providence, and a Trusting in the Enemy of Mankind. Hereby likewise (as has
been intimated) they abused and profaned the most Sacred Things of Divine
Institution and Appointment, viz. by an impious and profane aping of the Holy
Oracles, the Revelations, Visions and Dreams which were vouchsafed to God's own
peculiar and chosen People. Thus it appears that the Design of the Pagan
Oracles, was not wholly for the Interest of their Priests, but that the Devil
got much more by them than they. I see reason therefore to subscribe to
Lactantius and other Pious Fathers, who expressly tell us that they were the
Invention of Satan. And indeed this was not only the belief of Christians, but
of Pagans themselves. Lib. de Daemonibus.
Porphyrius (who was a very Inquisitive Man, and had diligently searched into
the Nature of the Oracles) ingenuously confesses that the Demons were the
Authors of them. And the same is a^knowledged by Lib. de Mysteriis, cap. 21.
Iamblicus. And though (it is true) some of the greatest Philosophers among the
Gentiles had not attained to this Notice, (or if they had, they would not let
the Vulgar know it); yet I wonder that any Man who understands the true Nature
of Things by the Light of the Gospel, where the Designs of the Malicious
Spirits of Darkness are so fully discovered, can be a Stranger to this, and
publicly tell the World that the Oracles were Cheats of the Priests, and not
of the Devil. This I have endeavored to disprove, and to show that the Cursed
Demons made use of these on purpose to deceive and delude Mankind, to uphold
their own Kingdom, and to weaken and destroy that of the Lord Jesus.

Having thus made it evident that the Pagan Oracles were the Works of the
Devil, (which it was necessary for me to undertake in the first place under
this Head) I proceed now to prove that our Savior destroyed those impious
Works. This he effectually did, by curbing and lessening the Power of this
Infernal Spirit, by detecting his Cheats and Forgeries, by silencing his
Priests, and by striking the Devil himself dumb. It is true, even before
Christ's Birth, the Histories of those Times tell us, that the O^acular Spi^^ts
did not make Answer, but began to faulter, and could not play their accustomed
Pranks. The Oracles did not presently cease just at our Savior's Coming; for
that they did decay before that time, is plain from those words of Cur isto
modo jam O^acula D^lphis non ed^n^^r, non modo nostra a^ta^e, fed (...), ^t
nihil possit e^^e contemptius?
Tully; What is the meaning of the Cessation of the Delphick O^acles, not only
in our Time, but a good while ag^, insomuch that nothing is more contemptible
now than they are? Neither is it denied that even after Christ's Death some
Oracles were enquired of, and returned Answers, if Su^tonius in the Life of
Caligula may be credited. And Plutarch speaking of the Ceasing of Oracles in
Greece, excepteth that of I ^badia. And other Histories, I know, mention some
kind of Oracling in force till Iulian's Time. But it is undeniable, that about
the time of Christ's arrival in the World, and when he was arrived, and soon
after upon the preaching of the Gospel, m^st of the Heathen Oracles were struck
speechless, and delivered no Answers to those that came to enquire of them.
This is testified by Excessere omnes adytis, arisque relictis
Dii quibus imperium hoc steterat, etc.

Lucan who lived in Nero's Time; and by -- Delphis oracula (...),
Et g^nus humanum damnat caligo (...).

Iuvenal who flourished in Domitian's Reign. These and other Writers complain
that Apollo's Oracles were ceased, and would tell them then Fortunes no more;
that the Demons were all packed away; that the Forlorn Spirits had quitted
their Beloved Territories, and with horrid Groans resigned up their former
Mansions. And this is it which was foretold by one of the Sibyls in her Mystic
Verses, that a Little Child, even the Blessed Babe Jesus, should throw down
Idolatry with his Hand, and stop the Mouths of the Delphick Devils. And here by
the way I appeal to you, whether it was not a wonderful Fore-^unner and Presage
of what should afterward be effected by Christ in this Matter, that one of the
S^byls was of Delphos, and prophesied concerning our Savior there, in the City
where the Oracle of Apollo was, whence she bears the Name of the Delphick
S^byl, because she had her chief Seat at Delpho^, and there delivered her
Oracles several Years before the Trojan Wars. This was a h^ppy Prognostic of
the Blessed Change which was to be made, i. e. that Christ Jesus should be
preached, and the Prophecies concerning Him and the Gospel be fulfilled, in
those very Places where Paganism and Idolatry so mightily prevailed. But we
need not fly to the Poets: It is evident from other Writers, that upon Christ's
manifesting himself to the World, yea, sometime before he actually appeared,
the Oracles were generally suppressed and quashed. I will mention only
Plutarch, a Grave Historian and Philosopher, who lived in Trajan's Reign, and
w^it two Treatises, wherein he positively attests the Cessation of the O^acles
in those Days, and purposely searches into the Causes of it: What a strange
Account does ^e give there of it? You will find that he is hard put to it, and
utters many Ridiculous and Absurd Things. But he is to be excused, because he
could give no other, he being so unhappy as not to own the Author of
Christianity, who was the Cause of this and G^^^ter Wonders in that Age. This
Writer will have the Cessation of Oracles to be the Effect of Natural Causes;
much after the rate of Tully in his Book of Divination, who imputes it to the
Earth become Old, so that the Fatidick Virtue was worn out through length of
Time; As we see, says he, many Rivers are dried up and turned into another
Course for the same Cause. Just so Plutarch Philosophizeth; The Oracles (says
he) depended upon the Nature of the Soil, that is, a particular sort of Ground
in those Parts, sent up a particular sort of Vapors and Exhalations, which
with their Steam affected the Priests Brains and Spirits, and so moved them to
prophesy, and made them capable of giving Answers concerning Future Events, to
those that came to consult them: But after a long time, this peculiar Quality
and Temperament of the Earth vanished, and could not any longer supply the
Priests with such a sort of Vapors as would cause Predictions; and so farewell
Oracles. A very goodly Account, you will say, especially from one of Great
Learning. This is Vain Philosophy indeed; but let us not upbraid Him, but bless
God in behalf of our selves, that we have attained to greater Light and
Knowledge, and are acquainted with the True Causes of things, and are assured
that those Oracles were Cheats and Delusions of the Prince of Darkness; and in
plain terms, that they were the Works of the Devil, and therefore it was no
wonder that they were destroyed by Him, who was manifested for that very
Purpose. But that which I alledg this Writer for is this, that you may be
satisfied from him of the Matter of Fact, and be thoroughly convinced that
things did really happen according to our Savior's Design, and that these
Works of the Devil were destroyed. Accordingly therefore this Author tells us,
that in his Time the Oracles generally were cashiered. Indeed the Pythian
Oracle would now and then tattle a little, but very sorry Stuff it was, he
says, and it was (...).
in Prose. The Oracular Demons could not afford, it seems, to versify as they
had done before; the Vein of Poetry flagg'd. And in Boeotia, a Country which
before swarmed with Oracles, there was (he says) but a single One left. Those
that would be farther satisfied in this Matter, may consult Praepar. Evang.
lib. 4 and 5.
Eusebius, who has fully treated of this Theme, showing not only the Vanity
and Falsehood of the Oracles, but particularly relating how they ceased at
Christ's Coming: this being so largely handled by him, I remit the Reader
thither.

And now I might observe concerning these Oracles, (as I did before of the
Superstitious Divinations) that many of the bravest and wisest Heathens cared
not for them, but manifestly slighted and jeered them, as Plutarch. de Herodoto.
Demosthenes could say the Delphick Oracle did (...) had learn^d to favor
Phi^ip King of Macedon; that is as much as to say, they were Arrant Cheats,
(for the Devil could Cheat and Flatter as well as the Priests) they could be
corrupted with Gold, and take what p^rt they pleased. The People began at last
to see through these Impostures, and consequently their regard to them was
considerably abated. They arrived to this Notion, (which Minutius Felix insists
upon) that the Observers of these Oracles were not successful, and the
Despisers of them prospered. They found out at length the Reason why Apollo
gave such Dark and Ambiguous Answers, why they were delivered by the Priests
mutteringly and with a low Voice, so as not to be perfectly heard, namely,
because by this means they could best salve their Cheating, and the Enquirers
should not be able to know whether they spoke Truth or Falsehood. For these
Reasons Apollo was Surnamed (...), because he oftentimes put them off with
Oblique and Doubtful Responses: for the Devil in these Oracles of Old
professedly Equivocated, and played the Jesuit betimes. I could set before you
what the brave Cato thought of these Oracles, as he is represented in Lucan. I
might transcribe a great part of Tully's second Book of Divination, which
discovers the Vanities of these Responses, and proves them to be mere Gulls.
But you know my Business at present is to evince, (and I hope I have done it
sufficiently) that these Lying Oracles were confuted at last by a Greater than
Cato or Tully, even Christ Jesus our Lord. It is a known, but remarkable
Passage in Plutarch, that the Demons complained aloud that their Great God Pan
was dead: That was the lamentable Voice which was heard in the Grecian Sea in
Tiberius's Reign, when our Savior was Crucified. Then Christ through Death
destroyed him who had the Power of Death, the Devil: then the Prince of this
World was judged: then our Savior, having spoiled Principalities and Powers on
the Cross, triumphed over them in it. No wonder then that the Cursed Demons
howled and lamented, when they saw their Kingdom was shaken, and began to fail;
when they experimentally found that He who cried with a loud Voice on the
Cross, had drowned the Noise of their Juggling Oracles. And in a short time, as
Other Writers will inform us, this Diabolical Trade was clearly put down in the
most considerable Countries of the World, which we must attribute to the sole
Power and Sovereignty of that Jesus who came to destroy the Works of the Devil.

Thirdly, I understand by these Works the Diabolical Obsessions of Men's Bodies,
which our Savi^ur did actually defeat and destroy, when he ejected the Evil
Spirits out of those poor Wretches who were thus possessed by them. It is
evident that at the time when Christ was on Earth, great Numbers of Persons
labored under this grievous Calamity, and we do not read that at any other
Seas^n such nume^ous Legions of them molested Mankind. But the Evangelists
acquaint us, that our Lord did frequently rescue the Bodies of the Possessed
from the Power and Dominion of those F^ul Fiends. For though the word (...) so
often used in the Gospels, may perhaps not be understood in the rigor of it in
every place, (for Lunaticks and Epileptick Persons, when they were
extraordinarily distempered, were said by the Jews to be possessed with an Evil
Spirit; and in this kind was Saul troubled, say the Jewish Doctors); yet the
Relation which those Inspired Penmen give of the Formal and Solemn Casting out
of Devils by our Savior, is a sufficient Proof to any observing Person, that,
if not all, yet most of those who are called (...), were really Possessed. For
tho that Man who is styled a Demoniack in Luke 9. 39. is said, (...), to be a
Lunatic, in Matthew. 17. 15. yet all that can be gathered thence is, that this
Man, and those others that were possessed with the Devil, had Periodical Fits,
that they were either Epilepticks, or Distracted at certain times; and that, as
it is usual with such Persons, they were worse when the Moon increased.
Therefore the Arabic Version of the forenamed Place in St. Matthew is very
remarkable; He has a Devil, and he is exceedingly vexed in the beginnings of
the Full Moon: as much as to say, the Devil and the Disease met together, and
the former was the Author of the latter. Or, we may say, the Impure Spirits
chose to enter into those crazy and Diseased Bodies, when they were most
disposed to Illness by the powerful Influence of the Moon. This is no Argument
that they were not really possessed with the Devil; but it is a plain Proof of
the contrary, and of something else, viz. that Satan doubled his Malice, vexing
and tormenting them at a time when they were least able to bear it. As for the
Reasons why such vast Numbers of Men were thus visited when our Savior was on
Earth, these may justly be assigned; it was an Age much given to Magic and
Enchantments, and the calling up of Spirits was a frequent thing in those Days:
Besides, Divine Providence might so order it at that very juncture of Time for
an Occasion of the more Glorious Cures. It might happen by the Particular
Disposal of the Almighty, that thereby it might appear to the World, that
Christ had Power over the Devils, and could, when he pleased, dislodg those
Mischievous Spirits, and rescue Mankind from their Tortures. The Reality and
Greatness of his Sovereignty over those Infernal Powers, were to be
demonstrated by those Atchievments. Moreover, it may rationally be thought that
the Devils would be most busy then when Christ came into the World, and would
be more interessed to disturb and torment Mankind, because they saw their
Kingdom was going down, and Christianity was to be exalted in the World. Now
therefore it was time for the Messiah to exert his Miraculous Power; and
behold, as an effect of it, the Devils submitted to him, and at his Command
presently quitted the Bodies which they had taken possession of. One Person
among the rest was a famous Instance of this sort, out of whom a Legion of
Devils was ejected by Christ's Holy Exorcism: With one Word he vanquished whole
Regiments of the Kingdom of Darkness; he routed Armies of Infernal Demons. I
remit you to the Evangelical Records, where you have abundant proof of the
casting out of these Hellish Spirits, not only by our Savior himself, but by
his Disciples, who (as you read) came to him with these words in their Mouths,
Luke 10. 17.
Lord, the Devils are subject to us: this being an Effect of that Mighty Power
which Christ had invested his Followers with, Luke 9. 1. And therefore Contr.
Cells. l. 3.
Origin rationally infers, that Christ's Power was ^ivine, because at his Name
the Devils left the Bodies of the (...).

And this was a thing not unusual in those very Days in which this Father
lived, as well as before. We are ascertained that the ordinary Christians,
merely by their Prayers and Invocations, ejected those Spirits, and made them
confess what they were. That they had this Power in Justin Martyr's Days, who
flourished in the middle of the Second Century, appears in his known Dialogue
with Trypho, where he expressly says, The Devils tremble at the Name of Christ,
and being adjured by that sacred Name, they become subject to us. That they did
the same in Irenaeus's Time, which was some few Years after, is clear from his
Lib. 2. cap. 58.
Writings. And the same Miraculous Gift continued till Tertullian, at the end
of the second Century, as is evident both from his Apology and his Book to
Scapula. And St. De vanit. Idolorum.
Cy^rian testifies the like of his Time, about the middle of the 3d Century. So
Minutius Felix and Lactantius relate how the Christians controuled the Evil
Spirits, and tell us, that not only their Words and Commands, but their bare
Presence shut the Mouths of the Possessed, and made the miserable Ghosts quake
and tremble. Yea, Gregory Nazianzen in the next Age gives this Testimony; Orat.
Apologe^.
The very Devils at this time tremble when Christ is called upon; neither is
the Power and Virtue of that Name diminished and impaired by our Sins. And if I
designed to expatiate, I could derive it lower, and also show you that these
and other Christian Writers commonly appeal to the Pagans concerning the Truth
of these things, and alledg this Ejection of Devils as a great and undeniable
Proof of the Authority of the Christian Religion, as certainly it was. But I
add no more, having said enough for my purpose, which was, to make it appear,
that among other Works of the Devil, Christ destroyed This in particular.

Fou^thly, Is there not reason to think that St. John refers here to what
Christ did, when by his Coming he rooted out Magic and Sorcery, Dealing with
the Devil, either by Practicing Witchcraft, or Consulting with those that did,
and the like Works of the Black Art, which the Cursed Spirit taught the World?
These were the Devil's Opera which he showed of old, and got so much by,
whereby he pleased and gratified, and at the same time bubled the easily
deluded People. Not to attend to the perverse Folly of those mere Matter-Men
who disown Spirits, and consequently deny a God as well as Devils, (for they
will rather profess Atheism, than acknowledge any such Rank of Beings.) Not to
gratify these Gross Atheists so far as to take notice in this place of what
they are wont to say in Defense of their Mad Opinion; I shall take it for
granted, that Magical Operations (properly so called) are the Works of the
Devil, and that he was the first Founder of them, designing and endeavoring
thereby to bring Men under his Dominion, and (so far as he can effect it in the
Minds of Men) to exclude God and his Providence out of the World. This
questionless was his Design, and was never doubted by the Ancient Christians,
as appears not only from Magi non tantum sciunt daemo^es, sed etiam quicquid
miraculi edunt, per daemones faciunt: illis aspirantibus and infundentibus
praestigias edunt, etc. Adv. Gentes.
Arnobius, but several other Primitive Writers, though some of late so
extraordinarily civil to him, that they will not impute the Practice of Magic
to his Assistance. Good Men! they are afraid to slander the Devil. But from the
History of several Ages, we are certainly informed that there was nothing more
usual th^n to make a Compact with Satan; which the M^gicians and Wiz^rds
effected with ma^y direful C^remonies. And when there was not a Fo^m^l League
with the Devil, yet there was a Communication with him, because the Persons
gave themselves into his Hands by their immoderate Curiosity, by their
affecting to know more than was fitting, or by an impatient coveting after
Wealth and Riches, or by a greedy desire of having an Ability and Opportunity
to satisfy their Revenge. From that infallible and inspired Testimony in Deuteronomy.
18. 10, 11. we are assured that there were Enchanters, Witches, Charmers,
Consulters with Familiar Spirits, Wizards and Necromancers: for these Persons,
and their Practices, would not have been condemned and pronounced an
Abomination, (as they are there) unless there had been really such. This I
think is very plain and unanswerable. And truly I am apt to believe, that the
Holy Ghost makes use of so many different Words here, on purpose to obviate and
refute the vain Cavils of the Men of our Days, who are Infidels as to the Point
of Witchcraft, and with great Confidence tell us, that there is no such thing,
and that the Foundation of it, viz. a Compact with Evil Spirits, is a mere
Forgery. Here are six Words to press and inculcate the same thing, (though if
we be Critical, there may be found some difference, because one word may be
more expressive of a particular Act of that Cursed Art than another; but I
speak now of the General Notion and Import of them) that we may be thereby
convinced of the Truth and Reality of the Thing, viz. that there were and are
Enchanters, Witches, etc. Persons holding Correspondence with Infernal Agents,
and by their Help and Assistance effecting strange things in the World. The
last in Moses^s Catalogue, are Necromancers, such who by Magic Enchantment
raised the Souls of the De^d, or the Devil rather to represent those Souls, and
then consulted with him, and enquired concerning some Future Events which they
were exceeding desirous to know. Of this we have an Ancient and Famous Instance
in the Sacred Records, viz. the Witch of Endor, who by this Devilish Art caused
the Appearance of Samuel, i. e. of some Evil Spirit in his Shape. And of these
Hellish Necromancers, perhaps that of I^b (Chapter 3. v. 8.) is to be understood,
they curse the Day, (for the Night is the time proper for their Black Work) and
raise up ^eviathan, i. e. the Devil, who most fitly is compared to No less
Persons than Gr^gory the Great, Hugo (...), and M. Luther, (...) Leviathan to
be the Devil, or rather apply what (...) of him to the Devil.
the Leviathan. Or, in a more li^eral sense, to raise up the Leviathan, may
signify, to charm and tame that Sea Monster, and so it sets forth the Great,
bu^ Devilish Power of Magic and Incantation. As Plutarch says of the Egyptian
Priests, that by Art Magic they could tame the Crocodile, so as to make him
come to their Hand. This Necromantick Practice is spoken of in Isa. 8. 19. and
is called, Seeking unto them that have Familiar Spirits, and unto Wizards that
peep and mutter. To which is added, a Reprehension with a Di^ection; Should not
a People seek unto their God? Yes surely; for the Living to the Dead should
they go? No certainly, that is abominable and execrable. And I question not but
the Idolatrous Jews, who used Necromancy, are meant by those who remain among
the Graves, and lodge in the Monuments, Isa. 65. 4. This, and the other parts of
this Science, were very frequent in the World heretofore; especially they made
use of it to enquire beforehand what Success they should have in their Affairs:
and thus the practice of Divination and Magic was often coincident. But their
Charms and Spells, and Mystical Characters, were the most frequent of all,
whereby they helped and eased People in case of Sickness, Bodily Pains, Cato de
re rustic. cap. 160. Plin. Not. Hist. l. 28. c. 2.

Cato prodidit luxatis membris carmen auxiliari.


Luxation of Members, and all outward Calamities that befell them: whereby also
they were able to inflict Diseases, and all manner of Bodily Evils, and (in
brief) to produce very surprising and astonishing Operations.

I am very ready to grant, notwithstanding what I have said, that many things
have been ascribed to the Devil which he was never guilty of, or was any ways
concerned in. I question not but many things have passed for Magic of the
worst sort with vulgar and unthinking People, which were the mere Effects of
Natural Philosophy improved and set forth by Art. The Times have been such,
that a Mathematician and a Magician have been esteemed the same. But though we
pity the Mistakes of the Ignorant, yet we are not to attend to the Dictates of
the Perverse, who avouch there is no Diabolick Magic, and therein destroy the
Faith of all History, both Divine and Humane.

The Ancient Great Masters in this Impipious Art and Practice, who are
mentioned in the Sacred Story, were the Egyptian Sorcerers, (of whom Iannes and
Iambres were the chief, and accordingly they are called in the Talmud the
Princes of the Magicians) Genesis 41. 8. 2 Timothy 3. 8. Baalam the Mesopotamian
Soothsayer, Numb. 22. 5. the Casdim or Chaldean Magi, Dan. 2. 2. And the
Ancient Practisers in this Art mentioned in Profane Writers, were Zabulus,
Zamolxis, Abbaris, Zoroaster, Pasetes, Pancrates and Zachlas, (both of them
Egyptian Magicians, spoken of by Lucian and Apuleius) Numa Pompilius, etc.
Pythagoras may be taken into the Number, for from several Circumstances of his
Life (as well as from the Precept, (...).
to worship the Infernal Gods) he may be thought to be a Magician: And perhaps
in this Travels into Egypt and Chaldea, he picked up this Ill Art; for it is
certain that from those Countries the Magical Practices had their Rise. Yea,
many of the Jews, the Chief Men especially, were given to Magic; and even the
Elders of the Sanhedrim studied this Art, says our Hor. Hebr. in Man. 24. 24.
Learned Lightfoot: And he farther observes, that the nearer the Jewish State
approached to its ruin, the more were they addicted to it.

Thus have I given you a brief Account of this Cursed Art, of the main Limbs of
it, of the Authors that supported it, and of its spreading and prevailing in
the World. But (which is the next thing I am to make good) by the Coming of our
Lord these Wicked Practices began to decay, Sorcery and Witchcraft lost their
Power. Christ by his Appearing, and afterward by his Apostles and Followers,
defeated such Hellish Works. At what time, says Orat. de Incarnat. Verbi.
Athanasius, did the Magic Arts and their Schools begin to be trodden down,
but when God the Word appeared among Men? It seemed to be an early Presage of
Christ's Power in this kind, that the Eastern Magi came to him, and prostrated
themselves at his Feet in his very Infancy: for I could produce the Testimonies
of Ignatius and Justin Martyr, of Origin and Tertullian, of Ierom and Basil,
and other Greek and Latin Fathers, to prove that these Wise Men (as our
Translation renders it) were no other than Sorcerers and Inchanters, the worst
sort of Magicians, who dealt with the Devil. These submitted to the Babe Jesus,
and owned him to be the Lord and Sovereign of the World. Though the Pharisees
were so malicious, impudent and b^asphemous as to represent our Savior himself
as a Magitian, as one that did his Miraculous Works by help of the Devil; yet
nothing is more clear, than that in all his Discourses and Practices, his
Design was to defeat the Devil's Projects, to ruin his Interest, and to
destroy his Works, and consequently This which is the grossest of all. So for
Necromancy, raising the Dead, and enquiring of them, he came to destroy this
Work, and did it effectually, by informing Men aright concerning the State of
the deceased, by fixing and determining the Place of their Abode after this
Life, by sending us to Moses and the Prophets, and bidding us consult and
believe them, and not expect any Tidings from the Dead. The Acts of the
Apostles acquaint us, that Simon the Sorcerer, who bewitched the People of
Samaria, was soon reclaimed by Philip's preaching the Gospel there, and that he
believed and was baptized, Acts 8. 9, 13. And another Noted Sorcerer, was not
only rebuked by St. Paul after this severe manner, Thou Child of the Devil, (a
fit accost to such a one as He, for Magic is properly the Devil's Work) thou
Enemy of all Righteousness, will thou not cease to pervert the right Ways of
the Lord? Acts 13. 10. but he was struck blind by the fame Miraculous Hand, and
disabled to pursue his impious Practices. St. Peter likewise undertook the
former of these Hellish Practitioners, and in the midst of his Magic Attempts
and Adventures, brought him down headlong and defeated him, as we are informed
from very Ancient Writers. When St. Paul preached at Ephesus, where several of
the Inhabitants were given to this Vile Art, he as it were, by more Holy Charms
and Spells, made them throw away their Books of Curious Arts, that is, of
Enchantment, and then bring them forth, and burn them, Acts 19. 19.

Because this is so famous an Instance of the destroying these Works of the
Devil, and because it may be enquired how the using of Curious Arts is the same
with practicing of Magic, I will examine the Greek word (...) which St. Luke
here makes use of, and let you see how fitly it is here applied. This word
being no where to be found in the New Testament but in this place and in one
other, we must consult other Writers, and observe how it is taken in them. (...)
is reckoned by Instit. Orat. l. 8. c. 3.
Quintilian among the Faults of Speech, namely when Persons are too nice about
it, and take too much Care in the ordering of it; and thence perhaps Apion had
the Epithet given him of (...), the most Curious and Quaint Grammarian. This
Over-curiousness in speaking, leads to Adulation and Fawning, and therefore
(...) is defined thus by Theophrastus in his Characters of Morals; (...). Cap.
14. (...).
It is a kind of a dissembling in Words and Actions, joined with a Pretense of
Benevolence: And according to him, (...) is an Officious Flatterer, and one
that does act that Part with much Affectation and Folly. The word refers to
Actions as well as Speeches, for Talkative Persons generally are Pragmatical;
therefore we render (...) Busy-Bodies, 1 Timothy 5. 13. who there are joined with,
(...), Tatlers, those that exceed in Words, as the other in Doing. So it seems
that Preposition (...), in this Composition, imports that which is too much,
that which is Superfluous and Unnecessary. And this Unnecessary and Pragmatical
Over-doing, does easily tend unto and end in Superstition; which indeed,
according to the true Denotation of the Word, is an Over-doing; and the Bigotry
of Superstition commonly ends in Unlawful Arts, and degenerates into Magic.
Wherefore it was well observed by an Historian, concerning one of the Roman
Emperors, (...). Herodian. l. 4. de Antonino.
that being given to a Foolish and Immoderate Curiosity, he was inclined not
only to search into all those Occult Things which relate to Men, but he was
very busy in prying into those Secrets which are Divine, yea, and those which
are Diabolical and Magical. Thus you see the Connection between these two,
Curiosity and Magic, and why the using of Curious Arts here is to be
understood of Magical Practices, viz. because Men's Unlawful Curiosity leads
them to these Wicked Enterprises. Having discovered the true Origin of this
word (...), and thereby settled the meaning of it in this place of the Acts, it
remains that I farther establish this by letting you see that this is the
meaning of the word, both in Ecclesiastical and Profane Writers. Thus an
Irenaeus adv. Haeres. l. 1. c. 24.
Ancient Father speaking of the Simonians, a sort of Heretics that took their
Name from Simon the Sorcerer, and who also were versed in his Art, says of
them, that the Eroticks, (or Phil^res) the Agogima, the Paredri and Oniropompi,
and whatever other Perierga there are, (i. e. whatever other Magic Tricks
there are) are studiously practiced by these Persons. And another Ancient
Writer of the Church uses the word Curiositas, which answers to (...), for
Incantationum vires promulgaverant, and omnem curiositatem usque ad stellarum
interpretationem designaverant. Tertul. de hab. mulier. c. 2.
the Magic Art, and particularly for the Unlawful Divination by the Stars. To
which we may add that Sanction of the Emperor Constantius against these Evil
Practices which is inserted into the Imperial Law, and is expressed thus; In
Lege cont. Maleficos.
Sileat omnibus perpetuo divinandi curiositas, etc. Among Profane Authors, De
Abstinent. lib. 2.
Porphyrius may be cited, who tells us, that the Philosophers used to give this
Name to Magical Operations, and that (...) was of the same import with them
that (...), and (...) were. In Epigram. 7.
Catullus and Epod. Ode 17.
Horace we shall find that Curiosus (which answers to (...)) is the Epithet
from him that pries into the Magic Secrets, or rather is the same with a
Magician. Thus you see what ground there is from the denotation of the word it
self, and from the use of it among Writers, to fix that sense upon it which we
have done. But besides this, if we take notice of the particular Place and
Persons that St. ^uke here refers to, we shall be yet farther confirmed in this
meaning. We may observe, that the Scene of this Action is Ephesus, as is clear
from the 1st and 17 verses of this Chapter. They are the Ephesian Converts whom
this Text speaks of, these are they that had heretofore used Curious Arts. By
minding of this (especially after what has been said already) we may certainly
gather what these (...) are, for Ephesus before all other Cities was addicted
to these Impious Studies. Not only In Alexandro.
Plutarch, but other very credible Writers (whom the Reader may consult)
particularly take notice that the People of this Place were in a more than
ordinary manner inclined to, and conversant in these Arts. This was so common
and notorious, that it became a Poverb, (...) was used as a known expression to
signify Magic Learning, as several Plutarch. Athenaeus, Hesychius, Suidas,
Alexander ab Alexandro, etc.
Ancient Writers testify. From this old Proverbial way of speaking, we may
gather what St. Luke here means by (...), viz. those Ephesian Characters or
Charms, those Magical Notes and Rites, which that People were so famed for, and
by which they did such great Feats, or seemed to do so at least. The Ephesians
had a certain set of Letters and Words which they used in Enchantments, and
they never failed; so greatly were they befriended by the Author of them. The
Christians called these Diabolical, but St. Luke here uses the word, which
perhaps was received at Ephesus as well as in other Places; and he tells us
that many of them who used these Curious Arts, were now weary of them, and
brought their Books together, and burned them before all Men. When they came to
be acquainted with the 2 Timothy 3. 15.
(...), they soon disliked those Ephesian Letters, and in a pious Revenge, used
them in the like manner that Books of that sort used to be dealt with: for from
the Live. lib. 39. Sueton. in Augusto.
Roman Writers and others, we are informed, that the Punishment which was wont
to be executed on Books of such a Nature, was Burning of them: so that the very
Penalty here voluntarily inflicted on these Books, acquaints us of what kind
they were. That which particularly and signally shows the Efficacy of the
Gospel in destroying these Diabolical Works, is this, that these Ephesians, who
were so addicted to Devilish Practices, and were Magical even to a Proverb,
that these (I say) were reclaimed from these damnable Studies by the Preaching
of St. Paul among them, and presently gave a demonstration of their hearty
Repentance for their past Enormities, by producing their Books of Enchantment,
and committing them to the Flames. And that which makes this yet more
remarkable is, that these Books which they thus consumed to Ashes, were of so
great a Price, no less than five Myriads of Silver, (for so it is in the Greek,
and I do not know why it should not be rendered so by us. This Translation is
more exact than [fifty thousand Pieces of Silver]). These Ephesians showed the
Truth and Sincerity of their Conversion by this one generous Instance, by
parting with that which cost them so dear, and by which they could have gained
so much.

So much for this Notable Passage in the Acts, which is as great and Convincing
a Proof of the Matter in Hand as could be offered, and therefore I thought good
to insist upon it. I might go on, and let you see out of Ecclesiastical
History, that Conjurers were not able to play their Magical Pranks in the
presence of Holy Christians. Tertullian and Lactantius agree, that the Heathen
Gods, or rather their Priests, complained that their Rites could not be
performed so long as any Christians were in their Temples, or present at their
Sacrifices. The Astrologers and Soothsayers of Alexandria cried out, that they
could do little or nothing in their Wicked Art till Athanasius, that Good
Father, was removed out of the City. And it is the Universal Testimony of
Writers, that when Christianity waxed Great in the World, Magic dwindled, and
grew less and less. It will, I think, be confessed by all Men, that the
Transactions of the Devil, with Witches and Persons of a resembling Quality,
are neither so frequent nor so powerful as they have been heretofore. The Light
of the Gospel dispels these Works of Darkness. This we find foretold by the
Prophet Micah concerning the Messiah, and his appearing in the Flesh, I will
cut off Witchcrafts out of thy Hand, Chapter 5. ver. 12. And it follows in the next
Verse, Thy graven Images also will I cut off, and thy standing Images out of
the midst of thee, and thou shall no more worship the Work of thy Hands. Which
reminds me of the next thing contained in the words.

Fifthly, By the Works of the Devil, we must needs understand Idolatry and
Polytheism; than which there was nothing more serviceable toward the promoting
his Kingdom in the World. I grant, that the Pagan Priests were no Losers by
Idolatry, yea, that they were Gainers by it; but it is absurd to infer thence,
(as I have showed before in the like Case) that it was not the Work of the
Devil, that it was not set up and managed by him to advance his Interest in the
World. Therefore you may know how to judge of that Gentleman's Doctrine, who
says, That Sir Tho. P. B's Essays.
the setting up many Gods among the Gentiles was only for the Priests Gain,
because the Sacrifices and Worship done to them were so profitable to them;
whereas the Worship of one God would not have brought in so much Gain. This was
the sole Cause of Idolatry, says he. Still he is wonderfully civil and
obliging, extremely courteous and friendly to the Great Enemy of Mankind, and
will not harbor any ill Thoughts of him, either as to the Pagan Oracles, and I
suppose as to Sorcery and Magic, and we are sure as to Idolatry. He is
persuaded, (but hold there, I do not know that, for it may be he speaks not his
inward Sense, I may rather say he tells us) that those most Cursed Inventions
and Designs of that Hellish Impostor were none of his, and that they were only
contrived by the Covetous Priests to get a Penny. I see the Devil is a very
Innocent and Harmless Creature, according to some Persons; it will be well for
them if they find him so. But we have more reason to believe that he is very
Spightful, Malicious and Destructive, and that he not only seeks for, but makes
use of all Occurrences and Opportunities to endamage Mankind, and that he is
pregnant in his Inventions to that purpose. And such we may justly reckon these
to be which I have mentioned, and therefore I take them to be from another
Spring than what some imagine. It is evident that they are properly the Devil's
Works, and carry his Mark upon them: particularly as to Idolatry or Polytheism,
it is plain that it is of his setting up. Ye shall be as Gods, was the early
Insinuation and Suggestion of that Evil Spirit to our first Parents in
Paradise: The Notion of being Gods strangely wrought upon them, and procured
our Misery. This was the first Temptation of Satan* and is the first step to
Idolatry, which of all his Works may justly be styled his Chief Masterpiece.
It is true, the wisest of the Pagans asserted One God, and knew that there were
not Different Deities, but the generality of them thought and believed
otherwise; and the Philosophers themselves complied with these Vain
Worshippers, and so confirmed the People in their Error. Nothing is more
evident, than that the greater part of the World heretofore declared for a
Multiplicity of Gods. The Idea of God, like some great Mirror, was broken in
pieces by the Heathens, and in every one of these they saw a Deity, or fancied
they did so. Every Attribute of God, was a Distinct God. But this was more
pardonable; they proceeded to worship the Heavenly Bodies, and ascribed Life
and Divinity to them. Nay, they ransacked for Gods and Goddesses below, as well
as above: they found them in the Earth, and in the Deep, as well as in the
Heavens. The Number of these Deities had reached to thirty thousand in (...).
Hesiod's Time; and they were almost as many more afterward; for, if Varro's
Computation be right, there were above that Number of Gods and Goddesses
worshipped by the Europeans alone. Nor would one way of worshipping them serve
their turn. There were as many various Rites and different Sacrifices, as there
were Deities; the Solemnities which were performed to one, would not suffice
another. Nothing forsooth would please Ceres but a Sow, nothing would serve
Aesculapius but a Cock, and the most acceptable Offering to Neptune was a Bull.
The Pagans fancied that one God delighted in this Oblation, and another in
that; and therefore to be sure to please them they had Particular Services and
Diversities of Worship for them. Egypt was the most fruitful Soil for this; it
furnished the rest of the World with Gods. The Grecians (who afterward stocked
the Romans) took the Names of their Gods, their Temples, their Altars, their
Images, and most of their Superstitious Ceremonies from that Country, as In
Euterpe.
Herodotus testifies. And with him agrees Lib. 22. c. 43.
Ammianus Marc^llinus, who positively tells us, that all Idolatry came from
Egypt. And Lib. 17.
Strabo and others acquaint us, that All sorts of Living Creatures were
worshipped by the Inhabitants of that place. That Sheep, and suchlike Animals,
had Divine Respect paid to them, is attested by the most Ancient and Undoubted
Annals of Holy Scripture: for it is said, in Genesis 46. 34. that a Shepherd is an
Abomination to an Egyptian, viz. because the Egyptians did not kill or eat
Sheep, or suchlike Animals, but looked upon them as Sacred. Hence Moses says,
Ex. 8. 26.
Shall we sacrifice the Abomination of the Egyptians before their Eyes, and
will they not stone us? i. e. If we sacrifice Sheep or Oxen, Creatures that
they worship, and abominably idolize, they will be incensed against us. They
abhorred the I^ws, because they were generally Shepherds, and fed upon that
sort of Animals, and used them in Sac^ifice. And this, it is probable, was the
reason why, when Joseph entertain^d his Brethren at Dinner* they did eat
asunder, because it was an Abomination to the Egyptians to eat Bread with the
Hebrews, Genesis 43. 32. For (as O^kelas here adds) the Hebrews eat those Animals
which the ^gyptians worship. And for this Cause the Israelites lived apart in
the Land of Gosh^n And besides, they were not permitted to Sacrifice all the
time they were in Egypt, as appears from those words of God to Moses Exodus 9.
13. Let the People go that they may serve me; i. e. that they may Sacrifice
unto me, as appears from Chapter 10. 25. which implies, that they were not
permitted to Sacrifice before; and the Reason was, because the Egyptians would
not let them kill, and offer in the Fire those Animals which they had so great
a regard for, and even Deified. So besotted were these Gentile Adorers, that
not only Irrational but Inanimate Creatures were deified by them. You might
have seen the Greatest Men, to whom others bowed and did lowly obeisance,
prostrate themselves to Stocks and Stones, to Wood, and Brass, and Iron, shaped
into Gods; and by the Art of Masons, Carpenters and Smiths, made Deities. This
was the Idolatry which obtained so much in the World, this was the Capital
Enormity of Mankind, this was the Main Guilt which they were polluted with, as
Principale crimen generis humani, summus (...) reasons. De Idololar. cap. 1.
Tertullian called it. Our Learned Dr. Hammond thinks this is meant by the
Apostle in Romans 8. 20. The Creature was made subject to Vanity; for he takes
(...) for the Gentile World, and Vanity for Idolatry, as this is called very
frequently in the Old Testament. The Heathen World was every where enslaved,
subjected to this Vile Sin, though not willingly, i. e. as this Author expounds
it; the Devil forced them to it, otherwise he would not be appeased.

But this gross Folly and Madness was soon disgraced and discountenanced by the
introducing of Christianity, and even in Egypt, the Mother and Nurse of all
Idolatry, where Garlicks and Onions (no very fragrant Deities) had Veneration
paid them, and Cats and Crocodiles were good fashionable Gods; where they
worshipped all things in Nature, where every thing living or dead was a Deity,
even here this Prodigious Idolatry was destroyed by Christ's Coming; for upon
on St. Mark's preaching there, and at Alexandria especially, Images were soon
demolished, the Counterfeit Gods were thrown away, and the only True God,
Father, Son and Holy Ghost were worshipped with an unanimous Veneration. At
Rome it self, and even in Nero's Palace, and in all the Territories belonging
to the Roman Emperors, there were some to be found who discovered their hatred
and detestation of Idols, and adored the True God in Spirit and in Truth. But
the Pagan Worship had got such deep rooting in the Hearts of Men, and had by
long Custom and Prescription so gained their good Will and Approbation, that
almost four Centuries of Years had passed after Christ's Incarnation, before it
could be universally extirpated, and the True Worship of God become the
Religion of the Roman Empire. Constantine the Great made the first remarkable
and generous Essay toward this Glorious Work; in his Reign it was that
Idolatry received its greatest mortification: and he was succeeded by many
Worthies that imitated him. Let all the Images be plucked up from their Seats,
was In Cod. Theodos. l. 16. Tit. 11.
Honorius's Constitution; and by the Edict of Theodosius and Valentinian, the
Idol Temples were all demolished, and Idolatry every where in their Dominions
destroyed, and all False Gods discarded. Thus the Blessed Work went on with
great Life and Vigor, being set forward by Royal Hands, and those Hands being
strengthened by the Son of God. Therefore the Pious Father said well, (...),
etc. Lib. de Incarnat. Verbi Dei.
When the Madness of Idolatry and Impiety possessed the World, and the Knowledge
of the True God was banished, to whom did it belong to instruct the World
aright concerning the true worship of the Father, but to the Son? And in the
same place he farther sets forth the vast spreading of Idolatry over the World,
and Christians more powerful destroying of it. And you shall find, that this
Glorious Achievement of Christ in crushing Idolatry, which was grown so
prevalent every where, is made the great Proof and Confirmation of the Truth of
the Christian Religion, and is insisted upon with mighty Force and Reason by
all the Ancient Apologists for Christianity. And that this was one Great Design
of our Savior's manifesting himself in the World, is evident from many
Promises and Prophecies in the Old Testament concerning the Messiah and his
Kingdom; as that of the Evangelical Prophets Is^. 2. ^0.
They shall cast their Idols of Silver, and their Idols of Gold, to the Batts,
and to the Moles, (to the Moles, fit company you will say for them that have
Eyes and see not, as Idols are described by the Psalmist). The meaning of this
Prophetic Writer is, that the enlightened and converted Gentiles shall renounce
their Beloved Idolatry, and with indignation throw their Idols and Images into
the dark Corners of the Earth. Whereas before they placed them in the Light,
and set them up to be seen, now they shall be ashamed of them, and being
ashamed of them shall hide them, and cast them into those obscure Holes where
Bats and Moles lie hid under Ground. To the same pu^pose is that of the Prophet
Jer. 16. 19, 20.
Jeremiah, The Gentiles shall come unto thee from the Ends of the Earth, and
shall say, Our Fathers inherited Li^s and Vanities, (which are terms in the
Isa. 28. 15 and 44. 20. Jer. 13. 25. Ho^. ^. 1. Am. 2. 4. Romans 1. 25.
Scripture-stile to express False Gods) but we will reject them, for shall a
Man make Gods to himself that are no Gods? And in several places, both Isaiah
and this Prophet insist upon this, that the Messiah should bring the Gentiles
out of the Darkness of Idolatry to the Light of the Gospel, and the
Acknowledgment of the True God. In Ezekiel. 37. 23. there is another Prediction of
the like Nature, Israel shall not defile themselv^^ any ^ore with Idols, nor
with their Detestable Things: which latter Clause is but an Explication of the
fo^me^, for Shikku^zim and (...) (which are the words in the Original and the
Septuagint) are frequently used to signify Idols, which are Detestable in the
Eyes of God. And Zephaniah foretells, that (...). 2. ^^.
the Lord will famish all the Gods of the Earth: which is a very remarkable
Passage, and alludes to the fond Conceit of the Pagans, which is mentioned in
Deuteronomy. 32. 38. that their Gods did eat the Fat of their Sacrifices, and drank
the Wine of their Drink Offerings. To which it is probable God himself was
pleased to allude in Psalm. 50. 13. Will I eat the Flesh of Bulls, or drink the
Blood of Goats? And in Isa. 43. 24. Neither have thou filled me with the Fat of
thy Sacrifices. It was a Notion among the Heathen Worshippers, that the God's
were nourished with the Steam of the Sacrifices; and in relation to that the
Prophet's Prediction is, that those Gods shall be famished: they shall not,
according to the fond Notion of the Gentile World, be any longer ^ed from the
Altars, they shall be starved when Christianity takes place amongst Men, for
the Pagan Sacrifices shall then be laid aside, and Idolatry cashiered. All
these P^ophecies were plainly accomplished, when our Savior came and
commissioned his Apostles to preach the Gospel to the whole World. This threw
down the Idolatrous Images, and in many places the very Idols themselves ^ell
down prostrate on the Ground, and, as it were, worshipped the Holy Jesus.

But as Christ gave a fatal Blow to Idol^trous Worship, so I am more
particularly to prove (under this Head) that he did con^ound the Worshipping of
Devils, which had been a thing very fashionable in the World before Christ came
into it. I say, the Worshipping of Devils, the highest Strain of Idolatry, was
confounded by our Savior's appearing: for it seems the Devil could not be
content to cheat the World with his Oracles, to enter into Men's Bodies, and to
make Leagues and Contracts with Persons, but (as an Effort above all these) he
affected to be worshipped and adored as a God. This is confessed by Porphyrius
in his Book of Abstinence from Animals: and Eusebius and St. Augustine, and
other Fathers make use of what he says there against the Pagans, whom they
undertake to confute. That the Gods whom the Gentiles sometimes worshipped, were
Devils, is also the acknowledgment of Trismegistus in his Asclepius. And it is
owned by all the Wise and Understanding Heads among them that the Service paid
to many of their Gods was a kind of Adoring the Devil. It is well known that
these Worshippers could, by certain Magic Spells make these Infernal Fiends
come to their Images when they pleased: and when they had brought them thither,
they worshipped these Wicked Ghosts to appease their Fury, and that they might
do them no harm. Besides, the Particulars which I insisted on before, do
sufficiently evince the present Point; for the consulting the Devil when he
spoke in Oracles, and dealing with him by practicing Witchcraft and Sorcery,
were a palpable forsaking of the True God, and setting up the Devil for a God.
These were giving Divine Honor to the Prince of Darkness. And, which is most
convincing, do not the infallible Oracles of Scripture expressly tell us, that
the Idolatrous Jews sacrificed unto Devils, not to God? Deuteronomy. 32. 17. which (to
confirm the Truth and Certainty of it) is repeated in Psalm. 106. 37. They
sacrificed their Sons and Daughters unto Devils. And if I be not mistaken, the
Psalmist had before referred to this abominable Practice, ver. 28. They ate the
Sacrifices of the Dead, i. e. (as I conceive) the Sacrifices that were offered
to the Manes, and to the Stygian Jupiter or Pluto the God of the Dead: these
are meant here by Zibche methim, the Sacrifices of the Dead. I know some
Writers have lessened and minced this Idolatry, as well as that before spoken
of, and tell us that the Pagans all along worshipped God, though under a false
Representation. It is partly true, that the best of the Heathens did so, but
others did not: and as for those that defend the contrary, they are confuted by
downright Authority from Scripture, which acquaints us, that they worshipped
even Devils: for sacrificing to them, is worshipping them. If they can evade
this, let them. I could add, that the Hebrew Masters were of Opinion that some
of the Jews worshipped the Devil in shape of a Goat in Woods and Deserts,
because the word Sagnir is both Demon and Hircus, Lev. 17. 7. 2 Chronicles. 11. 15.
Isa. 13. 21. and 34. 14. And it is likely this worshipping of Satyrs was a piece
of Devilish Idolatry which they learnt and brought from Diodor. Sic. l. 1.
Egypt, where 'twas practiced. But this we are certain of from a more sure
word, (as you heard) that the Devils themselves were adored by them. And
concerning the Gentiles Worship, the Apostle is peremptory, 1 Cor. 10. 20. The
things which the Gentiles sacrificed, they sacrificed to Devils, and not to
God. Whereas the Greeks used to call the Victims or Beasts which they offered,
(...); the Apostle on the contrary plainly styles them, (...), things
sacrificed to Idols, 1 Cor. 8. 1, 4, 7. and 10. 19, 28. In which places Idols
are no other than Diabolick Spirits which inhabited in those Idols.

But Christ by his coming soon put a Period to this Hellish Usage. When the
Devil was so impudent as to make that offer to him, All these things will I
give thee if thou will fall down and worship me, he presently rebuked the bold
Spirit, by alleging what was written, not only in the Law, but in all Men's
Hearts, that they should worship the Lord their God, and serve him only. And by
the whole System of his Heavenly Doctrine he built up this Truth, and pulled
down the Contrary, and all the least Tendencies to it. After our Savior left
this Earth, his Apostles and Followers managed the same Work, and endeavored
by all means to run down this Cursed Project of the Devil, viz. of his being
worshipped. As a particular Effect of their Care to baffle this Design, we read,
that the Primitive Christians solemnly vowed at their Baptism to renounce the
Devil and all his Works. By which, De Spectac. c. 4.
says Tertullian, is principally meant Idolatry, yea, and the worst kind of
Idolatry, a giving Divine Honor and Worship to those that are Devils, and not
Gods, a Sin very common at Christ's Coming into the World, the greatest part of
it at that time living in this Vile Practice: therefore, ^aith this Father,
this was made a chief part of the Baptismal Vow, that the Proselytes and
Converts to Christianity, should in a solemn manner bid Defiance to that
detestable Enormity of the Heathens. Conformably to this our Learned Dr.
Hammond, Pract. Cat. l. 6. Sect. 3. P. 375.
Catechist in reply to that Question, What is meant by the Devil and all his
Works? answers thus, Certainly the principal thing here renounced, is the False
Gods, i. e. Devils, which the Heathen World did worship so universally before
Christ's Time, and against which the Catechists (who prepared all for Baptism)
did first labor to fortify their Disciples, and are for that Cause called in
the Ancient Church Exorcists, as those that cast out these Devils. Very near
akin to This, is that which is added next in the Solemn Vow at Baptism, viz.
The renouncing the Vain Pomp and Glory of the World: For that word Pomp in its
Original meaning, refers to the Idolatrous Shows of the Heathens, it properly
signifying sending of some thing, and carrying it up and down to be seen and
exposed: so that hereby are denoted those Splendid Sights and Stately
Processions in use of old among the Heathens; at which Solemn Times the Images,
the Thrones, the Ornaments, and all the Habiliments, as also the Oblations and
Sacrifices which were to be offered to their Gods, were carried openly through
the Streets, and Honor was done to these false Deities. The Ancient Fathers of
the Church very strictly cautioned their Flock against these Devilish Customs;
and particularly when they admitted Converts into the Church by Baptism, they
took care to fortify them against them. Hence may be observed the Antiquity of
the Form and Office of Baptism, which our Church makes use of at this Day. The
solemn Renuntiation of the Devil and his Works, and of the Pomp and Vanity of
the World, is as old as Primitive Christianity. Yea, some Learned Men have
thought, that the Apostle St. Peter alludes to it, in his 1 Epist. Chap. 3. v.
21. and that the Answer of a good Conscience there, refers to the manner of
Interrogation and Answer used in Baptism. But this by the by. That which you
are chiefly to take notice of is, that whereas the Wicked Ghosts and Demons
were ambitious of Divine Adoration, it pleased God so to bless and succeed the
Christian Religion, that in a short time this wicked Usage wore away, this
cursed Work of the Devil came to naught, the Christian Faith being, by the
wonderful Providence of Heaven, ^^opagated so universally through the World.

Sixthly, I conceive, that by the Works of the Devil are meant here especially
those Sins which have most of his Image upon them, and wherein Men more
immediately and directly resemble that Accursed Spirit; those Works which the
Devil chiefly tempts Men to, and which he himself is observed to practice most.
As first, Malice and Envy are the proper Guise and Character of Devils; for
these lapsed Spirits being irrecoverably damned themselves, are fired with
Revenge and Malice against all Mankind; being thrust down from Heaven, they
endeavor to hinder us from coming thither. Wherefore Envy (which is a Grieving
at the Good and Welfare of others) Sporting with Men's Infirmities, Exposing
them to Obloquy and Disgrace, Delighting in the Miseries of those we affect
not, Rejoicing at the Evils which befall others; these have all an Impress of
the Devilish Spirit on them. Our Savior pronounced concerning the Pharisees,
whom he found to be Envious and Malicious, that the Works of their Father they
would do, plainly giving us to understand, that these Vices are more eminently
Diabolical. But the Laws of Christianity strictly enjoin us, 1 Pet. 2. 1.
to lay aside all Malice and Envy, and command us to Romans 12. 15.
rejoice with them that rejoice, to weep with them that weep, and -- V. 10.
to be kindly affectioned one toward another, and to delight in the Welfare
and Happiness of our Brethren. Again, Rage and Passion, Bitter Strife and
Contention may be justly ranked among the Devil's Works. Schism and Faction are
from him, who was the first Mutineer and Rebel against Heaven, and ever since
delights in Wars and Tumults, and loves to ruffle and embroil the World, and
raise Tempests and Storms in it. But Christ Jesus, our Blessed Peacemaker and
Reconciler, came to remove all Grounds of Difference, and to introduce
Universal Love and Charity. And Christianity it self is furnished with
Peaceable and Healing Principles, and offers all the Motives and Incentives to
it imaginable. The Laws of Christ are fully set against all undue Passion and
Choler, and there are in no Institution whatsoever so severe Prohibitions of
this Diabolical Temper; Ephesians. 4. 31.
Let all Bitterness, and Wrath, and Anger, be put away from you. V. 26, 27.
Let not the Sun go down on your Wrath; neither give place to the Devil. Where
we learn, that the Fire of Hell burns in Angry Breasts; the Brimstone of the
Bottomless Pit may be smelt there. He that is overcome of Passion, gives place
to the Devil.

I add in the next place, that Pride is perfectly Diabolical. It was this which
first infected Lucifer and his Fellow-Angels, and thrust them down from their
Heavenly Dignity, and made them (what they now are) Devils. But our Savior on
the contrary throws down Pride, and exalts Humility, and commends it to all his
Followers from his own Example, Learn of me, for I am Meek and Lowly. This is a
right Christian Temper, and is Heavenly and God-like, and whosoever fosters it in
his Breast is beloved of God, and all Good Men. Reproaching and Reviling are no
less the Devil's Works, and thence he has his Name given him in the Greek: A
Devil and a Reviler are terms convertible. It is the Office and Employ of the
Evil Spirit, first to raise, and then to keep up Slanders and Contumelious
Reports. But behold, our Blessed Master has left us Rules diametrically
opposite to these Practices. Ephesians. 4. 31.
We must put away from us all Evil-s^^aking. We are not suffered to revile,
though we be reviled: Yea, we are to be possessors of that Charity which 1 Cor.
13. 5.
thinks no Evil.

To proceed, Lying and Falsehood, Craft and Treachery, most sensibly discover
the Devilish Nature. These Windings and Crooked Courses are the Goings of the
Serpent. We are told, that the Devil put it into Judas' s Heart to betray
Christ, that we may thence infer, that Treachery and Perfidiousness are more
immediately from that False Spirit: And for this Reason chiefly our Savior
does once and again call this Mock-Apostle John 6. 70. and 8. 44.
a Devil. But certainly nothing is more opposite to Christianity, than this
base and sordid Vice. And Christ and his Apostles, both by Precept and Example,
commend Fidelity, Truth and Sincerity, and disallow of all Guile and Hypocrisy,
and herein show themselves opposite to the Wicked Spirit, who is a Liar, and
the Father of Lies, John 8. 44.

In the same place it is said, He was a Murderer from the beginning; which
suggests to us another Particular. He began betimes to exert his Cruel Nature:
in the first setting out of Mankind, he stirred up Cain to kill his Brother; and
ever since this Savage and Bloody Spirit has showed it self in the World. It
is the inseparable Property of the Roaring Lion to seek whom he may devour. He
is the Destroyer, Rev. 9. 11
Apollyon is his Name, and he acts agreeably to it. As for his Violence and
Cruelty toward Men's Bodies, in continual haunting and worrying the Possessed,
I have said something already in this Discourse; but it is another sort of
Cruelty which I am now to speak of, of which I will propound these two notable
Instances: First, The Humane Sacrifices which were offered in most parts of the
World. Secondly, The Bloody Prizes of the Gladiators, which prevailed in great
Cities, chiefly at Rome, the Mistress and Governess of the World: And I will
briefly hint to you how the Christian Religion destroyed these Works of Satan.

First, I say, Humane Slaughter and Sacrifices were no unusual things in the
World. The Evil Spirit taught Parents to make a Burnt-Offering of their
Children unto Moloch, to Sacrifice them alive in the Valley of Hinnom; so that
the Name of Hell, Gehenna, takes its denomination from that bloody Usage. This
Moloch was the God of the Ammonites; but it appears from Ier. 7. 31. and Psalm.
106. 37. that even the Jews, God's Select People, burnt their Sons and
Daughters to this Idol, nay, although they had been particularly cautioned
against it by an early Prohibition, Levit. 18. 21. I know some of the Solomon
Jarchi, D. Kimchi, Maimonides.
Rabbis hold, that the Children were not burnt or killed, but that two Fires
being made, the Priests drew them between both, and that was all. But this is a
Rabbinical Fancy, for it is clear from that place in the forementioned Psalm,
that the Children who were offered to Moloch, were slain and burnt. They
sacrificed their Sons and Daughters: Iisbechu, Mactarunt, they killed them: And
therefore it immediately follows, They shed Innocent Blood, even the Blood of
their Sons, and of their Daughters; and the Land was polluted with Blood.
Hereupon these Idolatrous Rites are called (...), Wisd. 14. 23. i. e.
Ceremonies that were accompanied with the Slaughter and Death of their
Children. But I think I can guess at the Reason why some of the Rabbis
conceited that this passing through the Fire was not attended with the Death of
the Persons, but was rather Purgative than Mortal. The Occasion of this Opinion
might be this; There was a very old Custom of passing through the Fire without
Killing: for those that swore to clear themselves of a supposed Guilt,
undertook likewise to purge themselves, and clear their Innocence, by going
through, or over, or between certain Fires, or hot glowing Coals, or Irons; and
if they came off unhurt, they were believed to be Guiltless. The Grecians of
old used to swear and purge themselves from Crimes, by creeping on their Hands
through some Fire, or by hold-a red hot Iron in their Hands: for thus one in
(...).
Sophocles's Antigona offered to swear and clear himself. St. Cont. Julian. I.
10.
Cyril treats of this old Piece of Superstition: and our own Histories tell us,
that our Ancestors in this Island were no strangers to such a kind of Ordeal.
This perhaps might give some Jewish Writers occasion to imagine, that this kind
of Fiery Trial is spoken of, when the Scripture says, The Children passed
through the Fire to Moloch; and to think it was only a Consecrating or
Initiating the Persons into the Pagan Rites, a Previous Purgation or
Februation, as De Idololat. I. 2. c. 5.
Vossius calls it, (for he holds they were not burnt, but only passed between
two Fires; though in another place he is of another opinion). But this is a
gross Mistake, for the forenamed Text informs us, that it was a Bloody Rite;
and accordingly Philo, a Learned and Sagacious Jew, as well as Eusebius and
other Christian Fathers, assert it to be of that Nature, and explode the
contrary Opinion.

But who has not read of the barbarous Effusion of Humane Blood on the Altars
of the Painims? The Jews, it is probable, had it from them, and particularly
from the Canaanites, who (as we are ascertained from Deuteronomy. 12. 31.) were
in^ected with this Cruelty: Their Sons and their Daughters they burnt in the
Fire to their Gods. And an impious Example of this we have in 2 Kings 3. 27.
where we read, that the King of Moab offered up the King of Edom's Son (the
Heir of the Kingdom) for a Burnt-Offering. These Heathens were not content with
Sacrificing of Beasts, but they must needs offer Humane Sacrifices to their
Demons. And it is strange to see how this Vile Usage spread it self, and
prevailed among all Nations. That it did so among the Old Grecians, is
testified by several Authors Virgil. Aeneid. 2. Diodor. Sicul.
Profane and Eusebius. Praep. Evang. lib. 6.
Ecclesiastical: Particularly we are told by De Abstin. lib. 2.
Porphyrius, that the Lacedaemonians used this Cruelty, and sacrificed a Living
Man to Mars. The rest of the Suid. in (...).
Grecians did the same, or the like: Yea, this Practice was Authorized by the
Oracle it self, which ordered the Greeks to Sacrifice Agamemnon's Daughter to
Diana, to appease her Goddessship. The Persons thus Sacrificed, were call'ed
(...)* Purgatory or Expiatory Oblations; to which some Critics have thought
the Apostle alludes, in 1 Cor. 4. 13. where he says, that himself, and the
rest of the Christians of that Time, were (...),, Devoted, Accursed, Abominable
in the Eyes of the World, and destined for Slaughter. Among the Trojans
likewise Sacrificing of Humane Blood was in use, as we learn from Homer and
Virgil. So among the Persians Men and Women were usually killed in Sacrifice to
Mithra. However, ever, great J. Mart. Apol. 2. Tertul. de Praescript. Suidas in
(...).
Torments were to be undergone by all that were entered into the Rites of their
Worship: No less than fourscore kinds of Punishments they were to suffer first.
That the Africans, and particularly the Carthagenians, sacrificed Children to
their Gods, is attested by sufficient Diodor. Siculus, Justin. Tertul. Apol. c.
4. Minutius Felix, Lactantius, lib. 1. c. 21. Eusebius. Praep. Evang. 4.
Writers: Nay, In vit^ Pelopidae.
Plutarch tells us, that those amongst them that had no Children, bought some
of poor People to Sacrifice them. This was the Practice of the Heliodor. l. 9.
Ethiopians, Evag. Eccl. Hist. l. 6. c. 33.
Saracens, Mela l. 2. c. 1.
Scythians, Porphyr. de Abstin.
Phoenicians and Curt. Hist. l. 4.
Tyrians. Our Neighbors, the Ancient Gauls and Germans (as Casar de Bello
Gall. l. 6. relates) were guilty of this Bloody Folly. Nor were the Old
Inhabitants of this Island, where we live free from this Wild and Extravagant
Practice. The Briti^h Druids held, that the Wrath of their Gods could not be
appeased in some Cases but with the Life of Man; and accordingly (as In Nerone.
Dio Cassius and Annal. 14.
Tacitus report) the People of this Isle, led on by their Priests, frequently
offered these Barbarous Sacrifices. Thus you may be satisfied from diverse
Authors, and many more than I have named, (for this I own to be a brief
Collection made from them, as I see Vossius de Idololat. l. 2. c. 5. Seldom de
Dis Sir. Syntag. 1. c. 6. Grotius de Satisfact. And in Deuteronomy. 18. 10. Dr.
Stillingfleet of Christ's Satisfaction.
Others have done before me) that the Custom of Sacri^icing Men did almost
universally obtain in the World. Nothing was more common with them, than to
offer up an Innocent Person to the Gods in time of some Imminent Danger, to
pacify their Wrath, and remove the Public Calamity. This Example of Devilish
Cruelty was very frequent among the Pagans before our Savior's Coming, and a
while after: But as soon as Christianity had got any footing in the World, it
began to disappear. After Christ had offered himself a Sacrifice on the Cross,
and his Holy Religion was propagated, this Custom of Sacrificing Men ceased in
a great part of the World. It is true, this Cruel and Tyrannical Sway of the
Evil Spirit is not yet wholly destroyed. The Sacrificing of Children to the
Hacklui^, Purchase, and others.
Devil, was in use not long ago among the Americans. We read of the Dreadful
and Astonishing Apparitions of Satan to the People of Florida and Brasil, and
other Countries where Paganism is still in its Meridian. These
Devil-Worshippers complain, that he cuts and tears their Flesh, and miserably
torments their poor Carcasses. Indeed those that give an Account of the
Americans and Indians, (as Acosta and others) do constantly take notice, that
flashing and cutting their Bodies are usual in their Worship. But it is to be
hoped, that this and all other Acts of Cruelty will at last be abandoned, when
the Christian Faith shall arrive among those Bloody Men. We are to bless God,
that there are any Effects of it already in those parts of the World, and to
pray that there may be yet a larger and more vigorous Influence of the Laws of
Christianity, which are against nothing more than Cruelty and Bloodshed.

Secondly, The Bloody Spectacles of the Gladiators were no small Instance of
the Devil's Empire in the Pagan World, which delighted in Slaughter, and made
it one of their Public Sports to see Men kill one another upon the Theater. It
was usual not only to expose Men to fight with Beasts, and at last to be torn
by them, but they kept others to fight with their own Kind, and to dispatch one
another. Of the former of these speaks that Pious Bishop Salvian; In
Spectaculis primum deliciarum genus est mori homines, impleri serarum alvos
humanis carnibus, cum circumstantium voluptate and conspicientium laetitia. De
Gubernat. lib. 6.
In those Spectacles, says he, the main thing that pleased them was, to feast
their Eyes with the slaughter of Men, and to see Wild Beasts gorge themselves
with Humane Flesh, and that with an incredible Satisfaction and Delight. This
was the Lot of some Condemned Malefactors, and of some that were taken Captive
in War. These who had fought with Men, were now compelled to fight with Beasts,
and so to lose their Lives. And some think that the Blessed St. Paul was put
upon this sharp Service at Ephesus, for they take that to be the meaning of his
words, when he says, He fought with Beasts at Ephesus, 1 Cor. 15. 32. i. e.
not with Wicked Men (as it is generally interpreted) who are Irrational and
Savage Creatures, and Men only in Shape, but really with Wild Beasts, with whom
he was condemned to fight for his Life, this being the Punishment inflicted on
him. This is the Interpretation which St. Chrysostom and St. Ambrose give of
the words: and it will not seem strange, if we duly consider these following
things.

1. When there is a plain and express place of Scripture, it is not safe to
evade it by flying to Metaphors. Which is the Case here: St. Paul says, he
fought with Beasts; and we may very well understand it in the plain and obvious
Sense of the Words; wherefore we are to choose this Literal Sense before a
Metaphorical one: Especially if we consider.

2. That this was in those Times and afterward an usual Punishment inflicted
on the Christians. Tertul. Apol. c. 40.
Christianos ad Leones, was the Peoples Cry: though, I grant, that merely to be
thrown to the Beasts was another thing; there was no fighting then, they were
thrown to them to be torn in pieces presently, and to be devoured, as that
Glorious M^rtyr Eusebius. Eccl. Hist. l. 3. c. 33.
Ignatins was. But Others were exposed to fight with them, and that on the
Public Theaters; and they were armed for that purpose, and if they could get
the mastery of the Beasts (of which the Instances are very rare) they were set
free: which known Custom and Practice it is likely the Apostle's (...) in the
forenamed place, may be well applied.

3. It is remarkably said [at Ephesus]; for in this Celebrated Place, that
Bloody sort of Prizes was very usual, as we are informed by Oneirocrit. l. 1.
c. 9.
Artemidorus and others.

4. What you read to have been the Consequent of the great Vproar against St.
Paul at Ephesus, the dragging his Companions into the Theater, Acts 19. 29, 31.
seems to have a particular relation to this very thing.

5. Those words in 1 Cor. 4. 9. We are made a Spectacle ((...)) unto the World,
may be thought to be an Allusion to this his fighting on the Public Stage;
especially if you mind the words immediately following, God has set forth us
as 'twere appointed to Death, designed by our Adversaries to that Fatal Combat.

6. This is more than intimated to the Corinthians, 2 Cor. 1. 8. where he
acquaints them with his Trouble which came to him in Asia, (of which Ephesus
was the Chief City) how he was pressed out of measure above strength, in so
much that he despaired even of Life: And in the next Verse he tells them, that
he had the Sentence of Death in himself: And then in the next words he
thankfully acknowledges God's Hand in delivering him from so great a Death.
All which Passages seem to refer very plainly to this Deadly Encounter with the
Beasts at Ephesus: Or at least it appears hence, (as the Learned Dr. Hammond
and Dr. Lightfoot acknowledge) that St. Paul was designed, appointed by the
Multitude to this Punishment, although God disappointed their Bloody Designs.
If it be objected, that the Apostle makes no mention of this among his
Dangerous and Bloody Adventures which he particularly recounts in 2 Cor. 11.
23, etc. This Answer may suffice, that the Apostle underwent more than he
particularly sets down; but in those general words [in Deaths oft] he
comprehends all: Yea, these very words may particularly refer to his fighting
with Wild Beasts, which certainly had been attended with Death, unless the
Divine Providence had in an extraordinary manner interposed. So that this
Objection is of no Force, and cannot hinder us from taking the words in their
proper meaning. In brief, I will say this, although perhaps none of these
forementioned Texts singly taken, may be thought sufficient to induce us to a
belief of what I have propounded; yet if we consider them altogether, I think
they will not fail to render it very probable. This is all I suggest, leaving
every one to determine as they please. Though St. Paul was delivered from so
great and imminet a Death, and that by no less than a Miracle perhaps, yet in
these Bloody Combats the Beasts generally got the better: yea, sometimes one
Lion was hard enough for Praeclara aedilitas! unus Leo, ducenti bestiarii. Cic.
Orat. pro Ses^.
two hundred Men; and when this happened, it was a Worthy and Noble Prize
indeed, for they always esteemed these Games according to the Number of the
Persons that were dispatched by the Beasts: when the most Men were killed upon
the Spot, the Sport was at the highest, which shows how Devilish it was.

But the latter sort of Prizes, viz. where Men fought with their own Kind, was
the worst. In these Bloody and Inhumane Matches, they first brought Slaves on
the Theater to combat one another, and afterward others of better Quality.
Besides, some were hired to undertake this Employment, and some were bred up
and disciplined to it. It grew an Art to Diet, to Arm, to fit them for this
Purpose. Nor can it be expressed how Id autem spectaculi genus erat quod omni
frequentia atque omni genere hominum celebratur, quo multitudo maxim
delectatur. Cic. Orat. pro Sestio.
the People were taken with this Sport, and how they flocked to it. No
Entertainment pleased them like this Bloody Fencing. Here they could kill Men
at their pleasure; by turning up the Thumb they could at any time adjudg the
Combatants to continue the Fight, and they had Power to keep them Fighting till
they died on the Place: And when any of them did so, others were presently
fetched and placed in their room, to fight with the Victor, till one of them
fell dead on the Spot. Lactantius has well expressed it thus; Irascuntur etiam
pugnantibus, nisi celeriter alter e duobus occisus est: and tanquam humanum
sanguinem sitiant, oderunt moras, alios illis compares dari poscunt
recentiores, ut quamprimum oculos suos satient. Lib. 6. c. 20.
They show themselves very angry, and grow enraged, unless one of the
Combatants be slain very speedily: and as if they thirsted after Humane Blood,
they hate all Delays, and call for other fresh Fighters that are not weary and
faint, but will briskly fall on, and thereby satiate the Eyes of the Spectators.

From these Passages we may be informed how mad the World was upon Slaughter
and Bloodshed: We see what strange Immoralities these Civilized People admitted
among them, what Barbarous and Outrageous Usages were approved of by them. This
I might well mention as one Instance of the Devil's working among them. But the
Christians continually declamed against those Bloody Games, they Preached and
wrote against these Inhumane Combats; and at last Eusebius. in vit. Constant. M.
l. 4.
the Christian Emperors strictly forbad them. You may read in the Ancient
Apologists, how these Unlawful and Mad Shows are struck at, and how the
Christians are particularly warned against them. A Christian was not permitted
to be a Spectator of them, but by his Profession and Character, he was obliged
to declare against them, and draw off others (if he could) from being present
at them. Hear the words of one of the most Learned Apologizers for the
Christian Religion against the Pagans; We, Athenagoras, in Legate. pro Christian.
says he, abstain from, and are averse to these Spectacles of the
Sword-Players, being persuaded that there is no great difference between being
a Spectator of these Bloody Prizes, and an Author of the Bloodshed there
committed. Thus the Primitive Christians showed their Abhorrence of these
Entertainments, and so at length they came to be wholly laid aside, and
accounted utterly unlawful. Thus this Work of the Devil was destroyed: which we
cannot but attribute to the Manifestation of the Son of God upon the Earth, and
to his Holy Institution, which promotes Tender-heartedness and Pity, and
condemns whatever is Savage and Bloody.

But the Slaughter and Murder of Souls are the worst and highest Cruelty, the
Main Work and Business of that Implacable Enemy of Mankind. Those Cursed
Spirits being fallen themselves from God, endeavor the Apostasy of all
Mankind; and this they do, by drawing Men into Error, and by tempting them to
Sin and Wickedness. They are as busy in debauching Men's Minds by Erroneous
Opinions and False Doctrines, as they are in any other Design; and they get as
much by it: for by corrupting Men's Understandings and Notions, they prepare the
way for all other Mischiefs to ensue. Heresies are of the Devil, and lead to
him; and therefore Polycarp knew what he said, when he called Marcion (that
Arch-Heretick) the firstborn of Satan. But the inveigling to Practical Error,
which is no other than Vice, gives him chiefly his Denomination of Tempter; and
consequently those who allure others to Vice, those who entice them to Evil
Courses, are to be called by no softer Terms, than those of Murderers and
Devils; for Tempting, i. e. drawing others to Sin, is properly the Work of the
Devil; this is that which he constantly practices, and takes so much delight
in. But the Blessed Founder of Christianity is a Savior and Lover of Souls,
who thus expostulated when he was on Earth; What is a Man profited, if he shall
gain the whole World, and lose his own Soul? or what shall a Man give in
exchange for his Soul? This Jesus was Loving and Kind-hearted, and submitted to
a painful and ignominious Death, to give an undeniable Demonstration of his
Compassion to the Souls of Men. He ascended the Cross, and shed his Blood
there, to convince the World how Tender he was of their Immortal Concerns, and
Everlasting Welfare: And let me speak a Great Word, He would even now leave all
his Glories, and die once more for Man, if it were necessary for the procuring
of his Happiness.

Lastly, Carnality, Lewdness and Uncleanness, may fitly be styled the Devil's
Works. It is well known, that these prevailed even in the most Solemn Rites and
Devotions of the Pagans. As the Poets represent the Gods Lewd and Lascivious,
so the most Serious Authors tell us of the Impure and Filthy Sacrifices, the
Villainous and Beastly Rites performed to them. They relate the Obscene Feasts
of Bacchus and Priapus, of Flora and Venus, and acquaint us that they kept
their Lupercalia, or Festivals of Pan, in running up and down naked, behaving
themselves in that lewd manner which cannot be named without injuring chaste
and modest Ears. Of the Eleusinian Solemnities, in Honor of Ceres and
Proserpina, we have some Account from Adv. Valentin.
Tertullian: and the Religious Ceremonies of Isis were as lewd and obscene,
says De Isid. and Osir. l. 1.
Plutarch. It is certain that Lewdness and Wantonness were the very Ingredients
of their Worship, and their very Temples were Stews. Arnobius makes it his
Business in his fifth Book, to show how obscene and unchaste, how immodest and
shameless their Rites and Ceremonies, their Stories and Relations of their Gods
were. In brief, Uncleanness has been so eminently confirmed to be the Work of
the Devil, that the Foul Fiends have sometimes assumed Bodies to act it in, as
S. Augustine. de civ. Dei. lib. 15. Bodin. contr. Wier.
some have thought. But Christ coming in the Flesh, destroyed even the Deeds of
the Flesh: he chose to be born of a Pure Virgin, that he might give a Pattern
of Spotless Purity in the World; and the Design of his Holy Institution, was to
Sanctify Men's Bodies and Souls, and to fit them for the unstained Pleasures of
another Life. Thus I have finished my Task, having largely and particularly
showed you what the Works of the Devil are, either such Works as are done by
that Evil Spirit, or such Vices and Practices in Men, as more nearly approach
to the Devilish Nature and Temper; and I have at the same time proved that our
Savior and his Religion, do overthrow and destroy these Works of the Infernal
Spirit.

I will only add a Critical Remark on that manner of Expression in the Text,
[(...)] that he may loose (our English Word, it is likely, coming from thence)
or dissolve, etc. for that is the exact rendering of the Word. This supposes
Bonds and Fetters: We were in Durance and Captivity, we were shut and locked up
Isa. 42. 7.
in the Prisonhouse, we were under the Power of Satan and Dominion of Sin: but
the Merciful Jesus came to rescue and redeem Mankind, to knock off their
Fetters, and to set them at Liberty. For this purpose the Son of God was
manifested, and for this only. He came not (as the Jews fondly imagined
concerning their Messiah) to be a Great Earthly Monarch, to wage War, and to
beat the Romans out of Judea, and to make his People Rich and Wealthy, and to
promote them to great Honors. This alas was a poor Design, and not worthy of
the Messiah: but he came to effect a thing of greater Moment, even of Universal
Concern, and that which is more Noble and Glorious than all Worldly Empire and
Sovereignty. He came to free his People from the Tyranny of Satan, to vanquish
the Prince of Darkness who had enslaved all Mankind.

Or, this Word gives us a true Notion of our Savior's Design, thus: The Devil
had corrupted Man, had been the great Instrument at first of depraving his very
Nature, and ever since he has made it his Work to debauch Men's Minds and
Manners, and by all ways imaginable, to render them like unto himself. Hereupon
the Son of God was sent, (...), that he might dissolve, defeat, undo these
Works of the Devil. This is the short and plain Account of the Grand End of
Christ's being manifested in the World, of his Incarnation, Doctrine, Life,
Sufferings, Death, and all his Undertakings whatsoever; it was no other than
this, to undo, to annul all that the Devil had done in the World. Christ's task
was to pull down what Satan had built up, to untie, to untwist all his Knots
and Intrigues, to baffle all his Plots and Contrivances, to unravel the
Enchantments of the Evil Spirit, to break the Snares of Satan, and to destroy
the Destroyer.

FINIS.
ERRATA.
PAge 3. line 27. read Iunius. P. 68. l. 22. prefix the Figure 7. P. 77. l. 10.
r. in the Margin (...) P. 118. toward the bottom, the Parentheses are
misplaced. P. 127. l. 20. r. a Mem for a Teth. P. 171. l. 7. r. Nun for Caph.
P. 217. l. 26. dele P. 270. l. 8. after Writer, add with others. P. 272. l. 13.
r. were. P. 275. l. 2. after dies make a Period. P. 290. l. 13. r. signifies,
l. 24. for Arrows r. Rods, l. 31. after Tribes, add, for it is certain that the
Jews and other Nations mutually borrowed from one another. P. 291. l. 3. after
Israelites, add (as well as these aped them). P. 318. l. 23. insert are. P.
337. l. 15. r. Christianity's.

Books printed for Jonathan Robinson, at the Golden-Lion in St. Paul's
Churchyard.
THE Holy Bible; containing the Old Testament and the New; with Annotations and
Parallel-Scriptures. To which is annexed, The Harmony of the Gospels; as also a
Reduction of the Jewish Weights, Coins and Measures, to our English Standards.
And a Table of the Promises in Scripture. By Samuel Clarke.

Synodicon in Gallia Reformata: Or, the Acts, Decisions, Decrees and Canons, of
those famous National Councils of the Reformed Churches in France. Wherein are
contained, 1. A most faithful and impartial History of the Rise, Growth,
Perfection and Decay of the Reformation in that Kingdom, with its fatal
Catastrophe upon the Revocation of the Edict of Nants, in the Year 1685. 2. The
Confession of Faith, and Discipline of those Churches. 3. A Collection of
Speeches, Letters, Sacred Politics, Cases of Conscience and Controversies in
Divinity, determined and resolved by those grave Assemblies. 4. Many excellent
Expedients for preventing and healing Schisms in the Churches, and for
re-uniting the dismembered Body of divided Protestants. 5. The Laws, Government,
and Maintenance, of their Colleges, Universities and Ministers; together with
their Exercise of Discipline upon Delinquent Ministers and Church Members. 6. A
Record of very many illustrious Events of Divine Providence relating to those
Churches. The whole collected and composed out of Original Manuscript Acts of
those Renowned Synods. A Work never before extant in any Language. In two
Volumes. By John Quick.

Books printed for Jonathan Robinson at the Golden-Lion, and John Wyat at the
Rose in St. Paul's Church^Yard.
A Practical Exposition on the Ten Commandments; with other Sermons. By the
Right Reverend Father in God, Ezekiel Hopkins, late Lord Bishop of Londonderry.

An Enquiry into the Constitution, Discipline, Unity and Worship of the
Primitive Church that flourished within the first three hundred Years after
Christ. Faithfully Collected out of the Extant Writings of those Ages. By an
impartial Hand. In two Parts.

Books printed for John Everingham, at the Star in Ludgate Street, near the
West end of St. Paul's Churchyard.
MIscellaneous Essays. By Monsieur St. Euremont. Translated out of French. With
a Character, by a Person of Honor here in England. By Mr. Dryden.

The Divine Art of Prayer: Containing the most proper Rules to pray well. With
diverse Meditations and Prayers sut^ble to the Necessities of Christians, useful
in every Family. To which are annexed, seasonable Prayers for Soldiers, both
in their Majesty's Army and Fleet.

Monarchia Microcosmi: The Origin, Vicissitudes and Period of Vital Government
in Man. For a further Discovery of Diseases incident to Humane Nature. By
Everard Maynwaring, M. D.

Books printed for John Wyat.
THE Christian Virtuoso; showing, That by being addicted to Experimental
Philosophy, a Man is rather Assisted than Indisposed to be a Good Christian. By
the Honorable Robert Boil Esquire.

Experimenta and Observationes Physicae. Wherein are briefly treated of several
Subjects relating to Natural Philosophy, in an experimental way. To which is
added, A small Collection of strange Reports. By the same Author.


