The Parliaments ANSWER TO The two petitions of the County of Buckingham, as
they were presented to both Houses by Knights, Esquires, Captains, and
Gentlemen, with a number of Freeholders:

Presented with a number of the same Shire in behalf of Mr. John Hambden, the
Lord Mandevile, Mr. Pym, Mr. Densill Hollis, Sir Arthur Hasilridge, and Mr.
Stroud.

With the manner of their coming through the City of London to the Parliament
House, with Papers in their hands: and of the manner of their presenting the
said Petition to the House.

Printed for H. F. 1641.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE, The house of Peers now assembled in PARLIAMENT: The
humble Petition of the Inhabitants of the County of Buckingham.
Shows,
THat whereas we hoped upon the happy Assembling of this present Parliament,
we should have had a speedy redress of those great pressures we had for many
years been under; but have hitherto been in great measure frustrate of our
hopes, by the strong counter-working of a malignant faction, whereby the
perfecting of Reformation is hindered, the endeavors of the House of Commons in
great part successelesse, our dangers grown upon us, by iterated plots,
Priests and other delinquents unpunished, to the encouragement of others:
Ireland near lost by practiced counsels, whiles thousands are butchered by
many cruelties, and to cut off all hopes of future Reformation, the very being
of Parliament endangered, by high and unexampled breach of Privileges, which
by our Protestation lately taken, we are bound by our lives and estates to
maintain, and in respect of that late attempt upon the honorable House of
Commons, we are now come to offer our ser^ice to that end, as resolved in their
just defense to live and dye.

And do therefore humbly pray, that this most honorable House will cooperate
with the House of Commons, in most speedy perfecting the most necessary work
of Reformatlon: Bringing to condign and examplary punishment, both wicked
counselors and other plotters and delinquents, that Ireland may be speedily
relieved, the Privileges of Parliament fortified against all future attempts,
and the whole Kingdom put into such a present posture of defense, that we may
be safe both from all practizes of the malignant party at home, and the
endeavors of any ill-affected States abroad.

And they shall pray, etc.
TO THE HONORABLE THE Knights, Citizens and Burgesses of the House of Commons
now assembled in Parliament.
THat whereas for many years past, we have lain under many great pressures,
which are clearly set forth in the late Remonstrance of the house of Commons,
the redress thereof, which has for a long time been by you endeavored, with
unwearied pains, though not with answerable success, having still Your
endeavors frustrated, or retarded, and we deprived of the fruit thereof, by a
malignant faction of Popish Lords and Bishops, and others; and now of late to
take from us all that little hope was left of a future reformation, the very
being of the Parliament shaken, and by the mischievous practizes of most wicked
counselors, the Privileges thereof broken in a desperate and unexpected
manner, and the Members thereof unassured of their lives; in whose safety the
safety of us and our posterity is involved, we hold it our duty, acccording to
our late Protestation, to defend and maintain the same persons and privileges
to the utmost power of our lives and estate. To which purpose we are now come,
to make the humble tender nf our service, and remain in expectation of your
command and Order, to the execution whereof we shall with all alacrity address
our selves to live by you, or to dye at your feet, against whomsover shall
illegally attempt upon you.

May it therefore please this Honorable Assembly to assist the ardent prayers
of your Petioners, that Popish Lords and Bishops may be forthwith outed the
House of Peers, that all Privileges of Parliament (Yours and Our posterities
inheritance) may be confirmed to you; avd that all evil counselors, the
Achans of this Commonwealth, may be given up to the hands of Justice; without
all which your Petitioners have not the least hope of Isreal's peace, or to reap
those glorious advantages which the fourteen months seed-time of your
unparalled end have given to their unsatisfied expectations. avours

Add they shall daily pray, etc.
THE PARLIAENTS ANSWER to the Petition of Buckinhingham-shire.
AFter this forementioned Petition was delivered up to the House of Commons,
they joyfully received it, and with great affection to the same. Buckingham
shire men standing and pressing toward the door, did all wait in expectation
of an answer, two or three hours at the least: when at length they were
called, but had no plenarie answer then, in regard that they had no concurrent
conference with the House of Peers. But report being made to the upper House
of the said Petition, they gave their ossent thereunto, so that it was
respectively voted in both Houses, that the said Mr. John Hambden, the Lord
Mandevile, Mr. Denzil Hollis, Sir Arthur Hasleridge, Mr. Pym, and Mr. Stroud,
should not be committed to the Tower, or any other place of custody whatsoever,
until the Parliamentall Process of Law had passed upon them: and withal the
House of Commons themselves affirmed, that they were partly confident, that
they were all innocent of the Articles of High Treason. Whereat the
Buckingham-shire men were ready to shout in acclamations, they were filled with
great joy: and most dutifully gave the Parliament all possible thanks, that may
be conceived: promising to defend and assist their Honors to the uttermost of
their lives, and fortunes. Then the Parliament graciously accepted their
Petition, and gave them thanks for their so free a Demonstration of their duty
toward them. Thus all Buckinghamshire men being fully satisfied in their
desires, departed with all allacrity to their lodging^ in London.

THE MANNER OF THEIR COMING IN TO THE CITY OF London with papers in their
hands to the Parliament House.
AFter intelligence was given to Buckingham-shire, that Mr. Hambden being
Knight of that Shire, the Lord Mandevile, Mr. Pym, Sr. Arthur Hasilrige, Sr.
Densil Hollis, and Mr. Stroud, were impeached of High Treason by His Majesty*
Moreover that His Majesty was intended to have them committed to the Tower
thereof: They were all unanimously resolved to Petition both to the King and
Parliament, on behalf of them all. The News was transported into the Shire:
but last Friday, late at night, and warants being given out to certify the
Country of the same: five thousand, or very nigh that number, were presently
assembled, and presented them submissively to go with the Petition to London:
and if they had had longer time, there would have been three times more. But
the Petition being made, and these men ready attending the fame, approached
near the aspect of the City of London, where they came through Leonard
Shoreditch, through Bishops-gate, and so through Cheapside, onward to
Westminster: where there was above three thousand on Horseback, every man with
a Paper in his hand, intimating that they had a Petition to present to the
Honorable Court, and the other were on foot: but they reached in all from the
Exchange to Newgate, three and four in a rank. Coming to Westminster, they
acquainted the House of their Petition, and humbly presented it unto them,
where they had afterward at the conference of both Houses, a correspondent
answer given them respectively, as is aforementioned.

FINIS.
HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE

