THE PLAGUE OF THE HEART: Its Nature and Quality: Original and Causes: Signs
and Symptoms: Prevention and Cure.
WITH Directions for our behavior under the present Judgment and Plague of
the Almighty.

By JOHN EDWARDS Minister of Trinity Parish in Cambridge.

CAMBRIDGE: Printed by John Field, for Edmund Beechinoe, Bookseller in
Cambridge, 1665.

To the Inhabitants of the Town of Cambridge, especially to my loving
Parishioners of Trinity, GRACE and PEACE.
AS you have the Plague of the Body wasting in your streets, so you are to take
notice of a worser, even the Spiritual Plague of your Hearts. To this purpose I
hope this short Discourse may be somewhat serviceable, which (even when it
shall please God to take away the Bodily Disease) may still be useful to you,
to guard you against the Spiritual, but more poisonous Distemper. It is
recorded to the honor of Queen Eleanor, that when her Royal Husband in the
Holy War was wounded with a poisoned Knife by a desperate Saracen, the
Incomparable Lady sucked the poison out of his Wound. A signal instance of her
Love to him! Sin, Beloved, is Poison: I wish unfeignedly, I could by any holy
skill and method, ease you of that more dangerous Venom at your Hearts: O that
this Paper might prove a Plaster to draw it! It is true, I must confess my
self one of the meanest and unworthiest of all those Physicians and Guides of
Souls that are in the Church: I may not be able to treat so successfully of
this Spiritual Disease as those worthy persons, who are of greater practice and
larger experience. But I request you, that when you make trial of what is here,
you would call upon God for a blessing; and if you find any good, thank God for
it, not me. I will not beg your excuse, by telling you these are very slender
Preparations for the Press; for I chose rather to hasten this little Thing, and
give it you as it is, then to loose the opportunity of doing good, by making it
better. There is nothing in it can render it worthy of the public view, but
its seasonableness, and your kind acceptance of it. Many of the Directions
which you will meet with, I gave you lately in some of my Sermons which I
Preached since the Hand of God has been heavy upon this Town. I must tell you,
I designed not language, but living well. It is not required that the
Physicians Bill be curiously Penned, but that the Medicines be there faithfully
prescribed. Besides, a gaudy and flaunting style is no ways suitable to these
Mournful Times.

I have only this to beg of you, that you would be mindful of me at the
Throne of Grace, beseeching the Lord that he would crown my Ministry with the
conversion and salvation of many souls, and that he would make me feel the
power and influence of those saving Truths upon my own heart which I deliver
unto you. And my earnest Prayer for you shall be, that ye may walk worthy of
the Lord unto all pleasing, being fruitful in every good work, and increasing
in the knowledge of God: that ye may approve things that are excellent, that ye
may be sincere, and without offense, till the day of Christ; being filled with
the fruits of righteousness, which are by Jesus Christ unto the glory and
praise of God. The Great and Good God multiply his Gifts and Graces upon you:
The God of all blessings bless you and yours, and keep you from sin and
sickness. This is the earnest Prayer of

Yours in all Christian service J. E.
Cambridge November. 11th 1665.
THE PLAGUE OF THE HEART.
1 KINGS 8. 38. -- Which shall know every man the Plague of his own heart.
THese words are part of King Solomon's prayer, which he made at the dedication
of the Temple: the drift of the whole is, that God would be pleased, whenever
any judgments and calamities befall the Israelites, to hear their requests,
and answer their prayers put up in that place, and to remove their crosses, and
forgive their sins. This is the design of the Prayer; Chap. 9.
and the Lord appeared to Solomon afterward, assuring him, Verse. 3.
that he had heard this his supplication. Here then is a refuge and an escape
for penitent sinners, against Distresses, Plagues, and Troubles; But every
Prayer will not prove effectual; observe therefore the several Requisites
fairly intimated in this Holy Address of Solomon, namely, confessing of Gods
name, confession of sins, and turning from them; and then lastly, the prayer
and supplication must be made by those Israelites which shall know every man
the Plague of his own heart.

Which shall [ know.]

1. Take notice of.

2. Lament and be sorry for.

3. Avert and cure.

[ Every man.] Every one, all persons of both sexes, of all qualities.

[ The Plague.] 1. The stroke, the blow; that is the Original signification.

2. Any great judgment sent by God for the punishing of sin, the lashes of the
Divine Nemes^s, strokes on the estates or bodies of men.

3. That signal stroke of God, that Plaga Dei, that infectious and fatal
Disease which we call the Sickness with an Emphasis. Thus the word imports, but
here it is applied to the

[ Heart.] 1. The soul and its faculties, principally; they received a blow, a
foul knock in Adam; and since they are bruised daily by our venturing at the
breach of Gods Laws.

2. The life and practice, consequently; for out of the Heart are the issues of
Life.

So that as we consider in the Heart in man's Body, its passages, apartments,
and ventricles; so here we may well understand, both the corrupt principles and
evil dispositions of our natures, and the vanities and follies of our lives,
which are but the emanations of the former.

[ His own Heart.] The man is to look into his own breast, and see if he find
any tokens there, he must live at home, he has work to do within doors.

So that I might present you with an Observation from every word; but my design
at present is only to take occasion from these words to treat of the Plague of
the Heart; for though (as I have intimated already) the word here used, does
not properly and primarily signify the Disease of the Pestilence, yet in the
Verse foregoing it is joined with (Sickness) [whatsoever Plague, Ve^se 37.
whatsoever sickness there be,] and it plainly referrs to the Pestilence or
Plague Emphatically so called. [ If there be Pestilence in the Land] One Plague
suggested another to the good man's thoughts: and indeed it is no unusual thing
with pious persons, to make even the diseases of their bodies, administer
matter of devout meditation for the health of their souls: there is nothing
that they see, but it brings God to their thoughts, there is nothing in Nature,
nothing in Providence that they converse with, but their sanctified minds can
make some good use of: a devout Fancy turns earth into heaven, and all
secular occurrences into something Divine and Spiritual. Did not our Savior
make use of Parabolicall speeches to slip in to the fancies, and prevail upon
the affections of his Auditors, and to represent to them heavenly matters more
forcibly and lively? to this purpose serve all those excellent Similitudes and
choice Metaphors which the Holy Scripture is full of; amongst the latter, that
which I have now pitched upon is no contemptible one.

Sin is the distemper and sickness of the soul; which the good Psalmist knew
well enough, when he made that Petition, Heal my soul, Psalm. 41. 4.
for I have sinned against thee. Neither is Sin any light and inconsiderable
distemper: all the laws and rules concerning the Leprosy of old, do but
signify to us more plainly the grievous nature of sin: the very words and
doctrines of vicious men and heretics, are compared by St Paul to a Canker or
Gangreen: 2 Timothy 2. 17.
nay, the sinner is a most wretched Lazar, and his soul a very Spittle of
diseases, Isai. 1. 5, 6.
sicknesses, sores and bruises; the whole head is sick, the whole heart faint,
from the sole of the foot, even unto the head, there is no soundness in it, but
wounds, and bruises, and putrefying sores. And then (as the sum of all) the
sinner is an Infected person, he has the Plague, the worst of Plagues, the
Plague of the Heart. It will be worth our while, to search into the nature of
this deadly disease, to show the resemblance between the spiritual and bodily
Plague, and to know the nature of the one by the other.

They agree as to their general Nature, and may be fitly expressed in the same
terms; for the best masters of Physic acquaint us, that the Pestilence is a
dangerous Poison which corrupts and invenoms the blood, and taints the spirits,
and spoils the agreement and harmony of the parts of man's body. And Sin is the
Poison that seizes on our souls and spreads it self into our members and
senses. Of the wicked men which imagine mischief in their hearts, the Psalmist
says, Psalm 140. 2, 3.
Adders poison is under their lips: The venom soon makes way from the Heart to
the lip. And if (according to St James James 3* 8.
) The tongue be an unruly evil, full of deadly poison, the Heart is much more
so. In short, the least sin is rank poison, it corrupts and debauches our
minds, perverts our faculties, destroys our good principles, it forces even
nature it self, it is violent, and disagreable to rectified reason, it is
improportionate to our souls, it puts all out of order and due frame, and
brings in unspeakable confusion. Poison cannot make greater havoc on our
bodies, then Sin on our immortal souls. But because the Essences and abstract
natures of things are hard to find out, we shall view it further in its Effects
and products, and in its Cure too: as Physicians say, that by these we shall
certainly know what the disease is. But before we come to those, let us stay a
while and consider the Original and Causes of the Spiritual Plague, or the way
how it is propagated.

And in this too, as well as in the other, it will appear that the Bodily and
Ghostly disease resemble one another.

For, not to speak here of the primary cause of all diseases, and of the
Pestilence more signally (which all but Atheists acknowledge to be the hand of
God,) nor to reckon up all other causes which are assigned, many of which are
in the dark and can scarcely be explained, without a piece of old Philosophy
called Occult Qualities;

The two main Natural and Secundary causes of the Pestilence, may very well
intimate unto us the rise of the Spiritual Plague; (viz.) Inward corruption,
Outward infection.

1. That original corruption and pollution which we derived from the loins of
our first Parents: which though indeed it may seem to be a cause of the second
rank, yet because we bring it into the world with us, and it is rivetted so
fast into the hearts of the best here on earth, because it is something bred
within and brought up with us; therefore I call it the Inward corruption, and
that which answers to the putrefaction of the humors in the body, which is the
root of the Pestilence. And thus there being something corrupted within,

2. It Is no wonder that there is an Outward infection and Corruption (the
corruption of our ways) that is, Mich 7. 3.
that we communicate the corruption unto others, and are again infected by the
vicious world. For as we experience that men by lying or ^itting with infected
persons, or by keeping something on which the contagion has seized, or by
taking in unholsome vapors and exhalations with the common air, have the
Plague derived unto them; just so is Sin propagated and increased: Whilst we
more nearly converse with our wicked neighbors, we participate of that fatal
poison, which will destroy both them and us.

But let us pass from the Causes to the Signs and Symptoms of this Spiritual
Plague, by which I mean all the sad attendants and consequences of the disease;
and here we will set down those several Passions, Tokens, and Indications by
which men commonly judge of the Bodily Plague.

I begin first with the excessive Heat and Inflammation which attends the
disease: the Sinner is one always in a fever; and therefore that expression of
the Evangelicall Prophet is worth our notice, who reproves the Jews for
inflaming themselves with Idols; Isa. 57. 5.
and not only the fond worshipping of Idols, but every sinful passion and
pursuit of lust is furious and enraged, fierce and fiery, and (which is a sad
truth) these flames are but a prologue to everlasting burnings. But as a man in
a violent feavour is sick and weak, and yet so strong that he is able enough to
beat his best friends, and those that would hold him within his bed; so fares
it with every sick sinner. Which leads me to the second Symptom (which
naturally follows from that excessive heat;) namely

Inordinate motions, restlessnesse and unrulinesse. And here I might lead you
to the sinners chamber; draw aside the curtains, and let you see how he tumbles
and tosses: you may think he sleeps soundly; yet you cannot say he takes his
rest. The wicked are like the troubled Sea, when it cannot r^st, whose waters
cast up mire and dirt: there is no peace; I saiah 57. 20, 21.
says my God, to the wicked. It is Sin that overturns the course of nature,
and raises tumults both in the world and in the sinners conscience, and at last
these exorbitances, these hot fits, bring the man to distraction. Which is the
third Symptom of the disease, for sin is a violent madness, a strange
distraction of the mind and reason, and ^n alienating of a man from himself: In
this Phrentick state was St Paul once, when he punished and persecuted many of
the Saints; you have the confession from his own mouth that he was exceedingly
mad against them. Acts 26. 11.
And idolatry (which you heard before was an inflammation) is in another
Prophets account no less then madness. Jer. 50. 38.
Sin then is the worst delirium and frenzy, for in this mad humor men abuse
and barbarously wound their own souls, which the Wise man knew well when he
said of sinners (they lay wait for their own blood, Prove. 1. 18.
they lurk privily for their own lives.) And this madness is long and lasting,
(as the same Preacher delivers it) (the heart of the sons of men is full of
evil; and madness is in their heart while they live.) I might add another
Symptom near of kin to this, which sometimes attends the Bodily Plague, but
always the Spiritual. I mean a strange vertigo and meagrim which every wicked
man is troubled with; else he would not stagger so shamefully as he does, and
decline his duty, and giddily rush into evil company, and suffer himself to be
shaken from the truth, and (as the Apostle phrases it) [ be carried about with
every wind of doctrine.] Again look as when the Poison has seized on the whole
mass of blood and got possession of the heart, the usual and equal mixture of
the blood is spoiled, and thence follows a coagulation and stagnation of the
spirits: so is it in the Spiritual Plague, which makes the sinner cold and
dull, benumbed, and indisposed to every virtuous action: his heart like
Naballs, dies within him, and he becomes as a stone. The Holy Spirit is
stifled; then it is no wonder that the man grows stupid, that his pulse is so
low and languide: swoonings and faintings are no unusual things in the Plague.

But then in the next place, the blood being putrified and invenomed, and it is
motion retarded, we see that boiles and swellings, spots and the like tokens
discover themselves in the outward parts. And are there not as sad breakings
out of sin, are there not fouler blemishes and spots upon every wicked man?
else what mean those palpable risings of lust and uncleanness? What are those
swellings and tumors of pride? What are those dismal characters and worser
sort of Carbuncles in the intemperate person and common drunkard? What are
those lamentable and apparent marks, those blows and bruises which oppression
and cruelty are the cause of? What are those curses and oaths which I hear from
the swearers mouth? such breaking out at the lips, is no good sign in the
spiritual patient. Alas! how many ways does a naughty heart discover it self?
How many Plague-sores does the sinner carry about with him? Upon this must
follow another effect and consequent, namely, Filthiness, pollution, and
noisomness: but of this loathsome attendant on the Spiritual Plague, I shall
speak some what when I come to consider the cure of it*

The next sad companions of the Plague (as of most sicknesses) are anguish, and
aches, pain and disease. Sure I am they are the inseparable associates of the
Plague of sin; out of the corruption of man's heart is soon bred the worm of
conscience. Horror and a certain looking for of judgment, a sting and
tortures, these are things that flagitious sinners know at the first naming:
and as wounds and sores do usually prick and pain most toward night, so when
death approaches, the guilty conscience finds it is torments doubled and
redoubled upon it.

I might add another Indication and Symptom, which is common to the Plague
with all other sicknesses, and that is a certain nauseating and refusing of
food, as it must needs be when the palate is out of taste and cannot relish,
and the corrupt matter has infected the stomach. Thus is it with a sick
sinner, he has lost his spiritual taste, and cannot savor the things of God,
but in the mean time the sweets and delights of the wicked world strike briskly
upon his vitiated palate, and are taken down with a huge complacency.

But to leave these more common Signs, I pass to another direct and proper
Symtome, which is the Pestilentiall malignity and Contagion, which ever waits
upon the Plague, it is of that ill nature that it propagates and derives it
self from one to another. Adam was the first that had the Spiritual Plague,
and he got it by eating the forbidden fruit, and since it has sadly spread and
descended from one to another. All sin to this day is Epidemicall and catching:
we are corrupted our selves, and we corrupt others.

How many are there that take a course to damn themselves? but that is not
all, they must damn their friends and neighbors too. This, this is the nature
of sin, it diffuses it self in a large circle, it runs as in a train, and does
mischief on all sides, it over-runs the whole man, soul and body.

Our Inward man, that is first depraved and infected. Alas! the brain is
faulty, the understanding blind and dark, it is dull to conceive what is good
and virtuous, but it pursues vain, unprofitable, and fruitless notions, it is
stuffed with carnal reasonings, fleshly wisdom, fond disputes, pride and
false principles: there is error, folly, rashness, and unbelief reigning in
the judgment: Romans 1. 21.
We are vain in our imaginations, and our foolish heart is darkened. Jer. 4 22.
We are wise to do evil, but to do good we have no knowledge.

In the affections too there is inordinacy, coldness and inpotency, a loving of
what we should hate, and a hating of what we should love.

The infection seizes also on our memories; as Thucydides tells us of some
persons who were infected in that great plague at Athens, that by reason of
that sad distemper they forgot themselves, their friends and all their
concernments. Most certain it is that by the Spiritual infection men forget
God and their duty, and their memories are only tenacious in holding what is
evil, especially vanities and injuries.

The will likewise receives no little damage by the contagion, it being made
weak and feeble, and wholly indisposed to good, it draws back at the proposal
of virtue, but is resolute, obstinate and stubborn in the ways of
unrighteousness. The conscience is dull and dead, and (as the Apostle well
expresses it) is seared with a hot iron, 1 Timothy 4. 2.
it discharges not it is office aright either in acquitting or condemning, but
is sadly insensible, presumptuous and desperate.

I might proceed to show you how all the parts and members of the body are
tainted and infected, Romans 6. 13.
and are (in the Apostles words) instruments of unrighteousness unto sin.

But I will say something of the adherency and pertinacy of this Spiritual
disease, the infection sticks close and cleavs to our nature, Levit. 14. 41.
it is like the fretting leprosy in the wall; the wall must be pulled down
before it can be extirpated. We must be striving every day against our lusts,
but they will not be quite rooted out, the leprosy of the soul will not wholly
be removed till the wall be thrown down, till the house be dissolved, even our
house of clay. And as we see the Pestil^nce lies still and dormant for a long
time, and then breaks forth more furiously, being rouzed (as it were) from
sleep, it gets up and spreads it arms wider, to take in greater numbers into
it is fatal embraces: so is it oftentimes with this Spiritual distemper, it
seems to be quelled and conquered, but soon after it regains it is strength and
by the malice of that evil Spirit it makes fresh assaults upon us, and we are
brought into it is subjection more then ever.

Lastly, That which brings up the rear in the Body of sin, is the decay of
strength, weakness, universal languor, and a sudden approach of death. For as
in the disease now reigning, the spirits are seized upon, their strength and
vigor is exhausted, and so consequently, the motions and functions of the body
are hindered and destroyed, nature is debilitated, and the strength fails; so
does the Infected Sinner grow sicker and weaker, fainter and feebler every day,
disabled to perform any offices of Christianity. And the case being thus, death
is making it is fatal approaches; as we see in Infected Persons, when the
poison has fully seized on the throne of life, and it is retinue, the vital
spirits, nothing but death is exspected; the throbbs at the heart, and the
faint and uneven pulses, are but as so many sad tolles of the Passing Bell: so
may you even Ring out for the sinner; after so many sad Symptoms that I have
named, it is no wonder that he dies, and that being dead in sin, he also dies
eternally.

The disease then being (in it self) mortal, let us learn from the Causes and
Symptoms, what may be the most effectual way to prevent it, and preserve our
selves from it.

In order then to Prevention and a happy Cure,

Labor to know the disease; it is true here, as in other distempers, the
perfect knowledge of them is half the cure. Do therefore what thou can, to
see the odiousness of sin in it self, and how loathsome it makes us in the eyes
of God, who is of purer eyes then to behold iniquity. All the laws of old about
uncleaness, (as I have told you before) were designed on purpose, to express
the pollution of sin; for there is nothing but this can defile us, nothing but
this can separate us from the favor of God. The Poets indeed present some of
their Gods obscene and debauched, lustful and impure; but our God, as he is
purity it self, so nothing can make him abhor a creature, but what is
contrary to it. It Is sin therefore, and that only which stains and defiles us,
which slurrs and debases us, in the midst of all our riches and honors.

Again, In order to the Cure, know that the Spiritual Plague is the worst sort
of Plagues: all the Plagues inflicted on Pharaoh, were nothing in comparison of
his hardness of heart: all the boyls and blains, the froggs and lice, and
swarms of flies, were not half so dangerous and destructive, as the Plague of
his heart. For consider with me, that

1. This seizes on the best part, the soul of man, which was made for God, and
bears his Superscription.

2. This being a Spiritual Plague, is therefore Invisible, and hard to be
discerned; this, rather then the other, may be called the Pestilence that
walks in darkness, it destroys silently; and this M^rthering-piece (as they
say of a piece charged with white Powder) goes off without a Report. Some sins
there are, which like Plants and Herbs, have no visible motion in their growth,
they advance by degrees, softly and insensibly; though it must be confessed,
there are others which are so plain and palpable, written in so large a
Character, that he that runs may read them. Some persons indeed there are, that
are so foully Infected, that every one may see, that their spot is not the spot
of Gods Children: Deuteronomy. 32. 5.
But there are others, that are not so much as suspected, and they may pass for
Clear-Corps, let the spiritual Searchers be never so inquisitive. The Prophet
Jeremy gives the reason, Jer. 17. 9.
[ The heart is deceitful above all things, and desperately wicked, who can
know it?] The scene of vice is the Heart, which is remote; and therefore to be
vicious and to be known to be so, are two things. Thus, though in the late
Philosophers sense, The mind be more knowable then the body, yet the diseases
of the forner, are harder to be discovered then those of the latter,

3. As it destroys more silently, so more suddenly then and Bodily Plague; it
hides it is fatal shafts for a while, but then it surprises the poor sinner
unawares, and wounds him without hope of cure.

4. It sticks closer, and stays longer: this is that which does so easily beset
us; this is (in the Apostles language) Sin that dwells in us, Heb. 12. 1.
which is hereditary and inseparable; and (as I have told you already,) Rom 7.
17.
is like that fretting leprosy, which could not be removed, without
demolishing of the house it self. It Is sad to consider, how inveterate this
Plague grows by custom and frequent practice. Can the Ethiopian change his
skin, Jer. 13. 23.
or the Leopard his spots? then may ye also do good that are accustomed to do
evil.

5. It spreads further: it diffuseth it is poison on all our duties, actions,
and performances: the poison is in the very fountain, and so derives it is
hurtful nature to the streams; or, like polluted vessels, we taint all that is
poured into us; Isa. 64. 6.
We are all as an unclean thing, and all our righteousness is as filthy rags.
Our most solemn attendances on God in his Ordinances, our praying, hearing,
reading, and conversing, as well as all our actions in our particular callings,
are more or less, touched with this Infection. Therefore

6. It destroys greater numbers; not unfitly is sin compared to leaven, a
little whereof leavens the whole lump; Which I take to be the meaning of those
words of the Preacher, Ecclesiastes 9. 18.
[One sinner destroys much good:] he is able to infect whole Families and
Towns, if he be not carefully shut up: the Bodily Plague may kill it is
thousands, but this it is ten thousands. You have a Bill brought in every
fortnight, to tell you how many dye of the former; but alas, how many souls
every week perish by the latter? If you had the total of those who are
infected and dye of the Plague of sin, not one Parish would be found clear, no
not one house, which had not cause to put up a more pathetick Prayer, then [
Lord have mercy on us.] More souls perish then bodies. The Bill of Mortality
runs high, Mat. 7. 13.
[ Broad is the way that leads to destruction, and many there be which go in
thereat.] That was a great Increase in the days of Noah, Genesis 6. 12.
When all flesh had corrupted it is way upon earth.

7. This is the cause o^ all other Plagues: the forbidden fruit, as if it had
been strangely impoysoned, shattered the goodly frame of our first Parents
bodies; and their posterity in all succeeding ages have fared abundantly the
worse for that sinful surfeit.

But besides this, they are indamaged on another account, their own actual
sins, and the enormities of their lives, have some of them in their own nature
bred distempers in their bodies, and all of them have moved God to punish them
with several sorts of diseases, with the dreadful Pestilence, in a more
signal manner, and with the direful Plagues of War; Famine and Scarcity.

The design of all this, is to stir thee up whosoever thou art, to consider
well the Plague of thy own Heart, to understand how destructive it is to thee.
There will be great hopes of thy welfare, if thou once thoroughly know thy
danger. Do thou then desire to be delivered from thy body of sin? Is it a
body of death unto thee? Is it heavy, uneasy, and burdensome to thee? it is a
sign it begins to mortify. Art thou so sensible of thy sin, that thou hate
it with a perfect hatred, and even loathest thy self for the commission of it?
Art thou willing to be ruled by the Spiritual Physicians, and true Lovers of
Souls, who advise thee to beware of sin, and call upon thee, and beseech thee
not to drink poison, for it will be thy death?

In a word, Art thou sensible of thy sickness and malady, and have thou
attained to this piece of knowledge, (namely) to understand that thou can not
cure thy self? Let that of the Prophet, or of God rather, by his mouth persuade
thee of the truth of this Aphorism, ^os. 13. 9.
[ Oh! Israel, thou have destroyed thy self, but in me is thy help.]

This also let me add, That delays and demurrs are unspeakably dangerous in
this affair. Alas, poor souls, now is the time for you to see your Plague, and
understand your misery; for if you stay till death, then indeed will you see it
with a witness. Oh! then the guilty soul will know what it is to be void of
grace and holiness, but it will not know how to help and recover it self. So it
is, that one minutes delay may cost thee thy life.

Look out then for a Physician presently; Naaman when he had the leprosy,
repaired to the Prophet. Some there are, that nominate a particular Saint, as a
proper Physician, for every distinct disease: and St Sebastian has the Plague
for his charge belike. Sure it is, that there are Quacks and Empricks enough in
the world, who can palliate the disease, and skin over the wound, but know not
how to cure either. There are Doctors who prescribe Physic, which leaves the
Patient as sick as it found him: he is sick at Heart still; I, there indeed
lies the distemper, at the Heart: the cure must be wrought within, the
applications must be such, as are able, not only to stint and silence the pain
for a while, to mitigate and assuage the grieved part, but to remove even the
very cause of the distemper. Wine and merry company, the pleasures and
entertains of the world, their jollities and catches may sing the man's sorrow
asleep, and flatter his disease for a time; but haeret lateri lethalis arundo,
the poisoned Arrow sticks fast in him, and the disease by such methods as this
is not eradicated. Thus there are Physicians of no value, miserable comforters
to the sick sinner, who (with the Woman in the Gospel) may spend all he has
upon them, and yet be never the better. But there is balm in Gilead, there is a
Physician there: Whether should we go but unto Christ? he has the words of
eternal life. But be sure you be not defective in these following things.

1. Have a good opinion of Him: great hopes may be conceived of thy doing well
if thou likest thy Physician.

2. Despise not the meanest advice: if it be but [ wash and be clean,] hearken
unto it. The cheapest Medicine may be the best. But

3. If it should be chargable, and must cost thee pains, refuse not the Physic
upon that account; Or

4. If it seem strong and bitter, no ways pleasant and toothsome, take it down
thankfully; as we take common Physic, and are content to be sick, that we may
be well.

Thou being thus prepared beforehand, and answering affirmatively to that
question which our Savior put to the diseased; [ Will thou be made whole?] I
commend unto thee these following Preservatives and Antidotes against the
Plague of the Heart.

The first is a holy fear of the Spiritual Plague. Be afraid to offend God.
Joseph made use of this preservative, when he was set upon and assaulted by his
lascivious Mistress, Genesis 39. 9.
[ How can I do this great wickedness, and sin against God?] So true is that of
Solomon, Prove. 14. 16.
[ A wise wan fears, and departs from evil.] That we may then avoid the
infection of sin, let us be working out our salvation with fear and trembling:
Isa. 8. 13.
let us sanctify the Lord of Hosts, and let him be our fear, and let him be
our dread: And let Christ his Advice to his Apostles prevail here, Mat. 10. 28.
[ Fear not them which kill the body, but are not able to kill the soul; but
rather fear him, which is able to destroy both soul and body in hell.

The second rule for preventing the Spiritual Plague is, that we shun all
Infected places and persons.

1. All places and dwellings where sin takes up it is abode, and keeps open
house, for the entertainment of all comers. Such are those Schools of Vice,
Shops of Sin, and Nurseries of Profaneness and Lewdness, which generally are
erected in every City and great Town. We must be careful that we Walk not in
the counsel of the ^^godly, nor stand in the way of sinners, nor sit in the
seat of the scornful; or, in the chair of Pestilences, (as the Septuagint
render it.) But the places are to be avoided

2. For the persons sake. You are therefore to reckon notorious sinners, as
those that have the Plague-sores upon them: by associating with them, you
partake of their sin; your commerce with them draws the infection to your
selves. This is the reason of St Paul's counsel which he gave his Ephesians,
Ephesians. 5. 11
[Have no fellowship with the unfruitful works of darkness.] And of Solomon's
dehortation, [ Enter not into the path of the wicked, Prove. 4 14, 15.
and go not into the way of evil men, avoid it, pass not by it, turn from it
and pass away.] And more particularly he guards us against the strange Woman,
as if she (as well as others of her wicked profession) were Infected, Prove. 5.
8.
[Remove thy way far from her, and come not nigh the door of her house;] for
(as he adds) [ Whosoever touches her, Prove. 6. 29.
shall not be innocent.] The Psalmists practice and resolution should be our
pattern, Psalm. 26. 4, 5, 6
[ I have not sat with vain persons, neither will I go in with dissemblers: I
have hated the Congregation of evil doers, and will not sit with the wicked:]
and it follows, [ I will wash my hands in innocence, and so will I compass
^^ine Altar, O Lord.] The Good man washed his hands, before he conversed with
God; but had he come just then out of wicked company, he had had much more
reason to have done so. The Church Story reports, that St John, and Polycarp
(his Scholar) made all the haste they could out of the Bath, when they espied
C^rinthus, that Arch-here^ick, to be there, as if they feared infection from
the very water that man's limbs were washed in. And concerning that Martyr and
Disciple of St John, (even now named) we are told, that it was his usual
custom to stop his ears at the wicked speeches of some that lived in his time.
You know who it was, that made a Covenant of Chastity with his eyes; and he was
a Wise man that wishes us to make a vow of temperance with the same sense;
that is, that we look not on the wine when it sparkles in the Glass. This man's
Father fell foully, by a lascivious glance upon Bathsheba; and therefore, it is
likely he guarded that sense better for the future; and he desires God, to Set
a watch over his mouth, and keep the door of his lips, that he might shut out
Infection there. We shall do well to stop up all the avenues and ways by which
sin usually enters; we must not approach so much as the confines of Satan's
Ki^gdom; we must abstain from all appearance of evil, 1 These 5. 22.
shunning the occasions of sin, Ep. Jud. 23. ^
and hating even the garment spotted by the flesh.

The third effectual Preservative against the infection of sin, is a holy
confidence, undauntedness, and trusting in God: For as we see, that a fearful
fancy and imagination, melancholy and a dejected spirit, have brought diseases
upon men's bodies; so is it as true, that fearfullness and a desponding spirit,
have betrayed men to the commission of sin. Then therefore we consult our own
welfare, and the health of our souls, when we confide and rely upon God. But
this must be done in the way of duty and Prayer.

In the next place then, get the Fire of devotion to air your houses, to warm
your hearts, to inflame your souls. Observe therefore the Connection of the
words prefixed to this Discourse, [ Which shall know every man the Plague of
his own heart, and spread forth his hands toward this house.] While our hands
are lifted up in devout Prayer, our spiritual enemies cannot prevail. Be sure
then daily to use this perfume, this incense of Prayer; this is an excellent
remedy against the Spiritual Plague.

To this belongs Confession, and an humble acknowledgment of our sinful ways;
by this we may disgorge our selves, when our consciences gripe us, and sin
makes us sick; Psalm 32. 3, 4.
by this we cleanse and ease our souls. [ When I kept silence, (says that good
King) my bones waxed old through my roaring all the day long, my moisture was
turned into the drought of summer.] These were the sad effects of his sinful
silence, and hiding of his sin; but the remedy follows, Verse. 5.
[ I acknowledge my sin unto thee, and mine iniquity have I not hid.] Uncover
therefore thy folly, and make thy breast bare before God; as I have seen
diseased Cripples lying in the midst of the streets, opening their bodies, and
showing their grievous wounds and sores, and then by hideous lamentations,
extorting charity and pity from beholders. We read that H^z^kiah took a lump
of figgs and laid it on the boil which he had, and so recovered. Alas! How
many are there, that (with our first Parents) use figg leaves for their
Spiritual sores and Plagues, concealing their faults, and hiding them, if it
were possible, Prove. 28. 13.
from the eyes of God? But, He that covers his sin, shall not prosper; as we
see many have perished. of the Plague, because they would not make it known.

Confession must be accompanied with grief, and sorrow, and hatred of sin; such
a sorrow as pricks the very heart: this will break the boil, and take down the
swelling. Beg then a broken and a contrite heart, and the cure is half done.

Now for to perfect the Work; the Blood of Jesus, applied by a lively faith, is
a sovereign r^m^dy. Christ crucified is more effectual for the cure of our
spiritual Maladies, then that brazen S^rp^nt was of old to the Israelites, for
the healing of those that were bitten and stung with fiery Serpents. Believe
then in this Jesus, steadfastly look up unto him, Isa. 53. 5.
for with his stripes we are healed. The Physicians Blood is the only Medicine
for the Spiritual Patient; this alone can wash out the spots of sin, this is
that fountain opened for sin, Zac. 13. 1.
and for unclean^ss. Let us here cleanse our polluted and corrupted natures;
let that sun of righteousness arise upon us, Mal. 4. 2.
with healing in his wings, hiding our sins with his m^rits, healing our
natures by his Sacred Spirit.

And this must be effected by Evangelicall Faith, which purifies the heart: By
this then we are to apply the gracious Promises of the Gospel, Acts. 15. 9.
which are made and prepared on purpose, to cleanse us from all filthiness of
flesh and spirit. Nay, 2 Cor. 7. 1.
these are not only Purgatives to remove the corrupt humors and infectious
mass, but they are Cordials to refresh the weak and fainting spirits. Here is
generous wine indeed, when thou go abroad into the world, drink full
draughts of this next thy heart, and it will keep thee from the infection of
sin.

And not only the Promises, but the whole Word of God must be made use of, as
the food and Physic of the soul; all the Pages of that holy Volumne are like
the leaves of the Tree of Life, for the healing of the Nations. Take this Book
often into thy hand, carry it along with thee, read it over, study and meditate
upon it; Bind it continually upon thy heart, Prove. 6. 21. 22
and tie it about thy neck: When thou go it shall lead thee, when thou
sleep it shall keep thee, and when thou awakest it shall talk with thee.
Here is an excellent Amulet to bear about with thee, it will be both a grace
and a guard, an ornament and safety; hang it always therefore at thy heart, and
thou shall never do amiss. This will discover thy secret sins and in-most
maladies unto thee; Heb 4. 12.
For the Word of God is quick and powerful, and sharper then any two-edged
sword, piercing even to the dividing assunder of soul and spirit, and of the
joints and marrow; and is a discerner of the thoughts and intents of the heart.
This, this will search and lanch thy conscience; no less then three thousand
persons were pricked to the heart, Act. 22. 37, 41.
at one thrust of this spiritual sword, at one single Sermon.

My next advice, in order to the cure of this fatal Plague of the Soul is,
that we do our endeavor to improve afflictions; for these are m^dicines
against sin, bitter but wholesome medicines. Gods judgments on a Land may
prove good Sudorificks, and make the sinner sweat, and the peccant humors
waste away, and drive out the venom from the heart. Folly is bound up in our
hearts, and these Rods of Correction must, or may fetch it out. Most
successful did this severer medicine prove to the Church; [ He has filled me
with bitterness, Lam 3. 15.
(says she) he has made me drunken with wormwood.] And it follows, Verse. 19,
20, 21.
[ Remembering my affliction and my misery, the wormwood and the gall; my soul
has them still in remembrance, and is humbled in me: this I recall to mind,
therefore have I hope.] Oh! Smell to this wormwood, and it will prove an
excellent preservative against the Plague of Sin. Afflictions are designed by
God for our amendment; Let that design take effect upon us; let those terrible
Thunderclaps clear and purify the air. As Naturalists observe, that one poison
is an Antidote against another, So let this grievous P^stilence which is now
upon the Land and upon this Town, drive out the Plague of the Heart. Ringing of
Bells (they say) is some ways serviceable to remove the Infection. Oh! let
every sad toll for our deceased Brethren, put us in mind of our Mortality, and
promote the death of sin in us.

Lastly, Keep a diet, in order to the preserving of thy self from the Souls
Plague. Too high and plentiful a feeding increases any disease in us; see
that thou be moderate in the use of the creatures: Luke. 21. 34.
Take heed to thy self, least at any time thy heart b^ overcharged with
surfeiting, and drunkeness, and cares of this life. Indulge not an intemperate
course of living, for death is in the pot which is set on by luxury and
wantoness. If thou call thy self a Christian, be content to be di^ted, kept
in, and confined by the stricter rules of the Gospel.

And now, what ever effect those usual Medicines and Receipts may have for the
curing of the Bodily Plague, I am sure, these that I have named, are approved
by Christ and his Apostles, that great College of Physicians; you may take
them safely, and with confidence of success; and I pray God give a blessing
unto them.

And thus having insisted on the Metaphor in the Text, I shall now treat more
at large, and descend to some plain Dir^ctions for our better behavior in
these sad times, both in reference to the present visitation of the Plague, and
the sad concomitants of it, poverty and necessity.

And the first Direction is this, Be sensible of Gods Judgments now upon you,
Jer. 2. 19.
and tremble at them. Know therefore and see, that it is an evil thing and
bitter, that you have forsaken the Lord your God. This was the use which that
Holy man made of Gods dismal providence, [ My flesh trembles for fear of
thee, Psalm. 119. 120.
and I am afraid of thy judgments:] And again, Psalm. 76. 7.
[ Thou even thou art to be feared.] Who knows, but that these present
calamities are prologues and presages of far worser? Certain it is, that this
is the duty incumbent on us at present, Heb. 12. 28* 29
to serve God acceptably, with reverence and godly fear, seeing our God is a
consuming fire. Here then you are to be called upon, to acknowledge that it is
Gods Hand that is now heavy upon you. Amos. 3 6.
Shall there be any evil in a City, and the Lord has not done it? No surely;
there is no evil in the great City of this Nation, no evil or Plague in the
Country, but God must be acknowledged the author and disposer of it. This is
the (...), that divine superintendency in all our calamities, which Hippocrates
speaks of, and frankly acknowledges in all diseases. And Christians should
much more allow of it, looking beyond second causes to the first and chief of
all. Say not then that the influence of the stars and heavenly bodies, or the
late glaring Comets which appeared, were the causes of the burning fevers and
malignant distempers, and even of this fatal Pestilence, which sweeps so many
into their graves; blame not this or that. Indeed as Philosophers and
Naturalists, you are permitted to search into the secondary and physical
causes of this dreadful distemper; but as Christians and those that live by
higher principles, you are first to look up unto God, and then down into your
selves, and there behold the Hand of the Lord stretched out against you. God is
the great Sovereign of the world, the wise disposer of the Universe, who does
what seems good unto him, both in heaven and in earth. If he shall please to
correct and chastise us, all natural causes shall give way to his providence,
which can find us out, though we labor to run never so far from it. The Plague
can climb over walls, never so high and strongly built; it can come in at the
windows, though they are made never so fast; it can make it is passage through
the doors of the house, though they are never so closely locked and bolted.
Labor then to be convinced of this, that there is a God that judges in the
earth, that you are in his hands, and that whatever you suffer, is by his
disposal. [ I, even I am he, Deuteronomy. 32. 39.
and there is no God besides, I kill, and I make alive; I wound, and I heal,
neither is there any that can deliver out of my hand.] 1 Samuel 2. 6.
[The Lord kills and makes alive, he brings down to the grave and brings
up.] And it is clear from David's Choice, that the Pestilence is more remarkably
the Hand of God. 1 Chronicles* 21. 12, 13.
Let me fall now into the Hand of the Lord (says he) and by David's Seer it is
styled the sword of the Lord. The present Arrows of the Almighty are not like
that with which Ahab was wounded, which the Story tells us, one shot at a
venture: No, chance and fortune have nothing to do here. Apollo was fitly
feigned by the Poet to have sent the Pestilence into the Grecian Army: no less
then a God in their Divinity could do it. But I pass to

The second Direction; Be more sensible of your sins then of the punishments
that are upon you; be more fearful of the Plague of the Heart, then of the
present contagion that raigns in your streets; be much more troubled in your
souls, to have committed a sin against God, then to have it punished by him;
and for the future, choose rather to undergo any suffering from men, then to
dishonor God: Avoid that which grieves the Holy Spirit, rather then what
troubles and afflicts thy outward man. How timorous are we and dejected, at the
thoughts of the Plagues approaching near us? We have much more reason to be
fearful of sin which is the sting of all judgments. We are apt to sit down and
bemoan our selves after this manner: Alas! our condition is very sad, the place
we live in is Infected, we see whole Families drop away; here Parents are
bereaved of their Children, there the Children survive their Parents, but
(alas) are left shiftless to the wide world: Many houses are shut up, and only
sickness and death are Tenants there. Neighbors are afraid of one another,
and it is not Trading, but poverty and want which bring them to the sight of
one another: How many are buried, as it were, while they live? and when they
are dead, they can hardly find any one to befriend ^^em with a Grave. What
cryings and complainings are there in our streets? and, if Gods Hand should
continue on us longer, it will be hard to tell, whether scarcity or the
Sickness be the worst Plagues. After this sort do we bemoan our selves under
Gods judgments; but where is the man among us, that cries out of his sins, his
sins? Where is the spiritual mourner that lays iniquity to his heart, and feels
a through remorse upon his mind for his rebellion against God, for his bidding
defiance to Heaven, and for his abuse of Gods mercies? Where is the man, that
beginning to be sensible of the hardness of his heart, strikes upon it, as if
he would break it, and drops down penitential tears that he might soften it?
Such a man is not easily found, such severity on our selves is not usual. But
know this, that nothing is worth a tear, a sigh, a groan but Sin. Turn
therefore your grief this way, and your sorrow for affliction will not be so
loud and clamorous. As Physicians stop the blood by revulsion, stenching i^'s
bleeding in one place, by opening vein in another, so do you change and divert
your sorrow, turn it quite into another channel: Humble your selves in the
sight of God, lie low before him, being cast down by the burden of sin: Be
sensible of the Hand of God which is heavy upon you, but chiefly eye the finger
that points at thy Sin. Neh. 9. 33.
God is just in all that is brought upon you, for he has done right, but you
have done wickedly. Gods wrath is but a due punishment for your abuse of his
mercy; the overflowing of his anger is but a just recompense for your repeated
provocations. Justify God, but judge and condemn your selves. Your destruction
is of your selves, your Plagues are the fruit of your own ways. Had you not
been stubborn, and obstinate, and sinned against mercy, you had not felt such
heavy strokes: but because you would not be drawn with cords of love, it was
but just, the cords should be twisted into a whip to lash you into your duty.
Common sicknesses would not amend you, you went on and minded not the ordinary
summons of Mortality, those it seems were not terrible enough. No wonder then,
that God takes another course, changes the rod into a Scorpion, and instead of
the usual diseases, sends a more fatal and astonishing distemper which carrys
poison along with it. You may thank your selves for all this, for sin was the
procuring cause of it. Jer. 2. 17, 19.
Have thou not procured this unto thy self, in that thou have forsaken the Lord
thy God? thy own wickedness shall correct thee, and thy backslidings shall
reprove thee. Isa. 59. 2.
And again, [ Our iniquities have separated betwixt us and our God, and our
sins have hid his face from us that he will not hear.] Lam. 1. 8.
[Ierusalem has grievously sinned, therefore she is removed.] To which let me
add that of the Apostle, ^. Cor. 11. 30.
[For this cause, (namely for your sins, especially your unchristian divisions,
and your profanation of the Lords Supper,) many are weak and sickly among you,
and many sleep.] Sin is the root of suffering; strike therefore at the root
first, evidence that you are more sensible of sin then sickness or any other
affliction, by your asking the pardon of sin chiefly. It may be somewhat
remarkable, that the Psalmist calls up his soul to praise God after this
manner, Psalm. 103. 3.
[ Bless the Lord, O my soul, and forget not all his benefits, who forgiveth
all thy iniquities, who heals all thy diseases.] God first forgives and then
heals: and the Holy man is well pleased with this sacred order and method, nay
he would have been contented with the pardon of sin, though the infirmities of
his body had still remained. The light of Gods countenance is far better then
the removal of our sicknesses; his favor to our souls transcends all worldly
ease and refreshment to our outward man: Affliction will never hurt us so long
as we can pray and believe, so long as God speaks peace unto our consciences.
And therefore in all our distresses, this should be our most ardent request
that God would pardon our sins, subdue our wicked natures, and sanctify us
with his Spirit; and then though the Cross lies heavy on our bodies and makes
our outward man decay, yet our inward man shall feel joy and comfort, and our
light afflictions, which are but for a moment, shall work for us a far more
exceeding and eternal weight of Glory. And let me commend unto you these three
ways, whereby you are further to discover, that you are truly sensible of your
Sins.

The first is a humble confession, hearty bewailing and mourning for your
manifold provocations. That Good King used this remedy, when the Plague was
broken out, and the destroying Angel gone forth to smite, 2 Samuel 24. 17.
[ Lo, I have sinned and done wickedly.] You are all to mourn for the crying
and reigning sins of this Land, you are to mourn for the sins and enormities of
those men, who have not hearts to mourn for themselves. Exodus 32. 30, 31.
Thus Mos^s was grieved sadly for the peoples ^dolatry, and most passionately
did he interpose in their behalf. Ezra and Nehemiah most deeply resented the
sins of their Nation. You know what Lamentations the Weeping Prophet made; you
read how righteous Lot was vexed with the filthy conversation of the wicked. 2
Pet. 2. 7.
And [ Rivers of water (says the Psalmist) run down mine eyes, Psalm. 119. 136.
because men keep not thy Law.] This was the practice of the Man after Gods own
heart; and that great Apostle could not write to his Philippi^ns, without
weeping, Phil. 3. 18.
when he made mention of the enemies of the Cross of Christ. The ways of the
wicked grieve God and his Holy Spirit, and shall they not grieve every good
man? Mourn then in secret for that great pride and haughtiness, that extortion,
cruelty and oppression, that want of brotherly love and Christian communion,
that perjury, couzenage and deceit, that wantoness and uncleaness, that
disobedience and murmuring at our betters, that coldness and formality in our
religious addres^es, that neglect of the Ordinances and Institutions of Christ,
that scoffing at Piety and true Devotion; for these and many other abominations
which this Land is highly guilty of, you are to mourn and weep, even desiring
in a holy passion, to weep your eyes out, as being loath to see such wickedness
committed. And yet I have not named a brace of horrid vices, which this Land is
to answer for no less then for the former; I mean, those common sins of
drunkeness and swearing; As for the latter, how prodigiously does it increase
in our days? James 5. 12.
And whereas St James his charge is, [ Above all things my brethren swear not,]
and our Savior has given us the same in his excellent Sermon, Mat. 5. 34.
[ Swear not at all,] yet are blasphemous Oaths so common and usual, as if
both those Texts had run thus, [ do dothing but swear:] every sentence with too
many men is set off with an oath, Gods great and glorious Name is used and
usurped in the most trifling and ridiculous matters, nay, it is brought into
the obscenest, nay, into the most profane and irreligious speeches. Gods Name
is seldom used by such wretches in prayer and supplication at the throne of
Grace, but in bitter curses and execrations against their brethren it is daily
abused. And is it not just with God to visit those men's houses with the most
horrid disease, who have so often wished the Plague to their Children, their
nearest relations and companions? It must needs grieve every good soul, to hear
men belch out such hellish Rhetoric* Is it not sad, that Christians should,
like those cruel Soldiers, open Christ's side, and delight in nothing but
Blood and Wounds? Sit down awhile and weigh these things well, and besides what
I have said, consider also the general decay of the practice of Religion,
which should be our chiefest Trade, but is now dead: Consider the ingratitude
and unfruitfulness, and (which is saddest of all) the general security,
inconsiderateness, and insen^ibleness of the people of the Land, and you will
have matter enough for mourning.

But then too, if you search and try your own ways and lives, and examine your
own iniquities, your proper and particular sins, you will have yet much more
occasion of mourning: and this must be your task likewise, You must know every
man the Plague of his own heart. Every party of men, I perceive, are ready to
lay the fault at another door, they clear themselves, and would not be thought
to be the procurers of this sad judgment that is now upon us; but let me advise
thee, as thou desire pardon of God and peace in thy own conscience, to look
into thy own soul, and grieve for those sins which thou espiest there, and
humbly confess, that thy iniquities have procured this judgment, and heartily
endeavor that the affliction may be sanctified. Which brings me to the second
way whereby you are to discover, that you are thoroughly sensible of sin, namely
by

Your care and desire, to have the affliction sanctified, rather then removed.
Oh then let all the calamities that befall us, quicken and enliven our graces;
let the rod make us take out our lesson the better; let the weights make the
clock go the faster; let the high and blustering winds speed our course and
send us sooner to our haven; let the Rack which we are upon make us confess our
faults, and even extort from us a godly remorse: the greater the judgment is,
the greater influence let it have upon our hearts and lives. A greater
(temporal) judgment then the devouring Plague cannot enter into our quarters;
this therefore, if God shall please to sanctify to us, may more effectually
show us our sins, and teach us righteousness.

Other diseases were but like single shot, this is chainshot and sweeps away
whole Families; or rather, other sicknesses were like smaller Guns of a lesser
bore, but this is one of Heavens Murthering-pieces, which car^yeth a great way,
and batters down whole houses: the thickest and strongest Walls cannot stand
out against it, the healthfullest constitution is no bulwark against it, the
art and skill of the Physician is not able to grapple with it; this devours by
wholesale, other diseases but by piece^meal and smaller parcels. This, this is
a rod made on purpose to scourge a wicked Nation, this is more eminently the
hand and stroke of an angry God, and do we not see how many by these blows are
made black and blew? And yet all this may be for our good, for our eternal
welfare* the greater the judgment is, the more careful it may, and should make
us to discharge our duty, the more fearful of sinning against God, and the
more humble under the due consideration of Gods wrath and displeasure. Let us
learn obedience, as our Blessed Master did, by the things which we suffer. We
are planted by the rivers of water, even of the water of affliction; let this
make us bring forth our fruit in due season. Let every one strive to say with
the Psalmist, [It is good for me that I have been afflicted.] O good rod, that
fetched out the folly which was bound up in my heart! O good poverty, that
drove me to God with a Petition in my hand, begging the riches of his grace! O
good reproach and affronts, that humbled me in the dust, and caused me to
reflect upon my wicked courses, and made me esteem Gods favor above all
things! O good sickness and disease, that showed me how vile, poor, and weak a
creature I am, how inconsiderable, mean, and empty this world is, and how full
and satisfying God is! O good distemper of body, that promoted the Welfare of
my soul! In a word, O good afflictions and distresses, that make me good! This
severe cours^ that God took, was the best way to mend me; the storms beat me to
shore; had I had a gentler gale and so failed along evenly and smoothly,
perhaps I had split upon some fatal Rock, I had sunk, and never seen good day
again. I had gone to hell, if I had had Heaven here upon earth. It is well
therefore for me, that I had so many Crosses laid on me; O! it is well that
affliction arrested me, else I had gone on still in offending God and my
Neighbors. I see now that I gain by my losses, now I perceive that every blow
was but a kind stroking of me; every Wound was a balsome, every judgment was a
mercy, and every affliction was a blessing. Less sorrow would not serve my
turn, else I had not felt so much. Therefore welcome affliction, thrice welcome
the rod; I will learn for the future how to get all crosses sanctified unto me,
and to grow better by the Worst condition. I will hear the rod, and who has
appointed it, I will listen to it is voice, and learn what is my duty by it, for
it calls and cries aloud to me, to prepare for another world, to leave my ^ins,
to repent and really reform. Which leads me to

The third way whereby we ought to evidence, that we are truly s^nsible of the
burth^n of our sins, (namely) by a through reformation of our lives. For alas!
all our mournings and lamentations, all our prayers and fastings, all our
sacrifices and services, all our seeking unto God, and calling upon him, all
our promises and resolutions signify nothing (as to the removal of judgments)
without holiness of life, Josh. 7. 12, 13
and the destroying of the accursed thing from amongst us. For you must know
this, that Praying, and Fasting, and bewailing of our sins, are not the things
ultimatly designed in Religion, they are in order to something higher, and that
is Reformation of our lives. Fasting is made a duty, because it may be
subservient and instrumental to holy meditations, to our nearer converse with
God, and abandoning of our lusts. It was one of Pythagor as his Symbols and
advises to his disciples, To abstain from beans: the old Philosopher (it is
thought) did not intend by it a refraining from that sort of food, but it was
mystical, (as much of the Pythagorean Philosophy is) and signified, that they
should be retired, and keep out of public offices; for by beans the
Magistrates were chosen in some parts of Greec^; or, perhapson another account,
(as some learned men have conjectured) Continence and Chastity were aimed at in
that Law of Abstinence. Sure I am, that in the Christian P^^losophy, Fasting is
subordinate to a higher thing: and as it should put us in mind to abstain from
^leshly lusts, so it is very apt in some bodies to promote piety and devotion,
and therefore it is to be used to such an end as that. So likewise for Prayer
and Confessing of our sins, they are intended to render us more holy and
religious, to compose our thoughts, to elevate our souls to God, and that we
may breath out the very secrets of our hearts before him. It Is pity therefore,
that these duties should be separated from their great end and design* Nay,
praying, and fasting, and seeking of God without Reformation, are but a taking
of Gods name in vain, and a very mocking of him; so that when we seem to debase
our selves, and appear before God in all postures of humiliation, when we
confess sin and pray against it, and yet live in the love and practice of it;
we do instead of averting Gods judgments, pull them down upon us, and continue
them longer amongst us. Be persuaded therefore to reform your lives, and turn
unto God in good earnest; do not only pray but practice, as those Mariners who
cried every man to his God, and withal, cast Jonah overboard. Cast out sin,
punish sinners, and then the storm will cease. Let every one reform himself,
and endeavor to reform those that are his charge; following the example of
that Holy man, Josh. ^4. 15.
who thus resolved, [ As for me, I and my house will serve the Lord.] Like unto
which was the resolution of that virtuous Woman, Esther 4. 16.
[I and my maidens will fast and pray.] So let every Master and Mistress of a
Family say. I will by Gods help see to my charge, I will reform at home. This
will be the most proper and compendious way to work a through amendment in the
whole Nation, thus the good work will go on apace and come to perfection.

And to promote this reformation, let me suggest these ensuing truths unto you:

1. Deliverance and mercy is promised to a Nation upon this condition and upon
no other. Thus runs that answer of the Lord to Solomon, 2 Chronicles. 7. 13, 14.
[If I shut up heaven that there be no rain, or if I command the locusts to
devour the land, or if I send pestilence among my people; If my people which
are called by my name, shall humble themselves and pray, and se^k my face, and
turn from their wicked ways: then will I hear from heaven, and will forgive
their sin, and will heal their land.] Thus likewise you find it in that word
of the Lord to Ier^miah, Jer. 18. 7, 8.
[At what instant I shall speak concerning a nation and concerning a kingdom,
to pluck up, and to pull down, and to destroy it; if that nation against whom I
have pronounced, turn from their evil, I will repent of the evil that I
thought to do unto them.] But

2. Put the case that the Plague be removed, and your sins still remain; then I
must tell you, that such a removal is not a mercy, for God never takes away his
anger till you reform. He often times indeed leaves a Nation and persons to
themselves and to their own sinful wills and ways: But alas! there is no
greater punishment then this, and no plainer sign of Gods displeasure. It is
sad when God speaks unto a Land as he did of old to Judah, Isa. 1. 4, 5.
[Ah sinful Nation, a people laden with iniquity, a seed of evil do^rs,
children that ar^ corrupters, they have forsaken the Lord, they have provoked
the holy One of Israel unto anger, they are gone away backward.] And then it
follows, [ Why should you be stricken any more^ you will revolt more and more,
the whole head is sick, and the whole heart faint, etc.] When the heaviest
strokes and Plagues, when the greatest judgments and calamities will not amend
a people, then God gives them over; as Physicians, when their patients are past
recovery, permit them any thing.

3. Punishments removed and your sins still remaining, do sadly portend a
heavyer judgment for the future, either upon your bodies or your souls, either
in this or the other world. When God took away the Plagues from Pharaoh, he
sent hardness of heart. Nay, God may remove the Plague and reserve you for
Hell, and then you cannot say your case is mended. Thus every ways it is your
interest to reform and break off your sins by repentance. Every person is
engaged in his place and capacity to appear against Vice, and to endeavor the
extirpation of it; but here the Magistrate in a special manner is concerned,
who is to see, that all Infected persons be shut up. The Leper under the Law
was to d^ell alone without the camp, that he might not converse with those that
were whole: now I have told you, that Sin is the worst of Plagues and
Leprosies. You therefore that are in public places and Offices are to set a
Watch over notorious sinners, that they go not abroad to inf^ct others: if they
break out you may shoot at them; if sinners will be bold and daring, you are
bound to unsheath the Sword of Justice and strike at them; as indeed there are
a sort of hardened sinners that star^ Justice in the face, and say she is
blind, and laugh at her Sword, and make their brag that they never felt the
edge of it. Here you will do well to make them experience how sharp it is; that
others too beholding the punishment inflicted on them, may not presume to glory
in their shame. They commonly say, that those who are infected long to infect
others; it is certainly true of the contagion of sin; wicked men cannot be
content to dishonor God themselves, but they invite and inveigle others to do
so too. Look well to these pestilent fellows, that they may not spread the
contagion, and corrupt others, though they would. And these are the ways and
methods whereby we are to discover how sensible we are of the great sins and
provocations of a Nation.

The third Direction for our behavior in these sad and calamitous times is,
that by Faith and Patience we compose our minds and submit our wills unto Gods
in whatsoever he shall be pleased to inflict upon us. We must bear the
indignation of the Lord, and resign our selves to his disposal, not murmuring
at his choice for us, but contentedly tarrying his time and leisure. ^a^. 3. 7.
We are h^dged in, (so the Scripture expresses affliction) we must not
impatiently leap ov^r this hedge, nor make a gap in it. There was a certain
offender doubted that he should be poisoned by Caligula, and so drunk off a
Counter-poyson to preserve and fortify himself; but the Emperor took the man
up very smartly in these words, A^tidotum adversus Caesarem? What! does he
think to take any Antidote against the fatal Dose which Caesar's hand shall
give him? Methinks God speaks to us in some such language; What? shall poor
mortals think to control me? can they prev^nt that affliction which I have
allotted them? When I have brought them into straits, can they by their own
power extricate themselves out of them? It would better become them to sit down
patiently, and shake of that base spirit of fearfulness and unwillingness to
bear the yoke. The Thracians (they say) when the Sun burns hot upon them, and
so when it thunders and lightens, out of a kind of revenge, shoot up their
Arrows against Heaven. And we read, ^ev. 6. 9.
that upon pouring out of one of the Vials, men were scorched with great heat,
and blasph^med the name of God, which had power over the Plagues. This is the
guise of some peevish and angry mortals; but if thou call thy self a
Christian, thou art obliged to be of another ^pi^i^, undergoing with patience
and cheerfulness whatever thy Heavenly Father shall inflict upon thee. John 14.
1.
[ Let not your hearts be troubled, (said our Savior to his sorrowful
Disciples) believe in God, believe also in me.] It Is Faith that must uphold
thee and support thy spirits, make God thy buckler and strength, thy Rock and
place of refuge; trust in Him now or never. It is he that must give us help
from trouble, Psalm. 60. 11.
for vain is the help of man. Do as David in his distress at Ziglag, Encourage
thy self in the Lord thy God. His Providence rules the world, there is not a
Sparrow falls to the ground without his permission, his eyes run through the
whole earth, he sees and knows thy soul in adversity; thou perhaps sit^est
solitary, and have no company to visit thee, thou weepest alone in a dark
corner, and thy case is not known to the world, but God takes notice of thee,
his Eye is toward thee. But that is not all, thou have his Ear too; thou art
assured of this, as well as of that other Prerogative, Psalm. 34. 15.
from the words of the Psalmist, [The eyes of the Lord are upon the righteous,
and his ears are open unto their cry.] And in another place where this Holy
King had laid open his sad and lamentable condition, he at last concludes thus,
Psalm. 38. 9.
[ Lord, all my desire is before thee, and my groaning is not hid from thee.]
Thou have Gods Heart too; he pitys thy condition, his bowels yearn toward
thee, he is afflicted in all thy affliction; he has the pity of a tender
Father: but because love and affection and kinde-heartedness is thought to lodge
most of all in the other Parent, therefore he tells us by his Prophet, that he
has the love of an indulgent mother toward her sucking child, whom she then
tends upon with the greatest care and compassion when she sees it is drooping
and sickly. But the mother may prove unnatur^ll and abate of her affection and
kindness to her little Infant, Isa. 49. 15.
Yet will I not forget thee, faith the Lord. Psalm. 27. 10.
[ When my father and my mother forsake me, then the Lord will take me up.]
That was the holy confidence and assurance which the distressed Psalmist had of
Gods mercy and compassion toward him. And it was an excellent contrivance of
Divine Wisdom to this very purp^^^* that Christ should assume our nature, for
hereby he is become such a High Priest as can be touched with the feeling of
our infirmities. Heb. 4. 15, 16.
Remarkable are those words in St Matthews Gospel, taken out of the Prophecy
of Isaiah concerning Christ, Mat. 8. 17.
[ Himself took our in^irmities, and bare our sicknesses;] Isa. 53. 4.
yet was he not personally troubled with any disease, but when he came to any
s^ck and diseased wretches his manner was, by pity and sympathy to afflict
himself with their sicknesses; as when he visited Lazarus, both alive and in
the grave: thus he bears our sicknesses and distempers by a fellow-feeling and
compassion. And then also thou have Gods Arm under thee, to support thee in thy
affliction; thy neighbors may see thee and l^sten to thy sad complaints, and
pity thy sadder condition, but they cannot help thee to bear thy burden; nay,
they oftentimes augment affliction by compassionating it: but thy God is
present with thee to succor thee, he will not suffer thee to be tempted above
what thou art able, 1 C^r. 10. 13.
but will with the temptation also make a way to escape, that thou may be
able to bear it. Psalm. 7. 24.
Though thou fallest, thou shall not be utterly cast down, for the Lord
upholdeth thee with his Hand. Eastly, Gods Hand is over thee to act for thee,
and in due time to deliver thee out of thy afflictions: to this purpose is that
promise made to every righteous man, [ He shall call upon me and I will answer
him, Psalm. 91. 15.
I will be with him in tro^ble, I will d^liver him and honor him.] Which
promise is the more remarkable at this season, because it is the conclusion of
that Psalm which treats wholly of Gods Providence over his children in the time
of the Pestilence. In short then, thou have Gods Eye to take notice of thee,
Gods Ear to hear thee, Gods Heart to pity thee, and Gods Hand and Arm to
support and deliver thee; thou have promises to live upon, which cannot be
taken from thee, great and precious promises; the Angels are promised as thy
lifeguard to defend thee and pitch their tents about thee; ^at. 6. 33.
upon condition, that thou seek^st first the kingdom of God and his
righteousness, all these temporal things which may serve for thy necessity
shall be added unto thee; if thou fear God, ^sal. 34. 9.
there shall be no want to thee; all things shall work together for thy good;
Psalm. 84. 11.
the Lord will be to thee a^ sun and a sh^eld, the Lord will give grace and
glory, and no good thing will he withhold from thee, if thou walk uprightly.
And the whole Ninety first Psalm is full fraught with Promises, which (as I
have intimated already) may serve thee as Cordials to cheer thee under the
present Visitation: Often think of, and support thy self with these props of
comfort, often resort to these wells of salvation, often read over these large
expressions of love and compassion, place thy whole trust and affiance in God
the author of these privileges, and the only sanctuary of thy soul: trust in
Him and despise this vain world, whose pleasures are counterfeit and imaginary,
whose enjoyments are momentany and unsatisfactory. Turn about this Globe often
and view it is several parts; survey it but narrowly, and that is enough to
bring thee out of love with it, and to make thee desire after Heav^n, that Land
of Promise. The Americans point to certain great hills, and tell us there it is
that they shall be happy hereafter, there they shall wander in fine fields,
take their pleasures in brave Orchards and goodly Gardens, and there dance and
be merry. Poor souls! do these sensual expectations, these ridiculous
fopperies and delusions cheer them, and shall not certain joys, well-grounded
hopes and real promises make Christians live cheerfully, and smooth their
brows in the greatest distresses and calamities? Look up then by a steady
Faith: This is the Christian Telescop^, hereby thou may discover and plainly
discern the joys of Heav^n and the glory of that other world: and having once
taken a view of that Celestial C^naan, thy soul will be ravished with it, thy
thoughts will be wholly placed upon it is excellencies, and thou will breath out
thy longings in such language as this, Oh take me up to thee, or come thou down
to me: thou will easily defy sufferings, overlook the cross, trust God for to
morrow and all thy life, thou will sing sweetly under the greatest
discouragements, and in the closest consinements thou will content thy fel^
with this, that thou art a Kings Son and Heir to a Crown, though now thou art
poor and despised, thou will give loosers leave to laughed at thee, and quietly
suffer the Bed^m-world to rage at will, thou will make thy self merry with the
Feast of a good Conscience, though thy diet be never so course; thou will thank
God for any thing, because thou deservest nothing, thou will bear thy present
evils with expectation of the promised good, and in all thy disasters thou will
comfort thy self that Heaven will make amends for all. Habak. 2. 4.
The just shall live by faith, said the Lord to Hab^kkuk: and mark how this
Proph^t lived by it, [ Although the figtree shall not biossom, Habak. 3. 17, 18,
neither shall fruit be in the vines, the labor of the olive shall fail, and
the fields shall yield no meat; the flock shall be cut off from the fold, and
there shall be no herd in the stalls; yet I will rejoice in the Lord, I will
joy in the God of my salvation; the Lord God is my strength, etc.] When all
things both for necessity and delight failed him, he was able to subsist by a
living faith, and this is that by which every holy man must live and hold up in
the world. And as the just must live by faith, so he must dye by it too, by
this he will be rendered willing to depart the world, and bid his friends
farewell, by this he may attain to old Simeon's Nunc dimittis, [Now let
thou thy servant depart in peace:] by this eye of faith he may look up to
Heaven, and with St Stephen, Behold Christ sitting at the right hand of God,
reaching out his arms to embrace him and take him to himself. Thus do thou act
faith, and thou may live comfortably in an unkind world, thou may bear up
against all the st^rms that are abroad; in the absence of things temporal live
on those that are spiritual and ^ternall; open the eye of faith but wide, and
thou shall see enough to comfort thee. Have you not read of Elijah, how that he
was weary (poor man) in the wilderness, and lay down under the Juniper tree,
complaining that he had no meat to ea^, and therefore desired God to take away
his life? but the distressed Prophet took his rest, rose up again and looked
about him, and behold! a cake and a cruse of water, and so he eat and drank
once and again, and he went in the strength of it fou^ty days and nights. Lie
down and repose thy self by faith and patience, and God will provide for thee.
Sometimes the water is spent in the bottle, our wordly comforts are drained
from us, and then we are apt with Hagar to sit down, and lift up our voices and
weep, as if we would fill the bottle again; we cry and take on sadly, but if it
shall please God to speak to us from heaven and open our eyes, we may discover
a well of water to fill the bottle; so that oftentimes we have the same and
greater comforts too. Hold out therefore Faith and Patience; let us dry up our
immoderate tears, which do but spoil our sight, and hinder us from seeing our
happiness, which we may be partakers of even in the greatest straits and
necessities.

The next Direction which may be serviceable unto us in these times of
affliction is, that we labor to contract our desires as to the enjoyments of
this life, and prize Gods blessing above all. Whoever thou art, be of a narrow
soul to the world, but enlarge it toward God: down with thy great sail, it is
too big for thy small vessel, and it will make it topple over; take a peg
lower, lest you crack; swell not so big lest you burst asunder; A little would
serve our turns, if we would but curb our lavish wishes, and lessen our
appetites. Luke. 12. 15.
[ A man's life consists not in the abundance of the things which he
possesses,] which our Savior gives as the reason of his foregoing Caution,
viz. [Take heed, and beware of covetousnes.] Which warning is backed by the
Parable of the Rich man who pulled down his barns to set up greater; whereas
the fool (as he is there called) might have saved himself the labor of
enlarging his barns, by contracting his covetous desires. By this excellent art
of abating our extravagant appetites, and by looking up unto God the author of
all we have, we may most comfortably deport our selves in the world. In that
Song of Moses, where he reckons up the sundry mercies of God to the Israelites,
it is said that God made them to suck honey out of the Rock, Deuteronomy. 32. 13.
and oil out of the flinty rock. It was but water (and well so) that they
received from the rock; this was a mercy, if not a miracle, for they might
rather have expected that fire should have been struck out of the rock of flint
then water. I, but mere water with Gods blessing and a thankful heart is honey
and oil, and this oil, like that of the Widows, by the same bl^ssing shall be
increased unto us. See then that thou be content with thy condition, though
it be never so poor, sit down and give thanks though thou have never so little,
draw thy desires into a narrow compass, but enlarge thy heart in praising of
God. The Children that refused the portion and provision of the Kings meat, and
fed on pulse and water were fatter and fairer then all those which did eat of
the Kings food. Dan. 1. 12, 13.
You see what Gods blessing could effect with the coursest fare; and it can do
as much in the want of all food. If God takes away our meat he can take away
our stomachs also, as a Holy Woman and Martyr once comforted her self. One way
or other Gods Providence will sustain us here, and see that we be recompensed
hereafter. Poor Lazarus lay at the Rich man's Gate, craving but the crumbs that
fell from his table, but those, even those were denied him: had the Churl come
out and seen him lying before his house, it is likely he would have set his
dogs upon him, to worry the poor cripple; but those bruits belike were friendly
to him, and licked his sores; he received a kindness from the dogs, when he
could have none from their Master. But stay awhile, and you shall see Lazarus
his condition much mended; his soul is carried hence by a convoy of good
Angels, and the Rich man's affrighted ghost is snatched away by a black guard of
Devils. Lazarus was not thought worthy to lie under the Rich man's table, but
now he is taken into Abraham's bosom. So true is that of the Sweet Singer of
Israel, [Mark the perfect man and behold the upright, Psalm. 37. 37, 38.
for the end of that man is peace: but the transgressors shall be destroyed
together; the end of the wicked shall be cut off.]

Another duty that I must direct you unto, and desire you to be servent in, is
Seeking of God by Prayer. This is seasonable at all times, but now more
especially in the needful time of trouble. When should we with greater
importunity make our addresses at the Throne of Grace, then when we are in the
jaws of death, and are like to be swallowed up hourly? When thou can do
nothing else, thou may pray and cry mightily unto God in behalf of th^s
distressed Land. Oh! labor to extort mercy from God by a holy violence, do
thou (with Moses) stand in the gap, and turn away Gods wrath; take this holy
cens^r of Prayer, and (with Aaron) stand between the living and the dead. Psalm.
46. 1.
God is our refuge and strength, a very present help in time of trouble. Psalm.
68. 20.
And to God the Lord belong the issues from death. To him therefore do thou
lift up thy soul; begging earnestly that He would fit thee for trouble, Psalm.
41. 3.
sorrow and sickness, that he would strengthen thee upon the bed of
languishing, and make all thy bed in thy sickness, Psalm. 39. 10.
(then be sure 'twill be soft and easy) that he would remove his stroke (or
Plague) away from thee, and from the place where thou live. James 5. 13.
Is any among you afflicted? let him pray. This is St James his Catholicon or
Universal remedy, this is that powerful key which heretofore has opened the
windows of heaven, and made a paessage from the belly of the whale, and this is
the key which still opens the doors of mercy. Open therefore with Prayer in the
morning, and shut up with it in the evening; have frequent recourse to him that
hears prayers, make thy complaint to God when none else will hear it, send up
strong cries and groans to Heaven; and be sure to remember this, that it is not
fluency but f^rvency, it is not ^loquence but importunity, it is not many words
but the Spirit which God most minds and will answer thee for. To Supplication
thou must add Thanksgiving: bless God therefore for his sparing thee and this
Land so long, bless God this sad season that thou enjoyest any mercy: it is
Gods goodness, patience and long sufferance that we are engaged unto for so
long a respite and freedom from the Pestil^nce. It is many years since this
noisome disease has made any considerable inroads upon us; and now that it is
broken out amongst us, those of you (my Beloved) who by divine providence
watching over you, are wholly shielded and secured from this grievous Plague
and Sickness, so that it neither touches you nor your Relations; those of you
(I say) are more especially bound to praise and magni^ie the singular goodness
of God. And you have all of you without distinction abundant cause to praise
and extol the Lord of heaven and earth, that though the Plague walks through
your streets, and poverty like its companion goes along with it, yet he has
not wholly taken away his mercies from you. The generality of persons in this
place are as healthful now as heretofore. The staff of bread is not broken. God
crowns the year with his goodness, and makes his paths drop fatness. But be thy
case never so mean, be thou and thine reduced to never so great straits, be thy
condition worse then I can express, thou have still reason to praise God. Psalm
103. 10.
He has not dealt with thee after thy sins, nor r^warded thee according to thy
iniquities. Thou art not worthy of the least mercy, thou deservest nothing at
Gods hands but H^ll; and therefore thank God heartily that he has not crushed
thee to pieces, and caused the pit to shut its mouth upon thee.

The next thing I would commend unto you for the upholding of your spirits in
sad times is, that (in imitation of the best and holiest servants of God) you
would make use of former experiences. Remember the days of old, look back and
consult the mercies you have received heretofore. Do you not observe, that in
this time of Sickness persons ask after the old Plagu^-water, the anti^nt
Antidotes and Electuaries used in former years of Contagion? Let us in like
manner call to mind those former gracious Instances and Experiments of Gods
loving kindness to us. Oh taste and see that God is good: Labor to regain that
excellent taste and relish which you once had upon your souls. Psalm, 9. 10.
[ They that know thy name will put their trust in thee,] ^aith the Psalmist.
Your experimental knowledge and observation of divine goodness in times past
should be used as an argument to induce you to trust in God for the future. 2
Cor. 1. 10.
So it was in St Paul's Logic, [Who delivered us from so great a death, and
does deliver, in whom we trust that he will yet deliver us.] As there are some
who have nothing to live upon these sad times but what they have laid up
before; so let me desire you in another and better sense to spend now upon the
stock, that is, remember how good God has been to you, and do not look upon
the mercies already received, as so many sad omens and forerunners of your
ruin, but rather as pledges and earnests of greater blessings.

And as you must look backward unto Gods former mercies, so look forward, and
prepare for further afflictions. Lay in yet a larger stock, thou will have need
of it all when thou art sick and in sorrow: Provide then for affliction by
meditating on it before hand, make it now familiar to thy thoughts, and so it
will be entertained with contentment when it comes. Ask thy self thus, How
should I bear it, if God should cast me on a bed of sickness? What if I should
go down the wind, if my credit should crack and my friends fail me? What if God
should take all my outward enjoyments from me, stripping me naked and turning
me so into the wide world? I have received good things at Gods hand, how shall
I do to receive evil things? Thus by putting these demands to thy own soul,
and by conversing (as it were) with the cross, thou do take it up by little
and little, thou bowest thy neck, and fittest it for the yoke. Oh then fail not
to parley thus with afflion at a distance; for thou know not how soon it may
enter thy doors, break into thy family, and lodge with thee and thine whether
thou will or no. Prepare for Gods hand, provide for thy departure, think that
thou hear those words spoken to thee which were once to Hez^kiah, [Set thy
house in order, Isa. 38. 1.
for thou must dye:] Be not afraid to take Death by the cold hand, and go along
with him, and lie do^n in the dust.

Being prepared for the worst thou need not fear any thing. Walk in Gods
ways, and they will be thy guard and security, God will protect thee in doing
his work. Trust in the Lord and do good, Psalm. 37. ^. 34.
so shall thou dwell in the land, and verily thou shall be fed. Wait on the
Lord and keep his way, and he shall exalt thee to inherit the Land: He shall
give his Ang^ls charge over thee to keep thee in all thy ways. Psalm. 9^. 11.
But then thy ways must be Gods ways, or else that promise of being in the
custody of Angels does not concern thee. Be about thy Masters business, and he
will look to thy maintenance. And beside our general Calling as we are
Christians, there are particular Callings and Places, in which we are set and
must serve our Master in, 1 Cor. 7. 20.
[ Let every man abide in the same calling wherein he was called.] This was an
Apostolical rule and command, and it holds row as well as in St Paul's time; for
we serve God by being diligent in our secular affairs, by faithfulness in our
several vocations and prof^ssions. The Magistrate is to keep his station, and
act in that higher sphere in which God has set him; this will yield him
comfort when God shall please to call for him hence, that he is found doing his
Lords work. The Minister has his place and peculiar calling, and it will be
well for him to be found in the faithful discharge of it: B. Jewel.
as that good Bishop made answer, when he was desired once to return home as he
was going to Preach, It best becomes a Bishop to dye Preaching. And it was the
like pious wish of St Augustine, that when Christ should come, he might be
found either Praying or Preaching. The Tradesman too, and every one whom God
has set in any lawful employment for the use of men must be diligent in it;
and as it is a known Maxim amongst them, [ Keep your shops, and your shops
will keep you,] so it is true in a higher sense, if they be careful in their
callings, that carefulness will prove their guard and protection. In a word,
every one in his own Orb wherein Divine Providence has placed him, must move,
shine and act with all his might. This is Christianity, and this will convey a
blessing unto thee. Moses put his hand into his bosom, and when he took it out,
it was leprous as snow. Let me apply it thus, the sloathful man that (as
Solomon sets him forth) hides his hand in his bosom, may justly fear that some
contagious disease, some Plague may light upon him. This life is a warfare, we
are like to meet with many hardships and dangers, many a brush and skirmish;
but as we are spiritual soldiers we must not dare to leave our station, or
quit the ground our great General has set us in. No, no, if we are shot in
Gods service we can not suffer, if we are taken off by the Arrows of the
Almighty, our end will be unspeakably comfortable; if we are snatched away with
the common calamity, even then we are safe and secure. The righteous p^risheth,
Isa. 57. 1, 2.
^aith the Prophet, (he may seem in the eye of man to fare very ill, but he
adds) The righteous is taken away from the evil to come, he shall enter into
peace. Isa. 26. 20.
[Come my people, ^nter thou into thy Chambers and shut thy doors about thee;
hide thy self as it were for a little moment until the indignation be
over-past.] The deluge is approaching, and so the righteous are taken into the
Ark, they are locked up safe there, and the flood shall not come nigh them. The
storm is coming, and so the Bees hasten to their hive. God plucks his out of
the fire, and it is no wonder, if in that plucking they have a little wr^nch
and pain; such pain is the greatest courtesy, for they are snatched from
future dangers, and secured from national calamities; No evil shall befall
them, no Plague shall come nigh their dwelling, no Plague that has evil with
it; they shall be freed from whatsoever there is of judgment in the stroke.
There was a great deal of difference between the death of Sampson and the
Philistin^s, though they perished with the fall of the same house. Gods
children may dye of the Plague, but that Plague is not sent as a curse but a
bl^ssing, for it improves their graces, prepares them for heaven and inhanses
their reward, it carrys them from an evil and unkind world to the company of
Saints and Angels, from a Prison to a Palace, from a wilderness to a Paradise,
from a valley of tears to a mount of joy. Thus it shall go well with thee (oh
Christian) whatsoever sort of death thou meetest with, the Bell that tolls for
thee is but to call thee to the Church triumphant; thy friends that weep, if
they consider aright what they do, grieve and lament that they cannot go along
with thee; and thou may be comforted by that revenge which is done upon
death, Hos. 13. 14.
[ Oh death I will be thy Plagues, oh grave I will be thy destruction.]

But then remember on the other side, how sad and miserable it is to dye in the
commission of sin; and are there not many persons that instead of being
employed in Gods work, are wholly taken up with the Devils, and go out of the
world in that employment? Have you not heard of some that have swom out of the
world in excessive drink, they being (in the worst sense of all) dead drunk?
Was not Senacherib slain when he was worshipping in the house of Nisroch his
god? 2 Kings 19. 37.
Have not some wretches been seized on and apprehended by death, in the very
acts of uncleanness and loose de bauchery? How sad must their condition be
which thus leave this world and appear in another? How scared and affrighted
are their souls in their entrance into that other state? This should make all
persons, especially now at this season, to be careful over their ways, that
Gods judgments may not arrest them in the commission of sin, and so their case
be unspeakably forlorn: this should make us all faithful in our general and
particular callings, that our Lord when he comes may find us doing his will,
and then in what manner soever he comes we shall be safe.

More particularly, to reach thy case, whosoever thou art that have or shall
have the hand of God upon thy body, and so art shut up and hindered from
commerce with the world, my Direction to thee is, that thou converse more
immediately with God, when thou art kept from the society of men. Thou art Gods
prisoner: He has shut thee up, and though thou art never so closely confined,
he can let in his Holy Spirit to thee, and let out thy ^erv^nt prayers to Him.
Christ Jesus will come and visit thee when thou art alone, when lovers and
friends s^and aloof off, and thy nearest relations hide themselves. This is an
unspeakable happiness, that thou have a God to go to, who is a rock and place
of refuge, who will never fail those that put their trust in him. When, like
Daniel, thou art shut up, make thy prayers to God, spread thy supplications
before him, for thou art not out of Gods hearing. In the want of all temporal
enjoyments, seek after those which are divine and heavenly. Let the sense and
feeling of Gods love to thee, and the comfortable witness of thy own
conscience, make thee joyful in the midst of all discouragements. Let it not
trouble thee, that thou art separated from thy friends and acquaintance. It is
not long before we must all take leave one of another, and be shut up in our
Coffins. The enjoyments of this world cannot long endure, and therefore dote
not so upon them, as to be utterly dejected when thou art cut short of them: if
thou art imprisoned by Providence, undergo thy restraint patiently, and do not,
like children, cry to go abroad. If thou conversest with God and thy own heart,
thou will not be so eager after other company.

Another Direction (but more large) is this, that in this time of danger you
use such means and secondary helps as Providence has approved of, but that you
do not trust in them. We must not be disobedient to Gods order and appointment,
what he has provided we may lawfully make use of, but then we must beg a
blessing of God and leave the success to him. King Asa did otherwise and was
blamed for it, 2 Chronicles. 16. 12.
namely, that when he was diseased he sought not to the Lord, but to
physicians. Thou may repair to the Physician, but remember that thou seek
to God first and beggest his blessing chiefly; for it is only under the conduct
of Divine Providence, that those outward means and supplies, helps and
medicines do take effect.

And so likewise if you have any thoughts of changing your place, and flying
from the danger, be sure to take God along with you. This the very Heathens
were careful of, who thought themselves safe where ever they iourneyed, so
they carried their gods along with them.

Thus they tell us of Aeneas, that when Troy was on fire, he was no less
mindful of rescuing his household gods, then of bringing away his old d^crepid
father on his back: you must think he reckoned so sacred and venerable a load
as his best protection, and that which would serve to lighten his future
calamities. And shall I add what some have conjectured concerning Rachels
stealing her Fathers Images, viz. That she was somewhat infected with the
Idolatry of Labans family, and so being to leave Padan-Aram, she would rather
rob her Father then go without those little Moveable and Guardian gods. As for
thee, if thou intendest to shift thy place, forget not to take the God of thy
fathers along with thee, even the great God of heaven and earth. Be sure that
thou flyest not away from the Town where Infection is, that thou may sin more
securely in another place: remember God sees thee, and can send his flying
arrows after thee, though thou do immure thy self never so closely. Rather
make thy peace with God, and get the blood of Jesus the Lamb of God sprinkl^d
upon thy soul, that so the destroying Angel may pass over thee: where ever thou
art make the most High thy confidence, Isa. 26. 3, 4.
so thou shall be best secured. [ Thou will keep him in perfect peace whose
mind is stayed on thee, because he trusted in thee. Trust ye in the Lord for
ever, for in the Lord Jehovah is everlasting strength.]

But though thou art free thy self, by Gods great goodness, from the grievous
distemper, yet forget not to sympathize with those of thy brethren on whom Gods
hand is heavy, let thy bowels yearn at their sad distress^s, and make them the
objects of thy greatest compassion. Jer. 9. 1.
[ Oh that my head were waters, and mine eyes a fountain of tears, that I might
weep day and night for the slain of the daughter of my people!] This was the
wish of that compassionate Prophet; do thou likewise weep with those that weep,
and make thy self a partaker in their misery by pitying of them: go into the
house of mourning, and now if ever lay aside thy looser sports and jollities;
this is not a time for immoderate mirth, which may both make thee forget thy
self and the sad condition of thy brethren. Mark therefore that woe which is
pronounced against the wanton Israelites, and I fear it reaches to many in our
days; Amos 6. 1, 3, 4, 5, 6.
Woe to them that are at ease in Sion -- ye that put far away the evil day;
that lie upon beds of Ivory, and stretch themselves upon their couches, and ^at
the lambs of the flock, and the calves out of the midst of the stall; that
chant to the sound of the viol, and invent to themselves instruments of music
like David (but not to such holy purposes as He did) that drink wine in bowls,
and anoint themselves with the (...) ointments; but they are not greived for
the affliction of Joseph: And take that which follows, verse. 7.
Therefore now shall they go captive with the first that go captive: and the
banquet of them that stretched themselves shall be removed. If any persons
before others shall feel the severe hand of God upon them, these are they.

The next Direction which I think will be hugely seasonable at present is, that
we now act all our graces more vigorously then ever, and stir up the gift of
God which is in us. For times of distress and calamity will try us: now we
shall be called forth to do and suffer. Ephesians. 5. 16.
Let us then walk circumspectly, not as fools, but as wise, r^deeming the time
because the days (we live in) are evil. Now we must take double money in our
hands; our ordinary care will not serve the turn, now we have much work to do,
and our time wherein we should dispatch it is uncertain; we carry our lives in
our hands, and therefore let us think that the advice of the Royal Preacher is
more especially directed to every one of us at present [ What soever thy hand
finds to do, Eccle. 9. 10.
do it with thy might, for there is no work, nor device, nor knowledge, nor
wisdom in the grave whither thou go^st.] Now then you ought to be on your
gaurd, your loins must be girt about, and your lights burning, as servants
attending their Master's business, ready to do any thing that he shall enjoin
them. Now you had need exhort one another daily while it is called to day; now
must you look narrowly after the concerns of your own souls, and do what you
can by sober advice and council, by exhortation and Brotherly reproof, by a
holy and exemplary life to make your neighbors better. 2 Pet. 3. 11.
What manner of persons ought you to be in all holy conversation and Godliness?
Let me under this Direction leave with you but these four words, which are the
abridgment of what I have said already;

1. Converse with God more vigorously then ever, unite your forces, and wrestle
strongly with Him, till you prevail for your selves, for this sinful land, for
this distressed Town. 2. Disingage your affections more resolvedly from the
world: you see the vanity of it daily, you have fresh experiences of the
uncertainty of all creature comforts; let your hearts be taken off from them
even whilst you do possess them, and be ready to part with them. 3. Act Faith
more strongly, and trust on God when the world fails you. 4. Walk more warily
and strictly in your lives, throw not away your time so vainly as heretofore,
be more sober and watchful, minding the welfare of your own souls, and calling
upon others to serve God and credit the Christian Religion by a holy life. Act
to the utmost of your power in the place God has set you, Gal. 6. 9.
be not weary in well doing, for in due season you shall reap if you faint not.

And lastly, to draw to a conclusion, when it shall please God in much mercy to
remove the present Plague and judgment from this Town, remember that you
faithfully keep those vows and promises which you made unto God in the day of
your fears and distresses, Psalm 50. 15.
[ Call upon me (says God) in the day of trouble and I will deliver thee, and
thou shall glorify m^.] See then that you glorify God by walking answerably
to the mercies and deliverances vouchsafed to you, Psalm. 76. 11.
Vow and pay unto the Lord your God. When you ate taken out of the Furnace of
affliction, do not return to your former hardness and inflexibleness. If you
have laid aside your sins in your affliction, do not afterward take them up
again when the affliction is removed. Do not as Pharaoh did, who cried out to
have the Plagues taken away, and withal acknowledged his sin, and asked
forgiveness, and made large promises of amendment; but when his request was
granted, he hardened his heart, and returned to his former wickedness. 'Twas a
bad requital Noah made for his escaping the flood, to be drowned afterward in
wine. 'Twill be sad for thee, if thy resolutions of living well end at last in
forgetfulness of God, and dishonouring of his Name by by a most scandalous
life. Think of it well then, and be sincere and cordial in thy purposes, and if
(with Hezekiah) thou have years added to thy life, add likewise to thy promises
and resolves a holy and blameless conversation. If God shall in love to thy
soul deliver it from the pit of corruption, do thou show thy self thankful unto
him, by walking in newness of life. Psalm. 66. 12, 13, 14.
If God shall bring thee out into a wealthy place, then pay the vows which thy
lips have uttered, and thy mouth has spoken when thou wast in trouble. If the
Lord has heard thy voice and supplications, when the sorrows of death
compassed thee, and thou d^dst find trouble and sorrow; if he has delivered
thy soul from death, thine eyes from tears, and thy feet from falling, break
forth into the Psalmists professions of love and duty to God for his
deliverance, P^^^ 6. 9, 12, 13, 14, 17, 18.
[ I will walk before the Lord in the land of the living. What shall I render
unto the Lord for all his benefits toward me? I will take the cup of
salvation, and call upon the name of the Lord. I will offer to thee the
sacrifice of thansgiving -- I will pay my vows unto the Lord now in the
presence of all his people.] Of the ten Lepers which were healed by our
Savior* there was but one of them returned to give thanks unto Him. We are
greedy of mercies, but how backward are we to acknowledge the receipt of them,
and to walk worthy of them? But let us now at length bethink our selves of our
duty, and resolve to put our resolutions into action: John 5. 14.
[Sin no more, lest a worse thing come unto thee.] This was the advice of that
great Spiritual Physician, thus runs his Bill for that man whom he had formerly
healed of a bodily disease. Oh! let us have a care of a Relapse, for that will
prove unspeakably dangerous and destructive to us. 'Twas a sad aggravation of
the Israelites sins, (acknowledged by the Levites in their Solemn Confession)
that after they had rest, Neh. 9. 28.
they did evil again before God. Sins committed after great mercies, are of a
Crimson dye, and are beyond measure sinful: these do cause the fullest vials of
Gods wrath to be poured down upon us; if there be any sins that escape
punishment, to be sure these are not they, as it follows in that place
before-named, [ Therefore leftest thou them in the hand of their enemies.]
Those Cities, Towns and Families which are, or shall be delivered from the
noisome Pestilence, may very fitly take up the words of Ezra, Ezra 9. 13, 14
[After all that is come upon us for our evil deeds, and for our great
trespass; seeing that thou our God have punished us less then our iniquities
deserve, and have given us such d^liverance as this, should we again break thy
Commandments, and join in assinity with the people of these abominations,
would thou not be angry with us till thou have consumed us, so that there
should be no remnant nor ^scaping? Yea, the Rod shall go about again, the
severities of Gods vengeance shall over-take us, Isa. 28. 17, 18, 19, 21.
God will lay judgment to the line, and righteousness to the plummet, and the
hail shall sweep away the refuge of lies -- and your covenant with death shall
be disannulled, and your agreement with hell shall not stand; when the
overslowing scourge shall pass through, then ye shall be trod^^n down by it,
from the time that it go^th forth it shall take you, for morning by morning it
shall pass over, by day and by night, and it shall be a vexation only to
understand the report: for the Lord shall rise up as in mount Perazim, he shall
be wroth as in the valley of Gibeon, that he may do his work, his strange work,
and bring to pass his act, his strange act.] God will not spare, neither will
he have pity, but he will recompense our ways upon our heads: He has variety
of punishments, he has a storehouse of judgments, he has a bundle of rods,
he has several vials of wrath, and he will pour them all out upon an
ungrateful, faithless and perverse people. Levit. 26. 18, 21, 24, 28.
[ I will punish you seven times more for your sins, and I will bring seven
times more Plagues upon you according to your sins.] Nay, this numerous curse
is twice more repeated and denounced against those that will not hearken unto
God, but walk contrary to Him. And to shut up all, after God had smartly
reproved and upbraided the Israelites for their incorrigibleness, and reckoned
up those several judgments which he had inflicted on them, and amongst the
rest, the Pestilence) and at the end of every one of them had complained that
nevertheless they had not returned unto him, [ Therefore (in the close of all
says he) thus will I do unto thee O Israel, Amos 4. 12.
(namely, as thy sins deserve, and as I have denounced against thee) and
because I will do this unto thee, PREPARE TO MEET THY GOD, O Israel.

Now unto the King eternal, 1 Timothy 1. 17.
immortal, invisible, the only wise God, be honor and glory for ever and ever.
Amen.

FINIS.

