THE Protestation made BY THE PARLIAMENT the third day of May, Anno Domini,
1641.

Printed Anno, 1641.

The Preamble of the House of Commons to the Protestation.
WE the Knights, Citizens, and Burgesses, of the Commons House of Parliament,
finding to the great grief of our hearts, that the designs of Priests and
Jesuits, and others adherent to the Sea of Rome, have of late bin more
frequently, and boldly put in practice then formerly, to the undermining, and
danger of the true Reformed Religion in his Majesty's Dominions established,
and finding also that there have bin, and having just cause to suspect there
still are, during the sitting of this present Parliament, endeavors to subvert
the fundamental Laws of England, and Ireland; and to introduce the Exercise of
an Arbitrarie and Tyrannical Government by most pernicious Councels,
Practices, Plots, and Conspiracies, and that the long intermission and breach
of Parliaments have occasioned many illegal Taxations, whereby the Subjects
have bin prosecuted and grieved, and that diverse Innovations, and Superstitions
have bin brought into the Church, multitudes driven out of his Majesty's
Dominions, Iealousies raised and fomented between the King and his People, a
Popish Army levied in Ireland, and two Armies brought into the bowels of this
Kingdom to the hazard of his Majesty's Royal Person, the consumption of the
Revenue of the Crown and Treasure of the Kingdom, And lastly, finding great
causes of Jealousy that endeavors have bin, and are used to bring the English
Army into misunderstanding of this Parliament, thereby to incline that Army
with force to bring to pass these wicked Counsels, have therefore thought good
to join our selves in a Declaration of our united affection and resolution,
and to make this ensuing Protestation.

The Protestation made May the third, 1641.
I A. B. do promise, vow, and protest in the pres^nce of Almighty God to
maintain, and defend as far as lawfully I may with my life, power, and
Estate, the true Reformed Protestant Religion expressed in the Doctrine of the
Church of England, against all Popery and Popish Innovations within the Realm,
contrary to the said Doctrine, and according to the duty of my Allegiance to
his Majesty's Royal Person, Honor, and Estate, as also the power, and
privileges of the Parliament, the lawful Rights, and Liberties of the Subject,
and every person that makes this Protestation in whatsoever he shall do in
the lawful pursuance of the same, and to my power, and as far as lawfully I
may, I will oppose, and by all good ways and means endeavor to bring to
condign punishment all such as shall either by force, practices, Counsels,
Plots, Conspiracies, or otherwise do any thing to the contrary in this present
Protestation contained. And further that I shall in all just, and honorable
ways endeavor to preserve the Union and peace of the three Kingdoms of England,
Scotland, and Ireland, neither for hope, fear, or other respect shall
relinquish this promise, vow and Protestation.

FINIS.
Whereas some doubts have been raised by several persons out of this House,
concerning the meaning of these words contained in the Protestation lately made
by the Members of this House, (viz.) The true Reformed Protestant Religion,
expressed in the Doctrine of the Church of England, against all Popery and
Popish Innovations within this Realm, contrary to the same doctrine; This
House does declare, That by those words, was, and is meant, only the public
Doctrine professed in the said Church, so far as it is opposite to Popery and
Popish Innovations; And that the said words are not to be extended to the
maintaining of any form of Worship, Discipline, or Government, nor of any Rites
or Ceremonies of the said Church of England.

May 5. 1641.
IT is this day ordered by the House of Commons now assembled in Parliament,
That the preamble, together with the Protestation, which the Members of this
house made the third of May, shall be forthwith printed, and the Coppies
printed brought to the Clarke of the said house, to attest under his hand, to
the end that the Knights, Citizens and Burgesses may send them down to the
Shrieves and Justices of Peace of the several Shires, and to the Citizens and
Burgesses of the several Cities, Boroughs, and Cinque Ports, respectively. And
the Knights, Citizens, and Burgesses, are to intimate unto the Shires, Cities,
Borroughs, and Cinqueports, with what willingness all the Members of this
House made this protestation: and further to signify, that as they justify
the taking of it in themselves, so they cannot but approve it in all such as
shall take it.

May, twenty fifth, 1641.
IT is thought fit that the Protestation, which the Parliament lately made, be
taken by the City of London, the next Lords Day, being the thirtieth of this
instant month, in the several^ Parish Churches in the afternoon after Sermon
before the Congregation be dissolved, by all Masters of Families, their Sons,
and men Servants in manner and form following. viz.

First, That forthwith notice of this intention be given to the Minister,
Churchwardens, and some other meet Persons of each Parish in London, Liberties,
and adjacent Parishes, and some of them to give notice to the rest of the
Parishioners. Secondly, That the Minister be entreated (if he please) to
acquaint his Parish in his Sermon, either forenoon or afternoon, with the
nature of the business, more or less as he shall think fit, for the better
and more solemn taking of the said Protestation, or if the Minister refuse it,
that some other be entreated to preach that will promote the business; or if
neither of these may be had, that some other convenient course be taken by some
well affected to the business to stay the Parish, and communicate the matter
to them. Thirdly, That the Minister or Ministers of every Congregation first
take it, in his or their own person, reading the said Pro^estation in so
distinct a voice, that all present may conveniently hear it, and that all the
Assembly ^resent do make the same Protestation distinctly after this manner,
every man taking this Protes^ation into his hand. I A. B. do in the presence
of Almighty God freely and heartily promise, vow, and protest the same which
the leading person took, naming the person. Fourthly, That there be a Register
Book wherein every Man taking this vow or protestation subscribe his name,
with his own hand or mark, and that the names be taken of such as do refuse
the same. Fifthly, That all the Parishioners abovesaid whether in Town or out
of Town be earnestly requested to be present at their own Parish Church in
the afternoon, that every man may take it in their own place, and if any be
necessarily absent that they may be desired to take it the next Lords day
after, or so soon as may be with convenience. Sixthly, and lastly, that all whom
it does not immediately concern be earnestly requested to depart.

