AN ORDINANCE OF THE LORDS and COMMONS Assembled in PARLIAMENT: For the speedy
supply of Moneys within the City of London, and Liberties thereof, for the
relief and maintenance of the Armies raised and to be raised for the necessary
defense of the City and Liberties aforesaid.

Die Veneris, 18. August. 1643.

Ordered by the Lord Mayor and the Militia of London, that this Ordinance be
forthwith Printed and published.

Printed at London by Richard Cotes. 1643.

An Ordinance of the Lords and Commons in Parliament Assembled.
Die Veneris, 18. August, 1643.
THE Lords and Commons, finding that there is for the present an urgent
necessity for the speedy raising and levying considerable sums of money, for
the necessary defense of Religion, Laws, and Liberties, and of the City of
London with the Liberties thereof, the chief objects of our enemies malice,
Have hereby Ordained, and be it Ordained by the said Lords and Commons, That
all and every person and persons as well Aliens and Strangers, borne out of the
Kings obeisance, as Denisens, and others Inhabiting, or who at any time since
the beginning of this Parliament, did Inhabit within the said City of London,
and Liberties thereof, forthwith after publication hereof, shall by way of
Loan for every sum of four shillings which every person and persons paid, or
was rated or Assessed to pay for twenty shillings Lands, in any one of the two
last of the six first Subsidies granted, this present Parliament: lend for the
Service aforesaid, and pay to the Treasurers hereafter appointed the sum of
ten pounds, and for every sum of eight shillings, which every such person or
persons paid or was rated or assessed to pay for three pounds Goods in any one
of the said two last of the first six Subsidies granted this present
Parliament, the sum of twenty pounds, and so rateably according to that
proportion for all and every greater sum and sums of Money rated and
assessed upon any person or persons, for the aforesaid Subsidies, either for
Goods or Lands, within the said City and Liberties. And it is further Ordained
by the said Lords and Commons, that the Alderman, Aldermans Deputy and Common
Co^nsell men of each Ward within the said City and Liberties, or the greater
number of them, shall be a Committee in their several Wards, forthwith to
nominate and appoint some trusty, able, and well affected persons, either
amongst themselves or others, inhabiting within each Ward respectively, who
upon sight of the Rolls of the said former Subsidies shall cause the said Rates
and Assessements hereby Ordained to be lent, to be paid in as aforesaid. And
the said Aldermen, Aldermens Deputies, and Common Counsel men of each Ward, or
the greater number of them, calling in to their assistance, such as they shall
think fit; shall also within their several Wards have hereby power and
authority to rate and assesse in such proportionable manner as they shall
think fit, toward the payments of the said Moneys for the Service aforesaid,
such other person and persons, as well Strangers as others, who being of
ability to pay, were notwithstanding not rated, nor assessed in the said former
Subsidies.

And it is also Ordained by the said Lords and Commons, that all and every
person and persons rated and assessed by virtue hereof shall, within three
days after demand made by such person or persons as the said Committees, or
the greater number of them shall appoint as aforesaid, after notice thereof
given and left at his usual dwelling place, pay to the Treasurers hereby
appointed, or to any two of them, one half of the sum so rated or assessed,
or to be rated and assessed upon him or them, and the other half within the
space of one month after publication hereof: And if any person or persons so
assessed or to be assessed by virtue of this Ordinance, shall fail therein,
that then the said Committees, or any two of them within their several Wards
by such person, or persons as they shall appoint, shall levy the sum so
assessed or to be assessed, by Distress of the Goods and Chattells of such
person and persons so assessed, or to be assessed, and neglecting or refusing
to pay the same in manner aforesaid, and sell the goods so distrained for the
service aforesaid, and if no sufficient Distress can be found, that then the
said Committees or any two of them within their several Wards, by such person
and persons as they shall appoint, shall certify the names of every such
person, and persons, to the Committee of the House of Commons for Examinations
sitting at Westminster, or to the Committee of the Militia of London, or any
three of them, who shall hereby have power respectively to commit such person
and persons to safe custody without Bail, and Mainprize, wheresoever the said
persons shall be found, whether within the said City and Liberties or without,
and his Estate shall be moreover sequestered by the Committee of Sequestrations
for the said City of London, or of such County where his Estate shall be found
to be employed for the service aforesaid, until the Sum so charged upon him
be satisfied. And the said Lords and Commons do further ordain that all and
every person and persons shall pay in their proportion of Money hereby rated
and Assessed upon them and every of them according to this Ordinance at the
Guild Hall London, unto Sir John Wollastone Knight and Alderman, Mr. Alderman
John Warner, Mr. Alderman Towse, and Mr. Alderman Andrews, or to such other
person or persons as shall be from time to time hereafter nominated and chosen
by the Common Counsel of London for that purpose, or to any two of them, who
are hereby appointed Treasurers for the receiving and issuing forth of the
Moneys aforesaid. All which shall be issued forth and paid by warrants under
the hands of the Committee of the Militia of London, or of such others as the
Common Council of the said City of London shall appoint for the intent and
purpose aforesaid. And for all such persons as shall pay in their Moneys
according to the true intent and meaning of this Ordinance. It is hereby
ordained that they shall have the security of the Common Seal and Chamber of
London, in manner as it was granted and agreed upon by Act of Common Counsel,
the II. of this instant August 1643. And it is further ordained by the said
Lords and Commons, that (all pretenses and delays set aside) all and every
person and persons inhabiting within the said City and Liberties heretofore
Rated and Assessed, to pay any sum or sums of Money by virtue of any Act or
Ordinance of Parliament: or of any Act of Common Counsel for the service
aforesaid. And all Aldermens Deputies, Common Council men, Collectors, or any
other person or persons within the said City and Liberties that now have or
hereafter shall have by virtue of this or any other Act or Ordinance of
Parliament, or of any Act of Common Counsel heretofore made, or by any
voluntary Subscriptions any sum or sums of Money in their or any of their
hands Collected for the service aforesaid, and shall not within six days after
publication hereof, or after the receipt of such sum or sums of Money bring
in the said several sums to the Treasurers and Receivers appointed for that
purpose, shall respectively undergo the like penalty as is hereby formerly
appointed to be imposed upon those that shall neglect or refuse to pay in their
Money, Rated and Assessed according to the proportions of the Subsidies
expressed in this Ordinance. And it is further ordained, that the Lord Mayor
and Court of Aldermen within the said City of London shall have power, and are
hereby authorized to commit to prison any person or persons hereby appointed to
execute this Ordinance, that shall wilfully refuse the same, or shall be
negligent in the execution thereof. Provided always, that this Ordinance shall
not extend to give power to Rate or Assesse any of the Peers, Members,
Assistants, or necessary Attendants of either of the two Houses of Parliament,
or of any person whose estate is seized upon by the Kings Forces, power, or
command; for his good affections, or conformity to the commands of the
Parliament. And has been necessitated to withdraw himself from his ordinary
place of habitation to the City of London.

FINIS.

