AN ORDINANCE OF The Lords and Commons assembled IN PARLIAMENT, For the utter
demolishing, removing and taking away of all MONVMENTS OF Superstition or
Jdolatry, Out of all the Churches and Chapels within this Kingdom of England,
and Dominion of Wales, Before the First day of November, 1643.

ORdered by the Commons in Parliament, That this Ordinance be forthwith printed
and published:

H: El^ynge, Cler. Parl. D. Com.



Printed for Edward Husbands, October 11. 1643.

Die Lunae, 28., Augusti, 1643.
THe Lords and Commons in Parliament taking into their serious Considerations,
how well pleasing it is to God, and conduceable to the blessed Reformation in
his Worship, so much desired by both Houses of Parliament, That all Monuments
of Superstition or Idolatry, should, be removed and demollished; Do Ordain,
That in all and every the Churches and Chapels, as well Cathedral and
Collegiate, as other Churches and Chapels, and other usual places of public
Prayer, authorized by Law within this Realm of England and Dominion of Wales,
all Altars and Tables of Stone, shall before the first day of November, in the
year of our Lord God 1643. be utterly taken away and demollished; And also all
Communion Tables removed from the East end of every such Church, Chapel, or
place of public Prayer, and Chancell of the same, and shall be placed in some
other fit and convenient place or places of the body of the said Church,
Chapel, or other such place of public Prayer, or of the body of the chancel
of every such Church, Chapel, or other such place of public Prayer; And that
all Rails whatsoever, which have been erected near to before, or about any
Altar, or Communion Table, in any of the said Churches or Chappells, or other
such place of public Prayer at aforesaid, shall before the said day be
likewise taken away; And the Chancell ground of every such Church or Chapel,
or other place o^ public Prayer, which has been within twenty years last
past, raised for any Altar or Communion Table to stand upon, shall before the
said day be laid down, and levelled as the same was before the said Twenty
years last past; And that all Tapers, Candlestickes and Basins, shall before
the said day be removed and taken away from the Communion Table in every such
Church, Chapel, or other place of public Prayer, and neither the same, nor
any such like shall be used about the same at any time after the said day; And
that all Crucifixes, Crosses, and all Images and Pictures of any one or more
Persons of the Trinity, or of the Virgin Mary, and all other Images and
Pictures of Saints, or superstitious Inscriptions in, or upon all and every the
said Churches or Chappells or other places of public Prayer, Churchyards, or
other places to any the said Churches and Chapels; or other place of public
Prayer, belonging, or in any other open place, shall before the said first day
of November be taken away and defaced, and none of the like hereafter permitted
in any such Church or Chapel, or other places as aforesaid.

And be it further Ordained that all and every such removal of the said
Altars, Tables of stone, Communion Table Tapers Candlesticks and Basins,
Crucifixes and Crosses, Images, and Pictures as aforesaid, taking away of the
said Rayles, levelling of the said grouds, shall be done and performed, and the
walls, Windows, Grounds, and other places which shall be broken, impaired or
altered by any the means aforesaid, shall be made up and repaired in good and
sufficient manner, in all and every of the said Parish-churches on Chapels, or
usual places of public Prayer belonging to any Parish, by the Churchwarden,
or Churchwardens of every such Parish for the time being respectively; And in
any Cathedral or Collegiate Church or chapel, by the Dean or Sub-Dean, or
other chief Officer of every such church or chapel for the time being; And
in the Universities, by the several Heads and Governors of every College or
Hall respectively; And in the several Innes of Court, by the Benchers and
Readers of every of the same respectively, at the cost and charges of all and
every such Person or Persons, Body Politic or corporate, or parishioners of
every parish respectively to whom the charge of the repair of any such church,
chapel, chancel, or place of public Prayer, or other, part of such church or
chapel, or place of public prayer does, or shall belong: and in case
default, be made in any of the Premises by any of the person or persons
thereunto appointed by this Ordinance from, and after the said first day of
November, which shall be in the year of our Lord God 1643. That then every such
person or persons so making default, shall for every such neglect or default,
by the space of Twenty days, forfeit and lose forty shillings to the use of
the poor of the said Parish wherein such default shall be made, or if it be
out of any parish, then to the use of the poor of such parish whose Church is
or shall be nearest to the Church or Chapel, or other place of public prayer
where such default shall be made; and if default shall be made after the first day
of December, which shall be in the said year 1643. Then any one Justice of the
Peace of the county, City or town where such default shall be made, upon
information thereof to him to be given, shall cause or procure the promises to
be performed according to the Tenor of this Ordinance at the cost and charges
of such person or persons, bodies politic or corporate, or Inhabitants in
every parish who are appointed by this Ordinance to bear the same.

Provided, that this Ordinance, or any thing therein contained, shall not
extend to any Image, Picture, or coat of Arms in Glass, Stone, or otherwise;
in any Church, Chapel, Churchyard or place of public prayer as aforesaid,
set up or graven only for (...) (...)meant of any King, Prince, or Nobleman, or
other dead person which has not been commonly reputed or taken for a Saint:
But that all such Images, Pictures, and coats of Arms may stand and continue
in like manner and form, as if this Ordinance had never been made.

FINIS.
Ordered by the Commons assembled in Parliament, That this Ordinance be
forthwith printed; And divulged and dispersed through the several and
respective Counties, Cities and Towns, by the several and respective Knights
and Burgesses:

H: Elsynge, Cler. Parl. D. Com.


