THE PETITION AND ARTICLES Exhibited in Parliament against Doctor Heywood, late
Chaplen to the Bishop of CANTERBURY, By the Parishioners of S. Giles in the
Fields.

With some considerable circumstances (worth observing) in the Hearing of the
Business before the grand Committee for Religion, and of his demeanor since.

London printed. 1641.

TO THE HONORABLE, the Knights, Citizens, and Burgesses of the Commons House
in Parliament, the humble Petition of diverse of the Parishioners, of the Parish
of Saint Gyles in the fields, in the County of Middlesex.
Most humbly shows,

THAT we live under the pastoral charge of one William Haywood Doctor of
Divinity, who has lately published in sundry Sermons by him preached in his
Parish Church most damnable and erroneous Doctrines, full of gross Popish
tenants. And whilst he was House Chaplain to the Archbishop of Canterbury,
did license a Book Entitled, An Introduction to a devout Life, containing the
like Popish Doctrines, all tending to the drawing away and seducing of the
respective Readers and Hearers from the true Orthodox faith, and to the
upholding and advancing of the Popish Religion, whose practice in Church
discipline, is superstitious and Idolatrous; manifested by strange anticke
jestures of cringings and bowings, by using and approving of many Antiquated
obsolet and Popish Ceremonies; both in the Administration of the holy Sacrament
of the Lords Supper, and in other holy duties: Contrary to the Laws
established within this Realm, in whose Parish Church aforesaid, are set up
Crucifixes, and diverse Images of Saints, and likewise Organs, with other
confused Music hindering devotion, are maintained to the great and needless
charge of the Parish. The particulars are contained in a Scedule annexed, ^all
tending to the great dishonor of God, the violation of his holy truth, to the
abuse of his holy Ordinances, to the utter subversion and overthrow of the true
Religion established, to the unspeakeable grief of our hearts, who desire
only to serve the Lord according to the rule laid down in his holy Word, and
who are hereby forced against our wills, to seek out the sincere saving truth
in our neighboring Churches, not being able to hear, and in our consciences
not daring to join in such Idolatrous worship, all which we are ready to make
good, as this Honorable Assembly shall appoint.

And therefore we do most humbly pray that this Honorable Assembly will take
such a course for his removal, that we may hereafter enjoy a faithful Pastor,
who may dispense unto us Gods Word and Sacraments, in our Parish, according to
Gods own Ordinance, without the superstitious mixture of humane Inventions.
And we shall pray, etc.

Some of the particular Erroneous Popish Doctrines preached in the Parish
Church of Saint Gyles in the fields, at several times by William Haywood,
Doctor of Divinity.

I. 1. HE affirmed that a Minister has power to remit and retain sins, and
not declaratively, or Ministerially only, as (he said) some would have it, but
actually and absolutely. And for proof whereof he cited John 20.23. Whosoever
sins ye remit, they are, etc. II. 2. He affirmed that every man in his
natural condition is by the fall of Adam wounded only, and but half dead,
which he preached the seventh of June last past, on the Sabbath day, and proved
it from Luke 10 30. A certain man went down from Jerusalem to Jericho, and
fell among thieves, who stripped him of his raiment and wounded him and
departed, Leaving him half dead. III. 3 He affirmed that the Virgin Mary was
free from, and without any mortal sins, which he preached lately on a
Sabbath day, on John 2.4. Jesus says unto her, Woman what have I to do with
thee, etc. IV. 4 He affirmed that Confession to the Priest of our particular
sins, is very necessary to the forgiveness of sin, and that they who did not
do it, were guilty of a great sin. Cum multis al^^, (had they been noted.)
Particular Erroneous, Popish Doctrines, contained in a Book Entitled, An
Introduction to a devout life, allowed (with a large approbation) by the said
Doctor to be Printed, whilst he was House Chap^ains to the Archbishop of
Canterbury.

1 To pray is a remedy against temptation, but if that fail, Then hastily run
in spirit to the Cross of our blessed Savior Jesus, imagining thou feast him
hanging thereon before thy face, and embrace, as it were, the foot of the
Cross upon thy knees, laying fast hold upon it as upon an assured Sanctuary,
page 591. chap. 7. 2 Stir up thy heart other times with corporal gestures of
outward devotion, prostrating thy self upon the ground, laying thy arms a
cross before thy breast, embracing his Image, which Exterior Acts are only
to be used when thou art retired alone in some secret Closet, Pa. 159. Cha 9. 3
By necessary obedience thou must obey thy Ecclesiastical superior as the
supreme head of Christ's Church; Also Archbishops, Bishops, Pastors, and such
as are their Deputies, Thou must obey thy Civil Superiors, to wit, the
Princes and Magistrates, but ever in that which he has charge over us; As in
that which belongs to Civil Policy, and public affairs, we must obey our
Prince; Our Prelate in that which belongs to Ecclesiastical matters, p. 366,
336.339. c. 11. 4 Call to the Saints of heaven, our blessed Lady, thy good
Angel, and the rest of the Saints to whom thou have an especial devotion, to
keep thee in the way to heaven, Page 691. Pray for the whole Church of God,
employing and imploring, to that end the intercession of our blessed Lady, Page
149. When thou come before thy spiritual guide, imagine thy self to be on
Mount Calvary, kneeling right under the feet of Jesus Christ crucified, etc.
Page 10. 5 An example of the practice of good thoughts, by S. Anselme
Archbishop of Canterbury: a Leveret started and sore pressed by hounds, as this
holy Prelate went on a journey, ran under his horse, as to the best place of
refuge, that the imminent danger of death suggested, barking and bragging round
about, durst not presume to violate the Sanctuary, to which their pray had
taken recourse, P. 183, 184. 6 Examples of good and manfull courage of Saint
Francis, and Saint Bennet, who feeling the great temptations of the flesh which
they suffered, the one cast himself naked into the thorns, and the other into
the Snow to mitigate them, Page 571. 7 Now certain it is that imperfections
and venial sins, do not take from us the life of grace, for that is never
lost but by deadly sin. The only care then that remains, is, that these
imperfections do not daunt our courage, Page 31. for a venial sin, be it
never so little, displeases Almighty God, though not so hainously, that he
will damme us for it, Page 112. 8 It is no heinous sin (my Philotheus) to
tell some little lie in pastime, to exceed somewhat in needless talk, in
careless looks, in apparel, in mirth, in play, in dancing, and such like
toys, Page 114. 9 In the Sacrament of Marriage, the Priest halloweth the
wedding Ring, Page 520. 10 Our blessed Savior has instituted the venerable
Sacrament of the Eucharist, which contains really and verily his flesh and
blood, to the end that he that eats it should live eternally, Page 219. in
which he does annihilate himself in a manner, and turns himself into our
celestial food, that so he may feed and nourish our souls, and make his
intrinsecall abode for ever within the hearts and bodies of his faithful
servants, Page 230. 11 As for bodily diseases, none are lawful impediments
from participating of this holy Sacrament, save only those which provoke much
vomiting, Page 226. 12 To communicate every eighth day is requisite, neither to
be guilty of mortal sin, nor of any affection to venial sin, Page 227.
Doctor Heywards Superstitious and Idolatrous manner of administration of the
Sacrament of the Lords Supper, in the Parish Church of Saint Gyles aforesaid.

The said Church is divided into three parts: the Sanctum Sanctorum being one
of them, i^ ^^parated from the Chancell by (...) large Screene in the figure of
a beautiful Gate, in which is carved two large pillars, and three large
statues: on the one side is Paul with his sword, on the other Barnabas with his
Book, and over them Peter with his Keys, they are set above with winged
Cerubims, and beneath supported with Lions.

Seven or eight foot within this holy place is a raising by three steps, and
from thence a long rail from one wall to the other, into which place none must
enter but the Priests and the Subde^^ons, this place is covered before the
Altar with afaire wrought Carpet, the Altar does stand close up to the wallon
the East side, and a Deske raised upon that with degrees of advancement, this
Deske is overlaid with a covering of Purple Velvet, which has a great gold and
silk fringe round about, and on this Desk is placed two great Books wrought
with needle work, in which are made the pictures of Christ, and the Virgin
Mary with Christ in her arms, and these are placed on each side of the Deske,
And on this Altar a is double covering, one of Tapestry, and upon that a long
fine Lawne does, with a very rich Bone-lace. The walls are hanged round within
the rail, with Hue silk Taffata Curtains. In the exterior Acts of
administering the Sacrament; For the preparation to this duty, the said Doctor
and three Subdeacons do all go from the body of the said Church unto the West
end, being there clothed according to their Order, some in Scarlet, silk, and
fine linen, they bend their course toward the East, every one at their first
entrance saluting the Church door with low Congies, then they all move to the
middle of the Church, where they all ducke down toward the East, then they
all advance to the beautiful gate, where they stand; Then every one bowing to
the ground three several times as they go. They enter into the Sanctum
Sanctorum in which place they read their second Service, and it is divided
into three parts, which is acted by them all three, with change of place, and
many duckings before the Altar, with diverse Tones in their Voices, high and
low, with many strange actions by their hands, now up then down, This being
ended, the Doctor takes the Cups from the Altar and delivers them to one of the
Subdeacons who placeth' them upon a side Table, Then the Doctor kneeleth to the
Altar, but what he does we know not, nor what he means by it. This dumb
devotion being ended, and the Altar more holy, the Cups are returned to him in
the same manner as he gave them, which the Doctor receives kneeling, and so
does he place them upon the Altar, with great adoration, in the bending of his
body, and in touching each of them with his finger. The bread being set upon a
Plate, and some of the wine powered into a bowl, all are covered with a fine
linen cloth; which cloth has the corners laid in the figure of a cross. This
being ended, he continues in his dumb devotion on his knees toward the East,
his back being toward the people, he takes money out of his pocket, and
lays it on the ground for a time, and then he takes it up, and offers it,
being on his knees with a very great bending of his body to the Altar, which
gift is reserved in a Basin only for that use. In these dumb devotions of his,
the Organs Play in a doleful low tune. When this is finished, the Doctor
begins the Consecration, which being ended, the number of beckings, bowings,
and bendings, by him and the Subdeacons before the Altar, are impious, ungodly,
and abominable to behold.

These Articles were all proved before the grand Committee for Religion, which
appeared to be far worse, by the circumstances declared by the witnesses: For
it was proved that when that Popish Book was Printing, the Printer seeing such
gross Popery in it, commanded his Workman to stay his hand, till he spoke
with the Licencer: so he took his Corrector of his Work, (being a Master of
Arts) with him, and showed the Doctor diverse Popish passages in the Book,
saying he durst not Print it, asking him if he had not overslipt the reading of
them. He looked on those they showed, and gave the Printer order to go on
with the Book, he would justify it, and would preach the same before the King
his Master (he being now his Majesty's Chaplen preferred thereto by Canterbury)
It was proved that (the book being called in by warrant, etc) the Printer was
troubled and put into the Pursivants hands, threatened with Star Chamber,
except he would deliver up the original Copy by which he printed, which he
refused to do, for that it is ever their custom to keep originals by them
for their own safeguards if they should be questioned, to show the License,
etc. But at length he by promises and threats, was constrained to deliver up
the Copy wherein the License was witten by the Doctors own hand. Which being
got, the Doctor or others for him did procure a Proclamation to be set out,
wherein it was declared that the Printer and the Author had conspired, and had
put in all the Popery after it was licensed, the Printer being then disabled to
prove the contrary.

At the hearing of the business before the Committee, the Doctor was asked in
what places it was altered from that he licenced. He answered, in Page 691.
Article 4. He allowed it to be read, Call to mind the Saints of Heaven etc
and the Printer had left our the word mind: but what stuff it is so read was
observed then by the Committee.

It was proved that a Parishioner of his being seduced to Popery by a Romish
Priest and others, the Doctor was entreated to admonish and reclaim her: and
though he had been solicited three or four several times, yet he refused,
although he came to the next door (to dinner) where she dwelt: her husband
being somewhat importunate the last time to have him confer with his seduced
wife, he was very angry with him, and wished him not to trouble him.

Another woman being perverted, her husband got her to go to the Doctor,
hoping by his council and reasons, to have reclaimed her: instead whereof, he
confirmed her, in saying, that Salvation might be had in the Church of Rome:
which though it were, true was very unseasonably spoken, and showed that he
had no great desire she should return.

He has caused the Protestation to be read and taken in that ridiculous,
absurd, and disdainful manner, with much scorn and jeering, that the
Parishioners that are forward and well affected to that just and pious act
become the scorn and laughter of their neighbor Papists, and to diverse of the
Vestry, his Creatures, of whom none has taken it as Parishioner, nor one word
said to encourage others to take it in Pulpit or else where, but much to the
contrary.

Many other things as bad as these could have been proved, but what was
already heard, appeared sufficient cause for his removal, which this
Honorable Assembly without all question will do, when those other weighty
Affairs of more general concernment are settled, especially in regard he does
still persist in his old manner not reforming any considerable thing; his Atar
stands decked continually, week-dayes and all, and mewed up within the Screene
and Rayles as before: some of the Parishioners desiring to receive the
Sacrament in their Pewes, were denied it and sent away without it, and he
forces all to come up to the Rayles still as before. In diverse of his Sermons
since the hearing of his business, he has with much bitterness inveighed
against the Petitioners, and at those that go from their own Parish Church,
although he has so weak a voice that he cannot be heard by the one half of
those that come to Church.

All the Premises well known, and seriously considered, there can no reason be
given by any well affected Protestant to desire his continuance.

FINIS.

