The Petition and Reasons Of both Houses of PARLIAMENT, to His Majesty, to
forbear His Intended Journey to Ireland; Sent the 15, and presented the 18 of
April.

By the Earl of Stamford, Sir John Culpepper Chancellor of the Exchequer, and
Anthony Hungerford Esquire.

Ordered to be forthwith Printed and Published.

Die Veneris 22 April. 1642. H. Elsing. Cler. Parl. D. Com.



Whereunto is added His Majesty's Answer hereunto returned to both Houses
April 22.

LONDON, Printed for R. Harford, in Queens-head Alley, in Pater noster-row.
1642.

May it please your Majesty,
YOur Majesty's most loyal and faithful Subjects, the Lords and Commons in
Pa^liament, have duly considered the Message received from Your Majesty
concerning Your purpose of going into Ireland in your own Person, to prosecute
the War there with the bodies of Your English Subjects, leavied, transported,
and maintained at their charge; which you are pleased to propound to us, not as
a matter wherein your Majesty desires the advice of Your Parliament, but as
already firmly resolved on, and forthwith to be put in execution, by granting
out Commissions for the leavying of 2000 Foot, and 200 Horse, for a Guard for
Your Person when You shall come into that Kingdom; Wherein we cannot choose but
with all reverence and humility to Your Majesty, observe, That You have
declined Your great Council, the Parliament, and varied from the usual course
of Your Royal Predecessors, that a business of so great importance,
concerning the peace and safety of all Your Subjects, and wherein they have a
special interest by Your Majesty's promises, and by those great sums which
they have disbursed; and for which they stand engaged, should be concluded and
undertaken without their advice: Whereupon we hold it our duty to declare, That
if at this time Your Majesty shall go into Ireland, You will very much endanger
the safety of Your Royal Person and Kingdom, and of all other States
professing the Protestant Religion in Christendom, and make way to that cruel
and bloody design of the Papists every where, to root out and destroy the
Reformed Religion, as the Irish Papists have in a great part already effected
in that Kingdom, and in all likelihood would quickly be attempted in other
places, if the consideration of the strength and Union of the two Nations of
England and Scotland did not much hinder and discourage the execution of any
such design: And that We may manifest unto Your Majesty the danger and misery
which such a journey and enterprise would procure, We present to Your Majesty
the Reasons of this Our humble Opinion and Advice.

I. Your Royal Person will be subject, not only to the casualty of War, but to
secret practices and conspiracies, especially your Majesty continuing your
profession to maintain the Protestant Religion in that Kingdom, which the
Papists are generally bound by their vow to extirpate.

II. It will exceedingly encourage the Rebels, who do generally profess and
declare, That Your Majesty does favor and allow their proceedings, and this
Insurrection was undertaken by the warrant of your Commission; and it will make
good their expectation of great advantage by Your Majesty's Presence at this
time of so much distraction in this Kingdom, whereby they may hope we shall be
disabled to supply the War there, especially there appearing less necessity of
Your Majesty's journey at this time, by reason of the manifold successes which
God has given against them.

III. It will much hinder and impair the means whereby this War is to be
supported, and increase the charge of it, and in both these respects, make it
more insupportable to Your Subjects; And this we can confidently affirm,
because many of the Adventurers, who have already subscribed, do upon the
knowledge of Your Majesty's intentions, declare their resolutions not to pay in
their money, and others very willing to have subscribed, do now profess the
contrary.

IV. Your Majesty's absence must necessarily very much interrupt the
proceedings of Parliament, and deprive Your Subjects of the benefit of those
further Acts of Grace, and Justice, which we shall humbly expect from Your
Majesty, for the establishing of perfect Union, and mutual confidence betwixt
Your Majesty, and Your People, and procuring and confirming the prosperity and
happiness of both.

V. It will exceedingly increase the jealousies and fears of Your People, and
render the doubts of Your Subjects, more probable of some force intended by
some evil Counsels near Your Majesty, in opposition to the Parliament, and
favor of the malignant party of the Kingdom.

VI. It will bereave Your Parliament of that advantage, whereby they were
induced to undertake this War upon Your Majesty's promise, that it should be
managed by their advice, which cannot be done of Your Majesty contrary to
their Counsel, shall undertake to Order and Govern it in Your own Person.

Upon which, and diverse other, Reasons, we have resolved, by the full and
concurring agreement of both Houses, That we cannot with the duty which belongs
to us, consent to any levies, or raising of Soldiers to be made by Your
Majesty, for this Your intended expedition into Ireland, or to the payment of
any Army, or Soldiers there; but such as shall be employed and governed
according to our advice and direction; and that if such Levy, shall be made by
any such Commission of Your Majesty, not agreed to by both Houses of
Parliament, we shall be forced to interpret the same to be raised to the terror
of Your People, and disturbance of the public Peace, and hold our selves bound
by the Laws of the Kingdom, to apply the authority of Parliament to suppress
the same.

And we do further, most humbly declare, That if Your Majesty shall by ill
Counsel be persuaded to go, contrary to this advice of Your Parliament (which
we hope Your Majesty will not:) We do not in that case hold our Selves bound to
submit to any Commissioners which your Majesty shall choose, but do resolve to
preserve and govern the Kingdom by the counsel and advice of your Parliament,
for your Majesty, and your Posterity, according to our Allegiance, and the Law
of the Land.

Wherefore We humbly pray, and advise your Majesty to desist from this your
intended passage into Ireland, and from all preparation of Men and Arms
tending thereunto, and to leave the mannaging of that War to your Majesty's
Parliament, according to your Majesty's promise made unto us, and your Royal
Commission, granted under your great Seal of England, by advice of both
Houses; In prosecution whereof, by Gods blessing, We have made a prosperous
entrance by many defeats of the Rebels; whereby they are much weakened, and
disheartened, and have no probable means of subsistence if our proceedings
shall not be interrupted by this interposition of your Majesty's journey, but
that we may hope upon goods grounds, that within a short time, without hazard
of your Majesty's Person, and so much dangerous confusion to your Kingdoms,
which must needs ensue, if You should proceed in this Resolution, We shall be
enabled fully to Vindicate Your Majesty's Right and Authority in that Kingdom,
and punish those horrible and outrageous cruelties which have been committed in
the murdering, and spoiling so many of Your Subjects, and bring that Realm to
such a condition, as may be much for the advantage of Your Majesty and this
Crown, the honor of Your Government, and contentment of Your People; for the
better and more speedy effecting whereof, we do again renew our humble desires
of your return to your Parliament; And that you will please to reject all
Counsels, and Apprehensions which may any way derogate from the faithfulness,
and allegiance, which in truth and sincerity, we have always borne, and
professed to your Majesty, and shall ever make good to the uttermost, with our
lives and fortunes.

His majesty's Answer to this Petition, returned the 22. of April, 1642.
HIs Majesty has thought something of the Petition, and is much unsatisfied
with many of Your expressions therein: His Majesty will shortly send His
Parliament, a particular Answer, but for the present you are to tell them, that
as He resolved to do nothing concerning his Irish Journey, before He should
receive Their Answer, so now He will not proceed further therein, until they
shall hear further from Him again.

FINIS.

