THE PARLIAMENTS ANSWER, To the ARMIES PROPOSALS,

OR, A true extract of the Iurnalls in Parliament, so far as they relate unto
the Petition and Proposals of the Army, and present distempers.

LONDON, Printed by John Redmayne, 1659.

The Parliaments Answer, to the Armies Proposals.
Thursday 22. of September.
LIeutenant General Fleetwood having acquainted the Parliament with the effect
of an Address intended to be made to them by some of the Army: They ordered
that Collonell Ashfield, Collonell Cobbet, and Lieutenant Collonell Duckenfield
be, and are hereby required forthwith this afternoon to bring to the Parliament
the Original Paper or address in their or one of their hands, intended by
some of the Army to be presented to the Parliament, and that the Copy thereof
in the hands of the Lieutenant General Fleetwood be also brought to the House
this afternoon; And thereupon Ordered that Lieutenant General Fleetwood do
give the said Collonell Ashfield, Collonell Cobbet, and Lieutenant Collonell
Duckenfield notice of the said Order.

Thursday 22. September Afternoon.
The House received in pursuance of their Order made in the forenoon, A Letter
signed by many persons of the Army, and directed to Collonell Ashfield,
Collonell Cobbet, and Lieutenant Collonell Duckenfield, by whose hands, or any
one or two of them, they desired the enclosed Paper with the Letter might be
presented to the Lord Fleetwood, and afterward unto the general Council of
Officers, which enclosed Paper was entitled, To the Supreme Authority of these
Nations: The Parliament of the Commonwealth of England, The humble Petition
and Proposals of the Officers under the command of the right Honorable the
Lord Lambert in the late Northern Expedition: after a debate thereupon until 7
of the clock that Evening; They ordered, that the further debate hereof be
adjourned until to morrow morning, and that it be the first business nothing
to Intervene.

Friday 23. September.
The House according to former Order resumed the debate upon the Petition and
Proposals, yesterday adjourned: And Resolved, That this House does declare,
that to have any more general Officers in the Army then are already settled by
the Parliament, is needless, chargeable, and dangerous to the Commonwealth.

Ordered, that Lieutenant General Fleetwood do communicate this Vote unto the
Officers of the Army, which being accordingly presented, the officers had
several meetings, and at last concluded upon a Petition and Representation. In
the interim, the House passed the following Resolves, unto which they do ^e^er
in their answer to the said Proposals.

Tuesday 4. Oct^ber
Resolved, that the Arrears due unto the Officers and Soldiers of the Army,
and also of the Militia Troops shall be paid out of the Moiety of such moneys
as shall be raised by the sale or composition of the Delinquents sequestered,
and to be sequestered upon the late Insurrection, and out of one Moyetie of the
money to be raised by the sale of Forests and Chases, excepting new Forest,
and the Forest of Dean, and excepting such timber and trees as shall be
thought fit to be reserved and made use of for the service of the Commonwealth
And that the other moiety of the money to be raised by the said Delinquents
Estates, shall go to the use of the Navy: And that the other moyetie of the
Fotrests, except as aforesaid shall go to the payment and satisfaction of the
debts due upon the Publick-Faith, and that the best way and means be speedily
taken for rendering this Vote effectual.

The following Resolves concerning the maimed soldiers, and orphans which
passed the 1 September. unto which those which passed the 5. of October have
relation.
Resolved, that two months pay be forthwith provided and paid unto the maimed
soldiers and widows at the Savoy, and Ely house, and that the Council of State
do see that one fortnights pay be paid accordingly: and that the Commit of
Inspections do consider how the residue may be forthwith paid.

Ordered, that the Trustees and Contractors at Worcester house do consult with
the Commissioners for maimed soldiers, who are sitting to be continued, and
how they are to be provided for. Ordered that the said Trustees be enjoined to
give an account hereof to the house before the 19. of September 1659.

Resolved, that no one be Pensioners who have married second husbands, since
the death of the first, who were wounded or slain in the service of the
Parliament, and that none be continued Pensioners, but such as are disabled
from working by their wounds in the service of the Common wealth.

Orderd, that the children of maimed soldiers as are fit, shall be put
Apprentises.

Resolved, that such widows of soldiers as have been slain in the service of
the Parliament, as are able to work and have no children, shall be continued no
longer as Pensioners.

Wednesday. 5. October
Upon report from the Trustees at Worcester house touching the maimed
soldiers. etc.

Resolved, that the power of the said Trustees in Reference to the maimed
Soldiers, etc. be, and is hereby continued for three months longer, and that
it be referred to Lieutenant General Fleetwood to confer with the said
Trustees and such others as he shall think fit, and to take care that such of
the maimed soldiers, as the said Trustees shall from time to time nominate, be
disposed in Garrisons for ease of the Public charge of the Commonwealth.

Resolved, that the Trustees at Worcester house have power to dispose of such
others of the maimed soldiers, at the Savoy and Ely house (as are not fit to
be placed in Garrisons) in such other Hospitalls of this Commonwealth,
(whereby they may be comfortably provided for) as they shall think fittest, for
the further ease of the public charge: And that they confer with the
Governors of the Hospital under the dispose of the Corporation for the poor,
about the placing and settl ng of the Orphans in the Savoy and Ely house, and
take care for the settling of them accordingly.

Resolved, that such moneys as come next in upon discovery to the Committee for
Inspections, shall be disposed of toward the payment of the 6. weeks pay to be
ordered to the maimed soldiers and widows at the Savoy and Ely house.

The House being informed that some Officers of the Army were at the door,
they were called in, and Major General Dishrow in the name of the rest, said as
follows. Mr. Speaker I am ordered by the general Council of the Army, with
the rest of these Gentlemen to wait upon you, to present unto you there humble
Representation and Petition; and they humbly desire you would accept it, as
that which proceeds from the hearts of those who desire nothing more then that
the Lord would strengthen your hearts, in carrying on that good work of settling
these Nations, upon the foundation of a free Commonwealth, where by the
Religious and Civil Liberties of the good people thereof may be preserved and
secured: they being withdrawn the Petition was read, which follows.

The humble Representation and Petition of the Officers of the Army, to the
Parliament of the Common wealth of England. Presented to them Wednesday the
5th. of October, 1659. by Major General Disbrow: together with the Parliaments
Answer thereunto.
Shows,
THat having had by Your order some late Votes of Parliament communicated to us
by Lieutenant General Fleetwood, our Commander in chief, occasioned by a Debate
in Parliament, upon the Petition and Proposals of the Officers, under the
Command of the Lord Lambert in the late Northern expedition; We have inquired
diligently into our hearts and ways, with reference thereunto; and finding
nothing amongst us but faithfulness and integrity to the Parliament and this
Commonwealth; we cannot but be sensible that there has not wanted some
persons, who have endeavored to beget misunderstanding between the Parliament
and Army: and to that end have presented our Actions and Intentions so, as it
is taken for granted there has been irregularity amongst us, at which we fear
you have taken offense. Whereas we are persuaded, that if there had not been an
anticipation, it would have appeared to all unprejudiced Spirits, that neither
we, (who for the generality of us, were utterly ignorant of that whereat the
offense is taken) nor our faithful brethren of the Northern Brigade, who signed
the said Petition and Proposals, did design or intend any thing tending to the
interruption of the Parliament, the prejudice of the peace of this
Commonwealth, or any other by, or sinister respect, not becoming the Trust
reposed in us. Wherefore being sensible of the evil Use, that persons abroad
may make from the least apprehensions of Difference between the Parliament and
Army, and that we may as much as in us lie, remove all occasions of Surmise,
justify our own innocence before you, and frustrate the expectations of any,
who by blowing up the Coals of Dissension, hope to warm themselves thereby.

We have thought it our duty to present our naked thoughts to you, and hope you
will find so much of integrity and approved faithfulness in us, for the welfare
of this Commonwealth, as may continue a firm confidence of us, and engage your
zeal against all such as shall go about to reproach your faithful Army, or any
Member thereof for the future: especially considering that the Peace of these
Nations, next under God, depends so much upon a Cordial and Affectionate
Agreement and Union of the Parliament and Army, and an un-interrupted good
understanding of each other, and therefore we do humbly and plainly declare.

1. That notwithstanding what any persons may suggest or say to the contrary,
we are not for, but against the setting up of any single Person whatsoever in
Supreme Authority; and for a demonstration hereof, we may appeal to your own
judgments upon our late Actings: wherein, since our Declaration of the sixth
of May last, we have withal industry and faithfulness, endeavored to render
our selves serviceable to you and this Commonwealth, and have cheerfully
observed your commands; some of us with our lives in our hands in your late
service, whereinto our great encouragement the Lord has once more appeared to
own you and your Army, and the good old Cause for which we have contended. And
at the late return of this Parliament to the discharge of their remaining
trust, We did with simplicity and plainness in our Humble Petition and Address
presented to you, manifest our hearts and desires, and that with much unanimity
and fullness of consent, which we apprehended was well accepted by you.

2. That we have not since changed our principles, (leading to a well-regulated
Commonwealth, wherein the Liberties of the people thereof, both spiritual and
civil, may be fully secured, and persons of known integrity, piety and ability,
employed in places of trust and concernment) but resolve by the assistance of
God to remain constant to them. And make it our humble prayer to God, that he
would incline your hearts effectually to prosecute the same; and make you
instrumental in bringing forth such a foundation of Government, whereby all the
good people of these Nations may rationally expect that such Liberties and
Rights shall be p^eserved to them and their posterities. And we can truly say
that it is in our hearts earnestly, to desire that God would crown you with the
h^nour of making these Nations happy by such a settlement, as may not be liable
at every change of Governors to have the peace thereof disturbed by introducing
new Governments.

3. Whereas a Petition and Proposals were lately drawn up by the Officers of
the Brigade that (under the command of Major General Lambert) hazarded
themselves in your service with good success, whereby through the blessing of
God upon them and others of your faithful friends and servants, the peace of
this Commonwealth is still continued; And the said Petition was sent up to
some Officers here, to be presented to the Lord Fleetwood, which has been by
some interpreted to evil and sinister ends, and from thence suggestions
derived, as if there were intentions to violate the Parliament, to set up a
single person or another General. In order thereunto; We do sincerely profess
(what ever the designs of any persons may be to promote such causeless
jealousies) we have had no other then faithfulness and candor in our hearts
and actions toward the Parliament, nor do we apprehend (with submission we
speak it) any reason or cause of offense to be conceived against your faithful
servants, who lately gave so ample proof of their fidelity and courage.

4. We cannot but esteem our selves unhappy to have been so misrepresented to
the Parliament, as should occasion such a public admonition upon record; And
considering what evil use may be made of these things by the public Enemy,
and to the end they may be disappointed of their hopes, and all such persons
discouraged as shall go about for the future, to promote jealousies, or by
misinformation to beget divisions betwixt the Parliament and their faithful
servants the Army, and that a good understanding may be preserved between them,
We humbly pray,

I. That the Officers of the Army, and particularly those who have reason to
bear the marks of your favor for their faithfulness in the late Northern
Expedition, may stand right in your opinion, and have your countenance.

II. That whatsoever person or persons shall for the future groundlesly and
causelessly inform the House against your Servants, thereby creating jealousies,
and casting scandalous imputations upon them, may be brought to examination,
justice, and condign punishment.

III. That it being an undoubted right of the people to have a Liberty in a
peaceable and submissive way, to petition the Supreme Authority, which liberty
has been by your selves asserted, allowed, and approved of, we cannot but also
assert the said liberty, and humbly conceive that your faithful Servants of the
Army have no way forfeited their Rights as Free men: and that therefore they
hope it will be no offense for them to submit their humble desires to the
Parliament. And we hope and pray you will not discourage them for so doing.

IV. That you would be pleased to take into your serious consideration the
necessitous condition of the poor Soldiers of your Armies and that all
possible care may be taken for their timely supply, their wants being such as
earnestly call for it; and that some speedy and effectual course may be taken
to provide for the maimed soldiers and he poor widows and orphans, of such as
have been slain in your service, that the blessing of the desolate may be upon
you.

V. That such who have freely offered themselves in the several Counties and
cities of these Nations, to own and stand by you and your Cause in the late
Insurrection, with the hazard of all which is dear unto them, may have your
encouragement, and be employed in places of trust and command.

VI. That (it being a thing granted by all, that without due execution of
Martial Discipline, the peace, union, and good government of an Army cannot be
preserved) the discipline of the Army may be preserved inviolable, and in
particular, that no Officer, or Soldier of your Army may be cashierd or
dismissed from their places, without a due proceeding at a Court Martial, or by
his own consent, except in cases of Reducement, or Disbandings.

VII. That it being judged necessary by the Parliament for the keeping of the
Army under such a conduct as may render the same serviceable to the
Commonwealth, to appoint a Committee of Nomination, for the proposing of
Officers to the Parliament for their approbation, we humbly pray, that no
Officers may be brought into the Army but such as shall first come under the
consideration of the said Committee, and be by them presented.

VIII. The Office of the Commander in chief of the Army being of so great
concernment to the peace of this Commonwealth, and his Commission at present
(as we conceive) expiring within a few months, we humbly pray, that the
consideration of that matter may come before you, and some such effectual
course taken therein, as may prevent our fears, and the hazard of leaving the
Army to confusion.

IX. And that you would retain a good opinion of your Army, and against all
discouragements whatsoever, proceed in the carrying on of that good work
entrusted in your hands for the glory of God, and advantage of these Nations.
In the prosecution whereof through the help of our God we shall be found
(notwithstanding all endeavors to the contrary) faithful to you and this
Commonwealth.

After which the Officers being called in again, Mr. Speaker by order of the
House gave them this answer: Gentlemen, the Parliament have read your
Representation and Petition, and taking notice of the good expressions of your
affections, and faithfulness to this Parliament and Commonwealth, which are
there in, have commanded me to return you the thanks of the House, and in their
names I give you thanks accordingly: I am likewise commanded to let you know
that the Parliament have already taken into consideration the relief of the
poor Widows, Orphans and maimed Soldiers, to whom pensions have been formerly
allowed, and have also settled away for satisfaction of the Arrears due to the
Officers and Soldiers, and shall endeavor to bring the same to speedy effect,
the other matters of your Petition are appointed to be taken into consideration
on Saturday next.

Monday 10. of October.
This day the House took into consideration the Humble Representation and
Petition of the Officers of the Army, and Resolved, That this House do now
proceed in the particular Proposals of the Humble Petition and Representation
of the Officers of the Army, as follows:

1. Proposal was read as follows:

THat the Officers of the Army, and particularly those who have reason to bear
the marks of your favor, for their faithfulness in the late Northern
Expedition, may stand right in your opinion, and have your Countenance.

Resolved, That this be the answer to the first Proposal: That the Officers of
the Army have received, and shall from time to time receive marks of the favor
of this Parliament, and countenance answerable to their merit and faithfulness.

Monday in the afternoon.
2. Proposal was read as follows:

THat whatsoever person or persons shall for the future groundlesly, and
causlesly inform the House against your Servants, thereby creating jealousies,
and casting scandalous impucations upon them, may be brought to examination,
justice, and condign punishment.

Resolved, That this be the Answer to the second Proposal: That it is the duty
of all persons, especially of the Members of Parliament, to inform the House of
any thing, which in their apprehension may concern the Public safety; And it
is the undoubted right of the Parliament to receive, and debate those
informations, and to resolve what they think fit thereupon; Ordered that a
Committee sit to morrow at seven of the clock, upon the 3d. Proposal.

Tuesday 11. October.
3. Proposal.

THis day the Committee appointed to prepare an answer to the third Proposal,
made their report to the House, which was read: That it being an undoubted
Right of the people, to have a Liberty in a peaceable and submissive way, to
Petition the Supreme Authority, which Liberty have been by your selves
asserted, allowed, and approved of, we cannot but also assert the said Liberty,
and humbly conceive that your faithful Servants of the Army have no way
forfeited their rights as free men: And that therefore they hope it will be no
offense for them to submit their humble desires to the Parliament, and we hope
and pray you will not discourage them for so doing.

Resolved, That this be the Answer to the third Proposal: The Parliament
declares, that every Member of the Army as Freemen of England, have right of
Petitioning the Parliament: But with all thinks fit to let them know, that the
Petitioners ought to be very careful, both in the manner, and in the matter
which they desire: That the way of Promoting and presenting the same may be
peaceable, and the things Petitioned for, not tending to the disturbance of the
Commonwealth, nor to the dishonor of the Parliament; And that it is the duty
of Petitioners to submit their desires to the Parliament, and acquiess in the
judgment thereof.

Tuesday in the afternoon.
4. Proposal was read as follows:

THat you would be pleased to take into your serious consideration, the
necessitous condition of the poor Soldiers of your Armies, that all possible
care may be taken for their timely supply, their wants being such as earnestly
call for it: And that some speedy and effectual course may be taken to provide
for the maimed Soldiers, and the poor Widows and Orphans, of such as have been
slain in your service, that the blessing of the desolate may be upon you.

Resolved, That two months pay be forthwith paid to the Officers and Soldiers
of the Army in England, out of the six months Assessment of 35000 l. p. month,
now due, and that the Council of State do give order that the same be paid
accordingly: Resolved, that two months pay be also forthwith paid to the
Officers and Soldiers, in Scotland and Ireland; and that the Council of State
do give order for the Payment thereof accordingly:

Ordered, That the former Votes for making provisions for Officers and
Soldiers, and wounded and maimed Soldiers, be also part of the Answer to this
fourth Proposal:

Ordered, That the Council of State do take care that the moneys formerly
ordered to be paid, to the use of the wounded and maimed Soldiers, Widows and
Orphans at Ely-house and the Savoy, be forthwith paid unto the old Officers
there, and that they pay it according to the regelation made by the Trustees
and Contractors at Worcesterhouse.

Ordered, that it be referred to a Committee to bring in a Bill for saving, to
such Apprentises as have served the Parliament in the late War, their time, and
to compel their Masters to grant them their Freedom, as if they had been in
their Masters service, during the time they were in the Parliaments service.

5. Proposal was read as follows:

THat such who have freely offered themselves in the several Counties and
Cities of these Nations, to own and stand by you and your cause in the late
insurrection, with the hazard of all which is dear unto them, may have your
encouragement, and be employed in places of trust and command.

Resolved, That this be the Answer to the fifth Proposal: That such persons as
have been faithful and active for the Parliament in the late Insurrection, the
Parliament will take care to give them all due encouragement as occasion shall
be offered.

Ordered, That this debate be adjourned until to morrow morning the first
business, nothing to entervene, the House also passed the Act against raising
of moneys upon the People without their consent in Parliament, which is as
follows:

An Act against the raising of Moneys upon the People, without their consent in
Parliament.
BE it Enacted by this present Parliament, and by the Authority thereof, and it
is hereby Enacted, That all Orders, Ordinances and Acts made by any single
Person and his council, or by both or either of them, or otherwise, or by any
Assembly or Convention, pretending to have Authority of Parliament, from and
after the Nineteenth day of April, 1653. and before the seventh of May, 1659.
and which have not been or shall not be enacted, allowed, confirmed by this
present Parliament, be and are hereby declared, deemed, taken and adjudged to
be of no force or effect, from and after the said seventh of May, 1659.

And be it further Enacted, That no person or persons shall after the eleventh
of October, 1659. Assess, Levy, Collect, Gather or receive any Custom, Impost,
Excise, Assessement, Contribution, Tax, Tallage, or any sum or sums of Money,
or other Imposition whatsoever upon the people of this Commonwealth, without
their consent in Parliament, or as by Law might have been done before the third
of November, 1640.

And be it further Enacted and Declared, that every person offending contrary
to this Act, shall be and is hereby adjudged to be guilty of high Treason, and
shall forfeit and suffer as in case of high Treason.

Provided, that this Act, or any thing herein contained, shall not be construed
or taken to make void or impeach one Act made this Parliament the twelfth of
July, 1659. Entitled, An Act of Indemnity and Free Pardon; nor any Article or
Clause therein contained,

Provided also, That nothing in this Act extend to interrupt the possession of
any Soldier or adventurer, or any Purchaser, their Heirs or Assigns, in
possession of any Lands or Hereditaments in Ireland, or of any Purchaser of any
Lands or Hereditaments within this Commonwealth, unless where this Parliament
has taken, or shall take further or other order therein,

Tho. St. Nicholas, Clerk of the Parliament.

Wednesday 12. October.
The House reassumed the debate upon the Proposals, the sixth being read, and
also a Letter dated at White Hall October the 5th. 1659. signed by diverse
Officers of the Army, directed for Colonel John Okey, and a paper in print
Entitled, The humble Representation and Petition of the Officers of the Army
to the Parliament of the Commonwealth of England presented to them October the
5th. by Major general Disbrow accompanied with the field Officers of the Army,
and subscribed by two hundred and thirty Commission-officers in and about
London, together with the Parliaments answer thereunto:

Resolved, that the several Commissions of these several persons, Colonel
John Lambert, Colonel John Desbrow, Colonel James Berry, Colonel Thomas
Kelsey, Colonel Richard Ashfield, Coll. Ralph Cobbet, Colonel William
Packer, Colonel Robert Barrow, and Major Richard Creed; who have subscribed
the said Letter, shall be, and are hereby made void and null, and they and
every of them, be, and are hereby discharged from all Military employment:

Resolved, that the Army shall be governed by Commissioners:

Resolved that the number of Commissioners be seven:

Whereupon a Bill was drawn up, impowering several persons therein named
Commissioners for the government of the Army, which after thrice reading, upon
the question passed as follows:

An Act appointing Commissioners for the Government of the Army.
BE it Enacted by this present Parliament and the Authority thereof, and it is
hereby Enacted, That one Act made this Parliament, Entitled, An Act
connstituting Charles Fleetwood Esquire Lieutenant General and Commander in chief
of the Forces, raised and to be raised by Authority of Parliament within
England and Scotland, and a^l Powers and Authorities thereby given, be and are
hereby repealed and made void, and that the Army and forces in England and
Scotland of this Commonwealth, shall for the Future be governed by
Commissioners in the place and stead of a Lieutenant General, and that
Lieutenant General Charles Fleetwood, Lieutenant Genesis Edmond Ludlow, Genesis
Georg Monk, Sir Arth. Hesilrigg Col. Herbert Morley, Col. Valentine Walton,
Colonel Robert Overton, be and are hereby appointed Commissioners to execute
all and singular the Powers and Authorities incident or belonging to the Office
of the Lieutenant General of the Army of this Commonwealth in England and
Scotland, in as large and ample manner as in and by the said recited Act was
granted and expressed, and that they or any three or more of them shall and may
execute the said office and Powers from the 11 day of October 1659 unto the 12
day of February 1659. any Act or Commission whatsoever made or granted to the
contrary in any wise notwithstanding. And that all Officers and Soldiers of the
Army, and other persons concerned are hereby required to yield their obedience
to the said Commissoners accordingly. And the said Commissioners are to obey
and observe such Orders and Directions, as they or any three or more of them
shall from time to time receive from the Parliament or Council of State
appointed, or which shall be appointed by Authority of Parliament.

After which the House passed the following Resolves.
Resolved. That it be referred to the Commissioners for commanding the Army, to
bring in the names of the next superior Officers in every of the Regiments late
of Col. John Lambert, Col. John Disbrowe, Col. James Berry, Col. Tho. Kelsey,
Col. Rich. Ashfield, Col. Ralph Cobbet, Col. William Packer, Col. Robert Barrow
and Major Rich. Creed, and present them to the Parliament to morrow morning.

Resolved that Col. Dixwell be Lieutenant of Dover Castle, and that his
Commission be brought in to morrow morning:

Referred to a Commit to consider of an answer to be given to the 6, 7.8.
proposals of the Officers of the Army, and report it to the House.

Ordered, that the Commissioners for the management of the Army be and are
hereby enjoined forthwith to meet and give order that the Forces may be
disposed of as may be for the peace of the Commonwealth, and safety of the
Parliament.

Thus gentle Reader have thou from the first Beginning the whole progress of
our present Distempers without any Observations thereupon, leaving all to thy
serious Consideration; Begging that thou also would petition the merciful
Father to put some period to the Distractions of poor England.

FINIS.

