THE Romanists Designs DETECTED, AND THE JESUITS Subtle Practices Discovered
and laid open.

Collected from their own Authors and other approved Testimonies.

By Anthony Egan B. D. late Confessor General of the Kingdom of Ireland: Now
through the great mercy of God Converted, and a Minister of the Gospel
according to the Reformed Religion.

LONDON, Printed for John Leigh at the Sign of the Blew Bell by Flying Horse
Court in Fleet Street. 1674.

Courteous Reader,
THat the Romanists (especially the Jesuitical Order) have ever since the
Reformation constantly endeavored the restoring of their Religion (or rather
Opinion) in these Kingdoms; and that they have not left any stone unturned, nor
stuck at any thing, how dangerous and difficult soever in it self, or contrary,
not only to true Religion, but even to those natural sentiments which God
himself has planted in every man, is as plain and perspicuous, as it is
certain and experimentally true. And though the Romanists with great confidence
will deny this charge; yet the actions themselves are so apparent and evident,
that no man of common sense and understanding, but may apprehend the truth and
reallity of it; insomuch that one of their own Priests, ( Watson by name) out
of a deep sense of the truth of this (in his Quodlibets, page 277.) has
ingeniously confessed, That no people under Heaven have so sought the Conquest of
their own native Land, the subversion of the State, the depopulation of the
Weale-publick, the alteration and change of all Laws, Customs and Orders. And
in short, the utter devastation, desolation and destruction of the ancient
Inhabitants of their Land, in so unnatural, unchristian, and uncatholick a
manner as the Popish faction has in this our Realm.

To this we may add the several Treasons and Conspiraces against the Persons of
Queen Elizabeth and King James, by Parry, Lopez, the Conspirators of the
Gunpowder Treason, etc. All or most of them allowed and approved on, not only
by several Priests and Jesuits in their Writings, but promoted and excited by
the Bulls, Pardons, and Dispensations of the Popes themselves. These ways of
force failing, they have been constrained to make use of more refined and
subtle means, by spreading jealousies, and somenting divisions amongst us. To
this purpose there was a College privately erected at Clerkenwell, and several
Jesuits in King Charles the Firsts days found there, as is apparent from the
several Histories of that time. Their design is evident from a Letter found in
their College, a Copy whereof is inserted in the following pages.

The Arts used to accomplish this design are the same now as formerly; but now
by often experiment they are grown more cunning, and have twisted their Plots
closer, and finding that of late the most Catholic King has been reduced low
in power, by the aspiring greatness, and the often successes of his Competitor
for Universal Monarchy, the French King; they have renounced the Spanish Party,
and have turned to that which is likely to be most successful; Knowing well
that if any Roman Catholic Prince can arrive at that they so long (in vain)
hoped would be effected by the King of Spain, the Priests Empire would be the
same in Grandeur and Power, they being exempt from all Civil jurisdiction, and
so no matter who, if he a Papist, shall attain universal Monarchy; They being
certain thereby to keep up their Hierarchy, and to be esteemed the greatest men
of their designed Empire. I therefore now publish these Papers, that the
present age may see what their designs were formerly to destroy our Religion
and Government, which without doubt in some sort they will strive to act over
again; that so the eyes of all true Protestants may be opened, whereby they may
apprehend their Intregues and Devices, and so be the better enabled to prevent
them.

A Copy of the Letter found in the Jesuits College at Clerkenwell, in the year
1627. Directed to their Father Rector at Bruxels, discovering their designs
upon this State, and their Judgment of the temper thereof, with a conjecture
of the success of the then ensuing Parliament.
Father Rector,
LEt not the Damp of Astonishment seize upon your ardent and zealous Soul in
apprehending the sudden and unexpected call of a Parliament: We have not
opposed but rather furthered it, so that we hope as much in this Parliament as
ever we feared any in Queen Elizabeth's days.

You must know the Council is engaged to assist the King by way of Prerogative,
in case the Parliamentary way should fail. You shall see this Parliament will
resemble the Pelican, which takes a pleasure with her beak to dig out her own
Bowels.

The Election of Knights and Burgesses has been in such confusion of apparent
Faction, as that which we were wont to procure heretofore with much art and
industry, (when the Spanish match was in treaty) now breaks out naturally as a
botch or boil, and spits and spues out its own rancour and venom.

You remember how that famous and immortal Statesman the Count of Gondamour fed
King James his fancy, and rocked him asleep with the soft sweet sound of Peace,
to keep up the Spanish Treaty. Likewise we were much bound to some Statesmen of
our own Country, for gaining time by procuring those most advantageous
Cessations of Arms in the Palatinate, and advancing the honor and integrity of
the Spanish Nation, and Villifying the Hollanders; remonstrating to King James
that that State was most ungrateful both to his Predecessor Queen Elizabeth,
and his most Sacred Majesty; That the States were more Obnoxious than the Turk,
and perpetually injured his Majesty's loving subjects in the East Indies, and
likewise they have usurped from his Majesty the Regality and unvaluable profit
of the Narrow Seas in fishing upon the English Coast, etc.

This great Statesman had but one principal means to further their great and
good designs, which was to set on King James, that none but the Puritan
Faction, which plotted nothing but Anarchy, and his confusion were averse to
this most happy union. We steered on the same course, and have made great use
of this Anarchical Election, and have prejudicated and anticipated the great
one, that none but the Kings Enemies and his, are chosen of this Parliament,
etc.

We have now many strings to our Bow, and and have strongly fortified our
Faction, and have added two Bulworks more; For when King James lived (you know
he was very violent against Arminianisme) and interrupted (with his pestilent
wit and deep Learning) our strong designs in Holland, and was a great friend to
that old Rebel and Heretic the Prince of Orange.

Now we have planted that Sovereign Drug Arminianisme, which we hope will purge
the Protestants from their Heresy; and it flourishes and bears fruit in due
season.

The Materials which build up our Bulwork, are the Projectors and Beggars of
all Ranks and Qualities: Howsoever both these Factions cooperate to destroy
the Parliament, and to introduce a new species and form of Government which is
Oligarchy.

These serve as direct Mediums and Instruments to our end, which is the
Universal Catholic Monarchy. Our foundation must be mutation, and Mutation
will cause a Relaxation, which will serve as so many violent diseases, as the
Stone, Gout, etc. to the speedy destruction of our perpetual and insufferable
anguish of body, which is worse than death it self.

We proceed now by Council and mature deliberation, how and when to work upon
the Dukes Jealousy and Revenge; And in this we give the honor to those which
merit it, which are the Church Catholics.

There is another matter of consequence, which we take much into our
consideration and tender care, which is to stave off the Puritans, that they
hang not in the Dukes ear; They are impudent subtle people.

And it is to be feared lest they should negotiate a reconciliation between the
Duke and the Parliament. It Is certain the Duke would gladly have reconciled
himself to the Parliament at Oxford: But now we assure our selves we have so
handled the matter, that both Duke and Parliament are irreconcilable.

For the better prevention of the Puritans, the Arminians have already locked
up the Dukes ears; and we have those of our own Religion, which stand
continually at the Dukes Chamber to see who goes in and out: we cannot be too
circumspect and careful in this regard.

I cannot choose but laugh to see how some of our own Coat have accoutred
themselves; you would scarce know them if you saw them: and it is admirable how
in speech and gesture they act the Puritans. The Cambridge Scholars to their
woeful experience shall see we can act the Puritans a little better than they
have done the Jesuits: They have abused our Sacred Patron St. Ignatius in jest,
but we will make them smart for it in earnest. I hope you will excuse my merry
digression; for I confess unto you I am at this time transported with joy to
see how happily all instruments and means as well great as less cooperate unto
our purposes.

But to return unto the main Fabric: Our foundation is Arminianisme; the
Arminians and Projectors, as it appears in the premises affect mutation; this
we second and enforce by probable Arguments. In the first place, we take into
consideration the Kings Honor, and present necessity; and we show how the King
may free himself of his Ward, as Lewis the 11th did. And for his great Splendour
and Luster, he may raise a vast Revenue, and not be beholden to his Subjects;
which is by way of Imposition of Excise: Then our Church Catholics proceed to
show the means how to settle this Excise, which must be by a Mercenary Army of
Horse and Foot: For the Horse we have made that sure, they shall be Forreiners
and Germans, who will eat up the Kings Revenues, and spoil the Country
wheresoever they come, though they should be well paid: what havoc will they
make there, when they get no pay, or are not duly paid? They will do more
mischief then we hope the Army will do.

We are provident and careful, that this Mercenary Army of 2000 Horse and
20000 Foot, shall be taken on, and in pay before the Excise be settled. In
Forming the Excise, the Country is most likely to rise: If the Mercenary Army
subjugate the Country, then the Soldiers and Projectors shall be paid out of
the Confiscations; If the Country be too hard for the Soldiers, then they must
consequently mutiny, which is equally advantageous unto us. Our superlative
design is to work the Protestants as well as the Catholics to welcome in a
Conqueror, and that is by this means: We hope instantly to dissolve Trades,
and hinder the building of Shipping, in devising probable designs, and putting
on the State upon Expeditions, as that of Cadiz was, in taking away the
Merchants Ships, so that they may not easily catch and light upon the
East India Fleet, etc. Rush. Col. p. 474.

Adam Contzens Directions for the preserving and restoring of Popery. Lib. 2.
Chap. 18.
The way to bring in Popery, and work out the Protestant Religion he thus
describes:
1. THat things be carried on by slow but sure proceedings, as a Musician tunes
his Instrument by degrees: Lose no opportunity, but yet do not precipitate the
work.

R. 2. Let no Prince that is willing despair; for it is an easy thing to
change Religion; for when the common people are a while taken with novelties
and diversities of Religion, they will sit down and be a weary, and give up
themselves to their Rulers wills.

R. 3. The Doctors and leading Pastors must be put out: but if that may be, all
at once: but if that cannot be, let it be by slow degrees. When the Leaders are
down all will submit.

Here he pretends the examples of some Princes that expelled Lutheranisme, and
gives his advice under the cover of instances:

1. The purpose of changing Religion, and extirpating Lutheranisme, must be
concealed, not but that some of the wiser sort may know it, but the people must
not, lest it should move them.

2. Some must be suborned to beg importunately of the Prince for liberty to
exercise their Religion, and that with many and gentle words, that so the
people may think the Prince is not inclined to novelty, but only to Lenity, and
to a tenderness for tender Consciences; and that he does it not as from
himself: for the vulgar use to commend a Prince, that cannot deny the subjects
their desires, though they are such as were fit to be denied.

3. One or two Churches only must be desired at first, as being so small a
matter, that the people will not much regard, --

4. When the zeal of Professors begins to rise against the change, they are to
be pacified by admitting both parties to conference before the Governors:

5. Let there be a decree for pacification, that one party do not rail at the
other, nor calumniate them; and so the errors that are to be brought in will
have great advantage, when they are covered, and may not be contradicted, or
so much as named; and so the Rulers will be thought to be only Lovers of peace,
and not to intend a change of Religion.

6. Next that, Let there be some public disputation between the parties, but
with some disadvantage to them that are to be outed.

7. Let all this be done, but on pretense that the several parties may be
joined lovingly together in peace: and when the Ministers refuse this, let them
be accused of unpeaceableness, and pride, and obstinacy, and disobedience
against the Magistrate, and not for their Religion.

8. When it comes to the putting out of some Ministers, and the people begin to
petition for them, let the matter be carried silently; and in the mean time,
let the people be told that it is because those Ministers are heady obstinate
men, that the people may be persuaded that the Ministers are faulty, and have
deserved it, and may be put only to desire liberty for the more peaceable men.

9. When thus the people are deluded, and there is no danger of resistance,
then turn the Ministers out of the Churches, and put in those that you would
set up in their stead.

10. Then change the Universities, and tell all the Fellows and Scholars, that
they shall hold their place if they will turn, else not; many will change
Religion with the Rulers.

11. Next he instanceth in Hassia, where the Prince pretended, that all the
Professors and Ministers places were void at the death of his Predecessor, and
he had the disposal of them by Law:

12. And the change was there made (as he pretends) by slow degrees, one or two
opinions only changed at the first, and not the whole controverted part of the
Religion; and so the people will think it but a small matter to yield in one or
two opinions, and be easily brought to obey.

13. Lastly, They fall to writing against each other, and those that have the
Court-favor, seem to carry it.

All this advice is about the third direction, that is, how to work out the
Ministers safely, which he covers under pretended instances of such as have
changed Religion in Germany.

4. The fourth Rule is, To put out of honors, dignities, and public offices,
all those that are most adverse to Popery; it is but just that those that
hinder the safety of the Commonwealth should be deprived of the Honors and
Riches of the Commonwealth. If men are deposed for heinous crimes, Why not for
Blasphemy and contempt of truth? If those of a contrary Religion be left in
honor and power, they will be able to cross the Prince in many things, and
encourage the people of their own Religion.

5. The fifth Rule is, That when a Heresy is wholly to be rooted out; and this
must be done by degrees, and in a way of reason, and cannot be done by mere
command and power: then you must first fall on those opinions that the common
people are most against, and which you can quickly make them think absurd. So
he instanceth in some that would work out Lutheranisme, that speak honorably
of Luther, and fell on them only under the name of Flaccians; so the Arminians
at Vtrecht when they would extirpate Calvinisme, made a decree, that no man
should Preach any thing that seemed to make God the Author of sin. Thus a
Magistrate that would bring in Popery must full upon such heinous opinions
which the impudent themselves are half ashamed of, and bring these into the
light that they may be odious, and so the teachers will lose all their
Authority, when the people see that they are taken in a manifest fault.

6. The sixth Rule to bring in Popery and abolish the Protestant Religion, is,
to make use of the Protestants contentions. How easy it is (says he) in
England to bring the Puritans into order, if they be forced to approve of
Bishops, or to reduce the Puritans in the Low Countries, if the Prince adhere
to the Arminians for the variety of Opinions makes them doubtful, that before
seemed certain: so that when the Magistrate joyneth with one side he easily
overturns the other, and leaves the whole obnoxious, as Paul did by the
dissension between the Pharisees and Saduces, joining to one side, he escaped.
This (says he) I would principally persuade an Orthodox Magistrate to, for he
may with as much advantage make use of the Protestants disagreements, as of the
Papists concord, to extirpate Protestants: As in Wars, it is not only the skill
and strength of the General, but often also the carelessness of the enemy, or
his mistake, that give very great advantages for success. When rigid Calvinisme
was assaulted by the Lutherans in the heat of the paroxism, it was exasperated,
and the sudden restraint did much hurt: But now the Arminians have of their own
accord let go the hardest part of their rigor, and judge the Calvinists to be
impious, and persecute them in the very University, and in other Towns they
force them to banishment, and would venture to do more and crueller things, if
they were not afraid of the strength of the adverse party. Verily if Prince
Maurice alone did but stand for the Arminians, the rigor of the
Contraremonstants would flag or be broken.

7. The seventh Rule is, to forbid the Protestants privately or publicly to
assemble together.

8. The eighth degree must be, to proceed to severity of Laws and punishments:
Here he endeavors to prove this violence lawful, but this violence though it
must be for the change of all, need not be exercised on all; cut off the
Leaders, and the multitude will follow the Authority of the Rulers; shame will
retain some, and fear others, but a vain security will prevail with most when
they know not how to help it. Within these few years, above an hundred thousand
have been turned to Popery in France, and more in Germany, not any of the
Princes of Germany that did endeavor to draw over his people to the Catholics
did ever find any force or resistance contrary to his Laws. Note this all you
slanderous Papists, that accuse Protestants so much of Rebellion to hide your
own, here is a Jesuits testimony on Record for our vindication.

His next Rule is the good life of the Popish Magistrates and Clergy, (and that
let them use as much as they will.)

Chapter the 19. He commends many smaller helps: As, 1. Music, to entice
people by delight. 2. To cause all at their Marriage to profess the Popish
Religion, and so rather then go without a Wife or Husband they will do it. 3.
So also to deny to Protestants Church Priviledges: as Baptism, Burial, etc.

Lastly, He concludes that where the work must be secretly done by degrees, the
Magistrate must keep the institutions, presentation, confirmation, and
examination of Ministers in his own hand; and so (if he cannot cast them out at
once) he must cast out the most dangerous, and put over the Churches, the
disagreeing, and those that do not mind matters of controvesie much, and those
that are addicted to their own domestic businesses (worldly men) and such as
are addicted to the Rulers: Let him cool the hent of Heresy, and let him not
put out the unlearned; and so their Religion will grow into contempt. Let the
Magistrate cherish the dissentions of the erring Teachers; and let him procure
them often to debate together, and reprove one another; for so when all men see
that there is nothing certain among them, they will easily yield to the truth;
and this discord is profitable to show the manners of those wicked men, for he
that will read the contentious writings of Lutherans against Calvinists, or
Calvinists against Lutherans, will think he reads, not the invectives of men
against men, but the furies and roaring of Devils against Devils, (a fair
warning, but the Jesuit tells you not what is done at home) from these things
the Ruler may take occasion for a change: Let him enquire into the original of
these accusations, and if he find them true, he may punish the guilty, if
false, he may punish (that is cast out) the Accusers.

The sum of Campanella's Counsel, for the promoting of the Spanish interest in
England in Queen Elizabeth's days, was, 1. Above all to breed dissentious and
discords among our selves. 2. To have Seminaries in Flanders, that for the
changing of our Religion, may first sow the seeds of division in points of
natural Sciences. 3. By suborned Forreiners, to promise great matters to the
great ones here. 4. To promise to King James the help of Spain, so he would set
up Popery, or at least not hinder the Indian Fleet. 5. At the same time to
persuade the chief Parliament men to turn England into the form of a
Commonwealth, by telling them that the Scots will be cruel when they come to
Rule them, etc. 6. To persuade Queen Elizabeth that King James would revenge
his Mothers Blood, etc. 7. To exasperate the minds of the Bishops against King
James, by persuading them that he was in heart a Papist, and would bring in
Popery; and by these means the seeds of an inexplicable War will be sown
between England and Scotland; so that no party will have leisure to disturb the
Spaniard; or if King James prevail, he will be a friend to Spain; or if the
Island be divided, or the Kingdom made Elective, we shall neither have mind nor
power to enlarge our Dominions, or if the Island be turned into the form of a
Commonwealth: it may keep continual War with Scotland, and will manage all its
affairs so slowly, as that they can little hurt the Spaniard. 8. The Catholics
here also are to be awaked and stirred up, that the Spaniards may take the
first opportunity to enter upon England, under pretense of helping them.

9. The Irish are persuaded to Rebellion, these (with the hiring of the Dutch
to defend the Spanish Plate Fleets, and fall out with us that we may not hinder
it) are the sum of this Friars design against England.

Their Method to win particular Persons, you may find in Costerus Pref.
Encheirid. Thoma a Jesu de Convers. Gent. L. 8. Par. 2. Sect. 2. p. 544. 545.
Possevinus Lorichius, etc.
1. BE sure to keep the Respondents part, and not the Opponents: It Is not so
easy to prove, as to wrangle against proofs.

2. Follow them with certain Questions which the vulgar are not verst in, as,

Qu. 1. Where was your Church before Luther, or where has it been visible in
all ages?

Qu. 2. How prove you that you have a true Scripture that is the word of God
among you?

Qu. 3: What express word of God do the Catholics contradict?

Q. 4. How prove you that you have a truly called Ministry, that is to be heard
and believed by the people?

Qu. 5. By what warrant did you separate from the Catholic Church, and condemn
all your own Forefathers, and all the Christian world?

Qu. 6. If you will separate from the Catholic Church, What reason have you to
follow this Sect rather than any one of all the rest?

Qu. 7. What one man can you name from the beginning that was in all things of
Luthers or Calvin's Opinions?

Qu. 8. Do you not see that God does not bless the labors of your Ministers,
but people are as bad as they were before, what the better are you for hearing
them?

Many more such silly questions, they train up their deceivers to propound and
prosecute, which a knowing man discerns easily to be transparent cheats; but
the ignorant may be gravelled by them.

The abominable Treachery and villainy of the Gunpowder-Plot, undertaken under
pretense of maintaining and restoring the Roman Religion; engaged the then
Governors to consult the preservation of themselves and the Kingdom: And
considering the furious zeal and wicked principles of some men, in affirming
the lawfullness of deposing and killing Heretical Kings: That the Pope had
power to deprive temporal Princes, absolve subjects from their obedience, and
such like villainous positions, with the many wicked practices then fresh in
memory, against the Crown and life of Queen Elizabeth and King James, it was
thought fit to draw up a solemn Oath, whereby every one should abjure such
treasonable Doctrines, and swear for the future to behave themselves as became
good subjects.

But so far were they from intending to be good Subjects, that fancying Robert
Cecil (Earl of Salisbury and Secretary of State) to be the chief promoter of
this Oath against them, and considering that if they could deter him from
prosecuting it, the King and others would trouble their thoughts the less about
the matter, and so the Parliamentary proposals would fall of themselves: a
threatening Letter was sent to the said Earl of Salisbury, a Copy whereof I have
here inserted, that all good men may see that they will not stick at Murder or
any other villainy to uphold their Religion.

My Lord,
WHereas the late unapprovable and most wicked design for destroying of his
Majesty, the Prince and Nobility, with many other of worth and quality
(attempted through the undertaking spirits of some more fiery and turbulent,
then zealous and dispassionate Catholics) has made the general state of our
Catholic cause so scandalous in the eyes of such whose corrupted judgments
are not able to fan away and sever the fault of the Professor from the
profession it self, as that, who now is found to be of that Religion, is
persuaded at least in mind to allow (though God knows as much abhorring as
any Puritan whatsoever) the said former most inhumane and Barbarous Project.

And whereas some of his Majesty's Council, but especially your Lordship, as
being known to be, as the Philosopher terms it a primus mortor, in such
uncharitable proceedings (are determined as it is feared) by taking advantage
of so soul a scandal to root out all the memory of the Catholic Religion,
either by sudden Banishment, Massacre, Imprisonment, or some such unsupportable
vexations and pressures, and perhaps by decreeing in this next Parliament some
more cruel and horrible Laws against Catholics than already are made.

In regard of these premises, there are some good men, who through their
earnest desire for the continuing of the Catholic Religion, and for saving
many souls both of this present and of all future posterity, are resolved to
prevent so great a mischief, though with a full assurance before hand of the
loss of their dearest lives.

You are therefore hereby to be admonished, that at this present there are five
which have severally undertaken your death, and have vowed the performance
thereof by taking already the blessed Sacrament, if you continue your daily
plotting of so Tragical Stratagems against Recusants.

It is so ordered that none of these five knows who the other four be, for
the better preventing the discovery of the rest, if so any one by attempting
and not performing should be apprehended.

It is also already agreed who shall first attempt it by Shot, and so who in
order shall follow.

In accomplishing of it there is expected no other then assurance of death, yet
it will willingly be embraced, for the preventing of those general Calamities,
which by this your transcendent Authority and grace with his Majesty, are
threatened unto us.

And indeed the difficulties herein are more easily to be digested, since two
of the intended Attemptors are in that weak state of body that they cannot live
above three or four Months. The other three are so distressed in themselves and
their friends, as that their present griefs (for being only Recusants) do much
dull all apprehensions of death.

None is to be blamed (in the true censuring of matters) for the undertaking
hereof, for we profess before God, we know no other means left us in the world,
since it is manifest you serve but as a Match to give fire unto his Majesty (to
whom the worst that we wish is, that he may be as great a Saint in Heaven as he
is King on Earth) for intending all mischiefs against the poor distressed
Catholics.

This giving your Lordship this Charitable Admonition, the which may perhaps be
necessary hereafter for some others your Inferiors (at least in Grace and
Favor) if so they run on in their former Inhumane and Unchristian Rage against
us; I cease putting you in mind, That where once True and Spiritual Resolution
is, there (notwithstanding all dangers whatsoever) the Weak may take sufficient
Revenge of the Great.

Your Lordship's well-admonishing Friends, etc. A. B. C. etc.
It may be your Lordship will take this but as some forged Letter of some
Puritans, thereby to incense you more against Recusants.

But we protest upon our Salvation, It is not so: Neither can any thing in
humane likelihood prevent the effecting thereof, but the change of your course
toward Recusants.




This Letter at the beginning offers fair, seeming to detest the
Gun-powder-Plot: but little of truth and sincerity may be expected from it,
when we consider, that the design of it is to Apologize for Murder; to which
it appears there is a Club, or number of them consenting and attempting: and
they are not ashamed to assert, That though they murder Privy-Counsellors, yet
the Murderers may be good men; nor are they to be blamed for it, for it is a
True and Spiritual Resolution.

The Oath of Allegiance was prudently drawn up, and confirmed by Act of
Parliament; and that you may see what it was their tender Consciences so
scrupled the taking of, I have here inserted the Oath it self.

The Oath of Allegiance. Anno tertio Jacobi.
I A. B. do truly and sincerely Acknowledge, Profess, Testify, and Declare in
my Conscience before God and the World, That our Sovereign Lord King -- is
Lawful and Rightful King of this Realm, and of all other his Majesty's
Dominions and Countries.

And that the Pope, neither of himself, nor by any Authority of the Church or
See of Rome, or by any other means, with any other, has any power or Authority
to Depose the King:

Or to dispose any of his Majesty's Kingdoms or Dominions:

Or to Authorize any Foreign Prince to Invade or Annoy him or his Countries:

Or to Discharge any of his Subjects of their Allegiance and Obedience to his
Majesty.

Or to give License or Leave to any of them to bear Arms, raise Tumults, etc.

Or to offer any violence or hurt to his Majesty's Royal Person, State, or
Government; or to any of his Majesty's Subjects within his Majesty's Dominions.

Also I do swear from my heart, That notwithstanding any Declaration, or
Sentence of Excommunication or Deprivation made or granted, or to be made or
granted by the Pope, or his Successors; or by any Authority derived, or
pretended to be derived from him or his See, against the said King, his Heirs
or Successors; or any Absolution of the said Subjects from their Obedience: I
will hear Faith and true Allegiance to his Majesty, his Heirs and Successors.

And him and them will defend to the uttermost of my Power, against all
Conspiracies and Attempts whatsoever, which shall be made against his or their
Persons, their Crown and Dignity, by reason or color of any such Sentence or
Declaration, or otherwise:

And will do my best endeavor to disclose and make known unto his Majesty, his
Heirs and Successors, all Treasons and Traiterous Conspiracies which I shall
know or hear of to be against him, or any of them.

And I do further swear, That I do from my heart Abhor, Detest, and Abjure, as
Impious and Heretical, this Damnable Doctrine and Position, That Princes which
be Excommunicated or Deprived by the Pope, may be Deposed or Murdered by their
Subjects, or any other whatsoever.

And I do believe, and in Conscience am resolved, That neither the Pope, nor
any Person whatsoever, has power to absolve me of this Oath, or any part
thereof,

Which I acknowledge by good and full Authority to be lawfully ministered unto
me.

And do renounce all Pardons and Dispensations to the contrary.

And all these things I do plainly and sincerely acknowledge and swear
according by these express words by me spoken, and according to the plain and
common sense and understanding of the same words, without any equivocation, or
mental evasion, or secret reservation whatsoever.

And I do make this Recognition and Acknowledgment heartily, willingly, and
truly, upon the true Faith of a Christian. So help me God.

A. B.

Unto which Oath so taken, the said person shall subscribe his or her Name or
Mark.

King James doubted not but that all honest and good Subjects would submit to
this Oath, Because, as he said, that he that shall refuse to take this Oath,
must of necessity hold all, or some of these Propositions following: Apol. for
the Oath of Alleg. Page 49.

I. That I, King James, am not the lawful King of this Kingdom, and of all
other my Dominions. II. That the Pope by his own Authority may depose me; if
not by his own Authority, yet by some other Authority of the Church, or of the Sea of Rome. If not by some other Authority of the Church and See of Rome, yet
by other means, with others help, he may Depose me. III. That the Pope may
dispose of my Kingdoms and Dominions. IV. That the Pope may give Authority to
some Foreign Prince to Invade my Dominions. V. That the Pope may discharge my
Subjects of their Allegiance and Obedience to me. VI. That the Pope may give
license to one or more of my Subjects, to bear Arms against me. VII. That the
Pope may give leave to my Subjects to offer violence to my Person, or to my
Government, or to some of my Subjects. VIII. That if the Pope shall by Sentence
Excommunicate or Depose me, my Subjects are not to bear Faith and Allegiance to
me. IX. If the Pope shall by Sentence Excommunicate or Depose me, my Subjects
are not bound to defend with all their power, my Person and Crown. X. If the
Pope shall give out any Sentence of Excommunication or Deprivation against me,
my Subjects by reason of that Sentence are not bound to reveal all Conspiracies
and Treasons against me, which shall come to their hearing and knowledge. XI.
That it is not Heretical and Diabolical, to hold, That Princes being
Excommunicated by the Pope, may be either Deposed or Killed by their Subjects,
or any other. XII. That the Pope has power to absolve my Subjects from this
Oath, or from some part thereof. XIII. That this Oath is not administered to my
Subjects by a full and lawful Authority. XIV. That this Oath is to be taken
with Equivocation, Mental Evasion, or secret Reservation; and not with the
Heart and good will sincerely, in the true Faith of a Christian man.
One would now think that none that intended to be good Subjects, or indeed did
not intend to be otherwise when they had opportunity, should refuse the taking
this Oath: yet so it was that (though some did take it, yet) the most refused
it: And because the Pope would not have those of his Religion tied from acting
Treasons and Villainies to support his Power, he sent several Bulls into England
against this Oath; one of which being of later date ( viz. in King Charles the
First's days:) I have here inserted so much thereof as concerns the said Oath.

VRBANVS Pp VIII. Dilectis Filiis Catholicis Angliae.
Dilecti Filii, Salutem and Apostolicam Benedictionem.
NON semper terraena foelicitas est beneficium Coeli and Patrimonium Pietatis;
pacem enim peccatorum videns Ecclesia non raro experta est potentiam mortalium
esse stipendium sceleris. Quare, Catenas Martyrum anteferimus exuviis
Triumphantium, and Rex sempiternus. Principatus Coelestes pollicetur, non ils
qui superbo pede jura proterunt, sed qui persecu ionem patiunturpropter
justitiam, etc.

Quod si eousque vis progrediatur, ut vos ad noxium illud, and illicitum
Anglicanae fidelitatis jura mentum adigat, mementote Orationem vestram ab
universo Angelorum spectantium consessu audiri. Et adhaereat lingua vestra
faucibus vestris, priusquam Authoritatem B. Petri ea jurisjurandi formula
imminutam detis. Non enim ibi id solum agitur, ut fides Regi servetur, sed at
sacrum Universae Ecclesiae sceptrum eripiatur Vicariis Dei Omnipotentis.

Quod foeliciis Recordationis Paulus V. Praedecessor noster in tam gravi
deliberatione decrevit, id omnino tanquam Decretum Veritatis servare debeatis.
Dilecti Filii, Tributum hoc Principi Apostolorum debitum nullae hominum minae
aut blanditiae a vobis unquam extorqueant; qui secus suadent, ij visionem
mendacem and divinationem fraudulentam prophetantvobis: Citiusenimviro
Christiano debet potentium gladius vitam eripere quamfidem Quod si Angelus
etiam e Coelo descendens vos aliter, quam veritas Apostolica, doceat, Anathema
sit, etc.

Datum Romae, S. Petri, sub Annulo Piscatoris, die xxx May, 1626. Pontificatus
nostri Anno tertio.
Pope URBAN VIII. To his beloved Sons the Catholics of England.
Beloved Sons, Greeting and Apostolical Benediction.
TErrene foelicity is not always the benefit of Heaven, and the Patrimony of
piety: For the Church, seeing the prosperity of sinners, has often found by
experience, that the greatness of Mortals is the stipend of Impiety. Wherefore
we prefer the Chains of Martyrs before the spoils of the Triumphant; and the
Eternal King promises Heavenly Principalities, not to them who proudly trample
the Laws under their feet, but to those who suffer Persecution for
Righteousness sake, etc.

And if Violence proceed so far, as to compel you to that pernicious and
unlawful Oath of Allegiance of England; Remember, that your Prayers are heard
in the whole Assembly of the Angels beholding you: And let your Tongue cleave
to the roof of your mouth, rather than you permit the Authority of St. Peter to
be diminished with that form of Oath: For that is not all, that Fidelity be
kept unto the King; but that the Sacred Scepter of the Catholic Church be
wrung from the Vicar of God Almighty.

That which our Predecessor Paul V. of blessed memory, with so great
deliberation Decreed, that ought ye altogether to observe as a Decree of Truth.
Beloved Sons, this Tribute due to the Prince of the Apostles, no threats or
flatteries of men ought at any time to extort from you; and they who persuade
you otherwise, prophecy unto you a lying Vision, and a fraudulent divination:
for sooner ought the Sword of the Mighty take from a Christian his life, than
his Faith; yea if an Angel from Heaven teach you otherwise than the Apostolic
Truth, let him be Accursed, etc.

Dated at Rome, at St. Peter's, under the Signet of the Fisher, xxx of May,
1626, the third year of our Popedom.

I shall here give a farther instance, that (abhorrence of Treason, and)
Fidelity to the Prince, is not only contrary to the desire and express command
of the Pope, but to the opinion of the greatest part of the Roman Catholics
themselves.

Peter Walsh a Romanist of the Order of St. Francis, somewhat more honest and
peaceable minded than the rest, esteeming it not only his, but the Duty of all
Persons, to be subject to the Prince under whom they live, and by whom they
receive protection; about the year 1662. drew up a formulary, and procured it
to be subscribed by as many of the Romanists in the Kingdom of Ireland as he
could, whereby they did profess their obedience to his Majesty, and subjection
to the Laws, with their Resolution to live peaceably under them; and although
this submission occasioned his Majesty to be much more favorable to them than
before, yet the greatest part of the Romanists of that Kingdom were so far from
subscribing the said Formulary, that they got it, not only to be condemned in
formal terms, as unlawful, detestable, Sacrilegious; yea, in effect, as
Schismatical and Heretical, by the public Censures of the Lovaine Theological
Faculty, and by the public Letters also of the Bruxel Internuncio's, De
Vecchii, and Rospigliosi, and of the Roman Cardinals de propaganda fide; but
prosecuted the Subscribers of it for these twelve years (especially for these
six last) with continual Monitories, Citations, Depositions, Excommunications,
Denunciations, and even public affixing or posting of them, and have
persecuted and hunted them almost to death, for no other cause, but for
professing Allegiance to his Majesty. So dangerous a thing it is reputed in the
Court of Rome, for Subjects to give their natural Prince any pledge of their
Faith which the Pope cannot undo. It is no less Criminal in the esteem of that
Court, than if the very essentials of the Papacy were invaded by it; as you may
see at large in a Letter to the Catholics of England, Scotland and Ireland,
written by the said Peter Walsh.

And now I shall leave it to the Candid Reader to judge, what reason those have
to be protected by the Laws, who will not be tied by them, nor subject to them,
but profess themselves the subjects of a Foreign power.

Their Designs to subvert the Kingdom of England, are sufficiently evident from
the foregoing Papers; I shall only add two Letters more, whereby they did, not
only endeavor, but actually promote the late unnatural and Barbarous Rebellion
in the Kingdom of Ireland.
Two Letters written by Pope Urban the 8th. for encouragement of the Rebellion
in Ireland: The first to O-Neale, and the second to the Nobility and people of
that Kingdom.
To our Beloved Son Eugenius O-Neale, Health and Happiness.
Beloved Son,
IT has ever been our constant custom to lay hold on every opportunity,
whereby you (following the steps of your Progenitors) might make known your
more than ordinary zeal and studious care of defending the Church. But now you
have more apparently demonstrated it, by resolving to go for Ireland, and to be
a present succor to the Catholic affairs: Wherefore your Letter was
exceeding welcome to us, wherein you intimate your steadfast purpose, desiring
to begin the successful management of the seaffairs from the Heavenly
assistance, and do no less humbly then Religiously crave our Apostolical
Benediction; we highly commend in you this renowned zeal, and constant
resolution to defend the true faith against Heretics; and we being long since
persuaded of your Piety, do expect the proofs of your courageous and lofty
spirit, in this opportunity which heretofore has rendered your name so
illustrious.

We do much approve of the determination of those whom you certify to be
excited by your example. And we hope that the Highest will be present to your
cause, and make known to the people your prowess and virtues.

And that ye may with the greater confidence give the onset to these designs,
we without intermission entreating the divine clemency to bring to naught
adversaries atttempts, do freely communicate our Benediction to you, and the
rest of them who manage the Catholic affairs in that Kingdom.

And to all and every of them (truly penitent making confession, and devoutly
partaking (if opportunely) of the holy Communion) we do bestow a plenary
forgiveness and remission of their sins, and in point of death a full and
absolute Indulgency.

Dated at Rome under the Seal of the Fisher, October. 18. 1642. in the 19th year
of our Popedom.
To all Archbishops, Bishops, Nobles and People of the Kingdom of Ireland.
VEnerable Brethren and Beloved Sons, The relation which we have heard of the
present state of your Kingdom, (out of that singular affection wherewith we did
ever embrace your Nation) does cause our deep sorrow; for although you are
removed from us by distance of place, yet we always bear you in the bosom of
Apostolical affection, and cannot but tremble at the least danger of our
Children: notwithstanding in this so great sadness, we are refreshed when we
mind your magnanimity and resolution, evidenced by very many and great trials;
which likewise does suggest to us a strong confidence, that in every occasion
your wonted height of spirit will eminently appear, not only to defend and keep
safe the Catholic Religion, but also by example you will demonstrate to
others with what alacrity and ardour of affection eternal things are to be
preferred before mortal, heavenly before fading, the salvation of the soul
before all earthly things whatsoever.

Acconut it all joy (Venerable Brothers and beloved Sons) when you fall into
diverse temptations, think not your selves exempted from the condition of those
whom Christ the Searcher does try and prove by the evils of this life.

There will be a just ground to hope for a plentiful crop of happiness from
these seeds of conflicts, as also be assured of the aid and assistance of the
Omnipotent God, if so be ye shall prefer the safety of the Catholic Faith
before what respects soever, not suffering any thing to be transacted which in
the least may prove prejudicial or destructive thereunto.

Thus much all Catholic Nations do expect from your approved constancy, thus
much the Church promises it self concerning you, and thus much our Pastoral
care and Paternal Benevolence does most rightfully require to be performed from
our most loving Sons.

Neither need we go far to fetch examples of this Religious constancy to which
we exhort you: call to mind by what Masters you have been disciplined in the
ways of virtue; Call to mind those famous Champions of the faith who have led
you the way; enquire of your Predecessors and they will rectify you, that in
times of hazard and peril, those Counsels and determinations with all possible
zeal and resoluteness are to be entered into, which may prove a bulwork to the
true faith, and a refuge to Ecclesiastical men.

Put on then vigorously by your actions, to make good that noble Encomium of
your Nation, frequently styled The Island of Saints; and those men whom you so
much glory to extol, be not unwilling to imitate.

Truly we do expect from you what is meet to proceed from an eminent Piety to
God, and a most ardent affection to the Church, to whom we willingly impart the
Apostolical Benediction, beseeching God of his Divine Clemency to vouchsafe to
be propitious to your godly endeavors and enterprises.

Dated at Rome Feb. 1. 1642.
FINIS.

