blazon of the Commonwealth
Die Jovis, 8 Novembr. 1649.
Resolved upon the Question by the Parliament,

Ordered, That all and every the Sheriff and Sheriffs of the respective
Counties in England and Wales, where such Apprehension and Conviction shall be
made and had, be required upon the Certificate of the Judge, or under the Hands
of two or more Justices of the Peace before whom such Conviction shall be made,
to pay unto such person or persons who shall Apprehend such Offenders, the
Reward aforesaid of Ten pounds for every Offender so Apprehended and Convicted,
out of the public Moneys received by him in that County, and that the same
shall be allowed unto him upon his Accounts in the Exchequer.

Resolved upon the Question by the Parliament, That the Sheriffs, the Justices
of Peace, and Members of the Committees in the several Counties throughout
England and Wales, or any of them, be authorized and required speedily to
Disarm all Papists, Delinquents, and other suspicious persons who have Arms
contrary to the Law, and to take order that such Arms be brought into some
public Magazine for the public use.

Ordered, That all Justices of Peace in the several Counties, be required and
enjoined to put in execution the Laws against Vagrants and Rogues, and to take
especial notice of such persons as are or shall come out of Ireland, or pretend
to be such, and Travel up and down the Country and beg, and either to send
them back again, or otherwise to punish them as Vagrants according to the Law.
And that all Masters of Ships, Mariners and Seamen, be enjoined not to bring
over any such persons coming out of Ireland into this Nation; And the Generals
at Sea, and all Captains of the Ships belonging to the State, and all Officers
of Ports are to take especial care hereof.

Ordered, That it be referred to the Council of State, to cause these Votes to
be printed and published, and to see the same put in execution, and require an
account every Month from the Counties; and that the said Council give an
account thereof to the House.

Hen: Scobell, Cleric. Parliamenti.

Die Jovis, 8 Novembr. 1649.
ORdered by the Parliament, That the Council of State be empowered to give
Reprieves or Protection to such person or persons guilty of any the Crimes
expressed in the former Vote, or shall make any considerable Discovery of his
or their Accomplices, or other the like Offenders, as they shall see cause, for
the safety of the Commonwealth, and to give an account of it from time to time
to the House, for their further direction therein.

Hen: Scobell, Cleric. Parliamenti

London, Printed by John Field for Edward Husband, Printer to the Parliament of
England.


