Die Veneris, 20. Maii 1642.
Votes of both Houses of Parliament, With sundry Articles, or Acts of
Parliament to confirm the same, taken out of the Records of the Tower.
Resolved upon the Question, by the Lords and Commons, etc. THat it appears,
That the King (seduced by wicked Counsel) intends to make War against the
Parliament, who (in all their consultations and actions) have proposed no other
end unto themselves, but the care of His Kingdoms, and the performance of all
duty and loyalty to his person.

Resolved, etc. That whenever the King makes War upon the Parliament, it
is a breach of the trust reposed in him by His people, contrary to his Oath,
and tending to the dissolution of this Government.

Resolved, etc. That whosoever shall serve or assist him in such Wars, are
Traitors by the Fundamental Laws of this Kingdom, and have been so adjudged by
two Acts of Parliament.

Out of the Roll of the Parliament held at Westminster, 11. Rich. 2.
ITem, By the said encroachment, the aforesaid Alexander Archbishop of York,
Robert de Vere Duke of Ireland, Michael de la Pool Earl of Suffolk, Robert
Tressilian false Justice, and Nicholas Brembre false Knight of London, have
done that, Whereas at the last Parliament, all the Lords and other Wisemen and
Commons there assembled, seeing the loss of the King and His Kingdom eminent,
as well for the perils and mischiefs aforesaid, As that the King was departed
from the Counsel of the Kingdom, and harkening wholly to the Counsel of the
aforesaid Malefactors and Traitors; As also, because the French King with His
Royal Power was Shipped upon the Sea, ready to have come into England to destroy
the Kingdom, and the English tongue, and that no Ordinance nor Government was
then established for the safety of the King, nor of the Kingdom, they knew not
other remedy thereupon, but remonstrated unto the King at full, how that he was
ill governed, counseled, and carried away, by the aforesaid Traitors and
Malefactors, declar^ng unto him their wicked conditions, and required him most
humbly as His loyal Subjects for the safety of Him, and of His whole Kingdom,
and for the avoiding of the perils aforesaid, to let go and put from him the
aforesaid Malefactors and Traitors out of His presence and company; and that
he would not do hereafter according to their wicked Counsels, But that he would
follow the wise, loyal, and discreet men of the Kingdom; And thereupon the
said Traitors and Malefactors, seeing this good and honorable opinion of the
Parliament, and to disturb their good purpose therein, by their false Counsel
caused our Lord the King to command the Major of London to cause a great power
of the people of London, to be suddenly levied, for to kill and put to death
all the said Lords and Commons, excepting only such as were of their party, at
the doing of which wicked act, the said great Malefactors and Traitors should
have been parties, and present to the destruction of the King and all His Realm.

Article 29. Item, For to accomplish this high treason aforesaid by their
Counsel, the aforesaid Alexander Archbishop of York, Robert Vere Duke of
Ireland, and Michael de la Pool Earl of Suffolk, caused the King to send his
Letters of Credence to his adversary the French King; some by one Nicholas
S^u^^well, Groom of his Chamber, and some by other persons of mean fortune, as
well Aliens as Denizens, requiring and praying the said French King, that with
his power and Counsel he would be ayding and assisting to our Lord the King to
destroy and put to death the said Lords, and other English, which the King then
hold his enemies and Traitors, as before, to the great disquiet and trouble of
his whole Kingdom.

Article 30. Item, The aforesaid Alexander Archbishop of York, Robert de Vere
Duke of Ireland, Michael de la Pool Earl of Suffolk, encroaching unto
themselves Royal Power, caused the King to promise unto the French King, by
his said Letters and Messages, for to obtain aid and assistance from the French
King, and his power, for to accomplish that high treason, prodition, and
murder, to give and surrender unto the said French King the Town and Castle of
Calis, and all other Castles and Forts in the March of Picardy and Artoys, the
Castles and Towns of Chirlurge, and of Brerte, to the great dishonor, trouble,
and damage of the King and of his Kingdom.

Article 37. Item, the aforesaid Alexander Archbishop of York, Robert de Vere
Duke of Ireland, Michael de la poole Earl of Suffolk, Robert Tresillian false
Justice, and Nicholas Brenbre false Knight of London, Malefactors and Traitors,
during the time of the said protection, to the overthrowing of the said
appeal, falsely Counseled, and caused the King to command by His Letters,
diverse Knights, Esquires, and Sheriffs, and others his officers of diverse
Counties, to raise and assemble all the power that they could to come with the
said Duke of Ireland, against the aforesaid other Lords Appellants, suddenly
to make war against them and destroy them.

Article 38. Item, During the time of the said protection, the aforesaid Robert
de Vere, Duke of Ireland, Michael de la Pool Earl of Suffolk, Alexander
Archbishop of York* Nicholas Brembre false Knight of London, caused the King by
his Letters, to signify to the said Duke of Ireland, how that he and others
were appealed of treason by the said Thomas Duke of Gloucester, Constable of
England, Ricbard Earl of Arundel and Surrey, and Thomas Earl of Warwick, and
how that the King had thereupon given day to the said parties, until the next
Parliament, and how he had taken both parties, with their Men, Goods, and
Chattels, into his special protection; and besides it was contained in the
said Letters of the King, That if the said Duke had sufficient power, he should
not fail to come on withal his aforesaid power, and to come to the King; and
soon after they procured the King, to write unto the said Duke of Ireland, that
he should take the field, with all his power, which he could gather together,
and that the King would meet him with all his power and that the King would
with him put in hazard His Royal person; and that the King was in great danger
himself and his whole Kingdom, if he were not helped and succored by the said
Duke of Ireland; And that the Duke of Ireland should make known this unto all
the men that were assembled unto him; and that the King would pay all the
wages, and charges of the said Duke of Ireland, and of all the men assembled by
him, by virtue of which letters, and the malicious and Traiterous excitations
as well of the said Duke, as of his Adherents and all the other malefactors and
Traitors, the said Duke of Ireland assembled a great number of men at Arms and
Archers, as well the Counties of Lancaster, Chester, and Wales, as of other
places of the Kingdom, to destroy, and to put to death the aforesaid Lords, and
all others which were assenting to the making of the said Ordinance, Statute
and Commission, unto the destruction of the King, and his Kingdom.

Article 39 Item, The said Robert de Vere Duke of Ireland, false traitor to the
King and Kingdom, assembled a great power of men at Arms, and Archers of the
Counties of Lancaster, Chester, and Wales, and of diverse other places, to the
intent to have traitorously destroyed so far as in him lay, the Lord Thomas
Duke of Gloucester, Constable of England, Henry Earl of Derby, Richard Earl of
Arundel and Surrey, Thomas Earl of Warwick, and Thomas Earl Marshall, and other
loyal Subjects of our Lord the King, as well to the destruction and
annihilation of our Lord the King and of His whole Kingdom; and so he rid with
great power and force of men at Arms, and Archers, from the County of Chester
through the Kingdom, till he came near to a certain place, which place is
called Rotcotbridge, near to Cotswold, inchroaching to himself Royal power,
caused the banner of the King to be displayed in his company, contrary to the
dignity of the King and of his Crown, at which time the said Duke of Ireland,
and his company, were by the grace of God, disappointed of their wicked purpose.

Memorand. That the same Roll containing the Petition of the aforesaid appeal
distinguished by Articles as above by quotation is marked, was delivered in the
present Parliament, by the aforesaid Duke, and Earls appellants; And Memorand,
that afterward in the same Parliament, the 1. 2. 11. 15. 17. Articles
aforesaid are declared, and adjudged treason, and every one of them is declared
and adjudged treason, And that that which is contained in the 22. Article of
the aforesaid Articles concerning the levying of men, to make war and destroy
the Lords Lieges of the King is likewise declared and adjudged treason. And
that the 28. 29. 30. 31. 32. 37. 38. 39. Articles aforesaid are also declared
and adjudged treason, and every one of them is declared and adjudged treason,
as is set down in the Record, and the process annexed and affixed to this Roll
on the back side of the said Roll by these words, Quelle petition levee in
presence du Roy nre dit Sr. etc.

This judgment was confirmed by Act of Parliament, 11. R. 2. cap. 3. 1. H. 4.
cap. 3. and 4. of the old Printed Statutes, and the said Statute, 1. H. 4.
repeals and makes void the Parliament of 21. R. 2. and all the proceedings
thereof, in which forced and tumultuary Parliament, the Acts of the Parliament
of 11. R. 2. had been reversed.

Rot. Parl. 11. Rich. 2.
MEmorandum quod iste idem Rotulus continens petitionem appelli supradicti per
articulos distinct pro ut superius per quotationem annotatur liberatus fuit in
praesenti Parliamento per praedict. Ducem and Comites appellantes; Et mem. quod
postea in eodem Parliamento primus, secundus, undecimus, quintus decimus, and
decimus septimus articuli praedicti declarantur and adjudicantur proditio; and
eorum quilibet declaratur and adjudicatur proditio; and quod illud quod
continetur in vicessimo secundo articulo praedictorum articulorum tangens
levationem gentium ad guerrand. and destruend. dominos and legeos legis
similiter declaratur and adjudicatur proditio: Et quod vicessimus octavus,
vicessimus nonus, tricessimus, tricessimus primus, tricessimus secundus,
tricessimus septimus, tricessimus octavus, and tricessimus nonus articuli
predicti declarantur Proditio, and eorum quilibet declaratur and adjudicatur
Proditio* prout annotatur in Recordo and processu huic Rotul. consutis and
annexis. In dorso Ejusdem Rotuli per haec verba. Quelle petition lui in
presence du Roy nostre dit Henneres and etc.

Crom at. per Statut. 1. H. 4. cap. 3. and 4. In the old Printed Statutes.
London* Printed for Joseph Hunscott 1642*


