GREAT SALVATION BY JESUS CHRIST TENDERED

To the greatest of Sinners, and in particular to such as have been Refusers of
it, if God shall now at last make them willing to receive it.

By RICHARD EEDES, Teacher of the Church at Beckford in Gloucester-shire.

LONDON Printed by TW for the Author. 1659.

To the Right Honorable the Lady VEERE, Grace and Peace.
Right Honorable and most Honored Madam.
MY ambition to invite your Honor to be Surety to my Firstborn, has offered
violence to my modesty in this Dedication, yet I know not why I may not
dedicate my labors unto you, to whom I have long ago dedicated my self. When
I had once the happiness to entertain your Ladyship for a very short time, I
found you so ready to take mean things in the best part, that I do the less
scruple here to invite you to take part of the Churches Ordinary.

The great Salvation that this weak hand holds out, may well beseem the
greatest Personages, not only to own, but to have in highest estimation; and I
am persuaded, that you have so long made the attainment of it (next to God the
Giver, and Christ the Purchaser of it) your chiefest interest, that you have
now, with your namesake in the Gospel, made the better part so sure unto you,
that it can never be taken from you: yet dear Madam, it is not unknown unto you
that sin is so deceitful to deceive, and the heart so deceitful to be
deceived, that we can see small ground of security (though some of safety) on
this side Heaven: Its our taking heed of falling that keeps us standing; and
Caveats against sin and condemnation may be of excellent use to keep the Soul
in awe; and reverend Dr* Sibbs tells us that fear is the awe-band of the soul.

I am not insensible that Scoffers may say, that here is more Porch than house:
but that was so far from being an oversight, that it was a part of my design: I
dare not enclose, nor impropriate that which the Apostle has called the common
Salvation Jude. 3. v. That mystical City that was called the holy Jerusalem
descending from Heaven, Revel. 21.10. Tipifying the Church, was said to have 12
Gates, which noted out the confluence of Beleivers that should come into the
preaching of the Gospel, and should fly unto that great Salvation like Doves
unto their windows and the discourse herein offered is so like the Pool of
Bethesda, a common Bath, or Fountain opened for sin and for uncleanness, that
I thought it convenient to make the more Porches; and if I could direct a
particular Epistle to every particular Soul, the Souls excellency would acquit
me from folly in so doing.

I have deservedly given your Honor the Preeminence, in opening unto you the
first Gate, and the more to ennoble it, have written your honorable name upon
it; that it may be called beautiful, and followers may throng in after you,
and when they are entered (if they will but learn of you) they may count the
feet (and much more the faces) of them beautiful that bring unto their Souls
the glad tidings of Salvation.

But when they have made their entrance they will find that here is house as
well as porch, yea and that it is very roomthy: for these three Stories
Salvation, Sin, and Damnation do resemble Heaven, Earth, and Hell.

Salvation has Heaven at the top of it, and Damnation has Hell at the bottom
of it, and Sin (like its Father the Devil) having the whole Earth for its
walk, is the worst Companion that the sonns of men have.

Madame, you are here presented with a strange sight, a poor sinner hanging
betwixt Heaven and Hell; if he will but accept of Salvation offered, Heaven is
his; but if he neglect in this his day to know the things that belong unto his
Peace, he will fall into Hell, and there is no escaping* It Is a sad thing to see
so many wallowing in sin, like swine in the mire, under such warnings, and very
sad to see many of the Godly to drive so low and dull a trade with Heaven, that
it may be said of them as of poor Tradesmen, whom the World favors not, that
they are still buying and selling, and live by the loss.

What sad lives do we lead, and what comfortable lives do we lose, by not
bringing our practices up to the principles of invisible Christianity; and for
want of more intimate acquaintance with the beauty of holiness, and power of
godliness; Gregory the great was said to be the last of the good Bishops of
Rome, and first of the bad; his life was such a medley of good and evil, and
therefore some Interpreters have thought him to be that Angel in the
Revelation that was said to fly betwixt Heaven and Earth. And Salomon's life
was so parti-colored, that an ancient Limner drew him half in Heaven and half
in Hell; and such is the pitiful case of many a Christian, they do so halt
betwixt God and the World, and so half it betwixt the Spirit and the Flesh,
that they may be thought, by themselves as well as others, to hang equally
poysed betwixt Fear of Hell, and Hope of Heaven, Oh how low are souls in their
consolations, for want of close and circumspect walking, and for want of a
laborious and costly serving of God?

Madam, you may here stand safe upon the Rock of your salvation, and behold the
dead, and red Sea of the Almighties wrath, upon which multitudes of dead Souls
ly floating like the Carcases of the drowned Egyptians when the Israelites
were passed over. And while you are standing upon safe ground, you may here
behold that Rock of Gospel-refusing which has shipwrack'd many, and that Gulf
of Damnation which has devoured them; whereas you, through Grace, are brought
nere unto the harbor, and within sight of the Haven where you would be: Let
Faith and Patience hold out but a little longer, for yet a little while he that
shall come will come and will not tarry.

So desiring that the God only wise may guide you with his Counsel, and
stablish your Mind and Heart with his Truth and Grace, and lead you through
militant holiness into tryumphant happiness, I humbly crave pardon for this
boldness, take leave, and rest,

Beckford Jan. 1st 1658. Madame, Your unworthy Remembrancer at the Throne of
Grace, RICHARD EEDES.

1 Timothy 1.15. This is a true, and faithful saying, and worthy of all
acceptance, that Jesus Christ came into the World to save sinners, of whom I
am chief,

Hebr. 7.25. He is able to save to the uttermost all them that come unto God by
him, seeing he ever lives to make intercession for them.

2 Timothy 2.24, 25, 26. The servant of the Lord must not strive, but be gentle
unto all men, apt to teach, patient.

In meekness instructing those that oppose themselves; if God peradventure
will give them repentance to the acknowledging of the truth.

And that they may recover themselves out of the snare of the Devil, who are
taken captive by him at his will.

To my indeered Friends Mr. JOSEPH, JONATHAN, and ISAAK BLACKWELL, Grace and
Peace.
SIRS,
AMong the variety of senses which the learned have put upon Christ's threefold
Pasce to Peter, John. 21.15, 16, 17, feed, feed, feed my Lambs and sheep, I
find this to be one, 1 Pasce dictis, feed them with your Sermons, 2 Pasce
exemplis, feed them with your exemplary conversation, 3 Pasce scriptis, feed
them with your writings. 1 How I have fed this people by preaching, aetatem
habent, they are able to tell you; How by Example, aliorum sit judicium, others
must judge who have known my conversation here and elsewhere. 3 And that I have
also a desire to feed them with my Writings, which may speak to them when I am
dead, I think my self concerned to give you some account, and to leave it upon
record with you as three faithful witnesses. The right of presenting an
incumbent into this Living is so mixed in two of you, who pro tempore are the
Patrons of its Minister and maintenance, and by whose manuduction I was here
seated, that I know not which to Challenge for my Patron, or if I did, I should
think my self a loser, and therefore rather than I would leave out a second, I
have endeavored to make the most of you, and taken in a third.

As the wise disposer of your habitations has seated you triangular in the
World, and made you Citizens of three famous Cities, London, Bristol, and
Hanburgh, so are you seated triangular in my heart, which desires unfeignedly
that you may all meet in one City, that new Jerusalem, which is above, and may
have Gaius his prosperity heaped upon you, internal, and eternal, as well as
external.

It is not so much the confidence of my entertainment as of your candid
acceptance that emboldens me to invite you to the reading, and owning of this
little Treatise, yet you will find that I have here apportioned my
entertainment to my guests, and provided you first, second, and third course,
all good, plain food, which I presume will be the more toothsome to you,
because it is so wholesome.

Though you have temporalls dealt out unto you with a liberal hand, yet I have
cause to have some confidence that the Churches ordinary will be more taking
with you than the Worlds g^^dies.

Yet I would not have you think that in this trichotomy I have carved to each
his several portion, but intend to each of you more than a Beniamin's mess,
and dedicate my book, as I do my self, all to each, desiring that the doctrine
herein taught may be in you like the Soul in the body, Tota in toto, and tota
in qualibet part.

Your memorable Father my predecessor had a large stock a going in this place
upon this saving account, what his returns were upon the people of his charge,
is not so visible as I could wish it were, but such as run may read that his
prayers were plentifully returned into his own bosom.

He had three Sonns separated to the Ministry, one is, and two are not, and
your selves that yet survive are witnesses to that great truth, that the seed
of the righteous shall be blessed; it is seldom seen that the Household of faith
has been supplied with so many plants out of one nursery; and whether I were
not called hither on the account of his prayers, who can tells; This I well
remember, that my access hither was paved with such remarkable providence,
that it looked very like the return of prayer.

Many in this part of the Vale are gotten out of the Vale of darkness and the
shadow of death, since your Father and some few more entered into this part of
the harvest, and if readiness to hear be a promising prognostic (as
undoubtedly it is) more are ready to break prison, and to seek the way to Ziou
with their faces thitherward. Oh let not the building cease for want of hands,
but whenever ever I shall pay my debt to nature, be careful to provide a
faithful waterer, that your Fathers plantation and mine may be like a field
which the Lord has blessed; So shall you have favor both with God and men.

These meditations were first digested, and calculated for the people of mine
own pastoral Charge, but may serve indifferently for this Gospel-glutted Age
and Land we live in. That it may find acceptance with the godly to further it
with their Prayers, and with the ungodly to further their Conversion, and with
all in order to their Salvation, is the hearts desire and prayer of,

Your Friend and servant for Christ's sake RICHARD EEDES.

To my beloved People the Inhabitants of the Parish of Beckford.
Dear Souls
MY hearts desire, and prayer to God for you is, that you may be saved, you of
this place may say (and few villages can say the like) that the Gospel has
dwelt here in power as long as you; How many parishes in England have desired
to hear the things that you have heard, and have not heard them, and to enjoy
the means that you have enjoyed, and have not had them?

My painful Predecessor (now with God) was a faithful labourer in this
vineyard above forty years, and shall it be said of you, as it was once said of
gainsaying and refusing Israel, forty years long was I grieved with this
generation? And I have been here a waterer where he had planted now full as
many years as there are Articles in your Creed, and yet cannot make it an
article of mine, that many have received our ^eport, or that the arm of the
Lord has been revealed but to a few.

What success the Gospel has had with your Souls, I must leave to your own
consciences, and to the searcher of hearts; I am loath to print my thoughts,
least I should be constrained to speak the Apostles language, 1 Cor. 15.34.
Some have not the knowledge of God, I speak this to your shame.

If you have embraced the Gospel, you have bought the field in which the hid
treasure is, and though you are never so poor, and mean of birth, you are
richer far, and more honorable than graceless Kings, and Christless Monarchs.

If you have refused the Gospel to embrace the World, you will find it the
worst match that ever you made, when you shall understand that you have pleased
the flesh, and gratifyed the Devil, and made God your enemy, and if you had
never so much pelf, it will not profit in the day of wrath, and you are but
base and beggarly, so long as you are without Christ, and without God in the
World.

Oh persist not in refusing this great Salvation, you have had many offers, and
one must be the last, and the more are past, the nearer the last is, and who
knows if this be not the last that ever shall be made to some of you? I wish
that these words which come from my very heart-root may reach to yours.

To espouse you to Christ is all the business that I have with you; I came not
hither to take tithes, but to winn Souls; The malevolent adversaries of the
standing Ministry of England call us hirelings (and its a miracle of providence
that we have our lives for a prey in the midst of such a blood-thirsty
generation of unreasonable men) but we so much more desire you, than yours,
that if you would make this our hire, to give up your selves to God by our
Ministry, that by taking heed unto our selves, and to the doctrine, we may save
both our selves, and them that hear us, let them call us Devils, and it should
but add unto our Crown, while we all study to be what I desire to approve my
self,

A Servant of Christ for the furtherance of your Salvation, Richard Eedes.

To the Reader.
Reader
BEhold I bring unto thee glad tidings of great joy. That whatever thy life
has been for the time past, and whatever thy sins unrepented of are for the
present. If God shall render thee teachable, and willing to be counseled, thou
may yet die happily, if thou will but be persuaded to live holily for the
short remainder of thy few and evil days.

I desire to approve my self a true friend unto thy Soul in my endeavor to
bring this to pass; and nothing can hinder it, if the Tempter do not still
prevail to make thee continue* thine own greatest enemy.

If thou be young, thou can not set out upon such work too soon, which is of
everlasting concernment to thy Soul, and tends to the sure-making of thy
Salvation.

If thou be old, and have spent much time already in the service of sin, it is
more than time that thou should awake out of that dead sleep, least the sleep
of death surprise thee, and if thou should be taken out of the world by
death, before thou be taken out of the World by grace (which God forbid) it had
been better that thou had never been born, or had been created a Toade; or
Viper, than a Man, or Woman. Deferr not a day, not an houer, not a moment
longer, to consider thy ways, and to turn to God: hearken to this call of God
while it is called to day, least deferring till to morrow, it should be to late
whiles the breath is yet in thy body, and the Lord yet offers to breathe the
breath of life into thy Soul, let not the Devil, World, and Flesh so bewitch
thee as to obstruct thy seasonable, and serious closing with God upon a
Covenant-accompt, and with Jesus Christ as Lord and Savior.

So shall thou break off that Great Sin of Gospel-refusing, and escape that
Great Damnation that is due to it, and attain unto that Great Salvation which
is here faithfully commended, and heartily wished to thee by him who is,

Thy Soul Friend Richard Eedes

To the Reader.
Reader,
IT is the glory and happiness of the Age and country in which thou live to
have the plain and plentiful teachings of the Lord, that while we see not God
or the life to come with open face, by immediate intuition, to our full
satisfaction, we may yet see him in a glass by reason, sanctified, and guided,
and elevated by faith so far, as to quicken our desires after more, and to
cheer and strengthen us, as a fore-tast and earnest of the everlasting
inheritance. Though the invisible things of God may be so far seen in the
things that are made, as to leave all those without excuse, that know not God,
or glorify him not as God (Romans 1.20, 21.) yet is the Gospel the much clearer
glass, though not as to the sensible manner of Revelation, yet as to the
fullness, and cleerness of Discovery. In this glass thou may certainly see on
earth the things that will be done in Heaven and Hell to all Eternity.

Thou may know, if thou can but know thy heart, both where and in what case
thou must live for ever: Whether with God or Devils; whether in joy or
torments; whether in the end I less sense of the love of God, and in his
Soul-ravishing vision, and fruition, and highest returns of Love and praise
with Christ and all the Heavenly Host, or in the endless feeling of his
confounding to wrath, and pangs of conscience for thy former willfullness and
folly, and comfortless despairing lamentations of thy misery. This certain
glass that from God foretells all these things is contained in the Holy
Scriptures, and daily held before thee by thy teachers, who are commanded to
call upon thee to try and know thy self hereby, and to prevent the eternal
misery foreseen, and set thy heart on the revealed glory, and make out after
it with the greatest care and desire of thy Soul, that it may be thine for
ever. This glass is here held out unto thee by this faithful Reverend Minister
of Christ, (a member of our Association in these united Churches) who has
judiciously, and concisely, yet seriously, and pathetically told thee how
great. a Price is in thy hand, if thou have but a heart to the blessedness to
be procured by it, and the improvement of it for that blessedness: He has told
thee also what a sin and desperate folly it is to slight and neglect this great
Salvation, and turn of that God, that Heaven, with a tri^le, or with the
leaving of this contemptable World, who is thy All, and should have All, and
will have thy First and Best, or nothing. He has told thee of that great
Damnation, that will certainly be thy Portion, if thou go on to neglect this
great Salvation. Bless God for this seasonable call and admonition, and harden
not thy heart, but hear if thou have but ears to hear. Abuse not a God of Love
that deserves not to be abused: Turn not away from him that speaks unto thee
from Heaven. Deny not thy Redeemer thy first and deepest thoughts and cares,
thy strongest love, and most resolved labors, that denied thee not his blood,
his doctrine, and his example. Away with sin, Man! tread down the World or use
it for the World to come. Crucify the flesh, that hitherto thou have served.
Heaven is before thee, thou art made and redeemed to be equal with the Angels.
Dally not about so great a matter as everlasting joy or torment is; God is not
mocked, and therefore do not mock thy self by preferring the t^yes of the
World before him: What needs all this ado for thy daily bread? Having food and
raiment be therewith content: Get well to Heaven and all is done, and thou
shall never want; lose that and lose all, and thou will certainly lose it, if
thou seth it not first, and give it not the chiefest room in thy heart. How
think thou to escape, if thou neglect this Salvation? Will a despised or
neglected Christ be thy Savior? or a neglected Heaven be thine Inheritance?
Do thou think to come back from the dead into this World to mend that which
now thou do amiss? or can thou escape against Gods will and word? Reader,
as ever thou have the Reason of a man, see that thou soberly bethink thee of
this matter, and rest not till thou can solidly answer this question, How
shall I escape? Death and Hell are a little before thee, if thou be an
unsanctifyed person, and how will thou escape them? Neither Policy, nor power,
riches, nor reputation, formality, or false presumptuous hopes will procure
thine escape; It must be by God the Father, by Christ by the Holy Spirit, or by
none; and it must be by a God most dearly loved, and by a Christ most highly
valued, and received, and by the Holy Ghost entertained into thy heart, and
obeyed; for a God, a Christ a Spirit finally neglected, will never save thee.
Take this warning and additionall Testimony from

A Friend of thy immortal Soul, Richard Baxter.

A PREFATORY POEM OF THE AUTHOR'S
GReat Structures should have Porches, but you will say,
This F^brick is not great, and well you may,
And yet it is so, a Riddle but no Cheat,
The volum's little, but the Title's great;
The Workman's low, but yet the Building's tall,
The Matter great, though Model be but small.
Much treasure lies in little room, and things,
When it consists in jewels, and in rings.
This work is like the Ocean, which you know
Is still the same at ebb as it is at flow,
Or like the Sun; that Magazine of light,
The same in Clouds as shining in its might;
Or like a Map, where points and lines do stand
For Rivers and for Counties; Sea, and Land.
Though in Octavo written, you must know
The Subjects are the largest Folio:
Though Book and Price be small (excuse that wrong)
The names are short, but yet the Things are long.
Salvation, and Damnation! Oh the height,
And depth of these expressions! Oh the weight
Of what they signify! Oh who can tell
The height of Heaven, or the depth of Hell?
That's high that has no topp you will confess,
And sure that pit is deep that is bottomless.
Salvation, Sin, Damnation, are not Theames
For sleepy sluggards, or for men in dreams:
Sin's cl^ath'd in Scarlet like a man of Bloods;
Damnation dogs it, like devouring floods
Cast from the Dragons mouth: Salvation stands
Like to a Refuge City on all hands.
Sin like a Sodom to destruct on tends,
Damnation's like a fire, whose smoke ascends,
Salvation's like a Zoar, Souls like Lot,
Fly for your life, make have, and linger not.
God and your Teachers lowdly call, and cry,
Oh senseless sinners wherefore will ye die?
Souls stop, and turn, oh turn, oh sweetest breath!
God says, and swears he joys not in your death.
O hearken for the Call of this ^ill voice
Sets Life and Death before the sinners choice.
Reader, wilt live or die? Consider well,
And then Resolve, it is more than time to tell
Thy thoughts to God; If he should snatch thee hence.
Thy best would prove a very poor defense;
Depart thou must into a state forlorn
Will make thee wish thou never had been born.
Eternity will all thy Thoughts confound;
It Is such a Depth no Intellect can sound:
We may the World and Wits outrun, yet be
But at the Entrance of Eternity;
Now wrestle and prevail, for who can tell
But Jacob may be Christened Israel.
Chaff now is sold for Wheat, and every dream
Which is but Froth, is now nicknamed Cream.
Now Heretics, and each Blasphemer vents,
And greedy Dogs lick up their Excrements.
The Press oppressed g^ves out like, Lotteries
Too manj Blanks for one poor single Prize.
Authors neglected lie, and sleep as dead,
Except, than others taller by the head:
And Books in such a crowd of short and long,
Like London Cries, are vended for a Song.
He'is the best Artist now that best can tell
How to make Books, and then to make them sell.
As in Samaria's seige the ruder throng
Are f^d with Asses heads, and Cabbs of dung.
How often have I dugge to find out Ore
In swarming Pamphlets? but alas how poor,
And full of Rubbish! little, little gains,
And often less than nothing for my pains.
When they should feed, and feed, and feed again,
And hold out Milk for Babes, and meat for Men,
And draw out new and old from their full store,
And should with Milk, and Honey feed the poor,
Their Entertainments like a Witches feast,
A show that feeds not, but deludes the guest.
How should Babes thrive in a Step-mothers lap?
When Nurses give them poison in their papp?
Oh that some Zealous powers would conspire
To sentence all such Stubble to the fire!
The whole is out of Order; Church and State,
In my Prognostics this is Englands Fate,
The Land will mourn, and Men will find it true,
Till Caesar come, who will give God his due.
Think not, kind Reader, that its my design
To clowd the Sun that my dim Starr may shine;
It is a task for Eagles, not for Wrens
To stain the beauty of deserving Penns:
This Iron age such Authors can rehearse,
Whose golden penns deserve a Golden verse.
Works should commend their Authors, this being scanned,
As it deserves, so let me fall or stand.
I never liked those Complements at Feasts,
That wish the best were better for the guests:
Those that in midst of plenty w sh for more,
And ( guilty of exceedings) call it poor:
I ever thought the worst dish there too much,
The Coursest Morsel much too good for such.
If here a Feast of fat things you do meet,
Give God the praise, and eat and drink the sweet.
If any failing here or leaness be,
Take you the best, and leave the worst to me.
Christ bids his Shepards feed, and feed, and feed,
His Lambs and Sheep, lo here is for your need,
And fill, served in First, Second, and Third Mess,
All wholesome food, though but in homely dress.
Eat, drink, and feast your selves, my Friends, but stay,
When that is done, do not rise up to play:
If you will eat to live, and live to die,
Join strictest Practice with the Theory.
Though naked Truth be best, yet Fancies qua^nt
Esteem the face the fairer for the paint;
And if we will men's queasy palates woo,
Our meat must wholesome be, and toothsome too;
Most are like Children, and refuse to eat
Unless the dish be gaudy as the meat:
Even Curious palates feed as they would wish,
When wholesome food is in a garnisht dish:
When pleasure is with profit twined, its sed
Its like the bristle that draws in the thread.
Austine delighting Ambrose for to hear,
His heart was led to Heaven by his Ear,
And men must be indulged in this, or we
Our Books with dust, and Cobwebs clad may see.
If Music dwell in discords, here are three
That make a Unity in Trinity;
Or if Variety delight your brain,
Trichotomize that Unity again;
But I am word-bound, starved in midst of store,
My subject is too rich, my Muse too poor.
Reader proceed, thoult not thy labor lose,
If halting Verse go more upright in prose.
It Is to catch precious Souls to God that I
Do bait the hook of Prose with Poetry,
Fishers of men must put on every guise,
Winners of Souls must study to be wise;
If Poetry be goats hair, and no more,
Yet it may serve to vail the Temple door:
I Will not detain you l^nger in the Porch,
Nor light you to the Sun with such a Torch:
What furnitures within is now made free,
The Curtain's drawn, you may go in and see.
ERRATA.
Page 17. line 15. read able. p. 34. l. 3. biot out, and make figure. 1 before
the next word. p. 36. l. 24. r. mankind. p. 50. l. 11. r. the for their. p. 59.
l. 15. r. sink p. 62. l. 5. r. vassalls. p. 69. l. 18. r. fold. p. 76. l. 2. r.
I count. l. 14. r. maine thing. p. 91. l. 21. r. great wickedness. p 24. l.
ult. r. Apostaticall. p. 127. l. 10. r. certainty] in the same line r. assert.
p. 128. l. 5. r. Apostates. p. 128. l. 18. r. road. p. 129. l. 23. r. preacher.
p. 135. l. 1. r. word. p. 139. l 7. Jsay. 1. p. 144. l. 5. r. bring. p 150. l.
9. r. wet finger. p. 151. l 17. r. as his right eye etc. p. 186. l. 15. r.
when. p. 192. l. 16. read puluerem. p. 196. l. 14. r. refuge. p. 200. l. 8.
read so obdurate. p. 209. l. 3. r. Solamen p. 211. l. 11. read Masters. p. 216
l. 23. r. (...) p. 218. l. 11. blot out if. p. 230. l. 5. r. stony heart. p.
236. l. 5. r. desponde. p. 237. l. 22. r. own deceived and deceitful hearts
p. 238. l. 8. r. whelpe.

A breife TABLE Of the CONTENTS.
A Short Introduction. page 1. 2. 3. The rule of Gods dealing with the Refusers
of his mercy, upon which is grounded the whole Method of the Treatise in these
3 particulars. 1. Ingentia Beneficia. 2. Ingentia Flagitia. 3. Ingentia
Supplicia. p. 4
Whence are raised 3 suitable Doctrines. 1. Gospel Salvation is Great
Salvation. 2. Setting light by this great Salvation is great Sin. 3. The
neglect of this great Salvation brings great Damnation.
1. Doct. proved and made plain. p. 5 1. By comparing it with Salvation by the
Law. 2. By comparing it with the old Test. manifestations. 3. By comparing it
with temporal deliverances. p. 5
It is also proved by improving the Text in its elegant Climax, or Gradation 3
stories high. 1. Salvation. 2. Great Salvation. 3. So great Salvation.
Illustrated further by alluding to the 3 degrees of comparison, wherein is
showed to be. 1. Positively great. 2. Comparatively greater than other. 3.
Superlatively the greatest of all. p. 8
Proved also from three pregnant Scriptures. Psalm. 130.7. Plentiful
Redemption. Luke. 1.69. A horn of mighty Salvation. Hebr. 7.25. Salvation to
the uttermost. p. 8, 9.
Proved lastly by three Reasons. p. 9. 1. Reason. Drawn from the ab hoc,
showing from what we are saved. 2. Reason. Drawn from the ad hoc, showing to
what we are saved. 3. Reason. Drawn from the per hoc, showing by what we are
saved.
1. Reason. Because it saves from great Evils. As 1. From the wrath of God. p.
10. 11. 2. From the curse of the Law. p. 12. 13. 3. From the tyranny and
dominion of Satan. p. 14. etc. 4. From the evil of sin. 1. From the
condemning. power p. 21 2. From the commanding. power p. 21
5. From the evils of Punishment from a 3 fold Death. 1. Internal of the
Soul. 2. External of the Body. 3. Eternal of both Soul and Body. p. 23. etc.
2. Reason. Because it advances to great Happiness p. 6 1. Before time in
Election. 2. In time in Justification and sanctification. 3. After time in
Glorification. p. 27.
Two bunches of Beatitudes belonging to Gods saved ones. 1 Bunch. 1.
Justification, wherein of ungodly they are made righteous. 2. Reconciliation,
wherein of Enemies they are made Friends. 3. Adoption, wherein of Aliens they
are made Sons. 4. Sanctification, wherein of Sinners they are made Saints. 5.
Glorification, wherein of imperfect Saints they are made perfect.
2 Bunch. 1. They are entitled unto the love of God the Father. 2. The Grace of
God the Son. 3. The Communion of God the holy Ghost. 4. The Protection of the
Trinity. 5. The Guardianship of Angels. 6. The comforts of an appeased
conscience. 7. The comfortable enjoyment of the things of this life. 8. The
believing expectation of the life to come. p. 28.

Its further showed that Salvation advances its heirs unto two Kingdoms at
once. 1. The Kingdom of Grace. p. 29. 2. The Kingdom of Glory. p. 31. to 35.
3. Reason. Because we are saved by great means. 1. The wisdom and love of God
the Father. p. 36. etc. 2. The sufferings and Righteousness of God the Son p.
39. etc. 3. The Revelation and Application of the holy Ghost. p. 41. etc.
The other subord nate means laid down in 2 paires. The 1 Pair is 1. Graces.
2. Duties.
p. 45. and 46. The 2 Pair is 1. Ordinances. 2. Providence.
p. 47 and 48. etc. 1. Use. Of Consideration. 1. What it is. 2. How great it
is. p. 51. to 54.
2. Use. Of Proclamation. p. 54. 55. 56. 3. Use. Of Reproof. p. 57. to 65. 4.
Use. Of Consolation. p. 65. to 70. 5. Use. Of Exhortation. p. 70. to 77.
2 Doctrine, Setting light by this great salvation is great sin. p. 79.
1 Positively great p. 84, to 88. 2 Comparatively greater than other p. 88, to
95. 3 Superlatively the greatest p. 95. 1 Reason: Because an accumulated sin p,
95. Proved to be so, because it is a refusing of Christ in all his Offices. as
p, 98. 1 His Priestly office p. 100. etc. 2 His Prophetical office p. 102.
etc. 3 His Kingly office p. 105. etc.
2 Reason. Because its an aggravated sin by three circumstances, p. 110. 1 Of
Person p. 111, to 114. 2 Of Time p. 114, to 116. 3 Of Place p. 117. 118.
3 Reason, Because it is a State confounding sin. p. 119 etc. 4. Reason.
Because it is a Church confounding sin. p. 123. etc. 1 Use of Information to
show wherein it consists. p. 131. (Viz.) 1 In taking no care for salvation p.
132. etc. 2 In taking but little care, conjunct with greater care. p. 137. etc.
3 In not making it our greatest care. p. 139. etc.
2 Use of Direction in 4 things. p. 142. 1 There must be great thoughts of
heart. p. 143. 2 Great searchings of heart about it. p. 145. 3 Great humblings
of heart about it. p. 147. etc. 4 Great chainges of heart, about it p. 151. etc.
3 Use of consideration, in order to consolation in two things. 1 That only is
Gospel refusing which is final. p. 153. etc. 2 Gospel-mercy will pardon all
Gospel-refusing which is not final. p. 156. etc.

^ Doctrine, The neglect of great Salvation brings great Damnation. p. 161.
Damnation, that is, 1 Positively great, p. 164. etc. 2 Comparatively greater
than other, p. 167. etc. 3. Superlatively the greatest. p. 170. etc
1 Reason. Because it comes from so great a God. p. 174. etc. 2 Reason. Because
it is for despising so great a Savior. p. 177. 3 Reason. Because inflicted for
resisting the spirit. p. 180. etc. 4 Reason. Because prepared for great
Enemies. p. 182. 5 Reason. Because it has a long reach. p. 185. 1 It reaches
to the Soul. p. 185. etc. 2 It reaches to eternity. p. 187. etc.
6 Reason, Because it consists of great Punishments, p. 189. 1 The Punishment
of Loss. 2 The Punishment of Sense. p. 189. etc. 1 Noted by the worm that dies
not. p. 192. 2 By the fire that never goes out. p. 193.
1 Rational Torments inflicted upon. 1 The understanding (...) 2 The
conscience in three things. p. 1 Remembrance of things past. 2 Sense of present
misery. p. 197. etc. 3 Fear of wrath to come. 3 The Will. p. 200. 4 The
Passions. p. 221. etc.
2 Sensible Torments for the Body. p. 213. etc. Use of Terror. p. 219.
Prompting us to a 4 fold Meditation. 1 Of Death. p. 224. etc. 2 Of Judgment.
p. 227. etc. 3 Of Hell. p. 230. etc. 4 Of Heaven. p. 232. etc.
The Conclusion. from page 234. to the end.
GREAT SALVATION BY JESUS CHRIST Tendered to the greatest of Sinners, etc.
Hebr. 2, 3. How shall we escape, if we neglect so great Salvation?


SAlvation is so sweet a subject, that its pity it should meet with any but
faithful handlers, and profitable hearers; I may say of the very sillables of
it, as once holy Bernard did of that saving Name Jesus, in which it was
founded, Mat. 1.21. That it is Mel in ore, melos in aure, jubilum in cord;
Honey to the mouth, Music to the ear, and rejoicing to the heart. Words of
Salvation are breath of life, and its pity any of that should be lik^ breath
scattered in the air; they are water of life, and its pity it should be like
water spilt upon the ground; we should deal by such doctrine as goldsmiths do
by the filings of their gold, secure every dust of it; As God says to ungodly
teachers, so may we say unto ungodly hearers, What have you to do to take my
word into your mouths, or ears, when it takes no hold upon your hearts,
Whereas you hate to be reformed, and have cast my words behind you. Psalm.
50.16, 17.

Salvation is such a mystery of miraculous mercy, that the very Angels do
delight to pry into is, 1. Pet. 1.12. And as they were ministering Spirits to
the great Savior when he was upon Earth, so they are glad to be Ministering
Spirits to the heirs of this great Salvation. Heb. 1.14. A Messenger coming
from the dead, and from that triumphant community of just and perfect Souls,
were fitter to speak to you of such a theme, than one that is going to the dead,
and is yet clothed with the rags of mortality and corruption: If such a one
should hear us expressing our low conceptions of such sublime mysteries as
accompany Salvation, he wouldsay as the Queen of the South of Solomon's wisdom,
that one half is not told you in your own Country; If the Devil and damned
Souls might hear but one Sermon more of Salvation with hope of obtaining it,
can you think that they would be so regardles, and negligent as the common sort
of hearers are? Do you think that the devils themselves (which believe the
dreadfullness of perfected damnation, and tremble to believe it) would say to
such a preacher as Foelix did to Paul, Acts 24, 25. Go thy way for this time,
and when I have a more convenient season I will call for thee.

This is the unum magnum, the unicum maximum; the great thing that the Apostle
endeavors to secure in this place, that none of Christ's blood may be lost,
that none of his own Ministerial labor may be labor in vain: In a word his
drift and scope is that that Salvation which was so great in the operation, and
in the Revelation, should be as great in the Worlds acceptance. Christ had
wrought it out, who was the Son of God, higher than Angels, the great Prophet,
and Priest, and King of his Church, as this Epistle declares at large.

The Gospel had brought it to light, which is the glorious Gospel of the
blessed God, 1. Tim. 1.11. which makes Salvation nearer and clearer than the
law did. And therefore if we accep^ it not, how shall we escape? that is to
say, there is no possib^^ity of escaping.

One of the Ancients has laid down this Rule as Gods method of dealing with
the refuiers of his mercy. Ingentia beneficia, flagitia, supplicia. Where God
offers, or bestows great me^cies, there the setting light by those mercies are
sins with an high hand, and those great sins draw down proportionable
punishments.

Now according to this Rule.

1. What mercy ^reater than Gospel-mercy?

2. What sin can be greater than to set light by such mercy?

3. What punishment can be greater than that, that such sin deserves?

The Apostles words here considered as related to the context, may be exactly
reduced to hat rule; we shall therefore from such premises draw these three
natural conclusions, as the plain results of this Scripture.

1. That Salvation brought to light by the Gospel is great Salvation.

2. That setting light by such Salvation is great sin.

3. That the neglect of such great Salvation brings great damnation.

The First Doctrine. Gospel Salvation is great Salvation.
BEfore we open the door to let you into a clear sight of this truth, it may
not be impertinent to remove an objection that lies as a stumbling block at the
very entrance, and that is this. In that we proclaim Gospel-Salvation to be
great Salvation, some may demand whether there be any other Salvation that may
stand in competition with Gospel-Salvation?

To which we answer, that God never revealed but two ways unto mankind for
Salvation.

The first was by a Covenant of works, manifested unto the first Adam as the
Worlds representative, wherein the condition was Hoc fac and vive, do this and
thou shall live, or do this and be saved.

But that Law being transgressed, and that Covenant broken; and Adam and his
posterity being under the curse of that Covenant, and the wrath of God abiding
on them: God was pleased to enter into another Covenant of grace with mankind
through the second Adam, proposing unto them another condition, Hoc creed and
vive, whosoever believes in him shall not perish, but have everlasting life
John. 3.16. Though there was an old way to Salvation by working held out by the
law, yet now the new and living way, brought to light by the Gospel, is the way
of believing; and this Salvation by the Covenant of grace does as far excel
that by the Covenant of works, as the second Adam does excel the first.

I may further add, that the Covenant of grace has been exhibited under two
dispensations.

First to the Jews, under the old Testament-dispensation, in tipes and
shadows, when the Ceremonial Law was the Jews Gospel.

And secondly to Jews and Gentiles, under the new Testament dispensation, in
truths and and substances, and this is that Salvation that the Apostle seems
here to commend and exalt above other Salvations, that Salvation which in the
manifestation of it, is grown up to more ripeness of years, and perfection of
Stat^e since the fulness of time, than ever it was before. And since we are
speaking comparatively of it, let us take in one consideration more, though it
may serve only for a pleonasme, for having spoken of the greater, we need not
doubt of the less. It may be called great Salvation, if compared with
temporal, and corporal deliverances; such as those from Egypt, and Babylon,
those were great delivera^ces, and great Salvations, but that was of bodies,
th^s of souls, that was temporal, and this aeternall, and therefore in every
respect,

1. If compared with Salvation by the law,

2. If compared with the old Testementmanifestations,

3. If compared with temporal deliverances,

We must give acclamation to it to be great Salvation. And as for dreaming of
any other Salvation, properly, and strictly so called, we must keep close to
those true sayings of God. Acts 4.12. Neither is, there Salvation in any other,
for there is none other name under Heaven, given among men, whereby we must be
saved, and 1. Tim. 2.5. unicus est mediator, There is one only mediator
betwixt God and man, the Man Christ Jesus.

The doubt being cleared, we proceed to clear the doctrine.

1. By improving the Text.

2. By Testimonies of Scripture.

3. By pregnant, and ponderous Reason.

First by improving the Text, where the spirit of God gives it a rise three
degrees high: 1 Salvation, 2 great Salvation, 3 so great Salvation, which last
is a sic without a sicut (as one says of Gods love from that Scripture, God so
loved the World) so that the tongues of men or Angels are not able to
express, nor the imaginations of men or Angels able to comprehend: Or what if
we suppose it better to illustrate those three gradations by the three degrees
of comparison; we may show you at large how Gospel-Salvation is, 1. Positively
great Salvation. 2. Comparatively greater than all other. 3. Superlatively the
greatest of alls.


But all this was hinted in that that went before.

Secondly to show you the consent of Scripture, and how harmoniously they
attest unto this truth.

Psalm. 130.7. Let Israel hope in the Lord, for with the Lord there is mercy,
and with him is plenteous redemption, let redemption but lead us to a redeemer,
and we shall find such plenty of it in Jesus Christ, that out of his fullness
we may be all receivers, and grace for grace.

Luke 1 69. Blessed be the Lord God of Israel, that has raised up for us an
horn of Salvation in the house of his servant David. Its a figurative
expression taken from beasts, whose strength is in their horns; It is such
mighty Salvation, that it can push down all power that opposes it: the Apostle
applies it Romans 8.33, 34. It is God that justifies, who is it that condemns?
It is Christ that died, yea, rather that is risen again, who sits at the
right hand of God, who also makes intercession for us; who shall separate us
from the love of Christ? etc.

Hebr. 7.25. He is able to save to the uttermost all those that come unto God
by him, seeing be ever lives to make intercession for them.

Put all these together, 1. Plentiful redemption, 2. A horn of mighty
Salvation, 3. Salvation to the uttermost,


And they do univocally bear wittness to this great truth that Gospel-Salvation
is great Salvation.

Thirdly to come to Reasons, take into close consideration these three things.
1. Ab hoc: From what 2. Ad hoc: To what 3, Per hoc: By what
we are saved.

And from hence we shall lay down these three Reasons to prove it to be great
Salvation.

1. Because it saves us from great evils. 2. Because it advances to great
happiness. 3. Because it does all by great means.
1 Ab hoc 1 Reason. It saves from great Evils, as is easy to show in a
multitude of particulars.

1. From the wrath of God, which bu^nes like a con^uming fire, and all the
wicked upon earth are hu^^ straw, and stubble before it: It burns to the
bottom of hell, and setts on fire the foundations of the Mountains and burns
up the earth with its increase. The burning Tophet is kindled with his
displeased breath as with a river of brimstone, Isay 30.33. the old World was
drowned in it, and the new shall be burned in it. It tumbled the Angels that
fell out of Heaven, and hurled them into Hell, to be reserved in chains under
darkness to the judgment of the great day. It brought such a curse upon the
whole creation for Adams sin, that the whole creation groans under it, Romans
8.22. Man sweats under it, and Woman is in labor of it. It has tumbled
Monarchy upon Monarchy, the Assyrian, Persian, Grecian, Roman, it has
reprobated the greatest part of men and women that ever were in the World, are,
or shall be. It has cast off the Jews, and unchurhed many famous churches of
the Gentiles. It has laid flourishing states on ruinous heaps, and has
brought to pass those desolations even to wonder and aston shment, by sword,
famine, and pestilence, which our fathers have told us of. It has done that
work, that strange work in our days, and in these parts of the World, which
our eyes have seen, and may long be for a Lamentation. In a word it brought
that confluence of indignation upon Christ, Gods only begotten, and only
beloved Son, when he stood in our room, and became our surety, that it made
him sweat blood, and cry out My God, my God, why have thou forsaken me? We may
say of all the punishments personal and national that have befallen us, or
can befall us, of all things that we feel, or fear, as the prophet does, Is
there any Evil in the City, Land World, and the Lord has not done it? Ames
3.6. Ex ungue leonem, all that see it may say, This has God done, for they
cannot but see that it is his work: we may know it to be the Lord by his very
footsteps, for as none can deliver and save like him, so none can punish and
destroy like him. Solomon, tells us the wrath of a King is like the roaring of a
Lion, Prove. 19.12. but Moses tells us that he cannot tell us the power of Gods
wrath, Psalm. 90.11. Who knows the power of thine anger, even according to thy
fear so is thy wrath, and this wrath we are saved from by this great Salvation.

2. It saves from the curse of his law, that binds over to that wrath, cursed
is every one that continues not in all things that are written in the book of
the Law to do them, Deuteronomy. 27.26. Its this malediction that makes sin to be the
sting of death, and makes the hornet of an accusing conscience to sting
self-condemned sinners like the pangs of death. This put Adam upon that
impossibility, to run away and hide himself from God; and made Cain to be a
cord suo fugitivum, a runnagate (if it had been possible) from himself. This
curse of the law sets the never-dying worm a gnawing, and lays upon evil
doers that intolerable burden of a wounded conscience which none can bear.
Cursed is the impenitent Drunkard, Swearer, Sabboth-breaker, Lier, Whoremonger,
prayerless, Christless person, says the Law, but I am such and such says the
conscience, therefore thou art cursed, thou art the man says right reason in
the conclusion. It was the dreadful impulse of this evil spirit that drove
Judas first to despair, and then to the gallows, and furiously poasted him
through an hell internal into an hell eternal: It Was this that doomed
despairing Spira to an hell above ground, and filled him so brimfull with
hellish horror, that he was the very monster of his time, and the most
dreadful spectacle of the age he lived in. Nay, to come nearer to the quick,
It was the consciousness of this curse that set David upon the rack, and put
his bones out of joint, and brought him into a consumption, that he complains
that his flesh was dried up for want of fatness, and his moisture was like the
droughth in Summer, These terrors of the Law, and plunges of conscience were
the storms, and floods, and mire, and deepes that he so deeply complained of,
and made one deep to call upon another, the deep of his misery to the deep of
Gods mercy. It Was this venom that so pointed those arrows of the allmighties
wrath that drank up Jobs spirits. And made Hezekia to mourn like a dove, and
chatter like a Craine, and complain that from morning to evening God made an
end of him: It Was this that pickled up Peter in his bitter tears; and put
blessed Paul so to it that he cried aloud to Heaven for a deliverer, Me miserum
quis liberabit? O wrethed man that I am, who shall deliver me from the body of
this death? and this curse we are saved from by this great Salva-

3. It saves from the tyranny, and dominion of Satan, Its man's hell above
ground to be under the devils dominion, and principality. The Apostle notes
that the unbeleveing and impenitent are held captive by Satan at his will, 2.
Tim. 2.26. and the Ephesians while they were dead in trespasses and sins, were
said to be acted by the Prince of the power of the air, the spirit that
works in the children of disobedience, Ephesians. 2.2. Satan is therefore called
The God of this World, 2. Cor. 4.4. who blinds the minds of them that believe
not, least the light of the glorious Gospel of Christ, who is the image of
God, should shine unto them. He goes about like a roaring Lion, seeking whom he
may devour. 1. Pet 5.8. And compasses the earth Job. 1.7. yea, he goes about
with great wrath, knowing that his time is but short, Revel. 12.12. He is
called therefore the strong man armed that keeps peaceable possession till the
stronger come, Luke. 11.21. but when that stronger comes, and God, and Christ
come in with this mighty Salvation; when the grace of God which brings
Salvation once appears, then the weapons of our warfare are not Carnal, but
mighty through God, to the pulling down of strong holds. When he that has the
key of David will open, there is none that can keep shutt; As the graves must
open to his Surgite mortui, and the Earth and Sea must give up their dead at
his word of command, so when he will give sinners their blessed part in the
first Resurrection, the Devil, World and Flesh shall not be able to detain
their Captives: If God will but give Paul a commission to go to the Gentiles,
he shall open their Eyes, and translate them from darkness to light, from the
power of Satan to God. Act. 26.17, 18. When God will shine upon the labors of
his planting and watering servants, and come in with that increase which the
Apostle calls the increase of God, then not only gates of brass and bars of
Iron shall fly open, and break in sunder, as they did before Cyrus when God
would use him as an instrument toward his peoples enlargement, but even the
chains of darkness shall snap asunder before the mighty word, and almighty
spirit of the Churches great Redemer, like Sampsons cords when the Philistines
were upon him.

And here is the comfort of all comforts, they that are set at liberty by this
great Salvation, have so full a rescue, that they shall never be led captive
more, though they have been pulled like brands out of the fire, like the prey
out of the paw of the Lion rampant, out of the hands of the strong man by a
stronger; yet now they are in safe hands, because there cannot come a stronger.
Christ says none can take his sheep out of his hand, and his father that gave
them him is greater than all, and none can take them out of his fathers hand,
John. 10.28, 29. Though he consider and study Job, Job. 1.8. and resist Josua.
Zech. 3.1. Though be desire to have the Apostles to winnow them, Luke 22.31.
and wresties with beleivers about Heavenly things, Ephesians. 6.11, 12. Though he
has (...) devices, plots, machinations, stratagems. 2 Cor. 2.11. and (...)
wiles, methods, snares laid at unawares, way layings as the word properly
signifies, traps artificially set to catch the prey and (...) Revel. 2.24. the
depths of Satan (those poor deluded Souls (like those in our times that are
under strong delusions, and the efficacy of error) called their opinions the
deep things of God, in allusion probably unto that expression 1 Cor. 2.10. The
spirit searches all things, even the deep things of God, and there the spirit
tells them they were the deep things of the devil, and not of God, they were
not fetched from Heaven, but from the depth of hell, and though he has such
weapons as the word calls (...), Ephesians. 6, 16. The fiery darts of the Devil, yet
though he set all his infernal powers on work, and employ all his heads and
horns, all his stratagems and strength, and join his serpentine subtilty with
his Lyon-like power; yet the least of God's little ones shall be saved from
him, though the Dragon cast Floods out of his mouth after the woman, and the
remnant of her seed, yet they shall have a hiding place provided. They have a
Captain general that is called (...). The chief Captain and Finisher of their
Faith, Heb. 12.2. Who, in that he himself, has suffered being tempted, h^ is
ble to succor them that are tempted, Heb. 2.18. He puts into their hands the
Shield of Faith, which will quench all the fiery darts of the Devil, Ephesians. 6.16.
And he prays that that says may not fail, Luke 22.32. And has ex abundanti,
for their strong consolation, furnished them with a (...), The whole Armor of
God, and bids them be of good cheer, he has overcome, And the Apostle being
strong in the Lord, and the power of his might, triumphs before Victory with an
(...), Romans 8.37. We shall overcom through him that loved us. And this bondage
we are saved from by this great Salvation.

(...) ^^ight here enumerate more particulars, (...), Judgment, and Hell; for
this great Salvation saves from the terrors of all these, and is a shelter
against these driving storms which swell up a raging Sea of wrath, to drown
the whole world of the ungodly, but these will come in seasonably among those
which follow, where we shall meet with them before we make a full dispatch of
this Reason.

4 To give you one general, that may be comprehensive of all particulars, that
we need to speak to. It saves from all evils: Now all evils have been well
reduced into two ranks.

1 Mala culpae Evils of sin. 2 Mala paenae Evils of punishment.
1. Salvation is from Sin, yea, and the best part of Salvation too; 'Twas this
that gave unto Christ his saving name. Mat. 1.21, Thou shall call his name
Jesus, for he shall save his, people from their sins. Salvation from wrath,
which is done in Justification, is quiddam exterius, the work of Christ without
us, who dyed for our sins, and rose again for our Justification, who did
undergo the curse of the law in his passive obedience, and fullfilled the
righteousness of the law in his active obedience for the justification of
sinners; but Salvation from sin, which is d ne in Sanctification, is quiddam
interius, the work of Christ within us, who works all our works in us, as
well as for us. See that pithy and pertinent treatise upon that forecited
Scripture Mat. 1.21. entitled Salvation from sin by Jesus Christ, published
not long since by a judicious and faithful Brother of our Association, Mr.
George Hopkins of Evesham, where you may read to satisfaction upon that
profitable subject, and save me the labor of enlarging upon it.

And as it is from sin, so from all sin that lies within the reach of
repentance: There is a sin indeed which the Scripture has excepted, called the
sin unto death, and the sin against the Holy Ghost, which is therefore
impardonable, because the sinner is impenitent, and because that sin is always
twined with a total, and final apostasy; otherwise there is no sin so great
but may be pardoned, no sinner so great but may be saved.

First hear what testimony the old Testament gives unto the Salvation Covenant.
Moses is very large in dealing out the great pardons of the great God to great
sins Exodus 34.6, 7. saying, he pardons iniquity, and transgression, and sin,
as if he alluded to the three degrees of comparison magna, majora, maxima
peccata, performing to the full what that Scripture promises; Isay 55.7. Let
the wicked forsake his way, and the unrighteous man his thoughts, and turn
unto the Lord, and he will have mercy upon him, and to our God for he will
abundantly pardon, or according to the original, he will multiply to pardon.
The Prophet Ezekiel. 36.25. dotr particularize: I will pour clean water and ye
shall be clean from your idols and from your filthyness will I cleanse you,
though your sins were as great as idolatry against the first Table, or
uncleanness against the second (and we can hardly think of grea^^^ yet upon
return to God they may be pardoned and purged. The Prophet Isay, 1.18 goes yet
further (if further may be) and makes mention of the pardon of Scarlet and
Crimson sins, i. e.) Sins that are double dyed, dyed in grain, like those
colors aggravated with the most notorious of circumstances, as bloody as
murder (as David's matter of Vriah, or as black as Hell, (as Manasses
witchcraft, and familiarity with Evil spirits) yet upon Gods terms they may be
forgiven.

Secondly and because you shall have the evidence of this truth from the
mouths of the two witnesses, the New Testament as well as Old, peruse that
place Mat. 12.31. That very verse, that puts a bar to the Salvation of
sinners against the Holy Ghost; opens a wide door of hope unto all besides:
All manner of sin, and blasphemy shall be forgiven unto men; but the blasphemy
against the Holy Ghost shall not be forgiven unto men.

Know further that Salvation from sin (to give you the dimensions of it) is,

1 Either from the Condemning power,

2. Or from the Conmmanding power of sin, and in respect of both it deserves
the title of great Salvation.

1 Believers are saved by Christ from the condemning power of sin: Romans 8.1.
The Apostle lays it down as a most certain conclusion resulting by way of
Argument from antecedent premises. Now then there is no condemnation to them
that are in Christ Jesus. John. 3.16. They shall not perish, John. 10.28. They
shall never perish, and John. 5.24. Shall not come into condemnation.

2 And they are freed from the commanding power of sin: Sin does not reign in
their mortal bodies, that they should obey it in the lust of it: They have
given their members servants to righteousness unto holiness, and though they
sometimes do the Evil which they would not, yet they have sued out their
divorce, and can say with the Apostle, their consciences bearing them witness,
It is no longer I, but sin that dwells in me. They have put themselves under
the regency of Christ, and put up that petition daily in his name, Thy Kingdom
come, desiring that God and Christ by the holy spirit may bear rule in their
hearts, and not sin: and Thy will be done, wherein they desire to be made
willing to be ruled by his will, and not the lusts of the flesh, and by this
means, though sin be not ^j^cted from its inherency, yet it is dejected from
its regency, and they are neither servants, nor slaves of sin.

2 Salvation is from punishment, a malis poenae, as well as a malis culpae,
from wrath as well as sin; and this so great Salvation, that I fear too many do
look upon it as the vna, vnica salus, that that comprehends the totality of
Salvation, but having said enough to und^ceive you in the antecedent branch of
Salvation from sin, it remains that we discover this also to be a considerable
part, though not the totum integrale, the All of this great Salvation. As all
of transgression is epitomized, and summed up in Scripture in the term of sin,
so is all of wrath and punishment in this term of death, and therefore the
Apostle briefly lays down both Romans 6.23. The wages of sin is death; (i e.)
All death is the wages of all and every sin, so that sin will find the sinner
suffering enough, death with all its appurtenances. 1 with all its forerunners,
diseases, aches pains etc. 2 With all its concomitants of tribulation, and
anguish, desperation and horror, 3 and all its followers, death after death,
fire and brimstone which is the second death. Revel. 21.8.

Let us distinguish of a threefold death which is the wages of sin, and all
will be plain, when we have cleared it that Salvation saves us from all the
three. Death 1 Internal of the Soul. 2 External of the Body. 3 Eternal of
the Body and Soul.


1 It saves from death internal, as Ephesians. 2.1. You has he quickened, who were
dead in trespasses and sins. John. 5.25. The time shall come, and now is when
the dead shall hear the voice of the Son of God, and those that hear shall
live, and John. 5.24. He that hears my words, and beleiveth in him that sent
me has everlasting life, and shall not come into condemnation, but is passed
from death to life, and Revel. 20.6. Blessed is he that has his part in the
first Resurrection, on such the second death has no power, which expositors do
interpret of the resurrection of the Soul from the death of sin to the life of
grace, as the second resurrection of the body from death to life immortal.

2. It saves from death external, though not from the stroke of death, for its
appointed unto all men once to die. Hebr. 9.27. Yet from the sting of death,
for blessed are the dead which die in the Lord Revel. 14.13. Paul tells us, if
in this life only we had hope in Christ we were of all men the most miserable.
1 Cor. 15.19. noting that the hope that we have in Christ for another life, is
the best part of our hope, and that which makes not ashamed, and in order to
this Solomon says, the righteous has hope in his death. Prove. 14.32. Though
beleivers die, yet they are not killed with death as that deadly phrase is
Revel. 2.23. It is but their dust that sees corruption; Their head having
killed death, Oh death I will be thy death, Hos. 13.14. nothing hinders but
that on the account of that victory they may triumph as more than conquerors,
and say with the Apostle. O death where is thy sting, O grave where is thy
victory? 1 Cor. 15.55.

3 It saves from death eternal. John. 11.25, 26. He that beleiveth in me,
though he were dead, yet shall he live, and whosoever lives and beleiveh in me
shall not die for ever. Death is therefore called the King of fears, because
there is a more terrible death stands behind it; as the Apostle says after
death comes the judgment, so we may say after judgment comes the death:
Observe but how the Apostle sends out bold challenges, and even bids defiance
to all adversary power upon this very score of being protected, and secured
from the second death. Romans 8.33. Who shall condemn? What shall separate? I am
persuaded that neither death, nor life etc. nor any other creature shall be
able to separate us from the love of God which is in Christ Jesus. etc. Let all
these be laid together that it saves us 1 From the wrath of God. 2 From the
curse of his Law. 3 From the tyranny of Satan. 4 From sin both condemning and
commanding, and then from punishment, death internal, external, and eternal,
and these make up a pregnant proof that Gospel-Salvation is great Salvation
from the ab hoc, the great evils it saves (...) from.

2 Ad hoc. 2 Reason. It saves us to great happiness, I mean that by this great
Salvation we are advanced to great happiness,

It were endless to handle all the particulars of that blessedness to which
Salvation does entitle us.

Moses brings in that blessedness in huddles that is prepared for the children
of obedience, and heirs of Salvation, Deuteronomy. 28. blessings of all sorts, and
sizes, in every state and condition.

David says Psalm. 1.1. Blessednesses belong unto them, or as the original
does more emphatically render it, o beatitudines, oh the blessednesses that
belong unto such as he there describes: and Psalm. 144.15. gives their
blessedness a rise above all other blessedness, yea, above all that can be
spoken or conceived, yea, blessed are the people which have the Lord to be
their God.

Paul says, they begin in election and end in glorification, Romans 8.30. Whom
he did predestinate, them he called, and whom he called them he also justified
and whom he justified, them he also glorified. In which words he sets down the
privileges of Gods saved ones.

1. Before time. In predestination. 2. In time. In calling, and Justification.
3. After time. In Glorification.
Let us if we can run back to the beginning of eternity, end run forward to the
end of it, and if we cannot (as we cannot) let us run to our wits end, and
then cry out o altitudo! o profunditas! oh the length, and breadth, and height,
and depth of the love of God, which passes knowledge! The measure of Heaven is
heaped up, and pressed down, and running over.

Yet though the excellencies of that Land of promise, which flows with better
blessings than milk and honey, cannot be told you, we shall not pass it by so
slenderly as to say no more of it, but shall do as those faithful spies, that
were sent to survey the Land of Canaan, present you with a bunch or two, that
you may have a taste at least of the fruits of the Land, though the full feast
be reserved till the time of our fruition.

1. Those that are the heirs of this great Salvation are adopted into the
family of Heaven, and received into the glorious liberty of the Sonns and
Daughters of the Lord God Allmighty; which giving us union with Christ, gives
us right also to all the privileges of Communion, Justification,
Reconciliation, adoption, Sanctification, and glory.

1. Justification, wherein of ungodly we are made righteous.

2. Reconciliation, wherein of enemies we are made friends.

3. Adoption, wherein of aliens we are made Sonns.

4. Sanctification; wherein of Sinners we are made Saints.

5. Glorification, wherein of imperfect Saints, and such as are sanctified but
in part, we are made perfect, grace being but glory begun, and glory nothing
else but grace perfected.

2. Those that are adopted into these privileges are thereby entitled.

1. Unto the love of God the Father.

2. The grace of God the Son.

3. The Communion of God the Holy Ghost.

4. The protection of the Trinity.

5. The guardianship of Angels.

6. The comforts of an appeased conscience.

7. The comfortable enjoyment of the things of this life.

8. The beleiving and hopeful expectation of the life that is to come.

These are two bunches of the beatitudes that this great Salvation does advance
us to.

But the most excellent are behind, this great Salvation does advance the heirs
of it unto two Kingdoms at once.

1. The Kingdom of grace. 2. The Kingdom of glory.
1. We are saved to the state or Kingdom of grace, we are brought into
Jerusalem the Holy, and led through it into Jerusalem the happy; we are
conducted through holiness into happiness, and made to pass through the porch
of grace into the palace of glory.

1. Salvation bestows upon us the first grace, Its therefore called a Creation,
which we call regeneration, and this as well as the first creation is ex
nihilo, the creating of grace where there was none before, If any be in Christ,
says the, Apostle, he is a new creature. 2 Cor. 5.17. and David prays, create
in me a clean heart, O God Psalm. 51.10. And the promise is, A new heart will I
give you, and a new spirit will I put within you, and I will take away the
stony heart that is your body, and I will give you an heart of flesh. Ez. 36.26.

2. It causes us to increase in grace, 1. By Addition, adding grace unto grace,
and proceeding from virtue to virtue; observe the Apostles direction. 2. Pet.
1.5. giving all diligence add unto faith virtue, and unto virtue knowledge,
and unto knowledge temperance, and unto temperance patience, and unto patience
godliness, and unto godliness brotherly kindness, and unto brotherly-kindness
love, there is no grace that a gracious Soul would want.

2. By Multiplication, heaping grace upon grace, knowledge upon knowledge,
faith upon faith, repentance upon repentance, obedience upon obedience,
endeavoring to advance to higher degrees in grace, laboring that grace may
not not only be in us, but that it may abound in us. 2 Pet. 1.8. As there is no
grace for kind, so there is no degree of grace for measure that a gracious Soul
would want.

3. And it does not only prevent us with grace by giving us the first grace,
and enabling us to will; and bestow upon us the second grace, by assisting us
with grace, and enabling us to do as well as to will, according to that saying,
Nolentem praevenit deus ut velit, volentem subsequitur ne frustra velit, God
prevents us with his grace to make willing, and God follows us with his grace
to make able.

But it also keeps us in grace, Paul gloryed that he had kept the faith, which
was by being kept in the faith, according to that of Peter, Ye are kept by the
power of God through faith unto Salvation. 1. Pet. 1.5.

2. By this great Salvation we are saved to the Kingdom of glory, as well as
to that of grace: Christ teaches us to pray for both at once in that Petition,
Thy Kingdom come, (1) let the Kingdom of sin and Satan be domolished in us,
and others, and let thy Kingdom of grace come in the room of it, and let us
and others be kept in it, and do thou also hasten the Kingdom of glory. David
mentions both by way of promise Psalm. 84.11. The Lord will give grace and
glory, and therefore he makes mention of both in his prayer, Lord guide me with
thy counsel, and after that receive me to glory, which is as much as if he had
said, Lord lead me through thy Kingdom of grace into thy Kingdom of glory.
Now as David said of the Jerusalem upon Earth, we may much more of the Heavenly
Jerusalem, Many excellent things are spoken of thee, thou City of God. We may
more easily give you a Negative description of it, by telling you what is not
there, than a positive, by telling you what is there; yet take somewhat, though
but a touch of both.

1 Negatively,
1. There shall be no sin, no unclean thing can enter into that Kingdom 1 Cor.
6.9. The Angels at the last day shall gather out of Christ's mixed Kingdom, the
Churchmilitant, all things that offend, and that work iniquity, Mat. 13.41.
that nothing but what is pure and undefiled may be gathered into the Church
triumphant, the Kingdom of glory.

2. There shall be no labor that is called the rest that remains for the
people of God. Earth was their place of labor and there was nothing else:
though some be so strong that they live to fourscore years, yet is their
strength then but labor and sorrow, labor and labor, labor upon labor,
labor for the body, and labor for the Soul, but blessed are the dead that die
in the Lord, even so says the spirit that they rest from their labors. Heaven
is their resting place, and there shall be nothing but rest, rest upon rest,
rest from their body labors, and rest from their soul-labour only, they shall
be restles in the praises of their God, but that restlesness is the best part
of heavens rest, they shall not cease in ascribing praise and glory and honor
and power and dominion and thanksgiving unto him that sits upon the throne, and
to the Lamb for ever and ever.

3. There shall be no sufferings; as they shall cease from their labors, and
all sweat shall be wiped from their brows, so they shall rest from their
sufferings, and all tears shall be wiped from their eyes: there shall be
nothing of want and weakness there, no corruption, nothing of infirm nature,
that which was sown in dishonor, corruption, weakness, nature, shall be
raised in honor, incorruption, power, and spirit 1. Cor. 15.42, 43, 44.

2 Positively.
1. There shall be fullness of joy, joy not capable of addition or
augmentation, Christ told his disciples that their joy should be full. John
15.11.

2. There shall be pleasures for evermore, not only joy incapable of
augmentation, but pleasures incapable of diminution, and therefore our Savior
in the same breath that he told them their joy should be full, he also promised
them that their joy should no man take from them, John. 16.22. All that the
World could present them with, were but shells without kernels, a few
mock-consolations, which brought them much labor in geting, more care in
keeping, and most sorrow in losing, such things as they could not enjoy
themselves with them: In a word they were empty and transitory, but the joys
of Heaven are commended to us by 2 most lovely and contrary qualities. two They
are full as opposite to the Worlds emptiness. 2. They are lasting, everlasting,
and so opposed to the Worlds transitoriness.

3. Gods saved-ones shall not only enjoy a Kingdom of prepared pleasures, but
they shall enjoy God with them: that they shall enjoy a Kingdom of prepared
pleasures, read Mat. 25.34. Come ye blessed children of my father, receive the
Kingdom prepared for you, must not that be the confluence of all Beatitudes
which has taken up the love, and wisdom of God in preparing them? And that
they shall enjoy God with them read, 1 These. 4.17. so shall we be for ever with
the Lord, the Apostle desired to be dissolved and to be with Christ. Phil.
1.23. Its the misery of unbeleevers upon earth that they are without Christ and
without God in the World, Ephesians. 2.12. but it shall be the imcomparable happiness
of believers in Heaven, that they shall be gathered to Christ and to God their
father, who sit as cheise in that blessed Parliament, that tryumphant
panegyricall Assembly, Hebr. 12.22. Ye are come unto mount Sion, and to the
City of the living God, the Heavenly Jerusalem, and to an innumerable company
of Angels, to the general assembly and church of the first borne which are
written in Heaven. and to God the judge of all, and to the spirits of just men
made perfect, and to Jesus the mediator of the new covenant, and to the blood
of sprinkling that speaks better things than that of Abel, and thus you have
the ad hoc laid before you.

3 Per hoc. 3 Reason. It saves us by great means, It does not only save from
great evils, as you heard in the 1 Reason, and procure great benefits as is
cleared in the 2 Reason, but it does all by great means, as is now to be made
good, and therefore in all these respects it may well pass for great Salvation.

Now the means which bring about this great Salvation shall be referred to two
heads.

1 To God. 2 To those things that he uses as instruments to this saving work.
1. Those that refer to God may be divided into 3 ranks, as the Godhead is
distinguished into 3 persons; for as the faciamus hominem Genesis 1.26. noted that
the whole Godhead was taken up in man's creation, so was the whole Godhead
imployd about this great Salvation: conceive it thus.

1. The wisdom and love of God the Father. 2. The sufferings and Righteousness
of God the Son. 3. The revelation and application of God the Holy Ghost.
1 To begin with the Father. No wisdom but his could have found out a way, and
no love but his could have contrived such a way.

1 No wisdom but his could have found out a way, God at the first created man
after his own likeness, in righteousness and perfect holiness, placed him in
Paradise, the glory of the World, gave him a perfect Law, that by doing it he
might live, gave him serenity of knowledge to understand his will, and
readiness of will to do it: In breife he had a posse non mori, though he were
left mutable, yet no necessity o^ ^alling was laid upon him, he was left to his
own freedom, either to stand o^ fall, (...) to good is now but a dream, but
then it was a privilege, had it been improved rightly* But ^^am by
transgression falling, and being a (...) person, and the worlds representative,
drew all manking with him. And all (...), being under the curse of that Co(...)
to the everlasting de^ertion of the Worlds Creator, the matter of Salvation was
utterly at a loss, Man could not save himself, neither could Angels help him,
so that as to men and Angels that work must be let alone for ever.

Now in this desperate and hopeles state, it pleased the Eternal Wisdom to
find out an expedient, and the offended Creator provided a Redeemer, whereas
he had but one Son* his only begotten, and only beloved, that thought it no
robbery to be equal with himself, he must be sent out of his own bosom, and
the Eternal word must be made flesh, that being God and man in unity of
person, he might undergo the wrath of God for man, and might reconcile God to
man, and man to God. This was that (...) which the Apostle speaks of 1. Tim.
3.16. Great is the mystery of godliness, etc. This might well be the
astonishment of men and Angels, the Angels being left remediles without hope
of a Redeemer, that for us men and for our Salvation, the Son of God should be
incarnate and made man, (...) altitudo! o profunditas! oh the unsearchableness
of Gods wisdom! This was the fullness of love, that was manifested in the
fullness of time, This is the mystery that the Angels desire to pry into 1
Pet. 1.12. Which was tipified by the Cherubims placed upon the mercy-seat,
looking down into the Propitiatory, and in regard the foundation of man's
Salvation was laid in such great, and deep wisdom, it may be rightly called
great Salvation.

2 And Gods love in this, was no less wonderful than his wisdom, and the
mercy of Redemption, may well be said to equal, if not exceed the power of
creation, The Apostle offers at an expression of this love when he says, Deus
sic delexit etc. God so loved the World John. 3.16. But it was so that the
tongne of man is not able to express, nor the heart of man able to conceive; It
overrunns all the degrees of Comparison, and has no parallel; for a Man to
give a Son to die to save a friend, were a favor to be admired, but for God to
give his only Son, to save his enemies, for him to become man, a servant, a
scorn of men, and the outcast of the people, that we who deserved to be
reprobated, and outcasts, and castawayes, might receive the adoption of Sonns,
this infinitely over reaches the topp of any created understanding: well might
the Apostle say God is love, 1 John 4.16. For had not the great God been so
turned into the very abstract of love, that all his ways had been mercy, the
Son of God had never become man upon such an account, well does he deserve to
be styled Pater misericordiarum, and deus omnium consolationum 2 Cor. 1.3. And
this great love, being twined with such great wisdom in God the Father, in
order to our Salvation, may well denominate it great Salvation.

2 Come we in the second place to the second person God the Son, and let us see
what he did contribute toward this great Salvation: and the sum total of
his account may be cast up in.

1. His active. Obedience. 2. His passive. Obedience.
1 He did all that man should have done in his active obedience; and therefore
was his name called the Lord our RIGHTEOUSNESS Jer. 33.16. Capital Letters to
note out the greatness of this Salvation. The Apostle says more 1 Cor. 1.30.
He is made wisdom, righteousness, and sanctification, and redemption, which
is but a paraphrase upon his threefold office.

1 He is our wisdom in his prophetical office.

2. He is our Righteousness and sanctification in his priestly.

3. He is our Redemption in his Kingly office.

He lived a most righteous and holy life, and there was no guile found in him,
he carried himself as a most innocent and harmless Lamb, in the midst of a
crooked, and perverse generation.

2. He suffered all that man should have suffered in his passive obedience,
herefore the Apostle says Gal. 4.4. That he was made under the law.

1. By fullfilling the righteousness of the law. 2. By undergoing the curse of
the law.
After he had like a man of sorrows run through a dolorous, and m^serable
life, he did undergo a most shameful and cursed death. Phil. 2.8. Being found
in fashion as a man, he humbled himself, and became obedient to death, even the
death of the Cross, which prompted the Apostle Peter to say 1 Pet. 1.18. Ye
were not redeamed with corruptible things as gold and silver, but with the
precious blood of Christ, as of a Lamb without blemlish, and without spot, now
if we look back upon the great righteousness, and sufferings of God the Son,
which were ingredient into our Salvation, we need not doubt to call it great
Salvation.

3 In the third place we come to the third person, and to show what proceeds
from that person (that proceeds from the Father and the Son) toward this great
Salvation, and that is,

1 The Revelation of the spirit, It is the spirit of God that has brought
Salvation to light through the Gospel.

The word is but the letter, the spirit is the inditer and penman of it, all
Scripture being given by divine inspiration 2. Tim. 3.16. And therefore as it
is called the sword of the spirit, so it may be called the word of the spirit.
Its true that men were the penmen of Scripture, or rather the penns in the hand
of a ready writer, as the Apostle said he was Gods pen to write Gods Epistle in
the fleshly tables of the hearts of the Corinthians, 2. Cor. 3.2, 3. And
therefore its said that no prophesy of Scripture is of any private
interpretation, but holy men of God wrote as they were moved by the Holy Ghost.
2. Pet. 1.21. And in the beginning of this Epistle to the Hebrews. The writer
of it says, God at sundry times, and in diverse manners spoke to our fathers
by his servants the prophets, etc. but especially take notice of the verse that
follows my text. How shall we escape if we neglect so great Salvation, which at
first began to be spoken by the Lord, and was confirmed unto us by them that
hear him? God also bearing them witness both with signs, and wonders, and
diverse miracles, and gifts of the Holy Ghost, according to his own will: it
was the Holy Ghost that sealed up the truth of the Gospel by diverse miracles.

The Apostle therefore calls the spirit the great Teacher. 1 Ioh. 2.27. Ye
need not that any man teach you but as the same anointing teaches you all
things, 1. Ioh. 2.27. And the spirit is said to reveal that in the word to the
spiritual man, which the word without the spirit cannot make the natural man
to understand, 1 Cor, 2.9, 10. Eye has not seen, nor care heard, neither has
entered into the heart of man, the things which God has prepared for them that
love him. But God has revealed them unto us by his spirit, for the spirit
searches all things even the deep things of God, And the Apostle prays that
God would come in with the spirit of wisdom upon the word of wisdom, and
with the spirit of revelation upon the word of revelation, to his Ephesians;
Ephesians. 1, 17.

2 The Application of the spirit. As this Salvation is from the spirits
revelation, so has it its efficacy from the spirits application. Its the
spirit that must bring our hearts to the word, as well as the word to our
hearts, that must speak us through, and say to our blind eyes, deaf ears, and
dead hearts be opened, see, and hear, and understand, and be converted, and he
healed, Its the spirit that must persuade us to recieve, entertain, and
embrace Christ, that must say to our understandings, and wills, and hearts,
lift up your heads O ye gates, and be ye opened ye everlasting doors, that the
King of glory may enter in, when the dead letter of the word, and a dead heart
meet, there can be but dead work, till the spirit of life, that free wind that
blows where it lists, do blow through that word upon the Soul, that spirit
that indicted the word can make it the savor of life, and that spirit that
formed the heart, and searches the heart, can say unto dead hearts live. In
this respect it is that we are said to be drawn to Christ John. 6.44. and to
be made believers by the exceeding greatness of his power, and according to the
working of his mighty power, Ephesians. 1.19. Now in that the Gospel needed so
glorious a revelation and so powerful an application, and both by the spirit,
our Salvation wrought by it must be confessed to be great Salvation.

3. Next we come to things in subordination, that do subserve under God in
Trinity, toward this great Salvation, and here I might enter upon a large
field of matter, but for brevites sake, I shall only point out the hid
treasures, that so knowing where they lie, you may digg after them.

And the things whose instrumentality, the great God of our Salvation uses,
toward the effecting of this great Salvation, may be laid before us in two
paires.

1. The First pair is 1. graces. 2. duties.
2. The Second pair is. 1. ordinances. 2. providence.

I thus join them together, because God joyneth them together.

1. Grace, and duty: grace being the principle of duty, and duty being but the
acting of grace.

2. Ordinances, and providence, which usually go hand in hand, for our
conversion, aedification, and Salvation.

1. We begin with grace: The word says Titus. 2.12. The grace of God which
brings Salvation teaches us to deny ungodliness and worldly lusts, and to
live holily, justly, and soberly in this present World: where the Apostle
teaches us that it is grace that makes us to abound in duty, and therefore to
that end that we may abound in the work of the Lord, which the Apostle
presses, 1. Cor. 15. ult, we are taught by the Apostle Peter, to abound in
grace, 2. Pet. 1.5, 6, 7, 8. giving all diligence add unto your faith etc.
and then it follows, If these things be in you and abound, they make you that
you shall neither be barren, nor unfruitful in the knowledge of our Lord Jesus
Christ. Note the graces of faith, virtue, knowledge, temperance, patience,
godliness, brotherly kindness, love, must not only be in us, but they must
abound in us, in order to this great Salvation. And the fruits of the spirit,
that the heirs of Salvation must endeavor to abound in, are laid down in
another cluster Gal. 5.22, 23. The fruits of the spirit are love, joy, peace,
long-suffering, gentleness, goodness, faith, meekness, temperance, these, and
all the rest of the train of heavenly graces do accompany Salvation, and it
must needs be great Salvation that is so greatly graced,

2. Duty is the next, wherein (as you heard before) they must no less abound,
than they must in grace. The Apostles exhortation is 1. Cor. 15. ult. My
brethren be ye steadfast, and unmovable, always abounding in the work of the
Lord, for as much as you know that your labor is not in vain in the Lord. And
it was not only his precept but his practice to, he did not like the Scribes
and Pharisees bind heavy burdens to lay upon others shoulders, but he taught
them by his own example to bear them too: Phil. 3.13, 14. This one thing I do,
forgetting those things which are behind, and reaching forth unto the things
that are before I press toward the mark, for the price of the high calling of
God in Christ Jesus, whereupon one of the Fathers called him insatiabilis dei
cultor, an unsatisfied, greedy worshipper of the Lord Jesus. Gods workmen
should be the best, and good workmen can never want work, did not our God lay
enough upon them, in the duties of holiness, righteousness, and sobriety, which
is the Epitome of the moral Law. Did not Christ lay enough upon them in
charging them to keep his Commandemeuts out of love, and that their faith work
by love, which is the Epitome both of Law and Gospel. Their own deceitful
hearts will find them enough, The alluring world, the enticing flesh, and
suggesting devil will afford them but a little breathing, redit labor actus in
Orbem, their work is never at an end, till death give them a quietus est
blessed are the dead which die in the Lord, even so says the Spirit, that they
rest from their labors. Rev. 14.13. What betwixt reading, and hearing, and
studying, and meditating, and praying, and mourning, and searching and
watching, and praising and all those laborious and painful duties that are of
absolute necessity in order to the attainment of this great Salvation, it is
plentifully attested to be great Salvation.

3. Next for Ordinances, what tendency have all these, but the furtherance of
this Salvation? The word that Converting, and edifying ordinance is it not the
word of life and Salvation: May I not say unto you. Men and brethren children
of the generation of Abraham, and whosoever among you fears God, to you is
the word of this Salvation sent, Is not the gospel our Law of life, and the
law our rule of life, leading to this Salvation? does not Evangelicall grace
fit us for legal duty? Consult that Scripture Tit. 2.12. and you shall find it
so. And for the sealing ordinances of Baptism and the Supper, their tendency
can be no other, but as seals to a deed to the suremaking of this Salvation
The Ministry we may say of it as the word does of the Sabbath, that it was made
for man, and therefore its reckoned to the Churches charter. 1 Cor. 3.22. All
things are yours, whether Paul, or Apollo, or Cephus etc. And the Apostle to
the Ephesians. speaking of the extraordinary Ministry of Prophets, Evangelists, and
Apostles, and the ordinary of pastors, and teachers, tells us that it was for
the perfecting of the Saints, for the work of the ministry for the edifying of
the body of Christ, till we all come in the unity of faith, and of the knowledge
of the Son of God, unto a perfect man, unto the measure of the stature of the
fullness of Christ. Ephesians. 4.12, 13. Wherefore has God given us his Sabbath, but
that we should make it our delight, if Salvation be our delight? wherefore has
he appointed the ordinance of prayer as a Catholicon, as universal food, and
Physic for our Souls, as necessary as our daily bread, and daily pardon, as
the fourth and fifth Petition of the Lords prayer note; yea, the very discipline
of the Church, Christian reprooses, and rebukes, and excommunication it self
aims at the reformation of the unruly, and at the destruction of the flesh
that the spirit may be saved in the day of the Lord.

4. Lastly for Providence, how strangely does God work for the heirs of
Salvation, though the word be the ordinary means for the conversion of a
sinner, yet how ordinarily is some afflictive providence singled out to set it
home, to weane unbelevers and such as stick at a half conversion, like a child
in the birth, and to make them more then all-most Christians, when souls do
hang in aequilibrio, and do as it were halt betwixt God and the world, or
flesh, its usually some pinching affliction that turns the scales, and causes
the sinner to turn his heart, and feet unto Gods testimonies: Those that keep
Catalogues of providence, can draw out choice of experiences out of their full
quivers: They can tell you with David who delivered them out of the paw of the
Lion and Bear. 1 Samuel 17.37. and can with Paul record unto Gods glory, he has
delivered, and does deliver, in whom we trust that he will also yet deliver. 2
Cor. 2.10. Cannot Gods people tell you when they were dead and he put life into
them, as the prodigalls Father said of his Son, so can they say of their
souls, this my soul was dead and is alive again, he was lost, and is found,
Cannot they tell when they were asleep and he awaked them, when they were in
deepes and he succored them, when they were rushing upon sin like a horse into
the battle, and he withheld them, as he did David from hurting Nabal, by the
providence of Abigal, yea, they can record thankfully the very ordinances, and
providence wherein God appeared to them It, were endless to enumerate all, let
experient Christians supply the rest out of their own store, while weaker
Christians do make use of those weak helps to further their understandings in
comprehending this truth. And now being come to the uttermost of their reason,
let us look back and gather up the several branches into one bundle, which we
need not doubt to call the bundle of life, in which all saved souls are bound
up.

1 The wisdom, and love of God the Father, who is the God of our Salvation.

2 The sufferings, and righteousness of God the Son, who is the Author, and
finisher of our Salvation.

3 The revelation, and application of the spirit, who is the furtherer of our
Salvation.

4 Graces, and duties, which bear the name of saving graces, and saving duties.

5 Ordinances and Providence, which are all things that do accompany Salvation.

And none of these can be left out, but our Salvation will miscarry, they are
all of absolute necessity, and for all these, gospel Salvation must be
confessed to be great Salvation, and a mighty engine, that is carried with so
many, and mighty wheels.

1 USE
Shall be of Consideration, wherein I shall commend unto your serious
consideration this Salvation, with its dimensions, as great, and so great
Salvation; so that you are to hear, 1 What it is. 2 How great it is.


What it is, take in this short account, which contains the substance of all
that goes before, Its the dear purchase of our Sovereign Lord Redeemer freely
bestowed upon Gods elect, whereby they are by a strong hand, and mighty means,
freed from sin, and eternal misery, and advanced to grace, and everlasting
happiness. You may read a breviary of it John. 3.16. God so loved the World,
that he gave his only bogotten Son, that whosoever beleiveth in him might not
perish, but have everlasting life. Its this Salvation that denominates the
Gospel to be glad tidings, for can there be gladder tidings then life from the
dead, then eternal life from eternal death? judge how sweet a pardon would be
to a condemned malefactor, when he were at the place of execution, and there
you have a shadow of it.

2 But how great it is, I cannot tell you, this I can tell you, that it is so
great that words cannot reach it, neither can our dull intellects comprehend
it: we read that the love that saves us, has the largest dimensions of length,
and breadth, and height, and depth, Ephesians. 3.18, 19. But in the same breath we
also read that it passes knowledge, and to be filled with it is to be filled
with the fulness of God: This Salvation must have the same dimensions, and
they must be as exactly fitted to each other as the arc and mercy-seat, you
have already heard of the depth of it, in the evils that it saves us from,
which are as deep as the nethermost hell; You have also heard of the height of
it, in the happiness that it advances unto, which is a happiness as high as the
third Heaven. The breadth of it you have also measured unto you, in the fullness
of excellent means that conduce to the accomplishment of it. The length of it
remains only to be supplied, and the Scripture is so full of that, that you
may even run and read it, that this great Salvation has no shorter date for
its durance, than Aeternity, those that are saved are saved for ever and ever.

Or to help our selves herein by speaking after the manner of men.

1 Men set great esteem by that which is the gift of some great friend, and
such is this Salvation that we are speaking of, we are not saved by our merit,
it is the gift of God; The gift of God is eternal life through Jesus Christ our
Lord, Romans 6. ult. Fear not little flock, says the purchaser of this great
salvation, for it is your Fathers good pleasure to give you the Kingdom, Luke
12.32. Yea salvation and Savior and all are the gift of God the Father, Unto
us a Son is given, Isai 9.6. And God so loved the world that he gave his only
bogotten. Son, etc. Joh. 3.16.

2 Men count that great, that has been purchased at a dear rate, and such is
this Salvation, less than the precious blood of Christ could never have
purchased it, we were not redeemed with corruptible things as gold and silver,
etc. 1 Pet. 1.18.

3 Men count that great that is hardly gained, and such is this great
Salvation. The righteous are s^^rsly saved (i. e.) At a hard hand, and with
much ado 1 Pet. 4.18. And we are commanded to strive to enter in at the
straight gate, Luke. 13.24. And to offer violence to the Kingdom of Heaven,
Mat. 11, 12. And to give all diligence to make our calling and election sure, 2
Pet. 1.5.

4 Men count him great that has a great retinue, that is a great king, that
has amultitude of subjects, and if we do but look back and recount the
multitude of evils that we are saved from, and the riches of grace, and glory
that we are advanced to, and the multitude of excellent means by which both
are brought to pass, Salvation may also pass for great upon that account

2 USE
Shall be a Proclamation to all that are willing to come in and challenge their
part in this great Salvation, Christ has made a full purchase of it, and he is
a mighty Savior, able to save to the uttermost all that do come unto the
Father by him. God is a free bestower of it, he expects not that we should
bring any thing with us, but a sense of our own blindness, nakedness,
nothingness, a sense of our own want of this great Salvation. He is no
respecter of persons, he accepts none for his goodness, nor excludes any for
his badness, provided that they will come in, and accept of it upon the terms
it is offered: observe and study those sweetest invitations, one in the old
Testament, the other in the new. Isay. 55.1, 2. Ho, every one that thirsts
come ye to the waters, and he that has no money; Come ye, buy and cate, yea,
come buy wine and milk without money, and without price; wherefore do ye spend
money for that which is not bread, and your labor for that which satisfies
not, hearken diligently unto me and eat ye that which is good, and let your
soul delight it self in fatness. Revel. 22.17. The spirit and the bride say
come, and let him that hears say come, and let him that is athirst come, and
whosoever will, let him take of the water of life freely. O who can but admire
at these gracious words, if we do but also take into consideration those moving
expostulations, which we find in the word. As I live, says the Lord, I have no
pleasure in the death of a sinner, turn ye, turn ye, why will ye die, O house
of Israel, Ezekiel. 18.31. How often would and. Mat. 32.37. My very text has the
force of a most vehement expostulation, how shall we escape etc. how shall we
answer it to God, that we thus slight his mercy, and undervalue his Son, and
destroy our own Souls and refuse our own mercies O let not any be guilty of
such bedlam madness, to exclude themselves, when God excludes them not, when
God throws open his door of mercy to all comers, what reason have poor, lost,
undone sinners to bar it against themselves. I may write a Noverint universi
upon this Proclamation, Be it known unto all the World, that this Salvation, as
great as it is (and it is greater than words or thoughts can reach unto) yea
and the great Savior to boot, with all their riches, are freely offered unto
us poor, wretched, worthless worms, upon no other, or higher condition than
our thankful, willing acceptance of them, John. 1.12. As many as received
him, to them gave he power (i.e.) privilege to become the Sonns of God, even
to them which believe on his name. Oh that our everlasting doors might now fly
open to give entertainment to this King of glory! Oh that our understandings,
and wills could now close with the truth, and goodness of this great Salvation,
that we may with one accord take up that saying of the Apostle, 1 Timothy 1.15.
This is a true and faithful saying, and worthy of all acceptance that Jesus
Christ came into the world to save sinners.

THIRD USE
3 Use Serves to reprove the madness of the neglecters, or refusers of this
great Salvation; since it is so great salvation, and offered on such easy
terms, surely the folly and madness of such as are regardless of it is
exceeding great, and this is the more aggravated, and made out of measure
sinful, by taking into consideration, what toys and trifles are prized, and
set by, while salvation is neglected; the Devil, World, and the Flesh shall be
served, while Father, Son, and Holy Ghost are basely neglected, men's profits,
pleasures, and honors, the perishing vanities of a transitory world shall be
sought after with uttermost diligence, while more durable profits, and lasting
pleasures, and everlasting honors are made no account of.

The body, and lust, and sin shall be satisfied, when the soul, and grace,
and glory, are laid aside as not worth the minding, we are ready to condemn
Adam of monstrous madness, that would looss Paradise for an apple, and to cry
out upon Esau as the fool of all fools, that would exchange his birthright
for a mess of pottage, and the very name of Judas the traitor in grain stinkes
like rotteness, that would sell his master for thirty pence; but surely the
World is full of such fools, and madmen, and monsters. Those that will please
their appetite with Adam, though they lose an Heavenly Paradise for so doing.
Those that will satisfy their craving flesh with Esau, though they lose the
glorious I berty of Gods Sonns, and forfeit all the privileges of the new
birthright. Those that will have Balaams wages, the wages of iniquity with
curied Judas, though they lose Soul, and Savior, and Salvation and all: If we
do but look abroad in the World, and take a view of the lives and behavior of
men and women; old and young, high and low, rich and poor, one with another; We
shall see that the multitude is like that heard of Swine, possessed of the
Legion, running headlong to their own damnation, Ambition carries away
thousands, voluptuousness ten thousands, worldly-mindedness hundreds of
thousands, so that Millions are visibly in a perishing condition, wickedness
recting the wicked man to his teeth (...) as Daved says) that there is no fear
of God before his eyes, and the abounding of iniquity makes proclamation, that
notwithstanding such great Salvation be brought to light, yet there are but few
that shall be saved; Hell has enlarged herself without measure, and all the
pomp, and all multitude of secure, and careless, and senseless sinners shall
fall into it. This, oh this is the condemnation that is come into the world,
that light is come into the world, and men love darkness more than light, that
a Savior is come into the world, and men will not come unto this Savior, that
there should be a proclamation of so great Salvation, and men will not leave
their sins, and close with God through Christ that they may be saved, yet let
us take a further survey, for as yet we have but stirred in the stink of
common sinners, those that give up themselves to serve the Devil by a sensual
serving the flesh, and worldly mindedness, these do turn their backs upon God,
and do in their actions profess against the dominion of Christ, that they will
not have him ^o reign over them; let us look toward them, that seem to look
toward Heaven, and observe diligently what we can find there.

1 Are not many of them merely civilized, and no more, though they will not
wallow like Swine in the mire, yet they are not careful to keep clean their
garments, nor to keep themselves unspotted from the world, though they will not
tear Gods Name by Ruffianlike oaths, yet they will pawae their faith and troth
for small matters.

2 Some that advance higher than mere Civility, yet make a stand at formality,
and take up with a form of Godliness short of the power of it, knowledge, and
grace they would have, and duty they will do, but it is but some knowledge, and
some grace, and some duty, that its an easy conclusion that they desire it
rather to save their credit than their Souls, that they may be in esteem with
men, rather than in favor with God, but our Savior has said enough to dash
all this, Matt. 5.20. Except your righteousness exceed the righteousness of the
Scribes who had but a form of knowledge and Pharisees (who had but a form of
Godliness) ye cannot enter into the Kingdom of Heaven, and Luke 8.18. From him
thah has not, from him shall be taken away, even all that he seems to have

3 Many do stick in half coversions like a child in the birth, and there is
not strength to bring forth, like that man in the Gospel that started aside
like a broken bow at a forsake all, and chose rather to forsake Christ, then to
forgo his wealth. Herod heard John Baptist gladly in many things, but would not
part with his Herodias, and all such as these are but like Agrippa almost
persuaded to become Christians; but if they come not up to Paul's measure,
altogether such as he, true Israelites indeed, such in whom there is no guile,
they are but Godless, and Christless, and Spiritless, and graceless Souls, and
will be reckoned in the number of the neglecters of this great Salvation.

How should the servants of the Lord, that have his spirit dwelling in their
hearts, and have the fear of the Lord before their eyes, knowing the terror of
the Lord, against all such as are out of Christ, and out of Covenant, how
should they pity these poor Souls, and entreat, and beseech them to pity
their own Souls, and to come in, and be reconciled to God, and to be willing
to embrace the things that belong to their Salvation before they shall he
hidden from their eyes. And if they continue refusers still, how should we ply
the throne of grace with our earnest entreaties, that God would forgive them
who know not what they do, that he would take away their hearts of stone and
give them hearts of flesh.

That he would deliver them up unto Satan for their Salvation, not for their
damnations, I mean that he would cast them into an Hell of conscience, and
plead with them there, and cause them to see, and feel themselves to be the
vessels of sin, and bondslaves of Satan, that they may spend the remainder of
their few and evil days in mourning, that their flesh, and body of sin may be
destryed, and their Spirits may be saved in the day of the Lord.

And to help forward this work, if God will, before I pass from this use afford
your attention, while I expostulate the case with stubborn sinners on their
Souls behalf, that they may be snatched as brands out of the fire, and pulled
out of the paw of the Lion rampant that seeks to devour them, if they be not
such deaf Adders as refuse to hear the voice of the Charmer, charm he never
so wisely.

I will not ask them whether grace and glory be of no reckoning with them,
which Salvation does advance unto, as you have heard in the second reason. I
will not ask them if the wisdom and love of God the Father, the sufferings and
righteousness of God the Son, the grace and communion of the spirit be of no
account, If graces, and duties, ordinances and providence are nothing set by,
its a common thing with those whose eyes the God of this World has blinded,
and with such as are wedded to world, and enslaved to the flesh to overlook all
these as if they were not worth the looking after.

But can they dwell with the devouring fire, or can they endure everlasting
burnings? Can the conflict with the wrath of God, which is a devouring fire
burning to the bottom of Hell? dare they provoke the Lord to jealousy, oh
foolish people and unwise? Ah it is a fearful thing to fall into the sin
revenging hands of the living God. Can they undergo the curse of that fiery Law
that was given with thunder, and lightning, and the sound of the trumpet, or
endure the appearing of the Lord Jesus when he shall be revealed from Heaven
with his mighty Angels, and in flaming fire to render vengeance to them that
know not God, and obey not the Gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ, who shall be
punished with everlasting destruction from the presence of the Lord, and the
glory of his power? Can they grapple with the strong man armed without a
stronger then he to their second? How will they withstand their sins when they
shall be gathered together in a general muster, and set in battle arey in a
most formidable army, and armed with the teeth of Dragons, and stings of
Scorpions, to kill their Bodies and Souls in Hell, When the numberless number
of their notorious provocations shall break in furiously like a Sea of
Billows, to drive away the wicked in his wickedness, and another sea of wrath
shall be tumbling in after it: When evils unrepented of, like a kennel of
Hellhounds, shall hunt the wicked persons to destruction, When God shall be so
severe to observe every thing that is done amiss, and shall set in order
before us the things that we have done, how shall we then answer to one of a
Thousand? Can you give battle to the King of fears, or secure yourselves from
a heartquake when death hangs out his black colors and gives you an alarm?
will not your hearts then die like a stone, or fall asunder in your breasts like
drops or water when your consciences are clamorous, and speak bitter things
against you, will not Belshazzers palsy seize upon your joints? and when you
think of that judgment that follows death, that fire and brimstone which is
the second death, will not this make you with Foelix to quake and tremple? Oh
do but forethinke with yourselves that you shall be as unable to stand in the
day of the Lords wrath as chaff to stand before a whirlewinde or stubble before
a consuming fire. O consider this you that forget God least ye be torn in
pieces, and there be none to deliver you.

4 USE
Is of Consolation to all such as have cordially closed with this great
Salvation; As the refusers of it deserve to be stigmatized for notorious
fools, for so wise Solomon declaims against them, Prove. 1.22. How long, ye
simple ones, will ye love simplicity, and the scorners delight in their
scorning, and fools hate knowledge? So such as thankfully accept, and embrace
this great Salvation, deserve the reputation of the wisest of men; no fool to
the wilful sinner, and no wisdom comparable to that that makes wise unto
Salvation. How was Timothy renowned, and his fame rings as far as the Gospel is
preached for searching the scripture, which were able to make him wise unto
Salvation. 2 Timothy 3.15. To be wise unto Salvation is to be wise indeed, all
wisdom that comes short of this leaves the possessors of it short of the
beginning of wisdom; To be wise for the world, and wise after the flesh is in
Gods esteem to be but fools, and rather a bar to keep men out of Heaven, than
a door to let them in, and therefore our first lesson is self-denial, which
consists in a denial of our wits, as well as a denial of our wills, and of
our worth, which the Apostle hints when he says, If any man will be wise, let
him become a fool that he may be wise.

As the wisdom of God is foolishesness with the world, and God saves men by
the foolishness of preaching. 1 Cor. 1.21. So the wisdom of the world is
foolishness with God. (...). Romans 8.7. The wisdom of the flesh is enmity with
God. To be wise to do wickedly is the most foolish of all wisdom, are not
they without understanding that work wickedness? Ps. 14.4. This wisdom is
not from above, but carnal, sensual, and divelish. To be wise according to
art in Phisicks, Ethics, Politics, Oeconomicks, etc. and to want the wisdom
from above which Gods word and spirit do teach, is but umbra sapientiae the
shadow of wisdom, and can make men no better than learned fools, all
amounting to no more than erudita ignorantia, a finer sort of ignorance, but to
be wise for God, for Heaven, for our Souls, for Salvation, this is to be wise
indeed: A true Israelite indeed, a true Christian indeed, and true wisdom
indeed, are much worth, when such as are so in show, are but like ciphers in
Arithmetic, join as many together as will fill a volume, and they will
signify nothing. O consider that when you have laid out your money for that
that is not bread, and have spent time and strength for that which cannot
profit, you will be the first that shall befoole your selves, as soon as God
shall anoint your eyes with eye salve from above, then you will say with David,
so foolish was I and ignorant, even as a very bruit before thee, Psalm. 73.22.
And my wounds stink and are corrupt through my foolishness, Psalm. 38.5. Yea,
the time is coming when those that thought the children of God to be fools,
because they set their hearts upon a wisdom that was above the world, shall
condemn their own wretched folly, and magnify the others wisdom, as Wisd.
5.4, 5. We fools thought his life madness, and his end without honor, how is
he counted among the Children of God, and his portion is among the Saints?

To draw toward a conclusion of this use, they shall not only gain the
reputation of wisdom, but as Solomon (when he desired an understanding and
religions heart in the first place) had riches and honor given in ex
abundanti, as more than measure, so shall these. And therefore they are called
heirs of Salvation, Heb. 1.14. a title next in dignity and riches unto his who
is called in the second verse of that chapter the heir of all things: All Gods
Sonns, are heirs, and fellow-heyres with Jesus Christ, Rom 8.17. and being
received into the glorious liberty of Gods adopted Sonns, by their union with
Christ, they communicate in all the privileges of Justification,
reconciliation, adoption, sanctification and glory. They have a right to all
the privileges of the Sonns of God. The love of the Father, the grace of the
Son, The Communion of the holy Spirit, The protection of the Trinity, The
guardianship of Angels, The comforts of an appeased conscience, The
comfortable enjoyment of the things of this life, and the beleiving expectation
of the good things of the life to come. We look upon him as honorably, and
richly provided for that is a Kings Son, and heir to his Fathers Crown, but
all Gods Children are heirs to two Kingdoms, all the glory, and riches of the
Kingdom of grace and glory, Such honor, and riches, have all his Saints. And
that which is the completory of their consolation, and makes their joy full,
yea, shaken together, and pressed down, and running over, with all these gifts
they shall receive the giver, which is more then all, and they may rejoice more
in the God of their Salvation, than in their Salvation it self, yea there is
such a plenitude in God that he is not only All in all, but he is all in the
absence of all things else. When David was in one of the greatest of his
temporal deepes, the people ready to stone him at Ziklag, yet the Text says,
he comforted himself in his God. 1 Samuel 30.6. And we cannot suppose a man can
fall into greater streights than the prophet mentions Hab. 3.17, 18. When the
figtree should not blossom neither should fruit be in the vines, the labor of
the Olive to fail, and the fields to yield no meat, the flocks to be cut off
from the foild, and no herd to be left in the stalls, and yet the Prophet
resolves in such a straight, I will rejoice in the Lord, I will joy in the God
of my Salvation. As it is the presence of the Sun that makes day, so it is the
presence of God, and Christ that makes Heaven, To be with Christ was that that
made Paul desire to be dissolved Phil. 1.23. And our being for ever with the
Lord, was that consideration with which he comforts believers, and bids them to
comfort one another with it 1. These. 4.17, 18. In a word David that holy man,
that man after Gods own heart, desired no more to cure him of all diseases
here, but the light of Gods pleased countenance, show me the light of thy
pleased countenance, and I shall be whole: And nothing but Gods presence to
make him happy for ever hereafter. In his presence is the fullness of joy, and
at his right hand there are pleasures for evermore. No consolation like theirs
who have closed savingly with the covenant of their God, whom he has chosen to
himself, and made heirs of this great Salvation.

FIFTH USE.
5 Use. The last use shall be of exhortation: Is it so great Salvation, as the
first use of consideration speaks it to be? Is it offered to all upon the easy
condition of receiving it, as the second use of proclamation affirms? Are they
fools and madmen that set light by it, as the third use of reprofe manifests?
Are they wise, and honorable, and rich that close with it as the forth use of
consolation declares? Then we shall close up all which a fifth use of
exhortation unto all to whom the word of this Salvation is sent, to embrace
both it, and the ambassadors that come to them to proclaim it: Oh how
beautiful should the feet of those be that bring unto you the glad tidings of
Salvation? And if their feet should be beautiful, how amiable should their
saces be? How should you entertain and welcome them like the very Angels of
God, for their angelical, evangelicall employment? how should they be had in
double honor for their work, and employment sake? And if the Messenger should
be so grateful, how much more the message? Do men enquire so diligently after
good news, and joyful tidings, as if the Athenian itch were in their ears,
and will they not entertain the Gospel of their Salvation, the most joyful
tidings that ever came into the world? what an oversight would this be? that
things of low concernment, such as belong to our bodies, names, estates, lives,
to take up so much of our precious time, and the most momentous matters of
grace and glory, of our Souls, and our Salvation to be no more thought upon
than our dying day (as the careless multitude do inconsideratly express
themselves) Oh be exhorted (what ever else is neglected) to make sure with your
Salvation, to give all diligence to make your calling and election sure, 2 Pet.
1.10. To seek first the Kingdom of God and his righteousness, Mat. 6.33. What
Solomon says of getting of wisdom, I may say of getting Salvation. How much
better is it to get wisdom then gold, anb happy is the man that finds
wisdom, for the merchandise of it is better than the merchandise of silver, and
the gain thereof than fine gold; she is more precious than rubies, and the
things thou can desire are not to be compared to her; length of days are in
her right hand, and in her left hand riches and honor; her ways are ways of
pleasantnese, and all her paths are peace, she is a tree of life to all that
lay hold upon her, and happy is every one that retains her, Prove. 3. from 13.
to 19, and how applicable is all this unto that great salvation that we have
been speaking of? Therefore above all gettings, get salvation, which
comprehends wisdom, honor, riches, safety and all together! oh who would load
themselves with thick clay, or set their hearts upon those toies and trifles,
that are called Crowns and Kingdoms, that has such true treasure as this to
trade and traffic for. If we must be coveting, let us covet the best things,
and remember that we are here shown a most excellent way. This will prove a
purchase that will more than recompense all the care and cost that can be laid
out upon it; and this is that that will so aggravate the folly of refusers,
because it will cost no more than our cordial accepting, and embraceing. The
Jews might have had Christ for the taking, and would not, he came to his own
and his own received him not, but to as many as received him, to them he gave
privilege to become the Sonns of God. John. 1.11, 22. O Jerusalem Jerusalem
how often would I, and ye would not? Mat. 23.37. When the Prophet directed
Naaman to wash in Jordan to be cured of his leaprosy, and he was angry because
he expected a quicker dispatch, and some easyer cure, his servants bespeake him
thus, My Father, If the Prophet had commanded thee some great matter, would
thou not have done it, how much rather when he says but wash and be clean? So
may I say in the case in hand, If God should Command us some great and
difficult matter for the cure of our Leaprosy of sin, and for the attaining of
this great Salvation, should we not do it; If he should command us to give our
first borne for our transgression, the fruit of our bodies for the sin of our
souls. If he did require of us such costly sacrifices as thousands of Rams,
or ten thousands of rivers of Oil, we might the more excusably draw back at
such difficulties, and impossibilities: But when it is no more but believe and
live, accept of Christ, and be saved, surely when this comes to be pleaded, all
such as are Christless, and faithless, will be also speechless, they will not
have one word to say for themselves, why the sentence of damnation should not
take hold upon them, who have been such wilful refusers of that great
Salvation, that was offered to them upon such easy terms. O work out your
Salvation while it is called to day, the night is approaching in which none can
work. Whatsoever is commanded you do it with your might, for there is no
knowledge, nor wisdom, nor invention in the grave whither you are going:
Perhaps your pains, that you must take for it, must be great, and your
sufferings that you must pass through may be great to; but remember that it
has been declared, and proved to be great Salvation, which is to be your
recompense, and such as will more than recompense you for all that you can do
or suffer for it. As to the recompense of our doing, the Apostle speaks
modestly, in speaking but negatively. 1 Cor. 15. ult. Be ye always abundant
in the work of the Lord, knowing that your labor shall not be in vain in the
Lord; But when he speaks of the recompense of our sufferings, a double
superlative is little enough. 2. Cor. 4.17. Our light affliction which is but
for a moment (...) works for us a far more exceeding, and eternal weight of
glory: observe but the elegancy of the Apostles Antithesis in speaking
diminutively of the sufferings, and loftily of the glory which he opposes to
them.

The one he calls. 1. Afflictions. 2. Light afflictions. 3. Light affictions
for a moment.


The other he calls. 1. Glory. 2. A weight of glory. 3. A weight of glory for
aeternity.


Compare 1. Glory with afflictions. 2. A weight of glory, with light
afflictions. 3. A weight of glory for aeternity, with light afflictions for a
moment.


The one will be ponderous beyond our imagination, the other will seem lighter
then vanity it self, well might the Apostle say, count that the afflictions of
this present world are not worthy to be compared to the glory which shall be
revealed in us. Romans 8.18. Upon which an expositor of note, excellently
enlarges, and says, non sunt condigni labores, nec condignae passiones ad
peccatumpraeteritum quod remittitur, ad praesentis vitae gratiam quae
immittitur, ad futurae vitae gloriam quae promittitur. All that we can do or
suffer is nothing compared to the sin past which is remitted, to the present
grace which is bestowed, nor to the future glory which is promised. This was a
mean thing that the Author of this Epistle amied at to encourage the Hebrews
to suffer the spoiling of their goods joyfully, and to take in good part all
that might befall them, and not to be offended at the Cross, because this great
Salvation would make them not only savers, but imcomparable gainers, I shall
shut up this point with the same consideration; O let us work and watch, and
strive, and walk circumspecctly, let us pray and pray, and give all diligence
and offer violence, and be abundant in doing, and suffering, for let us assure
our selves whatever men think of this Salvation now in that great day when the
Lord Christ shall be made terrible to the refusers of it, and glorious in them
that believe, the most unbeleiving will be more than thoroughly convinced that
the Salvation offered in the Gospel is,

GREAT SALVATION.
THE SECOND DOCTRINE, Setting light by this great Salvation is great Sin.
THough we shall easily confess all sins to be great, yea, the least to be
objectively infinite, because committed against an infinite God, as we see
David swallowed up of this deep, Psalm. 51.4. against Thee, Thee have I sinned,
etc. And we shall as easily confess that no sins are venial in the sense of
Rome, the Apostle Paul having declared, that the wages of all sin is death,
Romans 6.23. yet we cannot with the stoics think all sins to be equal, but more
or less sinful as they are circumstantiated; that very expression of the
sinfulness of sin, had otherwise been a paradox, which we find used in
Scripture, and in many of the writings of the learned, and orthodox, both
modern and ancient, and the Prophet had been guilty of an impropriety of
speech, in mentioning scarlet and crimson sins, if some had not been of a
deeper guilt than others, and their sinfulness like those colors dyed in
grain. Now that this sin of gospel-refusing, or setting light by this great
Salvation, is a sin with an high hand, and a hard heart, and a sin of that
aggravated nature, as to be out of measure sinful, is the point that is first
to be illustrated, and then to be proved by evidence and strength of reasons.

First for illustration thus, The Scripture thunders out a most dreadful curse
against such as do the work of the Lord negligently, Jer. 48.10. if the
negligent hearers and doers do lie open to the curse of God, what will become
of those that are so grossly negligent, that they neglect both the theory and
practick, the knowing and doing part, and all that care so little for the
gospel, that they desire not to be acquainted with it, that do as it were say
to the Lord, depart from us, we care not to know thy ways nor to walk in thy
paths? The forementioned Scripture levels that curse against such as are
negligent in the execution of Gods destroying work, as the words immediately
following do manifest; Cursed is he that does the work of the Lord negligently,
or deceitfully, and cursed is he that keeps back his sword from blood, when
God shall say to his sword, go through a Land, destroy all, and save none, and
his executioners must close with it under pain of the Lords curse, and fiercest
indignation: What shall become of such as will not close with his saving work,
when he shall say to his word, go thorough a Land, and open blind eyes, and
deaf ears, and dead hearts, that men may see with their eyes, and hear with
their ears, and understand with their hearts, and be converted, and be healed,
and when such as should proclaim these glad tidings shall be dumb, and not
declare it, and the hearers shall be deaf, and will not entertain it, there
must be blind leading the blind, till all fall into the pit, and the forna^
must be heat seven times hotter for the refusers of the Gospel than for the
transgressors of the Law, the fire of gods jealousy burning hottest about the
Sanctuary, and that judgment being most merciless, which begins at the
house of God; read that confluence of threatenings Deuteronomy. 29.20. where God
threatens that all the curses that are written in his book shall fall upon
such as bless themselves in a cursed estate, and add to that, Deuteronomy. 28.61.
where God threatens all the curses that are not written to the children of
disobedience; and yet that flaming place being a Gospel-threatning, 2. These.
1.7, 8, 9. is hotter and heavier than all; The Lord Jesus shall be revealed
from Heaven in flaming fire, rendering vengance to them that know not God, and
that obey not the Gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ, who shall be punished with
everlasting destruction from the presence of the Lord, and the glery of his
power, mark the tendencie and full scope of the words, you may take them at
large thus: O all you stubborn and rebellious sinners, who are refusers of
Gospel-mercy, and have long continued neglecters of that great Salvation;
remember that the Lord Jesus was revealed from Heaven, as the Lamb of God to
take away the sins of the World, and came down from his Fathers Throne to his
footstool, to take our nature upon him, to humble himself, and become obedient
to death, even the death of the Cross, to be made under the Law to redeem them
that were under the Law, that we might receive the adoption of sons, and he
sent abroad his Apostles to propagate to all Nations the knowledge of this
Salvation, and to persuade the sinful World that lay under condemnation, unto
faith and obedience, believingly to accept of this Savior and Salvation, and
in all thankfulness to return obedience, and to take him for their sovereign
Lord, Redeemer, and Savior! Oh know, and be it known unto you, and to all the
World, that he shall once more be revealed as a roaring Lion, to tear in pieces
such as know not God, and obey not the Gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ, but
this is to argue the greatness of the sin from the greatness of the punishment,
and the improvement of it may be referred unto the third doctrine, as to its
most proper place.

The same course that we took to illustrate the greatness of Gospel-Salvation,
we may take here to aggravate the sin of Gospel-neglecting or refusing.

We hinted there that Gospel-Salvation was called 1. Salvation. 2. Great
Salvation. 3. So great Salvation.


Which we further amplified by alluding to the three degrees of comparison,
showing, 1. That it was positively great. 2. That it was comparativly greater
than other. 3. That it was superlatively the greatest.


Conceive in like manner of the sin of setting light by this Salvation.

1. That it is positively great. 2. That it is comparatively greater than
others. 3. That it is superlatively the greatest of all except the excepted
sin.
And we may call it 1. Sin. 2. Great sin. 3. So great sin.


1. To discover it to be positively great, we need but name it, and a little
open the nature of it, to make men cry shame of it, as the unwrapping of a
plague sore, and opening it to be seen, is enough to make the sound to loath
it, and the stink of an open sepulcher is enough to make the living to abhor
it; Gospel-refusing, O monstrous sin! it has a face more ugly than Beelzebub
the Prince of devils, though it be a sin that is proper to men, and so common
to all degrees and estates of men, that it fills Hell with souls, yet it is
such a sin that the devils have no temptation to commit, they being left
without hope of a Redeemer, and doamed from their very fall to perish without
remedy. Salvation is a term that is comprehensive of all that is good, and
excellent, and desirable, yea, of the highest good, of the highest God, (for
they are convertible) the Trinity of persons agreeing in one unity of love, as
well as essence, to further our Salvation, yea, the great God turned all into
one great love to affect it; God so loved the World, that he gave his only
begotten Son, etc. Joh. 3.16. and Christ in the fullnes of time, manifesting
the fullness of love, Gal. 4.4. And the spirit coming down upon Christ's
Ascension, as another Comforter to abide with us to the end of the World, and
all in order to the bringing about of this great Salvation, and if this be not
a sin with a witness, tell me what is? Gospel-refusing is called in Scripture,
a God refusing, a Christ-despising, a spirit-resisting, and inconsiderate
sinners in refusing, and setting light by the word and ministry of this
Salvation do all this; Christ said of the contemners of his messengers, he that
despises you, despises me, and he that despises me, despises him that sent
me, Luke, 10.16. and Stephen said unto his and the Gospels persecutors, ye
stiffnecked and uncircumcised in heart and ears, ye do allwaies resist the
holy Ghost, as your father did, so do ye. Acts 7.51. When Gods Ambassadors
shall go out into the world, and do as the Prophet was commanded, lift up
their voices like trumpets to tell men and women of their sins, and
transgressions, when they with John Baptist shall cry, prepare ye the way of
the Lord, make his paths straight, when they shall make proclamation, Ho every
one that thirsts come, come, come. Isay. 55.12. And with the spirit, and
bride, and him that hears shall say come, come, come, Rev. 22.17. And let
whosoever will come and take of the water of life freely. When men are so
obdurate, that like Pharaoh they remain hard, and hardened in the midst of
means, neither miracles, nor ministry, nor misery, nor mercy, can do them
good, when all Gods, and Christ's, and the Spirits, and the messengers
entreaties, and beseechings shall be like breath scattered in the air, and
like water spilt upon the ground, and a labor in vain shall make Gods tired
ministers ready in a heartbreaking despondency to turn their backs upon their
labors, let such as have understandings of the longest reach, and wits
exercised to to distinguish betwixt good and evil, speak whether this must not
be concluded to be a great sin, for such only are fit to take the dimensions of
a sin that is so circumstantiated. I Will give you but one rule more to help you
to conceive of the greatness of this sin, in the positive description, and then
pass to the comparative. The Apostle prayed for his Ephesians, Ephesians. 3.16, 17,
18, 19. That God would grant them according to the riches of his glory to be
strengthened with might by his spirit in the inner man, that Christ may dwell
in their hearts by faith, that they being rooted and grounded in love, may be
able to comprehend with all Saints, what is the breadth, and length, and depth,
and height, and to know the love of Christ which, passes knowledge, that they
might be filled with the fullness of God. This is the wellspring of our
Salvation, the love of God in Christ, which is here measured out unto us by the
word and spirit of God in those dimensions of breadth, and length, and depth,
and height, and said to pass knowledge, and to comprehend all the fullness of
God, must not this have the length, and breadth, and depth, and height of sin
in it, must it not be a sin passing knowledge, must not this be to be filled
with all the fullness and sinfullness of sin? Those that are eaten up most of
the love of God, and know most of that love which passes knowledge, will be
most confounded with monstrousness of this sin, and know most of the sinful
nature of it, and such as these can assure the world of blind sinners, that it
is a Soul confounding sin, and a plague provoking sin, and such as are infected
with this leaprosy of sin, may well cry out, unclean, unclean, but while I am
speaking but positively of the greatness of this sin, I am already leaping
into the superlative, so hard it is to speak diminutively of this sin, Deus and
caelum non patiuntur hyperbolen.
as we cannot speak too highly of God, who is the highest good, so we cannot
speak too aggravatingly of this sin, because it is so objectively against the
highest love of the highest God, that it is a sin so opposite to the highest
good, is aggravation sufficient to speak it superlatively great, yet since it
was promised, we shall proceed to the comparative, and so come in order to the
superlative at last.

2. It is Comparatively greater than other sins, and here we shall take the
course to manifest Gospel-refusing to be great sin, as we did to manifest
Gospel Salvation to be great Salvation: we compared Gospel Salvation with Law:
Salvation, and with temporal deliverances, and lower Salvations, and showed
you that it was great, if compared with them, because it was greater than
those, we shall therefore,

1. Compare^ Gospel-refusing with Lawrefusing, and so demonstrate it to be
greater. And this the very argument made use of by our Apostle which ushers in
my text. Therefore we ought to give the more earnest heed unto the things that
we have heard, least at any time we let them slip, for if the word spoken by
Angels was steadfast, and every transgression and disobedience received a just
recompense of reward, how shall we escape, if we neglect so great Salvation.
etc. That is, if their sin, which was less, deserved so great punishment, how
much more ours which is greater? and Heb. 10 28, 29. He that despised Moses Law
died without mercy under two or three witnesses, of how much sorer punishment
suppose ye shall he be thought worthy, who has trodden under foot the Son of
God, and has counted the blood of the covenant, wherewith he he was sanctified
an unholy thing, and has done despite unto the spirit of grace? We shall
better improve that Scripture, when we come to the handling of the third
Doctrine, only here, as before, read the the greatness of the sin in the
greatness of the punishment, for God, who is, ipsissima justitia, justice it
self, does always proportion his punishment to the sin, and note above all
that, this sin is here called a treading Christ under foot, a counting of the
blood of the Covenant an unclean thing, and a doing despite unto the spirit
of grace, there is too much of these ingredients into the sin of
Gospel-refusing, which makes it to culminate, and to mount up unto a sin of the
highest altitude, and greatest magnitude, and to die in it, to do it finally,
to continue refusers and neglecters of so great Salvation, does much aggravate
it.

2. If we compare this with other sins, it will appear to be greater than such
as the Scripture condemns as very gross and out of measure sinful.

1 Adultery is looked upon as a great sin, it was so in Joseph's account, when he
said, how can I do this wickedness and sin against God? Genesis 39.9. And David
was even swallowed up of that twin-sin, whereof adultery was one, Psalm. 51.4.
Against thee, thee only have I sinned, and done this evil in thy sight; but the
refusing of Gospel-Salvation is far greater, for David by Gospel-indulgence
obtained pardon of that sin, but if he had refused that Salvation, he had been
left to perish without remedy.

2 Idolatry is also a most notorious sin, surely the spirit of God names these
two as two of the most crying, when it promises great pardon to great sins,
from your idols and from your filthiness will I cleanse you Ezekiel. 36.25. (i.e.)
if your sins be as great as Idolatry against the first table, or adultery
against the second, yet upon your seasonable and sincere return, you shall
find mercy: Idolatry is a spiritual adultery; that ad alterius torum, this ad
alterum Deum. Adultery is a running a whoring after strange flesh, Idolatry a
running a whoring after strange Gods. When the Israelites had corrupted their
ways by worshipping the calfe, Moses told them they had sinned a great sin:
Exodus 32.30. and when Israel had sinned in asking them a King, Samuel tells
them they had sinned a great sin, 1 Samuel 12.17. and what was that great sin,
they had rejected God; the Israelits had taken a calfe for their God in Moses
time, and a man for their God in Samuell's, but this is a greater refusing of
God; they refused him in his absolute power, commanding their obedience, these
refuse him in his marvelous mercy calling them to believe.

3 Rebell^on, or Treason are great sins, and disobedience to Gods commands is
rebellion. Isay. 1.20. If ye refuse and rebel. etc. how much more our
disobedience to that great. Gospel command, that we should believe in the name
of Jesus Christ, whom he has sent. 1 John. 3.23. and Samuel told Saul that
Rebellion was as the sin of witchcraft, and stubbbornness as iniquity and
idolatry 1. Sam. 1523. When a King shall proclaim his Laws by his
Ambassadors, and men shall offer violence to his Ambassadors, or refuse his
Laws, they are left without the protection of those Laws, and not only so,
but proceeded against as rebels and Traitors against the Crown and dignity of
the Prince; and Gospel refusing is Rebellion of an higher nature, because it is
against an higher Law, against the royal Law, and against a greater King,
against the King of Kings.

4 Once more and I have done with the comparative part of the Illustration. Its
a greater sin than the sin of Sodom, as may be gathered from Mark. 6.11.
Whosoever shall not receive you, nor hear you, when ye depart thence, shake off
the dust under your feet for a testimony against them; verily I say unto you,
it shall be more tolerable for Sodom and Gomorrah in the day of judgment than
for that City. Its very evident that its this sin of Gospel-refusing that is
here intended, its the not receiving, nor hearing the Apostles, and messengers
of Christ, that were sent to negociate in the deep things of the Gospel: Their
setting light by it is here hinted in the Apostles gesture toward them, they
set no more by the preaching of the Gospel, than they did by the dust under
their feet, and therefore they must shake off the dust of their feet against
them. And its further to be gathered by consequence that their sin was greater
than the sin of Sodom, in that Christ says it, and protests it, that it shall
be more tolerable for Sodom and Gomorrah in the day of judgment, than for that
City. Let us make enquiry then what Sodoms sin was, that we may judge the more
clearly of this Comparison. Moses says Genesis 13.13. The men of Sodom were
wicked, and sinners before the Lord exceedingly, that is they were a most
notorious sort of sinners and greater than ordinary. Though many of Sodoms sins
are enumerated in that black catalogue, that stands upon record as an
aggravation of the sins of Israel, whose sister she is called, Ezekiel. 16.49.
Pride, fullness of bread, (i.e.) gluttony, and drunkenness, and abundance of
idleness, and uncharitableness. Yet there is one sin that is hanged upon the
file, that takes its denomination from that place, and is called the sin of
Sodomy (e. i.) burning in strange unnatural lusts, not fit to be named without
trembling, this was that that caused them to be burnt with strange fire, even
with fire and brimstone from Heaven, as they had abused their land, and turned
it into a Hell of sin, so God raines down from Heaven upon them a Hell of
punishment, somewhat may be yet added toward the aggravation of their sin,
(which was monstrous enough without circumstances of guilt) from Isay. 3.9.
They declare their sin as Sodom; they hide it not, the meaning is they were
shameless sinners, they did add a brazen forhead to their stony hearts, and
added to the extremity of lust the extremity of impudence; And if the sin we
are speaking of be more monstrous than the sin of Sodom, what shall we say to
this? Surely as the Prophet thundering against the sins of Israel says, hear
the word of the Lord, ye Princes of Sodom, hearken to the Law of our God, ye
people of Gomorrah, Isay 1.10. The Gospel- Boanerges may cry louder against the
sins of England, and all such Lands as have lived under the sunshine of the
Gospel: Hear the Gospel of Jesus Christ, ye that are greater sinners than the
Princes of Sodom, give ear unto the Salvation of our God, ye that are greater
sinners than the people of Gomorrah.

3. It is superlatively the greatest sin, except that excepted sin, the sin
unto death, called in Scripture the sin against the holy Ghost, That it is
against the love of God, and grace of Christ, and revelation, and wrestling of
the spirit, you have already heard, a trinity of aggravations bigg enough to
make three superlatives, and evidencing it to be a sin against the Holy Ghost
of an high nature, though not the sin against the Holy Ghost yet it is not to
pass thus, we have further evidence against it, which will prove it to be more
than superlatively abominable, but we shall model that which is behind into a
few arguments or Reasons, which shall make up a convincing and pregnant proof
of this truth, that the sin of Gospel-refusing is superlatively great, and a
most sinful sin.

1. Reason proving it to be exceeding great is, because it is an accumulated
sin; To refuse Gospel-Salvation is to heap sin upon sin, we do all by nature
through Adams disobedience ly under the Condemnation of the Covenant of works,
the wrath of God abiding on us. Now Gospel-Salvation is a plaster of Christ's
blood to heal that wound, and a merciful indulgence provided by our wise and
gracious God, as a suitable remedy against that malady, God gave his only son,
that whosoever beleiveth in him might not perish etc. John 3.16. Now they that
refuse this mercy do expose themselves to judgments without mercy, and they
that are regardless of this remedy must be left to perish without remedy, and
all because they add to their transgessions of the Law, their own and their
forefathers: this sin above all, that they set light by the Gospel. The mercies
of Heaven are meted out unto men in Heavens measure, that is heaped up, pressed
down, and running over, though we are ready to stand upon niggardly terms
with God, ^e deals not so with us, and when God requires of us a
proportionable measure of thankfullness and obedience, even that we should be
abundant in the work of the Lord, who thus abounds to us in mercy and loving
kindness; for us to make such a wretched retribution unto the Lord for all his
mercies, as to return a full measure of our iniquities, sins heaped up, and
pressed down, and running over, this must needs be exceeding provoking to the
eyes of his glory: Our Righteousness indeed should be a righteousness running
over, as our Savior taught his disciples (...) except your righteousness
exceed (i. e. run over) the righteousness of the Scibes and Pharisees, ye cannot
enter into the Kingdom of Heaven, Mat. 5.20. Mistake me not, I do not hold
that the righteousness of the Saints can run over in the sense of Rome, by
works of supererrogation, for being sanctified but in part, we must crave
pardon daily for the iniquities of our holy things, and say when all is done,
that we are unprofitable servants, but in respect of such as come short, and
take up with the name and form, and easy part of Religion (as the Scribes and
Pharisees did) so it must exceed, and run over. Now when instead of a
righteousness running over, our sin shall run over, as it does when we are
guilty of Gospel-refusing, where shall such ungodly ones, and sinners appear?
The people of Israel when they had committed that sin of thunder in asking them
a King (when God was their King) when they were awakened and convinced by a
storm, and Son of thunder, they made this confession, we have added unto all
our sins this evil to ask us a King. 1 Samuel 12.19. But those that refuse the
Gospel, may take up this confession, that they have added this to all their
other sins, that they have refused them a King, yea the King of Kings, the
Royal King Jesus, yea, that that more than superlatively aggravates their sin,
they refuse Jesus Christ in all his offices, who offers himself in the Gospel
as their complete Mediator in his prophetical, preistly, and kingly Office,
and of God is made unto us wisdom and righteousness, and sanctification and
redemption. 1. Cor. 1.^0. And because we are now declaring against this sin as
an accumulated sin, we shall take a little liberty more than ordinary to make
good these 3 charges against the sin of setting light by the Gospel, that it is
against Christ in his threefold office, and this will do the office of a
magnifying glass, and present that sin, which to purblind sinners seems no
bigger than a moleh^ll, in his full propo^^on swelling to a mountain; I know
many will be ready to start^^ at such a charge, and ^he most guilty will be
ready to kick first, (as Judas was ready with his M^ste^, is it I?) what, we
Refusers of Jesus Christ? no we scorn it, we defy them that shall tell us so;
It is not fit they should live that refuse Jesus Christ, do you make dogs, or
Devils of us, that we should do so? and thus men are ready to cry peace, and
plead not guilty, and to bless themselves in their hearts, and to flatter
themselves till their abomminable wickedness be found out: I confess its common
with men and women to hang upon the outside of a Savior, as the Antidiluvians
did on the outside of the Arc, but those that will have a protection from
condemnation, and fly from wrath to come, must get into this Savior, as Noah
did into his arc. There Is no condemnation to them that are in Christ Jesus,
Romans 8.1. We must not think as the Papists do, that when we have blessed our
selves with the sign of the Cross, or superstitiously used as a spel, or
conjuration the sillables of the name of Jesus, that then we may bid defiance
to the Devil, and his Angels can then have no power over us; this does but
confirm them in their delusion, and make them much more the children of the
Devil than others; and yet the hope of the common sort of ignorant hearers is
but little better. If they can but say they believe in Jesus Christ, and they
believe he came into the world to save sinners, and they have believed this
ever since they can remember, and they will never be beaten out of it while
they live, and yet all this while they are Refusers of Christ, and such
notorious Refusers of him, that they refuse him in all his Offices, as I shall
endeavor toward their undeceiving (If God will) to make so plain, that those
whose eyes have been anointed with eye salve from above, may even run, and read
it.

1. Gospel-refusing is a refusing of Christ in his priestly office, we begin
with that, because here they think themselves to be cock-sure, and every one
will profess their willingness to be saved by Christ, and to be ready to take
him to be their Jesus and Savior, I easily confess that there is a natural
propensity in man to desire good for himself, and the principle of self-love is
so deeply rooted, that so long as man is master of his reason, he will not
yield willingly to be miserable, but we must further know that as there is a
spiritual, so there is a carnal desire of Christ and happiness, which cannot
be called a serving of Christ but our selves upon him. This may not so properly
be called a taking of Christ, as a catching at him, consider that Christ offers
himself unto sinners in the Gospel in all his offices jointly, and not in any
one of them singly, and he that will rightly receive him must receive him
wholly, and not catch at him by piecemeale, we must have all Christ, or no
Christ, and therefore we must give up our selves to be taught by him as by our
Prophet, and to be ruled by him as by our King, if we will be saved by him as
by our Priest. Are we willing to take Christ for himself, as well as for our
selves? otherwise we do frustrate the very end of his saving us, for we are
therefore saved by him, that he may be served by us, in righteousness and
holiness all our days, Luke. 1.74, 75. To be saved from wrath and not from
sin, is but the lesser half of Gospel Salvation, and such as are not willing
of both, can have neither. What God has joined together we must not put
asunder; Its a most disingenious and unreasonable thing to be all on the
receiving, and nothing on the returning hand, to expect all from him, and to
give nothing back, indeed his redeemed ones can give him nothing but his own,
which made the Apostle say, Ye are not your own but are bought with a price,
therefore glorify God both with your bodies and souls which are his, and as we
must give him our whole selves, bodies, souls, and spirits, so we must take
his whole self as King, Prophet, and Priest, if we can be content to be
willing disciples to his prophetical office, and willing subjects to his
Kingly office, then we may reasonably, and believingly expect the benefit of
his Pry stly office, but let us not dream that Christ will be our Jesus, when
our hearts tells us, and our lives tell all that are near us, that we have not
taken him to be our Lord.

2 Gospel-refusing is a refusing of Christ in his prophetical office, and
nothing is plainer than this, that they which set light by the Gospel, do
refuse Christ to be their Teacher, Salvation by the Gospel is the lesson that
Christ teaches, and can they slight the Lesson, and regard the Teacher? Observe
what the Apostle says Heb. 2.1. Therefore we ought to give the more earnest
heed to the things which we have heard, least at any time we should let them
slip, for if the word spoken by Angels was steadfast etc. how shall we escape
if we neglect so great Salvation? take notice of the Apostles inference.
Therefore we ought to give the more earnest heed etc. Wherefore? Why because we
have so admirable a Teacher, for this referrs to the beginning of the foregoing
Chapter, which tells us in the last days that God has spoken to us by his
Son, who was the express image of his person, and brightness of his glory, and
more excellent than the Angels. Therefore we ought to take heed, because a
greater then Moses is here, the Law was given by Moses, but Grace and Truth
came by Jesus Christ, John: 1.17. because a greater than the Prophets is here,
even the great Prophet of his Church, Acts. 3.22, 23. Moses truly said unto
the Fathers, A Prophet shall the Lord your God raise up unto you of your
Brethren like unto me, him shall ye hear in all things that he shall say unto
you; And it shall come to pass that every soul which will not hear that Prophet
shall be destroyed from among the people. And behold a greater than the Angels
is here, even the Angel of the Covenant, of whom Paul says Heb. 12.2^. See
that ye refuse not him that speaks, for if they escaped not who refused him
that spoke on earth, much more shall not we escape if we turn away from him
that speaks from Heaven. To be taught of God, and Christ is a thing that
should be the glory of the disciples of the Church, though some giddy spirit
have learned hence to exclude man's teaching, which Gods teaching, and the
teaching of the spirits anointing includes; we read of certain Sectaries in
Corinth that would not be of Paul, nor Apollos, nor Cephas, but not Christ 1.
Cor. 1.12. But those Gospel-refusers that we are speaking of, are such a
monstrous sort of Recu^ants, that they refuse the teaching of Christ himself,
and are such deaf adders that they will not hearken to the most alluring
charms, though they come from him that spoke as never man spoke. But as the
neglecters of Christ will say at the last day, Lord when did we see thee hungry
and not feed thee etc. So the refusers of Christ will be ready to say, when did
we hear Christ speaking and we slight him? I answer in every Sermon that you
have heard unprofitably, for Christ has a twofold teaching, an outward
teaching by his word, and an inward by his spirit, now they that refuse the
teaching of Christ's messengers, do refuse his Gospel, and refuse him too. It
was Christ that gave commission to his Apostles To teach all Nations, Mat.
28.19. And lo I am with you, says he there, that is I will be present with you
in that ministry, and in that teaching, and Ephesians. 4.8, 11, 12, 13. When Christ
ascended up on high, and gave gifts unto men (i.e.) gifted and graced men unto
his Church: Some extraordinary Apostles, Prophets, Evangelists and some
ordinary Pastors and Teachers: and he does not only set the workman before us,
but sets their work before them for the perfecting of the Saints, for the work
of the Ministry for the edifying of the body of Christ, till we all come in the
unity of the faith, and of the knowledge of the Son of God, unto a perfect man,
unto the measure of the stature of the fullness of Christ. Remember that the
teaching of a ministry of Christ's owning is Christ's teaching, and those that
refuse the word of wisdom, and revelation, do refuse to submit to the
teaching of Christ.

3 Gospel refusing is a refusing of Christ in his Kingly office. The King of
Saints will not be owned by these Rebels like those Citizens to the Nobleman
Luke. 19.14. that said we will not have this man to reign over us, but when he
returned, and received his Kingdom, and called his servants to an account, he
takes especial notice of those rebels, verse. 27. but those mine enemies that
would not that I should reign over them, bring hither, and slay them before
me; though the government were laid upon his shoulder, Isay. 9, 6. And all power
was given him in Heaven and in earth. Mat. 28.18. And his name was written in
capitalls KING OF KINGS, AND LORD OF LORDS. Revel. 19.16. And though this great
Priest, and King has promised to make all his subjects and servants Kings and
Priests Revel. 1.6. And these Kings and Priests shall make it their everlasting
work to ascribe blessing, and honor, and glory, and power, unto him that
sits upon the Throne, and to the Lamb for ever and ever, Revel. 5.13. Yet
will not these rebellious Refusers of Christ's easy yoke be subject to his
principality and dominion, though he has threatened to bruise his Enemies with
a rod of Iron, and break them in pieces like a Potters vessel. Though there
have been great disputes among the Nations about Government, some preferring
one, and some another, some Monarchy, when one governes, some an Oligarchy,
when a few govern, some an Aristocracy, when the Nobility govern, some a
Democracy when the people govern, some delighting in Anarchy to be Lawless,
and ungoverned, that there may be no king in Jsrael, but every one may do what
is right in his own eyes. But there were never any so desperately wicked
(except obdurate Atheists) to cast of a Theocracy, an acknowledgement of Gods
supremacy, nor any but Jews, and Turks that worship not God in Christ to cast
off a Christocracy the dominion and principality of Jesus Christ, and they
durst not do it neither if they did believe that Christ were come in the flesh*
as the Scripture observes of the Jews, If they had known it, they would not
have crucified the Lord of Glory, 1 Cor. 2.8. Amongst Christians Christ is
honored as the King of Saints, as the only King, and Lawgiver of his Church,
those that take him to be so indeed, are true Christians indeed; those that in
show and profession take him to be so, are taken to be visible Christians, but
those that refuse, they have not so much as a name to live, but are altogether
Christless, and without God in the World.

Its the Millenarian dream, that Christ shall reign personally upon earth for
a thousand years, and many are traveling in birth of such an expectation, a
delusion which its probable was borrowed from the Jews that looked for a
Messiah that should outshine all antecedent Monarks in temporal glory, and
terrestrial Grandeur, and because he answered not their expectation, but came
in the form of a servant, they crucified him and his title together, writing
upon his Cross as his grand accusation JESUS OF NAZARETH KING OF THE JEWS,
which conceit it seems some of the Apostles had taken up as a fomentation of
their pride, some of them reasoning which should be the greatest in their
masters Kingdom, and others demanding, by the mediation of their Mother that
one might sit at his right hand, and the other at his left in his Kingdom,
Mat. 20.21. And they all inquired with one mouth, Acts. 1.6. Lord will thou at
this time restore again the Kingdom to Jsrael? And it has been handed down
from age to age, by such whose faculty lies rather in troubling clear Texts of
Scripture, than lightning dark ones; And though it has been sublimated of late
by some Masters of fancy, and aeriall illuminates, into that philosophical
quintessence, which bears that Babylonian name of THE FIFTH MONARCHY. Yet the
royal KING JESUS who should be of more credit with us than a Million of those
millenary ser^phicall Doctors, having long since assured his subjects that his
Kingdom is not of this world, and the Scripture being so plain that he entered
upon his Kingdom at his Ascension, when he ascended up on high, and led
captivity captive, and gave gifts unto men as his coronation mercies; and sent
out his ambassadors to subdue nations to his scepter, and to make the Kingdoms
of the world to be the Kingdoms of the Lord and the Kingdoms of his Christ. And
afterward sending his mighty spirit upon his Apostles and Church, which was
the golden scepter of his gracious Kingdom, which subdued three thousand at
once as a promising earnest that he would give a plentiful increase unto their
planting and watering labors, and would make the weapons of their warfare
mighty to pull down the strong holds of Satan's and sins Kingdom: And finally
the Scripture, and our Creed teaching us to believe assuredly that he was once
offered to bear the sins of many, and unto them that look for him shall be
appear the second time without sin unto Salvation, Heb. 9.28 Being compassed
about with such a clowd of witnesses, let it be our earnest endeavor to
approve our selves to be true subjects of his Kingdom of grace, and to be such
as unfainedly love the Lord Jesus, and wait for his appearing, and so we may
have strong consolation in that hope that is set before us, 1 Ioh. 3.2. Now we
are the Sons of God, and it does not yet appear what we shall be, but we know
that when he shall appear we shall be like him.

But I have somewhat digrest in pursuing such as are out of the way, but not
altogether impertinently, in regard the concerned party have so perplexed
Christ's Kingly office, and rendered it more obscure to such whose eyes the God
of this world has blinded, that the light of the glorious Gospel of Jesus
Christ should not shine unto them. To conclude the point, it is in the
dispensation of the Gospel that the Lord Christ does exercise all his offices,
Prophetical, and Kingly, as well as Priestly, and those that are Refusers of
the Gospel are such as slight Christ in all.

2 Reason proving the sin of setting light by the Gospel to be great sin is,
Because it is an aggravated sin. That is, a sin monstrously great, further
greatned, and made notoriously sinful by circumstances. Its enquired which
sins are most sinful, those that are committed against the first table, or
the second, and its agreed that sins against the first are, if other
circumstances of weight concur not to make the other the heaviest Scale; But
this sin of Gospel-refusing is greater than all, because the administration of
the Gospel does excel in glory that of the Law, as far as Christ does excel
Moses: I might here enumerate a multitude of circumstances to aggravate the
guilt of this sin, but because I intend as much brevity as a subject so
momentous will well allow of, I shall satisfy my self to enlarge a little upon
three Circumstances.

The circumstances 1 Of Person. 2. Of Time. 3. Of Place.


1. The Circumstance of the Person adds sinfullness to the sin, otherwise
Nathan had been deceived in pleading the greatness of David's sin by the
eminency of his person, and Gods munificence toward him, 2. Sam. 12.7, 8, 9.
Thus says the Lord God of Jsrael, I anointed thee King over Jsrael, and I
delivered thee out of the hand of Saul, and I gave thee thy Masters house, and
thy Masters wives into thy bosom, and gave thee the house of Jsrael and Judah,
and if that had been too little, I would moreover have given thee such and such
things. Wherefore have thou despised the commandment of the Lord to do evil
in his sight? Much like that of David to his false friend, had it been mine
Adversary that had magnified himself against me, perhaps I could have borne
it, but it was thou my Companion, and mine own familiar friend. Joseph
interposes this consideration betwixt him and sin. Quomodo ego? how can I do
this great wickedness and sin against God? Genesis 39.9. And religious Nehemiah
fortified himself against flying, when Tobia and Sandballat were plotting his
discouragment with the very like argument, should such a man as I fly? I will
not go into the temple to save my life, Nehem 6.11. Oh let the
covenant-servants of the Lord, and such as retain to his Family consider this,
that those dishonours wound him most which he receives from his favorites, and
pretended friends. And as the abusers of grace given do sin with an high hand,
so the refusers of grace offered do sin with a hard heart, and their sins are
also aggravated by the circumstance of the person. None are capable of being
guilty of this sin, but such as live in the sound, and sunshine of the Gospel,
those whom the day star from one high has visited, and to whom Christ is
tendered in all his fullness. The rebellious Jews were guilty of it for, its
said that Christ came to his own and his own received him not, John. 1.11. And
the Gentiles to whom the Gospel was sent upon their refusal; they that receive
it not, are guilty of refusing it, but Heathens, and Infidels to whom the word
of God is a stranger, they cannot be guilty of this sin, though sinning without
Law, they shall perish without Law, Romans 2.12. Yet sinning without Gospel, they
cannot be judged for contemning the Gospel. Those Nations, and people to whom
the sound of the Gospel is gone out, as it was into Jsrael, of whom David said,
In Jury is God known, his name is great in Jsrael etc. He has not dealt so
with any Nation, neither have the heathen such knowledge of his ways, and
concerning whom Moses makes enquiry; What Nation is so great to have the Lord
nigh unto them, as the Lord our God is nigh unto us in all that we call upon
him for? and the like may be said of England, that it is a Land like Canaan,
the glory of all Lands, a Land flowing, not only with milk and honey, but with
better mercies, the bread and water of life, the wine and milk of consolation;
where the King that has made a marriage for his Son keeps open house, and the
Lord of hoasts has made for the faithful of the Land a feast of fat things,
and wine upon the lees, of fat things full of marrow, and wines upon the lees
well refined. For such to be found here that shall undervalue the Lords bounty,
and run after their Oxen, and Farms, and wives, their profits, and pleasures,
and lusts, when they should thankfully embrace, and rejoice in the riches of
Gods mercy, and be meditating, and studying some suitable returns; when they
should be coveting better profits, and solacing themselves with better
pleasures, and their hearts should be set upon better honors than the world
can afford them, what unthankfullness can be comparable to this, what sins or
sinners can be more notorious?

2. The circumstance of the time also does aggravate the sin: Paul said to the
Athenians that were exceeding superstitious, and given to idolatry, Acts 17.30.
The times of former ignorance God winked at, but now says he, he commands
all men every where to repent, God did not require much from the dark times of
heathenish superstitions, nor so much from the duske glimmering, or starlight
of legal dispensations, as he does from us under the clear sunshine of the
Gospel, now life and immortality is brought to light, and brought nearer, and
made clearer than ever before. Had we lived in the time of the old world, near
unto the deluge, when the world was overwhelmed first with ignorance, and
licentiousness, and then with water; They were eating and drinking, marrying
and giving in marryage (i.e.) Wallowing in drunkenness and gluttony and lust,
making provisions for the flesh to fulfill the lusts of it, so that Noah the
preacher of righteousness could not be heard. Or if we had lived in the time of
that great revolt of the old Israelites, when the Prophet complained, and I
only am left, and they seek my life to take it away, 1. Kings, 19.10. Or had we
lived near unto the time of Christ's coming in the flesh, when the Gentiles were
no people: Or in the rise and reign of Antichrist, that grand Apostasy of the
Gentiles, then there might have been some excuse, and we had had somewhat to
say for our selves: But to live in the last age of the World, when the Lord is
a destroying that man of sin with the breath of his mouth, and the brightness
of his coming, when the fullness of the Gentiles is to come in, and the Jews
to be reduced unto Christ's fold; I mean when these things are the great
expectation of the Church and people of God. To live in reforming times, when a
glorious reformation has been prayed, and paid for with a large expense of
treasure tears and blood, when it has been sought and fought, and covenanted
for; To be found Gospel-refusers in such a time when we should be encouraging
one another, like the people of Israel and Judah, weeping, and seeking the
Lord, and saying to one another, come let us be joined unto the Lord in an
everlasting Covenant never to be forgotten, Jer. 50.4, 5. Or to be found
refusers of mercy after such days, as lately passed over us, days of breaking
down in the valley of vision, wherein the Lord called to weeping and baldness,
and girding with sackcloth not to keep touch with God at such times may be
enough to blast our hopes of a full deliverance, and frustrate our expectation
of seeing Syons glory, and Jerusalems prosperity: Our bondage is not yet so far
removed, but our sins may easily call it back upon us, and make our yoke
heavier than ever it was; Let us take special notice of that remarkable
threatening, Jer. 18.9, 10. At what instant I shall speak concerning a Nation,
and concerning a Kingdom to build and to plant it, If it do evil in my sight,
and obey not my voice, then will I repent of the good, wherewith I said I would
benefit them; if God be willing to plant, and we will not comply, do we not
deserve to be rooted up, when he offers to do by us, as he did by Jerusalem, by
the call of his Gospel, gather us as a hen gathers her chickens under her
wings, and we will not, how justly may he leave our Land desolate; how
speechless shall we be when these things shall be brought to Judgment, and our
sins set out in their colors, and aggravated by this circumstance of time?

3. The circumstance of Place is also a greatning aggravation. The Lord Christ
reproached those Cities where he had preached his powerful Sermons, and
wrought his wonderful miracles; Matt. 11.21, 22, 23. Woe unto thee Corazin,
woe unto thee Bethsayda; for if the mighty works had been done in Tire and
Sidon, which have been done in you, they had a great while ago repented in
sackcloth and ashes, but it shall be more tolerable for Tire and Sidon at the
Judgment, than for you: And thou Capernaum, that art exalted to Heaven, shall
be thrust down to Hell; and the Prophet aggravates the sins of wicked doers by
this circumstance, Isa. 26.10. Let favor be showed to the wicked, yet will he
not learn righteousness, in the Land of uprightness he will deal unjustly, and
will not behold the Majesty of the Lord. For the Angels to lift up themselves
against God in Heaven, deserved a casting into Hell, and a reserving in chains
under darkness, to the judgment of the great day. For Adam to side with the
Devil against God in Paradise, deserved an ejection.

For the Israelites in Canaan to sin worse than the Nations that the Lord had
cast out before them, deserved a Babylon, and an iron yoke of bondage; And for
us that are like Angels of light, in comparison of such as live under Egyptian
darkness, Angli quasi angeli, as one says, placed as it were in an Heaven upon
Earth, in the bosom of the Church, or like Adam in Paradise, Angli quasi
angulo, as another says, in a select corner of the World singled from other
Nations, dwelling like a peculiar and chosen people by our selves, for this to
be a Land of forgetfulness and unthankfulness, and the Inhabitants of it to be
children of disobedience, and strangers to the mysteries of the Gospel, and
things that accompany Salvation, for this to be a receptacle of heresy and
blasphemy, and all notoriousness, for this to be like the old World which God
destroyed with water, like Sodom and Gomorrah which were destroyed with fire,
like rebellious Israel with whom the Lord entered into controversy, because
there was no truth, nor mercy, nor knowledge of God in the Land, Hosea, 4.1.
for us to abound with graceless principles and practices under such means of
grace, for us to neglect so great Salvation as has been brought home unto us,
and has dwelt among us; our sin of Gospel-refusing being thus circumstantiated
will make it to be more tolerable for Sodom and Gomorrah in the day of
Judgment than for us.

3. Reason of the greatness of this sin is, because it is a State-confounding
sin, it is a sin that has laid flourishing Kingdoms on ruinous heaps. Look back
upon the state of the Jews, whom the Lord owned as his firstborn, and in a
nearer relation than all other people of the World; see in what manner of
language the Lord spoke unto them, Exodus 19.5, 6. If ye will obey my voice
indeed, and keep my Covenant, then ye shall be a peculiar treasure unto me
above all people, for all the Earth is mine, and ye shall be unto me a Kingdom
of Priests, and an holy Nation, and yet how often were they cast off, for
casting off Gods yoke? God told them what he would do unto them in case of
disobedience, Lev. 26.18, 21, 24, 28. and he tells them again, and again, and
again, that they might take thorough notice of it; If ye will not be reformed
by these things, (that is by fewer stripes, and lighter punishments) but will
walk contrary unto me, then will I also walk contrary unto you, and will punish
you yet seven times more for your sins, and I will bring a sword upon you that
shall avenge the quarrel of my Covenant; There Is the quarrel of all quarrels,
the Covenant-quarrel, as Covenant-mercies and Privileges are the greatest
Mercies and Privileges. The Prophet Isa. was bid to cry loud against Israel
and Judah, because their sins did cry loud unto Heaven for vengeance, because
God cries out as one tired out of patience, they are a burden to him, and he is
weary to hear them: Read the first of Isa. and there the Lord has a
controversy with them, not only about their sins, but about their service,
their vain oblations, and abominable incense, their hateful Festivals, and
provoking Prayers, because there was nothing but seeming and formalitie, no
spirit nor power in any of their services; And observe whether the Lord do not
charge his valediction or last great forsaking of them upon that cause, that
they would not receive Christ, nor entertain the Gospel, Matt. 23.37. O
Jerusalem, Jerusalem, thou that killest the Prophets, and stonest them that are
sent unto thee, how often would I have gathered thy children together, even as
a hen gathers her chickens under her wings, and ye would not; and mark what
follows; behold your house is left unto you desolate, v. 38. That is, my house
is designed to desolation, which was so much your glory; the Temple of the
Lord, that you made such boast of shall be taken from you, yea, and the Lord of
the Temple too, he will repudiate you, and give you a bill of divorce, and
because you were no more faithful in keeping the Oracles of God, your
Candlestick shall be removed, and you shall be left in darkness, and that Land
of yours, which is the glory of all Lands, shall be like a desolated Desert,
and a forsaken Wilderness; what is it that has made such havoc of late years
in Germany, that has destroyed so many Towns, and made such depopulations as
our ears have heard of, was it not the Lords Covenant-quarrel? What was it that
opened such bloody sluices in England, Scotland, and Ireland, and the
Netherlands, without all peradventure this sin of Gospel-refusing has stricken
the deadlyest strokes in all our Wars, and we may say to this sin, as once
Zippora said to Moses, thou have been a bloody sin to us, and if we shall go on
to dishonor God, and slight his Gospel, and notwithstanding the loud outcries
of his Word and Sword, we shall nourish that viper in our bosoms, and shall
foment those blasphemies and heresies that strike at the foundation, and shall
help on those divisions that threaten to deprive us of Verity and Purity, as
well as Unity; we may take up a lamentation when it is too late, and Sword,
Pestilence and Famine may be sent upon that errand to bring our sins to our
remembrance, which the Gospel in the midst of peace, health and plenty could
not fasten upon us. It should be written with a pen of iron in every thankful
heart; what wonderful deliverances the Lord has wrought for us, especially
those of the Spanish Invasion, and the Powder Plot, of which we may say in
David's words, if the Lord himself had not been on our side, may England now
say, if the Lord himself had not been on our side when men rose up against us,
they had swallowed us up quik, when they were so wrathfully displeased at us;
but blessed be the Lord that has not given us over as a prey unto their teeth;
Our soul is escaped as a bird out of the snare of the Fowler, the snare is
broken, and we are delivered; And shall we after all this betray our native
Land into the cruel hands of our religious adversaries, that would borrow all
the politics of Julian, or Machiavill, and make use of all the Stratagems and
strength of the Devils heads and borns to deprive us of the Gospel? Surely we
cannot take a likelier course to effect all this, than by going on to neglect
this great Salvation, which if this Gospel-glutted Land shall persist in doing,
notwithstanding the warnings of all Gods Watchmen, when the Sword of the Lord
shall devour greedily your flesh, and his arrows shall make themselves drunk
with your blood, when your sins have made this populous and plentiful Land a
place of sculls, and a field of blood, when the hornet of your conscience shall
sting you like the pangs of death, and say unto you as Nathan to David, you are
the men that have done this; you will then know that you are Traitors to the
State, who have betrayed your Country into the Enemies hand. We read that the
Cananites dwelled in garrisons walled up to Heaven, and yet their sins
delivered them up into the hands of spoilers; and though our fenced Cities had
walls as high and thick as the walls of Babylon, yet the sin that is within
would let in the enemy; Though our Armies were never so mighty and numerous;
Our Counselors and Statesmen the very Oracles of the time; Yet they are the
faithful Ministers and people that are the Charets of Israel and horsemen of
it, And our greatest security under Heaven lies in such as teach, and live the
Gospel, such as know, and do, and declare the will of God, and endeavor to
keep a conscience void of offense toward God and man, and order their whole
conversation as it becomes the Gospel of Jesus Christ.

4 Reason of the greatness of this sin is because it is a Church-confounding
sin. There has been a great crying down of Churches in our days by giddy
sectaries, but this is a short cut to destroy all, and to turn the Lords
vineyard into a howling wilderness. All the secret underminings of schisms
within, and the malignant batteries of persecutors without, can do but little
hurt, so long as he is our keeper that never slumbers nor sleeps, and is able
to make his Church bear up against the gates of Hell; but when by setting light
by the Gospel, we do put God from us, and open a wide door to our own
overthrow, then the wild bore and beasts may make havoek, the adversaries may
fall on, and cry down with it, down with it even to the ground, and the
Churches Enemies may say as David's enemies did of him. God has forsaken him,
persecute and take him, for there is none to deliver him. What it was that made
the Lord God of Israel to forsake his tabernacle in Shilo, and utterly to
forsake the Jews, you hard in the last reason, for it was their setting light
by Christ that did overthrow their State, and Church too: What was it that made
Babylon the great to fall, and Rome to be unchurched, whose fame and faith made
the world to ring, but because of Christian they became Antichristian, and from
Apostolical did turn retrograde and became Antipostolicall, and of a Church
of the living God, a pillar and ground of the truth, they became an Hydra of
Heresy, and Synagogue of Satan. What removed the Candlesticks from the seven
famous Churches of Asia, and fills their ears with the forgeries of Mahomet,
where the sound of the Gospel was wont to ring, read the Prophesies that went
of them, in the second and third Chapters of the Revelation, and you will find
it was for turning their backs upon the Gospel, and entertaining falsehood
instead of truth. And what has made the Lord to stand so often upon the
threshold amongst us, as if he were ready to take his leave (though like a long
suffering God, and he yet plays ^oath to part) If we do but take these
following causes among many into close consideration, we may easily inform our
selves.

1 How many in this Goshen and Land of light do stand in open opposition to the
Gospel, and as it were bid defiance to God and Christ? How have sectaries
swarmed of late, and such as openly oppose the truths of God, yea, the very
fundamentalls? opening their black mouths wide against God, and Christ, and
the Spirit, and the Word, and Seals, and Sabbath, and Ministry, some denying
the immortality of the Soul, and persuading men that they are without Law, and
that there is neither Heaven nor Hell. And besides these, how many dissolute,
and profane Spirits abound in all places, even under searching and powerful
Ministries, that in words profess Christ, but in works deny him.

2 How few do close with the Covenant of God so visibly that they may pass for
beleiver, in a large sense, and be conversed with as Saints upon a charitable
account? I mean how few do walk exactly according to the Gospel-rule, that
their conversation may be an ornament to the Gospel, and a Gospel becoming
conversation, their light shining before men, that others seeing their good
works may be stirred up to glorify our Father which is in Heaven, Though they
will not be the Children of gross darkness, by tumbling and wallowing in
notoriousness, yet they walk but as it were by moonshine, and starlight,
that it may be well doubted whether the day-starr from on high has visited
them, or whether their Sun be risen, to make them Children of the light, and of
the day. They will not be persuaded to shine like lights in the midst of a
crooked and perverse generation, nor so far as visible Christianity requires,
deny ungodliness and worldly lusts, and live holily, justly and soberly in this
present word.

3 And among these professors at large, that are not so properly of, as in the
Church, how many revolters and backsliders do go out from us daily, of such the
Apostle says, They went out from us, because they were not of us, for if they
had been of us, they would have continued with us. 1 John. 2.19. Mistake me
not. I do not go about to shake the certainly of the Saints perseverance, nor
assure the falling away of any of the called according to Gods purpose, Because
Christians secundum dici, such as have but a name to live, may loose their
seeming: It will not thereupon follow that Christians s^cundum esse, true
Israelites indeed can he plucked out of Christ's and the Fathers hand. There are
principia cognoscendi, and essendi, Christianity affords us principles of
knowing, and being, and though titular Christians may fall from their
Principles of knowing, yet such as are really possessed of invisible Christianity
cannot fall from their being Principles; The gifts and calling of God being
without repentance, Romans 11.29. And whom he loves he loves to the end, John.
13.1. But the heart of man being deceitful and wicked above all things, Jer.
17.9. Men may think that they are standing, when it is no such thing, 1 Cor.
10.12. And this evil heart of unbeleife will cause men to depart from the ever
living God. Heb. 3.12. Therefore I speak of revolters, and Apostles, some
going out unto one sect, and some unto another; railing against the Church, and
like bastard children calling their Mother whore, reproaching their Brethren,
with whom they formerly walked in the house of God as friends, looking asquint
upon them as unbaptized Heathens, and branding them to be limbs of Antichrist,
and the Devil; vilifying the Ordinances, as if they were mere arbitrary
things, or might be used or refused at pleasure, forsaking the public
assemblies of Gods people, and preferring their own Conventicles before them,
which the Apostle makes the rod to that grand Apostasy, of despighting the
Spirit of grace, and sinning the sin unto death, Heb. 10.25. And reviling the
Ministry, wherein they act the parts of such sick patients as are frantic,
that abuse their Physician that comes in love to cure them. And as those
devouring gulphs of Schism and Heresy do swallow thousands, so those other two
of world and self do murder ten thousands. How many serve the Gospel as Demas
did Paul, forsake the Gospel to Embrace the world, and the Gospel must give
them leave to make provisions for the flesh, or else it is no Gospel for them.
This is an argument that they did never love God and Christ with the prevailing
degree of their love, nor prefer their interests above the interests of the
world and flesh, this shows that the number of such is very few, whose hearts
are whole with God, and which behave themselves steadfastly in his Covenant, and
all this will appear to be but Gospel-refusing when we come to application.

To draw toward a conclusion of the Reasons, we need not wonder that it pulls
down States, and unchurches Churches, for it was the great Sin that drowned the
old world, and its the firebrand that shall set this on a flame: The old was
drowned because iniquity did abound, and the flames of lust aid wax hot; and
the new shall be burned, because iniquity shall abound, and the love of many
shall wax cold. The old was destroyed because Noah, a preachers of
righteousness, could not work upon them, and the new shall be destroyed,
because Gods messengers cannot win upon them. The words of the Gospel are
plain, As it was in the days of Noah, so shall it be in the days when the
Son of man shall come, for as in the days of Noah, they were eating, and
drinking, and marrying, so in the last days the same sins of gluttony, and
drunkeness and lust shall abound. Mat. 24.37, 38, 39. So that this is the
condemnation all along of States and Churches, of Jews and Gentiles, of the old
World and new, that light is come into the World, and men love darkness more
than light, because their deeds are evil, Joh. 3.19. In the 51. Psalm, where
David laments his twin-sin of adultery, and bloud-guiltiness, its worth our
notice that toward the close of it he puts up this petition; O be favorable
and gracious unto Sion, build up the walls of Jerusalem, Sion signifying the
Church, and Jerusalem the state of Israel, as some have noted, his meaning
amounts to this, Lord do well unto Church and State, though I by my double sin
have done enough to undo both, and all such as have been guilty of this sin of
setting light by the Gospel, had need to turn from it with all speed, and to
turn to God with the like petition; Lord be merciful to the State and Church
whereof we are members, for we have done enough to ruin both.

1. USE
Shall be for Information, Is setting light by the Gospel so notorious a sin,
Is it a setting light by God the greatest good? An undervaluing of the length
and breadth, and height and depth of his love? Is it a setting light by Christ
in all his offices of King, Priest, and Prophet? Is it a resisting of the
Spirit of God that strives with man in the Ministry of the Gospel.

Is it 1. An Accumulated Sin? 2. an Aggravated Sin? 3. a State destroying Sin?
4. a Church confounding Sin?


Then it behooves all such as live within the Call of the Gospel, and within
reach of the beams of this Sun to make diligent enquiry what this sin is, and
our use of Information shall be framed of purpose to give satisfaction to such
an enquiry.

Besides, what may be gathered by intent, and meditational Readers from the
handling of the Doctrine, concerning the nature of this sin; I shall further
inform you in three particulars wherein this sin of neglecting so great
Salvation does mostly consist.

1. In taking no care about it. 2. In taking but little care conjunct with
greater cares. 3. In not making it our greatest care.
1. In taking no care about it; To live as if to mind Salvation were no part of
our business; we are sent into this World to make provision for another, and
though we are not so straightly confined as to do nothing else, yet we are
under a straight command to do nothing more; and thus much the Apostle teaches
when he teaches us, habere tanquam non habentes, so to be possessed of the things
of this World, as not to be possessed by them, and to use the World, as though we
used it not. Now when instead of so doing we shall use the things of another
World, as though we used them not, pray as if we prayed not, and hear as if we
heard not, and take our swinge in the World, as if we were sent into it, as
Leviathan into the Sea, to take our pastime therein, or to say to our souls
with the rich glutton, Soul, take thine ease, eat, drink, and be merry, thou
have Goods enough laid up for many years, to mind low things, and neglect high
things, to have an high esteem of low things, and a low esteem of high things,
is grossly to neglect this great Salvation, and if we look about us in the
places where we live, do not the greatest part live after that careless rate?
as Jeash said of Baal let Baal care for himself, Judges, 6.31. when his Altar
was pulled down by his Son Gideon, so too many are ready to say in works,
though not in words, let God take care for himself, and for his own service: If
his name be dishonored, his Son and Spirit abused, his Day profaned, his
Ambassadors vilified, his Ordinances and Worship slighted and disgraced, it may
be said of very many that would take it ill, not to be counted Christians, as
it was of Gallio, when the Apostles were under sufferings, that Gallio cared
for none of those things, Acts, 18.17. so that men may but have their wealth,
and pleasure, and honor, let Zion sink or swim, let it fare how it will with
the Church and Religion, that is none of their care.

And this carelessness is the more aggravated, because things of far less
concernment are seriously minded by them.

1. Their bodies shall be cared for, if in health they will pamper them, though
they suffer under never so much leanness of soul, they will provide largly for
the flesh, though their spirits starves, they will give themselves to
chambering and wantoness, and ryoting and drunkeness, though to the loss of
Christ and everlasting happiness: And if their bodies be sick, and their lives
in danger, no care, no cost, no pains shall then be spared, then with the woman
in the Gospel that had the bloody issue, they will spend all their substance
upon Physicians, and like Pharaoh in his streights, they will desire the
prayers of their Ministers, whom in health and prosperity they scorned, as the
very scumme and off scouring of the World.

2. Their Estates shall be cared for, as riches increase, they set their hearts
upon them, and as if nothing else deserved any part of their care, they will
rise early, and go late to bed, and fare hard, and all to grow rich, to join
house to house, and lay field to field, till they dwell alone, their barns
shall be pulled down, and bigger built, and all their care is for the Mammon of
iniquity; and indeed nothing shoulders out the love of God more than this
immoderate and inordinate love of the World, as the Apostle observes, whosoever
loves the World (prevailingly) the love of the Father is not in him, 1. Joh.
2.15. And these cares of the World, and deceitfulness of riches are said to
choke the World, and make it utterly unfruitful. This worldly gain is the
souls loss, not only loss to the soul, but loss of the soul, and what will it
profit a man though he should gain the World, if he lose his own soul, Matt.
16.26. Those that be rich do fall into a snare, and into many noysom lusts,
which drown the soul in perdition, 1. Tim. 6.9. Which caused the Apostle to
beseech Believers, as Strangers and Pilgrims to abstain from fleshly lusts,
which war against the soul, 1. Pet. 2.11.

3. Their names and reputations shall be cared for; every punctilio of a Title,
and every complemental Ceremony appurtenant to greatness and honor, shall be
narrowly observed, yea, our ambitious Nimrods will make use of any ladder of
the devils rearing to climb to the top of earthly greatness, and so they may
but be mounted to the pinnacle of preferment, they care not though they be
carried thither upon the devils back, and though they be afterward tempted by
him to throw down themselves headlong, and break their necks. They will build
Babel; to purchase an aerial name, though the Foundation be laid in Gods
displeasure, and the end prove confusion. How do men set their names upon their
Sons, and upon their Estates, calling their children an^ their lands after
their own names, which is but to write their names in the sand, which the next
generation like the next tide does clean put out. How much better were it for
them to pass the pangs of the new birth, to the obtaining of the new name, and
to be made the sons and daughters of the Lord God Almighty, to be engrafted
into Christ, and made new creatures, but this is none of their care, to become
fools that they may be wise, is altogether a Paradox to them, and such counsel
as that, they count the foolishness of preaching; The Doctrine of self-denial,
to deny Wits, Wills and Worth, though it be the first lesson of Christianity,
will not down with them, and therefore upon necessity they must live and die
fools, (what ever their other names be, that's their surname) who will not be
persuaded to advance so far as the beginning of wisdom.

In a word, Pleasures, Profits, Honors, which are the Worlds Trinity, and
self-seeking, or flesh pleasing, which are the same in Unity: These are the
great Diana's which the multitude do adore, and cry up, and these they will
have though they have Hell with them, and this great Salvation, and the eternal
weight of Glory balanced with these, are in the estimation of these men
lighter than vanity it self, and these are notorious neglecters of this
Salvation.

2. The neglect of this great Salvation is expressed by taking but a little
care conjunct with greater cares. Many, because it is too too gross and
abominable, and the very badge of Reprobates to give up themselves wholly to
the World, Flesh and Devil, and to serve sin in the lust of it, they will
divide themselves betwixt God and the World, God and the Flesh, God and the
Devil; They will give God and Christ their names and tongues; but the World,
Flesh and Devil shall have their hands and hearts, they will pretend to serve
God, but keep their sins; But the word is plain that we cannot serve two
Masters, there is no serving God and Mammon: O cleanse your hands ye sinners, and
purge your hearts ye double minded, if God must have the whole heart, and
strength, the whole body, soul and spirit, what remains then for other Lords? O
you selfseeking, and Salvation-refusing souls; why do ye halt thus betwixt two
opinions? If God be God, serve him, if you can find out a better Master, serve
him; but know assuredly, when God shall send you for succor at a dying hour,
to the Gods that ye have chosen, and to the Idols that you have set up in your
hearts, you will be forced to say of them as Job of his false friends,
miserable comforters ye are all.

Though the Scripture is most express that we must dedicate all our Talents of
time, and gifts, and parts, and interests, and callings to the advantage of our
great Lord, to the serving of our generation, to the benefit of other souls,
and to the furtherance of our own account, yet how ordinary a thing is it for
men and women to be of Agrippa's temper, almost Christians, of a Laodicean
frame of spirit, lukewarm, and betwixt hot and cold: They will sometimes read,
and perhaps pray in their families, and come to the Assembly on the Sabbath, if
their lusts will give them leave, and much of the easiest and cheapest part of
Religion they will practice, and be willing to adventure as far as a name to
live, and a form of godliness will bear them out, but still with Herod they
will set themselves a stint, hitherto they will go, and no further, ere his
right eye should out by parting with his Herodias, his reprovers head should
off, and ere these will cut off their right hands, by forsaking their evil
practices, and their right feet by forgoing their evil company, and saying,
away ye wicked, I will keep the Commandments of my God, they will do as the
rich young man did when he heard that command, forsake all and follow me, he
thought it a hard saying, and forsook his Counselor, though it were a Savior:
Many will be persuaded to do as much as the Jews did Isay. 2. Offer sacrifice,
burn incence, and observe days, and like hasty messengers run away with half
their errand, leaving all of substance and power behind them; but for close and
costly services these are hard and irksome, God must have them excused for
such, and for the suffering part of Christianity, they are meat strangers to
that, yea, and very enemies to the cross of Christ: These are they that in
praying, pray not, and in hearing, hear not, and use the things that tend to
Salvation, as though they used them not.

3. They may pass for neglecters of this great Salvation, that do not make it
their greatest care. God is the highest good, and not to love him with the
highest love, is interpretatively to hate him; Mistake me not, I do not mean it
absolutely that we must love God in the highest degree here, while we are in
our imperfect militant condition, to know but in part, to be sanctified but in
part, and to love but in part. We may love sincerely on earth, but we shall not
love perfectly till we come to Heaven, where perfect love shall cast out all
fear, but my meaning is, that in a comparative sense we should love him best,
and most, more than the creature, or our selves, more than the interests of the
world or flesh, for whosoever loves the World, or any thing in the World more
than God, is not worthy of him, and whosoever loves not God and Christ more
than any thing, than all things in the World, loves them not in sincerity;
Those that are lovers of pleasures more than lovers of God, lovers of Mammon
more than lovers of God, they are not better than haters of God. Salvation by
Christ is the greatest happiness, and therefore our greatest care and pains
should be spent upon it: It Is the unum necessarium, the only thing necessary,
and therefore ought to be the unicum maximum, that should carry away the flower
and cream of our affections and endeavors. It Is common with the vulgar to
judge of the things of the third Heaven, as they do by the things of the
second, the Moon and the Stars; they think the Moon to be biggest, because it
is nearest, and seems so; when stars of a greater magnitude are thought little,
because they are farther off; So we are ready to look upon the perishing
vanities of this transitory World, as great matters, because they are at hand,
and near us, and the joys of Heaven, and felicities above to be but small and
inconsiderable, because they are far above, and out of our sight.

But you have heard before, that the Scripture bids us strive to enter in at
the straight Gate, and to give all diligence to make all sure, and to offer
violence to the Kingdom of Heaven, and tells us that the righteous are
scarcely saved, and with greatest difficulty, and therefore not to lay out our
selves, our whole selves, and that to our uttermost possibility, is to be
neglecters of this great Salvation. Now the good Lord be merciful to us, and
help us, and give us seeing eyes, hearing ears, and understanding hearts, to
hear, and feel and consider this, for if this be to neglect this great
Salvation, not to make it our highest care, not to bestow the most serious
thoughts of our minds, the most ardent desires of our hearts, and the most
effectual endeavors of our lives upon it, what will become (not of loose and
carnal libertines) but of the greatest part of those that take themselves, and
are taken by others to be good Christians.

2 USE
Shall be of Direction for the use and benefit of such as being confounded with
the greatness of the sin of setting light by this Salvation, and being pricked
in their hearts, and covered with confusion, shall be ready to cry out, Men and
Brethren, what shall we do? I shall prescribe them a remedy in four branches
of direction.

In regard Gospell-Salvation is great salvation, and our setting light by it is
great sin; Therefore that this sin may not be our ruin, There must be 1. Great
thoughts of heart, 2. Great searchings of heart 3. Great humblings of heart 4.
Great changes of heart
about it.

These have such necessary dependence one upon another, that they are
preparative one to another 1. Great thoughts are antecedent to great
searchings. 2. Great searchings are preparative to great humblings. 3. Great
humblings to great changings.


1 There must be great thoughts of heart about this great sin. When Reuben was
separated from the other Tribes of Jsrael, the text says for the divisions of
Reuben there were great thoughts of heart; but when men and women shall be
separated from God by their iniquities, yea, by such a partition wall as this
of Gospel-refusing, these divisions should beget great thoughts of heart in
such whose consciences cry guilty. Thoughts are the seeds of action, as evil
actions proceed from evil thoughts, so good actions from gracious thoughts,
The Scripture says out of the heart proceed first evil thoughts, and then
murders and a black train of actual abominations. Mat. 15.19. And an evil
man out of the evil treasure of his heart brings forth evil things. Mat.
12.35. As vain and lustful thoughts do bring forth sin, so serious, and sad
thoughts of sin do bring forth repentance; Hezekia's thoughts troubled him by
day, David's by night, Job's day and night, so should a true penitent? My sin
is ever in my sight, says holy David. The plaster of Conviction should stick
close till it draw forth Compunction, and that of Compunction till it being
forth humiliation, and that till it being forth Faith, and saving Conversion.
David says, I considered my ways, and turned my feet unto thy Testimonies. In
which words David makes a turn, but first he makes a stop, his thoughts did
drive him to a stand. I considered my ways (i. e.) I studied them, I turned
them upside down; Its good thus to prevent God, he has threatened to turn the
ways of the ungodly upside down, its safest that we turn our own ungodly
ways upside down, for the promise is, If we judge our selves we should not be
judged. As all sin proceeds from ignorance and inconsiderateness, so all grace
begins in knowledge, and consideration. The progress of saving and conversion
is laid before us in these several degrees.

1. Consideration. 2. Deliberation. 3. Resignation.
Resignation is the uppermost step, when the Soul comes up to this point of a
Covenant-delivery of it self to God, and Jesus Christ, and this begins in
consideration, that is taking up of our most serious thoughts about it: for
consideration is the eye of the Soul that looks inward, or the reflecting of
the Soul upon it self, which is done by this duty of thinking or
thoughtfullnesse.

2. There must be great searchings of heart, Lament 3.40. Let us search and try
our ways, and turn unto the Lord, said the Church in distress, in order to
the getting out of her deepes. Commune with your own hearts, says holy David,
on your bed and be still. Psalm. 4.4. That is, when you are retired, and
solitary, and have sequestered your selves from other thoughts, and employments,
then take your hearts to task, ask them questions, and receive their answers,
and hold them to it, keep them from starting aside, or running away, till you
have your desired satisfaction. The heart of man is deceitful and wicked above
all things, It has many turnings and windings, and lurking holes in it, many
back-dores, and evading places; Observe how David did take his heart to task,
to make it a heart after Gods own heart, and acted what before he gave in
precept, Psalm. 77.2, 3, 4, 5, 6. In the day of my trouble I sought the Lord, my
sore ran in the night, and ceased not, my Soul refused comfort, I remembered
God, and was troubled, I complained, and my spirit was overwhelmed Thou hold
mine eyes waking, I am so troubled that I cannot speak. Sad thoughts did so
throng in upon him, that he could not speak for thinking, he was overprest in
his spirit, and what course did he then take, see verse 6. I commune with mine
own heart, and my spirit made diligent search. As officers would search for
hidden malefactors in every corner of an house where they are suspected to be
so must we search every corner of our deceitful hearts to find out those evil
ones, our selves, a meipso libera me, domine, that body of sin and death, that
lies lurking secretly within us, and as we would search dark vaults with
lights, so must we take Gods word to be a lantern, that heart-discovering
word, to which all things are naked and manifest, which is powerful and mighty
in operation, and will pierce to the dividing asunder of the Soul and Spirit,
and joints and marrow etc. The chief Quaeres that we should put to our selves
should be these.

1. Do we take no care about Salvation? 2. Do we take but little care about it?
3. Do we not make it our greatest care?
Our hearts should be fixed on such considerations and searchings, till they
are fired with them, and we should have no rest in our Souls, if our hearts
condemn us, till we have gone to God, and vented our selves in a free and
ingenuous confession of all our sins, especially that sin, with dejection of
Spirit, and humblings of heart, which is the next thing.

3. There must be great humblings of heart. This sin should be for so great a
lamentation, that we should call down the spirit of grace and mourning to
assist us that our mourning may be deep, and durable, Notorious sins must have
notable repentance: aggravated wickedness must have suitable sorrow, where
iniquity abounds, humiliation must abound too, if we expect grace shall
super-abound Manasses having sinned greatly, was said to humble himself greatly
before the God of his Fathers; 2. Chron. 33.12, 13. and having sinned, and
sinned, by adding sin unto sin; He prayed, and prayed, he was instant, and
constant in his supplication for pardon. We may not flatter our selves with the
deceived multitude, and think that a few good purposes toward the last, or a
crying God mercy upon our death beds will do the work. The word indeed says,
that the poor Publican, that said but Lord be merciful to me a sinner, went
home rather justified than the proud Pharise, that stood on up^oe in his own
justification; but observe the appurtenances to that prayer of the Publicans,
and you will find them to be such as do accompany deep humiliation.

1. He stood afar off Ecceti^^r 2. He (...) eyes to Heaven, Ecce pudor. 3. He
smote his breast, Ecce dolor.
That prayer of his was accompanied with, 1. Great fear, in standing afar off.
2. Great shame, in not lifting up his eyes. 3. Great sorrow, in smiting his
breast.


When souls tremble at Gods word, to such will God look, even to such, Isa.
66.2. when they take s^^ and shame to themselves, and accept of the punishment
of their iniquity, and judge and condemn themselves, God has no more to ^^y,
1. Cor. 11.31.

When the sinner is grieved because God and his Spirit are grieved, God does as
it were sympathize with them, and grieve for them, he is sorry for our
afflictions, and repents him of the evil, Joel, 2.13. and his soul was grieved
for the misery of Israel, Judges, 10.16. and I will repent of the evil that I
thought to do unto them, Jer. 18.8. I know the Scripture opens a wide door of
hope to faithful prayers in times of greatest distress, in that gracious
promise, whosoever shall call on the name of the Lord shall be saved, Romans
10.13. but its physic that is administered with this corrective, in the very
next words. But how shall they call on him in whom they have not believed? The
prayer of faith will not only recover health in sickness, but life in death,
but it is not every call, nor loud cry that is a prayer; not every one that can
say Lord, Lord can pray, and God told the Israelites that they did not pray
unto him when they howled upon their beds. Hos. 7.14. There Is a vast difference
betwixt saying a prayer, and praying a prayer; the words of prayer are but the
carcass of the duty, the longing desites of the soul after God and his mercies,
after gifts, and giver are the soul of it, and that only that makes the prayer
effective.

Therefore I say that such sinners as Gospelrefusers may find mercy, there must
be deepest humiliations, suitable repentance, and most tervent prayers. Old
weather-beaten sinners that have long settled on their lees, and have been
frozen in their dregs, and have lain soaking in their lusts, that have long
frustrated means, fair, and foul, and all that have been spent in vain upon
them, such Blackmores will not be washed white with a little nitre, nor such
Leopards purged from their spots with a finger. No, if after long humbling, and
praying, and fasting, and waiting, they may have a glimps of Gods pleased
countenance at last, they have cause to wonder at such mercy, if at their
latter end they may have their pardon sealed, though their gray hairs are
brought down with sorrow to the grave, yet they have reason more than enough
to die admiring the Lords mercy. But here I must enter a caveat against a
mistake, let all thought of meriting be banished from our severest, and most
mortifying humiliations. Though we should macerate our selves with fasting into
very Skelitons, and be like so many pale corpses, or wandering shadows, though
we could sigh our selves into very air, and dissolve into very tears, our
heads being fountains and our eyes rivers: Yet when all were done we must cry
out unprofitable, and we must fly from our best performances to the Lords
mercy, and to Christ's merit for succor and Salvation.

4 There must be great changes of heart, from stone to flesh is a great change,
and when God pours out his clean water of sanctification, he takes away the
heart of stone, and gives the heart of flesh, Ezekiel. 36.26. From worse than
nothing to the new creature, is a greater change, and this is wrought in
regeneration. From darkness to light is a change most remarkable, and this
saving conversion brings to pass, Acts. 26.18. For a Man to hate his flesh, his
unregenerate part, his lust, and body of death, which in the time of his vanity
he loved so deerly, and was as loath to part with the members of it, right eye,
foot, or hand, this is a great change, and such a change is wrought in
selfe-denyall.

It was a great change that was wrought on Saul upon a sudden, when from
persecuting he fell to praying, and preaching, this well deserved an ecce as a
note of admiration, behold he prays, Acts. 9.11. For one that was so mad upon
taking away the lives of others for professing Christ, to be more ready to lay
down his own upon the same account, was so notable a change, that all that
hear of it may say this is the Lords doing, and it is mavelous in our eyes.
The grace of God which brings Salvation brings such changes, and where great
changes of heart are wrought, there great changes of life will accompany them,
Gospel-sliting, and neglecting will be turned into Gospel-prizing, and
advancing, those that made no reckoning of Gods Law before, will after this
change say with David, I love thy commandments above gold, and the Lawof thy
mouth is deerer unto me than thousands of gold and silver, and they that thus
prize it in their hearts, will practice it in their lives, knowing that the
true sayings of God are verba vivenda non legenda, and they ought to live
Gospel as well as know it: David approves himself to God in the sincerity of
his own heart in saying, Lord, what love have I unto thy Law, all the day long
is my study in it, and desires God to sift, and try, and prove, and search him
over and over, that there may be no leaven of hypocrisy left behind, Psalm.
139.23, 24. And he makes it the Character of a blessed man that he exterciseth
himself in Gods Law day and night, Psalm. 1.2. We should make it our meat and
drink, our food, and Physic, and recreation. And for an answerable
conversation the Apostles exhortation is exceeding pregnant, wherein he gives
them one precept that may include totum homnis, the whole duty of man, Phil.
1.27. Only let your conversation be as it becomes the Gospel of Jesus Christ.
As Solomon says Fear God and keep his Law, for this is the whole duty of man,
Ecles. 12.13. So the Apostle there, love Christ, and love his Gospel, for this
is the whole duty of Christians.

3 USE
Shall lay before you and leave with you, two breife encouraging
considerations, by way of comsolation, for those that have formerly been such,
but now have resolved to break off that, and all other sins by unfeigned
repentance.

1 Let such consider it is not every Sermon that is slighted, or every tender
of mercy, and offer of Jesus Christ that is made to the Soul, and set light by
that is the great damning, and impardonable sin of Gospel-refusing, though
these are too bad, and exceeding heinous, and being objectively against the
Gospel, are much to be bewailed, but its the final refusing of mercy, and
slighting of Jesus Christ to the death, that is most properly, and in strict
sense the great sin of Gospelrefusing, and such as live and die in that sin, do
render themselves by so doing incapable of pardon, and cast themselves
unavoidably upon everlasting damnation, Gods word says as much, either
exprefly, or by direct consequence in a thousand places, every Minister that
you hear tells you so, or else he tells you not the truth, every Chapter that
you read gives you some hint or other of it, many a time have your brethren
and Christian friends told you that except you close which God, and lay hold
upon Christ, you cannot be saved, if they have dealt faithfully with your
Souls, yea many a time have your own consciences (if they are not blind, and
dumb, and seared) told you so, and is it not the extremity of madness to
venture your Salvation upon such terms, that either the Scriptures must be
false and God a Liar, or you cannot be saved? If you live and die in this sin,
you must as sure be damned as the Devil himself, as sure as the Heaven is over
your heads, and the earth under your feet, Hell will be your portion, and
everlasting damnation will be the wages of refusing Gospel-Salvation.

But if you may yet be prevailed with before your breath be stopped, and the pit
shut her mouth upon you, to embrace Christ whom you have long slighted, and
accept of that mercy which you have unworthily refused, and receive the Gospel
which you have neglected, there is yet hope in Israel concerning this: O for
the Lords sake, and for your Souls sake, stand out no longer, refuse not mercy
that may yet be had, be not accessory to your own everlasting undoing, do not
tire a long suffering God out of patience, and provoke him that swears he
takes no delight in the death of a sinner, to swear in his wrath that you
shall never enter into his rest. Do not make him your judge who is willing to
be your advocate, nor turn the Lamb of God into a Lion Rampant. O grieve not
the Spirit, which would be your comforter, and remember who said, when he was
waiting upon a rebellious people, My spirit shall not always strive with flesh,
O send not back Christ's Ambassadors to their master to tell him with tears
that you will not believe their report, and put them not upon that diabolical
employment to be your accusers to God, and swift witnesses against you at the
bar of Christ; make not the word to be the savor of death, which was ordained
to be the savor of life to the heirs of Salvation. Let not the Sermons, that
you have heard, and the books that you have, or might have read, and this that
you are now reading rise up in judgment against you: what should I say more,
the Lord knows how willing I am to say all that I can possibly invent that may
win upon you, and all that he shall put into my mouth, if he will open your
ears and hearts to counsel, who opens and none can shutt this may be enough to
prevail with you that has been already spoken; but if he will shutt, or will
not open, though I could speak with the tongues of men and Angels, I should be
but as a Sounding brass or a tinkling Cymball. O consider this and the Lord
give you understanding in all things.

2 Let such consider lastly that there is mercy enough revealed in the Gospel
even to pardon all such Gospel-refusing as it not final: The Gospel excludes
but one sin from pardon, and that is because such a sinner cannot be renewed by
repentance. If the sinner against the holy Ghost could be penitent, the sin
against the holy Ghost might be pardoned, for it is not therefore impardonable
because its greater than the mercy of the Father, or merit of the Son, but
because the sinner has done despite to the holy Ghost, and rendered himself
incapable of the help of the spirit of grace: I have already taught you that
Gospel mercy is a present, and precious remedy against Law-transgressions; but
this is a step farther to consider that its also a sovereign remedy against
Gospel-refusing, which is not final, and they may be Gospel-receivers who have
been of long season Gospel refusers. The blood of Christ was so savingly
sovereign, that it healed those that wounded him, and gave life to some of
those murderers that put him to death, as is evident from that plain Scripture
Acts. 2.36, 37, 38. Peter told them God had made that Jesus whom they crucified
both Lord and Christ. There we see they were such as had a hand in crucifying
Christ, The next verse shows that they were penitent, and pricked at the heart
for that sin, and begging directions of the Apostles what they might do to be
saved, they were directed to repent and encouraged with the hopes of the
promise, and v. 41. They gladly received the word and there were added to the
Church three thousand Souls, who continued steadfastly in the Apostles doctrine
and fellowship, and in breathing of bread, and prayer. And as the merit of
Christ extended to his very persecutors so the mercy of the Gospel extends to
the refusers of the Gospel. That Son, that said he would not go into the
vinyeard and went, was better accepted with the Father, than he that said I go
Sr. and went not. So those that have long stood at a distance from God upon
their unfeigned repentance will be better accepted than such as are forward in
profession and show, but have nothing of the power, and beauty, and reality of
Godliness, and Christianity in them. O what greater encouragement can Rebels
have to lay down arms and submitt to mercy, than a probability, nay a
conditional certainty of their Princes pardon: We have heard that the Kings of
Israel are merciful said the servants of Benhadad, and therefore got ropes
about their necks in token of submission, and humbled themselves, and found
mercy according to their expectation, you have heard again and again that the
God of Israel, the King of Kings is merciful, but how merciful none can tell
you, he is able to do more exceeding abundantly than we are able to ask or
think, let us lie in the dust, and shame our selves before him, and turn from
our evil ways, and turn unto the Lord, and as sure as he is a God of truth
we shall find him to be a God of mercy: but if notwithstanding all these
allurements we shall persist in our sin of setting light by the Gospel, our
blood will be upon our own heads, and we shall be left to perish without
remedy. I shall shut up all with that obtestation of the Apostle to the Romans
Chap. 12.1, 2. Which is my entreaty to you, I beseech you brethren by the
mercies of God, that ye present your selves a living sacrifice, holy, and
acceptable unto God, which is your reasonable service, etc.

THE THIRD DOCTRINE, The neglect of Great Salvation brings Great Damnation.
DAmnation is so dreadful a doom, that the very report of it is like a
thunderclap to cause a heart-quake in the hearers and speakers of it; If
Ministers must preach upon pain of Damnation, and people must hear and attend
upon pain of Damnation, the believing entertainment of this truth one would
think should be powerful to work miracles, even to make the dumb to speak,
and the deaf to hear; its better to hear the roaring of the Lion, than to come
into his paw, and its better to hear of the dreadfullness of Damnation, than to
come under the sentence. Its joyous to hear of Heaven, but its the fullress of
joy to be invited to it, wath a come ye bl^ssed children of my Father, receive
the Kingar^^ prepared for you. So its dreadful to hear of Hell, but its the
most terrible of terribles to be sentenred to it, with go ye cursed into
everlasting fire prepared for the Devil and his Angels. You have heard of the
amiableness of Salvation to invite you, hearken unto the dreadfullness of
Damnation to affright you, that either you may be drawn, or driven to mind the
things that belong unto your peace: the rule that we proposed was ingentia
beneficia, ingentia flagitia, great mercies abused do aggravate sin, and make
it sinful with a witness, And now the remainder of it is ingentia flagitia,
ingentia supplicia, those heinous sins do pull down punishnent with a
vengance, that sin with a hard heart does call and cry for judgment with a
high hand. Now though this be not expressed totidem verbis in express words in
the Text, yet that which does tantamount is employed in the question, How shall
we escape? which is as much as to say, there is no possibility of escaping. And
what is it that we cannot escape? why, a just recompense of reward for our
transgression, and disobedience; if we look back to the verse before the Text,
yea, a severer judgment more fiery indignation, and a sorer punishment than
the transgressors of Moses Law, if we look forward to Chapter 10.27, 28, 29. And
what the spirit of God speaks short here, is spoken out, and at large to the
Scribes and Pharisees, hypocrites, that slew the Prophets that were sent unto
them, and refused servants, and Son too, that came to require fruit of the
vineyard, Mat. 23.33. Ye Serpents, ye generation of vipers, how can ye escape
the Damnation of Hell? And observe that Mat. 25.41. Its called the Devils
damnation, depart ye cursed into everlasting fire prepared for the Devil and
his Angels. The harmonious discord that dwells in the antithesis which opposes
this great damnation to that great Salvation is very elegant and observable.

The Salvation refused is called the Salvation of God, all the ends of the
earth have seen the Salvation of our God.

The Damnation incurred by such a refusal is called the damnation of the Devil.

The Salvation slighted is the Salvation of Heaven. The Damnation deserved is
the Damnation of Hell.
I observed in the handling of the first that the mercy of Salvation is much
magnifyed, and made mervelous by three degrees. And now we are to observe that
the justice of damnation is made glorious by the same degrees, for these two
contraries have the same dimensions, the most righteous God that gives the one,
and inflicts the other, being as infini^e in justice, as in mercy. Observe then
in order to such an illustration of it, 1. That it is positively great
Damnation. 2. That it is comparatively greater than other. 3. That it is
superlatively the greatest of all.


1 That it is Great Damnation you may easily conclude from what is already
spoken, that it is the damnation of Hell, and the Devils Damnation, and the
very word gives such an astonishing sound to such as can apprehend both name
and thing, that to discover it to be great, it will need no more than the
naming; but since we have to do with such as are brutifyed, and must fight with
beasts after the manner of men, since our work lies much with dead men, such as
are dead in trespasses and sins, and though they bear the names of men and
women, that are reasoable creatures, yet they are further from knowledge than
the Ox and the Ass, Isay. 1.3. And as senseless and stupid as stocks and
stones, as the inanimate globes of Heaven and Earth, Isay. 1.2.

We must therefore use all possible means (and all little enough) to awaken
them to things of highest Consequence, and everlasting Concernment, and such
are the things that we have in hand. Matters of Salvation and Damnation,
matters of life and death for ever and ever.

Study with me but this one point, that the Damnation that we are speaking of,
and about to aggravate is not Damnation barely for the breach of Gods Law, but
for refusing the mercy of the Gospel, that was offered to make up that breach,
its Damnation for the refusal of Salvation, of which refusers we may use the
Apostles words, Romans 3.8. Whose Damnation is just. There can be no greater
justice than this, when life and death are set before men, and they will choose
death, that they should have it, when Salvation and Damnation are both held out
in the promise and threatening, that the refusers of Salvation should fall into
damnation, observe Ioh. 3.16. God so loved the world that be gave his only
begotten Son, that whosoever believes in him might not perish but have
everlasting life, and in the next verse, God sent not his Son into the world to
condemn the world, but that the world through him might be saved: In both
verses is declared both posivetily, and negatively for what end Christ came
into the world. 1 He came to save sinners, 2 He came to save, and not to damn.
But as God by his creating power brought light out of darkness; so men by their
destroying sin bring darkness out of light, and like the Spiders do gather
poison from the sweetest flowers, and most wholesome herbs; They do wilfully
aggravate their condemnation by the gracious offers of Salvation, and treasure
up for themselves severest wrath from sweetest mercy. And this is that that
brings this great damnation, as you may see there in the very next verse but
one, ver. 19. This is the condemnation, that light is come into the world, and
men love darkness more than light, that mercy is offered and wrath is chosen,
that Salvation is tendered, and Damnation is taken, men deal so Jewishly with
Christ, that they prefer Barrabbas a murderer before him, and this is rightly
called (...) The Damnation.

2. It is comparatively greater than other condemnations, we proved
Gospel-Salvation to be greater than other Salvations. And the sin of
Gospel-refusing to be greater than other sins. And now are to show that this
damnation is greater than other condemnations.

1. Greater than condemnation by man's law, sentences in Courts of humane
Judicature, reach But 1. Either to the estate as fining, or confiscation, 2. Or
to the body, as imprisonment and scourging, 3. Or to the name, as stigmatizing,
or burning in the hand or forehead, 4. Or if capital to the life as hanging,
beheading, etc. 5. Or in case of treason to the family and posterity.


But this transcends all those condemnations, as we may gather from Luke 12.4,
5. which were the words of our Savior to his Disciples, I say unto you my
friends, be not afraid of them that kill the body, and after that have no more
that they can do, but I will forewarn you whom you shall fear, fear him which
after he has killed, has power to cast into hell, yea, I say unto you, fear
him. Provoking sinners are said to treasure up wrath against the day of wrath.
Romans 2.5. Though they catch many a rap here, that is nothing in comparison of
what is behind: This is the day of grace, wherein God exercises patience and
long-suffering toward them, but if the goodness of God do not bring them to
repentance, there is another day a coming, where they must give another manner
of reckoning, a fearful, and terrible day, a day all of Wrath: Then righteous
Judgment will be impartially dispensed without respect of persons: here below
in men's judicatories it falls out oftentimes as with fish in a net, great ones
are caught, when little ones creep through; and sometimes again as with flies
in the Spiders webb, the little ones are held, when the great ones break
through, but that day will surprise High and Low, Rich and Poor, one with
another, We must all appear before the Judgment Seat of Christ, 2. Cor. 5.10
and every one must give an account of himself to God, Romans 14.12. If any are
left out of these expressions, all and every one, they may expect to escape
judgment, else not. Here sometimes the rod of the wicked falls to the lot of
the righteous, and Gods servants are condemned as evil doers, when the
Benjamins mess, and double portion is given to the wicked, but then the just
Judge of all the World will do all men right, and distribute righteous
judgment in giving to every one according to his works. Romans 2.6, 7, 8, 9, 10.
Rendering eternal vengeance to the ignorant and disobedient, and will be made
glorious in them that believe. 2 These. 1.7, 8, 9, 10.

2. Greater also than condemnation by Gods Law, as appears from the verse
before my text and Chapter 10.27, 28, 29, 30, 31. To such as wilfully refuse this
Gospel-Salvation, There remains no Sacrifice for sins, but a certain fearful
looking for of judgment, and fiery indignation, which shall devour the
adversaries: He that despised Moses law (i. e.) Gods law given by the
Mediatourship of Moses, died without mercy; of how much sorer punishment
suppose ye shall he be thought worthy; who has trodden under foot the Son of
God, and counted the blood of the Covenant, wherewith he was sanctified, an
unholy thing, and has done despite unto the spirit of Grace. For we know him
that has said, vengeance belogneth unto me, I will recompense says the Lord,
and again the Lord will judge his people. It is a fearful thing to fall into
the hands of the living God. So far the Apostle in that Scripture, which
thunderclaps, though by the concurrent Judgment of expositours, they are
levelled at sinners against the Holy Ghost, those that are guilty of that sin
unto death, yet many of the iniquities of that sin are (though in a lower
measure) to be charged upon the neglecter of this great Salvation.

3. It is superlatively the greatest of all condemnations, two places of
Scripture I shall quote and improve, that are of this tendency, and then shall
pass to the further confirmation of it by strength of reason.

The first is 1 These. 2.16. Where the Apostle notes that the Jews, that killed
the Lord Jesus and their own Prophets, and persecuted the Apostles, and envyed
the Gentiles, that in a word, with the unjust Judge did neither fear God, nor
reverence Man, did thus Fill up the measure of their sins, till wrath came upon
them to the utter most, (i. e.) they sinned to the uttermost till they were
plagued to the uttermost. compare with this place that Heb. 7.25. which words
are spoken of Jesus Christ, the great high Priest of his Church, the plentiful
Redeemer and mighty Savior, He is able to save to the uttermost all them that
do come unto God by him, seeing he ever lives to make intercession for them:
what can be more equal than this that they that refuse mercy to the uttermost,
should have wrath to the uttermost, that they which set light by that Salvation
to the uttermost, should endure the uttermost of Damnation.

The other place of Scripture that speaks to this point, and serves to set out
the superlative greatness of this Damnation is Matthew. 3.7. They are the words
of John Baptist to the Pharisees and Saduces, that came to his Baptism, O
Generation of vipers who has warned you to flee from the wrath to come. Where
note that this dreadful Damnation is called Wrath to come, and therefore
because the main of it is reserved for the life to come; true it is that some
notorious Malefactors have an entrance into Hell opened unto them while they
are upon earth, and are hanged up in Gibbets for the astonishment of others,
that are so pursued by the hornets of their consciences stinging them with the
pangs of the second death, that with Cain and Judas they are driven by the
Devil through hell internal into an hell eternal; but the dreadfulness of
perfected Damnation, which the Devil believes and trembles to believe, is
reserved for an endless life, in that which we call the World to come, David
says Great plagues remain for the ungodly: though upon the ungodly, God raines
snares, fire, and brimston, storm and tempest, and discharges whole Vollies of
Wonderful plagues upon the children of disobedience, Deuteronomy. 28.59. yet there is
a reserve of more and greater, and the biggest and worst are still behind. As
the Saints have usually the worst in possession, and best in reversion, and
this life is a sowing in tears that they may reap in joy; so usually the wicked
have the best at first, and worst at last, as Abrabram said to Dives, Son
remember how in thy life time thou receivedst thy good things, but Lazarus
pains, but now he is comforted, and thou art tormented. But to return to take
into further consideration that expression of wrath to come, Cast abroad your
eyes in all the world, and look back to the beginning of time, and enquire
whether ever sorrow were like unto that Weeping and Howling, and Gnashing of
Teeth, which the Lord inflicts upon the Damned in the day of his fierce wrath.

1. We read that for our first Parents disobedience, the whole Creation was
under such a load of wrath, that ever since it has groaned under it: Romans
8.22. But there we read also that the creature groans under an expectation of
liberty, waiting when it shall be restored into the glorious liberty of the
Sons God; but when this Damnation takes place, the Torments as they are
easless, so shall they be endless; the worm dies not, and the fire never goes
out, there is no hope of a deliverance.

2. Its upon record that Sodom and Gomorrah were destroyed with Fire and
Brimston, but when the Cities were burnt the fire was extinguished, but the
wicked are the chaff and stubble that must be burnt with unquenchable fire, the
damned, who are the fuel that feed; it shall be like the burning bush all on a
fire but not consummed, and therefore the fire must needs be everlasting; The
burning thereof is fire and much wood, and the breath of the Lord like a River
of brimston does kindle it. Isay 30.33.

3. God overthrew the old World with a devouring flood, but the Scripture makes
mention of the rising and raging of it, and then of its ebbing again, and
flowing no more: But those souls that are drowned in perdition, are cast into
the Mare mortuum, the dead, and deadly Sea, the Red and the Raging Sea of the
Almighties wrath, which has neither bank nor bottom, where they must be
sinking and drowning for ever and ever.

4. The Jews for their rejecting Christ, were unchurched, and Excommunicated,
but they are to be called again, when the fullness of the Gentiles is come in,
But the sentence of final Damnation shall be beyond the Anathema Maranatha, that
was but till the coming of Lord, but this commences at the coming of the Lord,
and from thenceforth for ever, Go ye cursed into everlasting fire.

But we also promised to clear this point unto you by evidence of reason, as I
did the former, for if such truths were but believingly received in the
evidence of them, they would surely be mighty in operation, and pierce to the
dividing of the Soul and Spirit: If our everlasting doors were but opened to
entertain such mighty Doctrines, can we think that men and women that have
reasonable Souls, and the principles of self-love, and self-preservation in
them, and the passion of fear in them, I say can it be once imagined that they
can be so brutish to cast away all care what will become of them in another
world, and with both hands to pull down upon bodies and souls this swift
damnation. Know then that the damnation that we are treating of, which men draw
upon their own heads by setting light by Gospel-Salvation, is monstrous great
for these ensuing reasons,

1. Reason, Because it proceeds from so great a God. If we would know the
greatness of this Damnation, let us study the greatness of that God that
inflicts it: The wrath of a King is like the roaring of a Lion; but let those
that can tell what the wrath of the King of Kings is: surely Moses his words do
advance it above all that can be spoken or thought of it: Psalm. 90.11. Who
knows the power of thine anger? for according to thy fear is thy wrath (i.e.)
let such as have the most enlightened and most enlarged understandings, graspe
as much as they can in comprehending thy displeasure, yet when they are come
unto their wits end, it is infinitely beyond their reach. The Lord does all
things like himself; If he do but speak concerning a Nation, and concerning a
Kingdom to build and to plant it, his very word will bring it to pass, it
brought the world out of nothing with as little ado, for he did but speak the
word and they were made, he commanded, and they were created: and again if he
do but blow upon it, and speak against it to destroy it, whether it be a
Nation, or all the Nations of the world, he can command a Flood or a Fire to do
his strange work: When he will deliver, none can deliver like him, and when he
will destroy, none can destroy like him. David's question puts all out of
question, that there is no resistance to be made against him. Who may stand in
his sight when he is angry? Dare we provoke the Lord to jealousy? oh foolish
people and unwise, are we stronger than he? Can stubble stand before a
deavouring fire, or chafe stand against a scattering whirlwind? Though hand
join in hand, the wicked shall not go unpunished, for he that judges them is
a strong Lord. Though they could sore as high as Heaven, or fall as low as
Hell, or fly to the uttermost coasts of the Earth, or Sea, though they should
lie buried under Mountains a thousand miles deep, or all the rocks of the Sea
and Land were piled upon them, yet there is no hiding them from the wrath of
this mighty God, who is no less omniscient, than he is omnipotent. Those that
desire to know more of the greatness of this God, let them study the 40 Chapter
of Isay. And there they shall find, v. 12. That he measures the waters in the
hollow of his hand, and metes the Heaven with a span, and comprehends the dust
of the earth in a measure, and weighs the mountains in scales, and the hills
in a balance. And v. 15. All nations are as a drop of a bucket, and are
counted as the small dust of the balance, and v. 17. All nations before him
are as nothing, and they are counted less than nothing and vanity. And v. 22.
It is he that sets upon the circle of the earth, and the inhabitants thereof
are as grasshoppers, that stretches out the Heavens as curtain, and spreads
them out as a tent to dwell in. That brings the Princes to nothing, and
makes the Judges of the earth as vanity. Considering all this greatness, and
considering further that one half is not told you* the more we study it the
more we are overwhelmed, and confounded with the glory of it, what can be too
hard for the Lord, or who can stand in the judgment before this mighty God, to
whom vengeance belongs: We may easily be confirmed in the truth of all that
is said, and all that can be said of the greatness of damnation, when we do but
hear from whence it comes, even from the dreadful Jehovah, who is able with a
word, or a frown, or a displeased breath to turn all the wicked into hell, and
all the people that forget God.

2. Reason, why this Damnation is so great, is, because it is for despising,
and setting light by so great a Savior, an undervaluing of the highest Love in
its lowest condescension; This must be a reason coequall with the former,
because Christ is the Son coequall with the Father. The mercy of heaven never
put the sons of men to a quid amplius in any thing more than this? What could I
do more for an unthankful world than this? Let the Sons of invention set their
wits upon the rack, and tell us (if they can) what God could do more than to
turn himself wholly into LOVE. 1 John 4.16. and having but one Son, who was
Heyr of all things, his or^^^^ begotten, and only beloved; who thought it no
robbery to be equal with himself, to send him out of his own bosom, to empty
himself of his glory, to take our sin and curse with our nature upon him, that
we, who were children of disobedience and wrath, and heyrs apparent to hell and
condemnttion, might be received into the glorious liberty of the Sons and
Daughters of the Lord God Almighty: Now for men to be so desperately rebellious
is to slight this love, and so stubbornly mad as to refuse this Savior, can
the greatest judgments in Gods storehouse, or the hottest place in that fire
that burns to the bottom of hell be a proportionable recompense for such d^ing
provocations? Shall wicked miscreants, slight and trample upon that which the
Saints admire, and the Angels adore? O stupendous madness! Its a thousand
wonders that the great eye of Heaven does not wink the earth into utter
darkness, and the very Sun take its leave of the world, abhorring to see men to
be such incarnate Devils, and to see the Earth tainted with such hellish
abominations; hellish do I say, nay in this the wickedness of man is so great
in the Earth, that it justifies the Devils, for they, being left without hope
of a Redeemer, were never guilty of setting light by a Savior, and knowing so
much of the terrors of the Lord as does accompany their initial Damnation, in
their chains of darkness, wherein they are reserved to the judgment of the
great day, and trembling to believe (...) much more of the consummation of it:
f^^^^night be put to trial whether they wou^ (...) of (...) off^^e Savior,
can we the (...) Devils themselves, (...) gent deceiving of finners to their
(...) they would greedily apprehend the opp^^nity of laying hold upon
Salvation. He^ O heavens, and hearken O earth; and be astonished at this! We
may stand amazed and wonder, that those prodigies are not every days news,
which accompanied the crucifying of this blessed Savior, and did witness to
the world h^^ deeply the Lord was displeased with the more than barbarous
cruelties; the (...) be a God even of invincible patien^e and long-suffering,
and can see and suffer himself to be provoked every day, and his Sons blood,
and righteousness to be trampled on, and set at naught by the refusers of
mercy, yet this is but during the day of grace, this will not last always, the
day of wrath is a coming, even at the doors, and then righteous judgment
shall be dispensed; and one high and main end of that great and terrible day is
the exaltation of Gods Son, that he may be manifested to both worlds, of men
and Angels, to be Gods only beloved Son, in whom he is well pleased. Then
shall the Lord Jesus be terrible to those that refused him, and glorious in
them that believe, 2 Th. 7.8.

3. Reason, Because it is wrath inflicted for resisting, and vexing of the
Spirit of grace; The Father and Son have been the matter of the two foregoing
Reasons, and this third is drawn from the third Person in this great and
glorious Trinity. This Spirit moved upon the waters in the worlds Creation,
Genesis 1.2. This Spirit did strive with man in the days and Ministry of Noah,
Genesis 6.3. This spirit was prophesied of in the days of the Prophets, Isay
59.^1. My Spirit that is upon thee shall not depart from thee, nor from thy
seed, nor from thy seeds feed, says the Lord, from henceforth and for ever,
and Joel 2.28. I will pour out my Spirit upon all flesh, etc. This spirit our
Savior promise when he went to the Father. I will pray the Father, and he
shall give you another comforter and he shall abide with you for ever. Joh.
14.16. And this spirit was sent according to promise in the likeness of cloven
and fiery Tongues, Acts 2.2, 3, 4. to guide, the Apostles into all truth, to
bring to their remembrance, and to teach them more perfectly the things they
had heard of Christ; to inspire and guide them in perfecting the Scriptures,
and bearing witness to the truth of them by many wonderful miracles: And this
spirit keeps residence in the Church, and joins it self as the spirit of wisdom
and revelation, with the word of wisdom and revelation, to call and draw men
unto Christ, and to work energetically and effectually in such as are made
believers by the exceeding greatness of its mighty power. Now as Steven
impleaded the Jews, so may we lay it to the charge of all such as live within
the sound of the Gospel, Act. 7.51. Ye stifnecked, and uncircumcised in hearts
and ears, ye do always resist the Holy Ghost, as your Father did, so do ye.
When the Spirit of God strives verbis, and verberibus, in the Word, and Rod, in
ordinances, and providence, and the Lord may charge it upon us, as he does,
Pro. 1.24, 25, 26, 27, 28, 29, 30, 31. Because I have called and ye refused, I
have stretched out my hand, and none would regard, but ye have set at naught
all my counsel, and would none of my reproof, I also will laugh at your
calamity, I will mock when your fear comes, when your fear comes as
desolation, and your destruction comes as a whirlwind, and distress and
anguish comes upon you. Then shall they call upon me, but I will not answer,
they shall seek me early but shall not find me, etc. Therefore they shall eat
of the fruit of their own way, and be filled with their own devices. When the
spirit shall be thus unworthily resisted, and vexed, nothing renders the Lord
more inexorable, implacable, and merciless, and leaves the guilty to perish
without remedy.

4. Reason, Because it is prepared for great enemies. The very word prepared is
a most stinging expression Go ye cursed into everlasting fire, prepared etc.
That wrath into whose preparation the wisdom, and justice of so great a God
is ingredient, must needs be inconceivably, and unutterably great. But if we
take in the great enemies for whom it is prepared, ^t will augment it; it was
prepared for the D^vel and his Angel. Mat. 25.41. Those that were discontented
with their own angelical excellency, and emulated the Majesty and greatness of
God, and had an ambition to be like him. Tophet is prepared for the King (i.
e.) for the Prince of darkness, and God of this world, or for the greatest of
malefactors be they never so high, never so mighty, never so noble after the
flesh, all their number, pomp, and greatness shall be swallowed up in the
bottomless pit.

Observe what black Catalogues the Scripture makes of that notorious rabble of
Rebels Rampant that must descend into the bottomless pit. 1 Cor. 6.9, 10. Know
ye not that the unrighteous shall not inherit the Kingdom of God, be not
deceived, neither fornicators, nor idolaters, nor adulterers, nor effeminate,
nor abusers of themselves with mankind, nor thieves, nor covetous, nor
drunkards, nor revilers, nor extortioners shall inherit the Kingdom of God.
See also Gal. 5.19, 20, 21. The works of the flesh are manifest, which are
these, adultery, fornication, uncleanness, lascivousness, idolatry, witchcraft,
hatred, variance, emulations, wrath, strife, seditions, heresies, enyvings,
murders, drunkenness, revelling, and such like, of the which I tell you, as I
have also told you in time past, that they which do such things shall not
inherit the Kingdom of God. And Ephesians. 5.5. This ye know, that no whoremonger,
nor unclean person, nor covetous man, who is an idolater, has any inheritance
in the Kingdom of Christ, and of God. These Scriptures are only exclusive, and
bar Heaven against such, hear one place more, that acquaints us which the place
that must receive them when Heaven spues them out, and that is the very sink of
Hell. Rev. 21.8. The fearful and unbelieving, and the abominable, and
murderers, and whoremongers, and sorcerers, and idolaters, and all liars shall
have their part in the lake which burns with fire and brimstone, which is the
second death, Its said in Scripture that those which die in their unbelief,
and impenitency, shall have their portion with hypocrites, dissemblers of
holiness do but double their wickedness, and God will double their damnation.
The persecutors of Gods people, that strike at God, and Christ, and wound them
through the sides of the Saints, these shall sink deep into the bottomless pit,
and the dispisers of God and Christ shall go into the same place of torment,
the damnation prepared for the most notorious malefactors, shall be shared
amongst the world of ungodly: When men are to entertain their best friends,
they will do it with a confluence of choicest provisions, such is God's free
entertainment of his Servants, and Favorites: Mine Oxen and Fallings are
killed, and all things in a readiness, come unto the Marriage. Mat. 22, 4. And
Come ye blessed of my Father, receive the Kingdom prepared for you, Mat. 25,
34. But when men are to prosecute their deadliest Enemies, they will do it with
the uttermost rigor that their possibility can reach unto; Such, and
infinitely greater, is Gods anger against his Adversaries, he takes pleasure at
their overthrow, and laughs at their destruction, Ah, I will ease me of mine
enemies, and be avenged on mine Adversaries, Isay. 1.24. And as if his mercy
were utterly at an end, and he had forgotten to be gracious, he will denounce
that everlasting excommunication, as the triumph of his glorious justice, Go ye
cursed into everlasting fire prepared for the Devil and his Angels, Mat. 25.41.

5 Reason. Because it has a great and a long reach.

1. It reaches to the Soul. 2. And it reaches to eternity.
1 It reaches unto the Soul: other sentences reach but to the body, name,
estate, family, relations, liberty, life, as was before hinted, but this
reaches the Soul. Fear not them which kill the body, and when they have done
that, have no more that they can do, but fear him, who when he has killed is
able to cast into Hell, yea, I say unto you, fear him, Luke. 12, 4. How do
malefactors, that are arraigned for some capital offenses tremble before an
earthly Judge, when he is pronouncing sentence of death upon them? but how will
corrupt Judges themselves tremble, as Faelix did, when he heard Paul reasoning
of judgment to come, yea, a more than either he or Belshazzar did, when the
hand was writing him a divorce from his Kingdom, when this sentence of
Damnation is going out? how will blackness cover all faces, when a World of
self condemned sinners shall stand before the dreadful Tribunal of the Lord
Jesus, which in the last Assize he is sitting upon life and death, when nothing
is left them but a certain fearful looking for of judgment, and fiery
indignation, which shall devour the Adversaries, Hebr. 10.27. 'Twas a sad
hearing to the rich glutton, Thou fool this night shall thy Soul be taken from
thee, Luke. 12.20. The Soul is more worth than the World in his esteem that
laid down his life to save Souls, Mat. 16.26. And in this damnation this
jewel is lost, and this darling of ours must be delivered to the roaring Lion.
The Saints do lay all at stake to save their souls; Profs^s, Pleasures,
Honors, Friends, Liberty, Life it self, and think all to be an easy exchange,
which will more than conclude the loss, of the soul to be the loss of all
losses.

2. And that which makes this so great a loss, and that we are treating of so
great Damnation, is because it is for ever and ever, It reaches to Eternity.
The sinner under convictions thinks he shall die no other death, and looks upon
himself as in a very hell upon earth; David after deliverance out of such a
deep, says, O Lord, thou have delivered my Soul from the nethermost hell, and
Saint Augustine having in his confessions taken shame unto himself for a
multitude sins, in the depth of his humiliation, calls out of the deep of
misery to the deep of mercy, Lord, pity my Soul in the lowest hell; and such
in Scripture-sense are called lost, Christ came to seek and save the lost, but
this loss shall-be their gain, and I may say in this case as the Word in
another, he that loses his life, shall find it, and the Apostle Paul desired
to be lost in himself, that he might be found in Christ, this is but a seeming
loss, nor will it last long, heaviness may endure for a night, but joy comes
in the morning, for a moment have I hid my face, in mine anger, says the Lord,
but with everlasting mercy will I return and have compassion; but the lose we
are speaking of is real, and irreparable. The soul under desertion thinks it
self in a woeful case, and has much ado to distinguish betwixt it self and a
castaway, as appears in David's case, Psalm. 77.7, 8, 9. Will the Lord absent
himself for ever? and will he be favorable no more? etc. and Job complained in
the bitterness of his soul, that God had set him up as his mark to shoot at,
and the venom of his arrows drank up his Spirit, and Hezekiah did mourn like a
Dove and chatter like a Crane, and complained that from morning to night, God
did make an end of him. But though it were now winter with them, and the sap
was gone down into the root, yet the Suns return brought their spring again,
and the light of Gods countenance made all whole; but in that desertion which
Damnation causes, the deserted soul is deserted for ever: When the body loses
the soul at the death natural, its a sad loss, but the Resurrection will bring
them together again, but where the soul and God are parted in the spiritual
death, and the natural death finds them in this case, eternal death presently
seizes that soul, and that separation will be everlasting, that soul and
happiness will never meet.

6. Reason, The last reason to prove this Damnation to be exceeding great, is
Because it consists in great, and dreadful punishments. We shall make use of
this old, and common distinction of 1. Poena Damni The punishment of loss. 2.
Poena Sensus, The punishment of sense.


All evil is distinguished into 1. Malum culpae, The evil of sin. 2. Malum
poenae, The sin of punishment.


All evil of sin may be distinguished into 1. Inherent, our own sins. 2.
Adherent, our other men's sins,


All evil of punishment as before, into 1. Poenam Damni, the punishment of loss.
2. Poenam Sensus, the punishment of sense.


Man is a compound creature, consisting of a soul and body, a Celestial and
Terrestrial part, as God is Lord both by Creation, Preservation, and Purchase,
so he requires to be honored with both, with all of both, all the parts of our
bodies, and all the powers of our souls: If the Apostles inference hold
concerning one, (viz) Gods right of purchase, ye are bought with a price, and
therefore ought to glorify God, etc. It will conclude much more strongly, if
we take in all: ye are created with his power, preserved by his providence, as
well as bought with a price, therefore ye ought to glorify God both with your
bodies and souls, which are Gods. Here is the very qu^n^essence of reason that
God should have his own, that which is so much his own by a manifold right.
Give unto Caesar that which is Caesar's, and give unto God that which is Gods.
Now for such as give up themselves wholly to God in a way of grace and duty,
taking him to be their ^^rtion, and his Son to be their Lord, preferring their
interests before all others, serving them in the beauty of holiness, and power
of Godliness, giving up themselves bodies, souls, and spirits unto God upon the
account of the Covenant, desiring nothing more than that their hearts may be
whole with God, and they could be steadfast in his Covenant, making God and
Jesus Christ the joy of their hearts, and breath of their lives, and resolve to
continue so doing to the death, God has provided for them suitable joys and
pleasures in the life to come; Rational delights for their reasonable souls,
and sensible delights for their glorified bodies. Mistake not, far be it from me
to say, or you to imagine that the glorified Saints shall enjoy such carnal
delights in heaven, which sensual, and flesh pleasing men do make their heaven
upon earth, that were a conceit better beseeming a Turk than a Christian, the
Proselytes of Mahomet have dreamed of such an earthly, or rather hellish
heaven, by fancying such an Utopian Paradise into which the unclean may enter,
and the pleasures of sin shall meet them. The sensible pleasures to be enjoyed
there are such as sort, and suite with the sublimated senses of glorified
bodies and no other.

And as God has prepared such suitable joys and pleasures for such as love
and serve him in sincerity, even joys for Souls, and pleasures for bod^es,
for those that glorify him with Souls (...) so on the contrary those that will
(...) ^ting call, nor close with his (...), in accepting his dear Son, (...)
great Salvation offered with him, but remain sworn vassalls to the Devil,
World, and Flesh giving up the parts and powers of their Souls and Bodies to
serve sin in the lust of it, These shall receive wages according to their work,
as they polluted themselves with filthiness of the flesh and spirit, and
dishonored God with their Souls and Bodies, so God will punish them
accordingly, their Souls with rational punishments, tribulation and anguish
shall be upon the Soul of every one that does evil, and their bodies with
sensible, which the word shaddows out by fire and brimstone.

These two sorts of Torments are briefly contained in those Scriptures, Isay.
66.24. Mark. 9.44. In the worm that dies not, and the fire that never goes
out. In which expressions expositors conceive the holy Ghost alludeth unto two
Kinds of burialls of dead corpses, some were interred in the earth, and out of
those worms would breed, which would eat them up, and never leave devouring
till all were consumed, an Ancient gives this account of the degrees of that
annihilation, which resolves the body into its principle of nullity. Caro in
putredinem, putredo in vermes vermis in pulvere, pulvis in nihilum redigitur.
The flesh is turned into rottenness, that rottenness into worms, those worms
into dust, and that dust is reduced to nothing.

Other bodies were not buried in the earth, but were burned with fire, and
reduced to ashes, and those ashes were reserved in urnes. Only here is the
difference, this worm is not like that that devours bodies, for when the body
is consumed, that worm dies, nor is this fire like that that burns carcasses,
for when the carcases are burnt, that fire goes out, but this is ignis
inextinguibilis unquenchable fire.

By this never dying worm we are to understand the worm of an accusing, and
tormenting conscience, that is ever gnawing, and hereby we may understand all
rational torments of which the buffetings of conscience are the chiefest.

And by this fire that never goes out, we are to understand the torments of
sense, set off by burning, because that was the most torturing death that was
inflicted by the Jews; but to open these a little more fully, we will take
them as they lie before us, and speak of them apart.

1 Rational torments provided for damned Souls are a part, and the greatest
part of the torments of Hell, for which this deserves to be called Great
Damnation. Now as the Soul is distributed into the understanding, will, and
affections, so we may assign unto these soveral faculties their peculiar
torments, I only intend to touch upon them to give you a taste, and not to enter
upon any topicall, and methodicall discourse concerning them.

1 They shall be plagued in their understandings, by seeing, and knowing, and
feeling themselves to be irrecoverably lost, and intolerably miserable: Here
the messengers of the Lord, knowing the terrors of the Lord, did cry alowd to
give warning of their sin, and danger, and duty, they did throw Hellfire in
their faces, and so gaster them with the thunder and lightning of Hell and
damnation, that they could never be at quiet, but were even tormented before
their time; and when they had done their uttermost, when they had studied, and
preached, and prayed, and waited, and wept themselves into consumptions, in
seeking to them, and to God for them, that they might be saved, they could make
no better a report of their embassy to him that sent them, but to this effect.
Lord, who has believed our report, or to whom has the arm of the Lord been
revealed? In which seat does that Sou^ si^, in what town is his habitation, or
in what family dwells he that was dead and is alive, that was lost and is
found? Some of us, thy unworthy servants, Lord, have through undeserved mercy
been preachers ten, some twenty, some thirty, some forty years and more, to
such and such congregations, we have preached some hundreds, some of us
thousands of Sermons, and through grace we have endeavored to do it faithfully
in our measure, we have taught publikly and from house to house, we have spoken
with authority, and dealt personally and familiarly with the souls of
refusers, and all was but lost labor upon them, though not a labor in vain
to our selves: Will not this be a sad hearing for thousands, when those, that
have been watchmen for their souls, must come to give up this account with
grief; But what will the Lord say to this? Will he say to those that would not
be taught, be ignorant still, and to those that would not be reformed, be
disobedient still, no surely, it may well be doubted whether the Lord had not
formerly seared them up in their ignorance and profaneness, with such an
hardening of their hardness by inflecting senslesness for their affecting
senslesness: But now it shall be otherwise, the ignorant shall be no longer
ignorant, the drunkard, swearer, who monger, sabboth-breaker shall be so no
longer, they shall see with their eyes, and hear with their ears, and
understand with their hearts, though they shall never be converted, nor be
healed; Lord thy hand is lifted up, said the Prophet Isay, and they will not
see, thy wrath was in the threatening, they saw a black clowd rising, and a
driving storm coming, and would not beware, but now they shall see, volentes,
nolentes, willing or nilling they shall hear and understand, and be ashamed,
and confounded.

Then shall the damned know good and evil, as the Angels that kept not their
first estate know it, and as the Devil persuaded our first parents to know it,
to know the excellency of good by the misery of evil, by a woeful
experimental knowledge, as light is known by darkness, or sweetness by
bitterness. Then they shall be fully convinced in their judgments of that,
which no art of ours, no evidence of the spirit could prevail with them to
believe, that Gods justice is as infinite as his mercy, and his mercy no larger
than his truth: That Christ is only a refuse for humble, penitent, believing
sinners, and none else, that Hell is as hot, and eternity full as long as Gods
word, and Ministers have told them.

2 They shall be plagued in their consciences; The conscience is taken to be a
part of the practical understanding: Scientia cum scientia, a reflex knowledge
joined with a direct knowledge, and most of the rational torments of the
damned are discharged upon conscience, and therefore the worm of conscience as
instar omnium is synechdochically, put for for all. If a wounded conscience
were an intolerable burden upon earth, surely a damned conscience will be much
more intolerable in Hell. Some do cut this worm of conscience into three
pieces, but cut it into an hundred, and it will never die.

1. Memoria praeteritorum. 2. Sensus praesentium. 3. Metus futurorum.
1. The remembrance of things past. 2. The sense of present misery. 3. The fear
of wrath to come.
But I may not enlarge upon these particulars, least it swell this part of our
discourse, that it will not hold proportion with the rest.

While they lived here, though the mighty word managed by Sons of thunder, did
often grate upon conscience, that their sins were hardly the pleasures of sin
for a season, yet the spirit of slumber did often fall upon them, and they
might perhaps fall into some pleasing dream while that sleep lasted; or they
might be seared with an hot iron, and made past feeling, but when the pit shuts
her mouth upon the sinner, the conscience opens hers, and opens it wide, and
opens it so as it shall never be shut more, the conscience is all feeling, and
the sinner can never hope for any flattering anodine from his bribed
conscience, but must endure conscience as Judge Jury, and Witness and
Executioner for ever and ever. When a sinner in hell shall look back upon his
time upon earth, and consider that God made him a reasonable creature fit to
perform unto him reasonable service, and revealed his righteous will in his law
and Gospel, both for matter and manner of his service; and g^ve him his lot of
being, not only in the bosom of his Church, and in Gospel times, but in
reforming times, when the Sun was broken out of a cloud, and shined in
strength, and did strive with him by his Spirit in ordinances and providence,
making many gracious offers of Christ, and with Christ himself, and Spirit, and
all things belonging to their peace, saying and swearing that he takes no
delight in the death of sinners, entreating, and beseeching them to be
reconciled, to return and live; expostulating with them why they will dye, why
they will not be gathered, waiting with invincible patience, and, a very
miracle of long-suffering, when it will once be; yet after all this, after
Christ, and mercy, and grace have been offered, and refused, after sin has
been reproved and yet continued in; Faith and other graces have been pressed,
of as absolute necessity to Salvation, and never heeded, duty has been taught,
and never performed, seasons and opportunitys have been offered and all
neglected and frustrated; and now to consider that there shall never be one
call more, one offer of grace more, one opportunity to be saved more, they are
all lost and lost for ever, this makes the heart to sink and dye, and this is
the worm of conscienc^ that never dies.

Sinners believe it, though you can now slight Christ at your pleasure, and
wilfully neglect this great Salvation, and deipise the riches of Gods patience
and long-suffering and will not be brought to repentance, all the cords of Love
cannot draw you to it, and neither scourges, nor scorpions can drive you: when
this shall be looked back upon in hell (and the time is near) it will prove the
most torturing torment in the bottomless pit, the most tormenting torture that
the damned can meet with through all eternity: Then let the stundiest sinner
refuse to submit to the sentence of Damnation, if he can, let him turn away his
ear from the clamours of his conscience, if he can, let him break prison, and
get out of hell, if he can, or if he cannot (as it is more than infinitely
impossible) then let men set themselves sericusly and seasonably to the
preventing of it, and make use of Gods gracious warnings, that they never come
into those torments.

3. They shall be plagued in their Wills, with stubborness, and wilfulness: God
would and they would not, here; they would, and God would not, when they were
departing hence, but neither they nor God will, when they come to hell: the
sinner that could not be wrought upon to be made willing in the time of Love,
shall be of obdurate, that he shall be wilful in the day of his wrath: sins of the
damned do partake much of that wilfulness that is in the sinners against the
Holy Ghost here, as here they sin willingly, so there they sin wilfully. As by
Adam's sin mankind was bound up to good, and let loose to evil, and that is all
the moral freewil they have, till through regeneration, the Son has made them
free indeed, so after judgment is past upon them, the damned are utterly
disabled from all good, and their hearts are set in them to do wickedly, so
that they are sinning, and yet suffering, suffering and yet sinning for ever
and ever. The damned could well enough away with a hell of sin, but they cannot
endure a hell of suffering, if that might but be abated, it were the haven
where they would be.

Objection, But if sin be their delight, is this wilfulness in sinning, their
plague, and punishment.

Answer, yea and as great as any, for as Pharoah's hard heart was the biggest
plague in Egypt, that pulled down all the rest, so this sining frame of Spirit,
this sinning wilfully and with a hard heart, is one of the greatest plagues of
hell, for if the sins of a sinners life were not more than enough, this would
find fuel to supply the fire for ever and ever.

4. I shall but touch upon some of the passions, and pass over to the next.

Love, Joy, Hope, Desire being bereft of their objects, the damned are bereft
of them: they would not love God, nor what God loves here, and there they
cannot, they would not joy in believing here, with joy unspeakable and
glorious, the joy of grace, and Salvation would not relish with them, and now
they have nothing to rejoice in; while they lived they made a kind of a
mock-consolation of the pleasures of sin, of the Profits, pleasures, and
honors of the world, but these are passed away, as if they had never been,
Transit voluptas, dolor manet, and nothing remains but the doleful remembrance
of them. They had a door of hope once opened to them, and a prize in their
hands, if they had had hearts to use it, but now its shut and barred, and shall
never be opened more, and they are left to mourn as without hope, and without
God in that world. They had no desire of God, and Christ, and happiness, while
they lived here, or no more but a carnal desire, as Balaam desired the death of
the righteous without their life, so they desired happiness without holiness,
and glory without grace, and there the desire of their Souls shall never be
toward his name, or if they could never so much desire to get out of the
bottomless pit, there can be no redemption.

The tormented and tormenting passions which will find the damned suffering
work in their Souls world without end, are those that are contrary to these
forementioned affections, I shall trouble you but with three.

1. Hatred, which is loves contrary. 2. Grief, which is joys contrary. 3. Fear,
or despair which is hopes contrary.
1. As there is no love in Hell, so there is all Hatred, and if hatred, envy,
and malice do gnaw so greedy, like hellish vultures upon the hearts of the
malicious here; If implacable anger, Ira furor brevis est.
which is more than furor brevis, do so macerate the Sons of violence, when
their blood-thirsty rage is not satisfied: How will this passion work, when
they come to hell? If they hate God, and the Saints, and one another with such
bitter hatred upon earth: surely the matter will not be mended when they come
to hell; besides that, that they shall hate God, as God abhors them, and that
they shall hate the Saints, that are gathered to the congregation of the
firstborn, whom God has secured in his pavilion from the strife of tongues.
They shall like mad Dogs, or enraged Lions discharge their envenomed spleens
upon one another: Those that have been fratres in malo, brethren in iniquity,
and have walked hand in hand in the counsel of the ungodly, and have enticed
one another into Satan's snares: and accompanied and encouraged, and hardened one
another in the, ways of sin, and hindered one another repentance and
conversion; those that could go in troops to the harlots houses, and bear one
another company days and nights at an Alehouse, and could swear, and be
drunk, and whore, and revel, and rant together, like so many hellish furies
that had broke prison, or hell had spued them out upon earth, and cast them up
as the foam and scumme of the bottomless pit, with what dejected, and fell
countenances will these look upon one another in hell? People that have been
lost by the neglect of Magistrates cursing their Magistrates, O you Princes of
Sodom, you should have been nursing fathers to us, and you have cut our
throats: your care should have been that your subjects should have lived under
you in all godliness and honesty, but you, like the unjust Judge, that neither
feared God, nor reverenc't man, gave up your Kingdoms and power to the Beast,
or Dragon, the Pope or Devil: Whereas you should have served God with your
might, and if it had been possible have set a Candle upon every Candlestick,
and countenanc't and protected a godly and learned, and laborious Ministry, and
not muzled their mouths, and have stopped the mouths of g^insayers, and
seducers, of blasphemers and heretics, and should have been copies for your
subjects to live by; but you were taken up in minding and plotting high things
for your selves and relations, (but the things of God and heaven, the highest
things were none of them) oh you cutthroats both of Churches and
Commonwealths, you are justly in this condemnation, and we that have perished
through your base negligence, and notorious ungodliness must be here with you
cursing and banning you for evermore.

Souls that have been lost through the neglect of Ministers will do the like by
their Ministers, oh you daubers with untempered mortar, you cursed
time-servers, and men-pleasers, you Wolves in sheeps clothing, that instead of
feeding did devour the flock, you cried peace, peace, and made us flatter our
selves with mercy, mercy, what peace is to the wicked now? what mercy for us
and you? whether had it been better believing God, or your lying visions; oh
you soul-murderers, our blood is required at your hands, but we must be damned
with you, world without end. The Quakers, and the Devils agents, the Factours
for Rome and Hell do rail at good Ministers now, and call them hirelings, and
limbs of Antichrist, but the bad Ministers that have fed upon the milk, and
clothed themselves with the fleeces of the flock, and have neither fed nor
taught the sheep and lambs of their fold; they will be ready to tear out their
own throats, they will then take shame unto themselves, and befool and bebeast
themselves, and the Souls that have perished by their neglect will heap worse
reproaches upon them for ever and ever.

Hearers that have been deceived by the damnable doctrines of seducers, that
have been led away by the errors of the wicked into Blaspemies and Heresies,
they will say to their Sect-Masters, as Paul said to Elimas the Sorcerer, Act.
13.10. O full of subtlety and all mischeife you children of the Devil, and
enemies of all righteousness, you have not ceased to pervert the right ways of
the Lord: You have cumbred the Church with your wranglings about circumstances,
while the substantials and vitals of invisible Christianity have been left
languishing, you have tithed Mint, Anniss, and Cummine, and neglected justice
and judgment, you have filled the world with doubtful disputations de lana
caprina, of things of naught; while the great truths of the Law and Gospel, are
unknown, and unbelieved, and unpractised: you do but beat your drums, and fill
the Church with calmour, like the Idolaters at Tophet, while the children are a
burning, that the cry may not be heard; whiles you are robbing the Church of
its Fundamentals, and poisoning the people with false doctrine, and Heterodox
principles; you were the men that taught others to fight with shadows, while
you carried away the substance, and perplexed people about Churchmember-ship,
and Baptism; and questions about the Law, till you had left them neither
Church, Savior, nor Gospel: Then shall the poor silly Women that were led
captive by House-creepers (as the Apostle calls them) let fly against these
seducers. O you sons of the Deceiver-General and daughters of the Sorceress and
the whore, oh ye children of Beelzebub, and sons of Which-craft, you are they
that have dealt with us as the Devil dealt with our first Parents, or Jacob
with Esau, that gave us an apple for Paradise, and a mess of Pottage for a
Birthright.

Family-Members that have been lost through the carelessness of Family-masters,
they will let fly against the oversights of such overseers: O you caterers for
the Devil, your houses should have been nurseries for the Church, and they have
been sties, and kennels to breed up hel-hounds in, you should have brought up
your children in the fear and nurture, and admonition of the Lord, and done
your endeavor to make your servants Gods servants, you should have read the
word of God to them, and talked of it with them at your downlying, and
uprising; you should have sought God early and late, with them and for them,
and according to the Commandment should have preserved the Sabbath in your
Families, as well as observed it in your selves. But there was nothing but
Prayerlesness all the week, and profaneness all the Sabbath; when you hired us,
you gave us your carelessness for our earnest, and now have brought upon your
selves and us Damnation for our wages. The neglected wife will say to the
neglecting husband, as Zipora once to Moses, Thou have been a bloody husband to
me, and the graceless child to the graceless father, thou have been a bloody
Butcher to me, and the unprofitable servant to the ungodly Master, thou have
been a cruel Master to me: God will say to careless Brethren; The voice of your
Brothers blood cries for vengeance, and those that live here as neighbors and
friends in their dull, carnal way of neighborhood and friendship, will cry
sin and shame upon one another, as the greatest foes and most cruel enemies; O
the heart-burnings that hellfire shall kindle, the everlasting grudges that
shall find Fomentations, there is the malice that burns and boyls in that fiery
lake in the breasts of the damned; 'Twas not for nothing that Dives desired his
brethren should be kept out of that place of torment, one reason amongst the
rest may be conceived to be this, that their sins being augmented by his, and
they hardened in them by his society, and example, his torments at their coming
to hell should receive an augmentation.

2. As there is no joy in hell, there is Grief with a witness, yea, with a
thousand thousand witnesses: Men count it their Solomon upon earth to have
fellow sufferers, but this will be no palliation to the pangs of hell, but
augmentations rather, especially by the sins of others, which have been made
ours by accessoriness. Here they would not greive with godly sorrow, but there
they shall greive, though with sorrow as far from godly sorrow as the heaven is
from hell. How many with worldly sorrow have grieved themselves to death;
taking up Rachells Lamentation, perhaps for children, or some other relation in
the flesh, mourning, refusing to be comforted? But this hellish sorrow does far
exceed it, every pang of it is a heartbreaking sorrow; we usually say, were it
not for hope the heart would break, and all the mourning in hell is mourning
without hope: Ezekiel makes mention of a book written within and without with
Lamentations and mournings and We, and the Damned have no other book to read
in: If they look to their book without, the book of Scriptures, by that they
stand condemned, and according to that, sentence is past upon them. If they
look to the book of conscience, the book within, that contains nothing but
matter of mourning and everlasting Lamentation, nothing but what will cause
Weeping and howling and gnashing of teeth.

3. As there is no hope in hell, so there is fear and horour in such
superabundant measure, that like a thousand Milstones, or Mountains of lead
they would sink the Soul to the bottom of that Sea of wrath, were it not
bottomless. They shall be raging mad with fear, and desperate horror at the
fearful sights that their eyes shall see, and the fearful things that their
ears shall hear. They had no fear of God before their eyes while they lived in
the flesh, they could fear the face and frowns of man, who was but Dust and
Ashes, but the dreadful everliving God, that ought to be feared, he was not
feared; we could never bring them to the beginning of wisdom, the fear of the
Lord, with all that we could say or do, though we have studied to speak words
that might cut like swords, and have preached them Sermons as keen as Razors:
Though we have improved all our wit and skill in handling that Sacrificing
knife that pierces to the dividing asunder of the Soul, and Spirit, and Joints
and Marrow, though we have in our severe denunciations of certain judgments
spoken thunder claps and firebrarnds, and thrown he^l fire amongst them in many
and many a Sermon, yet they were so cross-grained, and knotty, that they were
fearless in the midst of real fears, though they could fear where no fear was;
but now the case is altered, before they would not fear always to purchase
blessedness, Pro. 28.14. and now they shall fear always, with Gods curse to
boot; now they shall fear with a vengeance, and God shall set a mark upon
them, even Cain's mark, a perpetual quaking, not a horn in 's forehead, as the
Master of Fancy, the Jewish Rabbis have some of them thought, but a hornet in
his conscience. The curse that God threatened to the Rebellious children of
disobedience, Deuteronomy. 28.65. shall be inflicted upon them, God shall give them a
trembling heart. They would not sanctify the Lord in their hearts, nor make
him their fear and dread, when he would have undertaken to be for a Sanctuary
against all other fear, Isay 8.13, 14. and therefore now a confluence of all
other fears shall flow in upon them like the billovvs of the raging, Sea,
which cannot rest, one in the neck of another: Here the very name of the Devil
is like a Bugbear to children; if they have but thoughts of seeing him in
their solitary vvalks, especially when they are in the dark; they are ready to
creep into corners to hide themselves, If they do but dream of him, how do
their thoughts trouble them till they awake; and if they see him indeed, though
he do not appear in the most formidable shape, they are ready to fall dead, or
mad. Oh what will they do when they shall be cast into the same prison with all
the Devils in hell, and they must continue shut up with them for ever? What
fear and trembling shall then come upon them, what Tribulation and anguish
shall fill their Souls to the very brim? What horror and desperation shall
over-whelm the damned, when the King of fears, the death natural, has
delivered them up unto the Second death, when fear and anguish is still coming
upon them, and they shall never know when Wrath is come upon them to the
uttermost, it shall all be so to the uttermost, and all without end, despairing
Cain's Language differs now in the several readings: one runs thus, My
punishment is greater than I can bear, Genesis 4.13. the other thus, Mine iniquity
is greater than that it can be forgiven, then both these shall be true of all
the damned, their Sins are impardonable, and their torments unsuffereable;
Christ's merit cannot then satisfy for their sins, neither can Gods mercy
pardon them; God and Christ can as soon cease to be what they are as to do it.
The case of the damned for ever shall be much like that of the wicked, that
shall be alive immediately before Christ's coming to judgment, Luke 21.25, 26.
There shall be signs in the Sun, and in the Moon, and in the Stars; that is, if
we consult Mat. 24.29. The Sun shall be darkened, and the Moon shall not give her
light, and the Stars shall fall from heaven, and the powers of the Heavens
shall be shaken, etc. When upon the world God shall rain Stars, and the ungodly
may ever expect when he shall rain snares, fire and brimston, storm and tempest
to be the portion of the wicked to drink; When these are but the beginning of
sorrows, and more pangs are coming upon them as upon a woman in travel; as the
Evangelist Luke goes on, upon the earth there shall be distress of Nations and
perplexity, the Sea and Waves roaring; Men's hearts failing them for fear, and
for looking after those things which are coming: for all the judgments that
are come, they shall still be eaten up with fear of further wrath, and
indignation that is still a coming.

2. Sensible torments provided for the bodies of the damned are also a part of
those punishments: which do denominate this to be GREAT DAMNATION: As the
former were comprehended under the Worm that dies not, so these under the fire
that never goes out; As the torments of conscience were put for all rational
torments belonging to the Soul, so the torments of the sense of feeling, here
signified by fire, is put for all sensible torments belonging to the body. I
shall first discover unto you, why the torments of hell are compared to fire:
The Jews before their Jurisdiction was taken away by Herod, who was sur-named
the great, primus ex alienigenis Rex Judeorum, the first of forraigners that
was King of the Jews, had three Courts of Judicature: one was ruled by three
men, wherein were tried money matters, and lesser causes. The 2 did consist of
23 Judges, who heard and decided weighty affairs, and matters of life and
death: And these two were called the lesser Shanedrim. The highest of all,
which was called the great Shanedrim, had 71 Judges, who had the hearing of
most weighty affairs, as the matter of a whole Tribe, or an high Priest, or a
false Prophet. Now the punishments that their Judicatories did infl ct, were of
four Sorts. 1. Hanging, 2. Beheading, 3. Stoning, 4. Burning. And because
burning was the most dreadful, therefore does our Savior ^llude unto that in
comp^ring of hell torments to fire.

Neither is it every kind of fire, but the fire of Gehenna; now that Gehenna
was the Valley of Hinnom, a place in the suburbs of Jerusalem, where Idolaters
offered their children half burnt to Idols; Which place was also called Tophet
from a word in the Hebrew tongue which signifies a Drum, because they did beat
drums to deaden the cries of the Infants while they were a burning: Indeed
those half burnings do best shadow out unto us those of hell, where the d^mned
shall be fuel for everlasting fire, ever burning and never consumed, ever
dying, and never dead. Its also called fire and brimstone, as if fire it self
were not hot enough to shadow out the terror of it.

I might here enlarge upon all the senses, as we did before upon the faculties,
but the very torments of the Soul are the very Soul of torments, and do as far
surpass bodily torment as the Soul does the body. And I have enlarged so much
upon that, that its time to think of contracting here.

Yet for all the have, know that as Heaven is likened to a Kingdom, where there
is a confluence of Pleasures, so Hell is compared to a Prison, where there is
an inundation of Miserys Its called in the Gospel (...) utter darkness, being
furthest from God the Fountain of life and glory say some. Because compared to
a prison say others, and prisons were usually without the gates of Cities, and
they were dark places, especially the dungeons, where malefactors were as it
were buried alive: Without are dogs says John of the new Jermsalem, Revel
22.15. Within are children, but without dogs. And the Apostle calls Infidels
such as are without, Col. 4.5. without indeed if you read all those withouts
Ephesians. 2.12. Without Christ, without the Commonwealth of Israel, without the
Covenant of promise, without hope, and without God in the world; and surely
those that are in hell are, and everlastingly shall be without in all these
respects: Now as in a Prison all the senses have their punishments, The Eyes
are punished with darkness, the Ears with complaints of fellow prisoners, the
Smell with loathsome stinks, the Palate with the hunger or coursest provisions,
the Touch with the hard earth, and cold, and nakedness: So in the prison of
hell there is. (...) the blackness of darkness for the sight, besides that cursed
crew of the Devils and damned, the displeased countenance of the Almighty, and
the sight of him who^ their sins have pierced: Their ears shal^^ filled with
roarings, and howlings, and gnashing of teeth, besides the curses, and
blasphemies of the damned. Their smell shall be suffocated with fire and
brimston; their taste glutted with Gall and Wormwood, and the dreggs of the Cup
of the Lords Fury. And their touch with fire, with fire unquenchable. Observe
lastly that our Enquiries concerning Hell are here answered by fire, to note
out unto us the extremity of hell torments. Fire is as great a torment as our
capacities can reach unto, but if they can reach higher, the terrors of those
infernal torments are still out of our reach; As a fire painted on a wall in
the story of Dives and Lazarus is nothing in comparison of our Culinary fire,
so that fire that burns upon our hearths is but like a painted fire for heat to
the flames of hell. Suppose a woman should lie in the extremest pangs of
childbirth for 100 years; or a man should lie languishing under the continual
pains of stone, and gout, and colic for 1000. Suppose a Traitor should be
upon the Rack as many years as there are drops in the Sea; or a Malefactor
should be a burning as many years as there are Sands on the Seashore: Suppose
Captives should be detained in the Turkish G^llies, or in that hell upon earth,
the Devils Slaughterhouse, the Spanish Inquisition for as many years as there
are Stars in the Firmament. These if they were real would be amazing and
confounding considerations able to shake to pieces the stoutest heart of the
most daring Nimrod; but these that we have been speak^ng of are so infinitely
beyond them, ut nihil supra; that nothing can be more transcendedently
inconceivable, and unspeakable; AETERNITY is of such a length, that when we
have run to our wits end, we are but at the beginning of it, if that Ever and
Never, though short in syllables, and sound, yet are so long in sense and
signification, that they are the savor of life and death to the saved, and
damned; ever with the Lord, and never taken out of his Hands, is the savor of
life to life to the one; ever with the Devil, and never redeemed from hell, is
the savor of death unto death to the other. Eternity is the very bottom of the
bottomless pit, though the torments were easless, yet if they were not also
endless they might be the better endured, But when thousands, and ten
thousands, and Millions, and thousands of Millions, and Millions of Millions,
and all the numbers in Arithmetic are added, and put into one sum total; when
the drops, and sands of the Sea, and stars of the Firmament, and all hairs upon
all heads from the worlds creation to the day of Judgment shall be compared with
the years of Eternity: Nondum finis, nondum medium, nondum principium
aeternitatis designatur, they are so far from reaching to the end, that they
cannot reach the Middle, no not the Beginning of eternity. Sic parvis magna,
thus have I given you a Slender account of those great punishments which
constitute this Great Damnation, and so ends the last of the Reasons.

USE.
The only proper use to be made of a Sermon of Damnation; that it may be the
power of God through faith unto Salvation, is a use of Terror set home by a
Son of thunder unto the consciences of secure sinners that are settled on their
lees, frozen in these dreggs, and lie soaking in their lusts. As the Doctrine
of Salvation may be the savor of death, and aggravate the Damnation of
unprofitable hearters, so the Doctrine of Damnation may be the savor of life,
and tend to the furtherance of Salvation to such as hear in hearing, that hear
and understand, and are converted, and healed. The Doctrine of Salvation like a
pleasant Song, may lull sinners into a Spiritually Lethargy, when the Doctrine
of Damnation may awake them, and discover to them their danger to prevent it.
Oh that I could now speak with the tongue of Angels; or rather that the Lord
would speak unto you by the words of a man of like infirmities with your
selves, your fellow creature and servant, who is but dust and ashes; oh that
the Lord would either give me the tongue of the Learned, or speak effectually
by my Stammering tongue, and open me a wide door of utterance and entrance!
Though I speak of a dreadful Theme, no less than Great Damnation, yet afford
me the hearing; Its better to hear it than to feel it, you had better hear a
man coolly telling you of the greatness of the thing, than to hear an angry God
terribly denouncing the greatness of the sentence; I may bespeake your
attention as Elihu did Jobs, Job. 33 6, 7. Behold I am according to your wish
in Gods stead, I also am formed out of the clay; Behold my terror shall not
make you afraid, neither shall my hand be heavy upon you. But here I must lift
up my voice, and cry aloud, or else I cannot wake you, (and he had need to have
a stronger voice than mine that shall speak loud enough for the dead to hear.)
When sinners are so supine and negligent that they can hear the wise and
powerful charms of the Gospel with Adders ears, and so dead asleep that they
can hear the words of the curse and bless themselves in their hearts, and
promise themselves peace when God proclaims War, and says again and again no
peace to the wicked, I say 48.22. and 57.21. When you can come to the
ordinances, and sit as Gods people do, as if you did delight to know his ways,
and enquire after the ordinances of justice, and yet are no more moved with the
sad, or glad tidings of the law or Gospel, than the Seats you sit upon, or the
Stones you tread upon; no more moved with a discouse of judgment to come, or
shaken with the breath of Gods displeasure than the Walls, or Pillars that you
lean unto; The dead underground are as sensible of what is spoken as the dead
above ground; how justly may we fear that the Lord will answer you according to
your Idols? What need have the Lords servants to step into the gapp, and step
betwixt you and danger and seek the Lord that he may not give a hardening
commission to his word, and ministry, for if he once bind there is no loosing,
and if he shut none can open.

The proper effect of this great Damnation is to strike terror through the
spirits of such as are within reach of it; And I have to do with men and women
that have reasonable Souls, into which God has put the affections of fear and
love; and the same God has put into his word promises and threatenings suitable
to these affections, that they may be drawn with the promises as with the cords
of love, or driven with the threats as with the rod of men; you have heard of
great Salvation, a mighty motive to draw you, and great Damnation a mighty
engine to drive you; I have set before you life and death, blessing and
cursing^, oh that the Lord would persuade you to make Mary's choice, to choose
life, that your Souls, your precious Souls may live and live for ever: Since I
have undertaken this expedition, as David did his against Goliath, not having
any confidence in Sword or Spear, but laying all the stress upon the Name and
power of the living God, I will not despair, but that the Doctrine here
delivered may take hold upon some hearts that may be savingly bettered by it.

Sinners remember that the time is at hand when the Lord Jesus must be
revealed; and the great Judge is even ready to take the Throne to sit upon life
and death; and all both quick and dead must be gathered before him; and those
that have made light of Salvation offered, Christ will make light of their
Damnation inflicted; Those that take counsel against the Lord and against his
Christ, saying let us break their bonds asunder, and cast their cords from us;
He that sits in heaven shall laugh them to scorn, the Lord shall have them
in derision, Then he shall speak unto them in his wrath, and vex them in his
sore displeasure, yet have I set my King upon my holy hill of Sion, The
despisers of Christ shall be confounded, and he alone shall be exalted in that day.

It is reported of Philip King of Macedon, that he caused his Page to come
every morning to his Chamber door with this good morrow, Memento, Philippe, te
esse mortalem, O Philip remember that thou art a man, and must dye like a man,
as Moses says in Psalm. 82.6, 7. I have said ye are Gods, but ye shall dye like
men, and you Princes shall fall like others. Its reported of the ancient
Egyptians that in their great feasts they caused a Deaths head to be carried
about the Table, to put them in mind of their mortality, a frolic that the
Epicures and Belly-gods of our times, that sit-down to eat and drink, and rise
up to play, are not acquainted with: its reported of one of the Fathers, and I
think it is Hierome: That he seemed always to hear that saying sounding in his
ear, Surgite mortui, venite ad judicium, arise you dead and come to judgment.
The meditations of death and judgment are excellent corosives to eat out the
heart of sin, and no less Sovereign preservatives to keep us upright. If we
add two more unto them, which this Scripture prompts us to take in, it will be
more than a double fence, it will be a double bar to keep out sin, and a double
cord to draw to God, and duty. The second that my Text adds are Hell and
Heaven, Salvation and Damnation; and these four put together are quatuor
novissima, the four last things, and will furnish us with excellent matter for
profitable meditation; Some advise to meditate of Death, some to think of
Judgment; some advise that we should remember Hell, others that above all we
should not forget Heaven; but, if they are of such force single to kill sin,
and quicken grace, to help the Spirit, and mortify the flesh, vis unita
fortior, when they join forces, they will do their work more effectually; I
shall therefore lay and leave them before you as the fittest subjects of daily
serious Meditation.

1. Death shall be the first in order, because it is first in time; the great
Statute of the Churches Magna Charta (the Scriptures) is recorded thus, Heb.
9.27. It is appointed unto all men once to dye: The Scriptures tell us,
examples tell us, all former generations tell us, experience tells us, our own
infirmities tell us that there is not that man living that shall not see death:
O what should dying men have to do with sin? surely not to hugg it in their
bosoms, and lodge it next their hearts, and let it reign in their mortal
bodies, and serve it in the lusts of it, but to kill, and crucify, and
mortify it, to kill it before they dye, to kill it which otherwise will kill
them, sin is the sting of death, and it makes death to be the King of fears to
a man in his sins, O death how bitter is thy remembrance to such a one? We dare
not dye in our sins. Balaam that lived the life of the wicked, did choose to
dye the death of the righteous; sin unrepented of is the worst pillow that a
man's head can lie upon on a dying bed; and sinners, if they can by the help of
a seared, or flattering conscience make a shift to dye quietly, that no bonds
appear in their death, no desperate horror open them an entrance into Hell,
yet the wicked shall not be able to stand in the Judgment, nor the sinners in
the congregation of the righteous; they may elude humane justice, or outface,
and out-brave it in men's courts, greatness may carry them off with power, or
poverty with pity; but righteous judgment shall be there dispensed by the
searcher of hearts to high and low according to their works; And this is
certain, that no unclean thing can enter into the Kingdom of Heaven; there is no
Purgatory to scour such as dye polluted, but as death leaves them, so shall
Judgment find them: There Is no knowledge, nor wisdom, nor invention in the
grave, says Solomon, O that they were wise to consider this, that they would
remember their latter end, says Moses on the behalf of Israel, noting what
David says, the only way to apply a man's heart to wisdom, is to pray to God
to teach him to number his days, Psalm. 90.12. And in another place the Prophet
notes that Jerusalems filthiness was in her skirts, because she remembered not
her latter end, Lament. 1.9. The only way to have all in a readiness at death,
to have calling and election made sure, and to have nothing to do but to dye
when death comes, is to write it in our memories, and to be often drawing it
out by meditation and conference; some will wear a ring with a deaths-head upon
their fingers, some will keep a dead man's scull in t^eir studyes, or closets,
some will have death pictured on their walls, or windows, some will have their
Coffins in their chambers, some will write Memento mori upon their books as
their Motto, remember death, all to help our dullness, and slowness of heart in
believing that our end is near, and our dissolution at hand: but those that
have gotten it deeply rooted in their hearts, and are careful to keep the
memory of death alive and quick in their meditations, are the only champions
that are like to give death a valiant encounter, and to come off with victory,
and triumph; Oh death where is thy sting? Oh grave where is thy victory? These
are likelyest to give Paul's farewell to the world: I have fought, I have
finished, I have kept, etc. henceforth is laid up for me a Crown of
righteousness, 2 Timothy 4.7, 8. and Romans 8.38. I am persuaded that neither death,
nor life, nor any other creature shall separate us from the love of God which
is in Christ Jesus. The frequent Meditation of death is an excellent means to
make us dye daily.

2. Judgment is the second, because it is deaths second, and after death
comes the judgment, and it is sure that we must all come to judgment, as
that we must once dye: We must all appear before the judgment Seat of Christ
to receive according to things done in the flesh, whether they be good or evil.
The word of God is abundant in setting this before us with all appurtenances
that do accommodate it, as 1. The Judge and his throne, and attendants, and his
work. 2 These. 1.7, 8. The Judge the the Lord Jesus. 2. His throne Heaven, shall
be revealed from heaven. 3. His attendants, with his mighty Angels, 4. His work
of justice, to render vengeance in flaming fire to them that know not God, and
that obey not the Gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ, and his gracious work, to be
made glorious in them that believe. 2. The books by which we must b^ judged, of
Scripture, and Conscience, Revel. 20.12. And I saw the dead small and great
stand before God, and the books were opened (i. e.) of Scripture, and
Conscience, and another book was opened (i. e.) the book of life, and the dead
were judged out of those things which were written in the books according to
their works. 3. The causes that must be heard and tried, good and bad, just and
unjust. Ecles. 12.14. God shall bring every work into judgment, with every
secret thing, whether it be good or evil. 4. The whole process, and final
sentence, Gods dealing with the good and evil to convict the one of sin unto
Damnation, the other of righteousness unto life; and the sentence passed on
them both, you shall find very punctually recorded Mat. 25. from 31. to the
end. Wherefore is the word so exact in all these, but to assure us that there
is nothing of greater certainty than death, and judgment.

O what should those have to do with sin that must be brought to judgment? If
they be brought to judgment in their sins, that is before they have confessed
and forsaken their sins, before they have accused and condemned themselves,
they cannot stand in the judgment. Can dust stand before a whirlwind, or
stubble before a consuming fire. Solomon throws this judgment as a stumbling
block in the way of licentious youth, to stop them in their full careere, and
to be a means to teach the young man how to cleanse his way. Eccles. 11.9.
Rejoice O young man in thy youth, and let thy heart cheer thee in the days of
thy youth, and walk in the ways of thine heart, and in the sight of thine
eyes; but know that for all these things God will bring thee to judgment. The
former part of that verse looks lovely in the eyes of a libertine, and speaks
to his very heart, but it has as sad a farewell as ever was heard: In the
former part the preacher speaks Ironically and in jest, but in the last he
speaks plainly and in good earnest, thou may if thou will do as thy list, but
do if thou dare, for know this, take it home with thee, and take it home to
thy heart, receive the point of this sword into the very heart of thy beloved
sin, and if it kill it not, or give it a deaths wound, tell thy self that thou
have a strong heart a heart that is sermon-proof, and tell God so, and desire
him day night to take away thy heart of stone, and to give thee an heart of
flesh.

3. Hell and condemnation is commended as the third subject of our Meditation;
for as after death comes the judgment, so after judgment comes the death;
Had not men need to fear double least they dye a double death; If men be so
scared at the face of the death natural, what should they be at the thoughts
of death eternal, in comparison whereof the other death is but a shadow of
death? It was said of Jezebells children, Revel. 2.23. I will kill her children
with death; Though all dye, yet believers are not killed with death; as the
Spirit directed John to say unto Sardis, Thou have a name that thou live and
art dead, Rev. 3.1. We may say the contrary of sound believers, they have but a
name to dye, and are alive; that is (the thing) which kills the Soul, that is
but (the name) which kills the body. This death beyond death is that which the
Scripture calls the second death^, Revel. 21.8. The fearful and unbelie^^ng,
and abominable, and murderers, and Whoremon^ers, and Sorcerers, and Idolaters,
and all Liars shall have their part in the lake which burns with fire and
brimstone, which is the second death, and Revel. 20.6. Blessed and holy is he
that has part in the first Resurrection, on such the second death has no
power. O what should men do with sin, when if they will have it, they must have
hell to boot! durst a malefactor play his pranks if the Judge looked on him
that must condemn him, and the torments were in sight that were prepared for
him? If sinners did but see God frowning upon them, and hell gaping for them;
if they did but see death before them, and Judgment beyond death, and hell
beyond Judgment, they could not surely sin with such a swinge as they do; they
could not sin so damnably without check and control: Sinners, do but go aside
once a day, and seriously meditate on the great damnation that you have heard
of, and the Eternity of it, but one half hour, and if you do not walk the more
warily, humbly, and circumspectly, say I am a Liar. One that writes the life of
Mr. M^. Fu^^^r it his Holy State.
Perkins reports of him that he did pronounce the word Damn with such an
emphasis, that it left an Echo in the ears of his hearers a long time after; Oh
that I could make such an impression of this Doctrine upon your Memories, that
it may stick like a barbed Arrow in your consciences, that may never be shaken
out until you break off your sins, and unfainedly turn to God, who is ready to
forgive abundantly, and to give liberally.

4. Heaven and Salvation is proposed as the fourth matter of meditation, and
both these last do follow Judgment, which sends the Goats on the left hand to
hell, and the Sheep on the right hand to heaven: The Libertines of the age
would persuade us that there is neither Hell nor Heaven, but what is in the
conscience; but let us assure our selves, if there were no other Hell or
Heaven, there would be none there; if a conscience excusing in well doing did
not flow from a Heaven in hope, and a conscience accusing for evil doing did
not proceed from a hell in fear, surely there would be no such consciences; let
the fancies of these vain men pass for strong delusions, and let us mind the
true sayings of the everlasting Gospel, which tell us, that as the wicked go
into everlasting punishment, so the righteous into life eternal. Matthew. 25.
ult. How positively, and alluringly does the Scripture speak of this blessed
and blessed making place, calling it the third Heaven. 2 Cor. 12.2. The throne
of God, I say 66.1. and we are directed to prefer our petitions to him as our
Father dwelling heaven, Mat. 6.9. An house not made with hands, eternal in the
Heavens. 2 Cor. 5.1. the seat of the blessed. The kingdom prepared for them
from the beginning of the world, Matthew. 25.34. shadowed out by the Mount Sion,
Heb. 12.22, 23, 24. and the new Jerusalem, Revel. 21.10. to the end, wherein
many excellent things are spoken of this City of God. But I have spoken so
largely both of the Prison of Hell, and the Paradise of Heaven in the
antecedent Doctrines of Salvation and Damnation, that the less may serve here.
O what should those do with sin that make it their refuge to lay hold on the
hope that is set before them. There Is no sin in heaven, and if unclean sinners
should be carried thither in their uncleanness, heaven would not be heaven to
them; Its the Saints holiness that makes heaven their happiness, and the grace
they bring thither that prepares them for that Joy unspeakable and glorious.
When we meet with temptations to sin let us remember Hell, with its
forerunners, death and judgment, and that will prompt us to say with Joseph,
How can I do this great wickedness and sin against God? Genesis 39.9. And when we
meet with temptations from sufferings, let us remember Heaven, and that will
prompt us to say with Paul, I count that the afflictions of this present world
are not worthy the glory which shall be revealed. When we are enticed to sin, let
us sit down and count the cost, it may cost our lives, it may cost our precious
Souls, it may loose us Heaven and Salvation for eternity; and when we are
discouraged in the ways of God, in laying out our selves to be wail our sins,
to treasure up grace, to perform duty, and not be weary of well doing, to
suffer patiently whatsoever can befall us for Christ's sake, then let us sit
down and count our gain: It will make us live comfortably, it will give us hope
in death, it will give us boldness in Judgment, it will save us from hell, it
will advance us to Heaven.

To wind up all let me speak close to you as once Paul did to Agrippa, as if he
would offer violence to force his belief: O Agrippa, believe thou the
Scriptures? I know thou believe. you that have read or heard these Lines do
you believe these things? I know you believe them; they are so set out in the
demonstration of the Spirit, and in power, that you cannot gainsay them; and
if you cannot contradict them, will you not believe them?

1. Do you believe Gospel-Salvation to be great Salvation? The Angels believe
it and admire it, 1 Pet. 1.12. The Saints believe it and adore it, Revel. 5.11,
13. The number of them that gave glory to God was ten thousand times ten
thousand, and thousands of thousands, and every creature in Heaven, and earth
and sea were heard to say, Blessing, Honor, Glory, and Power, be unto him that
sits upon the Throne, and to the Lamb for ever and ever.

The Devils believe and envy it. The damned believe it, and the loss of it is
that neverdying worm that renders them restless; and whether you will now
believe it or no, the time is coming when you will believe and confess it with
hearts as full of anguish, as ever they can hold: O believe it now and be happy
for ever, and the Lord help your unbelief, and make you believers by the
exceeding greatness of his Omnipotent Power, and according to the working of
his mighty power; Oh that the King of Saints would command those everlasting
doors of your understandings and wills to be opened to give entrance to the
King of glory; that you may embrace, and receive thankfully this great
Salvation, that you may live and dye upon the faithfulness and truth of that
acceptable and accepted saying. That Jesus Christ came into the World to save
sinners.

2. Do you believe Gospel neglecting to be great sin? Those that are truly
enlightened, and touched with the fear of God do think so: those that are under
the convictions, and compunctions of the Spirit of bondage for this sin do
think so, they are ready to depend, and give up themselves as lost, and utterly
undone under the load of it; this is still ready at hand to make up the sum
total of their confessions, we have added to all our transgressions of thy law
this Monster, that we have resisted and slighted thy gracious Gospel. Against
thee, thee have we sinned and done this evil: O be merciful to our sin, to
this of all sins, for it is great. The infinite mercy of God and merit of
Christ; and mighty Spirit of grace and adoption, revealing, offering, and
applying that mercy and merit as balsome to the wounded Spirit, has much ado
to bear it up from sinking under so insupportable a burden. Enlightened sinners
will believe it at the last, when they are under the arrest of death, then they
will be ready with Cain and Spira to fill all the ears about them with their
despairing complaints, then they could seek the blessing with tears as Esau
did, and could be content to fill heaven and earth with their roarings, if that
would help them; Believe it, Sirs, the Devil that tempts you to make light of
this Salvation now, and presents it as a Molehill, will then turn the other end
of the prospective, and make it as bigg as a Mountain, and persuade you it is
greater than that it can be forgiven. How much better were it that you should
now believingly receive in this truth in the power of it, that where sin has
abounded grace may super-abound, and that you may in time leave and loath this
sin before it be your everlasting undoing.

3. Do you believe that Great Damnation remains for such as dye in this sin?
that the wrath of God abides on them here, and a sorer punishment, and more
fiery indignation will abide on them (if conversion prevent not) world without
end? Those that are in hell already do believe it, yea, they know not how to
evade the believing it. They do curse those Mountebank Preachers that heal men's
wound with oily words, that speak Placentia, things that may please itching
ears, rather than things that may profit unbelieving hearts. Yea, they do
charge it heavily upon their deceived and own deceitful hearts, that when they
heard the words of the Curse, and threats of Damnation caused them to bless
themselves in their cursed practices, though they added drunkenness to thirst,
and Gospelrefusing to Law-transgressing, till all curses written and unwritten
came in tumbling upon them like mighty waters. How much better were it for men
to carry about with them a hell in their consciences, than to be carried
captive by the Devils into this hell of torments? How much easier were it for
them to descend every day into hell by meditation, than at their dying day to
be doomed unto hell by condemnation.

Pliny writes of the Lions whelps that he is at first much given to Sleeping,
but being once awakened, and scared with the hideous roaring of the old Lion,
sleeps ever after with his eyes open; The application is to our present purpose
very pertinent. Those that set light by Salvation are much given to sleeping;
they hear in the Text Damnation thundered out against such sleepers, like the
roaring of a Lion Rampant; I heartily wish that this use may be made of it,
that our consciences may be so thoroughly awakened, to see our sin and danger
and duty, that we may always sleep with the eye of conscience open, and that
we may resolve not to suffer our eyes to sleep, nor our eyelids to slumber,
nor the temples of our heads to take any rest, till we have made this great sin
our great Lamentation; till we have great and grounded probability of escaping
this great Damnation, and till we have believed, and prayed, and lived our
selves into some settled and imfalliable persuasions of our obtaining of this
great Salvation. All which the Lord give grace unto his chosen people
effectually to perform, for his great names sake, for his beloved Sons sake,
for his gracious Spirits sake. And the grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, and the
love of God, and the Communion of the Holy Ghost be with you all, 2 Cor. 13.14.
Amen.

Now unto him that is able to do exceeding abundantly, above all that we ask or
think, according to the power that works in us, unto him be glory in the
Church by Christ Jesus, throughout all ages, world without end, Amen.

FINIS.

