C R
DIEV ET MON DROIT HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE royal blazon or coat of arms
Die Mercurii, 9. May 1660.
Resolved upon the Question by the Lords and Commons Assembled in Parliament,
England and Ireland, Dominion of Wales, and Town of Berwick upon Twede, Do and
are hereby required, and enjoined, in their Public Prayers, to pray for the
Kings most Excellent Majesty, by the Name of our Sovereign, Lord Charles, by the
Grace of God, of England, Scotland, France, and Ireland King, Defendor of the
Faith, etc. And for the most Illustrious Prince James, Duke of York, and the
rest of the Royal Progeny.

Resolved upon the Question by the Lords and Commons Assembled in Parliament,
Thursday next, being the day appointed for a Public Thanksgiving, and all
other Ministers within the Cities of London and Westminster, and the late lines
of Communication, who in their several Churches, and Chapels, are to carry on
the Duties of that day. And also all other Ministers who are on that day
fortnight to perform the like duty throughout the Kingdom of England, and
Dominion of Wales, and Town of Berwick upon Twede, shall be, and are hereby
enjoined to return Thanks to Almighty God for his Majesty's several Gracious
Letters to both Houses of Parliament, and to the Commanders in Chief of the
Forces both by Land and Sea, and to the Lord Mayor, and Common Council of the
City of London, together with the Declarations enclosed, and the Just and
Honorable Concessions therein contained, and for the hearty, loyal, and
dutiful conjunction of the Lords and Commons now Assembled in Parliament, and
the Universal Concurrence of all the Commanders and Forces both by Land and
Sea, to receive his Majesty into his Dominions and Government, according to
their bounden duty, and the Laws of the Land; And that the Ministers upon
Thursday fortnight be enjoined to read his Majesty's Letters and Declarations
to both Houses in their several Churches and Chapels at the same time.

Die Mercurii, 9. May 1660.
ORdered by the Lords in Parliament Assembled, That these Resolves be forthwith
Printed and Published.

JO. BROWN, Cleric. Parliamentorum.

LONDON, Printed by John Macock, and Francis Tyton, Printers to the House of
Lords, 1660.


