seal of the Commonwealth
By the Parliament.
WHereas the old and Implacable Enemy having for some time before the restoring
of this Parliament, Formed a Design for the bringing in of Charles Stewart, to
the Destruction of all the faithful and constant Assertors of the Parliaments
most Just and Righteous Cause, and had brought it to such ripeness, that (by
the confession of diverse Engaged) the day was prefixed the First of this
instant August for their Rising in Arms; but through the good Providence of the
Lord, were so timely discovered, that their Design was in a great measure
disappointed. Nevertheless, it has pleased the only Wise God, to suffer the
said Design so far to break forth, that Randolph Egerton a Major General, and
Robert Werden a Colonel, with diverse others, Officers and Commanders in the War
under the late King, together with Sir Thomas Middleton, Sir George Booth, and
other Apostates, in prosecution of the same Design, have Proclaimed Charles
Stewart to be King, Levied Actual War, and possessed themselves of Chester.

The Parliament does therefore Declare and Proclaim the said Randolph Egerton,
Robert Werden, Sir George Booth, Sir Thomas Middleton, and their Adherents in
this War, to be Rebels and Traitors.

And because it is not probable that the said persons should, upon what
specious pretenses soever, undertake so wicked a Design without expecting
Assistance from others, The Parliament, to the end that no more of the people
of this Commonwealth be seduced into any Compliance with them, do also Declare,
That whosoever shall from henceforth any ways Assist, Abet or Conceal the
carrying on of their said Design, be Deemed and Adjudged Rebels and Traitors,
and shall be proceeded against accordingly.

Tuesday, August 9. 1659.
Ordered by the Parliament, That this Proclamation be forthwith Printed and
Published.

THO. St NICHOLAS, Clerk of the Parliament.

London, Printed by JOHN FIELD, Printer to the Parliament. And are to be sold
at the seven Stars in Fleetstreet, over against Dunstans Church, 1659.


