An ABSTRACT of Proceedings of the House of Commons, in Relation to the
East India Company and Trade.
London concerning the East India Trade: And a Petition of the East India
Company, were presented to the House, and referred to a Committee of the Whole
House.

John Guise Reported from the said Committee the following Resolutions which
were Read, and agreed to by the House.

Resolved,

1. That the East India Trade is Necessary and Beneficial to this Kingdom. 2.
That the East India Trade will be best Managed by a Joint Stock, exclusive to
all others. 3. That a Company to Trade to the East Indies in a Joint Stock be
Established by Act of Parliament; And Ordered the then Company to lay before
that Honorable House a true state of their Stock and Debts at home and abroad.
Joseph Herne, the then Governor of the Company, delivered in several Accounts,
as a state of their Stock and Debts at home and abroad, which was referred to a
Committee of the Whole House.

John Guise (after Nine sittings of the said Committee of the Whole House)
Reported the Resolutions of the said Committee, which were read, and agreed to
by the House, and amongst other things it was Resolved;

That a Sum not less than 1500000 l and not exceeding Two Millions, is a Fund
Necessary to carry on the East India Trade in a Joint Stock.

That no One Person shall have above One Vote in a Company Trading to the
East Indies, and that each Person who has 500 l Stock therein, shall have One
Vote.

That no private Contracts shall be made, but all Goods sold at Public Sales
by Inch of Candle (except Saltpeter for the Use of the Government.)



That the Members of the Committee of the East India Company be obliged to give
Security to be Approved of by the House, That the Stock and Estate they then
had, should be made good 744000 l all Debts paid (which was 100 l per Cent.
their Capital Stock being then called 744000 l.)

That Security being first given, an Humble Address be presented to His
Majesty, to Incorporate the present East India Company by Charter, according to
the Regulations agreed upon by the House, that the same may pass into an Act of
Parliament.

And the Committee of the East India Company were ordered to attend the House
on the Wednesday following, to give Security accordingly.

Thomas Cook and others of the East India Committee, delivered in Proposals in
Writing, signed by the Secretary concerning the said Security, which Proposal
was,

That Security be given that the Company's Stock is really worth as much as the
Account delivered into the House of Commons makes out.

That the said Security be either by the Company's Common Seal, as has been
always done,

Or by every particular Adventurer's Personal Obligation for his own Stock.

Or by so many of the Principal Adventurers as shall be Approved of for the
full Value of the Company's Stock, as it was given into the House of Commons.

Which Security was not approved by the House, but the Committee of the East
India Company were ordered on the Tuesday following to bring the Persons they
shall propose to the House to be Security.

East India Company delivered in a Paper of the Names of the Persons they
proposed to be Security, and the Sums for which each Person would be Security;
many of which Persons, attended there.

That they submitted to such Regulations as should be passed into an Act, and
that the Security should be as the House should Direct.

Whereupon the House approved of their Security proposed, and ordered a Bill to
be brought in, to Establish an East India Company, according to the Regulations
and Resolutions agreed upon by the House. And Mr. Finch, Sir Christopher
Musgrave and others were appointed to bring in the Bill.

Christopher Musgrave presented the Bill to the House.



December last, were, after the Second Reading of the Bill, Ordered to attend
the next Day, to give Security according to their Proposals.

East India Committee attending, were called in, and the Speaker acquainted
them that there was a Bill brought in by the Order of the House to Establish an
East India Company. And that the present Adventurers might have a Stock
therein, of 744000 l. if they would give Security, That the Stock they then had
should be made good 744000 l. all Debts paid; And that the House gave them time
till Tuesday then next, to give in an Answer to the said Proposition; And that
the House expected an Answer to be then given accordingly.

February, Wherein they refused giving Security as the Bill stood, pretending
the same was not consonant to the Vote and Resolution of the 18th December, in
the very Substance thereof, But in its whole Contexture tended to the
Destruction of the said Company, by several Clauses therein contained.

The House took the said Answer into Consideration, and after Consideration had
thereof it was

Resolved,

That an Humble Address be made to His Majesty to Dissolve the present
East India Company, according to His Power reserved in their Charter, and to
Constitute another East India Company, for the better preserving of the
East India Trade to this Kingdom, in such manner as His Majesty in his Royal
Wisdom shall think fit.

Which Address was presented by the whole House on the Tenth of February.

Mr. Speaker reported His Majesty's Answer to the said Address as follows, viz.

That it was a Matter of very great Importance to the Trade of this Kingdom,
and that it could not be expected that He should give a present Answer to it,
but that He would take time to consider of it, and in a short time give this
House His positive Answer.

viz. Lunae 14. die Novembris. 1692.

Sir Edward Seymour acquaints the House that he had a Message from His Majesty
in Answer to the Address of this House the last Session, in relation to the
East India Company, the which he delivered in Writing at the Table, where the
same was read -- in these Words, viz.

THE House of Commons having presented an Address to the King, to Dissolve the
present East India Company, according to the Power reserved in their Charter,
and to Constitute a New One, His Majesty took into Consideration the proper
Methods of complying with their Desires, and of securing effectually this
Advantageous Trade to the Nation.

But His Majesty upon Examination of the Charter, and consulting His Judges and
Learned Council, found that he could not Legally Dissolve the Company, but upon
Three Years warning; and that during the Three Years after warning, the Company
must subsist, and might continue to Trade; and that though the King might
constitute a New Company, yet He could not empower such New Company to Trade,
till after Three Years: the Crown having expressly Covenanted, not to Grant any
such Liberties.

Hereupon His Majesty, was very apprehensive of the ill consequences of giving
warning to the Company, because they would be then less solicitous of promoting
the true Interest and Advantage of the Trade, whereof they could not long reap
the Fruits: And that no New Company could be immediately admitted to it: So
that this very beneficial Trade, which is already so much impaired, might be in
danger of being entirely lost to the Nation.

His Majesty being very desirous to prevent so great a mischief, and to
gratify the House of Commons in the end, since he could not do it without
great hazard in the manner they proposed, required the East India Company to
answer directly, whether they would submit to such Regulations as His Majesty
should judge proper, and most likely to advance the Trade: And the Company
having fully agreed to it, and declared their Resolution in Writing, His
Majesty commanded a Committee of His Privy Council to prepare Regulations;
which they did, and offered them to the Company: But the Company,
notwithstanding their Declaration of Submission, rejected almost all the
Material Particulars.

So that His Majesty finding, That what possibly the House of Commons might
have expected, and Indeed was necessary to preserve this Trade, could not be
perfected by his own Authority alone; and that the Company could not be induced
to consent to any such Regulations, as might have answered the Intentions of
the House of Commons; and That the Concurrence of the Parliament is requisite
to make a complete and useful Settlement of this Trade, has directed all the
Proceedings in this matter to be laid before them, and recommends to them the
preparing of such a Bill, in order to pass into an Act of Parliament, as may
Establish this Trade on such Foundations as are most likely to preserve and
advance it.

Upon this Message, the Honorable House of Commons took the same, and the
Regulating the East India Trade into Consideration, and

Resolved, Nemine Contradicente,

That a Bill be brought in for the Regulating, Preserving, and Establishing the
East India Trade to this Kingdom: And that a Committee of the Whole House
Consider of Heads for the said Bill.

The said Committee went through the Heads. Which

Smith reported to the House, and were agreed to by them; Which were the same
almost in substance as the Regulations agreed on in 1691. But in these Votes no
Provision was made to make the Old Companies Stock any part of the ^^ew.

The same day a Bill was Ordered to be brought in.





After three Sittings, and nine Adjournments of the said Committee of the Whole
House, The said Bill being greatly obstructed by the then Companies great
Opposition; and it drawing toward the end of the Session, the House despairing
of going through the said Bill,



That an Humble Address be presented to His Majesty, That he will Dissolve the
East-India-Company upon Three years warning to the said Company, according to
the Power reserved in their Charter.

Which Address was presented by the Whole House.

The Speaker Reported His Majesty's Answer:



I will always do all the Good in my Power for this Kingdom, and I will
consider your Address.





That all the Subjects of England have Equal Right to Trade to the East Indies,
unless Prohibited by Act of Parliament

After that, the Free Traders carried on their Trade thither as they saw fit;
but the Old Company (not contented to enjoy an equal Liberty with their Fellow
Subjects, and the extraordinary Advantages they pretended to have by their
Charter and Settlements in India) did, in their General Court held the 14th
April School, Agree the following Proposal:

THat by settling the East India Company, a Loan of 700000 l may be made to His
Majesty on the Terms following:

That the Stock of the present Company be valued at 50 per Cent. and that Books
for taking new Subscriptions be laid open for the Subscribing of 712696 l to
make up the Stock in the whole 1500000 l

That no Person Subscribe less then 100 l or more then 10000 l

That 700000 l be Lent, and paid in Four equal Payments, in such Convenient
time as shall be agreed on.

That the present Adventurers and new Subscribers be settled by Act of
Parliament, exclusive of all others, for Thirty one years, with such Powers and
Privileges, as will enable them to Carry on and Preserve the Trade.

That the Sum of 700000 l be Repaid, with Interest, out of such Parliamentary
Funds as will Repay the Principal and Interest in (...) years.

This may probably take Effect, according to the Goodness of the Fund, and the
Encouragement given by the Act.



And after consideration thereof in a Committee of the Whole House, The House
Empowered the Committee of Ways and Means to receive Proposals for settling the
Trade to the East Indies.

Hereupon the Free Traders (being unwilling to be deprived of a Traffic to
which they had for many years applied themselves) set on foot a Subscription
for Lending a Sum not exceeding Two Millions, on an undoubted Fund of 8 l per
Cent. per Annum. And when about 1300000 l. was Subscribed, they presented the
same to the said Committee; Which was Received, The Fund thereupon settled, The
Bill brought in and passed into an Act.

l per Cent, will amount unto, not exceeding Two Millions, Provided they be
settled by Act of Parliament exclusive of all others, with such Powers and
Privileges as will Enable them to carry on the Trade, and their Old Stock be
valued at 50 l per Cent.

Which Proposal was in effect to throw out that Bill after the Tenth of June,
and bring in a new Bill, to be Formed according to their own Minds: For they
did not offer it upon the Terms of the Act as it then was; Nor with the Powers
and Privileges then in the Act: But for them to be exclusive of all others,
and to have such Powers and Privileges as would Enable them to carry on the
Trade, but don't say what those Powers or Privileges were.

So that the Old Company must thank themselves for this Act, since it was they
first went into Parliament to get an Act to deprive the Free-Traders of their
Natural Right to the said Trade, and to Engross it to themselves.


