SEVERAL ORDINANCES OF THE LORDS and COMMONS Assembled in PARLIAMENT:
Concerning the Sale of Bishops-Lands.

LONDON, Printed by R. Cotes for John Bellamy at the three golden Lions in
Cornhill, near the Royal Exchange, 1647.

30 Novembr. 1646.
An Ordinance of the Lords and Commons assembled in Parliament for explanation
and better putting in execution the late Ordinance, Entitled, An Ordinance of
the Lords and Commons assembled in Parliament, For appointing the sale of
Bishops Lands for the use of the Commonwealth.
THe Lords and Commons assembled Col. Manwaring to ascertain the principal and
interest of Moneys, Plate, etc. advanced.
in Parliament do hereby Declare and Ordain, That Colonel Robert Manwaring
appointed to be Register Accomptant by the former Ordinance for the sale of
Bishops Lands, is, and be hereby authorized upon the Receipts or Certificates
given by the former Treasurers Receivers or Collectors of Money, Plate, Horse,
furniture or Arms advanced upon the Public Faith, to ascertain the Principal
and Interest thereof; and that his Certificate And upon his Certificate the
Treasurers to receive the Money, and give Receipts.
to the Treasurers appointed by the said former Ordinance, shall be a
sufficient Voucher for them to proceed thereupon to the receiving of the Money,
and giving their Receipts according to the former Twenty shillings per day
allowed to the Treasurers Clerks for a year.
Ordinance: And that Twenty shillings per diem shall be allowed to the
Treasurers for their Clerks and Tellers, the said allowance to continue for a
year, and to be distributed among them according to the discretion of the said
Treasurers. And that all other And all other charges incident to the Treasury,
to be allowed by the Committee hereafter named,
charges incident to the Treasury, which shall be discharged and paid by the
said Treasurers, shall be allowed to them by the Committee hereafter named, or
any five of them. And that the Comptroller appointed by the said former
Ordinance, shall The Comptroller to give acknowledgment thereof.
upon the weekly account given unto him by the said Treasurers, give a receipt
or acknowledgment thereof in writing under his, or his Deputies hands to the
said Treasurers for their justification therein. And further, that the
certificate of the Commissaries and Certificate of the Commissaries for Horses
shall be accepted.
others authorized for the listing of horses, furniture, or Arms, who have
power to give the public Faith for the same, shall be accepted and allowed for
as good and sufficient as the Receipts or Certificates of the Treasurers,
Collectors or Receivers of Money or Plate. And for the settling and determining
of any further doubt which may arise concerning the For determining of doubts
concerning the validity of any Warrant made to the Treasurers, a Committee of
Parliament is appointed.
validity of any warrant made by the Trustees of the Bishops Lands to the said
Treasurers for the issuing out of any Money, That the Earl of Northumberland,
Earl of Kent, Earl of Rutland, Earl of Pembrook, Earl of Lincoln, Earl of
Nottingham, Earl of Suffolk, Earl of Salisbury, Earl of Warwick, Earl of
Denbigh, Earl of Middlesex, Earl of Manchester, Earl of Mulgrave, Earl of
Stamford, Viscount Hereford, Viscount Say and Seal, Lord Berkley, Lord Dacres,
Lord Wharton, Lord Willoughby, Lord North, Lord Hunsdon, Lord Mountague, Lord
Gray of Warke, Lord Roberts, Lord Maynard, Lord Howard, and Lord Bruce. Mr.
Hollis, Mr. Francis Allen, Sir Philip Stapleton, Mr. John Ash, Sir John
Clotworthy, Sir Symonds D'ewes, Mr. Walter Long, Sir John Temple, Sir William
Lewis, Sir William Spring, Sir John Hobart, Col. Harvey, Mr. Got, Mr. Recorder,
Sir Hen. Vane senior, Mr. Leigh, Mr. Reynolds, Mr. Tate, Sir John Evelin of
Surrey, Mr. Roll, Sir Samuel Roll, Mr. Bond, Mr. Ball, Mr. Nicoll, Mr. Wilson,
Mr. Blackiston, Mr. Pierpoint, Sir Peter Wentworth, Sir John Curson, Sir Walter
Earl, Sir Robert Harley, Mr. Crew, Sir Gregory Norton, Lieutenant General
Cromwell, Sir Robert Pie, Sir Edward Hungerford, Mr. Knightly; Sir John
Burgoyne, Mr. Rous, Mr. Strode, Sir Anthony Irby, Mr. Humphrey Edwards, Mr.
Drake, Mr. Prideaux, Mr. Alderman Atkin, Sir Thomas Soame, Alderman Pennington,
Mr. Vassal, Colonel Ven, or any five of them shall be, and are hereby
constituted a Committee of Parliament for the purposes aforesaid, and shall
have power and authority to hear and determine the same in case the said
Trustees or Treasurers shall desire it. And that a warrant under any Five of
the hands of the said Committee shall be a sufficient authority to them, and
every of them to proceed accordingly in the execution of the said Ordinance.
And it is hereby lastly Declared and All persons, as well those who have
formerly lent upon the Public Faith, as others shall have the same repaid with
Interest.
Ordained by the authority aforesaid, That all persons, as well those who have
lent upon the public Faith, as those who have that shall advance or lend any
sum of Money for the purposes in the said Ordinance mentioned, until the
200000 l. intended by the said Ordinance to be raised shall be brought in,
shall have the same security for the repayment thereof, together with interest
for the same, after the rate of Eight per centum, as those who having formerly
lent upon the public Faith as aforesaid, and do now lend upon the said
Ordinance are to have.

H. Elsynge, Cler. Parl. D. Com.

Die Veneris, 15 Martii, 1646.
An Ordinance of the Lords and Commons assembled in Parliament, For the
lessening of the number of the Trustees for the sale of the BISHOPS-LANDS.
WHereas by virtue of an Ordinance of the Lords and Commons in this present
Parliament Recital of the Ordinance vesting the Bishops-Land in the Trustees.
assembled, made the 9 day of October, Anno Dom. 1646. All Counties Palatine,
Honors, Manors, Lordships, Scites, Circuits, Precincts, Castles, Granges,
Messuages, Mills, Lands, Tenements, Medows, Pastures, Parsonages appropriate,
Tithes, Oblations, Obventions, Pensions, Portions of Tithes, Parsonages,
Vicarages, Churches, Chapels, Advowsons, Donatives, Nominations, Rights of
Patronages and Presentations, Parks, Woods, Rents, Reversions, Services,
Annuities, Franchises, Liberties, Privileges, Immunities, Rights of actions
and entry, Interest, Titles of entry, Conditions, Commons-Court, Courts-Leete,
and Courts-Baron, and all other Possessions and Hereditaments whatsoever, with
all and every of their appurtenances of what nature or quality soever they be
which then were, or at any time within ten years before the beginning of this
present Parliament were belonging to any Archbishop or Bishop within this
Kingdom of England or Dominion of Wales, or which they or any of them had held
and enjoyed in the right of their Archbishopricks or Bishoprics, Dignities,
Offices or Places respectively, with all Charters, Deeds, Books of Accounts,
Rolls, and other Writings whatsoever concerning the same belonging unto them
were vested and settled in the real and actual possession and seisin of
Thomas Adams Alderman, then Lord Major of the City of London, Sir George Clarke
Knight, John Langham Alderman, and John Jones among others in the said
Ordinance named, and also by the said Ordinance, and by other Ordinances since
made in pursuance thereof, or for the explaining or executing thereof the said
Trustees are authorized and required to act and execute diverse Acts and things
concerning the premises. And whereas the said Thomas Adams, Sir George Clarke,
Recital of the four Trustees which desired to be discharged.
John Langham, and John Jones have humbly desired to be discharged of the said
Trust, because they cannot constantly attend and execute the same by reason of
their other necessary occasions: The said It is Ordained that the said Four
Trustees shall be no longer seized.
Lords and Commons do hereby Ordain, That the said Thomas Adams, Sir George
Clarke, John Langham, and John Jones, and every of them shall be from
henceforth no longer possessed, seized, or interessed of, or in the Premises,
or any of them, or any part or parcel of them: But that the seisin, But that
the seisin shall be out of them.
possession and interest thereof, or thereunto, shall be from henceforth wholly
and absolutely out of them and every of them; And that they, and And they
discharged of the Trusts.
every of them shall be from henceforth wholly discharged of the said Trusts to
all intents and purposes whatsoever; and shall not from henceforth act or
execute any power or authority, act or thing whatsoever by virtue of the first
recited Ordinance, or any other Ordinance or Ordinances aforesaid. And that all
and every the premises, and And that the Premises shall from henceforth be
vested in the remaining Trustees.
every part and parcel thereof shall from henceforth be vested and settled,
adjudged and deemed to be, and shall be wholly and only in the real and
actual possession and seisin of Sir John Wollaston Knight, and the other
remaining Trustees whose names are expressed in the said first recited
Ordinance, and the Surveyors and Survivors of them, their Heirs and Assigns
as fully and absolutely to all intents and purposes, as if the said Thomas
Adams, Sir George Clarke, John Langham, and John Jones had not been at all
named in the first recited Ordinance, nor in any other of the said Ordinances,
and as if the said Sir John Wollaston, and the other remaining Trustees only
had been named therein. And the said Sir John Wollaston, and the other
remaining And the remaining Trustees, or any Five of them from henceforth to
act in as ample manner as all or any of the Trustees might have done.
Trustees, or any Five or more of them shall from henceforth act and execute
all the powers and authorities, acts and things whatsoever, which by the first
recited Ordinance, or any other of the aforesaid Ordinances are appointed to
be acted and executed by all the Trustees named in the first recited
Ordinance, or by any part of them, in as full and ample manner to all intents
and purposes whatsoever, as all the Trustees named in the first recited
Ordinance, or any part of them, might, and ought to have done any thing
contained in the first recited Ordinance, or in any other of the aforesaid
Ordinances to the contrary in any wise notwithstanding. And it is further
hereby Declared and Ordained, That the said Sir John Wollaston and the other
remaining And the remaining Trustees, or any Five of them, or such as they
shall appoint, may let for one year or less, any of the Premises (out of
Lease) which are by the Ordinance appointed to be sold.
Trustees or any five or more of them, or such person or persons as they or any
five or more of them under their hands and seals shall thereunto appoint and
authorize, shall have full power and authority to let or set for one year or
less, and so from year to year, or less, before the sale hereof
respectively, any of the premises which are appointed to be sold by any of
the said former Ordinances now being, or which shall be at any time before the
sale thereof respectively out of Lease, unto such persons and in such manner;
whereby the best profits and advantages thereof may be made as they shall
think fit, the Rents and Profits hereof to be disposed in such manner as in
the said former Ordinances is declared, concerning the other Rents, Profits and
Receipts therein mentioned and contained; Provided always, that such of the
said Premises as are Provided that Copihold Lands be granted by Copy of
Court-Roll, and not otherwise.
grantable by copy of Court-Roll, according to the custom of any Honor or
Manor, and which they have power to Demise as is aforesaid, shall be demised
by the copy of the Court-Roll respectively, and not by any Lease at the Common
Law. And the said Lords and Commons taking into their consideration, the pains
and good service of the said Sir John Wollaston, and the other remaining
Trustees, for their encouragement therein, do hereby Ordain, That the said
Sir John The remaining Trustees (except the three Treasurers and the
Comptroller) shall have 2000. l. amongst them.
Wollaston and the other remaining Trustees, (except the three Treasurers and
the Comptroller, who have a Salary already allowed to them) shall have and
receive the Sum of Two thousand Pounds; That is to say, one thousand Pounds
thereof at the end of Six Months to be accounted from the aforesaid ninth day
of October, and the other one thousand Pounds at the end of Six Months after;
Which said Sum of Two thousand Pounds, the aforesaid Treasurers, or any Two
of them, are hereby authorized and required to pay accordingly unto them or to
such person or persons for them as they or the major part of them under their
handwriting shall appoint out of such moneys as the said Treasurers shall have
received by the Profits or sale of the Premises. And that the said Sir John
Wollaston and the other remaining Trustees (except The remaining Trustees are
to divide the 2000. l amongst them as they think fit.
such as are before excepted) or the major part of them shall distribute and
dispose of the said Two thousand Pounds among themselves by such Proportions
and in such manner as they or the major part of them shall think fit. Lastly,
the printing of this Ordinance is referred to the Trustees or the major part of
them.

Ioh. Brown, Cleric. Parliamentorum. H. Elsynge Cler. Parl. Dom. Com.


Die Veneris, 5 Martii, 1647.
An Ordinance of the Lords and Commons assembled in Parliament, For the bettet
Explaining and Executing of the former Ordinances for the sale of Bishops-Lands.
WHEREAS by Ordinance of the Lords and Commons in this present Recital of the
Contractors Instructions in the former Ordinance of the 16. of November. 1646.
Parliament Assembled, made the sixteenth day of November, Anno Dom. 1646.
Among other instructions for the Contractors in the said Ordinance named, it is
Ordained that the Demesne Lands of the late Archbishops and Bishops shall not
be sold under ten years Purchase of the full values they were at in year
1641. The same rule to be observed proportionably in the sale of Reversions
expectant upon Estates for lives or years. The said Lords and Commons The
Contractors to proceed to sale according to such particulars as shall be
delivered to them by the Register.
do hereby declare and Ordain that the said full value upon which the said
Contractors shall proceed to sale, shall be according to such particulars as
shall be made and delivered to the said Contractors under the hand of Henry
Elsynge Register in the said Ordinance named, and that such particulars so made
and delivered to them shall be a sufficient justification for them to proceed
to sale accordingly. And further that the said Register shall And the Register
to appoint a Clerk to attend the Contractors. And to enter all Orders.
cause one faithful, able and sufficient Clerk to be attending on the said
Contractors at all their meetings, and to enter all their Orders and
proceedings, and to observe and obey all such commands and directions
concerning the Premises, as they or any six or more of them shall direct and
appoint. And that the said Books of Entries shall remain in the custody of
the said Contractors or such of them as they or the major part of them shall
appoint. Provided that no Copies of the said Entries be made, had or taken out
of the said No Copies of Entries to be made by any but the Register or his
Clerk.
Books by any others then the said Register or his Deputy, or the said Clerk,
who are to have the use of them for that purpose. And that the said Register
and his Deputy and the said Clerk The Oath of the Register and his Deputy and
Clerk.
shall severally and respectively take an Oath before the Trustees or any three
of them, (which they are hereby authorized and required to administer to them
accordingly) to execute the said respective Offices and places according to the
Ordinances and instructions of both Houses of Parliament in that behalf made,
and not for any fear, favor, malice, or reward to violate the said respective
trusts in them reposed. And whereas by the before recited Ordinances, it is
Ordained, That the said Contractors shall receive two pence in the Pound for
every Sum that shall be paid to the Treasurers upon all and every Contract
or Contracts The Contractors to have two pence per pound for all such Lands as
shall be Contracted for and sold.
by them made* The said Lords and Commons do hereby Declare and Ordain, that
they shall in stead thereof, receive two pence in tehe Pound, for all such
Lands, Tenements, and Hereditaments, of the late Archbishops and Bishops which
shall be contracted for, and sold by them, according to the rates for which
they shall be sold. And further the said Lords and Commons do hereby Declare
and Ordain, That all such who All persons which have lent moneys shall have
like advantage for all other monyes due by the Ordinance as for the monyes lent.
have advanced and lent Moneys upon the aforesaid recited Ordinance, shall be
allowed and have all the same advantages and benefits for and concerning any
Moneys otherwise due unto them by the before recited Ordinance, as fully and
amply to all intents and purposes whatsoever, as for and concerning any ready
Moneys lent and advanced upon the said Ordinance.

Joh. Brown Cler. Parliamentorum. H. Elsynge Cler. Parl. Dom. Com.


Diae Lunae 23. August, 1647.
An Ordinance of the Lords and Commons Assembled in Parliament for regulating
the sale of Bishops Lands, and expediting the Conveyances thereof.
BE it Ordered and Ordained by the Lords and Commons assembled in Parliament,
That whereas in the late Ordinance of Parliament, made the 16. of November,
Anno Dom. 1646. it is appointed that the Purchasers of Bishops Lands shall pay
the latter moity of Purchase money within six months after the sealing of the
Assurance; And whereas diverse purchasers have before the sealing of the
assurance obtained the possession of the said purchased Lands, Tenements, or
Hereditaments, in all such cases the said six months wherein the latter moiety
of the Purchase money ought to be paid, shall be reckoned from the time of the
Contract, and not from the sealing of the Assurance; and that in lieu thereof
the Purchaser shall have and enjoy all the mean profits which he has had, or
received in the mean time; And that the Treasurers for Bishops Lands shall
allow, and rebate to any Purchaser, who has any money due by the said
Ordinance, the interest which shall be due unto him, together with the
principal, the same to be defaulked at the times of payment of his Purchase
money; and that all Assigns of any moneys due by the said Ordinance, may
defalke the same upon Purchasers in like manner as the lenders themselves might
do. And the Contractors, Trustees, Treasurers, and all others employed in the
sale of Bishops Lands, are hereby required, and enjoined to perfect and seal
the respective Conveyances or Assurances with all possible expedition.

Jo. Brown Cler. Parliament.


