AN ACT OF THE Commons of England In PARLIAMENT Assembled; With further
Instructions to the Trustees, Contractors, Treasurers, and Register, for the
Sale of the Lands and Possessions of the late Deans, Sub-Deans, Deans and
Chapters, etc. And for the better, and more speedy execution of the former
Acts, Ordinances, and Instructions made concerning the same.

blazon of the Commonwealth

London, Printed by Richard Cotes, 1649.

Die Martis, 31 Julii, 1649.
AN ACT With further Instructions to the Trustees, Contractors, Treasurers,
and Register for the Sale of the Lands and Possessions of the late Deans,
Sub-Deans, Deans and Chapters, etc. And for the better, and more speedy
execution of the former Acts, Ordinances, and Instructions made concerning the
same.
BE it enacted by this present Parliament, and by the Authority of the same;
That all and every person and persons, who^ by an Act of this Parliament,
Entitled, (An Act of the Commons of England in Parliament assembled, For the
abolishing of Deans, Deans and Chapters, Canons, Prebends, and other Offices
and Titles, of or belonging to any Cathedral or Collegiate Church or Chapel,
within England or Wales) are not disabled to hold or use the Place, Function,
Office, Title or Style of Precentor, or any other Title, Style, Place,
Function, or office, of or belonging to any Cathedral, or Collegiate Church or
Chapel, within England or Wales, the Town of Berwick upon Tweed, and Isles of
Guernsey and Jersey, or any of them, are, Precentors disabled to hold the
office or title.
and be from the Nine and twentieth day of March, in the year of our Lord,
1649. disabled to hold the same, or any such place, Function, Office, or Style
as aforesaid; And that all Manors, The Manors, Lands, Rectories, Parsonages
etc. the Trustees are vested in.
Lands, Tenements, Rectories, Parsonages, Vicarages, Advowsons, Donations,
Nominations, rights of Patronage, and Presentation. Tithes, Parkes, Commons,
Annuities, Rents, Reversions, Services, Courts Leets, Courts Baron, and other
Courts, Franchises, Liberties, Privileges, and Immunities, Rights of action
and entry, Conditions, and all other Possessions, and hereditaments, with their
and every of their appurtenances, of what nature or quality soever they be,
which now are, or at any time within ten years before the beginning of this
present Parliament of right were belonging to every or any such Precentor, or
other person or persons aforesaid; and which they, or any of them had held or
enjoyed in right, or by reason of his or their said Place, Function, Office,
Title, Style, or employment respectively; together with all Charters, Deeds,
Court-rolles, Accounts, Evidences, and Writings belonging to them, or any of
them, which concern the same premises, or any of them, shall be, and are
hereby vested, and settled, and are hereby adjudged to be, and shall be deemed
and taken to be in the real and actual possession and seisin of Sir John
Wollaston Knight, Thomas Noel, William Hobson, Thomas Arnold, Owen Roe, Stephen
Estwicke, Robert Titchborne, George Langham, John Stone, Mark Hildsley, John
White, William Wyberd, Daniel Tailor, William Rolfe, and Rowland Wilson
Esouires (Trustees in the said recited Act named) their Heirs and Assigns; And
that they the said Trustees, and the Survivor, and Survivors of them, and his
and their Heirs and Assigns, shall from henceforth hold such of the premises
(hereby settled and vested in them) and such of the Manors, Lands, Tenements,
and Hereditaments, by the said recited Act, vested in the said Trustees, and
their Heirs, as on the eight and twentieth day of March last past, were holden
of any Common person, or persons by the same tenures Rents and services, by
which the same were then held; And shall from henceforth hold all the rest of
the said Manors, and premises (as well those which are hereby, as those which
by the said recited Act, are vested or settled in the said Trustees and their
Heirs) of the Manor of East Greenwich, The Manor of East Greenwich.
in free and Common Socage, by fealty only, and not by any other tenure, or
service whatsoever: And that they the said Trustees, and the Survivor and
Survivors of them, and his and their heirs shall from henceforth stand seized
of all the said Manors, Lands, Tenements, Hereditaments, and other things
hereby or by the said recited Act vested in them, and their Heirs as aforesaid
(except Rectories, Parsonages, Vicarages, and such other things as in the said
Act are excepted) to the uses, intents, and purposes herein, What things are
excepted, and the uses and purposes thereof,
and hereafter declared, and not upon any other trust, nor to any other use,
intent, or purpose whatsoever that is to say) that out of the money which shall
be raised by the sale of such of the premises as shall be sold, and out of the
Rents, Revenues, issues, and profits of the premises which shall grow due
before such sale: The several sums of money, which hereby, or by the said Act
are, or are intended to be paid and satisfied; together with all charges to be
paid or borne, for or by reason of the execution of the trust in them reposed
(and not otherwise provided for) may be paid and satisfied; and after the same
shall be made and satisfied, They, and the Survivors, and survivor of them, his
and their heirs shall stand seized of the residue of the premises, then
remaining undisposed of, for the use and benefit of the Commonwealth, as by
the Parliament shall be appointed. And it is hereby further enacted, in all
things (not hereby otherwise directed) which concern the premises hereby vested
or settled in the said Trustees, and their Heirs, and the rents, issues, and
profits thereof, or which have reference thereunto, as in and by the said
recited Act, and such other Acts and Instructions as have been since that made,
or given; It is enacted concerning the Manors, Lands, Tenements,
Hereditaments, and other things by the said first recited Act vested, or settled
in the said Trustees, and their Heirs, and the rents, issues, and profits
thereof, or any other thing in reference thereunto; And that the said Trustees,
Contractors, Treasurers, and Register respectively, and all Purchasers and
others whom it does or shall concern, shall have the like Powers, Privileges,
and Authorities in all things, and are hereby authorized, and empowered, to
have and do, all such, and the like Acts and things, in reference to the
premises hereby vested, or settled in the said Trustees, and their Heirs, and
the Rents, Issues and profits thereof, in the like sort, as they have, or may
do by force of the said other Acts and Instructions, in reference to the
premises by the said first recited Act, vested or settled in the said Trustees
and their Heirs, and the Rents, Issues, and Profits thereof.

And it is further enacted by the authority aforesaid; That such of the
Contractors, Contractors that have any legal term in the Premises may
purchase.
named in the first recited Act, who on or before the first day of December,
1641. in his or their own right had, and now has, or which before, or since
that, as Executor or administrator to any other had, and now has, any legal
term in any of the premises hereby, or by the said first recited Act vested in
the said Trustees and their Heirs, may purchase the Reversion and Inheritance
thereof, without incurring any of the forfeitures expressed in the said Act;
and shall have and enjoy such and the like benefit, discharges, liberties and
advantages in reference thereunto, as any other Purchaser of any of the
premises may, or ought to have and enjoy, any thing in the said first recited
Act to the contrary notwithstanding. Provided, in the cases aforesaid; That the
Committee of Obstructions, or any five or more of them shall make the Contract,
according to the Rules, and values in the first recited Act mentioned: And
Provided also, That no Contractor do procure himself to be an Executor or
Administrator, by fraud or Coven, thereby to obtain an interest of a Reversion
or Reversions to become a Purchaser. And it is hereby further Enacted, That the
said Trustees, Contractors, Treasurers, and Registers named in the said first
recited Act, and all other persons, bodies Politic and Corporate, and every
of them shall, in reference to the premises hereby, or by the same first
recited Act vested, or settled in the said Trustees, and their heirs, and in
all things touching the same, observe and pursue, and have the benefit of these
Instructions following (viz.)

The time enlarged for bringing in the moneys to be doubled.
I. That the times formerly limited, and now near elapsed for bringing in of the
moneys to be doubled upon the Credit of the Deans and Chapters lands, shall be
enlarged, and have continuance unto the last day of Aug. 1649. for all those
who live in London, or within twenty miles distant from the same, and unto the
last day of September following for all others of this Nation, or resiant
therein. Moneys advanced for purchasing Rebels lands in Ireland admitted to
be doubled.
II. That all persons, Bodies Politic and Corporate, whose moneys advanced for
the purchase of the Rebels lands in Ireland, are admitted to be doubled upon
the Credit of the said Deans and Chapters Lands, who have, or shall within the
times hereby before limited, double the same, and bring in their moneys, shall
have allowance for the same, after the rate of Eight pounds percent. per annum,
from the time of their first advance thereof, and shall have their Bills cast
up accordingly. Moneys advanced in several Counties admitted of.
III. That the Receipt or Certificate of the high Sheriffs of the several
Counties and Cities, who by the Act for the speedy reducing of the Rebels in
Ireland, were authorized to receive moneys advanced in their respective
Counties, for purchase of the said Rebels Lands, and to give Receipts for the
same: As likewise the Receipt or Certificate of the Treasurers at Grocers-hall
London, As Iso the money advanced at Grocers-hall.
for moneys advanced, and paid to their Treasury upon the purchase of the said
Rebels lands, or any two of them shall be a warrant to the said Trustees, to
admit to double upon, in like manner as the Receipts or Certificates of the
Treasurers of those moneys at Guild Hall, or the Survivor of them are directed
or intended to be. Merchant Strangers and Mariners admireed to double.
IV. That all such Merchant Strangers, Mariners, and others who advanced moneys
for the relief and preservation of Ireland, and paid the same into the Chamber
of London, in the year 1642. and their Assigns, bringing unto the said
Trustees a Receipt or Certificate for the same, under the hand of the
Chamberlain of London, or his Deputy for the time being, shall be, and hereby
is admitted to double the same, with the interest thereof, upon the credit of
the said Deans and Chapters lands, and shall have such allowance of interest,
and the like privileges and advantages as any others admitted to double have,
or ought to have. Those admitted to double that raised and furnished horse for
the preservation of the City of London.
V. That all such persons who raised or furnished any Horse, with, or without
furniture, for the preservation of the City of London, which were listed, and
valued by Commissary Thomas Walker, and afterward sent out into the Public
service, and there continued or lost, and not returned to the owners, shall by
themselves, or their Assigns, upon producing to the said Trustees a
Certificate thereof, under the hand of the Colonel, or Mayor of the Regiment,
or Captain, or other chief Officers of the Troop, wherein the said Horses were
abroad in the Public Service, be admitted to double the moneys at which the
said Horses and furniture were valued by the said Commissary as moneys owing
upon the Public Faith, upon the credit of the said Deans and Chapters lands;
and shall have such Allowances, Privileges, and Advantages, as other persons
admitted to doubling have. What the Register may make a particular of.
VI. That the Register, or his Deputy, or any of his Clerks, shall not make
forth any particular upon any Survey but upon such only, as shall be first
allowed, and signed by the Surveyor General, according to which Surveys so
allowed and signed, particulars shall be made, and not otherwise. Upon what
particular the Contractors may contract for.
VII. That the Contractors or any of them, shall not make any Contract upon any
particular but such only, as shall be first signed by the Register or his
sworn Deputy, and every particular so made and signed shall be a good, and
sufficient warrant to the Contractors, or any five or more of them, to contract
upon for the sale of all or any of the Lands, Lenements, Hereditaments, and
other things therein comprised. Conveyances to be sealed to the purchasers.
VIII. That the Contractors, or any five or more of them, after any such
Contract made upon any such particular rated, and signed by the Register, or
his sworn Deputy, shall thereupon by writing under their hands, to be
subscribed under such particular, attest that Contract, and make request, and
give warrant to the Trustees, or any five or more of them to draw up and seal
Conveyances thereupon to the Purchasers, whereupon the Register or his Deputy
(having first entered the same, and all proceedings thereon) shall deliver the
same to the Trustees, or any five or more of them, who are hereby authorized to
make and seal Conveyances accordingly. Trustees to nominate Receivers for the
Rents, issues, etc.
IX. That the said Trustees, or any five or more of them, shall from time to
time by writing, or writings under their hands and seals, nominate and appoint
such and so many Receivers, as they shall think fit to receive the rents,
issues, and profits of the premises, which by this or the said first recited
Act are vested, or settled in the said Trustees and their Heirs; and from time
to time when, and as often as they shall think fit, remove them, or any of them,
and nominate and appoint others in their stead and place; and shall take of
every such Receiver such security as they shall think fit, for payment into
the Treasury, of so much as from time to time shall be received by every of
those Receivers respectively. And the said Trustees, Trustees to give
allowances to the Receivers.
or any five or more of them are hereby authorized to make, and give such
Allowances to every such Receiver for his service therein, as shall be allowed
of, with the approbation of the Committee of Obstructions, or any five, or more
of them; And for payment thereof, and of such Fees and Allowances, as the said
Trustees, or any five or more of them, are by the first recited Act authorized
to give, or make, the said Trustees, or any five or more of them, are hereby
authorized from time to time to make Warrants under their hands, to the
Treasurers, or any two of them; who are hereby required, and authorized out of
the moneys which shall be paid into the Treasury, to pay the same accordingly;
And that the said Trustees, Contractors, Treasurers, and Register and every of
them respectively, and all others whom it may concern, Relation to former Acts
and Instructions.
in relation to the premises, which by this or by the said first recited Act
are vested or settled in the said Trustees, or their Heirs, shall have the like
powers and Authorities, and are in all things not hereby, or by the said first
recited Act, or such other Acts or Instructions, as have been since that made,
otherwise directed, to proceed in like sort, and to observe the like Rules and
Instructions, as the Trustees, Contractors, Treasurers, Register, or other
Persons, for or concerning the late Bishops lands, have or may, or might by
force or virtue of any Ordinance of Parliament, to have, do, or observe in
relation to those Lands.
ORdered that this Act be forthwith Printed and Published.

Hen. Scobell Cleric. Parliament.

FINIS.

