TWO SPEECHES MADE By the Speakers of both Houses of Parliament to his
Excellency Sir Tho. Fairfax General: After the Army had guarded the Members to
sit in safety, on Friday the 6. day of August. 1647.

AND An ORDINANCE of both Houses of Parliament making his Excellency Constable
of the Tower of LONDON, and giving him power to make a Lieutenant.

A Months pay given to the Soldiers and under Officers of the ARMY, for a
gratuity: And the VOTES concerning the Guards.

With several Orders concerning the ARMY.

ALSO An Order of both Houses appointing a Committee to examine the Mutiny on
Monday seven night, whereby the Speakers and Members were driven from the
Parliament.

And a Thanksgiving appointed to be kept on Thursday August 12. 1647.

Printed at London by Robert Ibbitson. 1647.

TWO SPEECHES Made by the Speakers of both Houses of Parliament, to his
Excellency Sr. THOMAS FAIRFAX General AFTER The Army had guarded the Members
to sit in safety, on Friday, Aug. 6. 16 47.
Die Veneris, August 6. 1647.
HIS Excellency Sir Thomas Fairfax having guarded the Lords and Commons, (with
the Speakers) of both Houses, to Westminster, and the Houses being sat, They
Ordered, the Right Honorable the Earl of Manchester, Speaker of the House of
Peers, pro tempore, and William Lenthall Esquire Speaker of the House of Commons,
to acquaint His Excellency with Votes which were then made.

THE Earl of MANCHESTER (Speaker of the House of Peers) his Speech to His
Excellency Sir THOMAS FAIRFAX.
A Chair being set (in the House of Peers) by the Lords seats, for Sir Thomas
Fairfax, in which the General sat, and his Officers in the House without the
Bar, the Earl of Manchester declared to his Excellency:

That he was commanded by the Lord, to acquaint his Excellency how sensible
their Lordships are of the many good services which his excellency has done
for the Kingdom; and that they had taken the reasons expressed in the
Declaration of his coming to London into consideration, and do approve
thereof; and that they had commanded him to give his Excellency thanks for the
constant care which he has always had of the peace and safety of the Kingdom,
desiring him to go on in taking care for the security thereof for the future,
desiring that his Excellency will appoint such a guard for the Parliament as
may be a sufficient security to the Members to sit (in the house) in safety.

William Lenthall Esquire Speaker of the House of Commons, made the like speech to
the General in that House, his Excellency sitting in a Chair, nere the Speaker.

Die Veneris Aug. 6. 1647.
Resolved upon the question by the Lord and Commons in Parliament. That
Thursday the 12 of this instant August, be set apart for a day of thanksgiving,
to be kept by both Houses of Parliament, at the Abbey at Westminster And that
Mr. Martial and Mr. Nigh be desired to preach before the Houses on that day.

Die Veneris 6. Aug. 1647.
It is Ordered, and Ordained, by the Lords, and Commons in Parliament
assembled, hat his Excellency Sir Thomas Fairfax Knight, Commander in Chief of
all the Garrisons and Forces in the kingdom of England and Dominion of Wales,
under pay) be appointed and constituted Constable of the Tower of London, for
the space of one whole year, except both houses of Parliament shall otherwise
determine, And it is also Ordered, and Ordained, that his said Excellency shall
nominate and appoint a Lieutenant of the Tower under him.

Die Veneris; August 6. 16 47.
Resolved upon the question, by the Lords and Commons in Parliament assembled,

I.
That they do approve of his Excellencies coming to guard the City and
Parliament.

II.
That thanks be given to his Excellency for his care of the safety of the City
and Parliament.

III.
That it be left to the General, to appoint what Guard his Excellency shall
think fit, for the security of the City and Parliament.

IV.
That in consideration of the many good services of the Army, The sum of one
Months pay be given as a gratuity to all the Soldiers and under Officers of
Horse, Foot, and Dragoones that are under Commission Officers, as a gratuity
from the Kingdom.

V
That a Committee of ten Lords and twenty of the house of Commons be appointed
to sit in the Painted Chamber, to morrrow in the afternoon, an so de die in
diem, to examine the business of the mutinying, and the forcing of the Members
on Monday was seven-night at the Parliament doors, and to find out the
Authors, and fomenters thereof, and all such as did prosecute the same, as also
the Contrivers, and promoters of the Petition declared against.

Die Veneris Aug. 6. 1647.
1 Resolved upon the question, by the Lords in Parliament assembled,

That a Committee be appointed to draw up a Declaration from the Houses, to the
Army to be read in the head of every Regiament.

2 Resolved upon the question by the Lords in Parliament assembled.

That it is the opinion of this House, that all things done by the Members;
since the Speakers and other Members were driven away from the Parliament, be
adnulled, and of none effect, this to be communicated to the House of Commons.

Die Veneris Aug. 6. 1647.
Resolved upon the question, by the Commons in Parliament assembled,

1 That they will send Answer to the Lords Message, concerning the adnulling of
what has been done during the absence of the Speakers, by messengers of their
own.

2 That it be taken into consideration on Monday next.

FINIS.

