The several ANSWERS Of Both Houses of Parliament, to the City PETITION.

With a TRVE COPY Of the Petition of the Lord Mayor, Aldermen, and the rest of
the Common Council, of London, presented to both Houses of Parliament. March
18. 1641.

Together with, Mr. SPEAKERS Letter, Ordered By the Honorable House of
Commons, to the High Sheriff, and Gentry of YORKSHIRE.

Containing diverse remarkable matters of great note and consequence.

Published by Order of Parliament.

London Printed for John Wright. 1641.

A True Copy of the Petition of the Lord Mayor, Aldermen, and the rest of the
Common Council of London, presented to both Houses of Parliament, March 18.
1641. The humble Petition of the Mayor, Aldermen, and the rest of the
Common Council of the City of London.
Shows.

THat the Petitioners do much rejoice in the happy and joyful Concurrence of
both the Houses of Parliament, as in other things, so especially, in that most
necessary Ordinance touching the Militia of this Kingdom, and dominion of
Wales; Whereunto the Petitioners do most humbly and cheerfully submit, for
the safety of His Majesty, the Parliament and Kingdom: for the ordering
whereof many pressing Petitions from most parts of the Kingdom have been
exhibited, in this time of imminent Danger, proceeding from the bloody
Counsels of Papists and others, ill affected to the honor, peace and
prosperity of our most gracious King, and his Kingdoms.

And the Petitioners do likewise humbly return all possible thanks unto this
Honorable House, for the great honor and high favor vouchsafed in giving
them leave to nominate the Persons to whom the Militia of this City should be
committed; And for accepting and approving of the Nomination and return made to
this Honorable House, by the Petitioners on that behalf.

But this their joy is much disturbed and interrupted by an untrue, and
dangerous Petition, entitled The Petition of the Citizens of London, whose
names are under written, directed and delivered, in February last, to the Lords
and Commons assembled in Parliament; and since published in Print, with this
Title, The humble Petition of the Citizens of London: thereby to publish it
through the Kingdom, as the Petition of all the Citizens: wherein is set forth
(as appears by one of those Printed Copies annexed) that the ordering of the
Arms of London has time out of mind, been annexed to the Maioralty of the
said City; that the conferring thereof upon others would reflect upon the
government and Customs of this City, granted by the great Charter of England,
and confirmed by diverse Acts and Charters since that time: and which every
Freeman of the said City is by the Oath of his freedom bound to maintain to
the utmost of his power; and that such alteration in the ancient Government
might breed great distractions and inconveniences: or to this effect.

Nor this alone, but the Petitioners are yet more deeply wounded and grieved,
by the presumptuous boldness of the Publishers of the said Petition in Print,
by joining therewith His Majesty's Answer and denial, Entitled, His Majesty's
Message to both Houses of Parliament, February 28. 1641. Which Answer (as the
Petitioners humbly conceive) was grounded upon the said Petition, and
misinformation of some persons, ill affected to His Majesty and to the City,
who have thereby, and otherwise, often endeavored to make divisions betwixt
the King and the Parliament, betwixt the Parliament and the City, and betwixt
the Citizens among themselves, to the intolerable abuse of his sacred Majesty,
and of all his loyal Subjects.

And they verily believe, that this bold publishing in Print, of the said
Petition, and his Majesty's Message (which shortly after followed the
exhibiting of the said Petition) together in one Printed paper, was purposely
done, wickedly and seditiously, to make divisions as aforesaid, to beget an
opinion throughout the Kingdom, that the City of London does not intend to
conform unto, but complain of, and oppose the aforesaid Ordinance, and to
make the said Petition a desperate president to the rest of the Kingdom, to do
the like; thereby to hinder the cheerful, needful, lawful, and unanimous
Concurrence of the Kingdom, in yielding due, and full timely obedience to the
said Ordinance.

They do therefore humbly pray, This Honorable House will vouchsafe,

1. To believe, that neither this nor any other Petition of the like kind ever
came from the Petitioners, nor was framed, contrived or approved of by them.
And that they do wholly and with detestation disavow and disclaim the same as
untrue, unadvised, and dangerous Petition.

2. To put a difference between the Authors, Contrivers, Promoters, Advisers,
Publishers and Printers of it, and such, as it shall appear to this Honorable
House, were by subtilty drawn in unawares to subscribe the same, without any
malignant intention, and shall clearly and fully acknowledge their error, and
rashness therein; and that the latter sort may have such lawful favor as may
stand with the honor and justice of the high Court of Parliament.

Lastly, they do humbly pray, this Honorable House will still increase their
joy, by endeavoring to uphold and continue, by all good means that blessed
concurrence of both Houses of Parliament, in all your great affairs, and
effectually to proceed against all disturbers and undermyners thereof, and that
shall endeavor to cherish any misunderstanding betwixt the King and
Parliament, whom God and the Laws of this Land have united in so near a
Relation.

And they shall ever be ready to assist and stand by this Honorable House
therein, with their lives and Estates, to the utmost of their power, according
to their late Protestation.

Another of the same Petitions (with change only of the Title) was likewise
presented to the most Honorable House of Peers, the same day (March 18) by
diverse Aldermen, and other worthy Members of the Court of Common Council
aforesaid.

And shall uncessantly pray, etc.

The Answer to the aforesaid Petition by the Upper House. Die Veneris 18.
Martii. 1641.
THe Aldermen and Citizens that delivered the Petition this day to the Lords in
Parliament were called in, and the Lord Keeper told them by the direction of
the House, that their Lordships did give them thanks for their readiness and
forwardness in their Obedience to the Ordinance of Parliament, made by both
Houses, concerning the Militia, and further care of preventing any disorders
that might have happened by preferring or exhibiting a falls and scandalous
Petition in the name of the City, whereas it was not so. That their Lordships
have ordered, that this Petition now presented shall be printed and Published,
and for the scandalous Petition, the Lords have ordered the same shall be burnt
by the hand of the Commons, Hangman: and that their Lordships do resolve to
make a difference between those that were the Authors and Contrivers of that
scandalous Petition and those that were seduced and ignorantly drawn in to
subscribe to that Petition.

The Answer of the House of Commons to the aforesaid Petition. Die Veneris 18.
Martii 1641.
THe humble Petition of the Major, Aldermen, and the rest of the Common
Council of this City was this day read in the house of Commons, and ordered to
be entered in the Journals of the said House, and to be Printed. The Petitioners
were called in, and Master Speaker told them that the House had read their
Petition, and received it with a great deal of contentment and approbation,
and it being of that great consequence, and so full of expression of zeal and
affection to his Majesty, and the Kingdom: and in particular, that he was of
respect to this House, commanded to return them hearty thanks in the name of
the whole House: and wished, that he had words sufficiently to express it.

And for those of the City of London, that subscribed that dangerous Petition
complained of by the Petitioners, and are desirous to acknowledge their error
(Provided they were none of the contrivers of that Petition: nor had a
malignant spirit in the advancing and exhibiting thereof.) This House,
according to the desires of the Petitioners, is willing to show favor unto
them. And as the Petioners do express their care of the King and Kingdom,
and of this House in particular; so this House will be always ready to give
their best endeavors to further those things that may concern the honor and
safety of the King and Kingdom, and in particular of the good and safety of
the City of London.

H. Elsing Cler. Parl. D. Com.

Mr. Speakers Letter.
SIR,
THe House has received information by Letters from your self, that the
malice of some has proceeded so far of late, as to endeavor first, to
persuade your Country, that their Petitions to the Parliament were ill
relished by this House. And that your free offers therein of putting your
selves into a Posture of Defense, has given such testimony of your abilities,
that it has utterly taken away the hopes of paying your Billet money, til the
Parliament knows not how else to dispose of it. Secondly, to cry down
Exercises (which have already done much good, and to draw off some Ministers by
persuading them that they are not acceptable to this House. Thirdly, that some
in Holdernesse have dissuaded the Trained Bands from going into Hull upon the
Parliaments Order.

Which information of yours, the House takes for a an especial service, and
for so full a testimony of your fidelity to the Parliament, and of love to your
Country, as they hold it an evident character of your worth, and for this
commands me to give you very hearty thanks. And to desire you in the name of
the House to declare to the Country, how false and malicious these reports are:
since the House was so far from disrellishing their Petitions, or turning
their free offer to their disadvantage, as that they returned their public
thanks when the Petition was received, Passed a vote to approve of their
offer, and since by another Vote justified them in the same Act upon his
Majesty's taking notice thereof. And have since ordered that the same Counties
which paid their Pole money heretofore at York, shall now pay all their
proportions of the Bill of four hundred thousand pounds shortly to be raised
to the discharge of the Billet money in your County and those other Counties
where it is owing, which if it shall not fully satisfy, they will discharge as
soon as the great necessities of the Kingdom can possibly permit. And
likewise they command me to let you know that they do very much wonder at the
impiety and impudence of those men who dare to hinder the advancement of the
glory of God and of his worship. And also to scandalize the piety of this House
in so high a measure, as to say those good Ministers endeavors are not
acceptable to it, they accounting it their greatest honor to patronize
painful Preachers in the performance of their duties. And being resolved to
cherish and advance with their utmost power, whatsoever may tend to the
propagating of Religion, of which they hold those exercises to be an especial
means. This House therefore being very sensible of the great inconveniences
which may happen by their misreports in these distracted times, and from the
malice of these men, if it should proceed uncountrolled, desires, and enjoynes
you to return the names as well of those who have vented these untruths, as
likewise of those who have dissuaded the Trained Bands in Holdernesse, from
entering into Hull upon the Parliaments Order persuading themselves that you who
have already given such proof of your affection to the Kingdom, will still
continue it by your endeavors, to prevent the practices of any ill affected
persons upon any of that County, to the disturbance of the peace.

Die Mercurii 16 Martii, 1641.
It is this day ordered by the House of Commons now assembled in Parliament,
that this be forthwith Printed.

H. Elsyngs Cler. Parl. D. Com.

FINIS.

