July 18. 1648. by the City printer.
By the Commons assembled in Parliament.
IN the whole management of the late War, unto which the Parliament was
necessitated on the Kingdoms behalf for recovering and securing their Religion,
Laws, and native Liberties invaded by the enemies thereof; the great wisdom,
mercy, and power of God from time to time appeared in giving to their Forces
many great and seasonable victories, (as pledges of his love in owning their
Cause) until the whole power and force of those enemies were broken in pieces,
and a hopeful door opened for the settlement of a wel-grounded and lasting
Peace; But the same common Enemy by secret contrivances several ways,
obstructed the Parliaments progress therein, seducing the affections of the
people, instigating them to a general Insurrection; and under pretense of
petitioning for Peace, subtily promoting a new and bloody War; by whose wicked
practices, the Cause of God and the Kingdom is endangered, and utter ruin
threatened to those persons that yet own and stand firm to their first
principles, and earnestly thirst after the accomplishment of that desirable
work of Reformation in Church and Commonwealth, when many men are started
aside therefrom, and encourage that general Confusion endeavored by the
enemies of Peace and Truth; And we have just cause to say, If the Lord had not
been on our side when men rose up against us, they had swallowed us up quick,
when their wrath was kindled against us; yea, blessed be the Lord, mighty in
Councels and power, who has not yet given us as a prey unto their teeth, but
by weak means has wrought great Salvations for his people, by many Signal
victories over them lately obtained by the Parliament Forces in several parts
of the Kingdom; the which it is our duty briefly to recount before the people,
that their hearts may be enlarged with thankfulness, and the Lord of Hosts
receive therefore his due honor and praise.

First, That great defeat given to the Enemies forces in Wales under Laughorn,
and the reducing of Chepstow, and other Garrisons there; as also the reducing of
Appleby Castle, Brougham, and other places of strength in the North; and Walmer
Castle in Kent.

Secondly, That seasonable mercy and success in Northwales against Sir John
Owen; the gaining of Maidston in Kent after Four hours hot dispute, a place of
very great concernment to the Rebels; in which service of the General, had it
miscarried, in all probability, and as it appeared by several Letters then
taken, the ill affected persons in and about the City of London, and Counties
adjacent, had, as one man risen and engaged in the same Rebellion, to the
endangering and ruin of the Parliament, City and Kingdom, which success did
allay the distempers then very high in some neighboring Counties, raised
through the false suggestions of the Enemies to their peace.

Thirdly, The surprisall of about 600. Horse belonging to Langdale, and many
persons, some of quality, by the Forces under Colonel Fenwi^k and Colonel
Lilborne; and that without the loss of any blood on either side.

Fourthly, The utter routing of the Pomfret-horse, and some Foot at Willoughby
in Nottingham-shire, after a very sharp encounter, by the new raised Forces
under Colonel Edward Rossiter, the Enemies Forces consisting most of
Gentlemen, Officers and Reformadoes; of the Enemy, about 100 slain, their
General, Lieutenant General, and Major General, and many other Gent.
Officers, and Soldiers taken, and the number of 500. private Soldiers,
besides their Colors, Arms and Ammunition, and Carriages taken: And the
wonderful Mercy of delivering the City of Norwich and the well affected there
from imminent and apparent ruin.

Fifthly, The dissipating the Forces gathered together under the Earl of
Holland, Duke of Buckingham, Earl of Peterborough, and other men of quality; so
that in less then a week the places of their standing in Rebellion was not to
be found; who otherwise (had not God given a sudden check to their resolutions
and hopes) might have proved very prejudicial to the peace of the Kingdom.

Sixthly, The seasonable reducing of Pembrook both Town and Castle, after a
hard siege, upon honorable terms to the Parliament the 10. of July last;
whereby the Parliament Forces (engaged there) are at liberty to March Northward
for to join with the other Forces of the Parliament, for the preservation of
the peace of the Kingdom upon all occasions.

Read 18. July, 1648. and upon the Question assented unto, and Ordered to be
forthwith Printed and published; And that the Lord Major be desired to
communicate the same to the respective Ministers within the late Lines of
Communication, and Parishes within the weekly Bills of Mortality.

H. Elsynge, Cler. Parl. D. Com.

London, Printed by Richard Cotes, 1648.


