royal blazon or coat of arms
14. Julii 1641.
IT is this day Ordered by the house of Commons, That the Knights, Citizens and
Burgesses of the several Counties, Cities, and Boroughs of this Kingdom, and
the Dominion of Wales respectively, shall forthwith signify unto the
Commissioners appointed for the Assessing and Leavying of all sums of money
to be raised by an Act of Parliament, Entitled, An Act for the speedy
provision of money for disbanding the Armies and settling the peace of the two
Kingdoms of ENGLAND and SCOTLAND, That this House does require them to proceed
effectually, impartially, and with all possible speed in the due execution of
the authority given them by the said Act, whereby the returns of all moneys to
be thereby Assessed may be seasonably made, according as the great occasions of
this Kingdom require. And that from time to time the said Commissioners
respectively, shall acquaint the said Knights, Citizens, and Burgesses with
their proceedings herein, and of any difficulty that may occur to them,
whereby an Account thereof may be given to this House.

And further, that all Sheriffs (except of such Counties as by this Act are
appointed to make their paiments at the city of York) as soon as they shall
have received any considerable sum of money by virtue of this Act, shall
speedily convey and pay the same to Sir Edmund Wright, Lord Major of the City
of London, Sir James Cambell, Sir George Whitmore, Sir Nicholas Rainton, Sir
Christopher Clitherow Knights, Aldermen of the said City, and Robert Bateman
Esquire, Chamberlain thereof, or any two or more of them, at, or in the
Chamberlains Office in Guildhall within the said city of London.

And this House does further require, That all Collectors and persons
whatsoever to be appointed by the said Commissioners by virtue of the said Act
for any service in the execution thereof shall faithfully, diligently and
effectually attend the same according to the true intent of the said Act.

And it is hereby further Ordered, That there shall be allowed and paid to the
Collectors of every Parish the sum of one penie in the pound, for all such sums
of money as they shall Collect and pay in, according to this Act, and that
there shall be likewise allowed for all such Moneys as shall be so Collected
and paid in, one penie in the pound to the Commissioners Clarks, and others to
be employed by them for writing and engrossing.

And that there shall be further allowed to the Sheriffs of the several
Counties residing fifty miles distant from the Cities of London or York, or
upwards, two pence in the pound, and to such Sheriffs as shall reside within
that distance from the said Cities, one penie in the pound for all such sums of
Money, as the said Sheriffs shall pay in respectively, according to the said
Act. And the Treasurers in the said Act are hereby authorized, to allow one
penie in the pound for such sums of Money as shall be paid unto them by such
Sheriffs as shall reside within fifty miles of the said Cities, to such
persons as shall be employed in receiving and paying forth the Moneys by them.

It is further Ordered, That this Order shall be forthwith Printed by the Kings
Printer.

Imprinted at London by Robert Barker, Printer to the Kings most Excellent
Majesty: And by the Assigns of JOHN BILL. 1641.


