ARTICLES OF IMPEACHMENT BY THE COMMONS ASSEMBLED IN PARLIAMENT, In the Name of
themselves and all the Commons in England.

AGAINST Sir Thomas Gardener, Recorder of the City of London, for several
great Crimes, and Misdemeanors committed by him.

As also the Votes concerning Genenerall Major Skipton.

With an Order for the disposing of the Magazine of the Counties of England and
Wales.

Printed, May 23, 1642.

Die Martis, 17 Maii. 1642.
Several Votes of Parliament, concerning Sergeant Major General Skippon.
Resolved upon the Question. Philip Skippon, Sergeant Major General of the
Forces of London to attend his Majesty's person at York, is against the L^w of
the Land and the liberty of the Subject.

Resolved upon the Question. Philip Skippon Sergeant Major General of the
Forces of London, to attend his Majesty's person, being employed by both Houses
to attend their service, without their consent, is against the privil^dge of
Parliament.

Resolved upon the Question. Philip Skippon, Sergeant Major General of the
Forces of London, shall continue to attend the Service of both Houses,
according to their former commands.

Hen. Elsing, Cler. Parl. D. Com.

Die Martis. 20 Maii. 1642.
IT is this day Ordered by the Lords and Commons in Parliament assembled, That
the Magazines of the several Counties in England, and Wales, shall be
forthwith put into the power of the Lord Lievtenants of the said Counties,
respectively, (being such as the Parliament does confide in) for the Service
and safety of his Majesty and the Kingdom.

Ordered by the Lords in Parliament, That this Order shall be Printed and
published.

Ioh. Brown, Cler. Parl.

ARTICLES OF IMPEACHMENT AGAINST Sir THOMAS GARDENER Recorder of the City of
London.
Imprimis.
THat the said Sir Thomas Gardener being now and for 6 years last past, having
been Recorder of the City of London, and having taken an oath for his faithful
discharge of his said Office, and to maintain the Franchises and Customs of
the said City, and not discover the Council thereof to the hurt of the same* did
in the year of our Lord God, 1638. contrary to the Laws, of this Kingdom, and
contrary to his Oath wickedly advise, direct, and earnestly press Sir Maurice
Abbot, Knight, then Lord Major of London, the Aldermen and Common Counsel of
the said City, and others at several times since, to impose, levy, and take of
the said Citizens and Inhabitants, without their consent in Parliament the
illegal Tax of ship money, and being told by some of the said Common Council,
That the said Tax of ship money was against Law, he the said Sir Thomas
Gardener replied, there would be Law found for it ere Long.

II.
That the said Sir Thomas Gardener in the said year 1638. did wickedly advise
and persuade the said then Lord Major, Aldermen, and Common-counsell of London,
that they might at their own will and pleasure by force and power of the Acts
of that Court, tax, and levy on the said Citizens and Inhabitants, without
their consent in Parliament, a certain sum of money by way of Loan, to
furnish his Majesty for his wars, affirming that such Acts would bind and
compel the Citizens to pay the same; And also in the said year 1638. contrary
to his oath, and against the said Laws of the Land did wickedly advise and
direct the then Lord Mayor, Aldermen and Common Council, to raise and levy an
Army of 3000. men of the Trained Bands of the said City, to serve his Majesty
in his warr^s in the North against his Majesty's Subjects of Scotland, and
therein he affirmed, That every Subject was bound by his Allegiance to serve
the King, and that neither the Statute Law, nor their Charters could excuse
them, saying also the same time, It (...) now no time to plead Statutes and
Charters.

III.
That about the month of February 1639. he the said Sir Thomas Gardener,
contrary to his Oath, and to the Laws* of the Land, did earnestly persuade and
press Sir Henry Garraway, Knight, then Lord Mayor, the Aldermen and Common
Counsel of London, to impresse ^loth, and conduct 200 men of the said Citizens
and Inhabitants, to serve the King in his wars in the* North against his
Majesty's Subjects of Scotland, and also the same was to be done by the said
Court of Common Council as a thing against Law, yet by the persuasion of the
said Sir Thomas Gardener the same was then performed by the then Lord Major,
and the money paid for the same out of the Chamber of London, without any
consent or approbation of the said Court of Common Council, contrary to the
Liberties and Customs of the said City, and in subversion of them.

IV.
That a Petition directed to his Majesty, being prepared in the said year
1638. by the said then Lord Major, Aldermen, and Common Council, setting forth
the Laws and Statutes of this Kingdom, and the Charters of the said City, to
exempt the said Citizens and Inhabitants of London from certain illegal taxes
and services, whereby his Majesty might be pleased not to continue such his
Demand of men and money from them, and the said Sir Thomas Gardener, contrary to
his Oath and duty of his place, did reveal and disclose to his Majesty their
counsel and their intention of delivery of that Petition, and then told the
persons appointed to deliver the same Petition, that his Majesty would receive
no Petition from them.

V.
That the said Sir Thomas Gardener, to the end to preserve himself from being
questioned for the same crimes, labored to hinder the calling of Parliaments:
And therefore in the month of May, in the year 1640. presently after the
dissolving of Parliament, he the said Sir Thomas Gardener, advised and
persuaded the then Lord Major, Aldermen and Common Council of London to lend
the King 100000. l for his wars against His Majesty's subjects of Scotland,
and albeit they told him it was not safe for them to do it, when the Parliament
and Kingdom had refused it; yet he earnestly persuaded them thereunto, and in
of about July in the said year 1640. when many thousand of the said Citizens
of London joined in a Petition to be delivered unto his Majesty to call a
Parliament for settling the distractions of this Kingdom, and for the peace and
welfare thereof, and of His Majesty's Kingdom of Scotland, he the said Sir
Thomas Gardener did earnestly diswade them from it; saying, it was dangerous
and needless, and the Petition would come unseasonable to interrupt the Kings
affairs.

VI.
That in December last, when a petition was prepared and subscribed by many
thousands of the said Citizens to be presented to the House of Commons to
assure them of their good affection to the King and Parliament, and not to
divert the Parliament in their just ways: he the said Sir Thomas Gardener
caused some of the Petitioners to be sent for before the Lord Major and
himself, and questioned them as Rioters and disturbers of the peace, saying
that the putting of their hands to a Petition, was the way to put all together
by the ears, and being then answered by some of the said Petitioners, that
they sought nothing but peace, he replied in these or the like words: Is this
your way to peace? no, it tends to sedition and blood, and to cutting of
throats, and if it come to that you may thank your selves; your bloods be upon
your own heads; and he used other threatening speeches to discourage and
terrify the Petitioners from further proceeding in their said petition, which
Petition was afterward presented to the Lords and Commons in Parliament, and
well approved by them, and does not contain any dangerous matter, as was
maliciously by him pretended; as may appear by the Copy of a Petition hereunto
annexed.

VII.
That in January last, at a Court of Common Council in London, an Order of the
House of Commons was sent and delivered to the Lord Major, Aldermen, and
Common Council of the said City, appointing them to make choice of meet
persons to have the ordering of the Militia: Whereat the said Sir Thomas
Gardener was present and took notice of the said Order, and declared his
opinion, That the persons of the Committee formerly chosen for the safety of
the said City, were the fittest men to take that service upon them. Whereupon
the Lord Major and Sheriff desiring to be excused, the persons of the said
Committee were chosen by a clear Vote, and their names sent to the House of
Commons, and by them and the House of Peers allowed and approved of. Yet
afterward, he the said Sir Thomas Gardener endeavoring and plotting to hinder
^he proceedings in Parliament, the peace and safety of this Kingdom, did most
maliciously and wickedly advise and direct, the making and framing of two false
and seditious petitions. And he the said Sir Thomas Gardener upon perusal of
them, affirmed, the matters contained in them, to be agreeable to Law, and to
the custom of the said City; thereby encouraging diverse of the said City to
subscribe the same, and to send the one of them to be presented to His Majesty,
and the other unto the Lords and Commons in Parliament, which petitions do
contain in them, diverse false, scandalous, and seditious matters. And in
particular, that petition annexed hereunto, a Copy whereof was afterward
subscribed by diverse Citizens, and presented to the House of Commons contains
false matter, That the Ordering of the Arms of the said City of London, had
been time out of mind annexed to the Majoralty for the time being, and
insinu^ting that if the same should be conferred upon others, it would reflect
upon the Government and Custom of the said City, which every Freeman of the
said City, was by his Oath of Freedom bound to mayntain to the uttermost of
his power* Which Petitions were so contrived, framed, and published on purpose
to divert his Majesty from assenting to the said Ordinance, and to work a
distraction in the said City, and to bring the Parliament, City, and whole
Kingdom into disorder and confusion. All which matters committed and done by
the said Sir Thomas Gardener, were, and are high crimes and misdemeanors
contrary to the Laws of this Realm, and in subversion of them, and contrary to
the Rights and Privileges of Parliament, the liberty and propriety of the
subject, tending to sedition, and to the disturbance of the public peace of
this Realm.

And the said Commons by Protestation to themselves the liberty of exhibiting
at any time hereafter any other Accusation or Impeachment against the said Sir
Thomas Gardener, and also of replying to the answers that the said Sir Thomas
Gardener shall make unto the said Articles, or to any of them, and of offering
further proof of the premises, or any of them, or of any other Impeachment, or
Accusation that shall be exhibited by them, as the cause shall according to
the course of Parliament require, Do pray, that the said Sir Thomas Gardener
may be put to answer all and every the premises, And that such proceedings,
Exactions, Trials, and Judgments may be upon every of them, had and used, as
is agreeable to Law and Justice.

FINIS.

