DEPOSITIONS AND ARTICLES AGAINST THOMAS EARL OF STRAFFORD Febr. 16. 1640.

Printed in the year 1640.



ARTICLES OF the Commons assembled in Parliament, against THOMAS, Earl of
Strafford, in maintenance of their accusation, whereby he stands charged of
high Treason.
I.
THat he the said Thomas, Earl of Strafford, has traitorously endeavored to
subvert the fundamental Laws and government of the Realms of England and
Ireland, and instead thereof to introduce an arbitrary and tyrannical
Government against Law, which he has declared by traitorous words, counsels,
and actions, and by giving his Majesty advice, by force of Arms to compel his
loyal subjects to submit thereunto.

II.
That he has traitorously assumed to himself Regal power over the lives,
liberties, persons, lands, and goods of his Majesty's subjects in England and
Ireland, and has exercised the same tyrannically, to the subversion and
undoing of many both of Peers and others of his Majesty's Liege people.

III.
That the better to enrich and enable himself to go through with his
traitorous designs, he has detained a great part of his Majesty's revenue,
without giving legal account; and has taken great sums out of the
Exchequer, converting them to his own use, when his Majesty was necessirated
for his own urgent occasions, and his Army had been a long time unpaid.

IV.
That he has traitorously abused the power and authority of his government,
to the increasing, countenancing, and encouraging of Papists, that so he might
settle a mutual dependence and confidence betwixt himself and that party, and
by their help prosecute, and accomplish his malicious and tyrannical designs.

V.
That he has maliciously endeavored to stir up enmity and hostility
between his Majesty's subjects of England, and those of Scotland.

VI.
That he has traitorously broken the great trust reposed in him by his
Majesty, of Lieutenant general of his Army, by wilfully betraying diverse of
his Majesty's subjects to death, his Army to a dishonorable defeat by the
Scots at Newborn, and the Town of New Castle into their hands, to the end,
that by the effusion of blood, by dishonor, and so great a loss of
New Castle, his Majesty's Realm of England might be engaged in a National and
irreconciliable quarrel with the Scots.

VII.
That to preserve himself from being questioned for those and other his
traitorous courses, he labored to subvert the right of Parliaments, and the
ancient course of Parliamentary proceedings, and by false and malicious
slanders to incense his Majesty against Parliaments. By which words, counsels,
and actions, he has traitorously, and contrary to his Allegiance, labored to
alienate the hearts of the Kings liege people from his Majesty, to set a
division between them, and to ruin and destroy his Majesty's Kingdoms, for
which they impeach him of high Treason against our Sovereign Lord the King,
his Crown and dignity.

VIII.
And he the said Earl of Strafford was Lord Deputy of Ireland, and Lieutenant
general of the Army there, viz. His most excellent Majesty for his Kingdoms,
both of England and Ireland, and the L. President of the North, during the
time, that all and every the crimes and offenses before set forth were done and
committed, and he the said Earl was Lieutenant general of all his Majesty's
Army in the North parts of England, during the time that the crimes and
offenses in the fifth and sixth Articles set forth were done and committed.

IX.
And the said Commons by protestations, saving to themselves the liberty of
exhibiting at any time hereafter any other accusation or impeachment against
the said Earl, and also of replying to the answers that he the said Earl
shall make unto the said Articles, or to any of them, and of offering proves
also of the premises, or any of them, or any other impeachment or accusation
that shall be exhibited by them, as the cause shall according to the course of
Parliaments require, do pray that the said Earl may be put to answer for all
and every the premises, that such proceedings, examinations, trials, and
Judgments may be upon every of them had and used, as is agreeable to Law and
Justice.

The further impeachment of Thomas Earl of Strafford, by the Commons assembled
in Parliament.
1640.
WHereas the said Commons have already exhibited Articles against the said
Earl formerly expressed, etc. Now the said Commons do further impeach the
said Earl as follows, etc.

I.
That he the said Earl of Strafford the 21 day of March, in the 8. year of
his now Majesty's Reign, was president of the Kings Counsel in the Northern
parts of England.

That the said said Earl being President of the said Counsel on the 21. day
of March, a Commission under the great Seal of England, with certain
Schedules of instructions thereunto annexed, was directed to the said Earl, or
others the Commissioners therein named, whereby amongst other things, power and
authority is limited to the said Earl, and others the Commissioners therein
named, to hear and determine all offenses, and misdemeanors, suites, debates,
controversies, and demandes, causes, things, and matters, whatsoever therein
contained, and within certain precincts in the said Northene parts therein
specified, and in such manner as by the said Schedule is limited and appointed.

That amongst other things in the said Instructions, it is directed that the
said President and others therein appointed, shall hear and determine according
to the course of proceedings in the Court of Starchamber, diverse offenses,
deceits, and falsities therein mentioned, whether the same be provided for by
the Acts of Parliament, or not, so that the Fines imposed be not less then by
Act or Acts of Parliament provided for by those offenses is appointed.

That also amongst other things in the said instructions, it is directed that
the said president, and others therein appointed, have power to examine, hear,
and determine, accoring to the course of proceedings in the Court of Chancery,
all manner of complaints for any matter within the said precincts, as well
concerning lands, tenements, and hereditaments, either freehold, Customary, or
Copyhold, as Leases, and other things therein mentioned, and to stay
proceedings in the Court of Common Law by Injunction, or otherwise, by all
ways and means, as is used in the Court of Chancery.

And although the former Presidents of the said Counsel had never put in
practice such Instructions, nor had they any such Instructions, yet the said
Earl in the month of May, in the said 8 year, and diverse years following,
did put in practice, exercise, and use, and caused to be used and put in
practice the said Commission and Instructions, and did direct and exercise an
exorbitant and unlawful power and jurisdiction on the persons and estates of
his Majesty's subjects in those parts, and did dis-inherit diverse of his
Majesty's subjects in those parts of their inheritances, sequestered their
possessions, and did fine, ransom, punish and imprison them, and caused them
to be fined, ransomed, punished, and imprisoned, to their ruin and
destruction, and namely, Sir Coniers Darcy, Sir John Bourcher, and diverse
others, against the Laws, and in subversion of the same. And the said
Commission and Instrnctions were procured and issued by the advice of the said
Earl.

And he the said Earl, to the intent that such illegal and unjust power might
be exercised with the greater License and will, did advise, counsel, and
procure further directions, in and by the said Instructions to be given, that
no prohibition be granted at all, but in cases where the said Counsel shall
exceed the limits of the said instructions: And that if any Writ of Habeas
Corpus be granted, the party be not discharged till the party perform the
Decree and Order of the said Counsel.

And the said Earl in the 13. year of his now Majesty's Reign, did procure a
new Commission to himself and others therein appointed, with the said
Instructions, and other unlawful additions.

That the said Commission and instructions were procured by the solicitation
and advice of the said Earl of Strafford.

II.
That shortly after the obtaining of the said Commission dated the 21 of March,
in the 8 year of his now Majesty's Reign (to wit) the last day of August then
next following, he the said Earl (to bring his Majesty liege people into a
dislike of his Majesty and of his Government, and to terrify the Justices of
the Peace from executing of the Laws: he the said Earl, being then President,
as aforesaid, and a Justice of Peace) did publicly at the Assizes held for
the County of York, in the City of York, in and upon the said last day of
August, declare and publish before the people there attending for the
administration of Justice according to the Law, and in the presence of the
Justices sitting; That some of the Justices were all for Law, but they should
find that the Kings little singer should be heavier than the loins of the Law.

III.
That the Realm of Ireland having been time out of mind annexed to the
Imperial Crown of this his Majesty's Realm of England, and governed by the
same Laws: the said Earl being Lord Deputy of that Realm, to bring his
Majesty's liege people of that Kingdom likewise into dislike of his Majesty's
government, and intending the subversion of the sundamentall Laws and settled
government of that Realm, and the distraction of his Majesty's liege people
there, did upon the 30 day of September, in the ninth year of his now
Majesty's Reign, in the City of Dublin (the chief City of that Kingdom,
where his Majesty's privy Counsel, and Courts of Justice do ordinarily
reside, and whether the Nobility and Gentry of that Realm do usually resort
for Justice,) in a public Speech before diverse of the Nobility and Gentry,
and before the Major, Aldermen, and Recorder, and many Cirizens of Dublin, and
other his Majesty's Liege people, declare and publish, that Jreland was a
conquered Nation, and that the King might do with them what he pleased; and
speaking of the Charters of the former Kings of England made to that City, he
further said, that their Charters were nothing worth, and did bind the King no
further then he pleased.

IV.
That Richard Earl of Cork, having sued out Process in course of Law for
recovery of his possessions, from which he was put by color of an order made
by the said Earl of Strafford, and the Council Table of the said Realm of
Ireland. The said Earl of Strafford, upon a paper Petition without legal
proceeding, did the 20. day of February, in the 11. year of his now Majesty's
Reign, threaten the said Earl of Cork (being then a Peer of the said
Realm) to imprison him, unless he would surcease his snit, and said, That he
would have neither Law nor Lawyers dispute or question any of his orders. And
the 20 day of March in the said 1^ year of the said Earl of Strafford,
speaking of an order of the said Counfell Table of that Realm, in the time of
King James, which concerned a Lease which the said Earl of Cork claimed in
certain rectories or tithes which the said Earl of Cork alleged to be of
no force, said, That he would make the said Earl and all Ireland know, so long
as he had the Government there, any Act of State, there made, or to be made,
should be as binding to the subjects of that Kingdom, as an Act of
Parliament: And did question the said Earl of Cork in the Castle Chamber,
upon pretense of breach of the said order of Counsel Table, and did sundry
there times, and set upon sundry other occasions by his words and speeches
arrogate to himself a power above the fundamental laws, and established
Government of that Kingdom, and scorned the said Laws and established
Government.

V.
That according to such his declarations and speeches, the said Earl of
Strafford did use and exercise a power above, and against, and to the
subvertion of the said fundamental Laws, and stablished government of the
said Realm of Jreland, extending such his power to the goods, free-holds,
inheritances, Liberties, and lives of his Majesty's Subjects of the said
Realm, viz. The said Earl of Strafford the 12. day of December, Anno Dom.
1635. in the time of full peace, did in the said Realm of Jreland, give and
procure to be given against the Lord Mount-Norris (then and yet a Peer of
Jreland, and then Vice-Treasurer and receiver general of the Realm of
Ireland, and one of the principal Secretaries of State, and Keeper of the
Privy Signet of the said Kingdom, a sentence of death by a Council of War
called together by the said Earl of Strafford, without any warrant or
authority of Law, or offense deserving any such punishment. And he the said
Earl die also at Dublin within the said Realm of Jreland, in the month of
March, in the 14 year of his Majesty's Reign without any legal or due
proceedings or trial, give or cause to be given, a sentence of death against
one other of his Majesty's Subjects, whose name is yet unknown, and caused him
to be put to death in execution of the said sentence.

VI.
That the said Earl of Strafford, without any legal proceedings, and upon a
paper Petition of Richard Ralstone, did cause the said Lord Mount-Norris to be
disseized and put out of possession of his freehold and inheritance of his
Manor and Tymore in the Country of Armagh, in the Kingdom of Ireland, the
said Lord Mount-Norris having been two years before in quiet possession
thereof.

VII.
That the said Earl of Strafford, in the Term of Holy Trinity, in the 13
year of his now Majesty's Reign; did cause a case commonly called the case of
Tenures upon defective titles, to be made and drawn up without any jury or
trial, or other legal process, and without the consent of parties, and did
then procure the Judges of the said Realm of Jreland to deliver their opinions
and resolutions to that case, and by color of such opinion, did without any
legal proceeding, cause Thomas Lord Dillon, a Peer of the said Realm of
Jreland, to be put out of possession of diverse Lands and Tenements, being his
freehold in the Country of Mago and Rosecomen, in the said Kingdom, and
diverse other of his Majesty's subjects to be also put out of possession, and
disseized of their free hold by color of the same resolution, without legal
proceedings, whereby many hundreds of his Majesty's subjects were undone, and
their families utterly ruinated.

VIII.
That the said Earl of Strafford upon a Petition of Sir John Gifford Knight,
the first day of February, in the said 13 year of his Majesty's Reign,
without any legal process, made a Decree or Order against Adam Viscount Lofts
of Elie, a Peer of the said Realm of Jreland, and Lord Chancellor of Jreland,
and did cause the said Uiscount to be imprisoned and kept close prisoner, on
pretense of disobedience to the said decree or order.

And the said Earl without any authority, and contrary to his Commission,
required and commanded the said Lord Viscount to yield unto him the great Seal
of the Realm of Ireland, which was then in his custody, by his Majesty's
command, and imprisoned the said Chancellor for not obeying such his command.

And without any legal proceedings, did in the same thirteenth year imprison
George Earl of Kildare, a Peer of Jreland, against Law, thereby to enforce
him to submit his title to the Manor and Lordship of Castle Leigh in the
Queens County, (being of great yearly value) to the said Earl of Straffords
will and pleasure, and kept him a year prisoner for the said cause, two
months whereof he kept him close prisoner, and refused to enlarge him,
notwithstanding his Majesty's Letters for his enlargement to the said Earl of
Strafford directed.

And upon a Petition exhibited in October, 1635. by Thomas Hibbots against dame
Mary Hibbots Widow, to him the said Earl of Strafford, the said Earl of
Strafford recommended the said Petition to the Counsel Table of Ireland, where
the most part of the Counsel gave their vote and opinion for the said Lady,
but the said Earl finding fault herewith, caused an order to be entered against
the said Lady, and threatened her, that if she refused to submit thereunto, he
would imprison her, and fine her five hundred pound; that if she continued
obstinate, he would continue her imprisonment, and double her fine every month
by month, whereof she was enforced to relinquish her estate in the land
questioned in the said Petition, which shortly was conveyed to Sir Robert
Meredith, to the use of the said Earl of Strafford.

And the said Earl in like manner did imprison diverse others of his Majesty's
Subjects upon pretense of disobedience to his orders and decrees, and other
illegal command by him made for pretended debts, titles of Lands, and other
causes in an arbitrary and extrajudiciall course, upon Paper Petitions to him
preferred, and no other cause legally depending.

IX.
That the said Earl of Strafford the sixtenth day of Febr. in the 12. year of
his now Majesty's Reign, assuming to himself a power above and against Law,
took upon him by a general Warrant under his hand, to give power to the Lord
Bishop of Down, and Connor his Chancellor, or Chancellors, to their several
Officers thereto to be appointed, to Attach and Arrest the Bodies of all such
of the meaner and poorer sort, where after citation should either refuse to
appear before them, or appearing should omit, or deny to perform, or undergo
all lawful decrees, sentences, and orders, issued, imposed, or given out
against them, and them, to commit and keep in the next Goal, until they
should either perform such sentences, or put in sufficient Bail to show some
reason before the Counsel Table, of such their contempt and neglect; and the
said Earl, the day and year last mentioned, signed and issued a Warrant to
that effect, and made the like Warrant to send to all other Bishops and their
Chancellors in the said Realm of Ireland to the same effect.

X.
That the said Earl of Strafford being Lord Lieutenant, or Deputy of Jreland,
procured the Customs of the Merchandise exported out, and imported into that
Realm to be farmed to his own use.

And in the ninth year of his now Majesty's Reign, he having then intrest in
the said Customs (to advance his own gain and lucre) did cause and procure
the native commodities of Jreland, to be rated in the book of Rates for the
Customs (according to which the Customs were usually gathered) at far
greater values and prices, then in truth they were worth (that is to say) every
hide at 20. shillings, which in truth was worth but five shillings, every stone
of Wool at thirteen shillings four pence, though the same ordinarily were
worth but five shillings, at the utmost but nine shillings; by which means the
custom which before was but a twentieth part of the true value of the
commodity, was inhansed sometimes to a fifth part, and sometimes to a fourth,
and sometimes to a third part of the true value, to the great oppression of the
subjects, and decay of Merchandise.

XI.
That the said Earl, in the ninth year of his now Majesty's Reign, did by
his own will and pleasure, and for his own lucre restrain the exportation of
the commodities of that Kingdom without his license, as namely, Pipe-staves,
and other commodities, and then raised great sums of money for licensing of
exportation of those commodities, and dispensation of the said restraints
imposed on them, by which means the pipe-staves were raised from four pound
ten shillings; or 5 pound per thousand to ten pound, and sometimes eleven pound
per thousand, and other commodities were inhanced in the like proportion, and
by the same means by him the said Earl.

XII.
That the said Earl being Lord Deputy of Ireland, on the ninth day of January
in the thirteenth year of his Majesty's Reign, did then under color to
regulate the Importation of Tobacco into the said Realm of Ireland, issue a
Proclamation in his Majesty's name, prohibiting the importation of Tobacco
without license of him and the Counsel, there from and after the first day of
May, Anno Dom. 1638. after which restraint, the said Earl, notwithstanding the
said restraint, caused diverse great quantities of Tobacco to be imported to his
own use, and fraughted diverse ships with Tobacco, which he imported to his
own use: and that if any ship brought Tobacco into any Port there, the said
Earl and his Agents used to buy the same to his own use, at their own price.
And if that the owners refused to let him have the same at under values, then
they were not permitted to vent the same; by which undue means, the Earl
having gotten the whole Trade of Tobacco, into his own hands, he sold it at
great and excessive prices, such as he list to impose for his own profit.

And the more to assure the said Monopoly of Tobacco, he the said Earl on the
23. day of February, in the thirteenth year aforesaid, did issue another
Proclamation; commanding that none should put to sale any Tobacco by
wholesale, from and after the last day of May, then next following but what
should be made up into Rolls, and the same sealed with two Seals by himself
appointed, one at each end of the Roll. And such as was not Sealed to be
seized, appointing six pence the pound for a reward to such persons as should
seize the same: and the persons in whose custody the unsealed Tobacco should be
found to be committed to Goal, which last proclamation was covered by a
pretense for the restraining of the seal of unholsome Tobacco, but it was
truly to advance the said Monopoly.

Which Proclamation the said Earl did rigorously put in execution, by ceazing
the goods, fining, imprisoning, whipping, and putting the offenders against the
same Proclamation on the pillory, as namely, Barnaby Hubbard, Edward Covena,
John Tumen, and diverse others: and made the Officers of State, and Justices of
Peace, and other Officers to serve him in compassing and executing these unjust
and undue courses, by which cruelties and unjust Monopolies, the said Earl
rised 100000. pound per annum gain to himself. And yet the said Earl though
he inhanced the Customs, where it concerned the Merchants in general, yet
drew down the impost formerly taken on Tobacco from fix pence the pound to 3.
pence the pound, it being for his own profit so to do. And the said Earl, by
the same, and other rigorous and undue means, raised several other Monopolies
and unlawful exactions for his own gain, viz. on Starch, Iron pots, Glasses,
Tobacco pipes, and several other commodities.

XIII.
That flax being one of the principal and native Commodities of that Kingdom
of Ireland, the said Earl having gotten great quantities thereof into his
hands, and growing on his own Lands, did issue out several Proclamations,
viz. one dated the one and twentieth day of May, in the eleventh of his
Majesty's reign, and the other dated the 31 day of January in the same year,
thereby prescribing and injoyning the working of Flax into Yarne and Thread,
and the ordering of the same in such ways wherein the Natives of that Kingdom
were unpractised and unskilful: which Proclamations so issued, were, by his
commands and warrants to his Majesty's Justices of Peace, and other Officers,
and by other rigorous means put in execution, and the Flax wrought or ordered
in other manner then as the said Proclamation prescribed, was seized and
employed to the use of him and his agents, and thereby the said Earl
endeavored to gain, and did gain in effect the sole sale of that native
commodity.

XIV.
That the said Earl of Strafford, by Proclamation dated the 16 day of October,
in the 14 year of his Majesty's Reign, did mpose upon the Owners, Masters,
Pursers, and Boatswaines of every ship, a new and unlawful oath, viz. that
they (two or more of them) immediately after the arrival of any ship within
any Port or Creek in the said Kingdom of Ireland, should give in a true in
voice of the outward bulk of Wares and Merchandises, and number of goods, and
the qualities and condition of the said goods, as far as to them should be
known, the names of the several Merchants proprietours of the said goods, and
the places from whence they were fraughted, and whither they were bound to
discharge: which Proclamation was accordingly put in execution, and sundry
persons enforced to take the said unlawful Oath.

XV.
That the said Earl of Strafford traitorously and wickedly devised and
contrived by force of Arms in a warlike manner to subdue the Subjects of the
said Realm of Jreland, to bring them under his tyrannical power and will, and
in pursuance of his wicked and traiterous purposes aforesaid, the said Earl of
Strafford in the eighth year of his Majesty's Reign, did by his own
authority, without any warrant or color of Law, tax and impose great sums of
money upon the Towns of Baltemore, Baudenbridge, Talowe, and diverse other
Towns and places in the said Realm of Jreland, and did cause the same to be
levied upon the Inhabitants of those Towns by troops of Soldiers, with force
and arms, in a warlike manner. And on the ninth day of March, in the twelfth
year of his now Majesty's Reign, traitorously did give authority unto Robert
Savile, a Sergeant at Arms, and to the Captains of the Companies of
Soldiers, in several parts of that Realm, to send such numbers of Soldiers
to lie on the Lands and Houses of such as would not conform to his orders,
until they should render obedience to his said orders and warrants, and after
such submission (and not before) the said Soldiers to return to their
Garrisons. And did also issue the like Warrants unto diverse others, which
Warrants were in warlike manner, with force and Arms put in execution
accordingly, and by such warlike means did force diverse of his Majesty's
subjects of that Realm, to submit themselves to his unlawful commands.

And in the said twelfth year of his Majesty's Reign, the said Earl of
Strafford did traitorously cause certain troops of horse and foot, armed in
warlike manner, and in warlike array, with force and arms, to expel Richard
Butler from the possession of Castle-Cumber, in the Territory of Idough, in the
said Realm of Ireland, and did likewise and in like warlike manner, expel
diverse of his Majesty's Subjects from their houses, families, and possessions,
as namely, Edward Brenman. Owen Oberman, Patricke Oberman, Sir Cyprian
Horsfield, and diverse others, to the number of about an hundred families, and
took and imprisoned them and their wives, and carried them prisoners to
Dublin, and there detained them until they did yield up, surrender, or release
their respective estates and rights.

And the said Earl, in like warlike manner, has during his government of the
said Kingdom of Jreland, subdued diverse others of his Majesty's subjects
easily to his will, and thereby, and by the means aforesaid, has levied war
within the said Realm against his Majesty, and his liege people of that
Kingdom.

XVI.
That the said Earl of Strafford, the two and twentieth of February, in the
seventh year of his now Majesty's Reign, intending to oppress the said
Subjects of Ireland, did make a proposition, and obtained from his Majesty an
allowance, that no complaint of injustice or oppression done in Ireland, should
be received in England against any, unless it first appeared, that the party
made first his address to him the said Earl: and the said Earl having by
such usurped, tyrannical and exorbitant power, expressed in the former
Articles, destroyed the Peers and other subjects of that Kingdom of Ireland,
in their lives, consciences, land, liberties, and estates, the said Earl to the
intent the better to maintain and strengthen his power, and to bring the
people into a disaffection of his Majesty, as aforesaid, did use his Majesty's
name in the execution of his said power. And to prevent the subjects of that
Realm of all means of complaints to his Majesty, and of redress against him
and his agents, did issue a Proclamation bearing date the seventeenth day of
September, in the eleventh year of his Majesty's Reign, thereby commanding
all the Nobility, undertakers and others, who held estates and offices in the
said kingdom (except such as were employed in his Majesty's service, or
attending in England by his special command) to make their personal residence
in the said Kingdom of Ireland, and not to depart thence without license of
himself. And the said Earl has since issued other Proclamations to the same
purpose, by means whereof the subjects of the said Realm are restrained from
seeking relief against the oppressions of the said Earl without his license:
which Proclamation the said Earl has by several rigoruos ways, as by fine,
imprisonment, and otherwise, put in execution on his Majesty's subjects, as
namely, one -- Parry, and others, who came over only to complain of the
exorbitances and oppressions of the said Earl.

XVII.
That the said Earl having by such means as aforesaid, subverted the
government and laws of the Kingdom of Ireland, did in March in the 16 year
of his Majesty's Reign, in scandal of his Majesty, of all his Kingdoms, and
in further execution of his wicked purposes aforesaid, speaking of the Armies
in Ireland, declare, that his Majesty was so well pleased with the Army of
Ireland, and the consequence thereof, that his Majesty would certainly make
the same a pattern for all his three Kingdoms.

XVIII.
That the said Earl of Strafford, for the better effecting of his traytrous
designs and wicked puposes, did endeavor to draw dependency upon himself of
the Papists in both Kingdoms of Eengland and Ireland, and to that end during
the time of government in Jreland, he restored diverse Frieries and
Masse-houses (which had been formerly suppressed by precedent Deputies of that
Kingdom, two of which houses were in the City of Dublin, and had been assigned
to the use of the University there) to the pretended owners thereof, who have
since employed the same to the exercise of the Popish Religion.

And in the month of May and June last, the said Earl did raise an Army in
the said Realm of England, consisting of eight thousand foot, all of which,
except one thousand or there abouts, were Papists, and the said one thousand
were drawn out of the old Army there consisting of two thousand foot, and in
their places there were a thousand Papists, or thereabouts, put into the said
old Army by the said Earl.

And the more to engage and tie the new Army of Papists to himself, and to
encourage them, and to discourage and wear out the old Army, the said Earl
did so provide; That the said new Army of Papists were duly paid, and had all
necessaries provided for them, and permitted the exercise of their Religion,
but the said old Army were for the space of one whole year and upwards unpaid.

And that the said Earl being appointed a Commissioner within eleven several
Counties in the Northern parts of England, for compounding with Recusants for
their forfeitures due to his Majesty; which commission bears date the eight
day of July in the fifth year of his Majesty's Reign that now is, and being
also receiver of the composition money thereby arising, and of other debts,
duties, and penalties for his Majesty's use, by Letters Patents, dated the
ninth day of the said July: he, to engage the said Recusants to him, did
compound with them at low and under rates, and provided that they should be
discharged of all proceedings against them, in all his Majesty's Courts, both
temporal and Ecclesiastical, in manifest breach of and contrary to the Laws
and Statutes of this Realm, in that behalf established.

XIX.
That the said Earl having taxed and levied the said impositions, and raised
the said Monopolies, and committed the said oppressions in his Majesty's name,
and as by his Majesty's Royal command, he the said Earl in May the fifteenth
year of his Majesty's Reign, did of his own authority contrive and frame a
new and unusual oath, by the purport whereof among many other things, the
party taking the said oath, was to swear that he should not protest against
any of his Majesty's Royal commands, but submit themselves in all obedience
thereunto. Which oath he so contrived to enforce the same on the subjects of
the Scottish Nation, inhabiting in Ireland, and out of a hatred to the said
Nation, and to put them to a discontent with his Majesty, and his government
there, and compelled diverse of his Majesty's said Subjects there to take the
said oath, some he grievously fined and imprisoned, and others he destroyed and
exiled, and namely, the 10. of October, Anno Dom. 1639. he fined Henry Steward
and his wife, who refused to take the said oath, five thousand pounds a piece,
and their two daughters and James Gray, three thousand pounds a piece, and
imprisoned them for not paying the said fines. The said Henry Stewards wife and
daughters and James Gray, being the Kings liege people of the Scottish Nation,
and diverse others he used in the like manner; and the said Earl upon that
occasion did declare, that the said oath did not only oblige them in point of
allegiance to his Majesty, and acknowledgement of his Supremacy only, but to
the Ceremonies and government of the Church established, or to be established
by his Majesty's royal Authority; and said, that the refusers to obey, he
would prosecute to the blood.

XX.
That the said Earl in the 15. and 16. years of his Majesty's Reign, and
diverse years past, labored and endeavored to beget in his Majesty an ill
opinion of his Subjects, namely, those of the Scottish Nation, and diverse and
sundry times, and especially since the pacification made by his Majesty with
his said Subjects of Scotland in Summer, in the fifteenth year of his
Majesty's reign; he, the said Earl did labor and endeavor to persuade,
incite, and provoke his Majesty to an offensive war against his said
Subjects of the Scottish Nation: and the said Earl, by his counsel, actions,
and endeavors, has been and is a principal and chief incendiary of the
war and discord between his Majesty and his Subjects of England, and the
said Subjects of Scotland, and has declared, and advised his Majesty, that
the demand made by the Scots in this Parliament were a sufficient cause of
war against them. The said Earl having formerly expressed the height and
rancor of his mind toward his Subjects of the Socttish Nation, viz. the tenth
day of October, in the fifteenth year of his Majesty's Reign, he said that
the Nation of the Scots were rebels, and traitors; and he being then about to
come to England, he then further said, that if it pleased his Master (meaning
his Majesty) to send him back again, he would root out of the said Kingdom
(meaning the Kingdom of Ireland) the Scottish Nation both root and branch.
Some Lords, and others, who had taken the said Oath in the precedent Article
only excepted: and the said Earl has caused diverse of the said Ships and
goods of the Scots to be stayed, seized, and molested, to the intent to set on
the said war.

XXI.
That the said Earl of Strafford, shortly after his speeches mentioned in the
last precedent Article, to wit, in the fifteenth year of his Majesty's Reign,
came into this Realm of England, and was made Lord Lieutenant of Ireland, and
continued his government of that Kingdom by a Deputy: At his arrival here,
finding that his Majesty with much wisdom and goodness had composed the
troubles in the North, and had made a Pacification with his Subjects of
Scotland; he labored by all means to procure his Majesty to break that
pacification, incensing his Majesty against his Subjects of that Kingdom, and
the proceedings of the Parliament there. And having incensed his Majesty to an
offensive war against his said Subjects of Scotland, by Sea and by Land; and
by pretext thereof, to raise Forces for the maintenance of that war: he
counseled his Majesty to call a Parliament in England, yet the said Earl
intended, if the said proceedings of that Parliament should not be such as
would stand with the said Earl of Straffords mischievous designs, he would
then procure his Majesty to break the same, and by ways of force and power,
to raise moneys upon the said Subjects of this Kingdom.

And for the encouragement of his Majesty to hearken to his advice, he did
before his Majesty and his Privy Council, then sitting in Counsel, make a
large Declaration, that he would serve his Majesty in any other way, in case
the Parliament should not supply him.

XXII.
That in the month of March, before the beginning of the last Parliament, the
said Earl of Strafford went into Ireland, and procured the Parliament of that
Kingdom to declare their assistance in a war against the Scots. And gave
directions for the raising of an Army consisting of 8000. foot, and 1000.
horse, being for the most part Papists, as aforesaid. And confederating with
one Sir George Radcliffe, did together with him the said Sir George,
traitorously conspire to employ the said Army for the ruin and destruction of
the Kingdom of England, and of his Majesty's Subjects, and of altering and
subverting of the fundamental Laws of this Kingdom.

And shortly after, the said Earl of Strafford returned into England, and to
sundry persons declared his opinion to be, that his Majesty should first try
the Parliament here, and if that did not supply him according to his occasions,
he might then use his Prerogative as he pleased, to levy what he needed, and
that he should be acquitted both of God and man, if he took some other courses
to supply himself, though it were against the will of his Subjects.

XXIII.
That upon the thirteenth day of April last, the Parliament of England met,
and the Commons house (then being the representative Body of all the Commons in
the Kingdom) did according to the trust reposed in them, enter into debate and
consideration of the great grievances of this Kingdom, both in respect of
Religion, and the public Liberty of the Kingdom; and his Majesty referring
chiefly to the said Earl of Strafford, and the Archbishop of Canterbury, the
ordering and disposing of all matters concerning the Parliament: He the said
Earl of Strafford, with the assistance of the said Archbishop, did procure his
Majesty, by sundry speeches and messages, to urge the said Commons house to
enter into some resolution for his Majesty's supply, for maintenance of his
war against his Subjects of Scotland, before any course was taken for the
relief of the great and pressing grievances, wherewith this Kingdom was then
afflicted. Whereupon, a demand was then made from his Majesty, of twelve
Subsidies, for the release of Ship Money only; and while the said Commons then
assembled (with expressions of great affection to his Majesty and his service)
were in debate and consideration of some supply, before resolution by them
made, He the said Earl of Strafford, with the help and assistance of the said
Archbishop, did procure his Majesty to dissolve the last Parliament, upon the
fifth day of May last: and upon the same day, the said Earl of Strafford did
treacherously, falsely, and maliciously endeavor to incense his Majesty
against his loving and faithful Subjects, who had been members of the said
house of Commons, by telling his Majesty, they had denied to supply him. And
afterward upon the same, did treacherously and wickedly counsel and advise his
Majesty to this effect, viz. that having tried the affections of his people,
he was loose and absolved from all Rules of government, and was to do every
thing that power would admit, and that his Majesty had tried always, and was
refused, and should be acquitted both of God and man; and that He had an Army
in Ireland (meaning the Army above mentioned, consisting of Papists, his
dependants, as is aforesaid) which He might employ to reduce this Kingdom to
obedience.

XXIV.
That in the same month of May, He the said Earl of Strafford, falsely,
treacherously, and maliciously, published and declared before others of his
Majesty's Privy Council, that the Parliament of England had forsaken the
King, and that in denying to supply the King, they had given him the advantage
to supply himself by other ways: and diverse other times he did maliciously,
wickedly, and falsely publish and declare, that seeing the Parliament had
refused to supply his Majesty in the ordinary and usual way, the King might
provide for the Kingdom in such ways, as he should hold fit, and that he was
not to suffer himself to be mastered by the frowardness of the people.

And having so maliciously slandered the said house of Commons, he did with
the help and advice of the said Archbishop of Canterbury and the Lord Finch,
late Lord Keeper of the great Seal of England: cause to be printed, and
published in his Majesty's name, a false and scandalous book entitled, His
Majesty's Declaration of the pauses that moved him to dissolve the last
Parliament, full of bitter and malicious invectives, and false, and scandalous
aspersions against the said house of Commons.

XXV.
That not long after the dissolution of the said last Parliament, ( viz. In the
months of May and June) he the Earl of Straffard did advise the King to go
on rigorously in leavying the Ship Money, and did procure the Sheriffs of
several Countries to be sent for, for not levying the Ship-mony, diverse of
which were threatened by him to be sued in the Starchamber, and afterward by
his advice were sued in the Starchamber, for not levying the same, and diverse
of his Majesty's loving Subjects were sent for and imprisoned by his advice,
about that and other illegal payments.

And a great loan of a hundred thousand pounds was demanded of the City of
London, and the Lord Major and the Aldermen and the Sheriffs of the said City,
were often sent for by his advice to the Council Table, to give an account of
their proceedings in raising of Ship-mony, and furthering of that loan, and
were required to certify the names of such Inhabitants of the said City as
were fit to lend, which they with much humility refusing to do, he the said
Earl of Strafford did use these or the like speeches: viz. That they deserved
to be put to Fine and Ransom, and that no good would be done with them, till an
example were made of them, and they were laid by the heels, and some of the
Aldermen hanged up.

XXVI.
That the said Earl of Strafford by his wicked counsel having brought his
Majesty into excessive charges without any just cause, he did in the month of
July last (for the support of the said great charges) counsel and approve two
dangerous and wicked Projects: viz.

To seize upon the Bullion and the Money in the Mint.

And to imbase his Majesty's Coin with the mixtures of Brass.

And accordingly (...) procured one hundred and thirty thousand pounds which
was then in the Mint, and belonging to diverse Merchants, strangers and others,
to be seized on and stayed to his Majesty's use. And when diverse Merchants of
London, owners of the said Bullion, came to his house to let him understand the
great mischief, that course would produce here, and in other parts, what
prejudice it would be to the Kingdom, by discrediting the Mint, and hindering
the importation of Bullion: he the said Earl told them, that the City of
London dealt undutifully and unthankefully with his Majesty: and that they were
more ready to help the Rebel, then to help his Majesty: and that if any hurt
came to them, they might thank themselves: and that it was the course of other
Princes, to make use of such moneys to serve their occasions

And when in the same month of July, the Officers of his Majesty's Mint came
to him and gave him diverse reasons against the imbasing of the said money, he
told them that the French King did use to send Commissaries of Horse with
Commission to search into men's estates, and to peruse their accounts, so that
they may know what to levy of them by force, which they did accordingly levy:
and turning to the Lord Cottington then present, said, That this was a point
worthy his Lordships consideration.

XXVII.
That in or about the month of August last he was made Lieutenant general of
all his Majesty's forces in the Northern parts against the Scots, and being at
York did in the month of September by his own authority, and without any
lawful warrant, impose a Tax on his Majesty's subjects in the County of York,
of 8. pence per diem, for maintenance of every Soldier of the trained bands of
that County, which sums of money he caused to be levied by force. And to the
end to compel his Majesty's subjects out of fear and terror to yield to the
payment of the same, He did declare that he would commit them that refused the
payment thereof, and the Soldiers should be satisfied out of their estates;
and they that refused it, were in very little better condition then of High
Treason.

XXVIII.
That in the month of September and October last, he the said Earl of
Strafford being certified of the Scottish Army coming into the Kingdom, and
he the said Earl of Strafford being Lieutenant general of his Majesty's
Army, did not provide for the defense of the Town of Newcastle as He ought to
have done, but suffered the same to be lost, that so he might the more incense
the English against the Scots. And for the same wicked purpose, and out of a
malicious desire to engage the Kingdoms of England and Scotland in a National
and bloody war, he did write to the Lord Conway the general of the horse, and
under the said Earls command, that he should fight with the Scottish Army at
the passage over the Tyne, whatsoever should follow, notwithstanding that the
said Lord Conway had formerly by Letters informed him the said Earl, that his
Majesty's Army then under his command, was not of force sufficient to encounter
the Scots, by which advice of his, he did contrary to the duty of his place
betray his Majesty's Army then under his command, to apparent danger and loss.

All and every which words, counsels, and actions of the said Earl of
Strafford traitorously and contrary to his allegiance to our Soveragne Lord the
King, and with an intention and endeavor to alienate and withdraw the hearts
and affections of the Kings liege people of all his Realms from his Majesty,
and to set a division between them, and to ruin and destroy His Majesty's
said Kingdoms. For which they do further impeach him the said Thomas, Earl
of Strafford of High Treason against our Sovereign Lord the King, his Crown
and dignity.

FINIS.

