ARTICLES OF IMPEACHMENT, OF THE COMMONS Assembled in PARLIAMENT in the name of
themselves, and of all the Commons of ENGLAND, Against Matthew Wren Doctor in
Divinity, late Bishop of Norwich, and now Bishop of Ely, for several crimes,
and misdemeanors committed by him, when he was Bishop of Norwich.

Printed, Anno 1641.

Articles of impeachment against Matthew Wren Doctor in Divinity, late Bishop
of Norwich, and now Bishop of Ely.
THat the said Matthew Wren, being Popishly and superstitiously affected, did
at his first coming to be Bishop of Norwich, which was in the year 1635.
endeavor by sundry ways, and means, to suppress the powerful and painful
Preaching of the Word of God; did introduce diverse orders, and Injunctions,
tending to superstition and Idolatry; did disturb, and disquiet the orderly,
and settled estate of the Ministers, and people, and Churches of that Diocese,
to the great prejudice of His Majesty, the great grief and disquiet, and hazard
of the estates, consciences, and lives of many of His Majesty's Loyal Subjects
there, to the manifest bringing in, and increasing of profaneness, ignorance,
and disobedience in the Common people, (as by the particulars ensuing may
appear.)

I.
Whereas many Chancels of Churches, during all the time of Queen Elizabeth,
King James, and of his Majesty that now is, had laid and been continued even,
and flat, without any steps ascending cowards the East End of the same, and are
by the Rubric in the Book of Common Prayer, ordered to continue as they were,
and so ought to have continued. He of his own mind and will, without any
lawful warrant or authority, in the year 1636. being then Bishop of Norwich,
ordered and enjoined, that the same should be raised toward the East End, some
two, some three, some four steps, that so the Communion Table there placed
Altarwise, might be the better seen of the people.

II.
He in the same year 1636. ordered, That the Communion Table which is appointed
by the said Rubric, at the time of the celebration of the holy Communion, to
be placed in the Body of the Church or Chancell, where Divine Prayers are
usually read, and where the people might best hear, should be set up close
under the Wall at the East End of the Chancell Altarwise, and not to be removed
from thence; whereby the Minister, who is by the Law to officlate at the
Northside of the Table, must either stand and officiate at the North-end of the
Table so standing Altarwise, or else after the Popish and Idolatrous manner,
stand and officiate at the Westside of the Table with his back toward the
people.

III.
He in the same year 1636. enjoined that there should be a Rayl set on the top
of the new raised steps before the Communion Table so set Altarwise as
aforesaid, which Rayl should reach from the Southside of the Chancell to the
North within, which the Minister only should enter, as a place too holy for
the people; and some of the people were punished for stepping into it, as
namely Daniel Whayman, and others.

IV.
The more to advance blind superstition, he in the same year 1636. ordered
that all the Pewes in the Churches should be so altered, that the people might
kneel with their faces Eastward, toward the Communion Table so set Altarwise
as aforesaid; And that there should be no seats in the Chancell above, or on
either side even up with the said Table.

V.
He in the same year 1636. enjoined that every Minister after he had finished
the reading of some part of the Morning-Prayer, at the Desk, should go out from
the same to the holy Table set Altarwise, as to a more holy place and there,
when no Communion was to be administered, read at the said Table a part of the
Communion Service, now commonly called the second Service, whereby the
consciences both of the Minister, and people, have been not only very much
offended, and grieved, but also the Service it self was made very unprofitable
to the people, who could not hear what was said, or prayed in that place.

VI.
That both he in his own person, his Chaplains, and others of the Clergy, as
namely, Master John Novell, Master William Guest, Master John Dunckon, and
others following his example, did ever after the Table was so set Altarwise,
use and perform such, so many, and so frequent bowing, and adorations before,
and toward the said Table as have been dangerous examples to draw others to
the like superstitious gestures, and have given great scandal, and offense to
the sound, sincere, and well affected Christians.

VII.
He in the said year 1636. enjoined all the people to come up to the Rayl to
receive the holy Communion, and there kneel, and do reverence before the holy
Table placed Altarwise* And gave directions to the Ministers, not to administer
the Communion to such people as should not so come up, and do such reverence as
aforesaid, And that the Minister should within the Rayl deliver the Bread to
such people only as should so come up and kneel before the said Table as
aforesaid. This was to the offense of the consciences of many good people, who
for fear of Idolatry and superstition, durst not come to kneel at the said Rayl
before the Table so placed Altarwise; and many people not coming up thither,
though presenting themselves upon their knees in the Chancell, have not had the
Communion delivered unto them, and afterward for not receiving have been
excommunicated, as namely. John Shyming, Samuel Dunckon, Peter Fisher, Thomas
Newton, Edward Bedwell, Edmund Day, John Frowar, and many others.

VIII.
He did in the said year 1636. enjoin and command that there should be no
Sermons on the Lords days in the afternoon, or on the week days at all,
without his License. And also enjoined that there should be no Catechizing, but
only such questions, and answers, as are contained in the Book of the Common
prayer. Not allowing the Ministers to expound or open the points of the same to
the people. He and his under officers affirming in public places, that such an
exposition might be as ill as a Sermon. And the more to hearten, and confirm
the people in profaning the Lords day, He enjoined the Ministers to read
publicly in their Churches, a Book published touching sports on the Lords Day.
For not reading whereof, some Ministers were by the command and directions of
the said Bishop suspended, viz. Maker William Leigh, Mr Richard Proud, Mr
Jonothan Burr, Mr Matthew Brownrigg, Mr Mott, and diverse others, some deprived,
Master Powell, Mr Richard Raymond, Mr Jeremy Borrowes, and some otherwise
troubled. By all which, knowledge was suppressed, and ignorance and
prophannesse introduced in that Diocese.

IX.
There having been formerly two kinds of ringing of Bells, and calling people to
the Church in that Diocese (viz.) one kind, when there were only Prayers to
be read, and another kind, when there were both Prayers to be read, and a
Sermon preached, whereby the people did apply themselves to the Service of God
in those places, where both Prayers, and Preaching was to be; He to hinder the
people in their good desires of serving of God, and edifying their souls, did
in the same year 1636. command, and enjoin that there should be no difference
in ringing of Bells to Church when there was a Sermon, and when there was none.

X.
Whereas many godly Ministers for the preventing of the great sin in the
people of unworthy receiving the holy Communion of the Lords Supper, did use to
preach two or three days before every Communion, a preparation Sermon to
prepare, and instruct the people in the right and worthy receiving of the
Communion, He the said Bishop did in the said year 1636. forbid Ministers to
preach any such preparation Sermon in that Diocese, as namely, Master
Devereox, Master Swayn, and other Ministers.

XI.
Whereas all Gods Ordinances are sanctified, and made fruitful by the blessing
of God upon them by Prayer. He endeavoring to suppress the power, and benefit
of Prayer in the year 1636, enjoined that no Minister should use any prayer
before his Sermon, but move the people to pray only in the words of the fifty
fifth Canon made Anno Dom. 1603. which Canon was not warranted by the Law. And
that no prayer should be used before or after the Sermon. And he in his own
person having been at the Sermon in the Town of Ipswich when the Preacher did
use or make any other prayer, did sit upon his seat withont using, or giving
any reverence of kneeling, or otherwise, thereby to discountenance such prayer.
And he in the said year 1636. enjoined that no prayer should be made in the
Pulpit for the sick, and that such as were prayed for in the reading Desk,
should be prayed for only in the two Collects prescribed for the visitation of
the sick in private houses.

XII.
He the more to alienate the peoples heart from hearing of Sermons in the said
year 1636. commanded, and enjoined all Ministers to preach constantly in their
hood, and Surplice, a thing not used before in that Diocese, and much
offensive to the people as a scandalous innovation. And the Parishioners of
Knattshall wanting a Surplice, he did by his Officers in the year 1637. enioyn
the Churchwardens there, that no prayers should be read in that Church till
they had got a Surplice, which they not getting for the space of two Lords
days after, had no prayers during that time there.

13. That during the time of his being Bishop of Norwich, which was about two
years, and four months, There were for not reading the second service, at
the Communion Table set Altarwise, for not reading the book of sports, for
using conceived prayers before and after Sermons, And for not observing some
other illegal innovations by him, and his underofficers, by and upon his
directions, and Injunctions, sundry Godly painful preaching ministers, that is
to say, Master William Powell, Master John Carter, Master Robert Peck. Master
William Bridge, Master William Green, Master Mott, Master Richard Raymond,
Master Thomas Scot, Master Greenehill, Master Nicholas Beard, Master Hudson,
Robert Kent, Jeremy Burrow, Master Thomas Allen, and others to the number
fifty, were excommunicated, suspended, or deprived and otherwise censured, and
silenced, to the undoing of many of them, their wives, and children, and they
could not be absolved without giving promise to conform to his directions
editis and edendis, by means whereof some ministers were enforced to depart
this Realm into Holland, and other parts beyond Sea, viz. the said Mr. William
Bridge, Mr. Jeremy Borrowes, Mr. Thomas Allen, Mr. John Ward, and others of
Norwich, to remove into other more peaceable diocesses, as namely Mr. Edmund
Calamy, Mr. Broom, Mr. Beard and others, and some of them so prosecuted, as
has been suspected to be the Cause of their deaths, as namely Mr. Thomas
Scot and others; the terror of which proceedings has caused other ministers to
leave their Cures, and go away, viz. Mr. William Kirington, Mr. Thomas Warren,
Master John Allen and others; and if a stranger preached at the Cure of such
person suspended, the Churchwardens permitting such person so to preach, were
enjoined penance, and otherwise troubled, as namely the Churchwardens of
Snailwell, and the stranger for preaching, was also therefore molested, viz,
Mr. Ash, Mr. Eades, Master Manning, and other Ministers.

14. That during the time he was Bishop of the said See of Norwich, he did
unlawfully compel the inhabitants of the several parishes, within that
Dioces, to raise the flowers of the Chancells, of their respective Churches, to
rail in their Communion Tables, to remove the Pewes and Seats, and to make
other alterations in the respective Churches; in the doing whereof the said
inhabitants, were put to great excessive, and unnecessary charges and expenses,
amounting in the whole, to the sum of five thousand pounds, and upwards,
which said charges and expenses, he did by unlawful means and courses,
enforce the said inhabitants to undergo; And such of the said inhabitants, as
did not obey the same, he did vex, trouble and molest by presentiments,
Citation, excommunications, tedious, and frequent Journeyes, and by attendances
at the Courts of his Chancellor, and other his officialls, viz. the
Churchwardens of Lin, Ipswich, S. Edmunds Bury, and others.

15. That for not coming up to the rail, to receive the holy communion,
kneeling there before the table Altarwise, for not standing up at the Gospel,
and for not observing and performing of his unlawful innovations, and
Injunctions, many other of his Majesty's subjects viz. Peter Fisher, Samuel
Duncon, James Percivall, John Armiger, Thomas King and others, have been by
him, his Chancellors, Visitors, Commissaryes, and Officialls by his command and
injunctions, much molested, disquieted, and vexed in their estates and
consciences by Citations to the Courts, long attendance there, dismission,
Fees, Excommunications, Penancies, and other Censures.

16. That by reason of the rigorous prosecutions, and dealings in the last
precedent Articles mentioned, and by reason of the continual superstitious
bowing to, and before the table set Altarwise, the suspending, silencing,
driving away of the painful preaching Ministers, the suppressing, and
forbidding of Sermons, and prayer; the putting down of Lectures, the
suppressing means of knowledge, and salvation, and introducing ignorance,
superstition, and profaneness, many of his Majesty's subjects, to the number
of three thousand, many of which used trades of spinning, weaving, knitting,
and making of Cloth, and Stuff, Stockings, and other manufactures of Woolls,
that is to say, Daniell Sunning, Michaell Metcalfe, John Berant, Nicholas
Metcalfe, John Derant, Busby widow Mapes, Richard Cock, John Dicks, Francis
Laws, John Senty and many others, some of them setting an hundred poor people
on work, have removed themselves, their families, and estates into Holland,
and other parts beyond the Seas, and there set up and taught the Natives there,
the said manufactures, to the great hinderance of trade in this kingdom, and
to the impoverishing, and bringing to extreme want, very many who were by
those parties formerly set on work, to the great prejudice of his Majesty and
his people.

17. That he the said Bishop, finding the people to distaste his innovations
has often in public, and private speeches declared in the said year* 1636.
That what he did in the same, was by his Majesty's command, whereby he
contrary to the duty of his place, which he held under his Majesty, being
Deane of his Majesty's Royal Chapel, and contrary to the duty of a good and
loyal subject, endeavored to free himself of blame, and to raise an ill
opinion of his Royal Majesty, in the hearts of his loving subjects.

18. That he the said Matthew Wren, being Bishop of Norwich in the said year,
1636. in the Tower Church in Ipswich, and other places, did in his own person
use superstitious and idolatrous actions, and gestures, in the administration
of the Lords supper, consecrating the bread, and wine, standing at the West
side of the Table with his face to the East, and his back toward the people
elevating the Bread, and Wine, so high as to be seen over his shoulders
bowing low, either to or before them, when he after the elevation, and
consecration, had set them down on the Table.

19. That he the more to manifest his Popish affection in the said year 1636,
caused a Crucifix, that is to say, the figure of Christ upon the Cross to be
engraven upon his Episcopal Seal besides the Arms of the Sea.

20. That he has chosen and employed such men to be his Commissioners, Rural
Deanes, and to be his household Chaplains, whom he knew to be, and stand
affected to his innovated courses, and to popish superstition, and to be
erroneous, and unsound in judgment and practice, as namely M. John Nouel, M.
Edmond Mapletoft, M. John Dunkin, M. Bouck, M. Dun, and others.

21. That he has very much oppressed diverse Patrons of Churches by admitting
without any color of title his own Chaplains and others whom he affected
into Livings, which became void within his Dioces, unjustly enforcing the true
and right Patrons to long and chargeable suits to evict such Incumbents, and to
recover their own right, some of which he did against his Priestly word given
to the said Patrons or their friends in verbo Sacerdotis not to do the same.
This he did in the case of one M. Rivet.

22. That he and others in the year 1635, sold, or granted away the profits
of his Primary Visitation for five hundred pounds over and above the charges of
the Visitation, and for the better benefit of the Farmer, set forth a book in
the year 1636 entitled Articles to be inquired of within the dioces of
Norwich, in the first Visitation of Matthew Lord Bishop of Norwich, consisting
of 139 Articles, and wherein are contained the number of eight hundred ninety
seven questions, according to all which, the Churchwardens were enforced to
present upon pain of perjury. And some Churchwardens, that is to say, Robert
Langley, Charles Newton, Richard Heart, William Bull, and Zephany Ford, and
others not making presentiments accordingly, were cited, molested, and troubled,
and enjoined penance; notwithstanding many of the said Articles were
ridiculous and impossible.

23. That the Churchwardens, and other men sworn at the Visitation, were
enforced to have their presentiments written by Clarks specially appointed by
such as bought the said Visitation, to whom they paid excessive sums of money
for the same, some two and twenty shillings, as namely, Richard Hurrell, John
Punchard, and others, some more, some less, for writing one presentment, to
the grievous oppression of his Majesty's poor subjects in that dioces.

24. Whereas by the Laws of this Realm no tithes ought to be paid out of the
rents of houses, nor is there any custom or usage in the City of Norwich for
such payment, yet the said Bishop endeavored to draw the Citizens, and other
inhabitants within the said City against their wills and consents to pay two
shillings in the pound in liew of the tithes of houses within the several
Parishes of the said City, unto the Ministers there, of the said respective
parishes. And the better to effect this his unjust resolution, he did by false
and undue suggestion in the fourteenth year of his Majesty's reign that now
is, procure his Majesty to declare under his Highness great Seal of England
his royal pleasure, That if any person, within the said City shall refuse to
pay according to the said rate of two shillings the pound unto the Minister of
any Parish within the said City, That the same be-heard in the Court of
Chancery, or in the Consistory of the Bishop of Norwich. And that in such case
no prohibition against the said Bishop of Norwich, their Chancellors, or
Commissaries in the said Courts of Consistory be granted. And if any such writ
be at any time obtained, the Judges so granting the same, upon sight of his
Highness said Order shall forthwith grant a consultation to the Minister
desiring the same with his reasonable costs and charges for the same* which
said order and decree under the great Seal of England tended to the violation
of the oaths of the Judges, and was devised, contrived, and made by the said
Bishop. And afterward by his evil counsels and false surmises he did obtain
his Majesty's royal consent thereunto and by color of the order aforesaid,
and other the doings of the said Bishop, the Citizens and inhabitans of Norwich
aforesaid, viz. John Collar, Judith Perkeford, and others, have been enforced
to pay the said to shillings in the pound in liew of tithes, or else by suits
and other undue means been much molested, and put to great charges and
expenses, contrary to the law, and justice.

25. That he assumed to himself an arbitrary power to compel the respective
parishioners in the said dioces to pay great and excessive wages to parish
Clarks, viz. the parishioners of Yarmouth, Congham, Tostock, and others,
commanding his officers, that if any parishioner did resuse to pay such wages,
they should certify him their names, and he would set them into the High
Commission Court for example of the rest. And that one or two out of Ipswich
might be taken for that purpose.

And the said Commons by protestation saving to themselves the liberties of
exhibiting at any time hereafter any other accusation or impeachment against
the said Matthew Wren late Bishop of Norwich, and now Bishop of Ely, and also
of replying to the answer that he the said Matthew Wren shall make unto the
said Articles, or any of them, or of offering proof of the premises or any
other impeachments or accusations that shall be exhibited by them as the case
shall (according to the course of Parliaments) require, do pray that he the said
Matthew. Wren may be called to answer the said several crimes, and
misdemeanors, and receive such condign punishment as the same shall deserve,
and that such further proceedings may be upon every of them had, and used
against him, as is agreeable to law and justice.

FINIS.

