THE Votes and Orders Of the Honorable House of Commons, Passed February 25,
and 26. 1662.

Upon Reading His Majesty's Gracious DECLARATION and SPEECH: Together with
their Reasons and Address, Humbly presented to His Majesty (The whole House
present) By their Speaker Sir Edward Turner, Knight and Baronet, On Saturday,
Feb. 28. in the Banqueting House at Whitehall. With his Speech at the delivery
thereof;

And his Report of the Substance of His Majesty's gracious Answer thereunto.

HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE DIEV ET MON DROIT royal blazon or coat of arms

London, Printed by John Bill and Christopher Barker, Printers to the Kings
most Excellent Majesty, 1662.

CVM PRIVILEGIO.

THE Votes and Orders Of the Honorable House of Commons passed Febr. 25. and
26. 1662. upon reading His Majesty's Gracious Declaration and Speech, etc.
THe honorable House of Commons having appointed Wednesday the 25. of this
Month for the reading his Majesty's Gracious Declaration of the six and
twentieth of December last, and his Speech made at the opening of this Session;
and the same being then read and taken into mature debate and consideration;
The House proceeded to pass these Votes and Orders following, viz.

Mercurii 25. Feb. 15. Car. R.
Upon Consideration had by the House, of the Kings Majesty's Declaration and
Speech,

Resolved upon the Question, nemine contradicente, THat the humble thanks of
this House be returned to the Kings Majesty, for his constancy in the
Observation of the Act of Indemnity.

Resolved, etc. nemine contradicente, That the humble thanks of this House be
returned to the Kings Majesty, for His Profession against Introducing a
Government by a Military Power.

Resolved, etc. nemine contradicente, That the humble thanks of this House be
returned to His Majesty for His gracious Invitation to this House to prepare
some Laws against the growth and progress of Popery.

Resolved, etc. nemine contradicente, That the humble thanks of this House be
returned to His Majesty, for His Resolution to maintain the Act of Uniformity.

Resolved, etc. nemine contradicente, That the humble thanks of this House be
returned to His Majesty for his Gracious recommendations to this House to
prepare Laws against Licentiousness and Impiety* and also to provide Sumptuary
Laws, and Laws for the Advance of Trade, and for His Majesty's gracious
Expressions to retrench the Charge and Expenses in His own Family.

Resolved, etc. That it be presented to the Kings Majesty as the Humble Advice
of this House, That no Indulgence be granted to the Dissenters from the Act of
Uniformity.

Ordered, That a Committee be appointed to collect and bring in the Reasons of
this House for this Vote upon the present Debate, to be presented to His
Majesty; and that the nominating of the Committee be adjourned till to morrow
morning.

Jovis 26. Feb. 15. Car. R.
Resolved, etc. That in the close of the Reasons to be presented to His Majesty
for the Vote of Advice; it be also added, That this House will assist His
Majesty with their Lives and Fortunes, and That the Committee appointed to
bring in the Reasons do pen an Address for that purpose to His Majesty.

And the Committee appointed to bring in the Reasons and Address before
directed, having met, and agreed the same, Sir Heneage Finch, His Majesty's
Solicitor General, made Report thereof to the House on Friday the Twenty
seventh of this Month, and the same being twice read, and some small Amendments
and Additions made thereto, and the Reasons and Address so agreed, ordered to
be fair written.

A Message was sent to His Majesty by Sir William Compton and others of His
Majesty's Privy Council, Members of the House, to desire leave of His Majesty,
that the House might wait on him at such time and place as His Majesty should
appoint.

And His Majesty being attended, Sir William Compton on Saturday made report,
That His Majesty did most graciously receive the Message, as He did all things
that came from that House, and to testify he did so, had appointed the
shortest time He could to be attended, which was this present Saturday, at
Three of the clock in the afternoon, in the Banqueting House at Whitehall: and
the House thereupon adjourning till Two of the Clock in the afternoon, and
being then met again, Mr. Speaker with the whole House went from thence to
Whitehall to attend His Majesty, and Mr. Speaker delivered himself in manner
following.

Most Gracious Sovereign,
THe Knights, Citizens, and Burgesses of the Commons House of Parliament, did
with great joy receive Your Majesty's most Gracious Speech, at the opening this
Session of Parliament: And being thereby invited to consider of Your
Declaration of the Twenty sixth of December last; they have with all Sobriety,
Duty, and Affection, examined the grounds thereof; and do by me present unto
Your Majesty, their most hearty Thanks for the same, and humble Advice
thereupon; both which, I do beseech Your Majesty that You will vouchsafe me to
deliver in their own words.

May it please Your most Excellent Majesty, December last, and Your most
Gracious Speech at the beginning of this present Session:

Do, in the first place for our selves, and in the names of all the Commons of
England, render to Your Sacred Majesty, the Tribute of our most hearty Thanks,
for that infinite Grace and Goodness, wherewith Your Majesty has been pleased
to Publish Your Royal Intentions of adhering to Your Act of Indemnity and
Oblivion, by a Constant and Religious Observance of it. And our hearts are
further enlarged in these returns of Thanksgivings, when we consider Your
Majesty's most Princely and Heroic Professions of relying upon the Affections
of Your People, and abhorring all sort of Military and Arbitrary Rule. But
above all, We can never enough remember, to the Honor of Your Majesty's Piety,
and our own unspeakable Comfort, those solemn and most endearing Invitations of
us Your Majesty's Subjects, to prepare Laws to be presented to Your Majesty,
against the growth and increase of Popery; and withal, to provide more Laws
against Licentiousness and Impiety; at the same time Declaring Your own
Resolutions for maintaining the Act of Uniformity. And it becomes us always to
acknowledge and admire Your Majesty's Wisdom in this Your Declaration, whereby
Your Majesty is pleased to resolve, not only by Sumptuary Laws, but by Your own
Royal Example of Frugality, to restrain that excess in men's Expenses, which is
grown so general and so exorbitant; and to direct our Endeavors to find out
fit and proper Laws for Advancement of Trade and Commerce.

After all this we most humbly beseech Your Majesty to believe, That it is with
extreme unwillingness and reluctance of heart, that we are brought to differ
from any thing which Your Majesty has thought fit to propose; And though we do
no way doubt, but that the unreasonable Distempers of men's spirits, and the
many Mutinies and Conspiracies which were carried on, during the late Intervals
of Parliament, did reasonably incline Your Majesty to endeavor by Your
Declaration to give some allay to those ill humors, till the Parliament
Assembled; and the hopes of Indulgence, if the Parliament should consent to it,
especially seeing the pretenders to this Indulgence, did seem to make some
titles to it, by virtue of Your Majesty's Declaration from Breda. Nevertheless,
we Your Majesty's most Dutiful and Loyal Subjects, who are now returned to
serve in Parliament,, from those several parts and places of Your Kingdom, for
which we were chosen, Do humbly offer to Your Majesty's great Wisdom, That it
is in no sort advisable that there be any Indulgence to such persons who
presume to dissent from the Act of Uniformity, and the Religion established,

For these Reasons, Breda, and are humbly of opinion, That Your Majesty ought
not to be pressed with it any further;

Because it is not a Promise in it self, but only a Gracious Declaration of
Your Majesty's Intentions, to do what in You lay, and what a Parliament should
advise Your Majesty to do; and no such Advice was ever given, or thought fit
to be offered, nor could it be otherwise understood, because there were Laws of
Uniformity then in being, which could not be dispensed with, but by Act of
Parliament.

They who do pretend a Right to that supposed Promise, put the Right into the
hands of their Representatives, whom they chose to serve for them in this
Parliament, who have Passed, and Your Majesty consented to the Act of
Uniformity. If any shall presume to say, that a Right to the benefit of this
Declaration does still remain after this Act Passed.

It tends to dissolve the very Bonds of Government, and to suppose a disability
in Your Majesty and the Houses of Parliament, to make a Law contrary to any
part of Your Majesty's Declaration, though both Houses should advise Your
Majesty to it.

We have also considered the nature of the Indulgence Proposed, with reference
to those Consequences, which must necessarily attend it.

It will establish Schism by a Law, and make the whole Government of the Church
Precarious, and the Censures of it of no Moment or Consideration at all.

It will no way become the Gravity or Wisdom of a Parliament, to pass a Law at
one Session for Uniformity, and at the next Session (the reasons of Uniformity
continuing still the same) to pass another Law to frustrate or weaken the
execution of it.

It will expose Your Majesty to the restless Importunity of every Sect or
Opinion, and of every single person: also, who shall presume to dissent from
the Church of England.

It will be a cause of increasing Sects and Sectaries, whose numbers will
weaken the true Protestant Profession so far, that it will at least be
difficult for it, to defend it self against them: And, which is yet further
considerable, those Numbers, which by being troublesome to the Government, find
they can arrive to an Indulgence, will, as their numbers increase, be yet more
troublesome, that so at length they may arrive to a general Toleration, which
Your Majesty has declared against; and in time, some prevalent Sect, will at
last contend for an establishment; which, for ought can be foreseen, may end in
Popery.

It is a thing altogether without Precedent, and will take away all means of
convicting Recusants, and be inconsistent with the method and proceedings of
the Laws of England.

Lastly, It is humbly conceived, that the Indulgence proposed will be so far
from tending to the Peace of the Kingdom, that it is rather likely to occasion
great disturbance. And on the contrary, That the asserting of the Laws, and the
Religion established, according to the Act of Uniformity, is the most probable
means to produce a settled Peace and Obedience throughout Your Kingdom: Because
the variety of Professions in Religion, when openly indulged, does directly
distinguish men into parties, and withal gives them opportunity to count their
numbers; which, considering the animosities, that out of a Religious Pride will
be kept on foot by the several Factions, does tend directly and inevitably to
open disturbance. Nor can Your Majesty have any Security, that the Doctrine or
Worship of the several Factions, which are all Governed by a several Rule,
shall be consistent with the Peace of Your Kingdom.

And if any persons shall presume to disturb the Peace of the Kingdom, We do in
all humility declare, that we will for ever, and in all Occasions, be ready
with our utmost endeavor and assistance, to adhere to, and serve your Majesty
according to our bounden Duty and Allegiance.

The Speakers Report of the Substance of His Majesty's Gracious Answer.
THat His Majesty gave them hearty Thanks for their many Thanks; That never any
King was so happy in a House of Commons, as He in this; That the Paper and
Reasons were long, and therefore He would take time to consider of them, and
send them a message; That they could never differ but in Judgment, and that
must be, when He did not rightly express Himself; or they did not rightly
understand Him; but their Interest was so far linkt together, that they could
never disagree.

LONDON, Printed by John Bill, and Christopher Barker, Printers to the Kings
most Excellent MAJESTY, 1662.


