A Copy of the ASSOCIATION agreed upon by the Honorable House of Commons, on
Monday the 24th of February, 1695/6.
WHereas there has been a Horrid and Detestable Conspiracy, Formed and Carried
on by Papists, and other Wicked and Traitorous Persons, for Assassinating his
Majesty's Royal Person in Order to Encourage an Invasion from France, to
Subvert our Religion, Laws, and Liberty: We whose Names are hereunto
Subscribed, do Heartily, Sincerely, and Solemnly Profess, Testify and Declare,
That his Present Majesty, King William is Rightful and Lawful King of these
Realms. And we do Mutually Promise and Engage to stand by and assist each
other, to the utmost of our Power, in the Support and Defense of his Majesty's
most Sacred Person and Government, against the late King James and all his
Adherents. And in case his Majesty come to any Violent or Untimely Death (which
God forbid) We do hereby further Freely and Unanimously Oblige our Selves, to
Unite, Associate, and Stand by each other, in Revenging the same upon his
Enemies, and their Adherents; and in Supporting and Defending the Succession of
the Crown, according to an Act made in the First Year of the Reign of King
William and Queen Mary, Entitled, An Act Declaring the Rights and Liberties of
the Subject, and Settling the Succession of the Crown.

This Association being agreed upon by the House, and ordered to be engrossed
to be Signed by their Members, near 400 of that August Assembly have already
(with great Alacrity) subscribed it. But some are found at present to hesitate,
some others to refuse it, their Names follow: Berks.
WIlliam Jennyngs Simon Harcourt.
Bucks.
Alexander Denton Mountague Drake Sir James Etheridge.
Cornwall.
Henry Lord Hyde John Manley Daniel Eliot Henry Fleming Francis Buller John
Tredenham Seymour Tredenham Sir William Coryton John Mountstevens Bernard
Granvile Charles Lord Cheney Francis Gwyn.
Cheshire.
Sir Thomas Grosvenor.
Derbyshire.
Sir Gilbert Clarke.
Devon.
Francis Courteney Sir Edward Seymour John Granville.
Dorsetshire.
Thomas Strangways Thomas Freke Richard Fownes.
Ebor.
Robert Byerly Sir Marmaduke Wivill Sir Michael Wentworth.
Essex.
Sir Eliab Harvey.
Glocestershire.
Robert Pain William Frye Richard How John How.
Herefordshire.
Robert Price.
Huntington.
Anthony Hammond.
Kent.
Sir John Banks.
Lancashire.
Leigh Banks Thomas Brotherton Sir Roger Bradshaw Peter Shakerley.
Lincolnshire.
George Lord Castleton Sir John Bolls.
Norfolk.
Sir John Wodehouse.
Northampton.
Thomas Cartwright Gilbert Dolben.
Northumberland.
William Foster.
Oxford.
Mountague Lord Norris Sir Robert Jenkinson Henage Finch Sir Edward Norris
Thomas Rowney James Bertie Sir Robert Dashwood.
Salop.
Edward Kynaston John Kynaston Andrew Newport George Weld.
Somerset.
Sir John Trevillian Edward Berkley. John Sandford Sir Charles Carterett Sir
John Smith.
Southamton.
Henry Holmes Thomas Done
Staffordshire.
Robert Burdett Sir John Leveson Gower John Gray Sir Henry Gough.
Surrey.
John Parsons.
Sussex.
Sir William Morley John Lewknor Sir Thomas Dyke William Stringer.
Warwickshire.
William Bromley Andrew Archer George Bohun Lord Digby Francis Grevill.
Westmoreland.
Sir William Twisden Sir Christopher Musgrave.
Wiltshire.
Robert Bertie William Harvey Henry Pynnill Thomas Bennet William Daniel.
Worcestershire.
Samuel Swift Henry Parker.
Wales.
Edward Jones Jeffery Jefferies Sir Richard Middleton. Edward Brereton Sir John
Conway Thomas Mansel,



I should have told you the name of another, which does not at present occur to
Memory, but it was the same Gentleman who you may remember Spewed Sir Robert
Peyton out of the House of Commons, frr corresponding with the late King when
D. of York*


