An ORDER of the Lords, for the better direction of the Overseers appointed in
the several Parishes of the City of Oxford, against the spreading of the
Infection of the Plague.
THe Infection of the Plague being much dispersed in several Parishes and
Places within this City, To the end that all possible care may be taken to
provide for the sick, and to keep, the sick from the whole, which by Gods
blessing may be a great means to stay the Infection, It is Ordered as an
Addition to the former Order lately made by this Board, that the Persons
hereafter mentioned in the several Parishes to be the overseers for this
important service, take special care in the several Parishes and Precincts
commended to their charge.

1 That when they shall understand that any Person is fallen sick in any house,
that there be no resort thither by strangers, till it be discer^ed whether the
sickness be infectious or not.

2 That these Overseers use their best care, as soon as they understand who are
fallen sick, to inform themselves what the nature of the disease is, and the
Symptoms thereof, and then give farther directions.

3 That as soon as any house is infected, or probably suspected to be infected,
that it be shut up, and the persons in the House commanded ^o keep in the
House, till farther order given for opening the house again.

4 That a Watchman be set at the fore-dore of the House, both to keep in the
persons within the house, and also to fetch them such necessaries as they want,
to be delivered to them so discreetly and warily as may not endanger
themselves, or those to whom they shall resort.

5 That when the House shall be known to be infected with the Plague, forthwith
a Red-Crosse be set on the outward door of the House with an inscription in
Capital Letters, with these words, LORD HAVE MERCY UPON US, and this Cross,
and the Inscription be taken off again when the house is appointed to be
opened, and not before.

6 That the Watchmen appointed take an Oath for their faithful performance of
that service.

7 That every such Watchman, when he sits or goes in the streets, carry a
white stick in his hand, that so others may be admonished ^ot to press too
near into his Company.

8 That if there be a back-doore or gate to the house shut up, that that
back-doore be fast shut, that no passage be that way, and also a Pad^ocke
hanged upon the fore-doore, whereof the Watchman to keep the key.

9 That these overseers appoint searchers and tenders for the sick persons, and
bearers and buriers when any shall dye; and give oaths to them also, to
observe their several employments faithfully.

10 If any appointed to any of those places or services, being fit for the
same, shall refuse to undertake the employment, or neglect it when it is once
undertaken, or deal unfaithfully therein, they must know, that they shall be
proceeded against with all strictness and severity, according to the quality
of their faults.

11 That all burialls of Persons dying of the Plague be in the night time,
after ten of the clock at the soonest, and without concourse of People, and
that the Corpse be laid at least four foot deep under the ground, and be
bestowed in such burying places, as to that purpose shall be appointed.

12 That the Churchyards within the City be spared from these Burialls, they
being for the most part small, and now very inconvenient to receive the bodies
of these infected persons.

13 That all Dogs and Cats in the Town be forthwith sent away out of the
Town, or such as are found in the Streets, or Courts of the Colleges, to be
knocked on the head, and their carcasses carried away and buried without the
Works at a convenient distance.

14 That if any Colleges or Halls be infected or suspected, that the
Governors of those Houses give speedy notice thereof to the Overseers of that
Parish or Precinct within which such College or Hall lies, and then those
overseers by the advice and approbation of those Governors of the Colleges
and Halls for the time being, send such Officers as shall be so thought fit to
perform those Offices to the sick or infected persons which shall be fit and
necessary.

And in such cases so much to be shut up as the overseers, by the advice of the
Governor of that House, shall think fit.

The Overseers names of the several Parishes, viz.
For St Peter's in the East, and St Bartholomews.
Alderman Sowtham. M. Whistler. John Hopkins.
For St MariesandSt IohnsParish.
M. Humphrey Whistler. M. John Brown. M. Francis Bowman.
St Giles
Alderman Charles. M. Selwood. M. Surby. John White.
Magdalen Parish
M. Robert Cook. M. Nicholas Daniell. M. George Ladiman.
Holliwell Parish
M. Baily. M. Dickenson. M. Watson.
All Saints
Alderman Sowtham. M. Thomas Dennis. M. Hen. Silvester.
St Michaells
M. Baily Daniell. M. Kerry. M. James Deane.
St Petersin the Baily
M. William Harris. M. George Box. M. Johnson. John Warwick.
St Ebbes
M. Chillingworth. Alford Raunce. M. Robert Nicholas.
St Thomas Parish
M. John Wright. M. William Good. Richard Miller.
St Aldates
M. Carpenter. M. John Holloway. M. Langley.
St Martins
Alderman Wright. M. Francis Harris. M. Chesterman.

Printed at Oxford by Leonard Lichfield Printer to the University. 1644.


