Englands GRATULATION ON The Landing of Charles the Second, by the grace of
God, King of England, Scotland, France, and Ireland at Dover, and his advance
from thence to the City of London, May the 29. being His Birth Day.

Attended with all the ancient-Nobility and Gentry of this nation, and a great
part of the army commanded by his Excellence the Lord General MONK, His
magnificent entertainment in the City of London, by the Right Honorable the
Lord Mayor and his Brethren, and the great preparation for his Coronation,
which will be more full of state and triumph then ever King of England had before.

SPES ADDIDIT ALAS printer's device, consisting a winged skull and motto

London, Printed for William Gilbertson.

Englands Gratulation on the landing of Charles the Second, King of England,
Scotland, France. and Ireland, etc.
ON Tuesday May the 29. His Majesty made his Entrance into the City of London:
and it is very remarkable that Tuesdays are (with some Rubric at least) to be
observed in our Almanacks. It was on a Tuesday that my late Lord King Charles
Father to this present King, was beheaded. It was on a Tuesd^y that this King
was born. It was on a Tuesday that he received the intelligence at Brussels,
that a way was made for his inauguration in England. It was on a Tuesday that
he came from Brussells to Breda. It was on a Tuesday he was Proclaimed King.
And it was on a Tuesday that he came unto London. The manner and gallant
Equipage whereof is the present subject of this discourse.

The King on Monday having bin most Honorably received by the most Illustrious
the Lady Mary, Countess Dowager of Richmond, did on Tuesday prepare himself
himself for London: He had before at his first Landing bin nobly entertained
by the Mayors of Dover and Canterbury, where finding with what a flame of Love
and Duty he was expected and attended, He made more have to his City of London:
there was never seen a more gallant train of the Nobility and Gentry of England
then at this present, and every one striving to exceed another at much in
loyalty, as in Gallantry, the ways on both sides were hedged with people, and
the trees were filled with them to behold his Majesty as he Passed by, the
shouts and acclamations were loud, and universal. Coming to Dartfort there
were a hundred maids arrayed all in white, who strowed the way with Lillies and
Roses before him, which sweet ceremonies were continued by these until he came
to his palace at White Hall, the streets as he passed all along were railed
in: It was Ordered that no Muskets should be discharged, to the end that the
Traitors (if any should be so barbarous as to make a desperate shot) might more
readily be discovered; but had the Muskets of the City and the Army made never
so many Volleys, the shouts and the Acclamations of the many thousands that
perpetually cried God save the King, were so loud, that they would even have
deafned the noise of the Guns: the King was on Horseback in a sad colored
Suit, and a Red Feather round about his Hat: On the right hand of him rode the
Duke of York, and on the left hand the Duke of Gloucester: a little before him
rode his Excellence the Lord General Monk bare-headed, and the Marquess of
Newcastle, Master of the Horse, and a little before them were the Lord Mayor,
and his Brethren the Aldermen, and many other Citizens most richly habited, and
behind there rode bare-headed my Lord Viscount Mordant, my Lord the Earl of
Northampton, the Earl of Northumberlands and my Lord Jocelin his Son, and a
numerous and glorious company of the Nobility and Gentry. In this stately
Equipage he came to Whitehall about six of the Clock in the evening, where
Long may he live to Reign over us, and let all the people say Amen.

Englands Gratulation.
Assist me all the Nine, help me to sing
The glorious praises of great Charles our King,
whom heaven has tried and brought out of the fire
And laid him low to raise him up the higher
That to the wondering world he is become
The Grace and Glory of all Christendom,
It Is he repaires our Breaches, and restores
Our Land to safty, and does heal our sores,
It Is he that strokes our griefs, and wipes our eyes,
Sets us in order and does make us wise.
For never was Nation so before misled,
To Court the Tail and make the Rump their head?
No more we now shall rail at Noble Blood,
No more shall rich men for their little good
Be look 't upon as guilty, nor vile spies
Enjoy the lust of their so murdring eyes.
Men shall put off their Iron hands and hearts,
The times forget their old malicious arts,
With this new minute, and no print remain
Of what was thought the former ages stain,
where are our Saints now that would fain be known
To have no other holiday but their own.
Where are our cruel Regicids, and all
The petulent Crew we Anabaptists call.
Whose wild Religion and whose zeal does border
On Faction, Ruin, Falsehood and disorder.
Whose Gospel speaks, It is too hard a thing
At once, to fear God, and obey the King,
And from their Bibles do expunge that text
As too obliging, or too much perplexed.
Behold the hour's at hand that shall declare
What men of conscience, and what Saints they are
That still pursue [Oh most unhumane wrongs)
The Lords Anointed with their threatening tongus,
As if the Father slain, they had not done
Enough, unless they massacred the Son:
This to prevent, the King himself druws nigh,
Full of his cause, his eye with Majesty,
His brow with thunders armed, and on each hand,
The youth of Heaven in files unnumbred stand.
His glorious guard, for the world be it known,
That heaven is pleased to make this cause his own,
For who the King affront the like would do
To the King of Kings, could they come at him too;
And as the Sun when his absented light,
Approaches nearer, day does smile outright,
And the thick Vapors of the night do fly,
In guilty tumults from his searching eye,
So now the King in person has begun,
To show himself like the Meridian sun,
To shine in all his glories, and dispense,
Throughout his Isle his powerful influence,
The clouds of bold Rebellion, the false light,
Of falser zeal, and meteors of the night,
The sullen Vapors, and the mists that made
A great confussion in so great a shade
Shall wast before him, as he comes our states,
Extremes to temper, for it pleased the fat es,
Though others labourd in the work yet none,
Should heal our griefs but who our hearts do own,
Nor shall this Isle regaine her ancient worth,
But by that monarch which this Isle brought forth.
And fame no sooner to our ears did bring,
The joyful story of the landed King,
But all the Lords and Gentry of the land,
Made have to wait upon his high command,
So full their trayn, so gallant their array,
As if their splendor would outshine the day,
There was the Noble General, with whom
The best of all his men of arms did come,
And many able Citizens were sent,
To make the show seem mo^e magnificent,
Who all so soon as they the King displaid,
Who can imagine what a shout they made?
The glitering of their clothes out vy'd the suns,
Hats in the Air flew up; Guns roard to Guns,
and trumpets deafned trumpets, who'd have thought
These ere in arms' against each other had fought?
The outlandishmen that markd it, and stood by,
In our behalf all out aloud did cry,
Was never Nation now more blessed then we,
Nor ever monarch more admired then he,
Invirond thus, and come to the Cities gate,
He was received in all high pomp and State,
By the Lord Mayor and his brethren who,
Were proudly glad their Noble Prince to view,
How great will be our growing joys we may,
Presume will crown his Coronation day
Which to his matchless merit will be more,
Then ever King of Evgland had before,
At which since heaven and earth with shouts do ring
Let altogether say God save the King.
FINIS.

