The Humble ADDRESS Of the Right Honorable the Lords Spiritual and Temporal In
Parliament Assembled, Presented to HIS MAJESTY On Wednesday the Twenty Eighth
day of October, 1696.

AND His Majesty's MOST GRACIOUS ANSWER THEREUNTO.

LONDON, Printed by Charles Bill and the Executrix of Thomas Newcomb, deceased;
Printers to the Kings most Excellent Majesty. 1696.

Die Mercurij 28. Octob' 1696.
IT is Ordered by the Lords Spiritual and Temporal in Parliament Assembled,
That the Right Honorable the Lord Keeper of the Great Seal of England, do give
Order, That the Address of this House, presented to His Majesty this Day, and
His Majesty's most Gracious Answer thereunto, be forthwith Printed and
Published*

Matthew. Johnson, Cleric' Parliamentor'

The Humble ADDRESS Of the Right Honorable the Lords Spiritual and Temporal In
PARLIAMENT Assembled.
Dei Martis 27. Octob' 1696. May it please Your most Excellent Majesty,
WE the Lords Spiritual and Temporal in Parliament Assembled, Do conceive We
cannot enter upon the Business of this Session any way so well, as by an
Address to Your Majesty, Testifying Our Zeal to Your Service, and Our
Forwardness to Apply Our Selves to what Your Majesty has lately Proposed from
the Throne.

And being Entirely satisfied that the Liberty of Europe is concerned in the
Resolutions of this Parliament, and that the Welfare of your Majesty's Subjects
does depend upon Your Safety, and the Success of Your Arms: We beg leave to
Assure Your Majesty, We do and ever shall consider all the Disappointments You
meet with, and the Obstructions laid in Your way as Our greatest Misfortunes,
and those that Create and Promote them as Enemies to the Public.

And as with the utmost Sincerity We give Your Majesty these Assurances, so We
think it becomes Us to deal as plainly with Your Enemies; and therefore that
they may not believe your Majesty's Loyal Subjects can ever Wish for Peace, or
Think of it, but upon those Safe and Honorable Terms, which may make it
Lasting and Secure: We further Assure Your Majesty, We shall Endeavor to
overcome all Difficulties to Support You at the Head of so Just and Glorious a
Cause, and shall never be Wanting or Backward on Our Part, in what may be
Necessary to Your Majesty's Honor, the Good of these Kingdoms, and the Quiet
of Christendom.

Matthew. Johnson, Cleric' Parliamentor'

His Majesty's most Gracious Answer to the Address.
I Am Extremely Pleased with an Address so full of Affection to Me, and Zeal
for the Cause in which We are all Engaged; and I shall always Think that the
best Security against Our Enemies of all sorts, is to be thus happily United
and Resolved amongst Our Selves.

FINIS.

