England's Black Tribunal; BEING THE Characters of King CHARLES the First, and
the Nobility that Suffered for him.



Ecce Spectaculum dignum ad quod respiciat Deus operi suo intentus, Vir fortis
cum mala fortuna compositus.

Sen. de Prove. c. 2. LONDON: Printed for E. M. near White Hall.

On the Blessed Martyr King Charles the First.
portrait of King Charles the First

Written on Himself, a little before his Death.
LET them bestow on every Gate a Limb,
Then open all my Veins, that I may swim
To thee my Maker, in that crimson Lake,
Then place my parboiled Head upon a Stake,
Scatter my Ashes, strew them in the Air;
Lord, since thou know where all these Atoms are?
I Am hopeful thou wilt recover once my Dust,
And confident thou wilt raise me with the Just.
Written by the Marquess of Montross, with the Point of his Sword on the Sands
of Leith, 1648.
GREAT, Good and Just, could I but rate
My Grief, and thy too rigid Fate,
I Would weep the World to such a Strain,
As it should deluge once again.
But since thy loud-tongu'd Blood, demands Supplies,
More from Briareus' Hands, than Argus' Eyes,
I Will sing thy Obsequies in Trumpet Sounds,
And write thy Epitaph in Blood and Wounds.
Turned into Latin Verse, by his Tutor; thus,
CAROLE, Si possem Lacrymis Aequare Dolorem
Ipse meum fatumque tuum, tua funer^ flerem,
Ut Tellus nitidis rursum stagnaret ab undis:
Sanguis at ille tuus quum vocem ad sidera tollat,
Atque manus Briarei mage quam Argi lumina poscat
Exequias celebrabo tuas clangore Tubarum,
Et Tumulo inscr^ham profuso Sanguine Carmen:
SIR Bevil Granville, was a Knight of u^daunted Val^u^, which he never failed
to exert for the Service of his King and Country. He was a Gentleman of a good
Family, and well skil^'d in martial Aff^irs; but being overpowered by the
superior Number of the Rebels, was k^ll'd at Lansdown Fight, whence his Family
have the Title of Lord Lansdown: Th^s was the End of this Great Man, who was
worthily lamented by every true, loyal and faithful Subject.

portrait of Sir Bevil Granville

HE was a most courageous Knight,
And bravely for his King did fight,
As long as he had Power to whield
The Sword, and nobly keep the Field;
But when his Foes did him surround
At Lansdown Fight, with many a Wound,
He bravely fell, his Death acquired,
And thus with Honor he expired.
NOble Viscount Falkland appeared at first in Defense of his Master, and added
no small Reputation to the King's Army. He commanded a Party at the first
Battle of Newberry, where the Rebels under the Earl of Essex routed the King's
Forces, and this valiant Nobleman was slain, bravely Defending his Prince's
Cause He was a Person of great Learning, and well skilled in Poetry, Painting
and Music, and had other remarkable Qualifications, to render him aimable and
esteemed by loyal Men.

portrait of Viscount of Falkland

FAlkland the Wise as well as Great, chief Secretary to the Sta^^.
And Muse, his Pen and Sword did whield
And laid them down in bloody Field: For at the Battle of Newberry
As Voluntier, most necessary, to right his King, he lost his Life,
By bloody Rebels in the Strife.
EArl of Leitchfield though he was a Youth, yet the tender Age of this young
Nob^eman, was no Stop to his Courage and Loyalty; for he scorned to sit still,
and his Sovereign to undergo the Insults of such wretched Tools and Villains,
but valiantly taking up and whielding his Sword in his Defense, so that he
honorably Died in the Field near Chester, fighting the Rebels, whose Death was
much lamented, but more especially by the King himself, who loved him entirely.

portrait of Earl of Leitchfield

THis tender Youth, as one may call,
Had by base Rebels soon his fall;
In which an Honor there did spring,
A b'ing lamented by his King:
So Young, and so soon snatched away,
( Near Chester, as the Villains Prey!)
Was much Condol'd and much D^plor'd,
A Comely, Valiant, Courteous Lord.
SIR Ralph Hopton commanded an Army of the King's in the West and beat Sir
William Waller near Bath, and afterward in the Devizes, for which he was made
a Lord, but at last was routed at Torrington by a superior Force; so that
finding himself unable to do h^s King any farther Service he retired to the
young Prince in France, Thus he honorable got free from the Tyrany of the
Rebels. and comforted the King his Master in Exile, and was a Companion with
him in all his Misfortunes.

portrait of Sir Ralph Hopton

LOrd Hopton, like an inflamed Ma^s, with Courage fought his Masters Wars.
The Victory of Stration won,
And was a Lord made thereupon: But when the Cause declined, he
Was forced for his Security, to cross the Sea to save his Life.
From Oliverians Hate and Strife.
EArl of Carnarven, he did not forsake his Prince whilst he had Life, and was
killed by the R^bells in the first Battle of Newberry, where he f^ught so
courageously, as through the Bodies of thousands to make way for his righ^ful,
though injured. Sovereign to the quiet P^ss^ssion of his Imperial C^owns again.
So unfortunate were the noble and loyal Party, being overpowered by Numbers of
Villians, who sought the Destruction of Church and State, to introduce a
Republican Government.

portrait of Earl of Carnarven

THis Earl was Learned, full of Sense,
And only sought to please his Prince:
And Ill Success he had indeed,
And for his Monarch's sake did Bleed:
For vent'ring in the fatal Battle,
Where Cannons roar, and Guns do rattle,
At Newberry Fight he there was stain,
His Master'e Honor to maintain.
EArl of Holland was commissioned in 1647 by the then Prince of Wales, to raise
Forces for his Father the King, then a Prisoner in the Isle of Wight, which he
did at Kingston in the Face of the Parliament, but being taken in Battle, was
carried to Warwick Castle, and thence to the Tower, where he lost his Head for
hit Loyalty, I^ the mean time the Rebels triumph in there Villainy, breathing
nothing but Blood and Murder to every fai^hful Subject and sincere Loyallist.

portrait of Earl of Holland

THis Earl, when he his Master viewed, in Danger by a cursed Brood,
Imprisoned in the Isle of Wight,
An Army raised to do him Right. The Rebels they the Battle won,
This Earl was taken and undone, Sent to the Tower, then soon tried,
And for his King a Martyr died.
THE Marquisi of M^ntros^ se^zed Dumfreis for the King, routed the Cov^n inters
a^ Perth. with half their Numb^^ be^ts the Lord Burleigh at Aberdeen; and Swa^^
to Martyrdom it were through Sta^^ of unrighte^us Blood of the Rebels. But at
las^ he was taken and executed for his Loyalty.

portrait of Marquis of Montrose

SCotland, the Glory of thy Nation,
Was Great Montross, of noble Station:
He for his Royal Master stood,
And for his sake did lose his Blood:
But then before Rebellious Foes,
By cruel Death his Eyes could close,
He did revenge his Monarch's Death,
By stopping many a Rebel's Breath.
THE Earl of Kingsto^ was a good Satesma^ and complete Soldier, and served his
Prince faithfully both in Council and it Camp, and fighting boldly at
Gainsborough for hi^ Country's Liberty, seale^ that Loyalty with hi^ Blood in
the Field, which he had given the mos^ convincing Proofs of, to his Country in
his Life time. And thus fell the Senator and Hero, worthily lamented by every
loya^ Subject, and whose Memory is still precious to this very Day.

portrait of Earl of Kingston

THis Earl, adorned with brightesi Parts, Did als^ show the bes^ of Hearts*
For Loyalty was in his Blood,
And for hi^ injured Monarch stood He like the rest his Life laid down
To vindicate his Master's Crown. At Gainsborough where he did oppose*
Was slain by Rebels and cursed Foes.
DR. Laud, Archbishop of Can^urbury, was accused in Parliam^nt, in 1640. and
voted guilty of High Treason for no other Reason than endeavoring to preserve
Oder and Decency in the Church* and being true to his S^vereign. He was kep^
Pris^ner in the Tower f^ur Years and then led f^r^h to Tower Hill, to suffer
Martyrdom for the Church and King. He was a Prelate of great Piety and
Learning, and universally lamented by all true Churchmen.

portrait of William Laud, Archbishop of Canterbury

ALas! Elphegus lost his Head,
Who by the Dan^s was murdered;
And Simon Sudbury did feel,
By cruel Tyler fatal Steel:
Just so, or worse, good LAUD, thou felt,
Whose Sufferings made all Hearts to melt!
Firm to the Church thou always stood,
And sealed her Charter with thy Blood.
THE Earl of Lindsey was in the King's Army at the Battle of Edgehill, and was
there taken Prisoner, but getting his Liberty, he again espoused his Royal
Master's Quarrel with the greatest Courage 'till the bloody Battle of Naseby,
where the King's Forces were routed by the Rebels, he scorned to give way, and
was kili'd valiantly fighting in the Field. And thus died the valiant Hero in
the Bed ^f Fame, and is enrolled among the Royal Martyrs of England.

portrait of Earl of Lindsey

WHat Pity is it that Fortune's Favor Falls not on Men of bright behavior?
War makes no Difference of Degree,
Noble and Base die promise'ously. Yet shall the m^^ory of the good
Like Linsey 's Earl, who l^st his Blood, or royal Charles at Noseby Fight)
Will precious be iE Just Men's Sight.
DR Hewit, was a worthy Divine of the Church of England, whose Loyalty no
Threa's nor Premises could entice from his Royal Master's Service, therefore
thought a p^oper Person to be dispatched by the Executioner, dying in full
Belief of the Restoration both of King and Church to these then poor drooping
Nati^ns: So that neither the Dignity of the Priesthood could save those who
most rightfully served at the Altar of Almighty God, and then the Churches
became Stables.

portrait of Dr Hewit, Divine of the Church of England

BRight Saint, and Reverent Divine,
Thy Death, as Life does brightly shine!
Such Faith, such Love, such Charity,
Tells what a sort of Man was The^!
And though thy Death we do implore,
It Is what the Saints endured before;
Our Hope is now, thou art in Heaven,
Where blessed Rewards to thee are given.
THE Earl of Northampton (who was Father to the late Bishop of London) joining
his Forces wi^h those of Prince Rupert, in 1641. and so marching courageously
to Litchfield, attacked the Rebels at Hopton-Heath, where he was killed as
brav^ly fighting for his King.

portrait of Earl of Northampton

ON Hopton-Heath this Earl was slain, His King and Nation to regain,
Nor were his Tons, those Noble Lords.
Less Famous for their warlike Swords. The valiant Heart of this bravo Sire,
Was bent to rais^^^ Sov'roign higher,
The Sons did his Example take, and fought for good K. Charles's sake.
THE Lord Capel was one of those Rov^llists, who in Defense of his injured
Majesty, endur^d the Hardsh^^s of the ^^ng Si^ge of Co^chester, he was th^re
taken by the Fanati^ks who af^erward emb^ued their vi^e Hands i^ h^s Blood, by
bri^ging him to the Ax and B^ock.

portrait of Lord Capel

TO obs^rve the Champion of his Lord,
The greatest Wonder does afford.
Who ^^ught for to anticipate
H^s Royal Martyn's Rigid Fate;
But in the same he lost his Breath,
And died for him a Martyr's Death:
Upon the Block h^^ met his D^om;
And wore the Crown of Martyrdom.
SIR Henry Slingsby, in the third Year of Oliver's Usurpation, was brought
before the bloody Court of Injustice, and charged with Treason for endeavoring
to resto^e his lawful Sovereign King Charles the Second to his Father's Throne,
had Judgment given against him, and suffered accordingly, to the Grief of every
loyal Briton. So strong were the Rebels at that time, that they murdered whom
they pleased, that was against their damnable Proceedings, contrary to the Laws
of God.

portrait of Sir Henry Slingsby

BRave Slinsby, thou did plainly see,
The Parliament's Audacity;
And did resent thy Monarch's Wrongs,
By their base Hands and baser Tongues:
His Conscience made him not abide
The^ Measures, but cleav'd to the Side;
Of his imposed injured King.
THE Earl of Stafford in his time was a fa^thful Minister of State to his King,
for which the Rump Parliament resolved for to murder him; and in deed they
beheaded him on Tower Hill on the 12th of May, 16^1. to the great Grief of h^s
Royal Sovereign.

portrait of Earl of Stafford

OH, Stafford! Thy dear only King,
Lamented thy s^d Suffering;
And, at his Death, thy Fate was such,
As g^iev'd his Conscience very much.
If He, who was both King and Saint,
Did thus thy Life and Goodness paint.
Encomiums then thou need none,
Enough! -- The Thing by Charles is done.
DUke Hamilton entering into England with an Army for H^s Majesty's Service, was
met at Preston in Lancashire, by Cromwell and Lambert, where he fought three
Battles, though worsted in all, was taken at Vxeter, sent to the Tower, where
about 6 Weeks after his Royal Master, he was beheaded, together with the Earl
of Holland, and the Lord Capel. By this Duk^'s Death, the Treach^ry of the
False Scotch is very remarkable, in betraying this Nobleman in Pretense of
Loyalty.

portrait of Duke Hamilton

WHEN Scotland they had sold their King,
Conscience their wicked Minds did sting*
And strait an Army mustered
Making this Noble DUKE their Head:
But Rebels were triumphant grown,
And conquered him, near Preston Town;
Brought him to London, where his Head
Was from his Shoulders severed.
COlonel Penruddock, a Gen^tleman of great Learning and Valor, and approved
Loyalty, was put to Death by that Arch-Traytor Oliver Cromwell in the first
Year of his Usurpation. At his Trial, no Man could plead with more Sense and
Eloquence than he d^d; neither could any die with more Christian Resignation
and Undauntedness; In a word, he had every good Qualification in him; both as a
Warrior a Gentleman, and a Christian being un^versally lament^d.

portrait of Colonel Penruddock

Valor and Learning made him Great,
A Blessing both to Church and State:
On Articles he did surrender,
But they did prove a mean Defender:
For him they found, against Law and Reason.
At Exon, guilty of High Treason,
Yet no Man at his Trial pleaded
Better than he; but was B^headed.
SIR Charles Lucas was (...) valiant Knight, who served his King and Country
against the Rebels. He was one of those who bravely defended Colohester against
them to the last Ex^remity, that they had not Horse. Flesh enough to feed them
one Day longer when upon Surrender he was shot to Death, on Pretense of not
keeping his word with Fair-fax, General of the Rebels. But the true Relation
was for his b^ing untainted in his Loyalty and being against such bloody
Regicides.

portrait of Sir Charles Lucas

NOR was this worthy valiant Knight,
Amazed with Horror at Death's Sight:
That Cause, next JESUS' Suffering,
Did help to take away the Sting.
With cheerful Mind^ resigned Heart,
Submitted to the fatal Dart:
And thus the bleeding Worthy fell,
By Imps, the very Spams of Hell.
SIR George Lisle was another noble Knight, and Companion of Sir Charles Luc^^s
in h^s Life and Death. For he was at Co^chester at the Surrender and was shot
to Death with him; on p^etence of having directed ^he shooting of poyl^nons
Bul^ets who to^k up A^ms* against their King co^^rary to the Laws or GOD and
Man. This was a lo^al Subject made a Victim to the Fury of Trayto^s regardless
of every thing sacred and pa^ticularly the L^rd's A^ointed.

portrait of Sir George Lisle

BRave LISLE was Cavalier enough,
Of Loyal Faith, gav^ pr^gnant Pro^f^s
At Colchester, when sh^^ to Death,
He glorred in his l^t^st Br^ath*
Shrunk not, but bravely Just^fy'd
The Heavenly C^use for which he died;
That Cause, which ever yields Renown,
His Country, and his King and Crown.
THE Ea^l of Derby likewise fell a Sacrifice to their Cruelty, who beheaded him
at Bolton in Lancashire the 15th of October, 1^51. for his firm Adherence to
his Majesty King Charles the Second, who was forced to sh^lter himself in the
Reyol Oak from the Rump.

portrait of Earl of Derby

IN Factions Bolton, this Earl died,
Though against the Law of Nations tried,
The Church was blessed with his Sm^^^.
Who it Establish'st in Manx. Isle.
Thus Great and Good, by cruel
Exposed to Villains, thou in State,
The Fatal Ax his Head did sever,
Whose Soul will reign in Heaven for ever.

