Englands Grievances In TIMES of POPERY.

Drawn out of the Canon Law, Decretal Epistles, and Histories of those Times.

WITH REASONS why all Sober PROTESTANTS May Expect no better Dealing from the
Roman Catholics, Should GOD for their Sins, suffer them to fall under the
Popes Tyranny AGAIN.

Collected for the Information and Satisfaction of the English Nation at this
Time.

LONDON, Printed for Joseph Collyer and Stephen Foster, and are to be sold at
the Angel on London Bridge, a little below the Gate. 1679.

To his much Honored Friends, RICHARD DUKE of OTTERTON, High Sheriff of the
County of DEVON.

AND TO CLEMENT HERNE of HAVERINGLAND In the County of NORFOLK ESQUIRES.

The AUTHOR Dedicateth this Ensuing Treatise: Entitled, England's Grievances
in Times of Popery.

ENGLAND'S Grievances in Times of POPERY.
SECTION 1.
IT appears as well by the Pope's Laws delivered in Decretal Epistles, which
were particularly, and upon sundry occasions directed to the Bishops and other
Clergymen of this Realm of England in Popish times; as also by the report of
our English Histories; that at such time as the Bishop of Rome had his full
sway in this Realm, the Authority of the King was so obscured, as there was
hardly left any show of his Sword and Dignity. And on the other side, the
Subjects destitute of succor by their Natural Prince, and left to a most
miserable spoil and rapine of the Pope, and of such as it pleased him to give
them in prey; whereof these special Grievances here collected, may serve for
testimony; besides a number of others, which come not to my memory; but may be
easily supplied by any indifferent man's careful Reading.

GRIEVANCES.
1. The first Grievance was, The Exemption of the Clergy; Exemption of the
Clergy.
who being a considerable part of the Realm, by reason that great numbers as
well looking to Preferments that then were bestowed upon that State; as also
drawn by Privileges and Immunities which they infinitely enjoyed above others,
sought to be of that number, were wholly exempt (or at least so took themselves
to be) from all Jurisdiction of the King and his Justices, not in
Ecclesiastical Causes only, as then they were termed, but even in Causes Civil,
and in Matters of Crime; though the same touched the Prince and his Danger in
the highest degree.

The Popes Laws to this purpose are to be seen in C. Clerici extr. de Judiciis,
C. seculares de foro competenti in 6o. and a special Constitution Provincial of
this Realm made by Boniface Archbishop of Canterbury in the time of King Henry
the Third, in the Council of Westminster or Lambeth Anno 1270 or 1272. vid.
Prynne's Exact History of Pope's Intolerable Usurpations upon the Liberties of
the King and Subjects of England and Ireland: Vol. 2. lib. 4. c. 3. Johan. de
Aton. Constitut. Guil. Lindwood.

Touching the Practice, it is recorded in the Decretals that Pope Alexander
III. in the time of the Reign of King Stephen, wrote to the Bishop of London,
to take Order by his Jurisdiction in a Civil Controversy of Goods left in the
Custody of a Clerk; c. 1. de Deposito.

Likewise it does there appear, that in the time of King Henry II. Pope Lucius
III. wrote to the Bishops of Ely and Norwich, to compel a Clerk to save his
Sureties harmless: And to like purpose he wrote in another Case to the
Archbishop of Canterbury.

King Henry III. pretending Title by his Prerogative, or by the Common Law, to
certain Lands, which the Archbishop of Canterbury claimed to be parcel of the
possessions of his Church, was compelled to answer the Bishop in that Cause in
the Court of Rome. Mat. Paris fol. 494.

Adam Tarlton, or d'Orlton, Bishop of Hereford, in a Parliament ^olden at
London in the year 1324, was accused of Treason against King Edward II. as
having aided the Mortimers with Men and Money against that King. Being brought
before the King, and claiming his Privilege to be judged by the Pope, he was
forthwith rescued by the rest of the Clergy. After a few days the King caused
him to be brought before him, and when he should have been arraigned (a thing
till that time never heard of, that a Bishop should be arraigned) the boldness
of the three Archbishops of Canterbury, York, and Dublin, was very strange; for
they, with ten other Bishops, with their Crosses erected; came to the Bar
before the Kings Justices, and took him from thence into their own Custody. In
his absence he was attainted with High Treason notwithstanding, and his
Temporalties were seized into the King's hand, until such time as the King
(much by his device and machination) was deposed of his Kingdom. But though the
King took away his goods, yet he was not suffered to meddle with his Body. Tho.
Walsingham Hist. Angl. p. 98, 99.

SECT. 2.
Restrain^ of making Laws ^or Poli^y.
2. Whatsoever Laws the King in his Parliament made, which in any sort impeached
the Privilege or Liberty of the Clergy, or touched their Lands or Goods, were
for that time holden by the Pope and his Clergy, void, and of no force. And it
helped not the King, how just cause soever he pretended of any right
appertaining to his Ancestors.

For so are the Popes Laws in precise terms, save that some of the later sort
reserve to the King, Laws touching Services, and some other rights in Church
lands. c. qu. Ecclesiarum de Const^t. c. Eccles. Sanct. Alar. c. Noverit. etc.
Gravem, de Sententia Excommunicationis.

And some Popes were so jealous over Princes in the Point, that they refused to
allow Laws by them made to the benefit of the Church. As where Basil Lieutenant
to Odoacer King of the Lombards, provided by Law in favor of the Church, that
no Prescription should make his Title good, who had bought ought of the Church;
the Pope misliking that a Layman should deal in those Causes, disannulled the
Law. c. ^ene quidem, Distinct. 96.

The pract ce of this injury is notable in the dealing of Thomas Archbishop of
Canterbury with King Henry II. For whereas the King in his Parliament had made
very reasonable Laws in maintenance of the Ancient Rights of the Crown,
against the licentious Liberties claimed by the Clergy: Among which, one was,
That Clerks in Causes of Felony and Murth^r, should be tried by the Laws of the
Realm (for that it was showed unto the Parliament that then an hundred M^rthers
had been committed by Churchmen, So Nuburgensis notes, lib. 2. cap. 16.
not duly punished) whereto the said Archbishop and the rest of the Prelates
gave their consents, and bound themselves to the observation of them by their
Oaths; the Archbishop afterward grudging at these Laws, departed the Realm,
obtained at the Pope's hand Absolution from his Oath, and forced the King to
answer for those Laws in the Court of Rome; where the King finding no favor,
that Garboil insued, which after fell out betwixt the King, the Pope, and the
Archbishop; and many Murders committed upon Clerks by the Lay-subjects, who
greatly stomached this Indignity offered to the King.

The Pope fearing two such Potentates as the Kings of England and France, Mat.
Paris Hist. Angl. fol. 1, 4, 135.
determines to labor a Reconciliation betwixt the King and the Archbishop,
and to make the French King a Mediator for the Archbishop. This he effected,
and brought the two Kings together at Paris. Thither also came Thomas Becket,
who being come into the King's presence, falling down upon his knees, used
these words, My Lord and Sovereign, I do here commit unto your own judgment the
Cause and Controversy between us, so far forth as I may, salvo honor Dei;
sav^ng the honor of God. The King being much offended with that last
Expression [Salvo honor Dei] turned himself about unto the French King, and
said, See you not, how he goes about to delude me with this Clause [Saving the
honor of God,] for whatsoever shall displease him, he will by and by allege
to be prejudicial to the honor of God: But this I will say to you, Godwin's
Catalogue of English Bishops.
whereas there have been Ki^gs of England, many before me; whereof some were
peradventure of greater power than I, the most far less; and again, many
Archbishops before this man, holy and notable men. Look what Duty was ever
performed by the greatest Archbishop that ever was, to the weakest and simplest
of my Predecessors. Hereunto the Archbishop answered cunningly and stoutly,
That the times were altered, his Predecessors, which could not bring all things
to pass at the first dash, were content to bear with many things; and that (as
men) they fell, and omitted their Duty often times: that what the Church had
gotten was by the diligence of good Prelates, whose Example he would follow
thus far forth, as that if he could not augment the Privileges of the Church
in his time, yet ye would never consent they should be diminished. This Answer
being heard, all Men cried shame upon him, imputing the cause of these stirs
upon him; and so they parted at that time without reconciliation.

Another instance I will give, namely, that of Cardinal Pool, who in the
Dispensation granted to the Realm in the time of Queen Mary, for determining
Church Lands, etc. Does therein plainly declare, that it was of favor, and in
regard of the Peace of the Realm, that he so dispensed; otherwise all Laws made
in derogation of the Churches Rights, were void.

SECT. 3.
The King forbidden to levy Subsidies upon the Clergy. So are his Laws in c.
adversus. Ext. de Immunitate Ecclesiarum, c. 1. de Immunit. Ecclesiar. in sexto
c. Clericis, e^dem.
3. The Pope discharges the Clergy from all Payments of Money imposed by any
Temporal Prince, be it by way of Tax or of Subsidy, or for what necessity of
his Realm soever, except the Pope be first made privy thereto, and give his
assent: And Clerks yielding to such Imposition, do thereby fall into the Popes
Curse.

Roger Hov^den Annal pars posterior p. ^11, 817 Matthew Paris p. 146, 157, 194,
Holmshed p. 1^, 163, 170, Godwin in h^s Life.
King John demanding of his Subjects, as well Spiritual as Temporal, a
thirteenth part of their Goods and Chattels, Geoffery Plantaginet, Archbishop
of York, the Kings base Brother, opposed it. So says Mr. Prynne out of diverse
Authors, That he obstructed the levying of Carvage (demanded and granted to the
King by common consent, and paid by all others) on the Demesne Lands of his
Church or Tenants, beating the Sheriff of York's Servants, excommunicating the
Sheriff himself by Name, with all his Aiders, and interdicted his whole
Province of York for attempting to levy it. Wherefore the King incensed for
these intolerable Affronts, summoned him to answer these high Contempts; his
not going over with him into Normandy, when summoned; and also to pay him 3000
Marks due to his Brother King Richard: and by his Writs commanded all the
Archbishops Servants (wherever they were found) to be imprisoned (as they
were) for beating the Sheriffs Officers, and denying to give the King any of
the Archbishops Wine passing through York; summoned Geoffery into his Court to
answer all these Contempts; and ^ssued Writs to the Sheriff of Yorkshire, to
seize all his Goods, Temporalties, and to return them into the Exchequer, which
was executed accordingly. The King and Queen repairing to York the next
Mid-Lent, the Archbishop upon more sober thoughts, made his Peace with the
King, submitted to pay such a Fine for his Offenses, as four Bishops, and four
Barons elected by them, should adjudge, and absolved William de Stutvil the
Sheriff, and James de Paterna, whom he had excommunicated, and recalled his
former Interdict.

King Edward the First was in a like case resisted, by means of Robert
Kilwarby, Archbishop of Canterbury. For when the King in Parliament, holden at
St. Edmonds-bury, demanded there a Subsidy of his Subjects, the Temporalty
yielded an Eighth part of the Goods of Citizens and Burgesses; and of other Lay
Persons the twelfth part: but the Clergy encouraged by the Archbishop, This is
rep^rted by William Thorn, a Monk of Canterbury
who had procured from Pope Boniface the VIII Immunity from Subsidies (which I
take to be the same that is before recited, Ex. c. 1. de Immunitate Ecclesiarum
in Sexto) refused to yield any thing; whereupon the King called another
Parliament at London without the Clergy, where the Goods of the whole Clergy
were declared to be forfeited to the King; so as afterward most of the Clergy
were content with any condition to redeem that forfeiture.

SECT. IV.
4. Subjects Armed against their Sovereign.
The Kings own Subjects were by the Pope armed with Censures of
Excommunication, Interdiction, etc. by them to be denounced against him, for
redress of such wrongs as it pleases them to take themselves injured by.

Pope Innocent IV. has decreed, that a Prelate having wrong offered him by a
Temporal Judge, may defend himself with the Spiritual Sword of Excommunication.
c. Dilecto. De sententia Excommunicationis in Sexto.

In the Fortieth year of King Henry the Third, Boniface, Archbishop of
Canterbury, made a large Constitution, wherein he sets forth how the Clergy
shall proceed against the King, by whose Writ a Clerk is called in his Court to
answer for Matters pertaining to the Ecclesiastical Judge; and declares that
it shall be lawful to interdict all the Kings Lands and Possessions. This
Archbishop had summoned a Council of Bishops and Archdeacons, that like the
Martyr Thomas (says Matthew Paris) he might encounter the Enemies and Rebels
of the Church, and be a Wall of Defense unto it, as was pretended. The King
directed his Prohibitions to him and the Bishops, not to meet in this Council,
which they contemn. The Articles and Canons made in that Council, were against
the Kings Prerogative Ecclesiastical and Temporal; his Temporal Judges, Courts,
Laws, Prohibitions, Writs, and Judgments: Exempting of themselves, their
Clerks, Officers, Lands and Goods, from their Secular Jurisdiction, and
Judicatures: Decreeing Interdicts and Excommunications against the King, his
Judges, Officers, Lands, Castles, and Lay subjects, for which Liberties they
resolved to contend even unto Death. The Archbishop was forced by the King and
Barons, to fly the Kingdom for this and other like Constitutions, against whom
they complained, appealed, and sent their Proctors to Rome. Which Constitutions
are yet Printed in L^ndewood, and Aton, and urged for the Canon Law of this
Realm by some aspiring Prelates, and Ignorant Canonists of late times (says
Mr. Prynne) though always opposed in such manner as has been related; Prynn's
Exact Hist. vol. 2.
yea, totally neglected, or seldom put in use in times of Popery by those
which made them; as Lyndewood himself acknowledges in h^s Epistle to Henry
Archbishop of Canterbury, before his Prov^nciale.

SECT. V.
The Kings Prohibitions Contemned.
5. The King's Prohibition disobeyed by the Popes Warrant is another Grievance
complained of in those days. For Pope Eugenius has so decreed, That no
Spiritual Judge shall stay from proceeding in any Cause termed Ecclesiastical,
in regard of the Kings Prohibitions; c. Decernimus Extra de judiciis.

The Prohibitions sent by our Kings, their Council, Courts, Judges, to
Archbishops, Bishops, Archdeacons, Officials, and other Ecclesiastical Persons,
were some of them against admitting Clerks to Benefices or Prebendaries, till
the Title were tried in the Kings Courts. Some against holding ^lea of
Advowsons of Chapels, Churches, Prebendaries; or determining the Rights of
Patronages to Churches: Chapels, and Prebendaries, in Ecclesiastical Courts,
or before Popes Delegates: Against Alienation of Lands in Capite, in Mortmain,
or otherwise: Against granting Administrations of Intestates Goods, Debtors, or
Accomptants to the King, till the Kings Debts satisfied. Against Appeals to
Popes, Pryn's Hist. of Popes Usurpations. Vol. 2. p. 393 394, 878, 8^9.
or any other (in cases of Certificates of Bastardy) to the Kings Courts; or
trying Bastardy in Spiritual Courts, their Canons crossing the Common Law
therein. Against Abbots, or Convents, borrowing, or others, lending them,
Moneys upon Bond, without their joint consent and the Kings, etc. Against
Archbishops Consecrating Bishops Elect, not approved of by the King after their
Election. Against their holding and meeting in Convocations or Council, or
acting and doing any thing in them, ^ejudical to the King or Kingdom. Some
Prohibitions were a^^inst Bakers imprinting the sign of the Cross; Agnus Dei,
or ^^me of Jesus, upon Sale-bread. Some against Bishops, and other ^^eir
Officers, citing Lay Persons to make Inquisitions, Present^^ents, or give
testimony upon Oath, or excommunicating them ^^r not taking Oaths in any case,
except in matters of Matrimony ^^d Testament, being against the Kings
Prerogative, Law, or ^ustom of the Realm, etc. Against their holding Plea of
any Chat^^ls or Goods, which concerned not Marriage or Testament; or (...)
Goods Testamentary, for which there is Suit in the Kings Ex^^equer. Against
their Citing, Excommunicating, or Interdicting ^^^y of the Kings Barons,
Bailiffs, Judges, Officers, Sheriffs, for ^xecuting the Kings Writs, or
Misdemeanors in the execution of ^^eir Offices; or any of his Tenants in
Capite, or of his Demesne ^ands, Cities, Castles, without his special License,
or Lieutenants, etc. Against Archbishops, Bishops, Convents, or others,
presenting to ^ivings, or Prebends belonging to the King, during Vacations.
Against disturbing the Possessions of the Kings Clerks, presented ^y him to
Benefices, or Prebends; or Judgments in his Courts by any process out of
Ecclesiastical Courts; or from the Pope or his ^eligates. Against Suits in
Ecclesiastical Courts, Pro laesione fidei, ^r breach of Oaths in civil
Contracts. Against suing there for Lands ^evised by Custom, or Actions of Debt
devised by the Testator. Against Ordinaries, malicious Excommunications, or
Arresting, or ^^prisoning Persons unjustly Excommunicated by them, or for
^inging Prohibitions to prevent them. Against the bringing of any ^ulls,
Letters from, or sending any Letters to the Pope or Court of ^ome, prejudicial
to the King or Realm. Against citing, or drawing any of the Kings Subjects for
any Suits to Rome, or out of the Realm, ^y the Pope, his Delegates, or others.
Against collecting any Aid, ^isme, or Money for the Pope or others, by the
Popes Authority, without the Kings special License and Consent, by Popes
Nuncioes, ^egats, Bishops, or any others. Against Popes Provisions to
Be^ifices, Prebendaries, etc. belonging to the Kings Presentation (...) right
of his Crown; or by his Prerogative in Vacant Bishoprics, ^onasteries,
Wardships; or to his free Chapels, or Churches im^ropriated. Against Clerks
and others going to Rome, without ^aking a special Oath to procure nothing to
the Kings or Kingdoms ^amage. Against Popes Legates or Agents, coming into the
Realm, ^nless sent for; and taking an Oath to do or bring nothing to the
prejudice of the King, Church, or Kingdom. Against receiving or assisting a
Bishop or Archbishop, made by the Popes Provision. Against Popes and their
Delegates, Sequestration of the Temporalties, Goods and Profits of Monasteries.
Against Sheriffs or Gaolers, detaining Clerks in Prison after demand by their
Ordinaries. Against the Cruce fignati, or others going over Sea out of the
Realm, without the Kings special License. Against offering violence to the
Goods or Persons of Clerks, Churches, or Churchyards. Against removing Moneys
of Delinquents, and Alliens out of Monasteries. Against offering Violence to
Jews or their Goods. Against Noblemens siding with Bishops in their Quarrels.
Against Suits between Persons for Tithes, when the Patron may be prejudiced, or
for the Money of Tithes sold; until it be discussed by the King and Council,
whether the Right belongs to the King, or whether the Cause belong to the King
or the Ecclesiastical Court. Against Examining things in the Ecclesiastical
Court, that have been judged in the Kings Courts, in cases of Presentations to
Churches; and the like. Agasnst Women's Marriages, who held Castles, or Lands in
Capite, without the Kings License.

SECT. 6.
Restraint of the Common Law.
6. Another Grievance was, That the King was forbidden in causes of Clerks, to
use the Canon Laws of his Realm, but is commanded to decide them only by the
Common Law. c. Quod Clericus de foro competenti. Some Causes ever taken to be
merely Civil, Usurpation against Common Law.
and to appertain to the Crown, were drawn to the Ecclesiastical Authority: As
namely, The right to determine Questions of Patronage, whereof Pope Alexander
the Third wrote to the King of England, that it was to be tried by
Ecclesiastical Laws, and before an Ecclesiastical Judge; cap 3. Extra de
judiciis. Again in some Causes Civil, The King not permitted to use the Common
Law in some Cases of Lay Persons.
the King was restrained from the use of the Common Law of his Realm, though
the same concern Lay Persons: As when a Woman by Oath makes release of her
Jointure or Dower, the temporal Judge is compellable by the Ordinary his
Excommunication to judge of the Oath, according to the Canon Law. c. Licet and
jure jurand.

And where again an Ecclesiastical Judge has determined any Cause according to
the Canon Law, if the same Matter be brought before a Temporal Judge, he must
al^ow the Judgment of the Spiritual Judge, that it be pleaded before him; cap.
ult Extra de exeptionibus.

But contrariwise, if a Clerk be first Condemned by a Temporal Judge, the Canon
Law has no regard thereof, nor receives any thing for proof that was done
before him; c. At si Clerici de judiciis.

SECT. 7
7. That under the general color of their Authority, Civil Wrongs made Causes
Ecclesiastical.
to main^^in Ecclesiastical Liberties, some Wrongs offered to Church Men (...)
their Lands and Possessions, which otherwise were to be tried ^y the Laws of
the Land, are by them drawn to their Courts, as ^here Entries be made by Lay
Men upon Church Lands.

Simon Mepham Archbishop of Canterbury, in a Constitution by him and the Clergy
published in the year 1332, has decreed, that every one which invadeth the
Possessions of an Ecclesiastical Person, ^^all be judged a Violator of
Ecclesiastical Liberty, and for the same ^xcommunicate.

SECT. 8.
8. Generally the Pope claims to be judge of his own Liberties, The Pope sole
Judge of his own Privileges
and suffers no Man to examine or determine of them but him^^lf. c. Cum
venissent extra de judiciis.

Whereas it is an old Maxim in all Laws, that Nemo in propria ^usa potest esse
Judex. That no Man can be judge in his own Cause especially if Judge and
Witness too) yea Pope Gregory the First, ^^d a whole Council, denounced an
Anathema against the Pope ^^mself, or any other, that should presume to be a
Judge in his own ^ause; Sive in rusticano, sive in urbano praedio: whence
Bartholomeus ^axiensis, Dr. John Thierry, and other Canonists, in their Glosses
on ^ratian, do resolve downright that, Gratian Cause. 16. qu. 6. Alvar. Pelag.
de Planctu Eccles. l. 1. Artic. 34, 35.
Papa in sua causa Judex esse non ^bet; That the Pope ought not to be Judge in
his own Cause. Yet ^lvarus Pelagius, affirms the contrary upon this strong
Presumpti^^ and Supposition; Quod non debet aliquam causa a se remittere, im^o
non potest (licet suspectus) quamdiu est Papa. Papa enim aut sanctus est, ^^t
sanctus praesumitur: non enim praesumendum est, quod alias facit Papa ^am
Christus vel Petrus, cujus est Vicarius and Successor. That the Pope ^^ght not
to remit any Cause from himself: yea, he may not (al^^ough suspected) as long
as he is Pope; for (says he) either the ^ope is Holy, or is presumed to be
Holy: for it is not to be presumed ^at a Pope can do otherwise than Christ,
whose Vicar he is, or Peter, those Successor he is. But this is a Maxim
frequently resolved in ^aw Books, by all the Judges of this Realm, That none
can be Judge (...) his own Case; who have farther adjudged, That if an Act of
Par^^^ment make any Man Judge in his own Case, the very Act it self is void
Law, being against the Law of Nature, which ought not to be violated; ^^d all
Judgments given thereon are void.

SECT 9.
9. The Pope challenges to himself Judgment of Oaths, how far ^^ey extend, and
how they are to be taken, and gives order for redress of the breach of them.
Where therefore every Prince at his Coronation takes an Oath for the good
Government of his Realm, Princes called in question for their Government.
he is compelled to answer to his own Subjects at the Court of Rome to every
Quarrel and Pretense of his Misgovernment, as Matters falling within the Popes
Authority, to examine and reform the breach of Oaths. So did Pope Honorius the
Third, in a Cause of a King of Hungary, as appears in the Popes Decretals. c.
Intellect. Extra de jure jurando.

One of their Canonists of great Reputation, and a Cardinal, writes thus: Si a
Proceribus accusetur Princeps apud Pontificem, and non satisfaciat, vel a Papa
se poni potest vel a Proceribus voluntate Papae If a Prince be accused by his
Nobles unto the Pope, and does not give Satisfaction; either he may be laid
aside by the Pope or by the Nobles, at the Popes pleasure. c. Alius. 15. q. 6.

SECT. 10.
Assurance betwixt the King and his Subjects disturbed.
10. He takes upon him also to assoil Men from keeping their Oaths* whereby do
grow Disturbances, not only of Leagues betwixt one Prince and another, but also
of that Assurance which a Prince has of his own Subjects, and which sometimes
the Subjects have of the Prince, in Composition of Quarrels that do happen
between them Bellarmine, in the Second Chapter of the Book against Barckley,
says Pontifex potest d spensare in votis and juramentis, quae Deus ipse jussit
redd^ and quorum solutio est de jure divino. The Pope can give Dispensations
from Vows and Oaths, which God has commanded to be fulfilled, and the keeping
whereof is of Divine right. Bellarm. lib. 4. de Pontifice cap. 5.
And you need not wonder at this, (...) you consider what he says elsewhere.
If the Pope did err (says he) commanding Vices and prohibiting Virtues, the
Church should be obliged t^ believe, that Vices are good, and Virtues are evil,
unless she should si^ against Conscience.

In the year 882 Marin, or Martin, attained to the Papal Dignity of whom
Platina says, that he came to the Popedom by ill way* There was then one
Formosus Bishop of Porto, who by the will of Pop^ John IX, had been obliged by
Oath never to receive Episcopacy though it were presented unto him: But that
Marin delivered hi^ from that Oath by a Dispensation, giving him leave to be
forswo^ with a good Conscience.

At that time the Counts of Tusculum had such a Power at Rom^ that they made
Popes such as they listed. Marin being dead, the promoted Adrian the Third to
the Popedom, and after him Steph^^ the VII, to whom Formosus succeeded, who
made no difficulty to r^ceive the Popedom against his Oath. This Formosus had
but a sho^^ Reign, he had Boniface the VII for his Successor, whom Stephen the
VIII succeeded, who unburied the Body of Formosus; and having arrayed him with
his Priestly Robes, put him in full Synod upon the Popes Seat. Then having cut
off his Fingers wherewith he gave the Blessing, he caused him to be dragged and
cast into the River Tiber, declaring him a Perjured Man, and an Unlawful Pope.
That Stephen for his Tyranies was taken by the Roman People and strangled in
Prison.

To that Stephen, Romanus succeeded, and to him John the X; both which restored
Formosus again to his good Name: For this John assembled a Council at Ravenna,
where all the Acts of Formosus were made valid, and his Perjury approved. But
Sergius that succeeded, abrogated all that, and again unburied the Body of
Formosus, with a thousand Reproaches. It is a particular stain to that Age,
that in it the Pope began to authorize Perjury, and to dispense from Oaths. See
the 6th Question of the 15th Cause of the Decree, which is full of such
Examples. But leaving this, let us return to the Matter in hand, how Thomas
Becket was discharged of his Oath, it has been shown before; and the Examples
be many, of Subjects that have sought and obtained like Liberty at the Popes
hands, in matter of their Allegiance and Duty promised by Oath. King John had
taken an Oath to observe the Laws of King Henry the First, of Edward the
Confessor, and the great Charter of Liberties: but he violated this Oath, and
was absolved from it soon after by the Pope. And we find that Pope Urban the
Fourth absolved King Henry the Third from his Oath made to his Subjects, for
the observation of certain Articles, Mat. Paris fol. 1322.
called, The Provisions of Oxford, where^o he had condescended, after long
trouble, for the peace and quiet of his People. Pope Clement the V also did the
like to King Edward the First, touching his Oath which he had made to the
Barons of this Realm. Thomas Waisingham f. 61.

SECT. 11.
11. Princes Wars examined by the Pope; c. Sicut extra in Jurejurando.
The Pope takes upon him Authority to Examine Princes Titles, and the Causes
of their Wars, and to compound their Controversies at his pleasure, compelling
them to abide his Order upon pain of Excommunication; Interdiction, etc. A
matter very dangerous, considering the Corruption of Just ce in that See
(whereof there be so many Examples in Histories, as would fill a large
Treatise) and that the Pope can hardly be indifferent, his Affairs and State
being such as they are for the most part linked with the one part or the other.
The claim of this Authorlty appears in c. Tram. Extra de ordine Cognition.

David, Prince of North Wales, having Wars with King Henry III, committed
himself, his People, and his Land, into the hands of the Pope, promising to
hold his Right of him, and to pay Five hundred Marks by the year. Several
Charters were made to the King by the Prince and Nobles of North Wales,
ratified by their Oaths and voluntary Submissions to Ecclesiastical Censures of
Excommunication and Interdict, by the Bishops therein nominated, in case of
Violation. Matthew. Paris. p. 606, 607. Mat. Westminster. p. 180, 181, 182.
And the manner of his Oath is set down by Matthew. Paris. Et ad omnia firmiter
tenenda, Ego David juravi super crucem sanctam, quam coram me feci deportari.
And firmly to hold all these things, I David have sworn upon the Holy Cross,
which I have caused to be carried before me. And the Reverend Father Howel,
Bishop of St. Asaph, at my request (says David) has firmly promised in his
Order that he will do all these things aforesaid, and procure them to be
observed by all the means that he can. And Ednevet Wagan at my Command swear
the same thing upon the Cross aforesaid.

But the Pope lays hold of the Cause, the Controversy being committed by him
unto two of his Clergy. Matthew. Paris fol. 880, 881.
The King was called before them to answer David's complaint; which, the King
seeing how small likelihood there was of Indifferency, refused to do.

King Edward the First having war with Scotland, and being far entered into the
Land, was by Commandment of the Pope enjoined to leave off his wars against
that Realm, upon pretense that Scotland and the people thereof, were by his
special exemption discharged from all Authority of other Princes, and
appertained to his See. Thomas Walsingham adds, That the King refusing thus
to be ordered, was moved thereto again by the Pope, and commanded to receive
Order by way of Justice in his Court. The King having received Pope Boniface's
Letters, assembleth a Parliament at Lincoln, by whose advice he addresseth
Letters Responsal to the Pope. And the Lords Temporal, in the name of the whole
Parliament, answered the Pope, That the King of England ought by no means to
answer in judgment in any Case, nor should bring his Rights into doubt, nor
ought to send any Proctors or Messengers to the Pope, etc. And that they will
not suffer their Lord the King to do, or by any means to attempt the premises,
being so unaccustomed, and not heard of before. Dated at Lincoln in the year
1301, in the 28th year of the Reign of King Edward the First.

Walsingham, fol. 41.
But the same King in time of war with the French King, was required on the
behalf of Pope Boniface VIII by his Legate, to put their whole quarrel to be by
way of Arbitrament decided by the Pope: And further, he was enjoined upon pain
of Excommunication to take truce with the French King for two years; whereto he
gave place: says Thomas Walsingham.

SECT. 12.
12. Another Grievance was, Subjects departure out of the Realm against the
Kings will.
The departure of Prelates and other of ^he Clergy forth of the Realm, and
leaving the service thereof against ^he Kings will: Of which sort some
voluntarily have gone upon co^our of devotion, as Anselm Archbishop of
Canterbury in the time of King William Rufus, notwithstanding that he was
expressly forbidden by the King, and told, that if he went, he should no more
return into his Realm, departed from hence, pretending that he went, Matthew.
Paris fol. 29.
Ad Visitandum Limina Apostolorum, To visit the Thresholds of the Apostles. It
may be he pretended his Oath, for at that time Bishops used to bind themselves
by Oath, that once every year they should visit the Sea of Rome, except they be
otherwise dispensed withal; which Oath by the Canon Law is now taken by every
Popish Bishop: Ego N Episcopus N. ab hac hora in antea fidelis and obediens ero
beato Pe^ro, sanctaeque Apostolicae Romanae Ecclesiae, ac Domino nostro S. P.
suisque Successoribus canonice intrantibus. Non ero in consilio, aut consensu,
vel facto, ut vitam perdant, aut membrum, seu capiantur mala captione, etc.

Others again have been called forth of the Realm to the Pope's service, as
Peter Bishop of Winchester, in the time of King Henry the Third, was called to
Rome by the Pope, pretending that he would im^loy him in compounding certain
differences, which were betwixt him and the Inhabitants of Rome, and betwixt
him and the Grecians. But truly (as Matthew Paris notes) the Pope knew him to
be a very rich Bishop, and therefore sent for him to Rome, to assist him,
Matthew. Paris fol. 549.
not only with his Advice in his Military Affairs, but also with his Purse
against the Romans and Grecians: And the Pope having made as much of him as he
could for those ends, importuned the King for his return into England; which
the King assenting to, wrote thus to the Pope and Bishop:

Domino Papae Rex, Claus. 15 H 3. Part. 2. memb. 2. intus.
etc significavit nobis sanctitas vestra per venerabilem Patrem A. Cov^ntrensem
and Litchfeldensem Episcopum, and dilectum and fidelem nostrum P. Saracenum
Civem Romanum, quod gratum habere^is and acceptum, si venerabilis Pater P.
Wintoniensis Episcopus, cum gratia nostra reverti posset in Angliam, and sicut
ad ejus spectat officium curam securus genere pastoralem, and super hoc ex
part sinceritatis v^strae nos rogaverunt. Ad quod Sanctae Pattern tati vestrae
duximus respondendum. Quod cum idem Episcopus Regnum nostrum ultimo exivit
gratis, and mo^u ductus proprio, potius quam nostram, vel alterius
compulsionem: Et etiamsi been recolitis, ad preces vestras, nob^s specialiter
inde directas sedem adi^t Apostolicam. Vnde si memoratus Episcopus voluntatem
habuerit revertendi, and in Regno nostro commorand, been placet nobis ipsus
adventus. Nec erit qui ipsum super hoc aliquatenus impediat, aut cum redierit
tranquilitatem ipsius perturbet, licet etiam graviter versus ipsum moveremur,
ad Instantiam vestram conceptum rancorem, siquis esset, penitus et
remitteremus, parati et expositi, tanquam filius Sanctae Romanae Ecclesiae
devotissimus, in hiis and aliis vestris inhaerere Conciliis, and voluntatis
vestra pro viribus nostris been placitum ad implere. Test Rege. 40 die Martii.
Anno etc. XIX. The King wrote after the like manner unto the Bishop: Others,
and those very often, were called to Rome, to answer Complaints, or Private
Men's Suits, by which occasion the King lost the use of their Service, and a
great part of the Wealth and Substance of this Realm was spent in the Court of
Rome.

SECT. 13.
^^vestiture into Bishoprics, and the Kings assent in choice of Bishops, taken
from him.
13. It is well known that the King has special Interest in the Choice and
Investitures of Prelates unto Bishoprics; both because a great part of the
good Government of his People depends upon the good Government of that State,
and also because in those times he furnished himself with Counselors taken
out of the Number, and employed others in places of weighty and most necessary
Services of the Realm.

Wherefore the Kings of England were ever by the Ancient Customs and Laws of
the Land, allowed their Assent and Directions in all Elections of Persons unto
those places.

This right has been strangely oppugned by diverse Popes, some of them
disturbing Elections made by the Consent of the King; and others bestowing
Bishoprics at Pleasure, without Election at all, and against the Kings will.

The first that stirred that Quarrel in England, was Anselm Archbishop of
Canterbury: For when the Kings of England, needy of Moneys, borrowed of the
Clergy great Loans, never to pay again, he to exempt himself from Subjection to
the King, labored to make his Archbishopric to depend merely on the Pope, not
on the King, although he had acquired it by the Concession and free Gift of the
King.

Anselm then being promoted in the year 1092 to the Archbishopric by King
William Rufus, the King having franckly bestowed that rich Bishopric upon him,
soon after would extort from him a great Sum of Money for the exigence of his
Affairs, as claiming some recompense for his Gift. Anselm refused to give it,
and stealing away privately out of England, went to Pope Urban the second, who
at that time was Violently Prosecuting against the Emperor Henry IV, the
Quarrel of Investiture, begun by his Predecessors Gregory VII.

This Urban liking the Prudence and Dexterity of Anselm, gave ear ^o his
Counsel, and gave him the Archbishops Pall, thereby voiding ^he Investiture
which he had received from King William, Du Moulin contr. Card du Perron. l. 1.
7. cap. 11.
and obli^ing him there-after to depend upon him. This Anselm did, so beha^ing
himself ever after, as holding his Archbishopric by the Popes Ordination, not
by the King's Concession.

The King being herewith incensed, Prohibited Anselm to enter in^o his Kingdom,
confiscated the Lands and Estate of the Arcbisho^rick, and by an express Edict
declared, That the Bishops held their ^laces and Estates merely from him, and
were not subject unto the Pope for the same: And that he had the same rights in
his Kingdom, ^s the Emperor had in the Empire. At length it was determined,
that all the Abbots and Bishops of England should be called together to judge
of this Controversy. Bp. Godwins Catal. of Bps.
They met at Rockingham-Ca^tle, and the Matter being proposed by the King, for
fear or ^lattery (says Bishop Godwin) they all assented unto him, and ^orsook
their Archbishop. All the Bishops of England subscribed, except only Gondulphus
Bishop of Rochester.

By the Intervention of Friends Anselm made his Peace; but after his return
from Rome, holding a strict league with the Pope, ^e began again soon after to
dissuade the Clergy from receiving ^nvestitures from the King: wherefore he was
constrained to fly the second time out of the Kingdom, and his Estate was again
seized upon and conficated, to which he was restored at his return.

He came then to Pope Urban, who received him honorably, as a Confessor,
suffering for the Cause of Christ, The year after Urban kept a Council at
Clermont in Avergne, whereby he granted full Pardon of Sins to all that should
contribute to the expedition into the Holy Land, etc. In the same Council he
decreed, that thence-forth it should not be lawful for any Prelate, or
Ecclesiastical Man, to receive the Investiture, or Collation of a Benefice, or
Church-dignity, from the hand of any Lay Person. But the Princes derided these
Decrees, and retained the Possession or these Investitures.

In the year 1099 King William and Pope Urban died. Henry the First succeeded
William, who sought to be reconciled with Anselm, and called him home again.
But Anselm being obliged by an Oath to the Pope, prevailed with the King, that
a Council should be gathered at London, where he declared the Order he had from
the Pope, That no Lay Man should have the Power to confer any Investiture, and
began to degrade the Bishops promoted by the Kings Nomination, refusing to
consecrate some Bishops named by the King. King Henry being highly displeased,
banished him out of England presently, and confiscated his Goods.

Whilst these things passed in England, Pope Paschal prosecuted the Quarrel of
his Predecessors against the Emperor Henry IV. He caused the Emperors own Son
to rebel against his Father, who soon after dying with Grief, was so forsaken,
that Pope Paschal would not suffer him to be buried, for his Carcass lay five
years at Spire, rotting without any Christian Burial.

The new Emperor Henry V, past presently into Italy after the Death of his
Father, where the Pope hoping to be recompensed for helping him in his
Conspiracy against his Father, found himself deceived: for when he pressed him
to renounce the Rights of Investitures, which his Ancestors (as Sigebert says)
had enjoyed above three hundred years, the Emperor grew very Angry, and laying
hold of this Pope Paschal, committed him to close Prison. Neither would he
release him, till he had renounced his claim to the Investitures and Collations
of Benefices, saying to him in in scorn that which Jacob said to the Angel
wrestling with him, I will not let thee go before thou have given me thy
Blessing.

Then Paschal, to redeem himself out of Captivity, granted to Henry, that both
he and the Popes after him, should leave unto the Emperors the peaceable
enjoying of the Investitures of Ecclesiastical Dignities, by the Ring and the
Staff. Also that none should be Consecrated Bishop without an Investiture from
the Emperor. The Pope and the Emperor reciprocally bound themselves by Oath
upon the Host of the Mass, which they received together. But because that Oath
was extorted, the Pope thought not himself obliged to keep it. So he brake that
Agreement, and excommunicated Henry, and all Princes usurping Investitures.

This accident confirmed Henry the First, King of England, in a resolution to
retain the Investitures of his Kingdom. And that Order was held in England for
a long time. Only the Popes, that they might not be injurious to their
pretenses by a long Prescription, would send the Pall to some Prelates invested
by the King, confirming that which they could not alter, and giving an
Approbation which was not sought from them.

And further, as to Elections of Bishops, the great Troubles that were in the
Reign of King John, grew upon no other occasion, than because the King refused
Stephen Langton, whom the Pope would have thrust into the Sea of Canterbury,
Mat. Paris fol. 299.
notwithstanding that there had passed a former Election of another with the
Kings assent; and that the King justly alleged, he might not trust Lang^on in
his Realm, because he had a long time been on the part of his Enemies. The King
menaced the Pope and his Creatures, seized the Temporalities of the Archbishop,
banished him, his Pa^ents and Kindred, with the Monks of Canterbury as Traitors.

By his and the Prelates Treachery confederating with him, the Kingdom was
interdicted, the King excommunicated, his Subjects absolved from their
Allegiance; he and his deprived of the Crown, given to the French King;
enforced to resign his Kingdom to the Pope, become his sworn Tributary, Vassal
and Homager, to renounce the ancient Rights of his Crown, to receive Stephen
and his Confederats to favor, to restore them to their Bishoprics, with the
Profits and Damages sustained by their Exile, before the King could be
absolved: The King is forced to humble himself before him, and swear to him,
before he would absolve him. He instigates the Nobles against the King,
threatens to excommunicate him, and revive the interdicts if he proceeded by
Arms against them. He was very severe against the Clergymen, who adhered
faithfully to King John. He excites the Barons to take up Arms against the King
for their Liberties; extorts the Great Charter from him, with new additional
Clauses; wresteth a new Charter for the Election of Bishops and Abbots from
him, and of the Patronage and Royalties of the Bishopric of Rochester, as
absolutely as the King enjoyed them.

To requite which, he surrendered the Castle and Ammunition of Rochester to the
Barons. He refuses to execute the Popes Excommunication, though often pressed to
it by the Legate and others. He is aecused and suspended in the Council at Rome,
for confederating with the Barons against the King. A just retaliation! At
length his Suspension is token off, but he not to return into England till
Peace made betwixt the King and his Barons.

Ralph N. v l, Bishop of Chichester, and Chancellor of England, being chosen
Archbishop by the Monks of Canterbury, was approved by the King, and put in
Possession of the Temporalties by and by. The Monks of Canterbury thereupon
pressing the Pope to confirm his Election, Anno 123^, the Pope made diligent
enquiry of Simon Langton (Brother to Stephen elected, but rejected by King
John, and the Pope too at his request, to be Archbishop of York) concerning
Ralphs Person and Disposition, Simon told the Pope, that he was an hot Fellow,
Stout, Subtle, an old Courtier, and very gracious with the King, and therefore
that he would make variance betwixt him and the King, and cause him to deny the
payment of that Tribute granted unto him by King John: This was enough; so
without any more ado he dissolved the Election, never alleging any matter of
Exception against him, but willed the Monks to chose another.

Then the Monks chose one John their Sub-prior. He being called to Rome, and
first charged with insufficiency, but sufficiently cleared thereof by the
testimony of certain Cardinals, to whose Examination he was referred; he was
yet in the end compelled to give over his right to that See. And after some
other, several Elections of Archbishops to that See, Mat. Paris fol. 502, and
515.
made with the Kings Allowance, they were all one after another declared void
by the Pope.

In the Reign of King Edward the Second, Anno 1313, after the Death of Robert
Winchelsey, Archbishop of Canterbury, the Monks of Canterbury elected for his
Successor, one Thomas Cobham, Dean of Salisbury and Prebend of York, a Man of
such Virtue and Learning, that he was commonly called by the Name of the Good
Clerk; but the Pope bestowed that place upon Walter Reynolds.

SECT. 14.
Patronages disturbed and Benefices bestowed upon Aliens.
14. In other Promotions and Ecclesiastical Livings, the Popes usurped a larger
liberty of bestowing them at their will upon such as they made choice of, or
upon themselves, without regard of any Man's right to present, or whether the
Persons upon whom those Livings were bestowed, were the Natural Subjects of the
Realm or not.

Whereupon ensued many Mischiefs, one was, that a great part of the Wealth of
this Realm, was bestowed and spent in Foreign Parts. Another, that many Aliens
flocking into the Realm, to occupy these Promotions; their presence here was
dangerous to the State, and the King unfurnished of fit Persons being his
Liege-Subjects, to employ in necessary and secret Services of this Realm.
Thirdly, That the Natural Subject was discouraged, and sought not to make
himself fit for any place of Service, by diligence in Study, seeing that the
Rewards of Learning were carried away by Strangers. Of these are many Examples
in our Histories, and the wrong complained of from time to time.

In the Reign of King Henry the Third, Pope Gregory (before his Death) to carry
on his Wars and Designs against the Emperor Frederick, and throw him out of the
Empire, Anno 1240, intended by way of Provision, to confer all the Benefices in
England, (especially of the Clergy and Religious Persons) on the Sons of
Romans, and other Foreigners; sending his Bulls to three Bishops, ^iz. to
Edmond Archbishop of York, the Bishops of Lincoln and Sa^um, to confer no less
than 300 of the next Benefices, that fell ^oid within their Diocesses on these
Aliens. A dangerous Usurpa^ion on the Kings Prerogative, the Churches
Privileges, and the Patrons Rights! The next year the King issued Writs to the
Archbishops and Bishops of sundry Diocesses (by way of Opposition) ^o inquire
how many Aliens were promoted to Benefices or Prependaries, with their Values
and Names. In that injurious course of conferring Benefices upon Italians, the
Archbishop of York withstood the Pope, and was constrained to leave the Realm.

Pope Gregory forementioned, in the same Kings Reign, Mat. Paris fol. 735.
wrote to the Abbot of Bury, to bestow upon him a Benefice of the yearly value
of One hundred Marks; but so, as they [the Abbot and his Convent] should farm
the Benefice at his hands, and pay him yearly 200 marks rent.

The same Author writes of another Benefice, Ibid fol. 815.
and of the Treasureship of Sarum, bestowed upon Innocent his little Nephew, by
one Martin, at that time the Popes Legate in this Realm. This Man was sent into
England by Pope Innocent IV. to extort Moneys; ^e was armed with Bulls to
excommunicate, to suspend, and by manifold ways to punish all, as well Bishops,
Abbots, as others, who opposed his Rapines and Extortions, Provisions of
Benefices, Rents to the use of the Popes Clerks and Kinsmen. He extorted Gifts,
Garments, Palfreys from them, suspending those who refused, though upon
reasonable Excuses, till satisfaction. He twice summoned the English Bishops
and Clergy for a Contribution to the Pope, and their Mother the Church of Rome,
against the Emperor. The King sent a Prohibition to them not to give him any
aid, under pain of forfeiting their Baronies. He suspended all to present to
Benefices, of ten Marks value or upward, till his and the Popes Covetousness
was satisfied. The King sent memorable Prohibitions to him against his
intolerable Provisions and Rapines, who persevereth therein with a stony
heart, notwithstanding. The Cinqueports were guarded to interrupt the Popes
Bulls and Provisions sent unto him: His Messenger was imprisoned in
Dover-castle, but released upon his Complaint to the King. The King by advice
of his Nobles, sent Prohibitions to all the Bishops in England, and Chief
Justice in Ireland, not to suffer him or any other Nuncio, to collect any
Moneys for the Pope, or confer any Benefices without his Privity or Consent.
The Nobles sent a Message to him in behalf of the whole Kingdom, to depart the
Realm within three days, else they would hew him and all his in pieces. And
when he demanded the Kings Protection against the fury of the Nobles, Mat.
Paris p. 640.
the King wished the Devil to take him, whereupon he departed the Realm in a
terrible Pannick fear.

The Abbot of Abingdon refusing to bestow upon a Roman the Benefice of St.
Helens in Abingdon, which was esteemed at the value of an hundred Marks, and
belonged to the Monastery of Abingdon, because the King had demanded it for his
Brother, Idem fol. 1002.
was cited to appear personally at Rome, and could not obtain his Release,
until he had assured to the Pope a yearly Annuity of Fifty Marks to be paid out
of his Monastery.

Pope John XXII bestowed the Bishopric of Winchester upon his Chaplain
Rigandus, in the time of King Edward the Second, having before made reservation
thereof, Tho. Walsingham fol. 90.
and giving special charge, that no Election should take place, though approved
by the King.

We find in the Canon Law, that in the time of King Richard the First (though
from the Records of the Tower, we understand in the Reign of King John) that
Pope Innocent contriving how to usher in his Provisions into England, by
degrees without any observation, employed the Archbishop of Ragusa (whom he
discharged from that Church, because he could not live quietly there) to move
King John to bestow a Bishopric and other Benefices, upon him in England, to
relieve his Necessities, and support his Dignity; whereupon the King out of his
Royal Bounty, bestowed the Bishopric of Carlisle, the Archbishop of York, and
the Church of Melbourn, upon him.

Of these Wrongs the People of this Land made often Complaints, but could find
no Redress. The Usurpations of the Popes Legates and Agents, by Exactions,
Provisions, Disposing Churches to Aliens, and other Innovations, became so
intollerably Oppressive to all sorts of People in England, that by several
Letters of Complan it dispersed against them, in the year 1231, 1232, there was
stirred up a general Commotion and Opposition against them throughout England:
for finding that most of the Ecclesiastical Livings of this Realm to be in the
hands of Strangers, they were so offended, that they set fire on their Barns in
all parts of the Realm. The Pope on the other side stormeth with the King, and
commands the Bishops of the Realm to excommunicate the Authors of that
injury, and withal to send them personally to Rome, to receive their Absolution
at his hand. Speed in his History relates, Speeds Chronic. In the Reign of
King Henry III.
that it was alleged by these Reformers, that they had underhand the Kings
Letters Patents, the Lord Chief Justices Assent, the Countenance of the Bishop
of London, and the Sheriffs aid in diverse Shires, whereby the Armed Troops took
heart every where violently to seize on the Romans Corn and their other Wealth;
which Boo^ies they employed to good purposes, and for relief of the poor; Roger
de Wend. M. S.
the Romans the mean while hiding their Heads for fear of losing them.

In the time of King Edward the Third, Pope Clement granted to ^wo Cardinals at
one time, Provisions of so many Spiritual Livings, as would amount to the
yearly value of Two thousand Marks. Hereof the King complained to the Pope,
Tho. Walsingham Hist. in Edw. III.
alleging that the Rights of Patronages were disturbed, the Treasure of his
Realm spent upon Aliens in Foreign parts; and that the Students his Subjects
were thereby discouraged. Which Reasons are delivered in a Statute by him made,
for restraint of Provisions from Rome.

SECT. 15.
15. The Pope claims to have one proper Authority, Plenitudo Potestatis in
Beneficialibus.
which he calls, Plenitudo Potestatis in Beneficialibus; and is an infinite
and unbridled License to do in Matters of Church Livings what himself ^isteth:
By force whereof he takes from any Prelate, or Beneficedman, his Bishopric or
Benefice, at his pleasure, without yielding any Cause or Reason thereof.

He has used to bestow Bishoprics of this Realm at his pleasure; and when any
of the Bishops died, then the Pope claimed a Privi^edge to have the Gift of
them, as Decedentes in Curia Romana, and so kept them many years as Decedentes
in Curia; for they never came into England to die here, as Salisbury and
Worcester, which were claimed by that Title in Queen Mary's time.

Again, the Pope might dissolve Ecclesiastical Dignities and Benefices at will,
and turn them into what shape it best liked him.

Moreover, he might unite, appropriate, divide such Livings, and do many
strange things else about them, no cause appearing to any man, but his own will.

The Popes Legates also procured of the Kings of England, Stipends and
Provisions of good value, out of Ecclesiastical Benefices, and other Dignities.
Rustand the Popes Legate, being in Favor with King Henry the Third, procured
from him (besides the Livings he obtained by the Popes Provisions) a Grant of
Provisions out of the Ecclesiastical Benefices, Dignities, and Prependaries,
which should first happen in his own Gift, amounting to 300 Marks by the year,
to be preferred before all others formerly granted by him, one only excepted.

SECT. 16.
Soldiers mustered and sent out of the Realm.
16. Soulders have been Mustered and sent to Foreign Wars out of the Realm upon
the Popes Commandment; which Case happened in the time of King Richard the
Second, the Pope gathering within this Realm a Band of Soldiers for the Wars
of the Holy Land, and appointing them for their Captain the Bishop of Norwich:
The Realm generally misliked that their Soldiers should be committed to the
Guidance of an Ecclesiastical Person, unacquainted with the Wars and therefore
resisted for awhile; but at length suddenly yielded upon a superstitious
Conceit taken in their Heads.

The Croisado's for the Relief of the Holy Land, was a Papal Cheat, for Popes
and others to pick simple Christians Purses for Popes Designs, to maintain Wars
against Christian Emperors and Princes; the Greek Church and the Albigenses
detesting and opposing Papal Usurpations and Corruptions, to inthral, depose,
and murder them. So great was Pope Innocent's Animosity against the Emperor
Frederick, that when Forces of the Croisado came out of France or England, or
other parts, to sail into Syria, to defend Jerusalem, and the Holy Sepulcher
against the Saracens, he stopped them, and gave them the same Graces and
Indulgences, as if they had performed the Journey into the Holy Land, upon
Condition that they should turn their Arms against Frederick, whose Power lay
upon him, because he stiffly maintained the Rights of the Empire.

The Pope proceeded so far, as to give the Empire to Robert Brother of Lewis IX
King of France, upon condition that he should conquer it. But Robert sent his
Present back to the Pope, both because he sent him no Money to furnish him for
that Conquest; and because he found it very strange, that the Pope would give
that which was none of his. Also because he showed himself an Enemy to a great
and virtuous Prince, who had done and suffered so much, bravely fighting for
the Cause of the Christians against the Infidels. Then he added, That the Popes
are lavish of the Blood of others, and that their end is to tread all the
Princes of the world under their feet, and to put on the Horns of Pride.

Meanwhile persecution grew sore against those whom they called Vaudeois and
Albigenses; against whom the Pope caused the Cro^sado to be preached, and an
infinite number of them to be massacred.

Pope Gregory IX. (who compiled the Decretals) needing Money for his War
against the Emperor Frederick, sent a Legate into Eng^and, named Stephen, who
exacted a tenth part of all their move^ble Goods (that is) of all their Flocks,
Rents, Fruits, Wares, Offerings, and Gifts to the Church. And the said Legate
had power ^o Excomunicate all that should refuse to pay, and to put the
Churches in Interdict. He enjoined the Prelates upon pain of Ex^ommunication,
to make that Collection speedily, and without ^elay. All that should cross that
Holy Work, he Excommunicated ^pso facto. He would be paid in new Coin, and of
good Weight. He took the Tithe, even of the Corn in the first Blade, that is,
of ^he Crop of the year after.

In these Exactions he was so urgent and griping, that the Parishes were forced
to engage the Chalices and Church-Plate to satisfy his Covetousness. And he
had certain Usurers with him, who lent. Money upon double use, to those who had
no ready Money. This caused a great Clamor and Lamentation over all the
Country, but without effect. The Money was employed by the Pope in in^ading
many Towns belonging to the Emperor in Italy. And the Emperor could not defend
them, because he was engaged against ^he Saracens in the Levant, where he took
Jerusalem, and put the Affairs of the Christians in a flourishing Estate. And
it is probable, that he had utterly destroyed the Saracens, if the Injuries
which he ^eceived from the Pope had not re-called him. For the Emperor making a
League for ten years with the Saracens, and returning ^nexpectedly from the
Holy L^nd, Mat. Paris p. 351, 352. Matthew Westminster. p. 128, 129.
interrupted the Popes proceed^ngs, and soon recovered all his Castles; so that
the Pope was ^orced by meditation of Friends, to stoop to the Emperor, and make
his Peace with him beyond all Expectation.

Scarce was the Collection ended made by Stephen the Legate, when Pope Gregory
inventing Extortions grounded upon fair Rea^ons, sent Nuncios with power of
Legates, who by Sermons, Ex^ortations, and Excommunications, brought an infinite
number of English Men to Mendicity, and turned them out of their Houses. This
was done under a pretense of contributing to the expense of the Holy War, of
which himself hindered the success; and yet he promised to them that should
contribute Money for it, the remission of ^ll their sins, and to them that
should go in Person, an Augmentation of Glory; yet the Pope never gave any part
of the Money raised ^or that expedition, to any Prince that paid Armies, and
sought ^or that Quarrel. All was thrown into the Popes Coffers, as into (...)
Gulf, and by him employed to make War against Frederick, for he presently
broke the Covenant sworn unto him.

The Treasure of the Realm spent in the Popes Wars. Mat. Paris fol. 703, 704.
Moreover, Wars made by the Pope, were oftentimes supported at the Charges of
Foreign Countries, the Pope bearing them in hand, that they were the Wars of
the Church, and therefore did in common concern every of their States and
Interests; under which color large Contributions have been drawn out of this
Realm.

In the year 1240, the Pope forced all Aliens within this Realm, to contribute
to the Wars against Frederick, the fifth part of the Revenues of their
Spiritual Livings; and in the same year took another fifth part of all
Bishoprics to the same use.

The Pope ceased not thus, but immediately commanded new Collections to be
made, still pretending his Wars with the Emperor; against which Commandment the
Clergy made diverse Exceptions, which are at large set down by Matthew. Paris,
fol. 714. and 7^5.

Idem 1219.
In the year 1255, Alexander IV. sent a Legate into the Realm, who exacted the
tenth part of all the Goods and Chatels in England, Scotland, and Ireland,
pretending the Church-wars against Manfred, who had invaded the Kingdom of
Naples, which the Pope claimed to appertain to his See.

SECT. 17.
Sometimes again great sums were levied, no other cause being known but the
Popes pleasure.

Levies of Moneys to the Popes use without cause.
In the year 1245, the Pope demanded of all Clerks that were Non-resident, half
their Revenues, and of those that were resident a third part.

Matthew Paris writes, that in the year 1257, the Popes Proctors sent with his
Bulls into this Realm, extorted of Clerks and Religious Persons, great sums of
Money; and if any found themselves Grieved, and offered to appeal, they were
forthwith by one Commission or other Excommunicated.

Mat. Paris fol. 1002.
In the year 1248, he exacted of the Monastery of St. Edmondsbury (the place of
the Abbot being void) 1000 Marks, and would not confirm the Election of the new
Abbot until the Monks had promised to pay 800 Marks.

In the Reign of King Edward the Second, Pope John XXII, reserved to his See
the First Fruits of all vacant Benefices for the space of three years.

At that time also certain Usurers set up in England, called Caursins, who by
Usuries and strange Arts devised in Italy, did eat up the poor People and the
Clergy. The King himself was much indebted to them. The Bishop of London would
have repressed them, but because they were maintained by the Pope, he was not
able to ef^ect it.

The Franciscans and Dominicans preached up the Popes Power. and drew all the
Confessions to themselves, and every day obtained ^riviledges to the prejudice
of the Parochial Priests, who became ^lmost useless. The State of England was
deplorable, for hungry ^talians of the baser sort, with Bulls and Warrants from
the Pope, came daily to fleece the People, and to raise such sums of Money, ^s
they would demand upon the Clergy. If any denied what they demanded, he was
presently Excommunicated. And they that held the great Benefices were
Strangers, who were but the Popes Farmers.

This caused Matthew Paris, that lived then, and beheld these things, to
lament, That the Daughter of Sion was become like a shameless Harlot that could
not blush, by the just Judgment (says he) of him that made an Hypocrite to
reign, and a Tyrant to domineer.

Sometimes the Pope made his advantage by Grants made to other Bishops to spoil
the Realm; as to the Bishop of Rochester, whose Name was Laurentius de Sancto
Martino, a Chaplain and Counselor of King Henry the Third. This Man got a
Dispensation from the Pope to hold all his former Livings in Commendam with
this Bishopric. And yet alleging that his Bishopric was the poorest of
England, and therefore his Living yet unable to maintain the Port of a Bishop,
he never ceased till he had extorted from the Clergy of his Diocese a Grant of
a fifth part of all their Spiritual Livings for five years, and appropriated
unto his See for ever the Parsonage of Friends-bury.

The Pope at the same time granted a Bull to the Archbishop of Canterbury to
collect the Fruits of all vacant Benefices within his Province for one year.
Mat. Paris fol. 1000.


SECT. 18.
The way that yielded to the Pope his greatest Harvest, The Popes Legates.
was by Legates sent into this Realm; for they coming hither under a plausible
title of care to reform things that were amiss within the Realm; and the
presence of a Legate having an Authority little inferior to the Pope himself,
being terrible to the Subject, they had opportunity not only to gather to their
Masters whatsoever they liked to demand, but also prevailed intollerably for
themselves; and some of them with such insolence, as it is strange that any
Prince could ever suffer them in his Realm.

I shall here speak something of the Original of these Legates, and show how by
degrees the Legati a latere were brought in Authority amongst the Nations, and
how they did enlarge the Popes Phylacteries.

At first because Rome was the chief City of the Empire, from thence (as from a
Seminary) were preachers sent to sundry Nations, to preach and plant the
Gospel, or to confute Heresies, afterward to provide vacant Benefices, and to
supply the absence of the Roman Bishop in Synods; in all which they did no
other thing but as other Bishops might have done, and also did.

But when the Bishops of R^me were made Patriarchs, and became ambitious, these
Legates did the same Offices at some times: but therewith they began craftily to
enjoin unto Archbishops and Metropolitans, to execute some things which they
were commanded by the Word of God to do; and they would give them power within
their own Diocesses, as if Bishops had been Vicars of the Roman Patriarchs, or
his Legate.

Petrie's Church History p. 272.
These Primats did gladly embrace the show of Honor, that for reverence of the
Roman Church they might be the more respected in their own Jurisdiction, and
sometimes the more easily advance themselves above their Competitors.

Sometimes the Popes sent Legates into other Diocesses, with such modesty that
they had Authority to attempt nothing without concurrence of the Bishops, or
Synod of that Country.

Albeit these Legations were partly good and just, and at the worst were
tolerable, yet they were not potestativae, or imperious, but charitativae, or
exhortatory: nevertheless the Popes brought the Churches and Bishops into
subjection by such means; for afterward they were sent only for ambitious
Usurpation, Covetousness, and Worldly Affairs.

The ordinary Legates at Pisa, Romandiola, Bononia, Ferrara, Avignon (and if
there be any other such) are Provincial Deputies, Praetores; or Viceroys.

The Nuncio's at the Court of the Emperor, or of any King, Prince, or State,
are Ambassadors, or Spies for Secular Affairs: The Affairs of any Church that
are gainful, if they be of less account, are reserved unto the Judgment of the
Nuncio; yet not definitively, but to be determined at Rome. And things of
greater importance are wholly reserved for the Court of Rome.

The Ancient Bishops of Rome did severely enjoin their Legates to acknowledge
duly the inferior Bishops within their own Jurisdiction; but now they pass by
the Metropolitans, and draw all Actions unto themselves and the Court of Rome.
Likewise their Ambition and Avarice have so provoked some Nations, that they
will scarce ^it any Legate, as Sicily and France have entrenched their Office.
^^e particultrs are more largely written by Antonius de Dominis, ^hbishop of
Spalato de Republ. Ecclesiast. lib. 4. cap. 12.

^f these some had the Titles and Ensigns, others the power of ^ats (or more)
without the Title or Badges. Some were sent ^essively into England, Wales,
Ireland, France, and elsewhere, ^ublish Popes Excommunications, Interdicts,
Bulls, Croisados, ^ms, Suspensions, Citations, Mandats, etc. to and against
Em^^^ors, Kings, Princes, Bishops, Abbots, Priors, and all sorts of ^sons; to
exact, collect Moneys, Pillage Sacred Churches, ^^nasteries, Mansions founded
by our devout simple Ancestors, for ^^ief of the poor, of Strangers, and
Sustentation of Religious ^^rsons, etc.

^t was an Ancient Privilege of the Kings of England and Scot^^^d, that no
Legate a latere, should come into any of their Domi^^ons by the Popes Mission,
unless at the Kings special instant re^est to the Pope, who eluded this
privilege by sending Nuncio's, ^aplains, Clerks, Friars, Minors, or
Praedicants, sometimes into ^^eir Realm, with the full power, not Titles or
Ensigns of Legates.

Some Irish Bishops without the Kings Privity, endeavoring to ^^ocure a Legate
to be sent into Ireland, the King upon notice ^^ereof by his Chief Justice and
others, writes to the Pope to send (...) Legate thither against his will.

Pope Gregory the Ninth, his Legate was imprisoned for stirring (...) Sedition
in Lombardy against the Emperor. Three Legates, with ^ndry Archbishops and
Bishops, were taken by the Emperors Gal^ys, going to a Council upon the Summons
of Pope Gregory IX.

Gualo, a Presbiter Cardinal of St. Martin, crowned King Henry (...), causing
him to do homage to the Church of Rome, and Pope ^nocent for England and
Ireland, and to swear faithfully to pay ^e Annual Rent for them, which his
Father King John had granted (...) long as he enjoyed those Realms. He deprived
Simon Langton, ^rchdeacon of Canterbury and Gervase de Habruge (who obstinately
^dhered to Lewis and the Barons, and celebrated Divine Service to them and the
Londoners after their Excommunication) of their Be^efices, for which they were
compelled to go to Rome. He sent ^nquisitors through all Provinces of England,
suspending and de^riving Clerks of their Benefices for very small faults, and
adhering ^o the Barons; bestowing their Livings on his own Creatures Clerks.
^nriched with others Spoils. He received a thousand Marks from Hugh Bishop of
Lincoln, and vast sums from other Religious Persons, Canons, exhausting their
Purses, and reaping where he (...) not sow. He bare sway in the Councils of
King Henry III, w^ sealed some Writs and Patents with his Seal before his own
S^ was made, and usurped on his Crown, during his Minority wit^out Opposition.
Bernardus de Nympha came Armed into Engla^^ with the Bulls of Pope Innocent IV,
to collect Money from the Cruce signati, for Richard Earl of Cornwall, the
Kings Brother. D^vers Blank Bulls of the Popes were found in his Chest after
(...) Death, containing manifold Machinations of the Romans to debase and
oppress England.

John de Diva, an English Friar, was armed with many Pap^ Bulls to extort
Moneys from the English for Pope Innocent IV, under dreadful Penalties and
Fulminations. He exacts six thousan^ Marks out of Lincoln Diocese. His Exaction
at St. Albans wa^ appealed against, who demanded 300 Marks, notwithstanding the
Appeal, to be paid within Eight days, under pain of Excommunication and
Interdict, which the Pope upon an Appeal caused the^ to pay. He had a Bull from
the Pope to inquire of all Lands al^enated from Churches and Monasteries,
Vexations by Proviso's, a^ Simoniacal Contracts for Livings, to seize them to
the Popes use and Excommunicate, Interdict all Opposers without Appeal.

John Ruffin was sent with the power (though not the title) of a Legate into
Ireland, to collect Moneys there. He extorted six thousand Marks from the
Clergy there, notwithstanding the Kings Prohibition.

Otto I. Pope Honorius his Nuncio, was sent to King Henry III. H^ demands two
Marks by way of Procuration from all Conventua^ Churches of England; he
demands two Dignities, and two Monk^ portions in all Cathedrals and
Monasteries.

Pryn's Hist. of Popes Usurpations.
Otho, Cardinal Deacon of St. Nicholas in Carcere Tulliano, Lega^ to Pope
Gregory IX, was received into England with Processions an^ ringing of Bells. He
disposed of vacant Benefices to all that cam^ with him, whether worthy or
unworthy, the King almost did nothing without him, and adored his footsteps.
He was present i^ the Parliament at York, to mediate a peace between the Kings
o^ England and Scotland. The Charter of Peace was sworn to, an^ ratified in his
Presence. He desires leave of the King of Scots t^ enter as a Legate into
Scotland, to regulate Ecclesiastical Affair^ there as in England, who answered,
That neither in his Fathers time nor of any his Ancestors, any Legate had
Entrance into Scotland, neither would he permit it, whilst he was in his righe
senses. But if he ^ntered, at his own peril he must expect violence from his
rude Subjects, from which he was unable to protect him: yet he knighted and
be^^owed some Lands on his Nephew.

A great Fray was occasioned at Oxford by his Porters Insolence, and he was
assaulted by the Scholars at Osney-Abbey, styled an U^urer, a Simoniack, a
Ravisher of Men's Rents, a Thirster after Money, a Perverter of the King, and
Subverter of the Kingdom, (...) forced to fly secretly from thence. Both the
King and he pro^eeded severely against the Scholars for it, by Ecclesiastical
Cen^ures, Excommunications, Penances, Imprisonments, almost to ^he ruin of the
University.

He was denied Entrance into Scotland by the King thereof the ^econd time. He
gave a Writing under his Hand and Seal to the King of Scots, that his Admission
into Scotland should not be drawn unto Consequence, who took it away with him
upon his private re^cess. He there collected the fifteenth part of the Goods of
all Pre^ats, and Beneficed Clerks, and sent it to the Pope. The English No^les
send Letters of Complaint to the Pope against his confering of Benefices by
Provisions upon Aliens, and other Grievances. Frederick the Emperor was
incensed against King Henry III, for this Legates collecting of Moneys in
England, employed in Wars against him, demanding his Expulsion out of England,
as the Emperors and the Kingdoms Enemy. He demands Procurations for himself
from the Clergy, not exceeding the sum of four Marks for any Procuration. The
King sent a Prohibition to him to exact the fifth, or any other part of the
Benefices of his Clerks attending on his Service, which he could by no means
endure. He joyneth with Peter Rubee in exacting a great Tax from the Prelates
and Abbots to shed Christian Blood, and to conquer the Emperor. The Bishops and
Canons except against his intolerable Demands. He labored to raise a Schism
and Division among the Clergy, to obtain his Exactions. He demanded
Procurations from the Cistercians, who manfully denied them, as contrary to
their Privileges, which the Pope dispensed with by his Non obstante.

The King upon his Departure out of England, by the Popes Summons, feasted,
placed him in his own Royal Throne, and at Dinner (to the admiration of many)
Knighted his Nephew, and bestowed an Annuity of Thirty pounds per Annum upon
him, which he presently sold. He conferred above Three hundred rich
Prebendaries and Benefices, at his own and the Popes pleasure, on their
Creatures. He spoiled the Church of Sarum, and man other Cathedrals, leaving
them destitute of Consolation. He accompanied by the King and Nobles in great
state to the Sea-sid^ at his departure out of England He left not so much Money
(...) England behind him when he left it, Mat. Paris fol. 735.
as he drained out of it, Church plate and Ornaments excepted. He stayed three
years in England great were the rewards demanded by, and given unto Legates.
Pop^ Innocentius sent one Martin into England for his Legate, Rewards given to
Legates.
who wa^ not ashamed to demand Plate, Geldings, and other Reward without
measure. And if those things wherewith he was presented liked him not, Mat.
Paris f. 870.
he would proudly send them back to their Owner^ and threaten them with
Excommunications, except they brough^ him better. And other Examples in the
same Authors there we^^ diverse. Rich Presents were sent unto the Legates. The
Bishop of Wi^ton presented Otho with Fifty fat Oxen, One hundred Quarters o^
the best Wheat, and Eight Tun of the strongest Wine for his Table Others
presented him with handsome Palfreys, rich Vessels, Furrs Vestments; and diverse
other Provisions of Meat and Drink.

Again, the charge of the ordinary Entertainments of a Legate wa^ a great
matter, for all his Charges were born by the Realm. Wha^ those Expenses might
grow unto, may be conjectured by one demand of Procurations made by the said
Otho (which yet was bu^ a piece of his Allowance) for in the year 1240, giving
notice to the Clergy that he must tarry in the Realm some time longer than at
first was assigned unto him (in which space he was not to spend of his own)
commanded a second Levy of Procurations to be made, Mat. Paris fol. 702.
wherein he made show of some favor more than was ordinary* giving to
understand, that he meant not to receive of any Church above four Marks: and
where the Churches were poor, he would be content that two Churches should join
in contributing those four Marks.

The use of Legates.
What benefit the Realm received for all these charges upon the Legates, the
Monuments of two of the chief of these Legates, Otho and Ottobon (I mean their
Legantine Constitutions, which were the fruits of their Reformation) do well
show. They contain Matter of little or no moment in the World, and such as
every Bishop in his Diocese might have ordered well enough, viz. Triffles about
Citations, Proxies, and other small matters.

Danger by the stay of Legates in the Realm; Nich Machiavel History of Florence.
Moreover, their long abode and lingering in Countries, cannot but be dangerous
to the States where they come; because having opportunity to know the secrets
of the Realm, they bestow that knowledge often times unhappily, being persons
employed in ^ore Countries than one, and often where discovery of such ^ecrets
proves perilous to those Realms; where they have served before. Nicholas
Machiavel; that great States Man, in his Hi^^ory of Florence, notes of his
time, that the most of all the Wars and Garboiles in Christendom, were kindled
by the Whisperings of ^^e Popes Legates.

SECT. 19.
19. It is also proved by the Canon Law, Original Suits at Rome.
that any Ecclesiastical ^uit may be commenced Originally at Rome.

This cannot be void of great charges to the Subject, and is very ^ainful to
the Sea of Rome: and the Charge lies not alone in the long Travel thither, and
tedious Attendance upon that Court, but in ^he Cumbersomness of many intricate
Questions arising upon Commissions, sometimes one crossing another, and
sometimes doubtfully ^enned; sometimes again controlled by color of wrong
Suggestion, and a great number of ways besides, whereof the Decretals are full,
and most of them are directed to Bishops of this Realm, which be^okeneth that
this Plague has touched our English People more than any other.

The Subjects were constrained to follow the Popes Consistory for their right,
and there to waste themselves in Suit, in such wise, that one Case of England
was thirty years depending in Rome, Ante litem contestatam, as Speculator
writes. And the case between the Archbishop of Canterbury and the Archbishop
of York, for the Controversy whether the Archbishop of York might have Cross
born before him within the Diocese of Canterbury (a goodly Matter for Bishops
to contend about) did hang many years in the Court of Rome. And likewise the
Case between the Bishop of Worcester and the Abbot of Evesham, ^or the Vale of
Evesh^m. The Decretals are full of English Cases, decreed even as the parties
found favor in the Court of Rome. And the poor Cause of Matrimony of Cetwood,
did hang in Rome, and was reserved there by Act of Parliament, and never was
decided. And that very point was the occasion that King Henry VIII, did look
into the Usurpation of Rome; because the Pope would needs Excommunicate the
King for not answering in his own Case at Rome, as is notably discovered by
Bellay in his Memoires, Bellay in Memoires.
who was the Ambassador for the French King in England, and was sent of purpose
to Rome, to stay the Excommunication, and could not get six day^ respite; and
yet with^n these six days the Messenger came with Instructions to have appeased
the Matter.

SECT. 20.
Great sums carried out of the Realm for Dispensations.
What infinite Treasure was there carried out of the Realm by the Pope's
Collectors, and by Bankers for Bulls and Dispensations, (...) man can tell.
Therefore the French King has many times made Edicts against the Carrying out
of Money for Bulls out of France, a^ of a thing that spoiled the Realm of their
Treasure; using the Ter^ Epuiser les Treasors du Royaume, as a man does draw
the water of (...) Well, to dry up the Water.

The Sums that were yearly made of Dispensations and Absolution in Cases
reserved, were infinite; as also of Pardons and Indulgence^ and other
Faculties. It appears by the Book of Taxes made for Dispensations in the
Reign of Henry VIII. that there were foun^ Two hundred and sixteen Letters of
Dispensations given by the Pope, and that the Tax of some of them were Two
hundred Marks of others an Hundred Pounds, etc.

Tho. Walsingham fol. 257.
Thomas Walsingham writes, That in the time of King Richard the Second, one
Pileus the Pope's Legate, made such a Market wit^ Sale of Faculties, that his
Officers that were about him in that Service, grew weary of taking Silver; and
did not stick to say, Th^^ they had Silver enough, and therefore would not
afterward be paid for their Wares in any Coin but in Gold.

Robert Grosted Bishop of Lincoln, being suspended his Bishopric for opposing
the Pope's Provisions, Matthew. Paris fol. 1145. Anno 1252.
and trampling them under hi^ feet, caused his Clerks to take a view of all the
Spiritual Livings o^ Aliens in this Realm, and to make a diligent Inquiry to
what an Annual Sum they amounted unto; who found them to exceed above Seventy
thousand Marks. And it may be easily collected what the Pope's Share was in
those Gifts.

What the ordinary Payments were, that were yearly made to the Sea of Rome, he
that shall make the strictest Inquisition, shall hardly understand.

SECT. 21.
The Kingdom of England being daily oppressed with many intolerable
Grievances, and diverse new Devices to extort Moneys more than before, in the
days of King Henry the Third, he summoneth a Parliament at London, by reason
of the Complaints of the English against those Grievances, which they could no
longer tolerate without the brand of sluggishness, and their own imminent
ruin. Great was the Indignation of the Pope against the miserable English, for
that they durst complain against their daily injuries and oppressions in the
Council; which he so multiplied, that the English were more vile in his eyes
and the Court of Rome, than any other ^en of the remotest Nations: Insolently
saying, It is expedient for (...) to compound with the Emperor Frederick, that
we may trample the ^^tle King of England under our Feet, who now kicks with the
heel a^^inst us.

Then the King, the Nobles, Archbishops, Bishops, and Abbots, ^ew up seven
Articles in Parliament against the Popes Grievances ^^d Oppressions:

1. In Extorting and Collecting several Sums of Money by General ^axes and
Assesses, without the Kings Assent or Consent, against the an^ent Customs,
Liberties, and Rights of the Realm, and against the Appeal and Contradiction of
the Proctors of the King and Kingdom made (...) a General Council.

2. In hindering Patrons to present their Clerks to Vacant Livings, and
^estowing them by Proviso's on other Roman Clerks, utterly ignorant of the
English Tongue, to the peril of the peoples souls, and impoverishing the ^ealm
beyond measure, by transporting Money out of it.

3. In granting Pensions out of Livings by provision, and more provi^^on of
Benefices than he promised, after his Bull against them.

4. That one Italian succeeded another, That Subjects causes were ^^awn out of
the Realm by the Pope's Authority against the Custom of the Realm, against the
Written Laws; that men ought not to be condemned among their Enemies; and
against Indulgences granted by his Predecessors ^o the Kings and Realm of
England.

5. The frequent mention of that infamous word, Non-obstante in his Bulls, by
which the Religion of an Oath, ancient Customs, vigor of Writings, the
Established Authority of Charters, Laws, Privileges, were debilitated,
vanished away; and his not carrying himself courte^ously toward the Realm, in
revoking the plenitude of his power, as he promised.

6. That in the Benefices of Italians, neither their Rights, nor sustentation
of the poor, nor hospitality, nor preaching of God's Word, nor the useful
Ornaments of the Churches, nor Cure of Souls, nor Divine Services, were
performed as they ought to be; and according to the Custom of the Country.

7. That the Walls of their Houses fell down, together with their Roofs, and
were dilapidated.

To which other Complaints to the King and Parliament against (...) Court of
Rome, were super-added; which they sent to the Pope by their respective
Messengers, with five several Letters, two from the King to the Pope and his
Cardinals, a third from all the Archbishops and Bishops, a fourth from all the
Abbots and Priors, the fifth from all the Earls and Temporal Lords, speedily to
reform all their Grievances, to prevent unavoidable Mischiefs to the King, the
Pope, and the Church of Rome, and their revolt from Subjection to them.

They complained, that the Pope demanded Knight Service due only to the King,
to Lords from their Tenants, from Prelates and Clergymen, to find him so many
Horse or Foot for half a year, or pay a great Ransom in lieu of it, under pain
of Excommunication, which they must reveal to no Man. That he granted one years
Fruits of all Benefices that fell void within the Province of Canterbury to
Archbishop Boniface. That he by sealed Bulls required the Abbots of the
Cistercian Order in England, to send him golden Jewels to adorn his Planets and
Copes, as if they might be go^^ for nothing. That if any Clerk should from
thenceforth die intestate, his Goods should be converted to the use of the Pope
which he commanded the Friars, Preachers, and Minors, diligently to execute,
seizing on the Money, Goods, and Plate o^ three rich Archdeacons, which the
King hearing of prohibited; and by the common advice of his Nobles and Prelates
in Parliament, issued several successive Prohibitions to the Abbot of St.
Albans, and others, not to pay any Tallage to the Pope or his Agents, before
the return of their Messengers to Rome against these Grievances, under pain of
seizing his Barony: and to the Bishops, not to exact or levy any such Tax, for
any Clerk, Religious Person, or Layman, to the prejudice of his Royal Dignity,
against his and his Nobles Provisions in Parliament, which he neither could nor
would endure.

The Pope contemned the zealous Letters and memorable Complaints of the King
and whole Kingdom against his Exactions, requiring the Bishop of Norwich and
others, to levy a Subsidy for him, at which all were amazed. The King summons a
new Parliament at Winton, concerning the manifold Grievances of the whole
Realm, and especially of the Church; wherein the Messengers sent to the Court
of Rome reported, That they could discern no Humility nor Moderation in the
Popes Gestures or Words, concerning the Oppressions wherein the Church and
Realm of England were grieved, and whereof they complained. That when they
expected a pleasing Answer, the Pope told them, The King of England, who now
kick^ his Heel, and Frederizeth, has his Council, and I have mine, which I
will pursue. That from that time scarce any English Man could dispatch any
Business in Court; yea, they were all repelled, and reviled as Schismatics; so
as so many Epistles of the King, and the universality of the Nobles and Prelates
of the Realm, had no efficiency at all.

At which Report the King and Nobles being much exasperated the King by their
Advice commanded Proclamations to be made through all Countries, Cities,
Boroughs, and Villages of the Realm, that no Prelate, Clerk, or other Person,
throughout the Realm, should consent to any Contribution to the Pope, or
transmit any Money toward his Aid, or in any wise obey his Papal Commandment:
which was accordingly done.

The Pope hearing thereof, wrote to the English Prelates more sharply than
before, requiring them under pain of Excommunication and Suspension, to pay in
the Aid he demanded, to his Nuncio in the New Temple before the Feast of
Assumption. Hereupon the King was so terrified with the Popes Menaces, that he
and the Richest Prelates complied with his Designs, paying 6000 Marks to the
Pope, to the great impoverishing of the Realm; which was transported by the
Pope's Nuncio and Merchants, to aid the Landgrave against the Emperor
Frederick; part whereof he intercepting, grievously reprehended the Effeminacy
of the English, and of Richard Earl of Cornwall, for yielding to the Popes
party, to the Destruction of the Realm of England, and detriment of the Empire.

The Pope intended to have interdicted the Realm of England, had they not paid
his 6000 Marks, and the King by his Nuncio's signified his Compliance to it.
Now all the consolation and hope of relieving the English, expired; their
Enemies being their Judges.

SECT. 22.
22. Hereunto I shall add what I found in an Ancient Manuscript, which briefly
gives us an account of what things were heretofore beneficial to the Court of
Rome, and prejudicial to the Realm of England; which are as follows:

1. The procuring of Favor for all manner of Faculties, and Dispensations at
Rome.

2. The ordinary Fees for Dispensations and Faculties, besides Expenses in
suing out the same.

3. The kinds of Faculties and Dispensations, that in the beginning of Queen
Elizabeth's Reign, appeared in the Book of Faculties, remaining then with the
Queens Clerk of the Faculties.

4. The stranger the Faculty and Dispensation was, which was sued for, the
dearer was the Favor and Fees that were paid for the same.

5. The Gift of all Bishoprics, Abbeys, Monasteries, etc. in England, whereof
the present Incumbent died in the Court of Rome.

6. The Provisions procured from Rome for the best Bishoprics, Abbeys, etc.
when they fell void, or were voidable by the Law.

7. The Appellations to Rome, to stay all ordinary Law and Justice of Courts.

8. The Citations from Rome, in arrest of Judgment procured from Rome, when Men
knew or suspected the Law would pass against them.

9. The Bishops Suit at Rome for their Pall.

10. The Abbots Suit at Rome for the confirmation of their Elections.

11. The prefering of Strangers to the best Promotions of the Realm (as has
been largely shown before.)

12. The procuring of Bulls by Bishops, Abbots, Priors, and Colleges, to be
out of the Kings V^sitation and Prerogative.

13. The First Fruits and Tenths of all Spiritual Promotions. The First fruits
of vacant Benefices were granted by Pope Innocent IV. to Archbishop Boniface
for seven years, to raise Ten thousand Marks, to pay pretended Debts of the
Bishopric; an unheard of Innovation in England; opposed by the Bishops,
Nobles, and the King at first; yet enforced by Excommunications. But the
Benefices of Noblemens, and Laymens Patronage, and the King's free Chapels,
were exempted from them by Order of Parliament, and the Kings Writs.

14. Peter Pence granted by the Kings Ina and Offa to the English School at
Rome, not to St. Peter; called Peter Pence, because payable upon St. Peter's
day, excepted in King John's Charter to the Pope, frequently demanded by the
Popes. Granted to St. Albans Abbey by King Offa, confirmed since by Popes Bulls.

^leidan's Comment. lib. 15.
15. The strange number and kinds of Pardons, to allure all sorts of People to
take and purchase them. Friar Tecel, to set forth the glory and prevalency of
the Popes Pardons (whereof he was the Peddler in Germany) for the comfort and
encouragement of Harlots and Whoremongers, so far forgot the Honor and
Reverence he should have given to the chaste Virgin Mary, that he impiously
averred, If a Man had lain with our Blessed Lady, the Mother of Christ, and
gotten her with-child, yet the Popes Pardon was able to set him free from this
Offenc^.

Pardons were granted from the Pope for Eighty two thousand years, ^or saying a
short Prayer at Christ's Sepulcher in Venice, toties quoties. For saying every
Ave Maria in our Ladies Crown, consisting of 63 Aves, Two hundred eighty eight
days Pardon of all sins; and every Holy Mary in it 40 days Pardon: and for
saying the whole Crown of 63 Aves, and 12 Pater-nosters, by several Popes
Indulgences, Two hundred seventy three thousand, seven hundred fifty eight days
of Pardon. And by the Bull of Pope Sixtus IV. Twelve thousand years of Pardon
for ^very time any Person in the State of Grace, shall say this Prayer: Hail
most holy Mary, Mother of God, Queen of Heaven, Bernardinus de Busti Martiale.
part 12.
Gate of Paradise, Lady of the World, Singular and Pure; Thou art a Virgin,
thou have conceived Christ without sin: Thou have brought forth the Creator and
Savior of the World, in whom I doubt not; Deliver me from all Evil, and pray
for my Sins. Amen.

Here I shall present you with some Indulgences granted by Pope Gregory XIII.
at the instance of the Popish Bishop of St. Asaph, in favor of one Mr. John
Swynborn an English man, the last day of March 1574.
1. WHosoever having one of these blessed Grains or Beads (viz some consecrated
Grains and Beads sent by the Pope) among his other Beads; and shall (being
confessed and communicated) say over his Beads, or the Rosary; or shall read
the passion of Christ our Savior; or say the Seven Psalms with the Letanies,
praying for the Pope's Holiness, or for the Unity of the whole Commonwealth of
Princes and Christian people, with the Sea Apostolic, and for the Reduction of
the Heretics Septentrional; shall for every time obtain full Remission of
their Sins, as is granted in the Holy Wars against Infidels.

2. And in the days of the Conception, Nativity, Annunciation, Visitation,
Purification, and Assumption of Our Blessed Lady, being confessed and
communicated; and saying over your Beads, or the Office of our Lady; and
praying for the Reduction of the Heretics of England and other Countries
Septentrional; shall obtain in every the abovenamed days, all the Indulgences
that be granted to our Lady of Loretto, of Monteserato, of St. Angelo, and of
Sta. Maria Maggiore of Rome, and any other Churches of our Lady in the whole
World.

3. And so often as any having Contrition of their Sins, shall devoutly hear
Mass, or Sermon, or say the Ave Mary in the Morning, Midday, and at Night,
when the Bell tolleth, they being bare-headed, and kneeling upon their Knees;
or shall bear with them three Beads at their Girdle, or other place open to be
seen, or shall do reverence to the Image of the Cross, of our Lady, or any
other Saint; or shall examine their Conscience at Night before they go to
sleep: or shall, going in or out of the Church, or their Chamber, take Holy
Water; or persuade or move others to do the same; or shall charitably reprehend
Blasphemers and other Sinners, shall for every time so doing obtain an hundred
years of Indulgences.

4. And such as shall teach the Ignorant the Matters of the Faith, according to
his or their Estate; or openly defend in every place the Catholic Church, by
Writing, Catechizing, Preaching, or by any other means, they then shall obtain
thereby the third part of their sins to be forgiven.

5. Also thrice in a man's lifetime, after he shall have fasted three days, and
said over the whole Psalter, and his Beads once; or given sufficient Alms, or
done some other good Deed equivalent; making to a Confessor appointed by his
Ordinary, or Superior, a general Confession (that is) either of his whole
life, or of that which is passed since his last general Confession was made;
and being communicated, shall obtain thereby full remission of all his other
sins.

6. Moreover, every day in Lent, saying over with Devotion and Contrition of
Heart, and Desire of the Increasing of the Holy Faith, his Beads, Fasting also
if he may, otherwise praying, or doing some other Charitable Works, according
to his Confessors Counsel, shall obtain therefore all the stations of Rome day
by day, as they be appointed in diverse Churches thorowout the whole year.

7. Moreover, Every Friday of the Month of March, and in the days of the
Invention and Exaltation of the Cross, saying over the Corona, or Beads; or the
Office of the Cross; and upon Good Friday the Seven Psalms with the Litanies,
being confessed; or having purposed to be confessed, as soon as they may; shall
obtain therefore all the Indulgences of the Holy Sepulcher at Jerusalem, of St.
Cross in Rome, of the Holy Chapel in Paris, and all the places where any
R^lict^ be of our Savior Christ's Passion.

8. Item, Upon All Souls day saying over the Beads with Contrition, and being
present at the Service said for the Departed out of thi^ Life, or (at the
least) hearing a Mass; or saying over, or causing one to be said, shall deliver
one soul out of the Pains of Purgatory. Every Monday also, he that says over
his Beads or Dirige, for the Departed out of this Life, shall obtain the same
Indulgence^ which be obtained in Rome for Visiting Holy places for that purpose.

9. Item, Every Sunday and Friday, saying over the Beads for ^he increase of
all Orders of Religion, of Cathedral Churches, Cural and others, namely
Tramontaines, they shall be partakers of all the Prayers and Sacrifices of the
same, as though they were corporally present with them; praying also for the
Indans and parts without Europe, they shall be partakers of their well-doing,
which travel in those Countries in the Vineyard of God.

10. Item, It is granted, That for once or twice, an Unhallowed Grain or Bead
may be put in the place of an Hallowed Bead or Grain, if it be lost or broken;
and have the same Indulgences.

The Conclusion is in this manner, Laus Deo, Virginique Matri, Praise be to
God, and the Virgin Mother.

16. Hereto may be added the Special Pardons and Bulls given to special Places
of Pilgrimage, and the advancing of new found Miracles and Pilgrimages, with
new granted Bulls and Pardons. There is no Church of note among them, no
notorious Image, to which Men go on Pilgrimage, no Author of any new Sect,
scarce any Re^igious House, which is not famous by one or more pretended
Miracles.

If a man will trouble himself to read the Lives of their Saints, their
Legends, and Books of the like nature, he shall tire out himself with the
Reports of Miracles, far more strange than we can read of any in the Scripture.

Bellarmine glories in the daily Tidings of Miracles wrought by the Jesuits,
which are brought to Rome. Large Narrations are of the Miracles of Navierius a
famous Jesuit; of our Lady of Mountaign, of our Lady of Hall in the Low
Countries, and of many other such Idols. Almost a man's life were too little to
read over all of this kind, and now more multiplied than ever heretofore.

And we may suspect their Miracles, when diverse of their own Authors have
called in question the truth of them. Lyranus says, That people are much
deceived by Miracles made by Priests and their Fellows for worldly gain.
Alexander Hales a great Schoolman, says, That they make sometime Flesh to
appear in the Sacrament; partly, Humana procuratione, interdum operatione
Diabolica: by humane procurement, and sometimes by the working of the Devil.
And Claudius Espencaeus, sometime Bishop of Paris, says, No stable is so full
of dung, as their Legends are of Fables in this kind. And Canus in hi^ Common
Places says, That in the Legend a man shall read Mons^^^ Miraculorum. Thus I
say, The words of diverse eminent Men of their own side, do make us suspect
their Miracles to be but Tales.

Many of the things themselves in common conceiving are ridiculous; as that old
Tale of St. Dionysius, that carried his Head in his hand after it was stricken
off: Of Clement the First, that when he was cast into the Sea with a Millstone
about his Neck, the Sea fled three miles from the Shore, and there was found a
little Chapel ready built in the Sea; where his Body was Bestowed.

I have also read of another, who stuck his Staff down by him at the Bank-side,
which kept the River from overflowing the Banks; and soon after it sprang up,
and spread it self into a mighty Tree. There are a world of such Tales, enough
to weary any one to recite them. And yet even such as these had Bulls and
Indulgences granted to them.

17. The special Jurisdictions and Exemptions that one Bishop and Abbot
procured above another.

18. Their providing that no Condemned Clerk might be Executed.

SECT. 23.
In this state (as has been expressed) this Realm stood (for the most part) by
the space of 300 years after the Conquest: The times that followed were
somewhat freed from certain degrees of the Popes Tyranny, by reason that the
Kings of this Realm armed themselves with Laws made in defense of some of their
ancient Liberties, and Executed others with better Courage than their
Predecessors.

But I doubt, if God for our sins should cast us again under his Yoke, none of
those Laws would save us from the extremest of all those mischiefs which I
have here set down. My Reasons are,

1. The Popes are no Changelings, but were the same after those Statutes, and
are the same men that they were before; and to put us out of doubt, made
continual claim to their Usurped Authority in the time of the later Princes.

For in the Reign of King Henry V. Pope Martin the Fifth sent to levy a Subsidy
upon the Clergy of this Land, for maintenance of his Wars against the
Bohemians. And he made Henry Beaufort the rich Cardinal of Winchester his Legate
for these Wars, who did valiantly there for certain months together, assisted
with the foresaid Subsidy, until he was re-called by the Pope.

And two other Subsidies were afterward required, to persecute two private
persons of this Realm; viz. Peter Clerk, Fox. Acts and Monuments.
and William Rus^ In the time of King Henry VI. the Cardinal of Winchester,
notwith^^^nding the Statute against Provision, procured the Popes Bull to ^^e
again his Bishopric of Winchester, which he had lost by his Car^alship; and
after obtained a Pardon from the Pope against the pe^ty of the Statute.

And in the same Prince's Reign, Jews Archbishop of Roan, after (...) death of
the Bishop of Ely, had all the Fruits and Revenues of ^t Bishopric granted
unto him during life; but was therein re^ed by the King. Other Examples there
be of like sort.

2. In the last Council of Trent, Council. Trident. Sess. 5. c. 18^
there is a special Constitution for ^estitution of all Ecclesiastical
Liberties; and therein the Emperor, (...) Kings, Princes, and States, are
commanded that they see them ^otected.

The Title of Ecclesiastical Liberties, reaches to every of the ^ints before
touched, and therefore we may conjecture what (...) are to look for.

3. The Pope yearly publishes one Excommunication, which is ^led Bulla de
Coena, wherein by Name are comprised all that ^any let to such as would
prosecute any Suit at Rome; or that ^fer not the Popes Bulls, Commissions, and
other Processes ^atsoever, to be executed. And all that execute any Statutes,
Degative to the Liberties of Rome, be the custom to the contrary ^ver so
ancient; and such as impose Tenths, Subsidies upon the ^ergy, or receive them
at their hands with good consent, ex^ot the Pope allow thereof; and those also
which force any Ec^^siastical Person to answer before them in Criminal Causes,
be^^g Lay-Judges, etc. So says Martinus ab Azpil, in Enchyridion; (...) 27.
Which Book was made by the special Commandment of ^ope Gregory XIII. The
warning given us by Bulls published in ^een Elizabeth's Reign, assures us that
if he may have place ^ain, he means not to dally with us.

4. Some of our unnatural Contrymen in some desperate Books (...) theirs,
long since cast abroad against the Execution of Justice, ^^ve not spared to
tell us, that the Laws made in Catholic ^^es, viz. the Statute of Praemunire,
and some other, were bad ^^ws, and not to be allowed. And again, there were
found ^on some which came in Queen Elizabeth's time to disturb the ^ace of this
Realm, small Pamphlets, containing Directions (as ^^ey would have them taken)
for Men's Consciences, wherein they ^^livered many things to trouble those
persons whose Consciences were possibly in those Points stayed, in confidence
of the (...) Laws of this Realm, and upon some Grants made by the (...) himself.

5. The Pope has challenged a Sovereignty over this Realm, bestow it where he
lists, as feudary unto himself, having fo^merly received a Tribute, viz. The
Peter Pence, which was (...) times of Popery of every House a penny. Whereby
B^diu in (...) Book de Republica, argues, that the Realm of England is not
Sovereign Estate; not to speak of the yearly Tribute paid unto the Pope by King
John, and some other Princes his Successors. The may serve the Pope for a mean
to bridle all the Old Statutes an^ the Liberties of our Country, and to spoil
the Prince of all (...) Prerogatives. We know how he dealt with Sicily and
Napl^^ long agone; wherein it were an hard matter for the proudest (...) his
side to justify his Title: And that he has put out, and put (...) Kings at
his will, and sometime offered their Kingdoms to sal^ And from King Henry the
Third, by the shadow of a bare Title the Pope got infinite sums of Money, to
the great exhausting (...) his Treasure, and impoverishing of the Realm.

When Stukeley and Fitz-moris were at Rome, they and the Po^ practiced to give
this Realm in Prey, as he did the Kingdom (...) Navarre, and the Empire from
the Emperor Frederick, and also (...) get an Investiture of the Realm of
Ireland from the Pope, as of Sovereign; but they could not agree upon whom the
Pope shou^^ bestow that Realm.

FINIS.

