THE DECLARATION OF THE LORDS Spiritu^l and Temporal, In and about the CITIES
of LONDON and WEST^ (...) Assembled at GVILDHAL, 11 Dec. 1688.
WE doubt not but the World believes that this Great and Dangerous
Conjuncture, We are heartily and zealously concerned for the Protestant
Religion, the Laws of the Land, and the Liberties and Properties of the
Subject. And We did reasonably hope, that the King having Issued His
Proclamation^ and Writs for a Free Parliament, We might have rested Secure
under the Expectation of that Meeting But His Majesty having withdrawn Himself
and as We apprehend, in order to His Departure out this Kingdom, by the
Pernicious Counsels (...) Persons ill Affected to Our Notion and Religion* We
(...) not, without being wanting to Our Duty be silent under (...)se, (...)
wherein the (...) prevailed, have miserably involved these Realms. We do
^^^^efore Una^^mou^^^ resolve to ^pply Our(...) to his Highness the Prince of
Orange, who with so great Kindness to these Kingdoms, so vast Expense and so
the (...) own Person, has Undertaken, by endeavoring to Procure a Free
Parliament, to rescue Us, with as little (...) possible, of Christian Blood
from the imminent Dangers of Popery and Slavery.

And We do hereby Declare, That We will, with our utmost Endeavors, assist his
Highness in the obtaining such a Parliament with all speed, wherein Our Laws,
Our Liberties and Properties may be Secured, the Church of England in
particular, with a due Liberty to Protestant Dissenters, and in general the
Protestant Religion and Interest over the whole World may be Supported and
Encouraged, to the Glory of God, the Happiness of the Established Government in
these Kingdoms, and the Advantage of all Princes and Sta^^s in Christendom,
that may be herein concerned.

In the mean time, We will Endeavor to Preserve, as much as in Us lies, the
Peace and Security of these great and populous Cities of London and
Westminster, and the Parts Adjacent, by taking Care to Disarm all Papists, and
Secure all Jesuits and Romish Priests, who are in or about the same.

And if there be any thing more to be performed by Us, for promoting his
Highness's Generous Intentions for the Public Good, We shall be ready to do it
as occasion shall require.

W. Cant. Tho. Ebor. Pembroke Dorset. Mulgrave. Thanet. Carlisle. Craven.
Ailesbury. Burlington. Sussex. Berkeley. Rochester. Newport. Weymouth. P.
Winchester. W. Asaph. Fran. Ely. Tho. Roffen. Tho. Petriburg. P. Wharton. North
and Gray. Chandos. Montague. T. Jermyn. Vaughan Carbery. Culpeper. Crewe.
Osulston.

WHereas His Majesty has privately this Morning withdrawn Himself, We the Lords
Spiritual and Temporal, whose Names are Subscribed, being assembled at Guildhal
in London* having agr^^d upon and Signed Declaration, Entitled, The
Declaration of the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, in and about the Cities of
London and Westminster, assembled at Guildhal, 11 Dec. 1688. Do desire the
Right Honorable the Earl of Pembroke, the Right Honorable the Lord Viscount
Weymouth, the Right Reverend Father in God the Lord Bishop of Ely, and the
Right Honorable the Lord Culpeper, forthwith to attend His Highness the Prince
of Orange with the sa^^ Declaration and at the same time acquaint His Highness
with what We have further done at that Meeting. Dated at Guildhal the 11th of
December, 1688.


To Edward Jones Printer at the Savoy.
WE the Peers of this R^alm, being assembled with some of the Lords of the
Privy Council, Do hereby Order and Require You forthwith to Print and Publish
the Declaration herewith sent unto You.

At the Council Chamger in Whitehal, the 12th of December, 1688. Tho. Ebor.
Halifax. Kent. Anglesey. Carlisle. Ailesbury. Sussex Be^keley. Nottingham. P.
Winch^ster Tho. Petribu^g. Tho. Roffen. Nort^ and Gray. Chandos. T. Jermyn.
Crewe. Osulston




By Order, Re printed at Edinburgh, Anno DOM. 1688.


