ENGLAND'S Golden Watch-bell.

Summoning an Alarm to Death and Judgment.

probably a depiction of the Reverend Divine, Dr. J. H.

Licensed according to Order.

Printed for W. Thackeray at the Angel in Duck-lane near West-smithfield.

depiction of death as an arrow-bearing skeleton

depiction of the saints in heaven and the judgment of the righteous and the
damned

ENGLAND'S Golden Watch-bell.

Summoning an Alarm to Death and Judgment.

OR, An Exhortation set forth in these Times, that every poor Sinner, by
turning from his Sins, may lay hold of this the acceptable day of Grace and
Salvation, to the endless comfort of his precious and immortal Soul.

WITH The dying Speech and last Sayings of the Reverend Divine, Dr. J. H. who,
after he had been struck with the pains of Death and continued speechless seven
or eight days, coming again to his Speech left it, as his last Legacy, to
admonish all to a speedy Repentance and Amendment of Life.

ALSO, Prayers for every day in the Week, a Preparatory Prayer before the
Receiving of the Holy Sacrament, another after the Reception, and a Prayer
suitable for all young Persons.

Very necessary for all Families, etc.

Licensed according to Order.

Printed for W. Thackeray at the Angel in Duck-lane, near West-smithfield.

ENGLANDS Golden Watch-bell, etc.
Heb. chap. 9. ver. 27. It is appointed for all Men once to dye, and after
Death to come to Judgment.


IF Men, as it the Saying of an eminent Father of the Primitive Church, would
always have Death and Judgment before their Eyes; if they would but fancy
seriously that they heard the dreadful sound of Arise ye dead and come to
Judgment, continually in their ears, they would never do amiss: and certain it
is, however they may flatter and in dulge themselves in a long Security, It is
appointed for all Men once to dye, and after that to come to Judgment; and
where then shall the Sinner and Ungodly appear! how shall the unprofitable
Servant look his Lord in the Face, when he has not only neglected to improve
his Talent, but has idly and vainly squandred away the precious moments of
Time allowed him to traffic with Heaven for Eternity! with what Face can he
appear before the Judge of all the Earth, to whom all darkness is as day; and
to whom all secrets are laid open; all the Sins even from the first Commission
to the Grave stand open and naked to his view, when even himself shall be bound
to confess he knew the Will of his Master and did it not!

What I say, will those that triffe away their days in ease and idleness, and
the pursuit of vanity do in that day of fury and fear, when a universal flood
of Fire shall overstream the whole World, and consume both the Beauty and Glory
thereof! when at the sound of the Trumpet all Graves shall open and the drousie
dead shall break from the Chains of Death to appear before the dread Tribunal
of their Judge! for if Job confessed he always trembled before the Majesty of
God like one that failed in a stormy Tempest, and that his fear has been so
great that he has been unable to bear it: needs must then the Sinner
accompanied with nothing but an accusing Conscience tremble much more, when he
sees the Book opened wherein are Registered all his past actions, even every
evil Thought, for which he, when least able, must give an account for* as the
Wise man says, God brings every secret Work into Judgment, whether it be
good or evil: and St. John says, The Book was opened, and the dead were judged
out of the things that were written therein. Oh! then it will be that the Rocks
and Mountains will be called upon in vain to hide the Guilty from the face of
the Lamb, and from the Face of him that sits upon the Throne.

Oh consider! it is a terrible thing to fall into the hands of the living God;
for the Kingly Prophet affirms that if his Wrath be but a little kindled in his
Breast, Blessed are they that put their trust in him, Psalm. 2.12. For who can
dwell with the everlasting Burnings! Isa. 14 and with such must those dwell not
for a time but to all Eternity, who put far away the Evil day, and by relying,
at most, upon a Deathbed Repentance, are found unprovided of a Wedding Garment
when they come to the Marriage Feast; and sad was his case and ever to be
deplored who was so found, as you may read it, Mat. 22.11.12.13. viz. And when
the King came in to see the Guest, he saw there a Man that had not on a Wedding
Garment, and he said unto him, friend, how came thou in hither not having a
Wedding Garment? and he was speechless, then said the King to the Servants,
Bind him hand and foot and take him away and cast him into utter darkness,
there shall be weeping and nashing of teeth: in the like manner shall Sinners
in the last day be speechless that is, confounded and amazed at the sense of
their guilt, not knowing what excuse to make for the breach of those Laws that
were enjoined them upon no lesser a penalty than eternal Death to those that
break them; and on the other hand, no less than an Eternal weight of Glory, a
Crown of Righteousness and Pleasures that fade not away, to those that keep
them and persevere in them. For when the Son of Man shall come in his Glory and
the Holy Angels with him, then shall he sit upon the Throne of his Glory, and
before him shall be gathered all Nations; and he shall separate them out from
one another as the Shepherd divides the Sheep from the Goats, and he shall set
the Sheep on the Right hand but the Goats on the Left, Mat. 25.31.32.33. then
shall the one be rewarded and the other punished, for by the Sheep are meant
those that have persevered in well-doing, those that know their Lords Will and
obey it; and by Goats those that despise his Counsels and will have none of
his Reproofs, as will plainly appear in the subsequent verses of the foregoing
Chapter, and in the 46. verse the definitive Sentence, viz. These, meaning the
Goats placed on the Left hand, shall go into everlasting punishment; but the
Righteous, meaning the Sheep, on the Right hand into Life Eternal.

Consider these things, all you that have as yet the Golden opportunity left by
Time in you hands, and Kiss the Son least he be angry and ye perish in the way.
Psalm. 2.12. for although the young man shine to day like the glist'ring of a
Dove's neck, and dance like a bubble upon the Waves, yet too morrow he may set
in the gloomy shades of Death and his place remember him no more. How many are
there that sink suddenly into the blackness of night, and are laid up in the
gloomy Caves of during Darkness, till the Arch-angel's Trumpet rouse them from
their long sleep, to appear with the rest gathered from the four Winds of
Heaven, when they the least dreamed of leaving their Pageant Glories, when they
thought they most securely hugged and embraced the trifling vanities of the
lower. World, putting far away the evil day, like the Fool in the Gospel, who
flattered his Soul with ease and plenty for a long time, but found alas! his
Expectation failed; for even that very night his Soul was required of him, and
then too fatally he found that he had troubled himself in gathering Riches and
knew not who should enjoy them; in gathering Riches that made themselves Wings
and flew away, and could not, had they been more permanent and durable, have at
all relieved him in his last and greatest necessity, as you will find it in
Luke. 1. chap. 12. etc. and though as we see the Rich Man whilst he lived upon
Earth had all the Pleasures and Delights that the World could afford him, he
fared riotously every day, and was clad in purple; yet see how poorly these
availed him, for which he had strugled and labored, perhaps many years; for
being in Torment he had not a drop of Water to cool his tongue, the Mammon of
Unrighteousness that had barred him of Eternal Life, could not administer him
the least relief, when suffering under the divine Vengeance, but rather
increased with their sad remembrance his Torments in those flames. Yet to
these, even through what Seas of Blood will some Men wade, as if they were the
chiefest of all good, when indeed they bring a sting with them that pierces
through the Body and wounds the very Soul, too frequently destroying our peace
on Earth, and more frequently everlastingly causing the names of the too too
fond Possessors, who make their Bellies their God, and put their trust in
Riches, to be blotted out of the Book of Life. Oh that Men would be wise! and
consider this, that they would consider upon the present Moments of Life
depends Eternal Joys or Everlasting Woes; and that it cannot profit a Man if he
gain the whole World and loose his own Soul, for with the immortal Soul what
can stand in competition! not all the glittering Glories of ten thousand
worlds, were they put in the Balance, would weigh any thing, in the terrible
day when the Lord comes with ten thousand of his Saints to execute Judgment
upon all, and to convince all that are ungodly among them, of all the Ungodly
deeds which they have ungodly committed, etc. Jude, 1.14.15. if all the things
so valued in this World cannot bribe Death, which is the in let to Eternity,
much less can any expect that the impartial Judge of all the Earth should any
way regard transitory things; or that they should weigh in the least with him
at whose disposal and in whose hands is all the breath of Life, and who indeed
is the very Center of the Soul of Man, and by whom it is alone comprehended, so
that the World can render it no satisfaction as to its Eternal estate nor is it
capable of attaining for the least Transgression, When the Lord Jesus shall b^
revealed from Heaven with his mighty Angels in flaming Fire, taking vengeance
on those that know not God and obeyed not the Gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ,
2. Thessa. 1.7.8. when those who conceived themselves securely fenced by Riches
and Honor, shall be tumbled by Death from a Bed of Down into a Bed of Flames,
what relief can they hope for or expect from all they possessed which at most,
if any remembrance of temporal things be left beyond the Grave, will prove but
a Melancholy sight to show them the height of Happiness from whence they fell,
and the depth of misery into which they are fallen; especially if we consider
what a dreadful sentence is pronounced in the following verse of the foregoing
chapter, viz. Who shall be punished with everlasting destruction from the
Presence of the Lord and from the glory of his power; a destruction
irrevocable, not to be recalled, but as long as God is God, so long shall it
continue infinite ages of Eternity and never expire; for could there be the
least room for hope of ease to those in Torment, though at the Revolution of
Millions of years, it would in some measure mitigate their pain: but should a
heap of Sand be piled up to the Clouds and a Bird carry away a Grain every day,
a thousand such heaps, so removed, stand not in competition with the endless
flight of never ending Eternity. The consideration of which, made St. Austin in
a manner dwell upon the word Eternity, by repeating it often that it might be
ever in his mind to make him look up with the more earnestness to the Author
and finisher of his Faith, and oblige him to set the lighter esteem on temporal
things; remembering that he was a Stranger and Pilgrim upon Earth, and that here
he had no tarrying City but looked for one not built with hands in the highest
Heaven: on that alone then let us steadfastly fix our eyes, and even deny our
selves to the flattering pleasures and vanities of the World, that we may with
the more ease run the Race that is set before us, and strive with earnestness
to obtain the Crown that is held forth to true Believers and to such as
persevere to the end, viz. Be thou faithful until Death, and I will give thee
a Crown of Life. Rev. 2.10. a Crown more valuable than ten thousand worlds, or
any thing on this side the fruition of the beatifick Vision; the earnest desire
of attaining which, made Holy David say, His Soul pan^ed after God as the Heart
panted after the wate^ Brook, and in the midst of his Rapture crye^ out, O how
amiable are thy Dwellings, the Lord of Hoasts! my Soul longs and pants t^
enter into thy Courts. Psalm. 84.1.2.

To conclude, if Foelix who was a Heathen tremb^ed when Paul reasoned of
Righteousness, Temperance and Judgment to come let us that are Christians
consider what manner of men we ought to be if we expect to stand in the day
when the Sun shall be darkened and the Moon shall not give her light and the
Stars shall fall from Heaven, and the Powers of the Heaven shall be shaken* for
then shall appear the sign of the Son of Man in Heaven, and then shall all the
Tribe^ of the Earth mourn, and they shall see the Son of Man coming in the
Clouds of Heaven with Power and great Glory; and he shall send his Angels with
a great sound of a Trumpet, and they shall gather together the Elect from one
end of Heaven to the other, Mat. 24.29.30.31. for the which, that we may be all
right and fitly prepared, Grant dear Jesus for thy Mercies sake. Amen.

A Prayer for Sunday, or the First day of the Week.
O Lord God, great and glorious, who by thy infinite Power and Wisdom, after
thou had made all things out of nothing, in six days did betake thy self to
thy holy Sabbath of Rest, and have enjoined us in a perpetual memorial, so to
keep it that it may be spent in praising thee and adoring thy Goodness, for all
thy Mercies and Benefits bestowed upon us. Grant I beseech thee, thy saving
Grace to me the most unworthy of thy Servants, that being enabled by thy Holy
Spirit I may so walk according to thy Will, that when I come to dye I may given
up my account with joy and not with grief; and being through the Merits of thy
blessed Son and our alone Lord and Savior, received into thy heavenly Kingdom,
I may in thy Eternal Sabbath of Joy and Rest praise and adore thee, ever world
without end, Amen.

A Prayer to be said on Monday, or the Second day of the Week.
O Lord enter not into Judgment with thy Servant according to his deserts, for
in thy sight can no Man living be justified; but rather in the abundance of thy
Mercy have compassion on me, and pardon my Transgressions, forgive the
multitude of my Iniquities, and suffer the Light of thy Countenance to shine
upon me: enlighten me with thy Holy Spirit, that I may truly discern and abhor
my Sins, and turn away from the Pollutions whereby I am defiled. Pardon, O
Lord, and blot out the manifold offenses by which I have justly provoked thee
to let thy indignation wax hot against me till I am consumed* and this I beg
for the sake and upon account of thy dear Son and our blessed Lord and Savior
Jesus Christ, Amen.

A Prayer to be said on Tuesday, or the Third day of the Week.
O Lord God most Holy and Righteous, thou Father of Spirits and everlasting
King of Mercy, with shame and confusion of Face I prostrate my self before
thee, acknowledging and confessing my vileness, and that my Sins are ever
before thee. O pardon my manifold transgressions, and in the multitude of thy
mercies save and protect me from the Wrath to come. O give me a heart to depart
from all the ways of Iniquity, and suffer me no more by my Sinning against thee
to grieve thy holy Spirit, but enrole me amongst the remnant of thy Elect, to
be sealed by it to the day of Redemption; that when I leave this mortal Life I
may be admitted into the number of thy Saints to praise thee in life Eternal,
World without end, Amen.

A Prayer to be said on Wednesday, or the Fourth day of the Week.
O Lord God, gracious and merciful, of long-suffering, patience and
forbearance, I most humbly and heartily return all praise and thanks for the
manifold Blessings and Favors bestowed upon me, imploring continually thy
divine assistance, that all the actions of my life may be so ordered and
regulated that I may not offend thee in word, thought or deed; but improve on
all occasions and in all times, the blessed Opportunities thou have been
graciously pleased to put into my hands, to thy honor and glory, and to the
safety and salvation of my own precious and immortal Soul, through the Merits
and Mediation of Jesus Christ our Blessed Lord and Savior, Amen.

A Prayer to be said on Thursday, or the Fifth day of the Week.
GReat Creator of Heaven and Earth, Lord God infinitely wise and Eternal, look
down upon me with the eyes of thy pity, and take compassion on me thy poor and
unworthy Servant laden with the intolerable Load of mine Iniquicies, and
laboring under the heavy burden of my Sin; hear my Prayer and let my cry come
unto thee; remember that I am thy Creature and the work of thy hands, and
destroy not what thou have made though my Sins have deserved it. Oh look not
upon my Sin, but upon the Merits of thy well-beloved Son, and through his
Wounds let thy Mercy plead with thy Justice, that so considering my weakness
and frailty, my Heart by thy divine Spirit, may be so renewed within me, that
growing up in Grace I may wholly apply my self to thy Service and walk in thy
ways to my Consolation here and my endless Comfort hereafter, Amen.

A Prayer to be said on Friday the Sixth day of the Week; for young people.
O Lord consider not the frailties of my Youth, nor the vanity of my younger
years, but pardon my former transgressions, and ingrave thy Laws on my Heart,
that I may remember thee my Creator in the days of my Youth before the evil day
come, laying hold of the acceptable time with all humility to prostrate my self
before thee in whom alone I put my trust. Oh let not the Adversary gain that
advantage over me, but enable me to resist the power and subtilty of the
Tempter, and manfully to fight under the Banner of thy dear Son against the
World, the Flesh and the Devil; that when I am taken from thy Church Militant
on Earth I may be made a Member of thy Church Triumphant in Heaven, and there
with Angels, Archangels and all the Company of Saints praise and adore thee
from everlasting to everlasting, World without end. Amen.

A Prayer for Saturday or the Seventh day of the Week, or a Preparatory to the
Sacrament.
O Blessed Jesus enable me to lift up my Heart and Voice in some measure to
praise and extol thy wonderful Goodness, who was not only pleased to be born
of a Virgin and to take upon thee the form of a Servant, but even to humble thy
self to the Death of the Cross, to redeem and restore miserable, lost and
undone Mankind, who lay in Darkness and the Shadow, and did ordain sacred
mysteries as Pledges of thy Love and a memorial of thy Death, till thy second
coming in Glory to judge both the Quick and the Dead. Grant that by the inward
workings of thy Grace I may be so fitted and prepared to receive thy Holy
Communion, and spititually partake of thy Body and Blood that it may redound to
my endless comfort, and that having a true sense of thy compassion toward me I
may bless and adore thy holy name for ever and ever. Amen.

A Prayer proper to be said after the Receiving the Communion.
O Lord God and most merciful Father, as (...) have been spiritually a
partaker of the mystical Body and Blood of thy dear Son, so let me ever feed on
him in my heart with Faith an^ Fear, and being aided and strengthened by the
assistance of thy Divine Spirit I may grow up is Grace, and be perfect in every
good work as far as the frailties inherent to humane Nature will admit.
Thoroughly purge me, O Lord, and give a clean Heart and a contrite Spirit, that
I may find a renewing and a Regeneration within me, that living here according
to thy will I may be numbered with thy Elect, and dying in thy favor be
everlastingly happy, through the Merits of Jesus Christ thy only Son and our
ever Blessed Lord and Savior, Amen.

The Dying Man's Admonition to Repentance and Amendment of Life.
My Beloved take this as my farewell.
IT is good for Old and Young ever to be intent upon their latter end. Labor
to live so that when they come to dye they need not fear the Terrors of Death,
which indeed to those that walk uprightly can be no ways dreadful, but rather
proves a Friend to set the Soul at Liberty from her Earthly Prison, and gives
her leave to mount to Heaven. O consider then, whilst it is to day and hear the
Voice of our Blessed Lord calling upon you to repent, and warning you to flee
from the wrath to come: Oh flee, flee from Sin, and then the second Death will
have no power over you: O let your lights so shine before Men, that they seeing
your good works may glorify your Father which is in Heaven, and when it is
your time, as now it is mine, to leave this World, you may be received into the
Eternal habitations, and there receive an incorruptable Crown of Life. Amen.

The Religious and Pious Sayings o^ J. H. upon sundry occasions.
HAppy is the Man that puts his tru^^ in the Lord; for although he may
suffer affliction in this world, yet he shall be sur^ to be rewarded in the
next.

It is a good thing to live in peace and unity; for the person that is given to
strife, eve^ brings woe to himself.

That Man is richest who makes God hi^ treasure, and lays up an Estate for
himself in Heaven.

The success or misfortune of worldly affairs and under a kings are to be
judged of in the end, and not in the beginning.

Though Sorrow may last for a night, ye^ to such as trust in God, Joy will come
in the morning.

The four last things are Death, Judgment Heaven and Hell; the two first are
certai^ to all Men, are the reward and punishment of good and evil.

Who is he that would not endure a moment of pain for an Age of pleasure? why
then do we repine at crosses in this world, they lead to unspeakable and
everlasting Joys, for through many tribulations we must enter into the Kingdom
of Heaven.

To seek Good early, is a great sign of his Grace working in the heart.

Set not your mind too much upon worldly things, least they create you trouble,
and become a snare to you.

If any one injure you, reprove him gently, that so he may take shame to
himself for offending so good a nature.

Speak not evil of any person, especially undeservedly; nor lend your Ear to
those that do wickedly, for the Tongue of the Slanderer is a two-edged Sword.

Be patient in adversity, and the day of ^rosperity will the sooner come.

Beware of pride, for it makes many fall ^ow, and renders their misery more
intol^erable.

Where the fear of the Lord is, there true ^appiness dwells, and makes it abode.

Be not dismayed in a good cause, thoug^ a storm threaten you, for Innocence is
(...) bold as a Lion.

Give not ear to Flatterers, for their Li^^ are full of deceit.

Let your conversation be such, that y^^ give no cause of offense, and then no
r^proach can fasten on you.

Wisdom well applied, is like Rain in (...) thirsty Land.

FINIS.
depiction of the saints in heaven and the judgment of the righteous and the
damned


