A Letter directed to M. BRIDGEMAN, the fourth of January, and a Letter
enclosed in it to one M. ANDERTON, were this day read and ordered to be entered.
To the worshipful and my much honored friend, Orlando Bridgeman Esquier, and
a Burgess of the Parl. at his Chamber at the Inner Temple, these present.
SIR, we are your friends: These are to advise you to look to your self, and to
advise others of my Lord of STRAFFORDS friends to take heed, lest they be
involved in the common calamity: Our advise is, to be gone, to pretend
business, till the great Hubub be passed: withdraw, least you suffer among the
Puritans. We entreat you to send away this enclosed Letter to M. ANDERTON,
enclosed to some trusty friend, that it may be carried safely without
suspicion, for it concerns the common safety; So desire your friends in
Coven-Garden. Jan. 4.


To the worshipful and my much honored friend, Master Anderton, these present.
SIR, although many designs have been defeated, yet that of IRELAND holds
well. And now our last plot works as hopefully as that of IRELAND, we must
bear with something in the Man, his will is strong enough, as long as he is fed
with hopes, the Woman is true to us, and real, Her Council about Her is very
good: I doubt not but to send you by the next very joyful news, for the
present, our rich Enemies, PYM, HAMPDEN, STROUD, HOLLIS, and HASLERIG, are
blemished, challenged for no less then Treason: before I writ next we doubt not
but to have them in the Tower, or their heads from their shoulders.

The SOLICITOR, and FYNES, and EARL we must serve with the same sauce: And in
the House of the Lords, MANDEVIL is touched, but ESSEX, WARWICK, SAY, BROOK,
and PAGET must follow, or else we shall not be quiet. FAULKLAND, and CULPEPPER,
are friends to our side, at leastwise they will do us no hurt. The Protestants
and Puritants are so divided, that we need not fear them, the Protestants in a
greater part will join with us, or stand Neuters, while the Puritan is
suppressed. If we can bring them under; the Protestant will either fall in with
us generally, or else, if they do not, they are so indifferent, that either by
fair, or foul means, we shall be able to command them. The mischievous
Londoners, and Apprentices, may do us some hurt for present; but we need not
much fear them; they do nothing orderly, but tumultuously: Therefore we doubt
not but to have them under command after one brunt, for our party is strong in
the City, especially HOLBORNE, the new Buildings, and WESTMINSTER: We are
afraid of nothing, but the SCOTS appearing again: But we have made a Party
there, at the Kings last being there, which will hold their hands behind them,
while we act our parts at home; Let us acquit our selves like men, for our
Religion and Country, now or never. The Kings heart is Protestant, but our
friends can persuade Him, and make him believe any thing. He hates the Puritan
party, and is made irreconcilable to that side; so that the Sun, the Moon,
and Stars, are for us. There are no less then twenty thousand Ministers in
ENGLAND, the greater half will in their places, be our friends, to avenge the
Bishops dishonor. Let our friends be encouraged, the work is more then half
done.

Your servant. R. E.


LONDON, Printed 1642.


