ENGLAND'S GLORY, Begun in I. Restoring our Religion. II. Rectifying our Coin.
To be Complete in III. Reforming our Manners.

Tit. II. 14. Who gave himself for us, that he might Redeem us from all
Iniquity, and Purge us to be a Peculiar People Zealous of Good Works.

LONDON: Printed for Rich, Baldwin, at the Oxford-Arms in Warwick Lane. School.

TO THE Two Honorable Houses.
WHEN in good Repair, as at this present, you are the Object Britannia's Eyes
are most intently fixed upon, beholding with Joy and Admiration.

With Joy, because she can make her Addresses with so much ease and freedom.
With Admiration, because you can perform your Undertakings.

The Third House comprising both, as the Heavens the Terraqueous Globe, is the
Royal Palace of the British Monarch; whose Master, conveying Life and Luster
from the King of Kings, compleats our England's Glory: And unto this, your
Access is as free as ours is unto you.

Britannia thus lives and moves; the Almighty God having given her so excellent
a being. And here is a most happy Union of all the Three, composing that Noble
Body, the King and his Subjects, Barons, and Commons.

The good Constitution of health in this Body, has been very illustrious now of
late unto this Age, as much or more than to our Ancestors; tho they have seen
several happy Reigns: Therefore are the Eyes of all Europe upon our Britannia,
as a Body of the finest Fabric, and most Curious Composure: Even Majesty it
self making long Voyages to see a Solomon.

As the Queen of the South came from far unto Jerusalem, so the Emperor of the
North is come to London.

The Queen of Sheba came to see that Prince who built the first Temple. The
second Tabernacle then, which now is building, deserves certainly the most
Royal hand, and the most Wise hearted amongst the Princes of the Earth, being
so much more Excellent than the first; as unseen are more than seen things;
Spiritual more than Temporal Glory; an house not made with hands, more than the
stateliest Pile of Building upon Earth; the Gates of Sion, more than all the
dwellings of Jacob.

It is not Temples made with hands which delight the Holy one of Israel; But
those of Men's Spirits and Bodies, cleansed by the Holy Ghost, and prepared:
Typified by our Lords sweeping out the Defilements of Jerusalems Temple:
Therefore the CHVRCH OF ENGLAND, before she says, Take not thy Holy Spirit
from us, Begs that God will make clean our Hearts within us; Plainly evincing
that an unclean heart, does no more then babble in that Petition for the Spirits
residence.

Now if these three houses, wherein dwells the Government, do begin to make
such Preparation; The Country will also certainly be made sensible of their
Duty: And then we shall hear that blessed Proclamation, Prepare to meet thy God
O Israel!

The Essentials of a Leet seem to be such, as by the Romans were called, Fasti,
where the Praetor might keep a Court; which was not done without these three
words spoken, Do, Dico, Addico, Do I give way to Actions? Dico, I speak the
Law. Addico, I Judge matters and Men.

Now in this method of Governing the Poor, the Power of a Governing Leet is
Restored to the Decenners or Freeholders, etc. Viz. Dico, upon VIEW I speak,
directing and advising to Industry. Addico, I appoint such a daily Task to he
performed. Do, give Information to the Magistrate, of the Poors Carriage and
Behavior.

England's Glory, etc.
ENglands Peace calls for Englands Gratitude; If that be not forthcoming, her
Peace cannot be lasting. If we go to Individuals, too many are against the
Nations Peace; And therein against their own, and the Peace of their posterity.
But when People wilfully Impair their own sight, it is but just with God to
strike them with a Total Blindness: If we cannot persuade, yet we may Pray for
our Enemies, as our Master did, Lord forgive them, for they know not what they
do.

It is but sad in some places, if we go to Individuals; therefore we rejoice in
our Representatives, the Honorable House of Commons, in our Nobility, the
upper House of Parliament, in our King, the Happy head of that Fair and
Beautiful Body: To the Bon Repos, whereof it is every Subjects Duty and Interest
to contribute; For hereunto the Almighty has brought us, by the Council of a
Wise and Faithful Parliament, and the Conduct of a just and Valliant King: Not
only styled so, but upon Trial found so: And is not this indeed, He that never
Broke his Word?

I cannot be of their Opinion therefore, who would have us like none of our
Friends and Neighbors; But that whilst they are keeping strong Guards, we must
Disband ours. Would not this in us look more Vain, after the Worlds experience
of thousands or years, then if it had been done by our Forefathers, who lived
when Moats and Castles were first invented? This truly I do believe, that as
we are, the very Conduct of Common prudence is sufficient to secure us, against
any hand, but that which is above us: And that is the only Hand to be feared,
now we have Peace with us, and time before us, should we neglect Reformation of
that Evil habit of Idleness in the Poor, which like Tares has been sown, and
coming up whilst England has been sleeping; And that too in the day time, after
the Debauches of her Revelling Nights.

Negligent Masters, do but rarely meet with Industrious Servants. But now that
God has blessed us with a Prince that delights in the Noblest things, TO DO GOOD
TO MANKIND; (And not like those narrow Souls, who tho they leave the rest of
the World in darkness, would be drawing all the very Sunbeams to their side of
the Globe, without Pity or Commiseration unto others) every true Englishman
surely will consider, how the very Heavens now smile upon Great Britain and
Ireland, etc. Ay and more then any other Parts of the World (tho some others
have a great share) as presaging that these Beloved Isles, who have been
Honored and owned more then other places, both in the first spreading of
Christianity, and in every Reformation since, shall now again lead the Van,
When the greatest Reformation of all is approaching. And this brings to mind
that Prophetic Poem, upon occasion of the Death of the Earl of E -- x and
which has its Prediction as follows,

His l -- ed Acts thy Freedoms Birth shall Cause,
Secure Religion produce wholesome Laws,
No more the Poor, the Rich one shall devour,
No more shall right yield to oppressive Power.
No more shall Rapine make the Country Groan.
Nor Civil Wars shall Reign within the Town.
The Iron Scepter, and the Tyrants Hand,
Shall cease henceforth to bruise thy happy Land.
Rome's Hocus pocus Ministers no more,
Shall cause Mankind their Juggling Priests adore.
Thy Learned Clergy shall confound them all,
And they like Ely 's Sons unpitied fall.
Dark mists of Errors then must fly away,
And Hells Delusions shrink from the bright Day.
Truths sacred Light, in full abundance shall
Upon thy Teachers and thy People fall.
So when the Eternal Son was Born to die
For all the World; the lesser Gods did fly.
His Bright appearance struck their Prophets down,
And Death-like silence did their Gods Intomb.
The Tuneful spheres with Hallelujahs Rung,
Heavens mighty Host with Man one Chorus Sung.
Never fading Glory unto God above,
Peace upon Earth, to Men Eternal Love.
Thus the Creation shouted with one Voice,
Thus Heaven and Earth did at his Birth Rejoice.
And thus shall all Repeat this Song again,
When upon Earth he shall begin to Reign.
This Beloved Isle shall be the chosen place,
Here shall the King of Kings begin his Race.
Judea was his Cradle and his Tomb,
Britain shall be his Throne in time to come.
Now if Heaven smile upon our Nation, we are no better then Putrified Corrupt
Members, if we promote not her Happiness to our Power: Nay, those that have but
bare Mite, ought here to cast in with me into the English Treasury; And those
that have Talents give accordingly; as our great Men (God be thanked) now
incline to do very freely.

The very Stars that in their Courses fought against Sisera, are now in a
blessed Confederacy; have blessed the Confederate Princes, to prepare all
things for the King of Peace and Glory; Rejoicing at the approaching of that
Kingdom, we and our Forefathers have prayed, might come. The next mercy, to
the Restoration of our Religion, was the Rectifying of our Coin; The next in
Course, is the Reformation of our manners. And here the cries of the Poor,
being the loudest, seem to call for the first Relief: And so our Government may
think sit to begin with the Idle Poor, because in General speaking they are.

1. The most undutiful to God. 2. The most burdensome to the Rich. 3. The most
Cruel to their needy Brethren.
1. The most undutiful to God. Now this is a main thing; We as Christians
pretend to take care of our Children by bringing them to Church, etc Why do we
not so with the Poor? If England must be as an Israel to God, we know God has
appointed that the Poor shall never cease. They shall be always with us; for
the constant exercise of Love and Charity: That we may not think we were Born
for our selves, or those of our Household only; This would be the ready way to
forget God utterly the Poor being as sure our Lords Representatives in this
present World, as the Knights, Citizens, and Burgesses are ours, in this
present Parliament: And as what these do is our Act, so what the Poor has given
them is our Lords Receipt: Nay, he is pleased to call it a Loan unto himself.

If the Lord will have the Poor in his Israel receive Food for their Bodies, a
fortiori then for their Souls, being the more Noble part. The Poor are thus to
be with us, and thus to receive from us, to keep alive (warm at least) our Love
unto God, since we are fallen such a distance from him. And here is the force of
the Argument, if we love not our Brother whom we have seen How shall we Love
God whom we have not seen? The Poor then are to be as our Children, with no
difference, only the Quantum we are to give unto each. But why bring we not the
Poor to Church? They cannot be allowed the excuses Children sometimes make, that
they have not Clothes good enough to go in. The nearer the Poor live to us, the
more we ought to be concerned for them: And indeed much of our Poor are not
only our Brethren, Relative as Christians and Natives, but really as our Flesh
and Blood also; And certainly those of us, whose Families have been with, or
before King William the First, must have of Poor Relations, in a near or more
Remote Degree of Consanguity: And I think the Ancient Gentry, are as free in
owning them as the New. But if our Children were no better looked after, then
our more remote Relations that are Poor, our Children might soon become as
Rude; and Wild as our Poor Relations.

Let us then consider, if for want of Discipline we be not guilty before God,
almost as far as Old Ely: and let us but put these Queries to our selves, if
we are not Guilty of.

1. Their breaking of the Sabbath. 2. Their Sloth and Idleness. 3. Shall we do
well in putting those to Death, our ^^lves have Connived at in the Looseness of
their Life.
2. The Idle Poor are most burdensome to the Rich, specially the meaner sort,
that Pay the Poors Tax with ^he sweat of their Brows, and hard Labor. And here
^he Poet's in the right. Who Is in the Fault? It Is easy ^o know which:

The Idle Poor do Rob
The Laboring Rich.
And indeed Laboring Families cannot provide so com^ortably for their own, as
otherwise they might; a great discouragement to Diligence and Industry:
Besides how easily would Taxes be paid for Defense, or otherwise in a just War,
should half or more of the Poors Tax be abated, By any happy thought amongst
us. And is not the sharping and disingenuous dealing of many Men in their Trade
and Callings, occasioned by the Burden of the Poors Idleness, and that in
respect of. First, the want of those hands that lie Idle, which otherwise would
bring Commodities more plentiful, work being done at easier Rates. Secondly, in
respect of the great burden of the Tax, to these that are needers and might be
helpers.

Lastly, The Idle Poor are Cruel to their Impotent Brethren, the Sick, Lame,
Aged, etc. Who are not relieved like Christian Poor, the Idle snatching their
Meat out of their Mouths, by their dissembling Clamours and Idle outcrys. And
all this hardship too, whilst we pay near a Tenth to the Poor, besides that to
the Parson. How are the Impotent, honest Poor in London, every day Robbed by,
Mumpers, and Canting Beggars? which might and ought to be better discovered and
understood. Now let the remainder of this Poor Discourse, for order sake, be
wrapped up within these four following Considerations.

1. The cause of Decay in our English Industry. 2. The present mischiefs by
Idle Poor. 3 The remedy Proposed. 4 The method of proceeding therein.
For the first Consideration, the cause of Decay in English Industry seems to
have been,

1. A Connivance at the Poors Tippling, Drunkenness, and Idling.

2. The laying aside of that which prevented all the Evil, the Laudable English
Law, of View of Francpledge.

For the first, It is plain, the Poor took Encouragement to do ill, from the
very Charity of the Government (as bad Children from their Parents tenderness)
I mean the Stat. of 43 Eliz. touching the Poor: For the Poor finding they had
as good a Freehold in the Lands of England as the Freeholders themselves,
whose Lands must pay to the Poor, tho themselves wanted, the Free holders had
but an old Song for their Money.

Hang Sorrow, cast away Care,
The Parish is bound to find us.
Now Inferior Magistrates that will Connive at such Catterpillers we may call
them Good Natured Men if we will but how shall we call them Good Patriots in
their Country?

In a late Reign, so blind were some that they very fairly led the way, the
blind led the blind, and yet thought the World looked upon their Actings as
pleasant Commedys, that indeed were confounded Farces. A frolic went once to
such a height, that a Knot of J -- coming hot out of the Tavern, one hand must
go into the R -- Post, and the other drink the K -- health: And at the very
Market Cross, too, of a Burrow Town: So that some might think it a Piece of
Petit Tr -- to exclaim against it, yet so did not I then, no more than now. The
Second cause, is the laying aside the very Essence and proper being of a Leet.
It is the declared Opinion of many of our Sages of the Law, that this laying
aside, was an unspeakable Damage to the English Government: Whilst there was a
Capital Pledge to Answer for all Immoralities or every Person, and Family,
within the Decenary, or District of Ten Families to view and observe, there was
a very exact Eye upon every Family and Person throughout this Realm (for every
Person is within some Leet.) And the Capital Pledge and Decenary, upon offense
committed were fined, and suffered by their Purse to the Kings Majesty: and
very good Reason; If they would suffer his Subjects to Debauch, and so loose
him The best of his Treasure, why should not they Answer out of theirs?

This brings to mind what I have heard was done in a Leet belonging to a Noble
Man of this Kingdom, not many Years since, The place was so full of Poor, and
most of them Idle, that their Tax in the Parish amounted in ordinary to about
900, sometimes near 1000 l. per Annum, A By Law was made to put in Execution,
the Laws against Tippling, so far as the Poor should be concerned, and the
Constables to search the Houses for that purpose. Likewise the Grand Jury
Complaining, that if their Parish Poor would work, there was enough within the
Parish, (Being a place of Trade) to find them Employment, and so much, that
Cloathiers were forced to Travel many Miles out of the Parish for to get their
work done, when their own Poor might do it. There was a By Law made, that every
Householder should go upon the view of the Poor, and that weekly by turns; That
so the Overseers of the Poor might be informed of the Poors Carriage in order
to Relief for the wanting, and punishment for the Idling, as far as the
Justices of Peace had Power

This was undertaken and for some time the Poor were daily visited, and their
work observed; And this Account thereupon given by the Viewers, that if such
course was followed, two parts in three of the Poors Tax, being then about 900
l. would in a little time be brought off, viz. From 9 to 300 l. per Annum, for
they found the working Poor more diligent, and pleased that these methods were
finding out the fault, and that they were working. Again the Idle were so
quickened, that upon sight of the Viewers, and they would make to their work in
all haste; and the Viewers thought by giving a Penny or two in a House, that
was diligent, would be great Encouragement.

The second consideration is the present mischiefs by the Idle Poor, and such
Families as are so.

1. If they are not a Brood, and Nest of Idleness and Impudence, and likely
with sorrow, to be left so to our Posterities, if not in this Good Reign
prevented?

2. If they feed not upon the Labors of others? Drones in the Bee-hive of
business?

3. If so bad, it is not almost an Imprudence to put their tainted children, for
Apprentices, upon Sober Families?

4. If they are not the Nurseries of most that go to Bridewel and the Gallows?
What abundance of Lives might be saved by good Education!

5. If Swearing, Drunkenness, and Sabbath breaking, lies not much at their
Doors?

6. If their begging in the Streets, Lodging in Barnes, and want of wholesome
Food, brings not on them abundance of Diseases and Lameness, with great charge
to the Country?

7. If instead of being, poor in Spirit, most agreeable to meaness, they are,
not insufferably Proud, and Stubborn? So that Provisions made, for them at the
Workhouse, they will tell you is below them; they will not be used like, Slaves
there? They have heard of English Liberties, and would have them extended to
their Sloth and Idleness. Do they not already so shame with their Badges, as
to cover them from sight if any ways possible?

8 If the Pride of the poor, together with the many miscarriages of those
entrusted with a Stock, and the difficulty to find Good Men for the purpose,
have not hindered the project of a Workhouse.

9. If Houses of Correction do not fail mightily in their end for being
commonly Tippling Houses by a good shower of Ale may quench their Zeal.

10. The poor being so increased since the time of Queen Eliz. If it would not
be an unequal burden to the Church Wardens and Overseers, to make their daily
visits?

The third consideration is the Remedy: And thus proposed, viz. By a common
concern, and General, as that of the Winchester Watch, only this to be weekly,
in turns, through the whole Year. In some places it may not come three or four
times in a Year, to a Family where many Families are, and where but few, it is
little trouble: And a careful Servant may do it for the Master, which Method
seems to be,

1. Reasonable. 2. Easy. 3. Safe and Sure.
1. Reasonable because a Duty Incumbent upon every Leet, or Decennarie, being
no more but to revive and enforce an Ancient Law, Imprudently laid aside.

2. Easy, because so many hands to the work; and only a little Care and Pains;
no Cost.

3. Sure, because little venturing of a Stock, and if there were, it is every
day looked after by the owners. Thus the Eye of all England is every day
observing the behavior of their Poor: Nor can their be much Loytering, because
tho the viewers are not every hour of the day with the Poor, yet it is not known
at what hour they may come. Thus every Hamlet, or the like Division, may Revive
the Old English Service of the Leet, or Decennarie.

Upon what has been said, and yet follows, It Is humbly submitted as well as
offered, if these, or any of these, may be considerations thought on in the
Act, which the Government has been much thought full about, for better ordering
the Poor.

1. If Good Penalties be laid upon the Administrators of such an Act, who fail
in the Execution.

2. If small Woolen Clothes go not oat of the Nation undy'd; Which would much
employ the Poor and Advance the Crown Revenues: and if any Subject have some
present Interest in those Whites, the Dyers may Compound it.

3. If Attorneys and Solicitours (who converse most with People of all sorts)
be convict as common Swearers, or Drunkards, they be turned out of the Roll,
and Debarred practice.

4. If Justices of Peace Clerks, take nothing of Fees, where the Poor are
concerned?

If in the Commission of Peace, to Gentlemen, there be added some of the
richest and most understanding Tradesmen, who may Encourage Work and Industry?

5. And will it not be good Husbandry to discover needy Families in time, who
are ready to starve under the shame of Begging? want work, and would do it:
Thus preventing Sickness and Distempers, and saving thereby many Thousands of
Pounds Yearly in this Nation.

The Fourth and Last consideration, is the methods to he taken in order to the
Reformation of the Poor. But these are already under far greater and better
Judgment; However, this Mite goes, with other Men's Greater Talents, into the
Public Treasury.

1. If there be such a General and daily View of the Poor, and of those
suspected to be so?

2. If Justices of Peace have power to order a whipping at the Cross, etc. Or
remit for the first and second offense, after striped? Will not this, save the
Parish Money in sending to the House of Correction? And more like to have a
good Issue then any Correction there

3. And may not public shame before Neighbors be more Awful, then present
whipping in a House of Correction? And those too, favorable enough, if there
be Interest, which is not hard to make in a House of Tippling.

4. If a Bell be hung near the Cross, to give notice of the Execution, which
will be soon known by the Name of the IDLE BELL? So the very sight of it, bring
diligence more into the thoughts of our Poor.

5. If the Inhabitants that thus go their weeks be called, Viewers and Taxers
of the Poor; And appoint the Tax for Children or a Family where there is need?

6. If the Poor be constrained on Sundays to Public Worship under the like
Penalty?

7. Also restrained from Cursing and Swearing, Tippling and Drinking contrary
to Law: For they fear no Pecuinary Punishment?

These or some other Methods which others may hand unto the Government, Joining
with what is already resolved upon for a Law, it is humbly hoped may aid and
assist the last Acts about the Poor: For how can the Parish fairly turn out of
the Poor List, unless they acquaint themselves by their own Inspection, which
ought to be, for the Officers have not now that trust of admitting whom they
please?

And how can the late Act for forcing Apprentices be easy to the Freeholders,
etc. Unless the Poors manners be reformed? And if this remedy should not prove
so speedy as this Age could wish, yet it will make for the advantage of
Posterity we design our Estates for.

Besides, the Preventive part of our Law is more desirable to the Lawmakers
then the Executionary part of it. To add this further, may it not be convenient
to give Liberty of surcharging to the Poors Tax, where Men are Tradesmen, and
will not Employ their own Towns Poor in what they can do, the Church Wardens
and Overseers seeing the work to be truly and well done. Also may it not be
agreeable that there be in all public places of Worship, Stoles, or Forms in
the Isles, and other spare places, that no respect be wanting that is due to
Christian Poor.

The Pulpit has called long this way much in vain; The Reverend Bishops
therefore being part of our constitution, have been considering how to effect
this great cure, I wish every one that can contribute any thing this way, would
be Free and Generous in the mutter. And I think if the Gentleman with his
weighty reason for Disbanding the Guards or this Kingdom, had Employed it this
way, to keep us from the danger of being eaten up, (forasmuch as he can see so
little of danger) the Nation had been much more indebted to him.

To conclude, we owe uncessant thankfulness unto Almighty God, that has thus
manifestly owned and assisted the Government; So far, that indeed wonders have
been done, and may be done; for every undertaking has been Prosperous: First,
restoring Religion, then Rectifying our Coin. Why should we doubt the reforming
of manners, now Heaven's thus liberal? ^ow can we miss it? Unless (in Asking)
by a too soon giving over, as King Joash did his smiting of the Ground.

FINIS.

