ENGLANDS APPEAL TO ITS OWN ARMY.

OR THe loud cry of an oppressed KINGDOM, Against their oppressors

BEING A Declaration of the indirect and treacherous practices of several
Members of the House of Commons, who contrary to their trust have endeavored
to enslave the King, and Kingdom under an arbitrary power, contrary to Law and
Justice, and the practice of former Parliaments.

Published at the earnest desire of some well-affected Gentry and Commons of
this Kingdom

ENGLANDS APPEAL TO ITS OWN ARMY.
OR THE LOUD CRY OF AN OPPRESSED KINGDOM against their oppressors.
GAllant Soldiers, you who God has honored with success, to the admiration
of your friends, and astonishment of your enemies: Now let us see whether you
will prove faithful to England yea, or no: Whether the public peace and
welfare of this poor sinking Kingdom; be of so high esteem, with you, as
your own ease and particular interest or no; if you dare not trust God at
Jordan, which has wrought wonders for you in the wilderness; delivered you
out of the hands of Pharaoh; and brought you through the Red Sea; if you will
say after all this Manna, but can God give us flesh also; if ye will thus
dishonor God before the People; ye may come with Moses to see that good Land
that shall flow with righteousness and peace; but not possess it. [Therefore
be of good courage, and let us play the men for our People, and for the City of
our God, and the Lord do that which seems him good: 2 Samuel 1. 12.]

If ye have hitherto had considence in your own wisdom and strength. If ye
have hitherto sought your own exaltation and self interests in your actings.
If ye hitherto preferred your own pay and Arreares; your own honor, and
vindication; before the public peace and welfare of the Kingdom; let us know
it; do not dissemble any longer with us; let us have some time to prepare our
selves to become slaves.

But if God have hitherto been your wisdom and strength; if the Kingdoms
peace and safety have been of greater value with you then our own lives; if it
has been the honor and glory of God; you have sough^ more, then your own
vindication and reputation; why is it not so still? Did we ever think you
would be mercinary Soldiers, you are not all French and Scotch, sure there is
some of you freeborn Englishmen; we thought you had been equally interested
with us in the commonwealths good. What, have you lost your interest and
freedoms by fighting for them? If ye had been in France sighting there for
money against Spain, ye might have demanded as much there upon your
disbanding, as you have requested here yet.

Surely there is some other grievances lies upon your spirits, besides
particular interest, as arreares, Indemnity, Vindication; you pretend in your
Declaration you could wish other things; we hope your expectations in relation
to your work, will be equal to that of your wages. Have you taken all this
pain, and put us to all this cost to set up the building of a well grounded
peace, and will ye leave it so slightly pind, as the least blast of wind shall
blow it over again, and so make our latter end worse then our beginning?

But we hope you cannot, you dare not thus deal with us. The generallity of
your carriage and demeanor amongst us, has promised better things; your
several Declarations to your Soldiers in the behalf of the Country, as you
marched along, your sincere and exemplary proceedings against any of them that
did us any wrong; cannot but beget better thoughts in us toward you.

For we must confess, we never could distinguish betwixt Caveliers and
Roundheads by their carriage amongst us, till you were an Army, or at least a
great part of you in arms for us; and since God has made you useful to
affect many of us to the Parliament, by your fair carriage to us: Do not
leave us till in some measure we be assured of our expectation; lest we have
lust cause to say, you have therein been a snare to us.

Therefore we declare to you, if you disband or lay down Arms, before we
have some farther and fuller assurance of a peaceable enioyment of our
liberties and freedoms, and to live under the government and protection of our
known Laws, which you have often times pretended you fought to maintain, you
do as much as in you lies betray us into bondage and slavery; had we not been
conquered into subjection to arbitrary government, we should never have been
voted to it; therefore for your farther satisfaction concerning not
dis-banding, we shall refer to your consideration these following reasons.

1. Because we cnoceive you did not take up arms to defend either boundless
prerogative, or unlimitted privileges, but to maintain the common liberties
of all the freeborn People of England, against all tyrannical usurpations,
and unjust oppressions by whomsoever exercised; and since by the blessing of
God, you have delivered your selves and Kingdom from the former; we conceive
its your duty to do your utmost to preserve us from the latter, at lest to let
us know where the cause lies we are not eased of our unsupportable burdens,
and settled in the enioyment of our Jus^ Liberties and freedoms.

2. Because (we conceive) you are not engaged in this war by any mercenary
considerations, of profits or preferments, but as men equally interested in the
things ye fought for. And many of you chosen and entrusted by the Kingdom as
members of the Parliament; and you thereby are as equally concerned in the
proceedings of the Parliament, be they good or bad, as you are in the actings
of the Army; and what you have done or declared to do for the Kingdom as
Parliament men, you ought to do your utmost to maintain and make good as you
are Soldiers: and considering that the late proceedings of the Parliament have
been absolute contrary to their former Declarations, and Protestations,
whereby they will not only bring upon themselves, but you, the guilt of all the
blood which has been shed in pretense of opposing tyranny and oppression; when
at this present there is more arbitrary tyranny and oppression, upon the poor
Commons, then ever there was since man can remember; which we hope you will
not be the authors of.

3. Because this present Parliament is not a free Parliament, there being many
of the late elections have had undue proceedings in the choice of new members,
they having not been left to the free choice of the People, but have been first
chose by particular Parliament men, and then recommended by insinuating Letters
to the several Counties and Corporations they are chosen by; which by reason
of that influence some Committees and some others, had over the said Counties
and places, they durst not do other but choose them: many of the same members
which thus chooses others, are themselves guilty of high misdemeanour, some of
them having long, lain under the charge of betraying their trust, others of
ingrosing the public stock into their own hands, and so have cheated the
Commonwealth of vast sums of money; and for their own security of being
accomptable to the Kingdom for what they have done, have they procured by
those unjust elections such men as are either interested with themselves in
some guilt to the public as they have been Country Committees; or else such
as they have had particular interest in, and relation to, and so might corrupt
and sway them at their pleasure; by which means you had of late the mayor part
of the House carried on to such contradictory proceedings to their former
Declarations, and Protestations; they having been more mindful of deviding
the Commonwealths money among themselves, then they have been of paying the
Commonwealths just debts; as if they were resolved never to leave raising of
money as long as the Commons of Englands be worth a penny.

4. Because the end of your dis-banding, is not to ease us of the charge of an
Army, there being already provision made to continve an Army every whit as
chargeable, and to be feared will be more oppressive, and abusive to us then
ever you have been: but their design is (as fast as they can accomplish it)
to new modelize the Army and Parliament too; and to entrust none but such, as
are equally guilty with themselves, or in some kind interested in their design,
which is to dis-throne the King, and inslave the People, and set themselves up
as Lords and Kings in his room, and so in stead of having an Army to protect
us, we shall have an Army in our own bowels, paid by us, to inslave us; but
we hope since you expect your due in point of wages from us, you will give us
leave to tell you we expect the performance of your duty in point of
faithfulness from you hardly thinking you can in honesty or conscience demand
all your areares or wages till you have brought your work to some fuller
perfection, for if you leave us thus, you leave us in a worse condition then
you found us.

5. Because we have found more Justice and benefit from our trustees in
Parliament, within these ten days, since you have stood up and declared for
us, then we had formerly received in ten months, when you stood as it were
Neuters to us: as witness those selfe-denying Votes; The taking off the Excise
from flesh and Salt, except their desires to hasten the Propositions to the
King: their approving your Petition, and answering your grievances; their
relieving the necessities of several reformado Officers which formerly were
out of hopes; all which makes us confident, that if according to your declaring
there were a period set to this Parliament, and provision made for further
Parliaments to succeed one another, whereby Parliaments might know they were
questionable, for their actions at such a period of time, and should then
expect to find an impartial communicating of Justice to all the freeborn
People of this Kingdom: and we cannot expect it before. Therefore we declare
to you, if you will stand by us in those just and impartial things you have
declared to us, we are resolved to stand by you, and own you in them, to the
utmost of our abilities and last drop of our blood.

FINIS.

