royal blazon or coat of arms
At the Court at WHITEHALL, The 20th of July, 1683.
Present The Kings most Excellent Majesty, Lord Archbishop of Canterbury Lord
Keeper Lord President Lord Privy Seal Duke of Ormond Duke of Albemarle Earl of
Peterborrow Earl of Sunderland Earl of Clarendon Earl of Bathe Earl of Craven
Earl of Aylesbury Earl of Conway Viscount Falconberg Lord Bishop of London Lord
Dartmouth Mr. Chancellor of the Exchequer Mr. Chancellor of the Duchy.


THe Right Honorable the Lords of the Committee for Trade and Foreign
Plantations, having this day Presented to the Board, a Report concerning
New England, together with the Draught of a Declaration from His Majesty, to
the Governor and Company of the Massachusetts Bay, upon issuing a Quo
VVarranto against the Charter of that Colony; And the said Report and
Declaration being Read and Considered at the Board, It was Ordered, as it is
hereby Ordered, That Mr. Edward Randolph be sent to New England with the
Notification of the said Quo VVarranto; which he is to Deliver to the said
Governor and Company of the Massachusetts Bay: And thereupon to Return to give
His Majesty and Account of his Proceedings therein; And one of His Majesty's
Principal Secretaries of State, is likewise to Prepare the said Declaration for
His Majesty's Signature, in order to be sent to New England, and delivered to
the Governor and Company, by the said Edward Randolph, as aforesaid. And it is
hereby further Ordered, That His Majesty's Printers do forthwith Print, and
deliver unto the said Edward Randolph, Two hundred Copies of the aforesaid
Declaration, as also One hundred Copies of all the Proceedings at the
Council Board, concerning the Charter of London, which were Printed by Order of
His Majesty at this Board; to be Dispersed by him in New England, as he shall
think best for His Majesty's Service.

PHIL. LLOYD.

Charles R.
England, Scotland, France, and Ireland, Defender of the Faith, etc. To all, to
whom these Presents shall come, or may in any wise concern, Greeting.
Although We have thought fit to Issue Our Writ of Quo Warranto against the
Charter and Privileges Claimed by the Governor and Company of the
Massachusetts Bay in New England, by reason of some Crimes and Misdemenours by
them Committed; Yet Our Will and Pleasure is, and We do hereby Declare, That
the Private Interests and Proprieties of all Persons within that Our Colony,
shall be Continued and Preserved to them, so that no man shall receive any
Prejudice in his Freehold or Estate; and that, in case the said Corporation of
the Massachusetts Bay shall, before further Prosecution had upon the said Quo
VVarranto, make a full Submission, and entire Resignation to Our Pleasure, We
will then Regulate their Charter in such manner, as shall be for Our Service,
and the good of that Our Colony, without any other Alterations, then such as We
shall find necessary for the better Support of Our Government there.

And We do hereby further Declare and Direct, That all those Persons who are
questioned in or by the said Quo Warranto, and shall go about to maintain the
Suit against Us, shall make their Defense at their own particular Charge,
without any help by, or spending any part of the Public Stock of Our said
Colony; And that as well those that are not Freemen, as such as are willing to
submit to Our Pleasure, shall be Discharged from all Rates, Levies and
Contributions toward the Expense of the said Suit, both in their Persons and
Estates. And Our further Pleasure is, That this Our Royal Declaration be
Published within Our said Colony, that none may pretend ignorance hereof.

Given under Our Signet and Royal Sign Manual at Our Court at Whitehall, the
26th day of July 1683. In the Five and thirtieth Year of Our Reign. By His
Majesty's Command. L. JENKINS.

LONDON, Printed by the Assigns of John Bill deceased: And by Henry Hills, and
Thomas Newcomb, Printers to the Kings most Excellent Majesty, 1683.

Declaran about ye Governor and Company of the Massachusetts Bay in
New England: 26th July 1683.

His Ma Declaran upon issuing His Writ of Quo Warranto agt. the Charter and
Privileges claimed by the Governor and Company of the Massachusetts Bay in
New England; and ca. 26th July 1683


