ENGLAND Uniting to Her Sovereign; OR, The Advancing of the KING:

A Solemn LEAGUE and COVENANT: FOR Reformation and Defense of Religion, The
Honor and Happiness of the KING, and the Peace and Safety of the three
Kingdoms of ENGLAND, SCOTLAND and IRELAND.

ORdered, By the Parliament, That this Solemn League and Covenant be Printed
and Published, and forthwith read in every Church, and also once every Year,
according to former order of Parliaments.

LONDON, Printed for Charles Thomlinson, 1660.

A Solemn League and Covenant.
WE Noblemen, Barons, Knights, Gentlemen, Citizens, Burgesses, Mini^ters of
the Gospel, and Commons of all sorts in the Kingdoms of England, Scotland,
and Ireland, by the providence of God living under one King, and being of one
reformed Religion, having before our eyes the glory of God, and the advancement
of the Kingdom of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, the Honor and Happiness
of the Kings Majesty, and his posterity, and the true pu^lick liberty, safety
and peace of the Kingdoms, wherein every ones private condition is included,
and calling to mind the treacherous and bloody plots, conspiracies attempts,
and practices of the enemies of God, against the true Religion and Professors
thereof in all places, especially in these three Kingdoms ever since the
Reformation of Religion, and how much their rage, power, and presumption are of
late, and at this teme increased and exercised; whereof the deplorable estate
of the Church and King^ome of Ireland, the destressed estate of the Church and
Kingdom of England, and the dangerous estate of the Church and Kingdom of
Scotland, are present and public Testimonies: We have now at last (after
other means of supplication, remonstrance, protestations, and sufferings,) for
the preservation of our selves and our Religion from utter ruin and
destruction according to the commendahle practice of these Kingdoms in former
times and the example of Gods people in other Nations, after mature
deliberation, resolved and determined to enter into a mutual and solemn
League and Covenant, wherein we all subscribe, and each one o^ us for himself,
with our hands lifted up to the most High ^od, do swear:

I. THa^ we shall sine rely, really and constantly, through the grace of God,
endeavor in our several places and callings the preser^ation of the Reformed
Religion in the Church of Scotland, in doctrine, worship, discipline and
Government, against our common enemies, the Reformation of Religion in the
Kingdoms of England and Ireland, in doctrine, worship, discipline and
government, according to the word of God, and the example of the best reformed
Churches; and shall endeavor to bring the Churches of God in the three
Kingdoms, to the nearest conjunction and uniformity in Religion, Confession of
Faith, Form of Church Government, directory for Worship and Catechizing; that
we and our posterity after us may as brethren live in faith and love, and the
Lord may delight to dwell in the midst of us.

II. That we shall in like manner, without respect of persons, endeavor the
extirpation of Popery, Prelacy, (that is Church Government by Archbishops
Bishops, their Chancellours and Commissaries, Deanes, Deanes and Chapters,
Archdeacons, and all other Ecclesiastical Officers depending on that Hierarchy)
Superstition, Heresy, Schism, Profaneness, and whatsoever shall be found to
be contrary to sound Doctrine, and the power of Godliness; lest we partake in
other men's sins, and thereby be in danger to receive of their plagues, and that
the Lord may be one, and his Name one in the three Kingdoms.

III. We shall with the same sincerity, reality and constancy, in our several
Vocations, endeavor with our estates and lives, mutually to preserve the Rites
and Privileges of the Parliaments, and the Liberties of the Kingdoms, and to
defend the Kings Majesty's person and authority, in the preservation and
defense of the true Religion, and Liberties of the Kingdoms, that the world may
bear witness, with our consciences of our Loyalty, and that we have no
thoughts or intentions to diminish His Majesty's just power and Greatness.

II^I. We shall also with all faithfulness endeavor the discovery of all such
as have been, or shall be Incendiaries, Malignants, or evil Instruments, by
hindering the Reformation of Religion, dividing the King from his people, or
one of the Kingdoms from another, or making any faction or parties among the
people, contrary to this League and Covenant, that they may be brought to
public tr^al, and receive condign punishment, as the degree of their offenses
shall require or deserve, or the supreme Judicatories of both Kingdoms
respectively, or others having power from them for that effect, shall judge
convenient.

V. And whereas the happiness of a blessed Peace be^ween these Kingdoms,
denied in former times to our Progenitors, is by the good providence of God
granted unto us, and has been lately concluded, and se^led by both the
Parliaments, we shall each one of us, according to our place and interest,
endeavor that they may remain conjoined in a firm peace and union to all
posterity, and that Justice may be done upon the wilful opposers thereof, in
manner expressed in the precedent Articles.

VI. We shall also according to our places and callings in this common cause of
Religion, Liberty and peace of the Kingdoms, assist and defend all those that
enter into this League and Covenant in the maintaining and pursuing thereof,
and shall not suffer our selves directly or indirectly by whatsoever
Combination, persuasion or terror, to be divided and withdrawn from this
blessed Union and conjunction, whether to make defection to the contrar^ part,
or to give our selves to a detestable indifferency or neutrality in this cause,
which so much concerns the glory of God, the good of the Kingdoms, and the
honor of the King; but shall all the days of our lives, zealously continue
therein against all opposition, and promote the same according to our power,
against all lets and impediments whatsoever; and what we are not able our
selves to suppress or overcome, we shall reveal and make known, that it may be
timely prevented or removed; All which we shall do as in the sight of God.

And because these Kingdoms are guilty of many sins and provocations against
God, and his Son Jesus Christ, as is too manifest by on present distresses and
dangers, the fruits thereof, We profess and declare before God and the world
our unfeigned desire to be humbled for our own sins, and for the sins of these
Kingdoms, especially that we have not as we ought, valued the inestimable
benefit of the Gospel, that we have not labored for the purity and power
thereof, and that we have not endeavored to receive Christ in our hearts, nor
to walk worthy of him in our ^ives, which are the causes of our sins and
transgressions so much abounding amongst us; and our true and unfeigned
purpose, desire, and endeavor for our selves, and all others under our power
and charge, both in public and in private, in all duties we owe to God and
Man, to amend our lives, and each one to go before another in the example of a
real Reformation, that the Lord may turn away his wrath and heavy indignation,
and establish these Churches and Kingdoms in truth and peace. And this
Covenant we make in the presence of Almighty God the Searcher of al^ hearts,
with a true intention to perform the same, as we shall answer at the great day,
when the secrets of all hearts shall be disclosed: Most humbly beseeching the
Lord to strengthen us by his Holy Spirit for this end, and to bless our
desires and proceedings with such suc^ess, as may be deliverance and sfety to
his people, and encouragement to other Chrestian Churches groaning under, or in
danger of the yoke of Antichristian ty^anny, to join in the same or like
Association and Covenant, to the glory of God, the enlargement of the Kingdom
of Jesus Christ, and the peace and tranquillity of Christian Kingodmes and
Commonwealths.

Will. Lenthal, Speaker Beuchamp St. John Gilbert Gerrard Walter Earl James
Cambell Thomas Cheek Robert Nicholas Benjamin Rudyard John Gurdon Robert
Harley Francis Knollys Edward Masser John White Anthony Stapley Dennis Bond
Laurence Whitaker Michael Noble Pere. Hoby Richard Barwis Edward Baynton
William Cawley John Moyle John Pyne George Searle Henr^ Vane Senior Nevill
Poole John Young Henry Herbert Thomas Sandys William Jesson Philip L. Herbert
Thomas Barrington Martin Lumley John Trevor Francis Godolphin Thomas Arundell
Edward Stephens Gilbert Pickering John Greve Oliver Cromwell Henry Vane Junior
William Cage Richard Erisey Philip L. Lisle Will. Heveningham Isaac Pennington
Richard Cresheld Thomas Pelham Thomas Parker John Leigh John Harris Augustine
Skinner John Venn Will. Strickland John Franklin Samuel Brown Robert S^^wen
Roger Hill John Button John Meyrick Ambrose Brown Richard Winn Edward Owner
Charles Pym Charles L. Cranborn Ben. W^ston Dubley North John Nut Jo. Corbet
Roger Burgoyne Peter Temple Benjamin Valentine Tho. Walsingham Oliver Luke
William Alenson Humphrey Salwey Richard Moore Will. Ashurst Thomas Moore Thomas
Fountain Will. ^l^ys Henry Shelley Rich. Shuttleworth Henry Ludlow George
Gallop. Robert Wallop. Arthur Hesilrige Oliver Saint-John Thomas Grantham
Francis Barnham Will. L. Fitzwil^iams Edmund D^nch Henry Mildmay. Hugh Rogers
Thomas Hatcher John Wray Simon^s D*Ewes Anthony Bedingfield John Ash Will. L.
Munson Martin Lister Robert Goodwyn Edward Thomas Henry Lucas Miles Corbet
Philip Smith Cornelius Holland Will. Spurstowe John Lowry peter Wentworth Henry
Chomley philip Stapleton Will. pierrepoint Roger North Alexander popham ^homas
Hodges John Maynard Samuel Vassal Anthony Irby John Clotworthy John Broxolme
Richard Iervoyse John Blaki^ton Walter Long John Roll Robert Jennor John
VVaddon William Masham John Lisle Edmund Fowell Edward Ash Thomas Pury
Richard VVhithead Richard Jenyns Humphry Tuston Thomas Dacres Thomas Earl John
Downs John Goodwyn Francis Drake Will. Waller Samuel Luke Francis Buller
Richard Harman George Buller Arthur Onslowe Richard VVynwood Robert pie H L.
Gray of Ruthin Richard Knightley John pym Christ. Yelverton Anthony Nicoll
peter Wroth Robert Reynolds Not. Barnardiston Henry Heyman William purefoy
Valentine Walton Michael Oldesworth William VVheler Hall Ravenscroft T. L.
Gray of Groby Thomas Middleton Edw. Hungerford Christopher VVrey Richard Lee
Herbert Morley Thomas Lane Robert Cecill William Bell Thomas Some Herbot.
Grimstone Simon Snow John Nash Herbot Grimstone Rulph Asheton Edward Ayshcoghe
John Wild John Trenchard Thomas Iervoyse Richard Brown William Playters
Nathaniel Stephens Richard Rose Francis Rous Gilbert Millington Walter Young
John Brown John Hippisly Edward poole Henry pelham William Hay. John Driden
Nathaniel Fyennes William Lewis Giles Green William Lytton John Harvey Edward
Dowce William Strode Edmond prideaux Thomas Hoyle Edward Enton Francis popham
Zouch Tate John Curson Alexander Bence Squire Bence John Seldom John Glyn
Richard Onslow John Coke Tho. L. Wenman Bul^rode Whitelock George Mountague
Edward partheriche Henry Campion William Whitaker Danzel Holles Edward
VVingate James Fen^s poynings Moore Edward Bisse, Junior William Jerpson
Edward Mountague Norton Knatchboll Thomas Eden. Edward Baynton Jo. Evelyn Jo.
potts San^. Rolls Ralph Asheton William Drake pereg. pelham William Brereton
Thomas VVidrington Natha. Hallowes Joh. Bamfield Symond Thelwall Hen. Worsley
phil. par^er Edw. Boys John Alford


FINIS.

