C R

DIEV ET MON DROIT

HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE

royal blazon or coat of arms
Die Veneris, 13 December. 1661.
FOrasmuch as upon Writs of Error retornable into this High Court of
Parliament, The Plaintiffs therein often desire to delay Justice, rather then
to come to the determination of the Right of the Cause; It is therefore Ordered
by the Lords Spiritual and Temporal in Parliament Assembled, That the
Plaintiffs in all such Writs after the same, and the Records be brought in,
shall speedily repair to the Clerk of the Parliament, and prosecute their Writs
of Error, and satisfy the Officers of this House, their Fees justly due unto
them, by reason of the prosecution of the said Writs of Error, and the
proceedings thereupon; and further, shall assign their Errors within Eight days
after the bringing in of such Writs with the Records: And if the Plaintiffs
make default so to do, then the said Clerk, if the Defendant in such Writs
require it, shall Record, That the Plaintiff has not prosecuted his Writ of
Error; and that the House does therefore Award, That such Plaintiff shall lose
his Writ, and that the Defendant shall go without day, and that the Record be
remitted. And if any Plaintiff in any Writ of Error shall allege Diminution,
and pray a Certiorari, the Clerk shall enter an Award thereof accordingly, and
the Plaintiff may before in Nullo est Erratum pleaded, sue forth the Writ of
Certiorari in ordinary course without special Petition, or motion to this House
for the same; and if he shall not prosecute such Writ, and procure it to be
returned within Ten days next after his Plea of Diminution put into this House;
then unless he shall show some good cause to this House, for the enlarging of
the time for return of such Writ, he shall lose the benefit of the same, and
the Defendant in the Writ of Error, may proceed as if no such Writ of
Certiorari were Awarded.

Die Veneris, 13 December. 1661.
ORdered by the Lords Spiritual and Temporal in Parliament Assembled, That this
Order be forthwith Printed and Published.

Jo. Brown, Cleric. Parliamentorum.

LONDON, Printed by John Bill and Christopher Barker, Printers to the KING'S
most Excellent Majesty, 1661.


