Englands day of Joy and Rejoicing, Or, Long looked for is come at last.
Or the true manner of proclaiming CHARLES the Second King of England, etc. This
Eighth day of this present May; to the ever honored praise of General Monck,
being for the good of his Country, and the Parliament.
To the Tune of, Jockey.




Cheer up your heart^ kind Countrymen,
(...), for we have them,
(...) deed
Be (...) ^^os^d,
but (...), though you have had,
(...) need,
For (...) Foxes once were chief,
A^^ often with you laid the Thief,
But (...) he is come,
And (...) all to the run,
Though (...) so long a time have sot,
About this and that, and I know not what,
Now General Monck has done the thing,
And proclaimd Charles our royal King.
Then let us for his welfare pray,
both night and day, as on the way,
We pass along,
That his Enemies may be trapand,
that holds up hand, or gives command,
To do him wrong,
For there is two many now adays,
That if they might but have their ways,
Both King and Kingdom would destroy,
So they themselves might it enjoy,
But let all those now have a care,
Lest they fall into the hang-mans snare,
For it is General Monck that has done the thing
And proclaimed, etc.
Now I will in brief declare,
therefore be ware, and you shall hear,
Before you go,
Though he so longtime has been crossed,
and often tossed, like to a post,
Both too and throw,
Yet now to England he must come,
For to redeem all those from doom,
That has been kept under command,
And give them freedom in the land,
And be sure he will know all those,
Who are his friends, and who were his foes,
Then let his friends all merrily sing,
that Charles is proclaimed, etc.
Though the Foxes father did destroy,
with much anoy, that he might not enjoy,
His own,
Now let King Charles now have his right,
both day and night, in the despite
Of any one,
For it would have angered any one,
For to have been kept from their own
So long as young Charles he has been
This seven long years durst not be seen,
So was the Duke of York likewise*
But now the country people (...)
It is General Monck has done (...)
and proclaimed Charles, etc.
The second Part,
To the same Tune.




ANd now a Free Parliament does sit,
with honor great, all men complete,
To settle peace now in the land,
I pray to God they may prevail,
with fervent zeal: and not to fall,
What they have in hand,
And for to settle right the laws,
And to maintain the good old cause,
As heretofore time has been,
In Elizabeth's days our maiden Queen,
For we no good laws have had,
This twenty years to make us glad,
But now General Monck has done the thing
And proclaimed Charles our royal King.
Now all the Hanters and the Quakers,
and the Shakers, and their Partakers,
must go down,
So must the Anabaptist too,
unto their ^^o, no more must go
Aspe^^in^ up and down,
Though they (...) houses ^^rch,
Yet now they must re^air to the Church,
No more private meetings they must have,
Nor yet no speaker them to save,
For they too long their wicked courses have run
And many poor people has almost undon,
But now General Monck will have no such thing
For he has proclaimd, etc.
The Quakers had the land overrun,
and it undone, if Monck had not come,
their fury to swage,
For when that Lambert he went forth,
unto the North, then they were in wrath,
and in great rage.
The Ministers they would destroy,
If that they would not them obey,
And the Protestants they would have foold,
But Monck their courage has quickly cooled,
They raised Armies in the West,
For to destroy both man and beast,
But Monck an alteration did bring,
And has proclaimed, etc.
Then let us all pray to God,
with one accord, that his true word
may with us remain,
And it is a thing to be considered on,
and thought upon, what Monck has done,
without destroying honest men:
To carry all thing, so uprightly as he has done,
For the good of the Country since first he begun,
Without any shedding or spilling of blood,
Though he had many enemies that him withstood,
Yet God was on his side, you may very well know
That helped him to beat down the Protestants foes
It is General Monck that has done this thing,
And has proclaimed, ande.
And now you Country men all,
both great and small, unto you all,
I send this song,
Hoping your taxes shall be freed,
which you have much need, and indeed
Have paid it for so long,
For if Lambert and Fleetwood, in their ways had gone,
The poor protestants had been quite undone,
Lambert was for the Baptist as I did hear,
and Fleetwood for the Quakers as it does appear,
So they two would have agreed with high renown,
That ye poor Protestant should all hade gone down
But Monck an alteration did with him bring,
And has proclaimd, etc.
And now I wish that all those,
who are his foes, or about goes,
him to destroy,
That they may be stricken blind or lame,
unto their shame, that seeks his fame,
for to annoy.
For if brave General Monck had not stood our friend
For of sorrow and woes, we should never had an end
But decrit and delusions more and more,
True loving friends they turned out of door,
And now you kind Countrymen be not in have.
For though you have long looked for it, it is come at last,
For General Monck has done the thing,
And so God save Charles our royal King.
The true manner of proclaming Charles the second King of England, etc. by the
too Houses of Parliament, Lords and Commons from Westminster, through all the
streets of London, and accompanied by the Lord Mayor, and Aldermen, and
Common-Counsel of the City of London, with all the City Trained-bands for their
Guard, and many thousands of Citizens on Horseback.
London, Printed for W. Gilbertson, at the sign of the Bible in Giltspur-street.


