OXFORD, this 19th of August, 1645.
WHEREAS by a former Order of the second of July last, it was directed, That in
respect of the necessity of perfecting the Fortifications of this Garrison, all
Strangers, Inhabitants, and resiant within this University and City, being
above the age of sixteen, (except such as should be upon the Guards) should
upon the four several days therein appointed, work at the said
Fortifications, behind Christ-Church; or in default thereof, find one
sufficient able person to labor for him, or send toward providing other
Laborers for every such Person, other then Servants, twelve pence, and for
Servants, six pence. To which Order, very many of the said Strangers
(Inhabitants) did not conform themselves, upon pretense they had no notice
thereof. It is therefore now Ordered, and for avoiding all excuse whatsoever;
The Governor is hereby desired to give directions, that by sound of Drum,
and also by the Bell-man, notice be given to all the said Strangers Inhabiting,
and Lodgers within the said University and City, above sixteen years of age,
and except such as are upon the Guards, or as have since the date of the former
Order worked at the Fortifications upon the North line. That upon Thursday
next, being the 21th of this instant August, by seven of the Clock in the
morning of the same day, they repair to the Meadows at Christ-Church, there
to work upon the said Fortifications, and so to continue all that day, at the
usual hours; and so to work three other days, viz. on Friday, Saturday, and
Monday then next following: And (according to the directions in the former
Order) that in default thereof, every such Person find one sufficient able
person to labor for him; or then send toward the providing of other Laborers
for every such Person, other Servants, twelve pence, and Servants, six pence.
And order shall be given, for taking the names of all such as do work; And
those who shall not work, or send others in their places, are required to pay
their money at the Audit House in Christ-Church, before eight every morning,
where Mr Dugdale is appointed to attend and receive the same, whereby others
may be hired ^o labor in their places. And whosoever shall be discovered,
either to be absent himself, or neglect to send another in his room, or money
for providing of another (where the necessity is so great) must both expect to
have these Rates herein me^^^^^ned doubly leaved upon him; Besides, to be
looked upon, as Persons not de(...) ^he protection of the Garrison.

Cottington. F. Seymour. Hertford. Chr. Hatton. Ch(...) Ed. (...)


Printed at OXFORD, by LEONARD LI^ Printer to the University. 16^^


