ENGLAND AND SCOTLANDS COVENANT With their GOD;

VIZ.

In The Protestation, The Vow and Covenant, The Solemn League and Covenant, and
an Ordinance of the Lords and Commons assembled in Parliament, for the taking
the same; together with an Exhortation made by the Assembly of DIVINES.

An Ordinance for the better Observation of the Lord's Day.

An Ordinance, together with an Order, for the strict keeping the Monthly fast.

ORdered by the Commons in Parliament, That these Covenants and Ordinances, be
forthwith printed and published.

Printed for Edw. Husband, Printer to the Honorable House of Commons.

1645.

Die Mercurii, 5. Maii, 1641.
IT is this day Ordered by the House of Commons now Assembled in Parliament,
That the Preamble, together with the Protestation which the Members of this
House made the third day of May, shall be forthwith Printed, and the Copies
Printed brought to the Clerk of the said House to attest under his hand, to the
end, that the Knights, Citizens, and Butgesses may send them down to the
Sheriffs and Justices of Peace of the several Shires, and to the Citizens and
Burgesses of the several Cities, Boroughs and Cinque Ports respectively; And
the Knights, Citizens, and Burgesses, are to intimate unto the Shires, Cities,
Boroughs and Cinque Ports, with that willingness all the Members of this House
made this Protestation: And further to signify, that as they justify the
taking of it in themselves, so they cannot but approve it in all such as shall
take it.

WE the Knights, Citizens, and Burgesses in the Commons House of Parliament,
finding to the great grief of our hearts, that the Designs of the Priests and
Jesuits, and other adherents to the Sea of Rome, have of late been more boldly
and frequently put in practice then formerly, to the undermining and danger of
the ruin of the true Reformed Protestant Religion in His Majesty's Dominions
established: And finding also that there have been, and having just cause to
suspect that there still are, even during the sitting in Parliament, endeavors
to subvert the Fundamental Laws of England and Ireland, and to introduce the
exercise of an Arbitrary and Tyrannical Government, by most pernicious and
wicked Counsels, Practices, Plots, and Conspiracies: And that the long
intermission, and unhappy breach of Parliaments, has occasioned many Illegal
Taxations, whereupon the Subject has been prosecuted and grieved: And that
diverse Innovations and Superstitions have been brought into the Church,
multitudes driven out of His Majesty's Dominions; jealousies raised and
somented betwixt the King and His People; a Popish Army levied in Ireland, and
two Armies brought into the bowels of this Kingdom, to the hazard of His
Majesty's Royal Person, the consumption of the Revenues of the Crown and
Treasure of this Kingdom: And lastly, finding great cause of jealousy, that
endeavors have been, and are used to bring the English Army into a
misunderstanding of this Parliament, thereby to incline that Army, with force
to bring to pass those wicked councels, Have therefore thought good to join
themselves in a Declaration of our united Affections and Resolutions, and to
make this ensuing Protestation.

I A. B. do in the presence of Almighty God, Promise, Vow, and Protest, to
maintain and defend, as far as lawfully I may, with my life, power, and estate,
the true Reformed Protestant Religion, expressed in the Doctrine of the Church
of England, against all Popery and Popish Innovations within this Realm,
contrary to the same Doctrine, and according to the duty of my Alleagiance, His
Majesty's Royal person, Honor and Estate; as also the Power and Privileges
of Parliament; The lawful Rights and Liberties of the Subject, and every
person that makes this Protestation, in whatsoever he shall do in the lawful
pursuance of the same. And to my power, and as far as lawfully I may, I will
oppose, and by all good ways and means endeavor to bring to condign
punishment, all such as shall either by Force, Practice, Councels, Plots,
Conspiracies, or otherwise, do any thing to the contrary of any thing in this
present Protestation contained. And further, That I shall in all just and
Honorable ways endeavor to preserve the Union and Peace, between the three
Kingdoms of England, Scotland, and Ireland; And neither for hope, fear, nor
other respect, shall relinquish this Promise, Vow, and Protestation.

Whereas some doubts have been raised by several persons out of this House,
concerning the meaning of these words contained in the Protestation lately made
by the Members of this House, Viz. The true Reformed Protestant Religion,
expressed in the Doctrine of the Church of England, against all Popery and
Popish innovations within this Realm, contrary to the same Doctrine; This House
does Declare That by those words, was, and is meant, only the public Doctrine
professed in the said Church, so far as it is opposite to Popery and Popish
Innovations; And that the said words are not to be extended to the maintaining
of any Form of Worship, Discipline, or Government, nor of any Rites or
Ceremonies of the said Church of England.

Die Veneris, 30. Iulii, 1641.
Resolved upon the Question,

THat this House does conceive that the Protestation made by them, is fit to be
taken by every person that is well-affected in Religion, and to the good of the
Common wealth; And therefore does declare, That what person soever shall not
take the Protestation, is unfit to bear Office in the Church or Commonwealth.

The Vow and Covenant appointed by the Lords and Commons assembled in
Parliament, to be taken by every Man, in the Cities of London, Westminster, the
Suburbs and Liberties thereof; and throughout the whole Kingdom.
Whereas the Lords and Commons now astembled in Parliament have declared, That
there has been, and now is a Popish and Traitorous Plot for the subversion of
the true Protestant Reformed Religion, and the Liberty of the Subject; and that
in pursuance thereof, a Popish Army has been raised, and now is on foot in
diverse parts of this Kingdom: And have further in a solemn manner Declared,
Vowed, and Covenanted, That in order to the security and preservation of the
true Protestant Religion, and Liberty of the Subject, they will not consent to
the laying down of Arms, so long as the Papists now in open War against the
Parliament, shall by force of Arms be protected from the Justice thereof. And
whereas the Lords and Commons have Declared, That there has been a treacherous
and horrid Design lately discovered, by the great blessing, and special
Providence of God, of diverse persons to join themselves with the Armies raised
by the King, and to destroy the Forces raised by the Lords and Commons in
Parliament, to surprise the Cities of London and Westminster, with the Suburbs,
and by Arms to force the Parliament: And the said Lords and Commons finding by
constant experience, that many ways of force and treachery are continually
attempted, to bring to utter ruin and destruction the Parliament and Kingdom,
and that which is dearest, the true Protestant Religion: And that for the
preventing, and withstanding the same, they have thought fit, That all who are
true hearted, and lovers of their Country, should bind themselves each to
other in a sacred Vow and Covenant, in manner and form as follows, and
accordingly:

I A. B. in humility and reverence of the Divine Majesty, declare my hearty
sorrow for my own sins, and the sins of this Nation, which have deserved the
Calamities and Judgments that now lie upon it; And my true intention is, by
Gods grace to endeavor the amendment of my own ways; And that I do abhor and
detest the said wicked and treacherous Design lately discovered; And that I
never gave nor will give my assent to the execution thereof, but will according
to my power and Vocation, oppose and resist the same, and all other of the like
nature: And in case any other like Design shall hereafter come to my knowledge,
I will make such timely discovery as I shall conceive may best conduce to the
preventing thereof. And whereas I do in my conscience believe, That the Forces
Raised by the two Houses of Parliament are raised and continued for their just
Defense, and for the Defense of the true Protestant Religion and Liberties of
the Subject, against the Forces raised by the King: I do here in the presence
of Almighty God, Declare, Vow, and Covenant, That I will, according to my power
and vocation, assist the Forces raised and continued by both Houses of
Parliament, against the Forces raised by the King without their consent; and
will likewise assist all other persons that shall take this Oath, in what they
shall do in pursuance thereof; And will not directly or indirectly adhere unto,
nor shall willingly assist the Forces raised by the King without the consent of
both Houses of Parliament. And this Vow and Covenant I make in the presence of
Almighty God, the Searcher of all hearts, with a true intention to perform the
same, as I shall answer at the great Day, when the secrets of all hearts shall
be disclosed.

COme, let us join our selves to the Lord in a perpetual Covenant, that shall
not be forgotten, Iere. 50. 5. Take away the wicked from before the King, and
his Throne shall be established in righteousness, Prove. 25. 5. And all Judah
rejoiced at the Oath, for they had sworn with all their heart, and sought him
with their whole desire, and he was found of them; and the Lord gave them rest
round about, 2 Chronicles. 15. 15.

The excellent Usefulness of this COVENANT.
Union with God, Conformity to God, and Unity of the three Kingdoms, are things
most desirable: In the first we are happy: In the second holy: In the third is
strength, peace and safety. These are the kindly fruits of this Covenant, and a
Covenant that brings forth these, how gladly should it be embraced, and how
willingly received? They are lovely Bands that bind us to be happy, holy, and
safe. The heart of man is backsliding, and a Covenant is like a hedge or wall
to stop us from going back: it being a good and ready answer to a tempter or
tentation: How shall I do this, and break my Covenant? Surely we have been too
loose toward God, having almost lost a Religion, too loose in our lives, and
too dis-united among our selves: and well it may be thought, that a main end of
this Rod which now lies upon us, is to beat us into this Covenant; that thereby
we may be knit faster to God, to holiness, and each to other by this Band of
Unity. Yet the taking, is not the chief part of a Covenant, but the keeping.
The benefits of a Covenant are then sure and steadfast to us, when we are
steadfast in the Covenant: Now a main cause of unstedfastnesse in the Covenant,
is forgetfulness of it. To prevent this, the Covenant is presented in this
form that being set up before us, it may be daily seen, and by seeing
remembered, and by remembering performed: And withal let us remember this; that
all the ways of God are mercy and truth to them that fear him and keep his
Covenant. But because no man is strong in his own strength, let us seek
strength of Him who is both our strength and our Redeemer, that by Him we may
be enabled to keep our Covenant with him, that so he may delight to dwell with
us, to be called our God, and to call us his people; upon which happy
condition, attend Peace, Prosperity, and all blessings of Heaven and Earth,
temporal and eternal.

WE Noblemen, Barons, Knights, Gentlemen, Citizens, Burgesses, Ministers of
the Gospel, and Commons of all sorts in the Kingdoms of England, Scotland, and
Ireland, by the Providence of God, living under one King, and being of one
Reformed Religion, having before our eyes the glory of God, and the advancement
of the Kingdom of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, the honor and happiness
of the Kings Majesty, and His Posterity, and the true public Liherty, Safety
and Peace of the Kingdoms, wherein every ones private condition is included;
and calling to mind the treacherous and bloody plots, conspiracies, attempts,
and practices of the Enemies of God, against the true Religion, and professors
thereof in all places, especially in these three Kingdoms ever since the
Reformation of Religion, and how much their rage, power and presumption, are of
late, and at this time increased and exercised; whereof the deplorable estate
of the Church and Kingdom of Ireland, the distressed estate of the Church and
Kingdom of England, and the dangerous estate of the Church and Kingdom of
Scotland, are present, and public Testimonies; we have now at last, (after
other means of Supplication, Remonstrance, Protestations, and Sufferings) for
the preservation of our selves and our Religion, from utter ruin and
Destruction, according to the commendable practice of these Kingdoms in former
times, and the Example of Gods people in other Nations; after mature
deliberation, resolved and determined to enter into a mutual and Solemn
League and Covenant, wherein we all subscribe, and each one of us for himself,
with our hands lifted up to the most high God, do Swear:

I. THat we shall sincerely, really and constantly, through the Grace of God,
endeavor in our several places and callings, the preservation of the reformed
religion in the Church of Scotland, in Doctrine, Worship, Discipline and
Government, against our common Enemies, the Reformation of Religion in the
Kingdoms of England and Ireland, in Doctrine, Worship, Discipline, and
Government, according to the Word of God, and the Example of the best Reformed
Churches; And shall endeavor to bring the Churches of God in the three
Kingdoms, to the nearest Conjunction and Uniformity in Religion, Confession of
Faith, form of Church government, Directory for Worship and Catechizing: That
we and our Posterity after us, may as Brethren, live in Faith and Love, and the
Lord may delight to dwell in the midst of us.

II. That we shall in like manner, without respect of persons, endeavor the
extirpation of Popery, Prelacy, (that is, Church Government, by Arch Bishops,
Bishops, their Chauncellors and Commissaries, Deans, Deans and Chapters,
Archdeacons, and all other Ecclesiastical Officers depending on that
Hierarchy) Superstition, Heresy, Schism, Profaneness, and whatsoever shall
be found to be contrary to sound Doctrine, and the power of Godliness; lest we
partake in other men's sins, and thereby be in danger to receive of their
plagues, and that the Lord may be one, and his Name one in the three Kingdoms.

III. We shall with the same sincerity, reality, and constancy, in our several
Vocations, endeavor with our Estates and Lives, murually to preserve the
Rights and Privileges of the Parliament, and the Liberties of the Kingdoms,
and to preserve and defend the Kings Majesty's person and Authority, in the
preservation and defense of the true Religion, and Liberties of the Kingdoms,
that the world may bear witness with our consciences of our loyalty, and that
we have no thoughts or intentions to diminish his Majesty's just power and
Greatness.

IV. We shall also with all faithfulness endeavor the discovery of all such
as have been, or shall be Incendiaries, Malignants, or evil Instruments, by
hindering the Reformation of Religion, dividing the King from his People, or one
of the Kingdoms from another, or making any Faction or parties amongst the
people, contrary to this League and Covenant, that they may be brought to
public trial, and receive condign punishment, as the degree of their
offenses shall require or deserve, or the Supreme Iudicatories of both Kingdoms
respectively, or others, having power from them for that effect, shall judge
convenient.

V. And whereas the happiness of a blessed Peace between these Kingdoms,
denied in former times to our Progenitors, is by the good Providence of God,
granted unto us, and has been lately concluded and settled by both
Parliaments, we shall each one of us, according to our place and interest,
endeavor that they may remain conjoined in a firm Peace and Union to all
Posterity; And that Justice may be done upon the wilful Opposers thereof, in
manner expressed in the present Articles.

VI. We shall also, according to our places and callings, in this Common Cause
of Religion, Liberty and Peace of the Kingdoms, assist and defend all those
that enter into this League and Covenant, in the maintaining and pursuing
thereof, and shall not suffer our selves, directly or indirectly, by whatsoever
combination, persuasion or terror, to be divided, and withdrawn from this
blessed Union and Conjunction, whether to make defection to the contrary part,
or give our selves to a detestable indifferency or neutrality in this Cause,
which so much concerns the glory of God, the good of the Kingdoms, and Honor
of the King; but shall all the days of our lives, zealously and constantly
continue therein against all opposition, and promote the same according to our
power, against all Lets and Impediments whatsoever; and what we are not able
our selves to suppress or overcome, we shall reveal and make known, that it
may be timely prevented or removed; All which we shall do as in the sight of
God.

And because these Kingdoms are guilty of many sins and provocations against
God and his Son Jesus Christ, as is too manifest by our present distresses and
dangers, the fruits thereof: We profess and declare before God and the world
our unfeigned desire to be humbled for our own sins, and for the sins of these
Kingdoms, especially, that we have not as we ought, valued the inestimable
benefit of the Gospel, that we have not labored for the purity and power
thereof, and that we have not endeavored to receive Christ in our hearts, nor
to walk worthy of him in our lives, which are the causes of other sins and
transgressions, so much abounding amongst us; And our true and unfeigned
purpose, desire and endeavor for our selves and all others under our power and
charge, both in public and in private, in all duties we owe to God and man,
to amend our lives, and each one to go before another in the example of a real
Reformation, that the Lord may turn away his wrath and heavy indignation, and
establish these Churches and Kingdoms in truth and peace. And this Covenant we
make in the presence of Almighty God, the searcher of all hearts, with a true
intention to perform the same, as we shall answer at that great Day, when the
secrets of all hearts shall be disclosed, Most humbly beseeching the Lord to
strengthen us by his Holy Spirit for this end, and to bless our desires and
proceedings with such success, as may be deliverance and safety to his people,
and encouragement to other Christian Churches, groaning under, or in danger of
the yoke of Antichristian tyranny; to join in the same, or like Association and
Covenant, to the glory of God, the enlargement of the Kingdom of Jesus Christ,
and the Peace and Tranquillity of Christian Kingdoms and Common wealths.

An Ordinance of the Lords and Commons Assembled in Parliament; With
Instructions for the taking of the League and Covenant in the Kingdom of
England and Dominion of Wales.
Whereas a Covenant for the preservation and Reformation of Religion, The
maintenance and defense of Laws and Liberties, has been thought a fit and
excellent means to acquire the favor of Almighty God toward the three
Kingdoms of England, Scotland, and Ireland; and likewise to Unite them, and by
uniting, to strengthen and fortify them against the Common-Enemy of the true
Reformed Religion, peace, and prosperity of these Kingdoms; And whereas both
Houses of Parliament in England, the Cities of London and Westminster, and the
Kingdom of Scotland have already taken the same; It is now Ordered and Ordained
by the Lords and Commons in Parliament, That the same Covenant be solemnly
taken in all places throughout the Kingdom of England, and Dominion of Wales.
And for the better and more orderly taking thereof, these directions ensuing,
are appointed and enjoined strictly to be followed,

Instructions for the taking of the Solemn League and Covenant throughout the
Kingdom.
I. THat the Speakers of both Houses of Parliament do speedily send (to the
Lord General, and all other Commanders in chief, and Governors of Towns,
Forts, Castles, and Garrisons, as also to the Earl of Warwick Lord High
Admiral of England) true Copies of the Solemn League and Covenant, to the end
it may be taken by all Officers and soldiers under their several Commands.

II. That all the Knights and Burgesses now in Parliament, do take special
care speedily to send down into their several Counties (which are or shall
hereafter be under the power of the Parliament) a competent number of true
Copies of the said League and Covenant, unto the Committees of Parliament in
their several Counties; And that the said Committees do within six days at
the most disperse the said Copies to every parish church or Chapel in the
several Counties, to be delivered unto the Ministers, Churchwardens, or
Constables of the several Parishes.

III. That the said Committees be required to return a certificate of the day
when they received the said copies, as also the day they sent them forth, and
to what Parishes they have sent them, which certificate they are to return to
the Clerk of the Parliament, appointed for the Commons House, that so an
account may be given of it, as there shall be occasion.

IV. That the several Ministers be required to read the said Covenant
publicly unto their people the next Lords day after they receive it, and
prepare their people for it, against the time that they shall be called to take
it.

V. That the said League and Covenant be taken by the Committees of Parliament
in the place where they reside, and tendered also to the Inhabitants of the
Town, within seven days after it comes to the said Committees hands.

VI. That the said Committees, after they have taken it themselves, do speedily
disperse themselves through the said counties, so as three or four of them be
together on days appointed at the chief places of meeting for the several
divisions of the said counties; And summon all the Ministers, Church wardens,
Constables, and other Officers unto that place; where, after a Sermon preached
by one appointed by the Committee for that purpose, they cause the same
Minister to tender the League and Covenant unto all such Ministers and other
Officers, to be taken and subscribed by them, in the presence of the said
Committees.

VII. That the said Committees do withal give the said Ministers in Charge to
tender it unto all the rest of their Parishioners the next Lords Day, making
then unto their said Parishioners some solemn exhortation concerning the taking
and observing thereof; and that the said Committees do also return to the
several Parishes, the names of all such as have taken the Covenant before
them, who yet shall also subscribe their names in the Book or Roll with their
neighbors in their several Parishes: And if any Minister refuse or neglect to
appear at the said summons, or refuse to take the said Covenant before the
Committee, or to tender it to his Parish, that then the Committees be careful
to appoint another Minister to do it in his place.

VIII. That the League and Covenant be tendered to all men, within the several
Parishes, above the age of eighteen as well lodgers as inhabitants.

IX. That it be recommended to the earl of Manchester, to take special care
that it be tendered and taken in the University of Cambridge.

X. That for the better encouragement of all sorts of Persons to take it; It be
recommended to the assembly of Divines to make a brief Declaration, by way of
Exhortation, to all sorts of Persons to take it as that which they judge not
only lawful, But, (all things considered) exceeding expedient and necessary,
for all that wish well to Religion, the King and Kingdom to join in, and to be
a singular pledge of Gods gracious goodness to all the three Kingdoms.

XI. That if any Minister do refuse to take, or to tender the Covenant, or any
other person or persons do not take it the Lords day that it is tendered, that
then it be tendered to them again the Lords day following, and if they still
continue to refuse it, that then their names be returned by the Minister that
tenders it, and by the Churchwardens, or Constables unto the Committees, and
by them to the House of Commons, that such further course may be taken with
them, as the Houses of Parliament shall see cause.

XII. That all such persons as are within the several Parishes, when notice is
given of the taking of it, and do absent themselves from the Church at the time
of taking it, and come not in afterward to the Minister and Churchwardens, or
other Officers to take it in their presence before the return be made, be
returned as refusers.

The manner of the taking it to be thus: The Minister to read the whole
Covenant distinctly and audibly in the Pulpit, and during the time of reading
thereof, the whole Congregation to be uncovered, and at the end of his reading
thereof, all to take it standing, lifting up their Right hands bare, and then
afterward to subscribe it severally by writing their names (or their marks, to
which their names are to be added) in a parchment Roll, or a Bock, wherein to
the Covenant is to be inserted, purposely provided for that end, and kept as a
Record in the Parish.

XIIII. That the Assembly of Divines do prepare an Exhortation for the better
taking of the Covenant: And that the said Exhortation and the Declaration of
the Kingdoms of England and Scotland, joined in the Armies, for the vindication
and defense of their Religion, Liberties and Laws, against the Popish
Prelaticall and Malignant party, and passed the 30. of Ian. last, be publicly
read, when the Covenant is read, according to the fourth and sixth Articles:
And that a sufficient number of Copies of the said Declaration be sent by the
persons appointed to send the true Copies of the said Covenant, in the first
and second Articles.

FINIS.
An Exhortation to the taking of the Solemn League and Covenant, for
Reformation and Defense of Religion, the Honor and happiness of the King, and
the Peace and safety of the three Kingdoms of England, Scotland, and Ireland.
IF the power of Religion, or solid Reason, if Loyalty to the King, and piety
to their native Country, or love to themselves, and natural affection to
their posterity, if the Example of men touched with a deep sense of all these,
or Extraordinary success from God thereupon, can awaken an embroyled bleeding
remnant to embrace the sovereign and only means of their recovery there can
be no doubt but this Solemn League and Covenant will find wheresoever it shall
be tendered, a people ready to entertain it with all cheerfulness and duty.

And were it not commended to the Kingdom by the concurrent encouragement of
the Honorable Houses of Parliament, the Assembly of Divines, the renowned City
of London, multitudes of other persons of eminent rank and quality in this
Nation, and the whole Body of Scotland, who have all willingly sworn and
subscribed it, with rejoicing at the Oath, so graciously seconded from Heaven
already, by blasting the Counsels, and breaking the power of the Enemy more
than ever; yet it goes forth in its own strength, with such convincing
evidence of Equity, Truth and Righteousness, (...) may raise in all (not
wilfully ignorant, or miserably seduced) inflamed affections to join with their
Brethren in this happy Bond, for putting an end to the present miseries, and
for saving both of King and Kingdom from utter ruin, now so strongly and
openly labored by the Popish faction, and such as have been bewitched and
besotted by that viperous and bloody generation.

For what is there almost in this Covenant, which was not for substance either
expressed or manifestly included in that solemn Protestation of May 5. 1641.
wherein the whole Kingdom stands engaged until this day? The sinful neglect
whereof, does (as we may justly fear) open one floodgage the more to let in all
these calamities upon the Kingdom, and cast upon it a necessity of renewing
Covenant, and of entering into this.

If it be said, the extirpation of Prelacy, to wit, the whole Hierarchicall
Government (standing, as yet, by the known Laws of the Kingdom) is new, and
unwarrantable: This will appear to all impartial understandings, (though new)
to be not only warrantable, but necessary; if they consider (to omit what some
say, that this Government was never formally Established by any Laws of this
Kingdom, at all) that the very life and soul thereof is already taken from it,
by an Act passed this present Parliament, so as (like Jezabels Carcass, of
which no more was left but the skull, the feet, and the palms of her hands)
nothing of jurisdiction remains but what is precarious in them, and voluntary
in those who submit unto them: that their whole Government is at best but a
humane constition, and such as is found and adjudged by both Houses of
Parliament, (in which, the judgment of the whole Kingdom is involved and
declared) not only very prejudicial to the Civil State, but a great
hinderance also to the perfect Reformation of Religion; Yea, who knows it not
to be too much an enemy thereunto, and destructive to the power of Godliness,
and pure administration of the Ordinances of Christ? which moved the
well-affected, almost throughout this Kingdom, long since to Petition this
Parliament (as has been desired before, even in the Reign of Queen Elizabeth
and of King James) for a total abolition of the same: Nor is any man hereby
bound to offer any violence to their persons, but only, in his place and
calling, to end eavour their extirpation in a lawful way.

And as for those Clergymen, who pretend that they (above all other) cannot
Covenant to extirpate that Government, because they have (as they say) taken a
solemn Oath to obey the Bishops, in licitis and honestis: They can tell, if
they please, that they that have sworn obedience to the Laws of the Land, are
not thereby prohibited from endeavoring by all Lawful means, the abolition of
those Laws, when they prove inconvenient or mischievous. And if yet there
should any Oath be found, into which any Ministers or others have entered, not
warranted by the Laws of God and the Land, in this case, they must teach
themselves and others, that such Oaths call for repentance, not pertinacy in
them.

If it be pleaded that this Covenant crosses the Oaths of Supremacy and
Allegiance; there can be nothing further from truth: for, this Covenant binds
all, and more strongly engages them to preserve and defend the Kings Majesty's
Person, and Authority, in the preservation and defense of the true Religion and
Liberties of the Kingdoms.

That scruple, that this is done without the Kings consent, will soon be
removed, if it be remembered, that the Protestation of the fifth of May before
mentioned, was in the same manner voted and executed by both Houses, and after
(by order of one House alone) sent abroad to all the Kingdom, His Majesty not
excepting against it, or giving any stop to the taking of it, albeit he was
then Resident in Person at White Hall.

Thus Ezra and Nehemiah drew all the people into a Covenant, without any
special Commission from the Persian Monarchs (then their Sovereigns) so to do,
albeit they were not free Subjects, but Vassals, and one of them the meniall
Servant of Artaxerxes, then by Conquest King of Judah also.

Nor has this doctrine or practice been deemed seditious or warrantable by the
Princes that have sat upon the English Throne, but justified and defended by
Queen Elizabeth of blessed memory, with the expense of much Treasure and Noble
blood, in the united Provinces of the Netherlands, combined not only without,
but against the unjust violence of Philip of Spain; King James followed her
steps, so far as to approve their union, and to enter into League with them as
free States; which is continued by His Majesty now reigning, unto this day; who
both by his expedition for relief of Rochell in France, and his strict
confederacy with the Prince of Orange, and the States General, notwithstanding
all the importunity of Spain to the contrary, has set to his Seal, that all
that had been done by His Royal Ancestors, in maintenance of those who had so
engaged and combined themselves, was just and warrantable.

And what had become of the Religion, Laws, and Liberties, of our Sister Nation
of Scotland, had they not entered into such a solemn League and Covenant at the
beginning of the late troubles there; which course, however it was at first, by
the Popish and Prelatick Projectors, represented to His Majesty as an offense
of the highest nature, justly deserving chastisement by the fury of a puissant
Army; yet when the matter came afterward in cool blood to be debated, first by
Commissioners of both Kingdoms, and then in open Parliament here, (when all
those of either House, who are now engaged at Oxford, were present in
Parliament, and gave their Votes therein) it was found, adjudged and declared
by the King in Parliament, That our dear Brethren of Scotland had done nothing,
but what became Loyal and obedient Subjects, and were thereupon by Act of
Parliament, publicly righted in all the Churches of this Kingdom, where they
had been defamed.

Therefore however some men, hoodwinkt and blinded, by the Artifices of those
Jesuitical Engineers, who have long conspired to sacrifice our Religion to the
Idolatry of Rome, our Laws, Liberties, and persons to Arbitrary stavery, and
our Estates to their insatiable Avarice, may possibly be deterred and amused
with high Threats and Declarations, flying up and down on the wings of the
Royal Name and Countenance (now captivated and prostituted to serve all their
lusts) to Proclaim all Rebels and Traitors, who take this Covenant; yet let no
faithful English heart be afraid to join with our Brethren of all the three
Kingdoms in this Solemn League, as sometimes the men of Israel (although under
another King, did with the men of Judah) at the invitation of Hezekiah, 2 Chronicles. 30.

What though those tongues set on fire by Hell do rail and threaten? That God
who was pleased to clear up the innocence of Mordecai and the Jews against all
the malicious aspersions of wicked Haman to his and their Sovereign, so as all
his plotting produced but this effect, That when the Kings commandment and
decree drew near to be put in execution, and the enemies of the Jews hoped to
have power over them, it was turned to the contrary, and the Jews had rule over
them that hated them, and laid hands on such as sought their hurt, so as no man
could withstand them, Esth. 9. and that same God, who but even as yesterday,
vouchsafed to disperse and scatter those dark clouds and fogs which
overshadowed that Loyal and Religious Kingdom of Scotland, and to make their
righteousness to shine as clear as the Sun at noon day, in the very eyes of
their greatest enemies, will doubtlessely stand by all those who with
singleness of heart, and a due sense of their own sins, and a necessity of
Reformation, shall now enter into an everlasting Covenant with the Lord, never
to be forgotten, to put an end to all those unhappy and unnatural breaches
between the King, and such as are faithful in the Land; causing their
righteousness and praise to spring forth before all the Nations, to the
terror and confusion of those men of blood, the confederate enemies of God and
the King, who have long combined, and have now raked together the dregs and
scum of many Kingdoms, to bury all the glory, honor and liberty of this
Nation, in the eternal Grave of dishonor and destruction.

Die Veneris, 9. Febr. 1643.
AN Exhortation touching the taking of the Solemn League and Covenant, and for
satisfying of such scruples, as may arise in the taking of it, was this day
read the first and second time; and by Vote upon the Question assented unto,
and Ordered to be forthwith Printed.

H: Elsynge, Cler. Parl. D. Com*

An Ordinance of the Lords and Commons assembled in Parliament, for the better
Observation of the LORD'S DAY.
FOrasmuch as the Lords day, notwithstanding several good Laws heretofore
made, has been not only greatly profaned, but diverse ungodly Books have been
published by the Prelaticall faction, against the Morality of that Day, and to
countenance the profanation of the same, to the manifest indangering of Souls,
prejudice of the true Religion, great dishonor of Almighty God, and
provocation of his just wrath and indignation against this Land; The Lords and
Commons for remedy thereof, do Order and Ordain, and be it Ordered and
Ordained, That all the Laws enacted, and in force, concerning the Observation
of the Lords day, be carefully put in execution; and that all and singular
person and persons whatsoever, shall on every Lords day, apply themselves to
the sanctification of the same, by exercising themselves thereon, in the duties
of Piety and true Religion, publicly and privately: And that no person or
persons whatsoever, shall publicly cry, show forth, expose to sale, any Wares,
Merchandises, Fruit, Herbs, Goods or Chattels whatsoever, upon the Lords day,
or any part thereof; upon pain, that every person so offending, shall forfeit
the same Goods so cried, showed forth, or put to sale: And that no person or
persons whatsoever, shall, without reasonable cause for the same, Travel,
carry Burdens, or do any worldly labors, or work whatsoever, upon that day or
any part thereof; upon pain, that every one traveling contrary to the meaning
of this Ordinance, shall forfeit for every offense, ten shillings of lawful
money; and that every person carrying any burden, or doing any worldly labor
or work, contrary to the meaning hereof, shall forfeit five shillings of like
money for every such offense. And be in further Ordained, That no person or
persons shall hereafter upon the Lords day, use, exercise, keep, maintain, or
be present at any wrestlings, Shooting, Bowling, Ringing of Bells for pleasure
or pastime, Masque, Wake, otherwise called Feasts, Church-Ale, Dancing, Games,
Sport or pastime whatsoever; upon pain, that every person so offending, being
above the age of Fourteen years, shall lose and forfeit five shillings for
every such offense. And be it further Ordained, that all and singular person
and persons, that have the care government, tuition or education of any child
or children, under or within the age of Fourteen years, shall forfeit and lose
twelve pence for every of the said offenses that shall be committed by any such
child and children. And because the profanation of the Lords day has been
heretofore greatly occasioned by May poles (a Heathenish vanity, generally
abused to superstition and wickedness) The Lords and Commons do further Order
and Ordain, that all and singular May-poles, that are, or shall be erected,
shall be taken down, and removed by the Constables, Borsholders, Tything-men,
petty Constables, and Churchwardens of the Parishes and places where the same
be; and that no May Pole shall be hereafter set up, erected, or suffered to be
within this Kingdom of England, or Dominion of Wales. And it is further
Ordained, that if any of the said Officers shall neglect to do their office in
the premises, within one week after notice of this Ordinance, every of them
for such neglect shall forfeit five shillings of lawful moneys; and so from
week to week, weekly five shillings more afterward, till the said May Pole
shall be taken down and removed. And that if any Justice of the Peace of the
County, or the chief Officer or Officers, or any Justice of the Peace, of, or
within any City, Borough, or Town Corporate, where the said offenses shall be
committed upon his or their view, or confession of the party, or proof of any
one or more witnesses by oath (which the said Justice, chief Officer or
Officers, is by this Ordinance authorized to minister) shall find any person
offending in the premises, the said Justice, or chief Officer or Officers,
shall give warrant under his or their hand and seal, to the Constables or
Churchwardens of the Parish or Parishes where such offense shall be committed,
to seize the said Goods, cried, showed forth, or put to sale as aforesaid; and
to leavy the said other forfeitures or penalties by way of distress, and sale
of the Goods of every such offender, rendering to the said offenders the
overplus of the moneys raised thereby; And in default of such distress, or in
case of insufficiency, or inability of the offender to pay the said forfeitures
or penalties, that the party offending be set publicly in the Stocks by the
space of three hours; And all and singular, the forfeitures or penalties
aforesaid, shall be employed and converted to the use of the poor of the Parish
where the said offenses shall be committed, saving only, that it shall and may
be lawful, to, and for any such Justice, Mayor, or Head Officer or Officers,
out of the said forfeitures or penalties, to reward any person or persons that
shall inform of any offense against this Ordinance, according to their
discretions; so as such reward exceed not the third part of the forfeiture or
penalties. And it is further Ordained by the said Lords and Commons, that the
Kings Declaration concerning observing of Wakes, and use of exercise and
recreation upon the Lords day, The Book entitled, The Kings Majesty's
Declaration to His Subjects, concerning lawful Sports to be used; and all
other Books and Pamphlets that have been, or shall be written, printed and
published against the Morality of the fourth Commandment, or of the Lords day,
or to countenance the profanation thereof, be called in, seized and
suppressed, and publicly butnt, by the Justices of Peace, or some, or one of
them, or by the chief Officer or Officers aforesaid, in their several limits,
or by their warrant or command. Provided, and be it Declared, That nothing in
this Ordinance shall extend to the prohibiting of dressing of Meat in private
Families, or the dressing and sale of Victuals in a moderate way, in Innes or
Victualling-houses, for the use of such as otherwise cannot be provided for; or
to the crying or selling of Milk before Nine of the clock in the Morning, or
after Four of the clock in the Afternoon, from the Tenth of September till the
Tenth of March: or before Eight of the clock in the morning, or after five of
the clock in the afternoon, from the Tenth of March till the Tenth of
September. And whereas there is great breach of the Sabbath by Rogues,
Vagabonds and Beggars, It is further Ordained, That the Lord Mayor of the City
of London, and all Justices of Peace, Constables, Churchwardens, and other
Officers and Ministers whatsoever, shall from time to time, cause all Laws
against Rogues, Vagabonds and Beggars, to be put in due execution; and take
order that all Rogues, Vagabonds and Beggars, do on every Sabbath day repair to
some Church or Chapel, and remain there soberly and orderly during the time
of Divine Worship And that all and singular person and persons, that shall do
any thing in the execution of this Ordinance, shall be protected and saved
harmless by the power and Authority of Parliament.

And be it further Ordained, that this Ordinance be Printed and published, and
read in all Parish Churches and Chapels, before the Sermon in the Morning, on
some Lords day before the first of May next, on the South Side of Trent, and
before the first of June next, on the North-side of Trent

Die Sabbathi, 6. April, 1644.
ORdered by the Lords and Commons Assembled in Parliament, That this Ordinance
be printed and published, and read in all Churches and Chapels, before the
Sermon in the Morning, on some Lords day before the first of May next on the
South Side of Trent; and before the first day of June next, on the North-side
of Trent.

H: Elsynge, Cler. Parl. D. Com.

An Ordinance of the Lords and Commons assembled in Parliament, for the better
Observing and Keeping a Monthly Fast, within the Kingdom of England, and
Dominion of Wales.
Whereas the Kings Most Excellent Majesty, upon the request of the Lords and
Commons in this present Parliament assembled, and by and with their advice and
consent, considering the lamentable and distressed condition of his good
Subjects in the Kingdom of Ireland; (that there might be a general Humiliation
of all the Estates of this Kingdom before* Almighty God in Fasting and Prayer)
was graciously pleased to command the keeping of a Monthly Fast; and to the
end that all persons might the better take notice thereof (and to leave such
without excuse, as should not duly keep and observe the same) did afterward by
his Proclamation of the 8th of January 1641. appoint that the same should be
generally, publicly, and solemnly holden, and kept, as well by abstinence from
food, as by public prayers, preaching, and hearing of the Word of God, and
other Religious and holy duties, in all Cathedrals, Collegiate and Parish
Churches and Chapels, within the Kingdom of England and Dominion of Wales,
(without any exception) on the last Wednesday of every Month, to continue
during the troubles in the said Kingdom of Ireland: All which his Majesty did
straightly charge and command, should be reverently and devoutly performed by
all his Subjects, as they desire the blessing of Almighty God, and would avoid
his heavy indignation against this Land and people; and upon pain of such
punishments as may justly be inflicted upon all such as shall contemn or
neglect so Religious a work and duty. And whereas the Lords and Commons in both
Houses of Parliament, have received diverse informations from several parts of
this Kingdom and Dominion of Wales, of the great neglect of the due observation
and keeping of the said Fast upon the days appointed, and of the prophanations
of the same, by many irreligious, ill-affected, loose, and scandalous persons,
as well of the Clergy as others, who are so far from afflicting their souls,
and loosing the bands of wickedness, as that they provoke the wrath of
Almighty God, and make so pious a means to procure his blessings, the occasion
of greater Judgments.

For the prevention whereof for the time to come, the Lords and Commons do
Order, Declare, Ordain, that in all and every the Cathedrals, Collegiate, and
Parish Churches and Chapels, within the Kingdom of England and Dominion of
Wales, (without any exception) upon every Lords day, next and immediately
before any the days appointed for the said public Fast, the Parson, Vicar,
Curate, or Minister, that upon that day shall Officiate, or exercise in any of
the said Cathedrals, Collegiate, Parish Churches or Chapels, shall give
public notice in every of the said Cathedrals, Collegiate, Parish Churches or
Chapels respectively, of the Fast day next ensuing, immediately after Sermon,
or prayer ended in the forenoon, before the Congregation be dismissed,
carnestly exhorting and persuading all the people to the Solemn due keeping,
and Religious observation of the whole day appointed for the said Fast, and
that they would repair to some Church or Chapel, there diligently and
reverently to attend all such holy duties as shall be used in the observance of
the same; that they forbear to use all manner of sports and pastimes
whatsoever, and their ordinary Trades and callings upon the said day, as well
Carriers, Waggoners, Carters, Wain^^n, Drovers, Butchers, Hucksters,
Shopkeepers, Laborers; or any others using any Art, Trade, Mystery, or
manual Occupation whatsoever, and that all Vintners, Taverners,
Ale-house-keepers, and keepers of Victualling-houses, do forbear to keep open
their doors, Bulks, or Shops, or to sell or utter (except in cases of extreme
necessity) any Wine, Beer, Ale, or victual, till the public exercises, and
Religious duties of that day in the respective Cathedrals, Collegiate, Parish
Churches and Chapels, be past and over.

And lastly, all and every the Justices* of the Peace, Mayors, Bailiffs,
Constables, Churchwardens, and other Officers, inhabiting or residing within
the limits or precincts of any such Cathedral, Collegiate, Parish Church or
Chapel, are hereby required to take special notice as well of such Parson,
Vicar, Curate, or other Minister that ought to Officiate in any of the said
Cathedrals, Collegiate, and Parish Churches or Chapels, upon any such day
appointed for the said Fast, that shall either refuse or neglect to do the
same, or not do or cause the same to be done in that religious and solemn
manner as it ought to be, or that shall refuse to give notice of the Fast day,
at the time and in manner as aforesaid, and forthwith to return their names,
and the names of all such (from time to time) as shall wilfully offend herein,
in contempt of the Laws, His Majesty, and both Houses of Parliament, unto some
one or more of the Knights, Citizens, or Burgesses that serve for the county
where such offense is, or shall be committed, that some speedy course may be
taken for the severe punishing of such as shall offend herein according to the
Laws.

Die Mercurii, 22. Aug. 1642.
Ordered by the Commons assembled in Parliament, That this Ordinance be
forthwith Printed and published:

H: Elsynge, Cler. Parl. D. Com.

24 April, 1643.
Whereas the Lords and Commons in Parliament, have made an Ordinance for the
more strict and solemn keeping of the days of public Fast, which are not by
all persons duly observed, even in these times of public calamity, to the
great dishonor of God, and the contempt of the Authority of both Houses of
Parliament. Now that more particular notice may be given unto all such as shall
offend herein, before any exemplary punishment be inflicted upon them; It is
ordered by the Commons now Assembled in Parliament, That all Constables (or
their Deputies) shall the day before every public Fast, repair to every House
within their several and respective liberties, and charge all persons, That
they strictly observe the Fast, according to the directions in the said
Ordinance.

And they shall upon the said days of the public Fast, walk through their
said liberties, diligently searching for, and taking notice of all persons, who
either by following their work of their calling, or sitting in Taverns,
Victualling or Alehouses, or any other ways shall not duly observe the same:
And they are hereby required to return the Names of all such persons as they
shall find so offending, as also such Informations as they shall receive
against any other persons within their liberties, guilty of the like offense
unto the Committee for Examinations, that so they may be proceeded against for
the contempt of the said Ordinance; And all Constables are to observe these
directions from time to time, so long as the said public Fast shall be kept,
without expecting any further Order.

H: Elsynge, Cler. Parl. D. Com.

FINIS.

