ENGLAND'S SAFETY: OR THE Two Unanimous Votes OF THE Last Good PARLIAMENT
Concerning the Duke of York being a Papist, WITH Their Address to HIS MAJESTY
To be revenged on the PAPISTS in case HIS MAJESTY come by a Violent Death.

Published for the Information of all True Protestants, that they may not be
afraid, nor ashamed, openly to Act and Oppose the DUKE, and his Adherents from
Inheriting the Crown of England, in case HIS MAJESTY'S Life (which God forbid)
be taken from Him.

LONDON, Printed for A. Brewster. 1679.

Die Martis, 25o Martii. 1679.
REsolved, nemine contradicente, by the Lords Spiritual, and Temporal, and
Commons in Parliament assembled; That they do declare, that they are fully
satisfied by the proofs they have heard, there now is, and for diverse years
last past has been a Horrid, and Treasonable Plot, and Conspiracy, contrived
and carried on by those of the Popish Religion, for the Murdering of his
Majesty's sacred Person, and for subverting the Protestant Religion, and the
ancient, and established Government of this Kingdom.

Jo. Brown Cleric' Parliamentor'.

Sunday, April 27. 1679.
Resolved, NEmine contradicente, That the Duke of York being a Papist, and the
hopes of his coming such to the Crown, has given the greatest Encouragement
and Countenance to the present Conspiracies and Designs of the Papists against
the King and Protestant Religion.

Ordered, Russel do go up to the Lords to desire their Concurrence to this Vote.

Ordered, York as to the Plot, with all speed.

Sunday, May 11. 1679.
Ordered, York to Inherit the Imperial Crown of this Realm.

Resolved Nemine contradicente,

Ordered,

May 14. 1679. Most Dread Sovereign,
We your Majesty's most Dutiful and Loyal Subjects, the Commons in this present
Parliament assembled, do with all humble gratitude acknowledge your most
gracious Assurances your Majesty has been pleased to give us of your constant
care to do every thing that may preserve the Protestant Religion, of your firm
Resolution to defend the same to the utmost, and your Royal Endeavors that the
Security of that Blessing may be transmitted to Posterity. And we do humbly
represent to your Majesty, That being deeply sensible that the greatest hopes
of Success against our Religion in the Enemies thereof the Papists, are founded
in the Execrable Designs which they have laid against your Sacred Person, and
the Life of your Majesty; which it is not only our Duty, but our Interest, with
the greatest hazard to preserve an^ defend. We have applied our Councils to the
making such provisions by Law as may defeat these Popish Adversaries, their
Abbetters and Adherents, of their hopes of gaining any Adv^^tage by any Violent
Attempts against your Majesty, and may utterly frustrate their expectation of
subverting the Protestan^ Religion thereby in time to come. And further, to
obviate by the best means we can, all wicked Practices against your Majesty,
while any such Laws are in preparation and bringing to perfection. It is our
Resolution, and we do declare, That i^ Defense of your Majestys Person, and the
Protestant Religion* we will stand by your Majesty with our Lives and Fortunes,
and shall be ready to revenge upon the Papists any Violence offered by them to
your Sacred Person; In which we hope your Majesty will graciously please to be
the more assured, as we our selves ar^ the more encouraged, in that the hearts
of all your Majesty's Protestant Subjects with the most sincere Affection and
Zeal join with us herein.

May the 19th. The House of Commons attended His Majesty with this Address,
whereunto His Majesty was pleased to return this Gracious Answer following:

Gentlemen,
I thank you for your Zeal, for the Preservation of the Protestant Religion,
and my Person; and I assure you I shall do what in me lies to preserve the
Protestant Religion, and am willing to do all such things, as may tend to the
good and benefit of my Subjects.

Wednesday, May 21. 1679.
The Chairman of the Committee of Secrecy reports several Letters, most of them
tending to the great Assurance and Confidence the Popish Party had, by reason
of the Duke of York's being a Papist: After which the Bill to dis-inable the
Duke of York to Inherit the Imperial Crown of this Realm, was read a second
time, and committed to a Committee of the whole House on Friday next then
following.

FINIS.

