THE ENGLISH Military Discipline. Exactly described By Copper Cutts, in Forty
eight Postures of the Musket and Thirty six of the Pike. WITH Instructions for
all young Soldiers, and such who are disposed to learn and have knowledge of
the Military Discipline. WHEREIN, Are set down the Conditions and Qualities
which are required in every several Officer of a private Company, and the manner
of drawing up of Companies and placing them in Battle Rank.

Sold by John Overton at the White Horse without Newgate, where you may have
the best choice of all sorts of Maps, Copy Books French and Dutch Prints.
Books of Flowers, Beasts Birds, Drawing Books. Also several New MAPS for the
discovering the motion of the ARMIES, etc. 1672.

Diverse useful Instrustions for all young Soldiers and such who are disposed
to learn and have knowledge, of the English Military Discipline.
THe first principal in Military Instructions, binds every one that minds to
practice in Military Discipline, after the handling of his Arms, to understand
the several sounds of the Drum, without the which no Soldier is able to know
his Commanders pleasure, when to March, Charge, or make a Retreat, etc. For
when the Commanders voice can not extend to the hearing of the Company, the
Drum denounces and expresses the same.

The sounds especially to be learned, are these.
1. A Call. 2. A March. 3. A Troop. 4. A Charge. 5. A Retreat. 6. A Battalia.
7. A Battery. 8. A Releif.
The second principal [after the learning of his Armes] is to know how to
offend and defend, the readiest and easiest way with skill.

The 3. Principal to be learned, is the distance and order of Standing and
Marching, that is to be observed between Files and Ranks, which is a special
point of Discipline, some make 5. Sorts, but I content my self only three most
in use.

Distance in Files.
Order is three foot. Open order is six foot. Close order is a foot and half.
Distance in Ranks.
Order is six foot. Open order is twelve foot. Close order is three foot.
The learning of this principal is of great use, for if order and perfect form
be not observed, it can be termed no other thing but a disordered Company. In
the next place let the Soldier know how to distinguish betwixt every several
place in the Company, as follows.

The Front.

The Front is always where the faces of the Company are directed all one way.

The Rear.

The Rear is ever where the backs of the whole Company are turned.

A File.

A File is a sequence of men standing one behind another, back to belly, and
consists commonly, of 10, or 8. or sometimes 6. depth.

A Rank.

A Rank is a row of men standing one by another, Shoulder to Shoulder, their
faces being directed all one way.

Leaders of Foyles.

Leaders of Foyles are those that are in the first Rank; every one in the same
rank, is a Leader of a File,

Bringers up.

Bringers up, are those that are in the last rank; and they are every one
bringers up of a File.

Rear division, half Files, or sixth rank, all these three names may be given
to this division.

The Leaders of the Rear division are the sixth rank, if there be ten depth, if
but 8. the 5. rank. Also this division is called by some, middle men, but the
most sure being, what depth they will, Rear division seperates best, and is
soon known.

The Wing.

The Wing is the side of the Company, from the Front, to the Rear, the right
side being called the right Wing, and the left side the left Wing.

Hereafter follows certain general observations.

Let every Soldier know that in marching they are to follow their Leaders in
Files, as also keep even with their right hand man, which is their Leader in
Rank, the like must be done upon a stand to stand right after their Leaders in
File, and rank even with their right hand man in rank, observing true distance
and form according unto such order as shall be enjoined by the Commander. Let
the Pikeman know that in a march he must always shoulder his Pike, either just
or sinking, as the word shall be given; and coming through any port or gate, he
is to port his Pike, upon a Troup he must carry his Pike mounted, and upon a
stand let him always set down or order his Pike, unless he have command to the
contrary. Let the Pikeman further know and observe that in charging (being ten
depth) half the ranks or front division are to charge or present their Pikes,
the other half or rear division are to carry their Pikes mounted or ported
over the heads of their leaders, that they be no hinderance to them, either in
charging or in retiring.

Observe likewayes that when they present standing, to fall back with the right
foot, and marching, to present the left foot being stooped foreward.

The Musquetier must observe upon a march to shoulder his Musket, and carry
the Rest in his right hand, except he prepare to give fire, then is he bound to
carry his rest in his left hand: the like also in a troop, but in a stand let
him ever rest his Musket, except he have command to the contrary. In
exercising of the Company, first cause the body to stand in good order, and
being in such order as they are enjoined to, let them face to the right or left
hand, and so look upon then round, seeing them stand right in Files, and Ranks.

Ten ranks, and five files, face them to either hand, and then there is as many
files, as ranks were before, being become ranks, and the ranks being converted
into files. When you double your files to any hand, by doubling of ranks to the
contrary hand, they are brought to their first form; likewayes having doubled
ranks to any hand, by doubling of files to the contrary hand, they become to
their first order, or as they were.

Now the next for the fifth principal, shall be expressed the most usual words
of command, especially used in the exercising of a Company, with the reasons
thereof, which every Soldier must be well acquainted withal, otherwise they
can never rise unto any preferment.

The words of Command following.

1. Files double to the right.

Doubling of files to the right is after this manner, the utmost moves not,
but stands fast: the next unto the right, moves into the right, so that of
ten in deep, it is now become twenty, accordingly every second moves into
their next on their right hand.

2. Double to the left.

The left must stand fast, and every second file is to move into their next on
their left hand.

The Use.

Thus you strengthen your Wings.

3. Ranks double to the right.

In doubling of ranks, you must know the foremost rank stands fast, the second
moves into the first, to the right hand (for that is commonly first done in
exercising) the third rank stands fast, the fourth moves into the third, and
so of the rest, every second rank moves into the rank before them, that of
five in rank, they are doubled and become ten in rank.

4. Ranks double to the left.

Doubling of ranks to the left, every second rank moves, passing up by their
leaders left hand, and so stand in the rank with them, beginning at the front
first, and so take it one from another. Note that in doubling to any hand, in
going to your first order, that you fall out with the contrary foot.

The use.

Thus you strengthen your Front.

5. Files close.

Being in open order, the word is Files close without naming to any hand, which
is thus performed, the two middle leaders close first, the one to the right,
the other to the left, till they are in the distance commanded, the rest of the
company to take their distance from them, on either Wing closing to the middle
leaders.

6. Files close to the right.

The right hand file moves not but stands fast, all the rest close to the,
right file, taking their distance one from another, from the right hand.

7. Files close to the left.

Files closing to the left, then the left file stands fast, the rest of the
files close, and take their distance from the left hand.

There is great use in closing of Files for many causes.

8. Files close to the right and left by division.

Files closing to the right and left by division, the one half of the Files
close to the right files, the other half to the left files, leaving a space
between, which is done upon some special use, best known to the Commander.

9. Files open.

Being in close order, the word is, files open (not naming to whether hand) and
is thus to be done, the middle leaders press upon their wingers, first taking
the distance commanded, having then opened both ways, the rest of the Company
on both wings take their distance from them.

10. Files open to the right.

The left is not to move but stands fast, the next to the left first takes
the distance, pressing upon the right, until the distance commanded be
obtained, the rest of the files do, the like pressing upon their right, still
opening by the right, until they have all done it.

11. Files open to the left,

The right stands fast, the rest open to the left, still pressing upon their
left, until they are all in distance commanded.

This word of command is ever given to that hand where there is most ground, or
fittest ground for convenience.

12. Ranks close from the Front to the Rear.

After this manner, the rear (or last rank) moves not but stands fast, the
rest of the ranks fall back to the rear.

13. Ranks close from the Rear to the Front.

To do this, the first rank moves not, but stands fast, all the rest of the
ranks close up, taking their distance commanded, rank after rank, from the
Front, (or first rank) the second rank to the Front beginning first, the rest
consequently one after another, till all have done it.

14. Ranks open from the Front to the Rear.

The first rank moves not, the rest of the ranks fall back, till they have
gained the ground to the distance commanded, then stand, the second rank takes
the distance first, the rest in like manner one from another, until they have
all effected it.

15. Ranks open from the Rear to the Front.

Which is thus done, all the body advances foreward, the last rank only
stands fast, the second to the last takes the distance first, then the rest
advancing foreward till they have done it.

16. Files and ranks close.

The whole body being at open order, the word is files and ranks close, to do
the which your middle leaders of files close first, the rest of the files close
to them, the ranks close all up to the Front, or the first rank to such
distance as is commanded.

17. Files and Ranks open.

The whole body being close in rank and file, the word is, files and ranks open
after this mannet: the middle leaders of files open, and take the distance
first, the rest of the files on either wing from them, the ranks fall back, the
second to the front takes the distance first, the rest in like manner from the
front to the rear backwards.

18. Files countermarch and maintain ground.

To countermarch and maintain ground, the leaders of every file, having turned
to the hand directed (which is specially to be observed) pass through the
company, their followers match up to the leaders ground, making the same good,
then turn and pass through the company after their leaders, till they have all
done the same.

19. Countermarch and lose ground.

To countermarch and lose ground, the leaders of every file, turn to the hand
directed, passing through the company, the followers move not till their leaders
are passed by them, then they turn and pass after their leaders, the ranks do
the same one after another, not moving till their leaders are passed by them,
then they turn in the same ground.

By countermatch the rear may become the front in the same ground that the
front stood in, having brought them up, and face about.

Note.

The files must be in their open order when they countermarch.

20. Ranks countermarch from the right to the left.

The right hand man passes between the first and second rank, all the rest of
the same rank follow, the right hand man of the second rank, passes between
the second and third ranks, passing to the left wing, the rest of the rank
follow him, all the rest of the ranks do the like, bringing the right to the
left.

21. Ranks countermarch from the left to the right.

The left hand man of every rank turns first, passing to the right, all the
rank follows him, the rest of the ranks do the like, so bringing the left
wing to the right.

This is done upon some politic respect of the Commander to change the wing,
doubting the courage of the one by the other, or otherwise best known to the
Commander.

22. Files rank, 3.5.7. or 9.

The right hand first executes the same, advancing foreward, and fall in rank
to such number as shall be joined, the next does the like, advancing foreward
fall in rank after the former file, the rest of the files keep the same form
and order, until they are all ranked.

23. Files rank 3.5. or 7.

The left file first advances, falling in rank, the rest of the files observe
the like form, till the words of command be fully executed.

24. Ranks rank 4.6. or 8.

The first rank executes the same beginning at the right hand man, the first
rank having ended, the right hand man of the second rank begins, the rest of
the ranks do the like, till all have done it.

25. Ranks rank 2.4. or 6.

The left hand man first begins here, the rest of the ranks join with him,
making so many in rank as shall be commanded, every rank passing up till they
have all done it.

26. Ranks file to the right.

The right hand man of every rank stirs not, but the next to the right hand
man falls behind his right hand man: the rest of the ranks follow: all the
ranks do the same, falling behind their right hand man, making one file of the
whole company.

27. Ranks file to the left.

Every left hand man stands fast, the rest fall behind one another to the left
hand, and so are converted into one file.

The use.

Thus you give a strong charge upon the wing by facing to any hand: this
serves also for a narrow passage, to do this, let the ranks be in open order,
and the files in close order.

28. Ranks turn to the right.

The right hand man turns in the same ground he stands, not moving forth of
the same: the rest of the same rank turns all together and become all above
him, the left hand man being uppermost, all the ranks do this.

29. Ranks turn to the left.

The left hand man turns in the same ground he stands in, the rest become all
above him, the right hand man being uppermost, all the ranks do this.

The use.

By this you may give a charge by either Wing very easily.

Note.

To perform this easily and shortly, let the Files be in their close order, and
the Ranks in such open order as shall be requisite according to the number of
men in Rank.

30 Ranks and Files turn to the right, the great turn.

This word of command is spoken to the whole body, know that the right hand man
moves not but a little, and slowly, the left wing somewhat faster, but all the
whole body together, till such time as the left wing be brought about, and then
halt, their faces being all one way.

31. The great turn to the left.

Then the left hand man moves but little and slowly, all the rest of the body
turn together, the right wing being brought to the left.

32 The great turn right about to the rear.

The right hand man moves but little and slowly, as it is said before, until
his face be at the rear, then stands.

33. The great turn left about to the rear.

The like does the left hand man as the right did before, until all be turned.

The use.

Thus the Front is brought to either of the Wings, or to the Rear, being
strongest and best Armed.

Note.

For turning of this great turn, the whole body must be at their close order,
both in ranks and files.

34. Rear division, half files, sixth rank, or middle men double the front to
the right.

These four words of command, tend all to one purpose.

Therefore I say, rear division double the front to the right, the Leaders of
this division are according to the deepness, the just half of the number, and
they pass up every man of the rank by the right hand of his Leader, until they
have all done, and then stand in the Front or first rank, the next rank
follows and stands in the second rank, and so the rest, till all have done
it.

35. Rear division double the Front to the left.

The Leaders of this division or first rank of it, passes up upon the left
hand of their Leaders, unto the front or first rank of the front, and so
consequently all the rest, until all be doubled.

The Use.

There is a special use of this motion, for by this the same order in distance
of ranks is still observed, which cannot be in doubling of ranks.

The second Use.

Again, they bring sufficient men into the Front and Rear.

The third use.

Thirdly, it makes the Company to show fair upon a March through a City, or
place of note, for faces to any hand being thus doubled and then March, and you
shall be bravely winged.

36. Rear division double the front to the right and left by division.

The rear division divide themselves, the one half of them face to the right
hand, the other half face to the left hand, then march out both to the wing of
the Company, then face again to the right and left, then march up to the Front;
and stand there.

The Use.

Thus the front is doubled on either wing, and the same distance between files
and ranks still observed.

37. Rear division double the front to the right Enteare.

The rear division face to the right hand altogether, then march forth, then
face to the left hand and march up to the Front, joining rank by rank and there
stand.

38. Rear division double the Front to the left Enteare.

The rear division face to the left and then pass out, then face to the right
and march up to the Front, joining rank by rank to the wing and stand.

The Use.

Thus the Front is enlarged by such wing as the Commander thinks fit, and shall
be most useful.

39. Bringers up double the Front to the right.

The last rank (as formerly is shown) are Bringers up, who pass through the body
by the right hand to the front, and there stand the second to the rear, follow
the Bringers up, and stand in the second rank to the Front, and so they rest
till they have all done it.

40. Bringers up double the Front to the left.

The last rank passes up by their leaders left hand to the first rank and
there stand, the second rank to the rear follow, and stand in the second rank
to the Front, all the ranks do the like until they have all done it.

The Use.

This is another manner of doubling the Front, and not the worst: for by this,
there is sufficient men brought to the Front, to the strengthening of the same.

By this word of Command, you may alter the Front, and bring the rear to the
front, by causing the rear or last rank which are bringers up to pass through
the Company, the rest of the ranks following them.

41. Ranks file by inversion.

After this manner the whole body standing in open order, especial in ranks,
one half of the ranks fall into the right file, the other half into the left
hand file, becoming two files only, wherein you must note that the two
uttermost files, which are called the right and left hand files, they stand
fast, the rest of the files invert to them.

The Use.

This serves for the avoiding of Cannon-Shot upon the main body, or for a guard
for some great Commander to pass through, it is used also at the lodging of the
Handsign.

42. To your first order, or as you were.

These words are, words which bring the Company to their first Station or
Order: after every motion foresaid we say, either to your first order, or else
as you were, which tends both to one use.

But because I use this first word in my own practice, I would wish all those
that uses this book to follow it, so that there be no diversity.

To your first order.

This word of Command is often used to perfect the body after doubling of ranks
or files, when the rear division has doubled the Front, or Bringers up have
doubled the Front, after ranks turning the great turn, ranks fileing either by
conversion or inversion, and at other times to bring them to their first form.

The Use.

The use of this is so necessary, that when the Company cannot understand by
any other word of Command, they can more easily fall to their first order.

There be diverse other words of Command generally to be observed by the whole
Company in time of service, or upon any sudden assault to cause face to any
hand, or charge to any hand.

The company standing in battle orderly, both in ranks and files, and true
distance in both, the words of exercising, are these, viz.
Faces to the right. To your first order. Faces to the left. To your first
order. Faces right about to the Rear. To your first order. Faces left about to
the Rear. To your first order.

PRESENTING.
Present to the right. To your first order. Present to the left. To your first
order. Present right about to the rear. To your first order. Present left
about to the rear. To your first order. Faces to the right and left. by
division. To your first order. Faces to the front and rear. by division. To
your first order.

PRESENTING.
Present to the right and left by division. To your first order. Present to the
front and rear by division. To your first order.

There is diverse sorts of Exercising of Musketeers by themselves apart, which
cannot well be set down but in action.

The first is to winn ground upon the Enemy.

The second is to lose ground, or making a Retreat, and yet offend the Enemy.

The third is in Marching by the Enemy, and dischargeing upon them by Files as
they March.

The fourth sort is by dividing the front and rear by divisions, six foot
distance, and marching away by the Enemy, and discharging upon them half Files,
the first half File marching through the division from the right to the left:
the second half File discharging upon the Enemy, and falling by the Rear or
last Rank, unto the left half File.

The fifth Sort is by dividing the right and left division six foot distance one
from another, the first half Ranks discharging upon the Enemy, and falling off,
from the right hand to the Rear, the one half rank falls off by the right
division to the Rear, the left division falls down through between the
divisions upon the right hand unto the rear.

For brevities sake, I will omit most kinds of frams and motions, and also
because many of them are hindrances to the young Soldiers mind, I will only
present you with some few which you shall find at the end of the Book.

We shall now discourse of the Heads, and Officers in an Army. The General.

The highest Office of all, is that of a General, who as he is above the rest
in Authority and Power, so ought he not only to know perfectly the Duties of
every Officer; but also to excel them all in Religion, Wisdom, Experience,
Policy, Gravety, Secrecy, Council, Modesty, Temperance, Valor, Magnanimity,
Vigelancy, rare Constance, Liberality, and Resolution, with all other good
parts infident to a perfect Man of War, and how much all these good parts, and
many more ought to be in this Personage elected, to this high and careful
Dignity, you may easily conceive and gather, because he is set over the rest,
to the end that he being their Chieftain and Head, may not only know how to
govern them both in actions, but also in his virtuous Life and carriage, be a
Pattern, Light and Lanthorn, unto the whole number of the Companies, to
imatate; for it is an old Proverb: Like Master, like Man, like General, like
Officers and followers: for commonly a wise, valiant, and virtuous General,
will choose wise valient and virtuous Captains and Officers: good and virtuous
Captains will as near as they can, choose good, honest, sober, and virtuous
Officers under them, entertain their Soldiers with good and fair speeches to
Command with, all alurements to bring them to the due form of Martial
Discipline.

The Crowner.

The Crowners place and Office, is to be Commander over the Captains, and all
other inferior Officers of his Regiment, having Jurisdiction and Dominion over
them all, whereby may be inferred and gathered, the parts and qualities which
ought to be in him, and the great skill and experience in War, as one who ought
to exceed them all, for to know how to Command, Rule, and Govern them with
Prudence; and Valor; and for as much as in many occurants and occasions,
growing and presented in War, he should know to perform the parts and Office of
a General, being alone with the Companies of his own Regiment, as when his
General Commands him to the Battery or Seige of Port or City, or to defend any
Fort or Town, or to War in any open Campania, to give Battle to the Enemy, to
make Incursions, to retire and withdraw Skirmishers, to frame Briges over
Rivers, to fortify himself in Camp, to conduct Artillery, and many other pieces
of service to be performed in him, he is greatly to respect and honor his
General, Obeying and Performing his commands and Orders, with great care and
diligence, as he would be Obayed himself, and Reverenced by his Captains and
other Officers of his Regiment.

The Sergeant Major.

His Office is to be the general Minister or Officer of a whole Regiment of
Sundry Companies, and super intendant of all the Sergeants of the same, by
whose hand and Industry, the Crowner does give the orders convenient to the due
government of his Regiment, as in Marching, Incamping, Inbattalleing, and in
such other matters concerning hereunto, whereby may be gathered the parts, the
qualities, the valor, the great skill, experience, and great diligence which
ought to be in him, who is chosen to this degree of Office, being of such
importance: the Sergeant Majors Office is of much higher degree then any
ordinary Captain, for every Captain do receive his directions from the Serjent
Major, and the Sergeant Major from the Crowner or General, if he be in place:
the ordinary place where the Crowner Marches, is in the Vanguard, and so the
Serjant Major being his Officer, by whom he sends his Commands unto the
Captains, Lievtenants, Handsigns, and Sergeants, and other Officers, ought
always to be near unto his Person, for the Serjant Major is guide of the
Battle.

A Captain.

A Captain should consider that he has the charge of men's lives committed to
his hands, over the which he should watch, least any of them be lost under his
Conduct, either by rashness or want of knowledge, which should be more easily
performed, if skillful and sufficient men were chosen to bare Rule, and such as
either had passed, or at least did understand the degrees of all the inferior
Officers, whereby he may be able to discharge a place of such importance, that
he may presently redress any thing amiss, and give Instructions, and Orders
upon every new accident either in Marching, Encamping, or Fighting, what the
said Officers have to do, for no man is able to teach that which he has not
himself before learned, for if he have not Experience [by his Ignorance] a
whole Company may be overthrown, he must diligently use his Soldiers to the
often using of their Arms, which shall be more profitable unto them, then the
assistance of the Physicians, for daily practice and exercise, makes them both
perfect and healthful, and at last Victorious in the Feilds, in the time of
Battle.

Leivetenant.

He that is elected unto this Office, ought to be a man of great Experience,
Fidelity, and Valor, who in the absence of his Captain carries his Place,
Charge, and Command, unto whom the Soldiers and under Officers are to Obey for
the time, as unto the Captain himself.

His place of March, his Captain being present, is in the rear of the Company,
but in Retiting or Marching out of the Field, he is to March in the Front, and
the Captain in the Rear.

The Handsign or Ensign.

The Handsign, is the foundation of the Company, wherein consists the Honor
and Reputation of the Captain and Soldiers, he ought not only to be a good
Soldier, Bold and Valient, but as near as may be the Captains equal, in
Valor, Discretion, and Counsel.

His place of March is upon the head of the Pikes, the same place he must
observe in set Battails, but rather betwixt the 3. and 4. Ranks.

The Sergeant.

In this Officer, consists the principal parts of the observation of
Military Discipline, and for that the execution of the superior Officers Orders
and Commands, do concern his charge and duty, it Imports that he be a
skillful and valient Soldier, and well Experienced in Military Discipline, yea
of so great Importance, that more rollerable it were for all the Officers of
the Company [were it the Captain himself] to be unskilled men and of little
experience, rather then the Sergeant, who of necessity ought to be an expert
Soldiers and of great Spirit and Diligence. He is to rank the Soldiers as he
shall think good not suffering them to contend or fall out among themselves,
for the Front or best places.

The Corporal.

As he is a degree above the private Soldier, so ought he in skill, that no
man that is a Soldier, seek to come to preferment in any Office in the Field,
except he know himself fit to discharge the same, or else he shall become a
laughing Stock to others, and be contemned of all men, as he justly deserves,
that takes upon him more then he is able to perform.

I might have written more at large of every Officer, but for brevities sake, I
have but only touched every one a part, so wishing all to take this is good
part, not set forth for the well Experimented Soldier, but for such as yet
have not tasted thereof.

Good Admonitions for a Soldier.

Having said somewhat concerning the conditions and quallities which are
required in every several Officer of a private Company. Now let us see what
manner of men are worthy the name of Soldiers.

First, the Soldier of all men, ought to set the fear of God before his Eyes,
to have a clear Conscience, and to be of honest Conversation, lest in running
upon the Pike, he fall into Hell Fire.

Secondly, he that loves Right and Justice, is fit to be the defender of the
same.

Thirdly, he that pittyeth the Poor and Afflicted, is a meet man to sucker his
Country, and Town, against the violence of Oppressors.

Fourthly, he that tendereth the Widow and Fatherless, he that delights to
see Virtue flourish in his Country, Honor advanced, Faith and Equity to abide
in every Fellowship.

Fifthly, he that hates Covetousness, Theft, Extortion, Murder, Fornication,
Idleness, and Drunkenness, these and such like men, are fit to be, and bare the
name of Soldiers, or Martialists.

For the first foundation and use of Arms, was erected of necessity, to
restrain and repress the disorders of Lude and Wicked men, and to settle and
establish Peace and Justice upon Earth. So then as the Armed Host is the
remedy to chastise and repress the offenses of others. It is therefore
convenient that the same Host be free from the like offenses, and every Vice
in a Soldier ought to be strongly Bridled and Punnished with extremity.

Because I am of opinion, that there be many who will be desirous to know the
manner, how to draw up Companies, and placing them in Battle rank, this being
a most difficile and pleasant piece of all the Exercise, I have now for their
contentment and satisfaction, set down in a Table under their view, diverse
sorts and fashions of this kind, out of the which they may be able easily by
their own Industry, according to the occurrances to frame other forms, as the
number of the Companies and the occasions that they shall find, shall permit.

military diagram A Company presenting to all quarters, being 200.100. Pikes,
100 Musketeers.


military diagram The Company brought up in battle, for the exercising.


military diagram

military diagram A Company drawn up with the Pikes upon the right hand. 200
men.


The order. how a Company should march of 200 men, 100 Pikes, and 100 Muskets.
military diagram

military diagram A Company drawn up and winged upon both the wings with
Musketeers. 200 men.


military diagram This Company having their Musketeers upon, the left wing,
has now doubled the right division of Pikes 200 men.


military diagram A Company drawn up with the Musketeers in the front.


military diagram Hear the rear division of Pikes, has doubled the front
division of Musketeers to the right hand.


engraving of a man, soldier, or musketeer with a bandolier and a gun or musket
1 Put on yor. Bandeliers.
Sold by John Overton at the white horse withouts Newgate

Take up the Bandeliers in the right hand hold them in the hollow between the
thumb and for finger, then clearing yor boxes from tangling with yor left hand,
put yor elbow through the bandeloir and bring yor right hand over yor. head,
taking your hat in the left and leave the bandeleir on yor left sholder.



engraving of a man, soldier, or musketeer with a gun or musket 2 Take up your
Rest ^
Take your Rest in the Right hand at the foot and then take it in the left
about the middle then with the right hand take it at the (...) and put your
left hand through the string and hold the Rest with the left hand



engraving of a man, soldier, or musketeer with a gun or musket 3 Take up your
Match ^
Take up the Match at the middle with your thumb and forefinger of the left
hand, then with your thumb and second finger of the Right hand place one end of
the match between the great and Ring finger and the other and between the
Ring and little finger of the left hand and So let the middle hand down.



engraving of a man, soldier, or musketeer with a gun or musket 4 Handle your
Musket ^
Standing at the But end of yor Musket with yor right foot, the left somewhat
advanced and the knee bent) which is the general proper stand of a Musket ^^^^ue
a large step with yor right leg their stooping down yet bearing up yor.
head, with yor right hand gripe the Musket, and so raising up yor body fall
back (...)



engraving of a man, soldier, or musketeer with a gun or musket 5 Order yor
Musket ^
Being come to your first stand hold yor Musket barrellm yor hand about the
height of your shoulder with the But end on the ground, In your left hand hold
the Rest a little below the forke, the Pike end on the ground



engraving of a man, soldier, or musketeer with a gun or musket 6 Give your
Rest to your Musket ^
Sink down your right hand not bowing yor body, then gripe your musket and
lift it up the bring about the left hand with the rest and join it to your
musket on the out side, holding yor thumb hard against the forke of the Rest
and so carry both musket and Rest in the left hand only



engraving of a man, soldier, or musketeer with a gun or musket 7 Open your Pann
In the ioying of yor. musket and Rest together, fall back with your right leg
to your-proper stand, then hold the thumb of the Right hand be hand the
seutchian of the Pan, and with yor. two formerr (...)



engraving of a man, soldier, or musketeer with a gun or musket 8 Clear yor.
Pann
Bring up your musket with the left hand only, toward your mouth and blow
your Pan stiflie, not stooping upon any terms, and in the mean time with
yor. right hand take



engraving of a man, soldier, or musketeer with a gun or musket 9 Prime your
Pan
Hold yor touch box between the thumb and fore finger of the right hand
only and so Prime as in the figure.



10 Shut your Pan
Lay the right thumb over the barrel near the Pan, and with your two
foremost fingers shutt the Pan.



engraving of a man, soldier, or musketeer with a gun or musket 11 Cast of yor:
loose Powder
Hold yor musket fast with the right hand at the breech, the left as before
turneing the Pan down wards yt the loose powder may fall of.



engraving of a man, soldier, or musketeer with a gun or musket 12 Blow of yor.
loose Powder.
Hold yor. musket in both hands as before, bear it up toward your mouth, not
stooping blow of the loose powder.



engraving of a man, soldier, or musketeer with a gun or musket 13 Cast about
yor Musket
Hold yor musket in both hands as before bear it right up toward yor left
side and with all step forwards ye right leg then holding the musket only in the
right hand at the breech forsake the Rest.



engraving of a man, soldier, or musketeer with a gun or musket 14 Trayle your
Rest
Haueing forsaken yor rest take the Musket into the left hand about ye middle of
ye barrel so as ye butt end touch not ye ground trayling yor rest between yor
musket and yor body



engraving of a man, soldier, or musketeer with a gun or musket 15 Open your
charge.
Take your charge in your right hand: with the thumb and forefinger thereof
thrust of the cover



engraving of a man, soldier, or musketeer with a gun or musket 16 Charge with
Powder.
Put back your left hand with the musket as far as conveniently you can, and
with yor right hand turn ye powder into the muzell of the barrel holding ye
charge between yor thumb and forefinger only as in ye figure.



engraving of a man, soldier, or musketeer with a gun or musket 17 charge with
Bullet ^
Take yor. Bullet forth of yor bag or out of yor mouth and put it into the
muzell of your musket.



engraving of a man, soldier, or musketeer with a gun or musket 18 Draw forth
your scouring stick ^
With yor. right hand (ye palm turned from yor) draw forth yor scouringstick
beareing yor body and yor left hand with yor musket so far back as you cann



engraving of a man, soldier, or musketeer with a gun or musket 19 Shorten your
scouring stick
Having drawn forth yor scouring stick set the Rammer head against yor breast
and slip yor hand close to yor Rammer yt you may ye easier put it into ye
muzell.



engraving of a man, soldier, or musketeer with a gun or musket 20 Ram Home.
Put your scouring stick down into your musket and Ram home hard twice or
thrice.



engraving of a man, soldier, or musketeer with a gun or musket 21 Withdraw
your scouring stick
With your right hand turned draw your scouring stick out of yor musket as
before.



engraving of a man, soldier, or musketeer with a gun or musket 22 (...) stick
^
Your scouring stick being drawn forth of ye barrel turn it and bring the
scouring stick end to yor breast and so slip yor hand wthin an hand full of the
end.



engraving of a man, soldier, or musketeer with a gun or musket 23 Return your
scouring stick
Put the scouring stick to his place from whence you had it



engraving of a man, soldier, or musketeer with a gun or musket 24 Recover your
Musket.
Bring forward yor musket with yor left hand and bear it right up Take it into
ye right hand at ye breech and so hold it in ye right hand only.



engraving of a man, soldier, or musketeer with a gun or musket 25 Poize your
Musket and recover your Rest:
Fall back with yor right leg to your first stand hold yor musket in ye right
hand at ye breech and recover your rest in yor lest hand holding it ^ just
under ye forke.



engraving of a man, soldier, or musketeer with a gun or musket 26 Give your
Rest to your Musket.
Bring up yor left hand with ye rest toward yor right side near yor musket and
so sink yor musket and hold it with ye rest in ye left hand only, the rest
being one ye out side of ye musket.



engraving of a man, soldier, or musketeer with a gun or musket 27 Draw forth
yor Match ^
Take yor match from between yor little finger with ye. thumb and ye second
finger of yor right hand being turned with ye Palm from you.



engraving of a man, soldier, or musketeer with a gun or musket 28 Blow your
Cole ^
Bring the right hand with ye match backward and your left hand with ye musket
and rest forward, turning your face some what backward blow yor match stiff



engraving of a man, soldier, or musketeer with a gun or musket 29 Cock your
Match.
Holding your match between yor. thumband second finger bring it to the cock,
and press it into the cock with the thumb



engraving of a man, soldier, or musketeer with a gun or musket 30 Try yor
Match.
Your thumb and forefinger being upon the cock and the second and third finger
under the cock, pull the cock to the Pan and with the finger either raiseor
sinkethe match



engraving of a man, soldier, or musketeer with a gun or musket 31 Guard and
blow.
Lay the two forefingers of the right hand upon the pan, the thumb behind the
seutchion of the pan the easier to lift up the musket, and so raising up the
muskel with both hands blow (...) in the in posture.



engraving of a man, soldier, or musketeer with a gun or musket 32 Open your Pan
with the two forefingers of the right hand open the Pan as in the 7 posture



engraving of a man, soldier, or musketeer with a gun or musket 33 Present.
Remove your. right hand to the thumb hole yor second finger to ye tricker --
with yor left hand fix the forke of ye Rest to yor musket and yor thumb against
the forke, and the pike end of the rest on the ground.



engraving of a man, soldier, or musketeer with a gun or musket 34 Give Fire
lift up yor right elbow and place the but end of yor musket within yor
shoulder nere your breast, the small end appearing a little above you shoulder
standing with ye left leg foremost and the knee bent and the right leg standing
stiff



engraving of a man, soldier, or musketeer with a gun or musket 35 Dismount yor
Musket
Bring your musket and rest to your right side and carry both in the left hand
only



engraving of a man, soldier, or musketeer with a gun or musket 36 Vncocke your
Match
Take the match from the cock with the thumb and second finger of yor right
hand holding the musket and rest in the left hand only.



engraving of a man, soldier, or musketeer with a gun or musket 37 Return your
Match.
Put the match between the two lesser fingers of the left hand from whence you
had it.

Note from henc forward you may Prime and charge as before from ye 8 postur and
so forward as in ye 25 postur



engraving of a man, soldier, or musketeer with a gun or musket 38 Shoulder yor
Musket.
Haueing yor. musket poized hold yor rest an handful under the forke, then
bring your musket before yor. body and yor rest crossouer it behind the thumb
hole, and so with both hands lay it gently on yor. shoulder haueing the rest
cross yor body and withal bring yor right leg up to yor left, then fall back
again with yo.r right leg.



engraving of a man, soldier, or musketeer with a gun or musket 39 March with
yor rest in yor right hand.
First take the match from the left hand between the fingers of the right
hand, then take the string of the Rest from the left arm, and return the
match between the fingers of the (...)



engraving of a man, soldier, or musketeer with a gun or musket 40 March and
with your Musket carry yor. rest.
First shift the match as in the former direction, then put the string of the
Rest over the left arm and the rest in the hand and so return the match and
carry yor rest as in the figure.



engraving of a man, soldier, or musketeer with a gun or musket 41 Vnsholder
yor. Musket.
Bringing up yor right leg to your left sink your musket and carry it right up
and withal turn it, that the pike end of yor. Rest be toward yor left side
then take the Musket at the breech with yor right hand and slip down yor left
with ye rest



engraving of a man, soldier, or musketeer with a gun or musket 42 Poyze your
Musket.
Hold the Musket right up in the right hand on yor right side raise yor left
hand to ye forke of yor rest, and set yor thumb against the forke as in the
figure.



engraving of a man, soldier, or musketeer with a gun or musket 43 Rest yor
Musket.
Bring up yor left hand with the forke of the rest to the musket, and so let
Musket and rest sink down togather and fall back with yor right leg to
your proper stand.



engraving of a man, soldier, or musketeer with a gun or musket 44 Draw out
yor. Match.
Take the match beetweene the thumb and the seacond finger of the right hand
as in the XXVII posture and with the thumb of your left hand hold the musket
fast on the rest.



engraving of a man, soldier, or musketeer with a gun or musket 45 Blow yor.
Match.
Bear your Musket and rest forrvard with the left hand, and your match
backwand in the ^ right, and blow as in the 28 posture.



engraving of a man, soldier, or musketeer with a gun or musket 46 Cock yor
Match.
Cock your macth as in the 29th Posture ^



engraving of a man, soldier, or musketeer with a gun or musket 47 Try your
Match.
Try your match as in the 30th posture.



engraving of a man, soldier, or musketeer with a gun or musket 48 The
sentinel Posture.
Hold the two forefingers of ye right hand upon your pan, the thumb be: hind
the scutchian ready upon all occasions



engraving of a man or soldier with a pike 1 Handle yor Pike.
Standing at the but end of yor Pike fall backward with yor left foot, and with
yor right hand turned, take your Pike at the But end and bring yor right hand
up to your hip.



engraving of a man or soldier with a pike 2 Recover your Pike and Order.
Bring yor left foot besore yor right, and with yor left hand take yor Pike
forwards bearing the butlend downward, and remove yor right hand above yor left



engraving of a man or soldier with a pike 3 Order yor Pike.
Set the but end of yor Pike nere your right foot on the out side, holding it
right up inyor right hand, about the height of yor eye, and your arm a little
Bending, and yor right foot forward



engraving of a man or soldier with a pike 4 Advance yor Pike in three motions.
The first Motion.
with the right hand alone bring yor Pike just before yor body, bearing it
directly right up, raising the but end from the ground, then take ye Pike with
yor left hand about the height your girdle



engraving of a man or soldier with a pike 5 the seacond Motion
Forsake the Pike with your right hand and with the left hand alone raise up
the Pike, that the But end be about the height of yor thigh, then take ye But
end in yor right hand, without stooping to it.



engraving of a man or soldier with a pike 6 the third Motion being Advanced
Forsake the Pike with the left hand and with yor right hand alone carry the
Pike right up. locking the Pike between yor shoulder and arm, yor right hand
holding the but end of the Pike about the height of yor hip.



engraving of a man or soldier with a pike 7 Order yor Pike in three motions.
the first Motion.
Sink your right hand a little, and with your left hand take the Pike as high
as well you can reach and bring ye Pike just before yor Body.



engraving of a man or soldier with a pike 8 the 2d Motion
Forsake the Pike with yor right hand, and bring down the pike in your left
hand that the but end be nere unto the ground, then with, yor right hand take ye
pike about the height of yor head.



engraving of a man or soldier with a pike 9 The 3d motion being ordered
Forsak ye Pike with your left hand, and with the right hand only set the but
end on the ground, on the outside of yor right foot as in the third Posture.



engraving of a man or soldier with a pike 10 Shoulder yor. Pike in 3 motions
The first Motion
Bring ye Pike just before yor body and raise the but end from ye ground
bearing it forward, then take it with yor left hand a little beneath yor right.



engraving of a man or soldier with a pike 11 The seacond Motion.
Bring forward the Pike with yor left hand, and take it in your right, reaching
backward as far as well you may.



engraving of a man or soldier with a pike 12 The 2d motion being Sholdred
Forsake yor Pike with yor left hand, and with the right only lay it upon yor
right shoulder, bearing the but end about a foot from the ground, holding yor
thumb under the Pike, the better to govern it, carrying the pike forward.



engraving of a man or soldier with a pike 13 Port yo.r Pike in 3 motions. the
first Motion.
Bear yor right hand with the pike back ward as far as well you can, with yor
left hand take ye pike forward, and with. the right hand bear ye pike op ward.



engraving of a man or soldier with a pike 14 The 2d Motion.
Forsaking ye Pike with the right hand east ye point forward that ye But end may
conveniently be taken in ye right hand.



engraving of a man or soldier with a pike 15 The 3d motion being Ported.
Take ye But end of ye Pike in yor right hand, holding it about yor hip, and
raising the pike with, yor left hand about ye hight of yo breast carry ye Pike
directly before you yor left foot forward.



engraving of a man or soldier with a pike 16 Charge yor Pike
Raise ye right hand and strech it backward, yor left hand being at yor breast,
yor left elbow against yor hip ^



engraving of a man or soldier with a pike 17 Advance yor Pike.
Bear down the butt end of ye Pike with yor right hand and raise ye pike with
ye left, and so advance as in ye 6 figure.



engraving of a man or soldier with a pike 18 Sholder yor: Pike in 3 Motions.
The first motion.
Sink yor right hand, and with yor left take ye pike as high as well you can
reach bringing the pike just before yor body



engraving of a man or soldier with a pike 19 The 2d motion.
Forsake the butt end with yor right hand bring forward yor Pike in the left
hand, and take the pike backward in ye right hand as far as well you may reach.



engraving of a man or soldier with a pike 20 The 3d motion being Sholdred
Forsake ye Pike with the left hand, and with the right only lay it upon your
shoulder oc: as in ye 12 figure.



engraving of a man or soldier with a pike 21 Charge to ye Rear in 3 motions.
the first motion
Bear the pike with yor. right hand backward, take it forward in yor left hand
as far as you may conveniently reach, bearing ye pike with yor right hand upward



engraving of a man or soldier with a pike 22 The 3.d motion.
Forsaking the Pike with yor right hand. bear it over yor head and at the same
instant turn yor body to ye left hand that you may conveniently take ye butt
end of ye: Pike in yor right hand.



engraving of a man or soldier with a pike 23 the 3d motion being Charged.
Having ye butt end of ye Pike in yor right hand stretch yor right arm back
ward and set your left hand at yor breast etc as in ye 16 figur



engraving of a man or soldier with a pike 24 Recover yor Pike and Sholder in 3
motions The first motion.
Slip yor left hand forward as far as well yor may and lift ye Pike upwards to
yor head and with the right hand bear ye But end somewhat downward.



engraving of a man or soldier with a pike 25 The seacond motion.
Forsakeing the Butend of the Pike with yor right hand, bear up the Pike over
your head with your left hand only and that instant turn yor face to ye right
hand, and be ready with yor right hand to take ye Pike more Backward.



26 The 3 motion being Sholdred
Having the Pike in the right hand forsake it with your left and with the right
hand only, lay it on your sholder, as in the 12 and 20 figurs.



engraving of a man or soldier with a pike 27 Order yor Pike
This is to be done in 3 motions as the contrary is shown in f. 9.10.11.
figures Bear the Pike with the right hand backward, with yor lest take it
forward bearing the but end downward, then slip down your right hand a little
above yor lestand let ye butend on ye ground, as in ye: 9 figur.



engraving of a man or soldier with a pike 28 Cheek yor Pike the first Motion
This is to be done by several palming postures, first with the right hand
bear the butend of the Pike backward, as far as yo^ can and so Contiew
palming till y^ come to the head of your Pike.



engraving of a man or soldier with a pike 29 The 2d motion being Cheeked
With yor left hand hold the Pike a little be low the head, your right hand
more backward, as far as the cheeks or arming reach, set yor right hand upon
yor hip, yor elbow stretched forth and yor left hand more forward before yor
breast.



engraving of a man or soldier with a pike 30 Trayle yo.r Pike
Remove your Right hand to your left, and in your right hand only carry your
Pike, your hand Being upon your hip.



engraving of a man or soldier with a pike 31 Recover yor Pike and Charge The
first Palmeing motion
This to be done by several Palming postures backward, Bring forward your
right hand as far as well you can, and with ye left hand gripe the pike
Backward as far as you can.



engraving of a man or soldier with a pike 32 The 2d Palming motion
Forsake the Pike with yor: right hand, bring forward the Pike with ye left and
take it backward with the right; and so continue palming until you have the
Butend of ye pike in your Right hand



engraving of a man or soldier with a pike 33 Charge yo.r Pike.
Strech yor right arm backward with ye butt end of ye Pike in yor hand yor.
left hand at yor breast, and yor elbow upon yor hip and as in ye 16 figure



engraving of a man or soldier with a pike 34 Order at close Order.
This is to be done in 3 motions first bearing the pike right up before ye body
and so forward as from ye Advance in ye 6.7. and 8 figures, only you must
observe to set ye butt end of ye Pike at the in side of ye right foot with is
yor closse order.



engraving of a man or soldier with a pike 35 Charg for horse and draw yor sword
The Butt end of yor Pike resting agauist yor right foot take it in yor left
hand about ye hight of yor girdle and step forward with yor left foot ye knee
bent lay yor left arm upon yor knee couching down low and draw yor sword over
yor left, arm



engraving of a man or soldier with a pike 36 Recover yor Pike and put up yor
sword.
Raise yor body right up set yor Pike against yor right sholder with. the left
hand ye but end being still upon ye ground then put up yor sword:




