ENGLANDS Third Alarm TO WAR: Stirring up the whole Land as one Man, to help
the LORD, and His servant David (all the Faithful in the World) against most
bloody Adversaries, mighty Hunters before the LORD. In which War, No
Resistance is maintained, but what has now (as in David's time) a sweet
agreement with Duty, and affinity with the best Obedience: No Resistance then
or now of Regal Authority, or Higher Power, but of those, who are the greatest
Enemies thereunto: Such were Saul's willing Helpers in his War against David;
such are the Kings Helpers in his War now, against his best Subjects, the
Faithful of the Land.

Jer. 48.10. Cursed be he, that keeps back his Sword from blood.

1 Cor. 7.23. Ye are bought with a Price, be not ye the servants of men.

Joel 2.11. Fear not, O Land, be glad and rejoice; for the LORD will do great
things.

Genesis 8.1. God remembered Noah, and every living thing, and all the Cattle that
was with him: He will remember David, and all his afflictions.

Psalm. 132.1. Chrysos. Sermon. 68. Oremus ut Christus suo semper regnet in
Milite: ut Miles semper suo triumphet in Rege.

Let us pray, That Christ would evermore be King in his Soldier: That His
Soldier may evermore triumph in his King.

London, Printed for Thomas Underhill, in the second year of the Beasts
wounding, warring against the Lamb, and those that are with Him, Called,
Chosen, and Faithful. 1643.

TO THE READER.
This Epistle shows the purpose of the Book what could not be showed in the
Ti^tle; cleares the Duty of all good people, to stand-up now all as one man;
Gives Arguments full to that purpose; answers all material Arguments against
is.
He that speaks to All, speaks to none: Words, as Physic, cannot be applied
to MAN under that general notion: but to this or that man in particular:
Therefore I intend all this unto thee, who have taken it into thy hand, that
thou may lay it unto thy heart. The noise of the Drum, and sound of War
still in thine ears, has awakened thee sure; no Sleeper now, when such a
Tempest lies upon us, unless thou art as one of those, who can be secure in
the midst of the Sea, or lie asleep upon the top of a Mast. I suppose thee
awakened, and hearing thy self summoned to War. Thy Call is from Heaven, A
supposition only that the Reul enites and Gadites had built an Al^ar. contrary
to God^ command, did stir-up the whole congregation of Israel to war against
them, Iosb. 22.12. So did the forcing a Concubine; All Israel arose, and were
knit together as one man, four hundred thousand men, to war with Benjamin,
ref^sing to give up (...) Delinquents to death. Judge. 20.1.8.11.13. See Ep. p.
4.
all the Laws of Heaven and Earth have sealed thee thy Warrant: for the cause
is Gods, and His Peoples. To maintain all that is dear to Him and them in Earth
and Heaven: Thy enemies are the Lords Enemies, the most insulting that ever the
Church was infested with; for they are, most of them, homebred, that are
helpers with the Beast, of the same Country with thee, and have the same
Mother: Besides, they have the horns of a Lamb, they will fight under formal
colors, semblances, shows, and pretenses of Law and Justice, which they carry
upon their Swords point. It will be the hottest War that ever was yet. If
these Adversaries have the day, expect no more mercy from them, then from the
mouth of the Devourer, be it Cannon, Dragon, Wolf, Lion, or she Bear, or from
the Devil himself; for indeed he plays Rex now, he has armed the Edomite
(Papist I mean) with a Sword, and with a Sword ( Spirit though he be) he must
be resisted.

But in warring now, Ob.
I may resist the King.

No thou shall resist no other, Ans.
but that Evil Spirit, which has put a Sword into an Edomites hand now, and
has engaged the heart of the King to her, who has pawned the Jewels of the
Kingdom, to purchase Instruments of death, thereby to lay waste the Kingdom of
Israel, and to dethrone the King thereof: The soul of the King cleaves in love
to her, even her, who bends all her power against the LORD CHRIST and His
Kingdom; And, To purchase this cursed end (which will cost the best Flower in
their Crown, and they shall miss of it too, when all is done) To carry on
this horrid design, they have joined hearts and hands, with Irish Rebels, and
English Monsters, men skillful to destroy, whose hearts and hands are steeped
in blood, and brawned in villainies. There can be no question now of the
lawfulness of resistance, for thou shall offer no more violence to the King
and Kingdom, then what thou should offer to the Kingdom of Heaven; a sweet
violence in contending for the Faith, and the trust of the Kingdom.

But some there are most contrary minded, Ob.
Lawyers and DIVINES both; these are against the Covenant now, which engages
to defensive Arms: and they say their Reason and Conscience is against it too
*, and this their example may very well stumble thee.

Example may win much with unstable minds; Ans.
But surely the example of such men, whose walking is as contrary to a common
Light and principles, as darkness is to light; as contrary to Christ, His
ways and servants, as the Devil is, or as Hell is to Heaven: surely the
example of such men cannot persuade with thee. These men have so long shut
their eyes against a natural light, and so long labored to stifle and choke a
natural Conscience, that now they have not so much Logic (Reason I mean)
then has a Dog: nor any more (good) Conscience, then has a Beast. I would
rather my tongue should cleave to the roof of my Mouth, then that it should
send forth the scum of a foul stomach, or corrupt heart, rotten speeches: The
Lord knows I speak what I know, and what all may know, that will observe the
conversation of these men, ( Anti-Covenanters now, like as the inti-petitioners
before:) I will say it again. They have no more (true) Reason, nor (good)
Conscience then a B^ast has: No, their pleasure and profit are their gods,
their glory their shame, unreasonable men they are: And this is the clearest
evidence thereof that ever was given, ^^ll. 3.19.
They mind earthly things. No matter what such Cretians say, always Liars,
evil Beasts, slow Bellies. Show thy self a man, bring forth the spear, and
stop the way against these Murderers; for even these men are as one of them;
Obad. 11.12.
They stand on the other side: They have looked on the day of their Brother,
They have rejoiced in the day of his destruction, and have spoken proudly in
the day of distress; these are as one of them. Thou will wish that these may
be cut off that so trouble us: and bring forth the spear against those
Murderers, whose notorious violences are more legible all over the Land.

Ob. No thou will say, for thou art not res^lved of any other resistance that
is lawful, but by prayer, and fasting and so a Spirit must be resisted too.

Ans. Thou may read and be fully satisfied touching this matter, toward the
close of this work, therefore I will say nothing to it here. See chap. 7.

Ob. But thy Relations are such, that thou can not go forth to battle. It
is as cleafe as the Sun, that the resistance, the Covenant ^ow engages unto,
is against the Evil Spirit, which now wo^keth effectually in the children of
disobedience. Therefore it had been a wonde, it the Devil and his children did
not now contend against it, mad with rage because the entering into this.
Covenant, and standing to it, will destroy Satants Kingd^me. This commands a
set discourse, though woe ds are lost pon such men


Be not willingly ignorant at this Point: Ans.
Is there any relation nearer then that to thy God, to His Church, to His
People, to thy Country? But I will not examine thee strictly at this point,
touching thy Relations, he is not good, who is not answerable there. I would
gain thy heart to the work; and for thy Relations otherwise, I leave to GOD,
and thy Conscience; only this I say, If ever there was a time, when all the
People of the Land were called forth* to stand-up as one man now is the time,
Now Altars are built contrary to the command, And the Spouse of Christ is
FORCED before her LORDS face. Never was there such a Cause as th^s to make all
Israel arise, and to knit them together all as one man. See Ep p. 1.
Do thy duty now, gird up thy loins and put on thy harness, and go forth
thy self to battle, and not another for thee; Pity thy Country, and thy
dwelling place; keep the Wolves from thine own door. Remember the poor
sheep there, wives, children* sucklings, all these were a prey to the Edomite
once, so they will be now; If thou will not quit thy self like a man. Gird-up
thy loins, and put on thy harness* and boast in The Lord all the day long.
Though the Enemy be strong, so is God too. Neh. 4.16. Jer. 20.11.
Who is great and a terrible one, mighty to deliver. The enemy is wise, so is
God too; The Counselor. The enemy is many: one God is enough to answer all
discouragements: He works most gloriously with a few, Joshua 1. Heb. 13.5.,
five Negatives to ascertaine the Affirmative, and to give the Church strong
consolation for ever.
and those, a few and weak people. Boast in The Lora all the day long, be
strong and of a good courage, for He has said five times in one breath, He will
Never, never, never, never, never leave thee, nor forsake thee.

Object. But He seems to forsake His people, for they are fallen down.

Answ. As good a sign as any the sacred word gives us; That now is the Time
when God will build His People up, so as they shall stand fast like Mount Sion
He builds-up but not before all is fallen to ruins in the Soul and in His
Church; and so runs the promise; Act. 15.16.
After this I will return and will b^^ld again the Tabernacle, which is
FALLEN DOWN: and I will build again the RVINES thereof, and I will set it up.

But thou have not a heart to reach forth thy hand to help them, Ob.
that are fallen so low into the Deepes, and their Adversary is so high.

Choose thee; these people shall rise without thy hand: Ans.
and thou shall be trodden down by the foot of pride. But consider what a
poor discouragement this is! The Righteous are fallen low! No disparagenent,
as long as GOD is highest. It is His glory to work for His People, when they
are lowest, and their power as gone, then G^d comes-in. Deuteronomy. 32.6.
If thou will read, thou shall find excellent Reason, why The Lord suffers
His people to lie low as in the Deeps, and their adversaries to be above: It is
for DISCOVERY-sake; Chap. 5.
that the hearts of His own people may be discovered to themselves; That the
Adversary may be discovered too, his rage and malice (before in the heart
secret there,) may be made manifest to all Israel: And that Gods right hand
may be discovered also, made glorious before all the peoples sight, friends and
adversaries both. If then God suffers His people to be l^w, it is that their
(proud) spirit may fa^l, and their Faith may rise. Now say again* and make thy
boast of it before thy Adversaries, who say, These people, whom they call GODS
people, are low. Ans. Their GOD is above, above all their rage, Exodus 18.11.
above all their water-floods; abo^e all, wherein the Enemy deals proudly; He
is above all; And He will set His people above, and through these adversaries
down like a Millstone into the great waters. We have GODS Word for it Rev. 18.21
, and that is as much as the Heavens and Earth have for their continuance. And
Israel have had an example for it before their eyes; ^hey sanke as Lead in the
mighty waters Ex. 15.10.
. This gives the Church assured confidence for ever, That by the greatness of
Thine arm, these enemies also shall be as STILL AS A STONE Verse 16.
. Remember, God stopped the mouths of these Lions then, when out souls lay
amidst those devourers; God is the same still, He will do so still; He has put
an hook in their nose. Note there are bridles in the lips of these Beasts at
this time. Gird up thy loins, and stand fast in the faith, and for the
maintaining of it till thou die. While thou can stand, stand fighting; when
thou must fall, fall praying; And if thou do not rise again victoriously
here, thou shall rise gloriously anon; else The Lord has not spoken by the
mouth of His Servants, Patriarchs, Prophets* Apostles, in those days* nor by
the Messengers of the Churches and glory of Christ in these days. But thou art
resolved at that point; Thou LORD wilt bless the righteous: Psalm. 5.12. Isa.
26.3.
with favor will Thou compass him, as with a Shield. Thou will keep him in
perfect peace, whose mind is stayed on Thee. Perfect peace; So we read, and it
is a full reading, but it is peace, peace. A double Peace; In famine, enough
then; peace in war, peace then: peace in life* and peace in death; then peace
indeed a perfect peace. Now, no peace in the North, nor in the West nor in any
quarter in the Christian world, nor no peace can be, till the great Whore be at
peace with the Saints; and the devil at peace with the Church, (and that will
never be, what ever offers and semblances there be that way,) but to him whose
heart is stayed upon his GOD, peace, peace; The Peace of God, which passes all
understanding, shall keep your heart and mind through Jesus Christ. Amen.

Behold, God is my salvation: I will trust, and not be afraid, for The LORD
JEHOVAH is my strength. Isa. 12.2.

Look unto Me, and be ye saved, all the ends of the earth: for I am God, and
there is none else. Isa. 45.22.

ENGLANDS Third Alarm to WAR, Against the Beast.
SECT. III. 0200 David's story, and Saul's persecution is continued: his hand is
restrained, but his heart is bloody; and men are, as their hearts are. David
delivers the Keilites, yet they will deliver David, into a murderers hand. A
lesson from thence. Saul holds-on his foot, in the path of the destroyer. Why
does not Israel stand-up, for Israel, and for their (temporal) Savior;
against an over-bearing Lord, and an insulting Edomite? The Answer will resolve
the Case of Conscience; and Isreal's duty touching that matter. Saul drives-on
furiously after David, seems to prosper, gains men, The Chosen out of all
Israel, to carry-on his bloody design; and drives David from all his strong
holds every one. David's GOD looks upon all this, and suffers it to be done, for
excellent Reasons, relating To David, To his Adversaries, and To GOD Himself;
and all relating to these times: David was delivered then, and he shall be
delivered now; but not before all his strong holds are cast down. The Tribes
come* in at last, when the way was cleared before them, and all good means
used first. All true Israelites will come in shortly, To help The LORD against
THE MIGHTY, when That, which lets, is taken away; There is the Conclusion;
GODS Time is the best Time, best to Advance His Glory, and His Peoples Peace.
CHAP. 1. David's story and Saul's persequution is continued; his heart as bloody
as before; though after his march from Nob, he could draw no more blood, for a
Man is as his Will is. David delivers the Keilites out of the hand of spoilers,
and the Keilites would deliver David into Saul's hands. David will do his Duty
notwithstanding, and leave the rest to God.
PRoud and haughty Scorner is his name, Prove. 21.24.
who deals in proud wrath. The Edomite is he* who had a Bloody Commission
scaled unto him, and has executed it accordingly; Turn thee and fall upon the
Friests, because their hand is with David; and the Edomite turned, and did as
aforesaid. And so we have read a bloody Tragedy, Nec adhuc finitus Orestes,
scriptus at a tergo, and yet we are not at an end. Turn over the leaf, on the
backside we have as much more: As much more, I say* in proposition, and design
only, not in conclusion, which God makes that was, and, will be glorious still:
But much more endeavored nothing done: Much Action, yet nothing effected to
Saul's heart and purpose; And yet was it a deadly Persecution. True it was, The
LORD suffered the Evil Spirit to open, by the hands of Saul, and the Edomite,
a sluice or floodgate of wrath, and there-out issued a mighty stream of blood;
But He, That opens at pleasure, and shuts also at pleasure. He quickly shut
02 this Sluice, and stopped this full stream; So as* Though Saul, and his Edomite
persecuted David, I know not how many years after with deadly hatred, yet they
shed not one drop of blood all that time: A wondrous thing; Psalm. 31.15.
we cannot stand upon it. My TIMES are in Thy hands, says David; They are
indeed, and it is David's comfort that they are so, that David's life, and all
his concernments are in GODS hand. He will dispose of all, and all shall come
through His hands and shall be transacted there; all for David's good in the end.
If not a Sparrow falls to the ground without your FATHER* Matthew. 10.29.
then not one drop of (David's) blood sure. Though Saul and his Edomite
pursued-hard after David, yet they shall draw no more blood Though five hundred
drawn swords (after our account,) nay five thousand drawn swords are about D
vi^ round about, as we shall see anon, yet not one drop of blood is drawn by
Saul or his men.

Why then, Qu.
how is the story Tragical? you will say, for we shall read no more of men or
garments rolled in Blood.

True, we shall not, and yet we shall see the Story is Tragical, Ans.
and Saul the King, with the Edomite his General, are as grievous persecutors
as before. The Devil was a murth^rer from the beginning; So he will be to the
end, a murderer stil^ not because he actually sheds blood every where at
pleasure; but b^^^use intentionally he always has a will to do it. Had the
devil power in his hand (but God has him in His Chain,) if he could do what
he would do, he would make the whole earth one stage to act a Tragedy, which
would destroy the stage whereon it is acted, he would make the world a field of
blood, HORMAH, as was said, utter destruction; such a good will. the devil has,
he has not power; that must be let forth or restrained as GOD pleases, and as
it was here. But this is the point. The will makes the murderer; for, A MAN IS
AS HIS WILL IS; And such an one was Saul, and his Edomite both; their wills
were murtherous and destructive, wasting was in their paths, therefore they
were murderers, men of bloods. That it was so we shall well understand if we
read the Text. Saul and his Edomite pursue David; What to do? To take away
from him his Sword; No, the Text is clear; To take away his life. 1 Samuel 19.1.
They sought David every day To kill him, says the Text. What care bloody
enemies for the Sword? Their care is to sheath the Sword in David's bowels, that
will satisfy, and nothing else; So the enemies, Saul with his Edomite drive-on
furiously toward ^his City, and the other strong nolds. Why do they drive-on
so furiously? The ans^er is upon everlasting Record, TO DESTROY THE CITY FOR
DAVID'S SAKE. But I will not huddle up things so, I will proceed in order, 1 Samuel 22.10.
and keep pace with Saul's and his Edomites march after David; taking in the
Remarkables by the way. We shall see the Persecution was very sore, and that
Conscience could not hold back the neighboring Israelites from coming in to
hold Saul's Sword, and his Edomites hand from shedding blood, and acting such
notorious violences. This will be put to the question anon, and resolved, I
hope* to every reasonable man's satisfaction. I will follow Saul and the Edomite
a little in this march, and David in his slight.

It was well for David, that Doeg espied him at Nob, for he knows what will
follow; therefore he hastens thence, and leaves the City, as (...) lef^ ^odom;
or as a man leaves his house, no sooner he is gone out thence* but he sees it
fall into ashes. David flies be knows not well whither, but for fear of Saul
he went to Achish ^ing of Gath; Th^^ the Kings servants hurt him by recording
his commendations (in a Panagerick;) and make him so sore afraid, 1 Samuel 21.11.
That he seems not to be himself, and so plays mad prankes.

Reader, you cannot justify David in all he did, though one of the best men in
those days; nor may you condemn him; Nor may you say, if you had been in his
case, you would not have done as David did; You know not what you might have
done, had you been in his case, close pursued at the heels by a cruel Lord,
and a bloody Edomite. Thou little know now, what thou might have done
then, being in David's case. It is thy neighbors case now, pity them, condemn
them not, but look to thy own standing, and in whose strength thou do
stand; Meditate Terror, and strengthen thy hand and thy heart in GOD against
the day of trouble and treading down. Now proceed; The Lord orders all, even
David's mad prankes for David's good; He is not more afraid of Achish, then
Achish is afraid of David, A mad fellow! I have no need of him, David shall
not come into my house, says Achish. David cared not whether he came thither
or no. Nay he counts it a mercy, That he is escaped thence. And now he is gone
to the Cave Adullam; 1 Samuel 22.
There his friends comfort him, and he has an Army of five hundred men. He goes
on somewhat an indirect course (we shall hear more of that anon,) for he was
afraid. The Prophet meets with him, bids him go back again into the land of
Judah. There Saul hears tidings of him, and from Doegs mouth, he hears of all
that was done at Nob. Then follows a miserable destruction, as we heard, all
the Priests slain, except one, who escaped to bring David the heavy tidings of
All, that befell the City of Priests; which yet David expected, knowing it
would be so, because he saw the Edomite was there. But David has escaped, and
being delivered, he will do some service in testimony of his thankful
remembrance for that deliverance.

David hears, that the Keilites were distressed, the Philistines were fighting
against them, and notorious, Pillagers they were almost as these in our days,
1 Samuel 23.1.
They robbed the threshing floores, took from the poor People their provision
they had layed-up against winter: David cannot endure this wrong, his Soul
hates oppression where ever he sees it, and to the LORD he goes, for He is
David's Oracle: The LORD delays not David, gives him present Answer, Go and
smite the Philistines, and save Keilah: Verse 2.
No but do not, said his men: See! they cross Gods command, Verse 3.
but they give good Reason for it, so as they put David to a stand; We are
afraid (say they) of one man Saul, who is behind us, and will thou thrust thy
self into the mouth of the Troopers before thee, a legion of them? A poor
hand-full of men against the Armies of the Philistines? a front.
Will thou so? It must not be so. The men spoke like men, very good reason,
[but they who can speak no more, are not for action, they will hinder David's
victories:] Now David is at a stand, and faints, hastens to GOD again,
[thither he can retire himself still, and refresh his fainting spirits]
enquires of The LORD, and is established. A gracious God! He does not reprove
David for harkening to his men, after he had heard what God said, but gives him
the same answer as before: And now David is upon his legs again, and as bold
as a Lion, he will venture himself among Scorpions now; what cares he who they
are, they are Gods enemies; or how many they are, they are but men all, and
miserable men, David carries the revenge of God with him, and he must prevail,
and do worthily. God bids him go against them, and he will go; David waits
but for GODS commission, and that shall be a sufficient warrant for David
indeed; Let God alone with the rest. In point of work and good service we must
divide with God: We have to do with no more but the Duty, the doing Gods
command: as here David's command was, Go, and smite the Philistines: David must
go, for GODS command carries a good man, as Abraham, blindfold, he knows not
whither. But the distracting troublesome part, that which is above strength,
the difficulty, the darksome part of the work, which so disheartened David's
men, and so shakes the soul with fear, that is not ours, but Gods part: It
must be rolled upon Him Who is mighty, and set Faith to work there: A little
Man, and a great Faith; an hand-full of Men, and an heart-full of Faith, will
do great matters, Put to flight Armies of Aliens: So David did here, he smote
those Pillagers, and saved the Inhabitants of Keilah. And now there David is
even at KEILAH, amongst the inhabitants there; he is amongst those, whom he has
indeared and engaged to him, he thinks, by unrecountable favors. This was
told to Saul, That David was come to Keilah; and Saul was glad of that, and so
he said, God has delivered him into my hands, 1 Samuel 23.7.
for he is shut in by entering into a Town that has gates and bars. And that
he may take the opportunity, which GOD put into his hand (he thought, which yet
was but to discover Saul's spirit, the treachery of the Keilites, and his own
glorious Arm stretched out still against Saul, and for his Servant David) Saul
calls all the People together to war, to go down to Keilah, to besiege David
and his men there: David understands all this and more; for this was David's
advantage, and comfort both, GOD was with David, and went along with him where
ever David went; a Refuge to Whom he could continually resort for counsel, and
direction from His Mouth: So David understands all the purposes of Saul's heart,
and that the Keilites will prove Treacherous also. Set a Mark upon these
Keilites as we pass, that we may know them where ever we meet them. Wicked,
ungrateful -- people; David has taken off their yokes, delivered them out of
the hands of Spoylers, made them Freemen, who were Slaves before; David put
his life in his hand, would jeopard it for them, stand up for them against an
Army of Philistines: In a word, David did for these KEILITES as the Parliament
have done for us; and when all this is done, ungrateful wretches as they are,
they are so far from standing up for David, that they will betray him into
Saul's hand: O monstrous! etc. -- Deliver up, deal treacherously with him, who
was the best friend they had in the world! Give him up into the hand of Saul,
and his Spoylers (the Edomites) to be spoiled, who had delivered them from out
of the hands of Spoilers! O monstrous! But yet David must not repent of what he
has done; it was his duty, he had a command for it: Though Saul is a bloody
man, and the Keilites treacherous, GOD is faithful; He will but learn His
Servants this great Lesson, Not to trust in men, but in the Living, and
Faithful, and True God. Men will deal like men, deceitfully; GOD is Truth,
and David's Mercies are sure; There is David's Hold-fast; He has nothing to do,
it is not his part, to trouble himself about this, What Saul is, or what the
Keilites are; he may enquire of the LORD about it, and he shall be told, That
Saul's intentions are bloody, and the Keili es treacherous; but he must not
trouble himself about it, not about what Saul will do, or the Keilites will
do; David must do his duty, that is his part to do; let God alone with Saul
and his Keilites, they shall do David no hurt, but good a great deal, so be
David does h^s duty. We have learnt our part also, and what is our duty to do
now, and now we proceed.

David was resolved to have defended himself, and the Keilites: he would not
have s^ffered their City to be destroyed for his sake; but advising with his
Oracle, and understanding how the Keilites were minded, he quits the place, and
with his men marches away toward the Wilderness. Here a grave Question may
be asked.

Why does the Lord suffer David to be put to his shifts? Quest.
why is his condition so restless from place to place, and no certain place?
before he can fix his foot, stand still and breath himself, he must run for
his life.

For excellent Reasons the Lord did this, Ans.
That David might know this wo^^d is a Wil^ernesse indeed, not the place of his
rest; and that he mig t not trust in strongholds neither, nor in men,
therefore was his condition so fleeting and full of changes: He must be raised
to a Crown it must be from a low bottom, after men's hearts toward him are
^^lly discovered, and all his strongholds are thrown down; for GOD must be
exalted in that day. But of this toward the conclution, Isa. 10.11.
when we shall see GOD performing His wh^^^ work, and what end He makes; for
then we shall, ^ee the LORD is very pitiful, and of tender m^^ey. Jam. 5.11.
But we must wait f^r this, as the Husbandman ^aiteth for the precious fruit of
the earth, and has long patience for it. Therefore I will refer that to the
last, and give resolution here to another Question.

CHAP. II. Why did not the Neighboring Israelites Come-in to help their
Brethren and Sisters, grievously oppressed by a cruel Lord and a bloody
Edomite? Or why did they not relieve David now driven into the Wilderness?
What Saul did, and would have done is examined, and who this Edomite was? So it
is made very clear, That Conscience could not hold-backe the neighboring
Israelites from standing-up, every man in his place, to defend himself, and to
withstand the notorious violences from Saul's and his Edomites hands.
Here Is a strange sight! Saul with his Edomites have smitten and burnt Nob, a
City of Priests and have destroyed Man and Beast there; They make the like
offer against Keilah to destroy that City for David's sake. They pursue David
still with fire and sword, and now they have driven him out into the
wilderness, as he says himself, from abtaing in the inheritance of the LORD.
Why does Israel suffer all this? Why do they not bring forth the spear, to
stop their Master Saul and his Edomite, driving on furiously in the Path of the
destroyer? Why did not Israel withstand their Master Saul, 2 Chro. 26.17, 18.
as AZariah, with fourscore Priests more withstood VZZiah their King, entering
upon their office? And why did they not deal with the Edomite, as the Prophet
caused that messenger to be dealt withal* who had a Commission from King Ahab
to fetch away his head? 2 Kin. 6.32.
Why did they not deal so, or more roughly with the Edomite? It is answered
here boldly enough, That Israel were a conscientious People, they knew their
duty, they saw no VVarrant to make resistance, let their King Murder Priest,
and People, then Pillage, rob and spoil them by his Servants, like the
high-lander thieves there, mere Conscience keeps these neighboring Israelites
hands close in their Pockets the while; It is their King; they will not resist
him mere conscience forbids them. I would speak something here in the
general first, Conscience is a tender thing, and must be tenderly dealt with,
and not judged rashly. But certain it is, we of the common fort have been and
now are, very little troubled in point of Conscience about such matters as
these are; we are not so conscientious of our duty, as to commune with
Conscience about it: we mind other matters here, Hab. 26.
to lade our selves with thick clay, which we call private wealth, neglecting
the common; How long? It is a Prophets question, and by an Interrogation he
makes his Answer very strong and terrible; until they shall rise-up suddenly
that shall bite thee, and awake that shall vex thee, Ve^s 7.
and thou shall be booties unto them: To whom? To Spoylers and Robbers: That
thick clay, wherein we have labored, shall be booties unto those Robbers;
there is the cross indeed, and if it were not for fear, we would fight our
selves out of slavery sure, were it but to secure our private wealth; but
because we would rather be accounted Conscientious men, then Cowards, we will
not holdup our hands, for fear it should be taken to be, a lifting-up the hand
against our King. This were well now, if we did make conscience in other
things, of Lying, Swearing, Blaspheming, Cursing, Robbing, Spoiling, etc. and
of all unjust gain; or if we did make conscience not to keep our Purses shut,
when the necessity of the Poor commanded us to open: or if being able men, and
could go a warfare at our own proper cost, we did make conscience of taking
gain of money, when we stand-up for our selves, our own lives and liberties.
If we make conscience of these things, we might be accounted conscientious men
in other matters, in point of resistance, for fear we make war against the
King; wherein every true Israelite must make conscience, or else quit that
name; for he is unworthy the name of Israel, that does not make conscience at
that sacred point. To proceed a little in the general, GOD forbid that any
Israelite in the world should Resist their King and make conscience so to do:
Nay more (for I keep to the story) GOD forbid that an Israelite should have
resisted Saul; he is the Anointed of the LORD ^s was said, the great Fiduciary
of the Kingdom; An Israelite will make conscience of resisting Saul; I say
Saul, for hearken what Ahimelech says, Be it far from me, Let not the King
impute any thing unto his servant, nor to all the house of my Fathers. 1 Samuel
22.15.
What should not Saul impute unto Ahimelech? That he resisted his Lord, King
Saul* and intended ill unto him; it was far from him so to do. And certainly
it was, and is far from all true Israelites in the world, To resist Saul* to
oppress him, and do him hurt, The LORDS Anointed, they remember that still.

To come more particularly to the point, that we may resolve Conscience anon,
we will see first what Saul did, and by whose Instigation he did it: Then, who
this Edomite was.

What Saul did, is legible before, written in bloody Characters, which will
remain unto the worlds end. By who^e instigation he did it? This is as legible
also: By the instigation of the Devil, vexing and tormenting Saul, effectually
working in him, together with his own spirit, thereby agitated, stirred-up,
and boiled to the height of extreme wrath, against David, and all those that
wished well unto, or had their hand with David. This being premised, I conclude
first,

That Conscience could not hold-backe Israel from helping their Brethren in the
day of distress, and treading down, for who did so oppress Israel at this
time? It must be answered, Saul their King: for he had hands and feet, and
other Instruments besides, to execute the wrath; but all he did was by the
devils motion, that Evil spirit upon him, which hurried him from place to
place, so as he did not go, but was driven; and all his way long he breathed
out threatenings against David: By the motion of this Evil spirit, and his own
(which every man, Saul also, are bound to resist) did Saul do all this;
Therefore whatsoever Israel makes conscience of, they cannot make conscience of
resisting the devil, or the private will, which by the help of the devil,
has done all the violences that ever were done in the world. I presume this is
a cleared case, therefore I leave it; for if Saul, acted by an Evil spirit,
will fly at Isreal's throat, they can make no conscience in the world to resist
him, I mean the bloody actings, and notorious violences of the devil.

Secondly, Israel must look upon Saul now, the great Fiduciary of the
Kingdom, betraying that trust into an Edomites hand; then smiting Isreal's
City, Man and Beast there. Conscience well informed now, calls-in Israel to
help their distressed Brethren, so far as was in the power of their hands to
help: grant so much power in their hands, that they could and were able to
relieve their Brethren, and yet would not, then Conscience will be so far from
pleading their excuse, that it will condemn them as accessory to that murder
and bloodshed. Israel stands charged not to suffer blood to be shed, so far
as they can hinder the shedding of it; Deuteronomy. 21.7.
Our hands have not shed this blood, nor have our eyes seen it: That is,
Conscience to quit their Eyes in this case, as well as their hands; had their
Eyes seen innocent bloud-shedding (as in this case) and not come-in to rescue
the Innocent, they had not been innocent. Conscience then did not hold Israel
back from comming-in all as one man to rescue Nob, the Priests and People
there, now greatly distressed, and to deliver David: Rather Conscience rightly
informed engages Israel upon all this, being in the power of their hands; for
it is to show mercy to their Brethren, in this time of their great distress,
and treading down by the foot of pride.

Thirdly, they had shown mercy indeed to Saul their Master, even to his soul,
could they have conjured that Evil spirit, and overcome him, solacing and
delighting himself (as his manner is) in proud wrath, and wherewith their
Master Saul was sore vexed, that (like the Lunaticke man) he falls often times
into the fire and often times into the water (i.e.) into most imminent apparent,
and destructive dangers. Doubtless it had been a point of pure love, duty and
conscience, to have resisted him, to have withheld him, driving-on furiously
to shed blood: Had Israel done so, they had shown themselves conscientious
men, who understood their duty, and entirely loved their King, and therefore
would not suffer him to do that, which would undo him for ever. O! it had
been an act of mercy, and of a well instructed conscience, if Israel had, every
man to his power, as one man stept-in, and withstood Saul in his bloody way:
and all the true Israel in the world would have acquitted them so doing, and
said, in mere pity and compassion to Saul, and that which should be dearest
unto him have they done this, withheld their Master from shedding blood. Nay,
Saul himself, had he ever come to himself (but the Evil spirit haunted him
to the day of his death) would have thanked Israel for so doing.

But here, though nothing can be said for Saul in justification of what he did,
yet much is said against them that had any hand with David. That they were
Rebels and Traitors all against the King, and so Saul himself charge all
his servants, and all the Priests too; All of you have conspired against me, 2 Samuel 22. Verse. 8. Verse. 13.
and why have ye done so? An heavy charge, but yet no honest man made any
account of it, as a charge of dishonor: They counted it a cheap word, a great
honor rather, being the Cognizance of the choicest men of all Israel, and they
could glory in it, defamed for rig^teousnesse sake; for the very best and
choicest men in those days were called Conspirators, Rebels to their King:
David was called so, I know not how often, and the Edomite the Rightest man,
and best Subject; yet let us hear what may be charged upon these so defamed
men, though nothing can be proved; That, Ob.
had Israel rose up to defend themselves, and their Brethren, they had
withstood their King.

No, Ans.
they had stood for him, and had done him an infinite service, could they have
delivered their King from the power of the Evil spirit, and his own Will, and
from the hands of the Edomite, who withstood the King indeed, and fought
against his Crown, Peace, and Dignity.

But if Israel, Ob.
standing up in their own defense, had not withstood Saul, yet they had
resisted the ordinance of God, and they must make conscience there.

Yes, Ans.
great Reason they should; let Israel make conscience evermore of resisting
Saul their King, or their Kings power, for that power is the ordinance of GOD,
and he that resists the ordinance of GOD, does resist GOD. That is true, but
these orders (disorders rather) of the evil spirit, and of man's perverse will,
are not the ordinance of GOD: Therefore to resist these is to obey GOD, and to
resist the devil. Make conscience evermore of resisting Saul the King, the
power, which GOD has entrusted him with, but never make conscience of
resisting the evil spirit, ruling and commanding in Saul the King; he did
nothing in prosecution of David, but by suggestion from that evil spirit,
mighty in Saul and in other of Isreal's Kings, and Queens; And this spirit was
pro tempore Dominus fac totum, therefore it could not be conscience that kept
Israel quiet, and still the while. A sinful, and base fearfulness i^ might be
(yet I will not be so bold as to determine that) a stupidity, a benummednesse,
a drossinesse of spirit, contracted by long rest, and so Israel might be like a
Dove without an heart an Ass, and a strong Ass couching down betwixt
burdens, laid upon them by Saul, and his bloody Courtiers, for Saul commands,
and the Edomite smote Nob, and overthrowes all, who stood-up for, or had an
hand with David. And all Israel stood shrinking up their arms into their
sleeves, as we read, in Xenophon, The Persians were wont to do before their
King in homage and subjection to all his commands. But as I said, I will not
conclude so; That a deadness of spirit was upon Israel at this time: I believe
there was a more commanding cause then that, which withheld Israel at that
time. We shall hear that anon, when I have taken off the imputation of
treason, and rebellion, charged upon David, by his master Saul, for David a
private man does defend himself as well as he can, and would have fortified
Keilah, had they not proved treacherous to him; and the lawfulness of this may
be questionable by all Israel, as well as by Saul himself.

Whether David in defending Keisah, Quest.
had not maintained it against Saul?

It was not against Saul; Ans.
It was against the notorious violences of his evil spirit, those David would
have withstood.

But Keilah was Isreal's City; Saul the King of Israel, Qu.
why would David fortify that City? [As it is more then probable he would have
done, had not the Keilites proved themselves ungrateful and treacherous.]

Because David knew, That Saul secretly practiced mischief against him, Ans.
and would destroy Keilah for his sake. All this is written. 1 Samuel 22.
Therefore he thrust himself into Keilah, would have fortified that place.

But Saul might thrust out David thence, for it was Saul's City, Qu.
was it not?

No; it was Isreal's City, Saul's for Isreal's good, to defend Israel, Ans.
not to destroy Israel: We are sure of that.

But David had strongholds here and there, Qu.
and did Breast-worke himself against Saul his master.

No, Ans.
not against Saul his master, but against those notorious violences, the
actings of the evil spirit upon Saul his master. Against these extreme
outrages and riots David did fortify and Breast-worke himself. And where
ever we read of these strongholds and Breast-works, there we shall read of
Saul's bloody persecution against David, Isreal's best friend, and temporal
Savior. Therefore will those strong holds be an eternal dishonor to King
Saul, till the Records of Time be lost. 1 Samuel 26.19. 1 Samuel 23.14
David did get up to his strong-hold, where be abode, and there he did
Breast-worke himself. Why? It is answered, for Saul sought every day to kill
him. It is upon ever-lasting Record, an eternal dishonor to King Saul, so to
persecute his best servant, for who so faithful as David in all his Kingdom;
And if David, a private man, did so fortify himself to safeguard his own
throat, much more might all Israel for their own and David's sake, stand-up
against the insolences of a private will, and an evil spirit acting thereby.
Whatever held in Israel from comming-out armed at this time, conscience it was
not, To let the King do what a Tyrant does, make will his law, and do what he
pleases, and yet Israel stand still the while, behold all this with open face,
hold their hands in their pockets, or shrink them up into their sleeves in
homage, forsooth, to the Evil spirit commanding in Saul, and in obedience to
the Edomite executing that command. Surely the like was never done since the
beginning of the world until this Day: For here is the King of Israel smiting
Israel; the great Fiduetary of the Kingdom, to whom Cities and Towns, Priests
and People are all entrusted, betraying this Trust into an Edomites hands; And
so he, that should, next to GOD, uphold and preserve Israel, destroys Israel,
and will lay their Cities waste. And all this that he may be avenged of David,
one of the best men, and best subjects he had in his Kingdom; We are well
resolved now in point of Isreal's subjection to that power, which GOD had
entrusted Saul with thereby to be a Terror to the evil, not to good works.
Romans 13.3.
And that if Israel had stood-up in their own and David's defense, they had not
stood-up against Saul, but for him; and against the notorious violences, the
actings of the evil spirit by Saul's and his Edomites hands. And so I come to
enquire concerning this Edomite, who he was; When we know him, we shall see
plainly, that Israel could make no scruple of conscience to stand up in
resistance of him, who stood up against the Crown and peace of Isreal's King
and Kingdom. [VVho this Edomite was; How bloody his mind against Israel.]
Who was this Edomite? A Child of Edom, who in the day of Jerusalem said,
Raze it, raze it: even to the foundation thereof. And The LORD remembers this,
and charge the Edomite with it, Am^s 1 11.
he did pursue his brother with the sword, and did cast off all pity, and his
anger did tear perpetually, and kept his wrath for ever. The LORD threatens
the Edomite in the same place also: For three transgressions of Edom, and for
four I will not turn away the punishment thereof; A finite number for an
infinite; for three transgressions, and for four. But his bloodshed, his
cruelty toward his brother, that shall set deep upon his score. Though the
LORD should pass over six transgressions of Edom, yet the seventh GOD will not
pass over, I will not turn away the punishment thereof. Edom has broken all
the bands of Nature. [O take heed of breaking those bands of Nature, and
brother like kindnesses; the Edomite did so;] he did pursue his brother with
the sword; and when he had his brother under his hands, he cast-off all pity,
his anger did tear, as we read before; An old adversary to Israel; Number.
20.14.
The Edomite knew of all the travel that befell his brother; Yet he will not
show his brother the least favor; he will not suffer him to pass by the Kings
high way, though Israel will not be chargeable to the Edomite for a drop of
water, or a mouthfull of grass, if my Cattle drink of thy water, then we
will pay for it. A reasonable request as ever was asked, yet the Edomite would
not grant it; He would give his brother a stone for bread; and for a fish a
Serpent; so he answered his brothers request, and then came-out against, his
brother with much people, and a strong hand. When? In the day of Jacobs
trouble. And now see what he has done: He had no sooner the word of command
from Saul's mouth, but he answers it with his hand; Turn thou and fall upon
the Priests; And Doeg the Edomite turned, and pursued his Brother with the
sword, and showed no pity. Ah Lord! Can an Israelites heart endure to see this,
An Edomite flourishing with his sword in Isreal's Land, and hold their hands!
Can they endure to see 85. Priests slain in one day; their City smote with the
edge of the Sword, both Men and Women, Children and Sucklings, and Oxen, and
Asses, and Sheep, with the edge of the Sword, and by the command of the Evil
spirit! Can they endure to see all this, and stand still the while, seeing an
Edomite not only buffeting Israel, but utterly destroying a City in Israel!
Conscience could not hold back Israel, that is certain. But perusing the
Text, I persuade my self thus it was.

The sentence was hasty from the King, he did indeed suffer Ahimelech to plead
for himself, but Saul was resolved upon the question, though there was a
parley, or treaty betwixt them, as if they would come to a good understanding,
and so end the matter; yet Saul was resolved what to do, (as some Judges have
been resolved in the Case before they came to their Court to hear the
matter,) To take away Ahimelechs life; And he was quick in doing of it. No
sooner Ahimelech had given-in his Answer, (as good Reason and Law both, as ever
was given,) but Saul passed his sentence, Thou shall surely dye, Ahimelech,
etc. And so it was, it was presently done, as Saul commanded, (the evil spirit
on him,) for an Edomite had the doing of it, and it was done suddenly; on that
day he slew 85. Priests, and smote their City, Man and Beast there; On that
day; A sudden execution, for the evil spirit is strong, and as cunning too,
we are not ignorant of his devices, but know not half the depths of Satan: he
surprised the City before the inhabitants were aware, much less could the
neighboring Israelites be provided to come-in, and rescue their Brethren; so
suddenly surprised, for the Devil watches, whom, and when he may destroy:
Besides, it was not an ordinary strength, that could give check to, and mate
That evil spirit working so effectually in Saul and the Edomite, the Manager
of the Devils and Saul's wrath. See we now how all this relates to the present
Time; And if we shall find, That the Devil has as active instruments now,
and Managers of his wrath against Israel, as once he had, Then. I hope, we
shall make no more scruple of Conscience to resist the Devil now, than the
Israelites did make then. With Gods help we will examine the matter, and
resolve the case of Conscience at that point.

CHAP. 3. This persecution comes-up to our Times, as bloody now as ever any was
in any time. The Papists now of the same generation with the Edomites then, and
as bloody now as then. Our engagements to withstand them: In so doing we stand
for the King. What should be our prayer for him; and a case of Conscience
touching our obedience to him, resolved; and the chief Objections touching
that matter.
THis persecution of David, managed by King Saul and the Edomite, comes fully
up to our times, though in the degrees of cruelty, and execution thereof, it
falls much short of what is done now. Saul and the Edomite in those days
destroyed a City of Priests, for David's sake, and would have destroyed Keilah
also: The King, by his wicked Counsel, have the same execution more then upon
design, they have executed the same wrath upon two kingdoms. But two Cities,
then, one destroyed, the other in design for destruction; Two kingdoms here:
For David's sake then; The same Reason now, because the hands of the godly are
with David now.

I will not spend time now to prove this. That the Atheists, and Papists, are
the same in these days with the Edomites in Saul's days; Their words and
actions make too sufficient proof thereof: For they have done, Psalm. 137.7.
as their Fathers said before them in the day of Jerusalem, RAZE IT, RAZE IT,
EVEN TO THE FOUNDATION THEREOF. Children of Edom sure enough: So they said in
ancient time, so they say now: So they pursued their Brother with the Sword
then, so they pursue him now: They showed no pity then, they show no pity
now: They did smi^e and burn Cities then, they do the same now. Reader, I
could stuff my Pages from out of the Records of time, with the most horrid
horrible, divellish, etc. But I purposely forbear, for thou art satisfied
touching this matter, from what thou have heard seen, and felt: Therefore thou will make no question here, for Conscience sake; Thou will resist the Edomite
according to the power in thy hand, for Conscience sake; Conscience of thy vow
in Baptism; thou have vowed there to renounce the devil, then this Edomite
sure, he must be renounced too, (he is singular, but a Legion) who is the great
MANAGER of all the devils affairs, against the ^ity of GOD, all the Christian
world over. Who but the Edomite, he does all, he transacts all, all the devils
affairs come through his hands, whether they concern his War or his Peace,
(there is not a Pin to choose if his Peace were not the worst of the two) in
conscience of thy Vow in Baptism thou must renounce the Edomite, the Son as
well as the Father, the devils Right Hand, the Manager of all his affairs upon
earth: I say it again, that it may be remembered always.

Secondly, in Conscience to thy oath of Allegiance: Thou have taken an oath to
subject thy self to the Power GOD has set over thee, and that is a Power,
which cannot be perverted to base ends, against GOD, and the power of
Godliness; it cannot be Committed to an Edomites hand, nor can he be the
MANAGER thereof: We shall hear more of this anon.

3. In Conscience of thy Covenant entred-into; You are not your own now* you
are bought with a price, you are GODS, a sworn Servant to Him: You have sworn,
and will not repent, to serve the Living GOD, and not the Lusts of Men; You
have entered into Covenant, by the help of GOD, you are resolved to stand to
it, and then to stand-up against all those, who stand up against GOD, and His
Truths revealed in His Word. We are fully and clearly resolved at this point,
To stand-up for GOD against the Edomites of these times, for Conscience sake;
nay, for the Commonwealths sake, as our Contrymen stood up against the
Wolves; our Land would not bear them, Sect. 2 chap. 6.
say some; nay, the Land would not endure them, say I, for so says my Author
too: Every man stood-up with his weapon in his hand, and out they thrust the
Wolves, they could not endure them. The time will come, when we shall do so
with these Edomites too, else we cannot maintain our Laws, our Liberties, our
Lives; and, which is the Life of our Lives, and should be the Crown of our
rejoicing, The Gospel; we cannot maintain that, if we do not thrust out the
Edomites, for they will Thrust us from the Gospel, and the Gospel from us. We
are resolved in this case of conscience touching the Edomite, Resistance of
him. But here is a greater case; If we resist the Edomite in our sense, and in
Scripture language, That Legion of the Papists, now Raging and Rioting in our
Land, we shall resist the King too; for this Edomite is the chief MANAGER
(next to the Devil) of all the Kings affairs in this Kingdom his very best
Subjects, and truest Friends. O horrible, what words are these! Papists his
best Subjects! It must pass, for it has the Kings allowance, he has declared
it so, he has proclaimed it so, once and again, and a third time: The Edomites
in Ireland, in England, they are the Kings best Subjects, those he may
confide-in, his heart may cleave to them in love, when David, The faithful of
the LORD, are called Traitors every day, and his good People Rebels all. O
David cannot be silent now any longer; GOD knows, and all the Christian world
knows, David's heart is upright, and his hands clear, and his prayer pure
touching this matter; Their hands have not shed innocent blood, nor have their
eyes seen it, but with indignation and Zeal against these Murderers. And we
say, That many Kings have been seduced by evil counsels, Many, whose hearts
have been stolen away from their good people; and given-up into their enemies
hands cleaving to them in love; and some have shed blood to their power, as
Saul here, and others after him. But, oh, how loath I am to speak! The Evil
Counselors have carried-on the King in the Path of the destroyer, beyond all
These, for he has given a Commission to destroy his good people, and makes
shows, That his soul bleeds over them: He pittieth his Peoples nakedness,
and takes from them their clothes; he calls them Rebels in Ireland, and
entertaines the same Rebels here; He professes to do all by help of GOD and
the Law; and all he does, has a manifest contrariety to GOD, and contradiction
to the Law. He professes with his tongue to be for Religion indeed; when his
heart and hand is utterly against the professors of the same. To take them from
the Earth. He professes to maintain his Peoples liberties and does all. that
is in the power of his hands to inthrall, and oppress his people; To make
their necks bend to the Edomites yoke; he would make believe his hand goes
along with GOD, when he puts it forth against The Almighty, in all his peoples
sight, as if he had an arm like GOD. But the bloodshed in both his Kingdoms,
this The Lord sees, and hears the voice of it too; And, which makes the voice
yet louder, The LORD hears how he charge it upon the innocent, and blesses
the Murderers, those that have shed it indeed. The LORD lay it close to the
heart of his Majesty, that his soul may bleed over the blood he has shed;
That he may forbear to say so, till he does so; That his soul may shed tears
for the blood he has shed, indeed and indeed. Let others pray, The LORD bring
his Majesty home to his Parliament upon the wings of the Churches Prayers; They
that pray so, pray well; but they pray better, who pray, The Lord open the
Kings eyes and heart, that he may discern the Path he has trod, the way he is
in, and feel the working of that blood shed upon his soul, working in him a
sorrow after a godly sort; The LORD show him the falsehood, the hypocrisy of
his heart, make it as manifest to him, as it is to all his good People, That
his uncircumcised heart may be humbled, that he may abhor evil, and loath
himself for what he has done. Amen, say I, and all who wish that his soul may
prosper. He may come home to his Parliament, and do more hurt then good there,
unless his heart be humbled for all he has done first,

I remember very well, the Eleventh King of Scotland (the worst King that ever
was, I think, yet) was brought home to his Parliament. I mean, he came-up to
his good People* even to all the desire of their hearts; for thus he did. Those
pernicious Counfellors [he had many, and they stole away his heart* or he stole
away theirs: surely the King was worst* because chiefest in the trespasse] he
suffered to be imprisoned, and over some the wheel was turned: And all this he
did in deep dissimulation, that he might the more freely, with no resistance,
worke-out his own will, and do according to his own pleasure afterward. And
so he did; the year after, by that time he saw all clear before him, the
hearts of his Nobles gained; for he gave the offenders into their hands, and
all was well: and now they must be feasted. They were glad of that, and to
supper they came, which was served-up in a Lordly dish; and after the meat,
Wine: they are, and drank, and their hearts were merry* but the worst Wine was
kept last; toward the close of the Feast, the Nobles were made drunk with
their own blood, as with sweet Wine: A few escaped, and those few (by the
help of the People) rose-up against their King, and slew him. I shall not
meddle with that, though in the close of the work, I shall point to that King
again, and another half as bad.

I conclude from hence, That till the King be truly informed for what he has
done, That he has walked in the counsel of the ungodly; his foot has stood in
the way of sinners; and he sits in the seat of the scornful; Till his heart
be humbled for this, T^ll his soul cleaves to the ground for this, and what
else God and his conscience best knows. Till this be, the King cannot
come-back to his Parliament, he cannot be to the heart and desires of his good
People there. Therefore pray we; LORD turn the heart of the King, give him a
sight of what he has done, and humble his soul in the sight of it; th the has
blasphemed the Name of his GOD; deal deceitfully with his Maker; treacherouoy
with His People; abominably with His Day, profaning it by a Law. He must be
restless in his spirit till he has vindicated That dishonor done to That
Rest; forcing and persecuting His best Servants, touching that matter, and
shedding their blood to his power ever since. LORD give the King a sight of all
this, and of all that The Searcher of hearts, and his own heart knows by
himself, and kindly humble him for all. Then all the rest follows, the King
will be right for his Parliament, his heart will be with them; then it will be
said, and not till then, What the King does pleases all his people; and what
his good people do, pleases the King. Amen:

But if the King do not his duty, his people must do theirs; if he look not
to his charge how he rules, not his, but Gods People, [THY PEOPLE] sitting in
GODS Throne; Yet must the people look to their obedience; they must be subject
to the higher Power notwithstanding. I come then to resolve what this higher
Power is, and the cases of conscience thereabouts. Not touching the giving of
the Sword, Strongholds and Forts, Ammunition* and the like, into confiding
hands; To this there is enough said, though I had said nothing; I will say but
this; So long as these Strongholds and Breast-workes do stand, they will be
a memorial of the Kings illegal and most injurious dealing with a righteous
people. So long as these shall be spoken of, will the injustice, the bloody
proceedings of the King, (in the hands of bloody Counselors) be remembered
also, to all generations. We shall tell it to our children and they to their
children, That the King of England would have oppressed his own people; he
would have inthralled their Laws, Liberties, Religion; And for the maintenance
of all these, their lives and all that was dear unto them, did his people so
fortify and Breast-worke themselves, against the fury and rage of their King,
in the hands of bloody persecuters. The Case of Conscience now.

The People must not stand up for their lives and liberties, Ob.
against murderers, for if they stand up against them, they stand up against
their King.

We deny that, and conclude the Contrary, Ans.
That a standing up against Murderers is a standing up for their King, To
deliver him out of the hands of Murderers; It has an affiance with duty, a
full aspect and agreement thereunto.

Why? but if you resist these Murderers, Obj:
You resist the King; and if you resist the King, You resist the Higher power,
and that is the Ordinance of GOD whereto we must be subject for Conscience sake.

Yes, but we are clear mistaken in point of Power: Ans.
Therefore I will ask a question, and resolve it.

What is this higher Power. Qu.


I will tell you first what it is not. It is not that Power, Ans.
which the King may have a will to give, and may commit to an Edomites hand; It
is not a destructive power (that is from the Devil) whereby Saul and his
Edomite were enabled to lay waste one City, and made faire-offer to destroy
another; Not such a Power, whereby the King and his wicked Council now
endeavor the same destruction to two Kingdoms. It is not such a Power.

What Power then? Qu.


A Power, whereunto? in case the King or his Edomite wrongs me, Ans.
though the lowest in his Kingdom, yet I may appeal from him or them for
Righteous Judgment; And this Power is the Law, and in the high Court, Who can
determine what Law is; and do stand bound to right me oppressed by a Contrary
Power, though the meanest of many Thousands, and not worhty the dust I tread
upon; yet This Court stands bound to right me. And if so be they stand so bound
to a private Person (we must note this by the way) how much stronger is their
obligation to two or three Kingdoms, To stand up for Defense of Lawful power
against this Destructive Power?

And now we have learned our duty and office too; we would have the Pa liament
stand up for us, we made choice of them for that end; The greatest shame in the
world, If we should not stand up for the Parliament with our Swords in our
hands, or with what comes next to hand in defense of Lawful power, and all
that is dear or near unto us, involved in the same.

What! see a King, seduced by evil Counsel, giving up his power (I say his
power not the higher power) into an Edomites hand, and this Edomite flourishing
with his Sword, and displaying his Banners in Isreal's Land, and Israel stand
still the while! What a shame to all Israel! But blessed be God, they do not
stand still, they move, and they do great things as their GOD inables them.
Who gives Courage, Spirit and invention when and where He pleases: And where
the Inhabitants of the Land are not overpowered by the King and his bloody
party, there they do fortify the Cities and Towns, and Breast-worke
themselves there. And these Forts and Breastworkes, are like to remain to
after Generations an Eternal dishonor to the King, now in the hands of
desperate and pernicious Men; For when the Child shall ask; Wherefore were
these Forts, and Breastworkes raised? The Father will Answer; The King of
England, seduced by evil Counsel, would have destroyed the Parliament of
England, Laws, Liberties, Religion, Life and all; Therefore did the Parliament
and all good people, in defense of the Parliament and themselves, raise up
themselves and these Forts, Strongholds, and Breastworkes: so we shall
declare to our Children, what the King, by his pernicious Counselors, has done
against his good people; and what the Lord has done for them, shall be had in
perpetual remembrance.

But will not this be called a resisting of the higher power? Qu.


Yes, by those who understand not what higher power or Law means: Ans.
or judge it to be that which rules in their Members: Or do understand by
power The Kings private will, or that Commission he can give under the Great.
Seal (such a KEEPER it has) into the hands of Edomites, David's utter and
implacable enemies now, not like, but of the same generation with the Edomites
in ancient days.

But is it not a Resistance of the Power, Quest.
which is indeed the Ordinance of God?

No, Ans.
but a contending for that Power, the settling and establishing thereof in the
Land by all lawful means, which GOD has not only allowed, but commanded;
That his people may live as His people, in holiness and righteousness, giving
obedience to their Master in Heaven, (and in Relation to Him) to that power He
has set over His people on earth. This is more then enough to these questions,
which we find so fully and excellently cleared to every eye, but theirs who
will not see, though we should (as the Proverb is) Show them the Sun in our
hand. Si solemn ipsum gestemus in manibus, Last. 7.1.


I conclude then, That they, and they only show themselves conscientious men,
and to understand the weight of duty, who stand-up now for their Laws and
Liberties, and life of their lives, their Religion, so to deliver a captive
King, a distressed Church and State, now in the hands of bloody and most
pernicious Counselors; And if all the people in the Land do not stand-up now
in this breach, it is not because they want will but because they want power,
they are overpowered: The Devil is as strong now, and works as mightily now,
so does the Edomite also, the Devils right hand in our Land, as they did
anciently in the Kingdom of Iudab.

But some make scruple here, and conscience too for they say,

They have taken an Oath to serve the King, Ob.
and they cannot dispense with their Oath.

God forbid they should; Let them serve the King, and serve him heartily and
faithfully; but then they must not serve his private Will, which they see
enlived, made strong and mighty by an Evil spirit, now ruling against the
Commonwealth and public Faith of the Kingdom. I know this taking an Oath is
much pleaded, and Conscience of breaking there; But let these conscientious men
look inward, deal truly, and turn their conscience outward, that we may see
it, then we shall read their minds plainly, That it is not conscience of an
oath that troubles them, for they cannot be bound by an Oath to serve the lusts
of men: But this pincheth them, They are conscientious of unlawful gain, and
they will hold it fast still, and their honors they will not part-with, nor
their reputation amongst men; They will hold to the King, that he may hold fast
with them; They will serve his lusts, that he may serve theirs; and this is all
the conscience these men have, which they have choked as well as they can,
that they may the more quietly hold-fast iniquity, and keep close their unjust
gain, and quite neglect their duty, while they suffer the Devil to command in
chief, and the Edomite not only to buffet, but to destroy their brethren,
they looking upon all this the while with open face, and hold their hands in
their pockets, or shrink them up into their sleeves, in homage to the Evil
spirit, and the Edomite; and then plead Conscience to beare-out their baseness
of spirit, when they make no conscience of unjust gain, nor of their vow in
Baptism, nor their Protestation, nor Covenant, for there they take an Oath,
and draw upon them a Curse, if they perform not: It will not serve their
turn. But I forbear. We are concluded what is the Power GOD has set over us,
That we must make conscience of obeying that, and to resist the contrary power
with all our might; we must be as active that way, as zealous for the truth, as
our enemies are against it; as valiant to maintain our Laws and Liberties, as
the adversaries are to destroy all: Why should it be said, Infelix populus Dei
non habet tantum fervorem in bono, quantum mali (...) malo. Hi^ron.
O unhappy people of God! They have not so much zeal in good, as the wickea
have in evil; not so much zeal to build-up, as the wicked have to pull down;
not so much zeal to advance Christ and H^s Government, as the wicked have to
dethrone Him: The People of GOD (unhappy in that point) have not the courage,
and constancy in the love of the SPIRIT, that the wicked world has in the
lusts of the flesh. That courage! nay nothing like it, Ad ertibescen^iam
nostram dico N^^ron:
to our shame it must be spoken. Yea, but we must hear more what is spoken to
take off that little courage and zeal the people of GOD show at this time, in
their war against the Beast

Let us hear first Master Fullers Argument, (I mean not his against the high
Commission Oath, which could never be answered till it was taken away) but the
Court-flatterers argument, Page 260.
Master Fullers in his Holy-Warre; he says* Subjects are Adjectives, nothing
in themselves, b^^ ^ll they are in reference to their King, in f^ll agreement
with their Princes will, and dependence upon him. That every Reader may
understand this Argument, I will unfold it clearly to Master Fullers meaning,
in the Grammatical construction of the same; The Subjects must be Adjectives
and the King the Substantive; that is first, If the King will number himself
with the wicked those that will ruin themselves and their King the Subject is
an Adjective, he must number himself with those also, else he makes bad
construction says he.

Secondly, If the King bring himself into a miserable Case, the Subject must
throw himself into the same c^se too, though it be upon the swords point.

Thirdly, if the King degenerate, and prove Feminine, uxorious, and womanish,
as a man may be; the Subject is an Adje^tive, he must degenerate too, for he
must be of the same gender with his Substanstive: or if the King will be
Neuter, neither Masculine nor Feminine, of neither side, neither hot nor cold,
a midling person, and he is worst of all; be he what he will be, the Subject is
an Adjective, he must be so too: this is that the Grammarian calls Concord,
such an agreement or dependence the Subject has upon his King, as the Adjective
has with his Substantive, with whom it must agree in Number, Case: and Gender.

All this is good Grammar, but the worst Logic that ever I read, for there is
no Reason in it at all: No Reason at all, that the Subject, whom God has made a
man, endowed him with a reasonable Soul; That this man should be Adjective,
wholly at the dispose and will of his Prince, so dependant upon him; of the
same mind and judgment, though the Princes mind be most contrary to the
mind of Christ. But it is excellent Divinite, not as Master Fuller understands
it, but as we must understand it. The Subject is adjective; and GOD, his King,
has only a B^ing in Himself; The Subject is adj ctive, nothing in himself but
all in reference to and dependance-on his GOD; no being in himself, but all in
GOD; he understands, he wills, he does, he loves, he hates all in reference to
GODS command; he is an adjective, all his dependence is upon GOD, his walking
is before GOD; his love to GOD he expends and layes-out himself for Him, and
renders all back to Him, To Whom be glory for ever and ever. Amen.

But we must recall what was said before, A.
the manner of the Persian Subjects Subjects indeed; Their manner was to
shrink-up their hands into their sleeves in homage to their King.

What have we to do with Heathenish customs? B.
This shrinking-up their hands into their sleeves, employed an absolute
obedience, which we absolutely deny. But yet we will hearken to it this once,
and read it again as we find it in Xenophon; It was the manner of the
Persians in presence of their King, and homage to his Sacred Majesty, To
shrink-up their hands into their sleeves. But they never did so while their
King was smiting their Cities, and laying waste their Towns. Indeed there was
never such a thing read of as now we see with our eyes. A King laying waste his
own kingdom* as at this day. And therefore if we do not shrink-up our hands
into our sleeves we must be pardoned.

But consider we Beza's note upon Romans 13.5. Although the Magistrate have no
power over the Conscience, yet he is the Mini^ter of GOD* Ob. Etiamsi magist
atus 05 in conscientiam jus non habet, tamen qu ni De. sit Minister, bona
conscientia ei resisti non potest*
and cannot with good Conscience be resisted. His Note is somewhat fuller and
more binding, Act. 23. verse 5. We must hea^til, honor Magistrates yea though
they be Tyrants. And it is out of all question, that so they were, when Saint
Paul taught submission unto them, whether to the supreme powers, or, the
powers under him. But it is as clear, That their obedience consisted in
suffering* rather then in obeying, rather in bearing from the hand, what the
Power inflicted, Magistratibus ex animo deferendus honor, etiam Tyrannis. Ans.
then in doing what the Power commanded.

This is true, for there is an obedience in suffering, and so no resisting of
the power, for he that suffers from the hand of the Ruler, for what his
conscience will not suffer him to do* he does not resist, but obeyes the
Ruler. And yet we must note, That there is a wide difference betwixt giving
obedience to that, the Heathen Emperors commanded by their Laws; and
obedience to that, which Kings now command against Law. Christians then did
take-up the burden of their Ruler with a bended knee, (as the Lord Verub
expresses it and as I may interpret it) i. e. They made their body bow unto
it, not their conscience; They suffered for that they could not obey; as the
three Worthies in Daniel, who yeelded-up their bodies ^o the dispose of their
King, and so The LORD, Whom they served, kept their bodies untouched by the
fire, who would keep their consciences free from polution. It is otherwise
with Christians now, They are called to liberty, To obey their King ruling by
Law, The ^igher Power, which GOD has set over them; and which the King cannot
commit to an Edomites hand. If he d^es, it ought to be resisted, for it is a
terror to the good, not to evil works; Clean contrary to that a Minister of
GOD should be. And whereas it is said, We must give honor to Magistrates,
though Tyrants; we grant as much, for it has been, and is the manner of all
the children of GOD so to do. David did so, witness his words, and humble
deportment before Saul; But David did not give his throat to Saul; though Saul
was King, and David a private man, yet he read no Law, nor could see Reason for
that, but all Law and Reason against it.

There is one argument more from the example of the Jews, if not shrinking-up
their hands into their sleeves after the Persian manner, yet bowing their hands
behind them in hom^ge to their Emperors person, and commands; Philo relates
the story in his Ambassie to Cajus, as follows. Caligula would set-up his
Image in the Temple of Jerusalem that Abomination in that Sacred Place. So he
would do; And for that end, Petronius was sent unto them to assure them, That
Caligula, their Emperor, would have it so, and for that purpose an Army of
foot and horse was in a readiness to shoulder-in the Image, if by fair means
he prevailed not. The Jews, with their wives and children met the Emperors
Ambassador, stand before him as children before their parents, with their
Arms bent behind them: assuring the Ambassador by that reverentiall posture
of their bodies, That as they were not so mad as to withstand their Lord; so
they were not so mindlesse of their duty to GOD, as to suffer that abomination
to be brought into their Temple, unless over the heads of themselves, their
wives and children trampled upon all the way thither, as the mire in the
streets; And so they quitted themselves, say they of themselves, like men, in
hese two great points, In preserving entire the service of their GOD: And the
b^nd of allegiance to their Prince.

This is the very posture of good Subjects, Ob.
to carry their hands bent behind them, while they suffer the Rebels to ride
over their heads, And that is the objection from hence.

I confess this Story speaks as fully to Doctor Fearnes purpose, Ans.
as any we have read; yet will it not satisfy his tender conscience, nor any
understanding man; For he must hear Reason. A wise man will not show his
teeth, that cannot bite; his offer that way, may cause all his teeth to be
struck out. I will shrink my hands up into my sleeves, or turn them behind
me, if I am not able to use my hands. Again,

If the Jews at that time would expose themselves, wives, and children, to the
lust of one domineering Lord, That is no rule for Christians so to do. Nay it
was no rule for the Christians after them. So we will answer practice with
practice; For they, being oppressed by the hand of an Heathen Emperor
Lucinius, sought help from a Christian Emperor, who gave them aid, and
thereby they oppressed him that oppressed them. Though yet it makes a wide
difference, to live under them, whose will is their law, and will do what they
list; And under him* who is under a power, which must rule him, and his
commands; Whereof before.

The case is cleared; without controversy the King is not the higher Power:
Yet before we conclude, let us hear how the Heathen have resolved this matter.
Whose is the power? The Kings: Who has the power over the King? The Law: Then
the Law is the higher power, says Plutarch in his Moralls. But me thinks
Aristotle's words are yet more notable, he says, He that will have the Law to
be the higher power, (...) Polit. lib. 3. sub finem: (...) (obliquos agit)
(...). Ibid.
sets GOD uppermost, and the Law next to Him; But he that will have man to be
the higher power, says a Beast may be it. A Beast! Yes: so says Aristotle,
and his Reason must be this, though I find it not in the place; for it is
sufficient that he says, a Beast; Man may be carried by his sensual part,
then he walks like a Beast, and acts like a Beast, his Reason and Judgment may
be steeped (as was said) in his affections, Lust may sway him, Anger too, and
turn him from the rule of Law and Reason both; yes that it may, the best men
living, and all the while the man is so carried, he acts like a Beast.
Therefore we must not place the higher power in him. What is the higher power
then? The Law: What is the Law? It is (as the mind of the Lawgiver Senate, or
Council should be) void of all sensual Desire and Appetite. I express it as
well as I can, I would it were expressed better, and better thought upon, for
truly it is very excellent. I conclude then, that is the higher power, that
can do me no Wrong, but all the Right that can be, because it is void of all
manner of Malignity, from self, se^fe-seeking, or selfe-pleasing. Then it is a
Truth as clear as the Sun-beame, That the King is not the higher power, he is
a Man, and may do, and does much wrong, for there is a Malignity in man, even
in the best of men, and will be there so long as self is in him. I am now to
make further discovery of this malignant spirit in Saul persecuting of David,
so we proceed in the Story, where we shall read that which may be a great
disheartning to Israel now, while they look downward upon number and strength
of men: But if they look upward, setting their faces steadfastly heavenward,
then they are in heart again, and as bold as Lions. We read as follows.

CHAP. 4. Saul has shed blood to his power, is resolved to shed more; summons
Israel to come-in for that purpose; They come at his call. What to think of
his Troopers. It relates to the later and present time, not to dishear^^^, but
to encourage all Israel David must be driven from out of all his strong Holds,
and forsaken of all his friends; excellent Reason is given why it is so, in the
next Chapter.
SAul has done according as his will carries him, and the Edomite according to
his Commission. And now their foot is entered into blood, they drive-on
furiously in the Path of the destro^er, and to Keil^h they march. A man would
think now, that such a cruel Lord, and such a bloody General as is the
Edomite, should not have one man to go out with him into the field, no not
one. But see! it is otherwise; 1 Samuel 23.8.
for we read, Saul called all the People together to war. And they came in at
his call* I examine not now what moved them) thick and threefold (as we say) by
Companies and Troops to the number of three thousand men: What to do? To
safeguard Saul's person, that was Saul's pretense, against the insolences of
David, who (ye know, or else ye know nothing) ran away faster then Saul could
march after, though Saul made as much speed as possibly he could, who was
exceedingly MAD against the righteous, and persecuted David even to strange
Cities; yet Saul was afraid of David, and made his guard so strong. Let it go,
for I will not inquire into that matter, being made so legible already; I would
rather enquire, Who, or what manner of persons these Soldiers were? It is
answered, Chosen men out of all Israel, that is, noble, rich, valiant, stout
men, learned men also, the vile Priests, and the treacherous Prophets:
Doubtless these were now, as always ever since, engaged in the war against
David, and Chosen men out of Israel to that purpose. And truly this must needs
be a great disheartning to David, and so to all Israel; for Saul's foot is in
the Path of the destroyer, the Edomite is with him, they are marching to
Keilah, to do to that City as they did to Nob; and yet GOD seems to shine
upon Saul and his Council; Saul calls, and they come-in unto him no fewer them
Three thousand ch^sen men out of all Israel.

To relate unto the present time as we go along; This has been and is our
present case. The King in his war against David now, (the faithful in his
Land) has the same advantages now, as Saul and his Edomite had in the days of
old; though the King, seduced by evil counsels, is gone-up to the knees in
blood, yet Nobles are come-in unto him, rich men, valiant men, an Army of
Scholars too, Lawyers and Divines both, to help-on the persecution, with their
Swords and with their Pens: Such Instruments the King has, Choice, and
Right-men for his service; and they serve their Master heartily, without gain
of money (for they feed upon free cost, all is theirs they can lay hold on;)
Right-men indeed as heart could wish; such as the Orator tells me Philip of
Macedon found; He sought with diligent search for wicked men, who w uld, in a
treacherous way, bring his designs to pass, against their own Contrymen,
and such be found; Demost. de falsa legatione page 204. in folio,.
but yet (says the Orator) Philip found them more wicked then he himself
could have wishe^. They had plotted and hammered out such projects, and
contrivances against their own Country, and for Philip^ ends, as that Philip
himself durst not frame-out unto them the like plot, or desire the same either
by Letter or Embassy; so abominable those Instruments were. Such instruments
the King has* worse indeed, but more Right and straight to the Designs his
Council has laid-out unto him, then he expected or perhaps could have desired.
And what David's case is (the faithful of the LORD) he knows nothing that
knows not this: He has Armies by S^a and Armies by Land, North and South, East
and West stand-up for his help and the E^e of the LORD is upon them for good
that is certain though many are sick amongst them, and many fallen asleep;
even the Righteous are taken away: Nay, many are runaway, and more have dealt
treacherously, as we have heard, and shall hear; few there are that be hearty
to the cause, and fewer yet that do not serve for gain of money: and no money
no march.

Thus they deal with D^vid. Ah Lord! how does the enemy laugh at this! Let his
laugh. GOD laughes too, and His servants laugh also, rejoicing always in The
LORD; they will do their work, let GOD alone to perfect His work. They will
give in their hand to David, he shall have their hearts too. And no marvel all
this* not can it seem any strange matter, That many noble, rich, valiant,
learned men, are now on the contrary side and enemies to David. None of all
these can endure afflictions with David, not a wilderness with David; They
cannot go from soft beds, to bard boards. They must have their ease for the
present, for after time they leave it to the DECREE; give them their portion
here, they are satisfied. Nor can they conceive, but, That Saul with his three
thousand will overcome David with his five hundred, and then they shall receive
what a King can give, for he will be abundantly good to them, now they have
assisted him to complete his victory (which will never be) over David and his
men. Yes, you will say, Saul will overcome David, for he has ten for one. This
Saul understood no more then the Egyptians did, when God set Himself betwixt
them and Israel. Ex, 14.19.
True, if Saul were to fight with men. David only and his men: But Saul must
fight with David and his GOD; he must overcome GOD, before he overcome David.
You have not man's warrant now, you have GODS warrant; That Saul shall never
overcome. Let him call-in the chosen men out of Israel, give them his
Commission, bid them cut, and kill, and slay, there is their warrant, yet they
shall never overcome David, for GOD is with David. But yet Saul must have all
the advantage that heart can wish: and all the disadvantage must be on D^vids
side. Saul must rise in his hopes oftentimes, and David must fall very low, and
yet not at the lowest. Saul must have the advantage, counsel on his side, and
strength both, and numbers also, Thousands for David's hundreds; yet David is
not troubled at all this, for it is as good a sign as can be looked upon; he
looks to the Cause, and to his GOD, rolls himself, and his concernments upon
GOD, and there he rests his head, and has peace in himself, and in his way.
But here is a Trial now, The LORD does more then seem, He does indeed lift-up
the right hand of David's Adversaries, does David and Israel say. Yes, and so He
may do, that He may exalt His own Right Hand toward David anon. Where we
shall see, That David's cause is not carried on by number, or multitude, or by
strength, but by an overruling Hand; And That GOD on David's side answers all
advantages on the Adversaries side, both of number and strength; and all
disadvantages on David's side in want of both; Though for Thousands with Saul,
he can write, but hundreds, yet he will not fear, for GOD is with David, and
is departed from Saul, and that answers all advantages on Saul's side, and all
disadvantages on David's side as was said: For now GOD delights to show Himself
and His Arm, [else we will not see it, unless it be made most bare of flesh]
we would have many on our side; so it will be, but not yet; but let us
remember, they may be too many for GOD to give us victory; Judges. Eccles. 9.11.
for we think The race must be to the swift, and the battle to the strong;
When in David's war it is quite contrary. So much to Saul's Alarm to war, his
success therein, his numbers of men and how it relates to this war against
David as it is at this day; and answers Saul's seeming advantages* and takes off
the wonder there. Now I come to examine what persons these were, who come-in to
Saul, side to carry-on his persecution against David. Saul called all the
people together to war, and they came-in by Troops, an Host of three thousand
chosen men What manner of persons were they? Murderers all; I fa^ all, nay GOD
says all, and every one of them were murderers, that were privy to Saul's
intents, and willingly followed the Commandment. Mark that, and mark we what
we read; Saul spoke to all his servants. What to do? That they should kill
David. And they, 1 Samuel 19.1.2
who did as Saul spoke, To their power, were murderers to their power. And it
was very possible to finde-out some Thousands chosen men in Israel, who would
kill David, the faithful of the LORD at this time: for there were many Noble
men in Israel, and not many of these would give their hand to David, conflict
with him; against him rather, giving their hand to Saul. Very probable it was
so. There were many rich men in Israel. And wha^ says the Apostle of them?
They despise, they oppress the po^re, they draw them, (we need not make it a
question, Ia^. (...). 2.6.
our eyes have seen it) before the judgment seat; they blaspheme the worthy
Name, by which we are called. Doubtless many of these were with Saul. and bare
their own charges. And I am more then half persuaded. That David's five
hundred Troopers were but poor men, a ragged Regiment, very poor, and almost
naked; for whence should they have supplies of necessaries! GOD knows, surely
man cannot tell. I find them in a wilderness, for the most part amongst wild
Goats. [No strange place to David and his Army.] They sen^ to a very Rich Man
and he sent them a very churlish Answer, but not one bi^ of bread. And yet
contented men they were* whether paid or not paid; and pillage they would not,
rather dye then do wrong. It it had: or been so they might have made brave
pillage of Nabals sheep, whereas they would not, no not they; David's Soldiers!
1 Samuel 25.16
they were a wall unto Nabals shepherds, and their flocks, both by night, and
by day. And yet such a Nabal he was, such a Churl and such a Fool, when he
made a feast like a King* surfeited on his meat, and was very drunk; Nay
before he was so distempered he would not give David no not a morsel. This
stirred D^vids spirit not a little. I pass it over here; only this in
passage; David's spirit must be discovered to himself, and that will be one
maine Reason anon, why his deliverance was delayed. The Note is this; The Rich
Churl^ minds not David in the wilderness, nor shall he, or his men taste of
his morsels. David shall taste of the Rich Man's spirit he will give David bad
language and censure him withal: Who is David? A despicable person I warrant
you* he and his men are broken away from their Masters. There Is his censure,
for as his name is so is he, Nabal is his name and folly is with him; Verse 25.
he censures David at pleasure: But it was well for the Rich man, that D^vid
and his men were so near his Shepherds and his Flocks; had Saul's Troopers been
so near, they would have taken them all for Boo^ies; and had they smelt-out
Nabals feast* they would not have sent Messengers unto him with a Blessing in
their mouth, Peace be both to thee, Verse 6.
and peace be to thy house, and peace be unto all that thou have: Nor would
they have spoken supplications, Verse 8.
Let the young men find favor in t^^ne eyes, for they come in a good day, give
I pray thee, etc. No, they would not have prayed, they would have commanded,
and done as the vile Priests did, 1 Samuel 2.16.
Thou shall give it me now, and if not I will take it by force: Such a
commanding Host was with Saul, and (past question) such Priests were with him
too, to helpe-on the persecution, for it was against David; And never was there
any persecution against David, wherein the Priests were not most Active
Ministers, not knuckle deep, as we say, but elbow deep (in blood.) as at this
day.

We will take a view now of the Kings Army. As before, many Nobles there, not
many with David; Rich men there, such as the Apost^e has described, great
hunters before The LORD, mighty to oppress, and to blaspheme The Name of their
GOD. There are the vile Mini^ters too, Isa 56.10.
they kennell near the Court, even all your Dumb-D^gs, which cannot b^rke,
sleeping l^ing down, loving to slumber: All these all over the Land are with
the King now, that his hand is against David, and to strengthen his
persecution. They cave murdered Souls already, now they will murder Bodies;
If they cannot with their hands, they will set their heart to the work, and
open their purses wide toward it. Shall these and these men prosper? Shall
they carry-on their design against David? Shall they, that hate The LORD
lift-up the head? Yes for a Time, till GOD has perfected His work; And His
Adversaries have done theirs, filling-up their measures; and for other
excellent Reasons which we shall hear anon.

We have seen now what Persons they ever have been, and are, who have their
hand against David, murderers all, mighty hunters before The LORD. And yet as
I am not so foolishly ignorant, to think. That the vile Priests were not a
part of Saul's Army, either in Action, or Affection, contributing their Prayers,
and Purses toward the holy war, wherein, they always have been a willing
people, of very large hearts: So I am not so uncharitable, as to think, That
all these three thousand were all murderers; They that were acquainred with
Saul's mind, and willingly followed the Commandment, Those all were murderers
in the highest degree, there is no doubt of all that. But some there were, a
very few, who followed Saul, and crossed his commandment, what they could; So
did Jonathan; and how many more I cannot tell: And others there were, who
followed Saul as sheep are driven by the Shepherd, when he means to plunge
them into the waters; They did not properly follow Saul, but were driven by the
hand of violence, (as some of late have been, and as Saul himself was) by the
Devil. To exemplify this by the Edomites practice at this time: The Edomite
now in the North (we have no other name for him) has exercised such cruelties
upon the inhabitants there, to force them to his side, tying their heads and
heels together, till from some of them breath departed; And by these Turkish
inforcements he has gained many bodies to his side, but David has their hearts.
And so we may conceive, and so judge it was with men in Saul's Host* because the
Sacred Scripture gives us that allowance. For we read of no execution done
upon Israel, upon their Cities, but by Saul and the Edomite; Saul spoke indeed
to all his Servants. That they would kill David; and we make no doubt many
were active Instruments that way, for the Edomite could not do all his
executions alone: But that all this Host was engaged upon this service, and
would have answered Saul's bloody will, had they come to a set Battle is more
then I can tell, or any man in the world, for we have not a word for it: Only
to clear this, and to say as much as needs in reference to the present ti^e
also* for all is plain all along this I will say, That whosoever amongst those
three thousand did follow Saul, and his Command, though grieving (for
Conscience not asleep, or seared, will regret and recoile, give check
sometimes) and yet approving, An. lib. 14 cap. (...) In some Books the fourth,
Moerens ac laudans.
as Tacitus speaks of Burrhus, in a case not unlike: I say, All such as
followed Saul so (though grieving, yet) approving, and commending what Saul did
these were, as one of them, Edomites, murderers in true judgment, and
Scripture account. And if the Sacred Scripture accounts these men murderers,
then GOD accounts them so and then what will their Commission and Warran^
profit them? Or can it b^are them out in these outrages they have committed,
when they are indeed the fiercest enemies that ever the Church had! But I will
draw-up to a conclusion of this matter, with some few observations from all we
have read* First;

1. Here an Edomite has done all the mischief a Right Hand to Saul in his
bloody execution. What was he? A mean man sure an Heards-man, then he was
lifted up higher, and made Steward of Saul's house, set over his Servants there.
Conferring of honors upon him, engaged him to Saul and his service; so Saul
made him General in the Field. O! This preferment these hono^rs, are a sweet
bait! it takes a man strangely; it will take a man quite from D^vid that has
not his heart engaged to his GOD: Saul knew what he did, when he ra^l^d the
Edomite to honor, he shall do what Saul will have him do: He is more then a
man, who can shut his eyes against the glory of the world, and contemn it, for
Davi^s s^ke; A man without truth of Grace, is like a ship without ballast, it
cannot endure a stonne.
That can be content to pass over with a careless eye the pleasures and
profits of the Court. and endure afflictions with David the friends of GOD. An
HOTHAM, who had the boldness (when time was and GODS pleasure to maintain
David and his cause) to out face a Prince, could not outface the glory of the
world* he is taken with the bait of honor, gain, or I know not what, and so
has undone what he did, and made himself infamous to all generations. The
King has that at his dispose, which will work upon all complexions; but honor
for the proud works strangely, brings many to his side, and makes them RIGHT
for his service. David is in a Wilderness, has little for himself, and less
for his friends; but they that serve David serve Him heartily; nothing can win
them to David's side but mere conscience of duty to GOD and His cause. LORD
stablish the heart with Grace* (a sleeting thing, we are never sure of it, and
must never be secure about it) show it the excellencies in the LORD JESUS* then
we shall not be taken with the ^omp of the world,. Acts 24.
(a Fantasy) nor be offended at the troubles of David.

Secondly, there were many Noble many Rich, many Stout, many valiant men, and
many wife men on Saul's side; but yet they must not be a dishonor to Israel all
these must come-in under one Head, and the Edomite their General must bear
the envy and dishonor of that Natural war, (for it is as Natural for the
Edomite to war with David, as for the fire to burn:) It is not said, Israel
smote Nob; No, The Edomite smote Nob; and all his helpers, (some Israelites no
doubt) yet they go under that name. So here are two Kingdoms smitten with the
sword: Who smote them? It shall not be said, This Prince or That Prince; This
Nobleman, or That Nobleman; No, The Edomite did it: It shall not lie as a
reproach upon England; it shall cause her sorrow, that her own children, whom
she has dandled upon her lap, have to their power eat out her bowels: It is a
grievous thing. And that those Brethren in evil, who ought themselves unto
this Church, should prove such vipers, and do her such mischief; This is
grievous. But the dishonor of it shall not lie upon this Mother Church, but
upon Rome it shall lie, upon the children of that Edom, and the Church shall
remember them to all generations, Who in the day of Jerusalem said, Raze it,
raze it, even to the foundation thereof.

Thirdly, though we do not question Ionathans sincerity, being well resolved
at that point, that he was a good man, and a true friend to David and did him
great service at the Court; yet I think we may question, whether his bands of
nature, or Court-bands (all very strong no doubt) were strong enough to bind
his bodily presence to continue with his father, all the time his father
persecuted David. I determine nothing here, because the Scripture is silent,
but thus the Scripture speaks out, and we may set a mark upon it, that if
Jonathan was not slain first (which yet the Text seems to say) yet thus it
was, 1 Samuel 31.6.
Saul died, and his three Sons and his Armor-bearer, and all his men that
same day together: TOGETHER, they went along with Saul in a bloody Path, he did
drive-on furiously, but they went along with him, and they were slain the same
day TOGETHER. Certainly, it is not safe to go one step forward with a man,
when we see plainly what way he goes, and that he drives furiously on toward a
cursed end. If we see two men walk together, we must needs think they are
agreed, for so says the Spirit, they cannot walk together else: yet we will
not judge that all in the Kings Court are Enemies to David.

We think rather, That some there be, whose body is with their King, and their
heart with David. We acknowledge, That Relations are binders; and Court-bands
are shackles; But yet there is no such binder in the world, as our engagement
to David. Which Jonathan answered, as a right precious: and faithful friend,
therefore no blame can lie upon him.
And, in case we find him persecuted. GOD will bear us out in it, if we cast
off all orher bands and shackles, and come to help David, for then we help
The LORD against Whom the Adversary kicks, when he kicks David. And let the
Adversary remember, and all his men with him, That Saul died, and all his men,
That same day TOGETHER.

4. Saul called together his men, bade them follow him, do as he did, pursue
David, and shed blood to their power: 2 Samuel 13.28.
Be courageous and be valiant, have not I commanded you?

So he said to his followers, as Absalon to his Servants, Smite David, then,
kill him, fear not, my COMMISSION shall be your WARRANT, for you and every one
of you, to bear you out in all violences you shall do against David. Well,
GOD takes the matter into his own hand, and in the day of Recompenses for
Sion, Saul is slain, and all his men together And then what good does it to
his servants, That they had their masters Command for what they did, and his
Commission for their Warrant.

The Servant has done his Masters work, as his charge was, and the power in
his hands, and now the hangman must pay him his wages. They are the most
unhappy servants in the world, that are servants to men, who will put their
servants upon desper^te designs, and then tell them, that they shall have a
Warrant for what they do under the Great Seal, which yet is of no more
strength, then are the Popes Paper-pardons, from whom the LORD deliver us* and
from them and their commands, who are not Masters of themselves. It is good and
safe to be at the command of that LORD, who gives His Command, and His Warrant,
and His Wages too: He will beare-out His Servants in all they shall do by
Command from His Mouth; That shall be their Warrant indeed, To them, and every
one of them, for what they do, and for so doing there is a sure reward. And if
the adversary shall thrust these men, for doing their duty, into a fiery
furnace, or Lions den, yet GOD HAS COMMANDED, That is their Warrant still, and
shall carry them boldly into the mouth of the devourers, so as they shall
quench the violence of the fire, and stop the mouth of Lions. O how good a
thing it is to be at the command of such a Master, whose command is your
Warrant, your defense, and reward too.

We have viewed the Armies on both sides; Saul has most men, and the most
successful he is, and strong for the war: But GOD is with David, Job 9.19.
and if we speak of streng^h, Lo, He is strong; or of counsel, Lo, He is
WONDERFUL, COUNSELOR, the MIGHTY GOD; or of Reward, Lo, there is no service to
the service of That KING; nor Wages like to that He gives. Woe must proceed in
the Chapter; Saul has David in chase, he will pursue him to the utmost extent
of his chain, as far as his hand can reach; so far we will follow him, and
so end the Chapter.

David and his men are hunted from Keilah, whence they went whathersoever they
could go; 1 Samuel 23.13.
And the best way they could thinke-on in their distraction, was to go into a
mountainous and wild country, where David abode in strong holds, Verse. 14.
even in the wilderness of Ziph: And Saul sought him every day, but God
delivered him not into Saul's hand. Jonathan, Saul's son, Verse. 16.
a true friend, visits David in the wood, strengthened his hand in GOD; they
two made a Covenant together, then Jonathan returned to his house, lest David
in the wood, in a strong hold there, with the Ziphites. Verse. 17.18.19 20
Now they play their prankes, give notice to Saul where Saul's abode is. Saul
takes this wondrous kindly, counts it (the Ziphites treacherous dealing) a
compassion, blesses them (those Murderers*) then bids them prepare his way,
Verse 21. Number dicebat mihi esse, etc. Trem.
observe David's haunt, a subtle fellow [he told me so himself, says Saul,
when we were familiar together] bring me word, says Saul, touching the
certainty of David's abode, Verse. 23.
and his lurking places, and I will go up with you, and search him out
throughout all the thousands of Judah. Verse. 22.23.25
[See! Saul works all by treachery; if any help and success in his way, the
devil helps him to it, for he makes lies and liars his refuge.] And Saul does
as he said, he and his men went to seek David; And they told David, [Who told
him? Some in Saul's camp sure, faithful to David. See! David has friends,
perhaps besides Jonathan, Verse. 19.
in Saul's Court!] So he leaves Hachilah, came down to Maon, and before he could
breath himself, Saul hears where his abode is, and pursues David even thither.
There David is in a maze, knows not in the world what way to take, for Saul
and his men have compassed him round. But behold in passage the wonderful
works of GOD toward David! Saul pursues after David in all haste, as after an
enemy, has him in a Coop, makes no more conscience of destroying him, then he
does to eat bread; Saul shall lose his advantage, for now he must be told, that
an enemy indeed has invaded his land; so Saul must hasten as fast against the
Philistines, as he hasted before in the pursuit of David, etc. for it is noted
before. Thus David escaped at this time, and at all times, Verse. 29.
and he now dwells in strong holds in En-gedi.

Saul has cleared his land of the Philistines, 1 Samuel 24.
now he drives after David as furiously as before; for David is discovered
again, and Saul is told where David's abode is, even among the wild goats,
Verse. 2.
and upon the rocks there; Saul, a mighty hunter before the LORD, hunts David
with two thousand dogs, and more, not three thousand, I think, for the
reason before said, though so many were with him. Notwithstanding Saul's
Companies, David shall have the better; Saul had an advantage upon David
before, but could not take it; David has an advantage now of Saul, but will not
take it, farther then to declare his uprightness toward his Master: As for
wickedness, it does ever proceed from the wicked man. This we have read
before, and the words are clear, and so David's innocence is cleared as the
noone day, and Saul abundantly satisfied, and his Evil spirit silenced for
that time.

But yet David would not trust Saul: No reason he should trust him, in whom is
no truth, and from whom God is departed; So David and his men gat them up into
the hold in the hill of Hachilah, Verse. 22. 1 Samuel 26.1.
among the Ziphites again; and these are as treacherous as before: It Is
expected so, Knave once, and Knave still! Treacherous persons will deal
treacherously; they saw Saul did deal so, it was his common practice, they
would follow such a great Master, he hearkened to lies, and all his servants
were wicked, Pro. 29.12. But methinkes GOD does not deal so graciously with His
gracious Servant; the poor man knows not whither to run: he went forward even
now, and now backward again, and still almost in the mouth of danger, and
hands of treacherous men: Is this GODS kindness to His Friend, may some say?
Yes indeed is it, and we shall see it to be so anon, Admirable Kindness,
wonderful Providence strange Discoveries, but we will remember all David's
adventures first: In the mean time, this will serve to beare-up our Spirits,
that it matters not whither David runs, whether forward or backward, so he
keeps with GOD, and GOD with him; nay, though he do stray from GOD a little,
yet GOD will not leave David. We proceed. Saul reading the Ziphites
Intelligence, drives furiously with the three thousand men to Ziph again,
where he knows he has Right-men for his service: what follows now in the
Chapter we have read before, but it is very well worth the pains to read the
Chapter again; for besides the beholding GODS wonderful hand there* in
working for David, and casting his enemy into a deep sleep, we shall observe
there also. That the devil was non-^lust, quite silenced, he had not a word to
say; and yet David, who could have trusted Saul very well, durst not trust his
Evil spirit, but concludes, It is better for him to make speed into the land
of the P^ilistines, and thither he goes, and dwells in Gath, driven out from
abi^ing in the inheritance of the LORD: The King shows David favor there,
assigns him a Town called Ziglag, [which must be smitten anon, and burnt
with fire] Now we may suppose David's case to be full of distraction; David
looks on the right hand, calls out, Who is on my side, who? The Keilites,
thought he: No but they are not their hand is with Saul: Then he looked on the
left hand to the Ziphites, to see if they would help him; No, they are with
Saul as Right as the other: No help from men they are deceitful, and
treacherous; Then D^vid looks before him, and hastened to that strong hold and
the other, and Saul drives him out thence also; then into the Wilderness he
goes, Saul hunts him there; then to Gath, and there he is out of Saul's reach,
whose power was stinted there, when his will to do David mischief was
boundless.

Now to the Relation it has with our time, as it is at this day, and then I
will conclude the Chapter; Indeed it relates it self, Saul has thrust out a
rough hand against David; David's LORD an Almighty Hand to deliver him from out
of Saul's hand. The hotter the persecution, the more glorious the rescue. But
how did Saul gain advantage upon David? By corruption in the Officers, and base
treachery, which we call fine designs. But the LORD wrought-forth glorious
salvations for David hereby. All shall yield precious matter for his soul and
spirit to work upon, filling his mouth with MICHTAMS, golden Songs of
deliverance; Michtam of David, a golden jewel, o^ notable Song, and so notes
the excellency of these Psalme^, 16.56, 57, 58, 59, 60.
So it was with David in those times: So it will be with David, The People and
Friends of GOD, unto the worlds end. But these Michtams had been lost, this
precious Treasure of the Church; had there not been such fine devices, such
subtle contrivances against him; had there not been so much of Hell in all
Saul's designs, against David, there had not been so much of Heaven in David's
Psalms. Nay, had not David been in these and these straits; had not his
friends deceived him, and all his Strongholds too, the Church had lost David's
MASCHILS also, his Psalms to give Instruction, how to make advantage of an
Adversary, and of all the mischiefs he shall do, or intend to do against
David. He could not have wanted any one thing was done against him by the
violence of man, either from their hand, or from their tongue. David could not
have been so high above his Adversaries at the last, had they not had him under
at the first; had not his Enemies dealing toward him been so base vile and
treacherous, David had not been so glorious.

The truth is, Saul's violent dealing with David, did David much good; he could
not have wanted it: So likewise the treacherous dealing of the Keilites, and
Ziphites, all this did him much good also. And for his strongholds, he lost
them with more advantage at the last, then he gained them at the first. These
stood him in stead, but for the present time, to keep Saul from his throat;
the loss of them turned unto infinite advantage.

To sum-up all that has been spoken last: David is come to Nob, gets the sword
into his hand, the best Sword that ever was in the world, for he sees The print
of an Almighty hand upon it, and carries the revenge of The LORD along with him
in it; And now he thinks he shall be delivered; No not yet. Then he came to
Keiliah; he has wrought a strange deliverance for them; Now he makes no doubt,
but they will work for his deliverance with all their might; No, they are
treacherous. Then to Ziph he came, to see what the Ziphites will do; As little
as the Keilites, all they can against David. Friends prove themselves all
false; Strongholds are all too weak; yet all to make David strong in his GOD
at the last, to fill David's mouth with MICHTAMS, and with MASCHIL's, precious
songs for deliverance, and To give instruction. Therefore though we see great
reason why all should be even so with David, yet we will soberly enquire more
fully into all these matters, for GOD will give us excellent resolution
thereunto.

CHAP. 5. God suffered the Adversary to prevail a while. To worke-out his
designs against David; That thereby David's spirit might be discovered to
himself; That his Adversar^es spirits might be made manifest also, and
convinced: And GODS Right Hand made glorious toward David. This, in all
particulars, relates to David The Faithful of The LORD evermore.
Why does The LORD deal thus hardly, for so it seems, Qu.
with His gracious Servant D^vid?

For excellent Reasons has The LORD done all this; First, Ans. I.


1. The Lord will discover David to himself. Saul shall prosper yet longer; he
shall have fine devices, and neat contrivances against David; he shall corrup^
by flattery, and work mightily by treacheries: And David shall continue in his
straits yet, longer; Why? That Saul's spirit might be fully manifest, and all
his fine prankes fully opened to the world. That is true as we shall hear
presently. But there is a maine and prime cause first to be considered on; That
David may be discovered to himself. Alas! David knows not himself yet; he
shall before he be delivered; and his adversary shall help him exceedingly at
this high point; To discover David's spirit to himself; wherewith, in
probability, David had not been acquainted, had not Saul persecuted him from
place to place. As first,

1. Suppose Saul and David had come to a good understanding, and then to an
agreement before David came to Nob; Then David had not been acquainted with
his lying spirit. I will but point at things, for excellent reason, that GOD
may have the glory, for I like not to stay upon the Saints infirmities. The
truth was, David had a lying spirit, and he has told all the world so much,
who will hear him; It was customary to him to tell a lie; he came to the
Priest at Nob, and slaps him in the mouth with four lies before he came to a
full stop. And he traversed the way of lying, till he came to Achish in Gath,
and then he was in the way of lying too.

David shall not be delivered yet fully. This lying spirit must be discovered
to David first: And blessed be GOD, Who sanctified Saul's rough hand toward
David, and the treacheries of men, for this high end: The making David's lying
spirit manifest to himself, so as he can abhor himself for it, and desires of
his GOD nothing more, then That He would remove out of sight (now upon his
deep humiliation) these wicked shifts; Psalm. 119.29
Remove from me (says he) the way of lying.

2. David's spirit could close with the creature; it could rest it self upon
the Arm of flesh: he had done a notable service for the Keilites; now thought
he, they, whom I have so and so delivered, from such and such dangers; They
will be fast friends unto me, I may rest upon them. No, if that be his thought,
he shall be hunted yet further, till he see clearly, That men are vanity,
deceitful and light upon the balance; There is no trust to be put in men:
Saul may take them off with a profer of honor, gain, or the like; But David
may trust in GOD, He is faithful. David's spirit shall be restless, till it
winde-up it self (by GODS power) above man, all humane props, and has
bottomed it self upon GOD, an Almighty foundation.

So for Strongholds too, he must be driven from them all, because his spirit
could secure it self so well in such hiding-places. David must not be
delivered yet, till he be acquainted with his own spirit at this point also,
That David may say, Surely Thou only art my strong-hold, and my Hiding place.
But more of this, when we come to Ziglag.

3. David had a very shifting fleeting spirit bessides his mad pranks, which we
will not recall; he fluttered from place to place; I cannot tell how
warrantable his way was, either when he went to the King of Moab; or
afterward, to Gath; True it was, David was hardly driven, Saul still at his
heels, and Saul was driven by the devil: It would make the wisest man run and
fly also, to get out of the devils reach. But yet surely, the Prophet advised
David well, Get thee into the land of Judah. David must be advised whither he
runs, and suffer reproof too. What, make thou with the King of Moab? 1 Samuel
21.5.
Get thee into the land of Judah; It seems spoken by way of reproof. David
would thrust himself into this place, and into that, here he might have
refuge, and there; No, David must be taught now, and Saul shall be his good
master, That these are but shifts, vain thoughts; These places (being trusted
unto, as we shall see anon) are but like childrens castles, which they have
framed with their own hands, not likely to be of any continuance, GOD must be
David's refuge whereto he may continually resort.

4. David was very impatient of delays; he could not wait till GOD had
perfected His work: A man of an hasty spirit; If he was not delivered at this
time, then GOD was slack, as he counted slacknesse; And if not delivered at
the other time, just when he would have it, Then all men were liars, Samuel and
all; Non Deispiritu prophetice sed etc. Psa. 116.11.
All his promises touching a Kingdom were but words, and they vanish into
wind, he shall never be King, but by Saul's hand he shall fall; he said so (in
his HASTE) haste indeed, all men are liars. It is well then; Accellerando cum
praeceps raperetur in perturbatione carnis. Ibid.
David shall not be delivered, till he has got more power over his spirit, more
constancy there; Till he can be long-suffering endure, and wait GODS time,
which is evermore best for David. Now I may be the briefer in relating to these
times.

God seems to deal hardly with His Friends; They are not delivered; They
expected, That at such a time deliverance would be, and at such a time, but yet
deliverence is delayed, and a rough hand is put-out against them to the
uttermost, as it is at this day. It is well it is so; for GOD does all things
well. Alas! what a little ease of Iron yoakes would have pleased His People!
How little of purity in GODS Ordinances, Quicquid Deu^ instituerit and
faciendum praeceperit certum est non esse rem nihili, sed pretiosam and utilem,
etiamsi externa facie st^pula fabali aut casia nuce esset inanio^ and levior
Luth. Cat. de Bap. Tempore s^o. Is. ^.60.12.
would have pleased them well; might they have had their Will, and their Time!
A little, though nothing is little there, and the least swerving from the Rule
makes a great Rent, and greatly to be stood upon; But I say, and I do but
point at it, how little would have served the turn, would GOD have left His
People to their own time and way! GOD is better to them, then they are to
themselves; Blessed be His Name, He has provided better for them, above their
prayers, and beyond their hopes; They shall have a deliverance* if they will
wait a little, A full Reformation. But ^hey must leave GOD to His Own Time,
and Way. But how are the spirits of the best men discovered by these (seeming
delays) unto themselves! Even David, the best servants of the LORD, made lies
their Refuge; That they did, and it is plainly discovered unto them now, that
so they did: so also the warpings of their spirits, and their vain
confidences, and how their hearts departed from their GOD; for so much as the
heart draws, and inclines to the creature, so much, and by the very same steps
and degrees it withdrawes from GOD; so much of the world as comes-in, so much
of heaven goes-out. This were excellent matter to dilate upon, but every good
man's spirit is fitted for such a work, selfe-searching and trial what spirit
he is of, and how it has been discovered to himself all this time. O the
murmurings of his spirit, how many have they been! what haste has he made! If
he be not delivered now, he shall be tired, and can follow GOD in His way no
longer. It is not necessary, nay nor possible, to set down the murmurings,
warpings, hastinesses, of the best man's spirit; but he will confess he has, in
his HASTE, limited the Holy One of Israel, and tied GOD (like a creature) to
his own time and way; A man would do it at such a time, and by such means,
Therefore GOD must do so too; GOD must work like a man. This argues a great
distemper of spirit, and must be corrected. Alas! shall David be delivered at
this present time? It cannot be, the Servant of the Lord must be instructed
first to a constancy of spirit, so as he can come to this Period, and stop
there: David shall be delivered the fittest time, and after such a manner, as
shall most gloriously exalt GODS Name, and David's comfort, (and that, I hope,
will best content) and so he will conclude, Therefore he will do his work,
and let GOD alone to perfect His: and he will let GOD alone to His own Time,
and to His own Way, in confident assurance, That if David's deliverance be
delayed, there is mighty Reason why it is so; and the prime Reason is, that
David may be discovered, his own spirit made fully manifest to himself.

David's adversaries every one may be discovered too, all the Right-men, his
true Enemies, and false friends; all their fine designs, all their horrid
hellish machinations, that all may be discovered, and laid open before all
Israel, and before the Sun. David thought GOD was slack touching His Promise;
He was indeed, as we count slicknesse, when things are not done, and
deliverance wrought by the very same means, and at the very nicke of time,
which we, in our haste, have concluded upon; GOD was not slack, nor is he
slack toward David, He is working wonders for David, and we shall see it
anon; David's deliverance stays a little: Why? That all David's enemies may be
discovered, how wicked, how pernicious they are, how mightily they fight
against GOD, and His servant David. The enemy must be clearly convinced too: we
will take this, and David's adversaries in order, and proceed upon discovery.

First, Saul's most malignant spirit shall be made as manifest, and naked to
Isreal's eye, as his body was in the day he was born: He made shows of love to
David, all his shows shall shrinke-up to nothing, or prove real hatred. Saul
would have it told David, That the King delighted in him: Does ^e so? Hear
what Saul says, and tell your self; Saul blesses the Ziphites, those
Murderers, 1 Samuel 23.19.
Blessed be ye of the LORD: Why blessed? Because they undertook David's
destruction in design, in the manner as they did at Bristoll, London,
Lincoln, To deliver David into Saul's hands, that he might do to him according
to all the desire of his soul: What desire was that? To sheath his sword in
David's bowels: Will the Ziphites give such a price into Saul's hand, that he may
do to David according to all the desire of his soul; will they so? Blessed
are ye of the Lord: O strange! Nay it was not strange, it was ordinary with
Saul to bless his Right-men, Murderers, and no others; Blessed are ye of the
Lord. O monstrous! what abominable words are these! Saul blesses the Ziphites:
I ask again, Why does he so? Because the Ziphites have a fine design upon
David, (as our Right-men upon Bristoll, etc. as was said) to deliver him into
Saul's hand, that Saul may do to David, as we understood before. The Ziphites
have that in design, and Saul blesses them for it, and so his wickedness is
shown before the whole congregation: Prove. 26.
For that is GODS design too, Saul shall not cousen the world any longer; but
GOD will turn Saul's blessings into curses; Saul blesses Murderers, GOD
curses them; a treacherous, and a murtherous Generation; though they curse,
yet bless thou; So GOD will, and curse them whom Saul blesses. Saul applauds
their designs, GOD abhorres them, and their designs too, and the Hangman is
appointed to give them their wages for their work.

Observe further, the Evil spirit of the man must be made more manifest, for
he says, ye have compassion on me: What ye? or who were they? The same men,
who would lay a City waste, so they might gratify Saul, in the destruction of
David; and this Saul calls compassion: O blindness! O desperate wickedness!
he counts that a COMPASSION to his soul (the working his will upon David)
which will destroy Saul's life here, and his soul for ever: Who is there that
understands this, and does not pray, Lord leave me not in the lap of my own
will; to run mine own way, and to accomplish my own desire. Does not many a
man now-a-dayes count the granting of that a Compassion to his soul, which,
being granted, and effected to his hearts desire, will destroy body and soul
both, eternally. But I forbear. Here was a full discovery of Saul's spirit: But
let me speak a word for Saul (for truly he had good things in him, which must
be remembered, though the Evil spirits, the Devil, and his own Spirit,
perverted all the contrary way.) Saul's good spirit was discovered too; we f^^de
him weeping in one place, and blessing David in another.

True; But the Text says, David would not trust him for all that; Saul gave
David good words, and Blessings too, and there was an Oath betwixt them, and
doubtless All was done heartily. Saul did not treat with David, and in the
mean time carry on a fine design, to take away David's life; No, doubtless
Saul spoke as he thought, and meant to perform: 1 Samuel 24.22.
But (says the Text) David would not trust Saul; he and his Men got them up
into the hold: And the Reason was David knew an Evil Spirit haunted Saul; an
Edomite besides, still at his Elbow, and Saul had his foot entered into blood up
to the ankles, David would not trust him. Had Saul shed but a bottle of Blood,
he might have bethought himself upon cold blood, as we say, and repented; and
he might show favor to an Edomite, being his Herdsman. But Saul has filled Nob
with blood, from Corner to Corner. And now that the Edomite is declared to be
the Chief Malignant to Israel, that ever was in Isreal's Land, Saul approves of
him the more: The more blood he has shed, the better Subject he is, and friend
both, and more right for Saul's designs, the more he declares himself an enemy
to David. Why, now David cannot trust Saul; All his sweet words are lost; if he
be melting a little, the Evil spirit and the Edomite will harden him again;
So David will to his Strong-hold; and is resolved upon the question, To go to
GATH, out of Saul's reach, else he could not avoid Saul's bloody hand, (he
thought) which pursued him so far, even till he had driven David from out of
the Inheritance of the Lord; And so Saul's Evil spirit is fully discovered now,
and manifest. He must be convinced also, non-plussed, and put to silence. The
Evil spirit shall be convinced, that he shall not be able to say a word, but
in way of acknowledgement, and honest confession from a sound conviction, That
he is a liar, a murderer, and has erred exceedingly. See how convincing Truth
is, from David's mouth! and how ingenuous Saul is in his confession, 1 Samuel
26.21.
I have played the fool, and erred exceedingly. He had indeed. Saul, David's
grand enemy, is fully discovered, convinced also: yet David is not delivered;
no. though all Saul's Right men, the Edomites implacable adversaries; his false
friends, Keilites and Ziphites are made manifest too; yet David is not
delivered, no not yet; we shall see more reason for it anon; first, we must
bring-this-up-to our time.

GOD delays his Churches deliverances now for the same reason sure, That the
adversaries thereof might be fully manifest to all Israel. The actings of the
evil spirit (President over the Kings Council,) were not manifest enough six
years ago, when they thrust a cursed Book upon the Scots, and after that the
sword; Nor when they called a Parliament in England, not to ease the yokes, but
to engage the Kingdom in that war, which would have ^ashed the people one
against the other, even the father and the son together. Ierem. 13.14.
This evil spirit was not manifest enough yet; for wickedness may be
established by a Law in Scotland, and yet pretense very fair, To establish
True Religion, Laws, and Liberties, here in England: And goodly and sweet
words were spoken that way; and much done touching Bishops and their Courts;
And all this while the evil spirit was as an Angel of light; And his Actings
more indiscernable then before. But then the Design touching the Army in the
North, changed the Devils color quite, and made him look as black as soot, as
he is, an Angel of darkness. But let the evil spirit alone, he can clear up
himself again; he will not be made manifest yet; No not when he prevailed by
the evil Counsel To remove the Lieutenant of the Tower, in whom all Israel
could confide; and placed a Murderer there in that Strong-hold;
notwithstanding the evil spirit was not manifest enough. No, nor when he
counseled the King to desert the Parliament. No, nor when he persuaded the
King to call all Israel to war against David, and all that had their hand with
David, under pretense of taking a guard to his person. Nor when he made the
Edomite General in the field, MANAGER of all the Kings affairs here in
Isreal's Land; notwithstanding the evil spirit was not manifest enough yet. But
now we know what spirit they are of, and who rules them; For the Land is filled
with blood from corner to corner. Zeph. 3.3.
The Princes within her are roaring Lions; (reade-on, her Judges are evening
Wolves,) never such violences acted by Tartars, Caniballs, as by these Princes.
Surely I cannot tell what shall be done unto them, these murderers; GOD
knows; And that they have broken all the laws of Heaven and Earth; Divine and
Humane, such Children of Belial they are: Job 31.3.
I cannot tell what strange punishment shall befall these workers of iniquity.
Does not the LORD see their ways, and count all their steps? We will leave
them in His Hands, Who has put a bridle in their lips. But this I can tell,
What an execution The LORD would have done upon those, who had wrought villainy
in Israel, joining themselves unto BAAL-PEOR, Number. 25.3.
as these unto as abominable an Idol as was that. [But they had not shed blood
in the defense of that Idol; These Princes, in name, have filled the Land with
blood from corner to corner.] Yet hearken what The LORD says unto those, who
joined themselves unto Baal-Peor, as these to the Idol of Rome; Take all the
heads of the people, Verse. 4,
and hang them up before the LORD against the Sun, that the fierce anger of The
LORD may be turned away from Israel. We will wait Gods time, for then they
shall be made manifest indeed before Israel and before the Sun. In the mean
time the evil spirit is discovered and discerned plain enough, for by his
mere motion he has prevailed with the King to seal a Commission to his
Edomites, To kill and to slay his good people, to lay a City waste, even a
Mother in Israel. And if they will do so, to their power, They shall approve
themselves in so doing his best subjects, and truest friends: so he blesses
murderers whom GOD will lay (if they repent not) in the lowest hell. They have
compassion on their King; why they? Because they will, to their power, destroy
a mother City in Israel; They would have a whole Kingdom wasted: Blessed be ye
of the LORD, ye have compassion on me, does the King say; Blessed be The LORD,
The discovering GOD, Who has had compassion on His poor people, trusting in
His Name; and on His dwelling place; Blessed be GOD! The Spirit, that rules the
King and his Council, is discovered, the Edomites also, those bitter enemies,
the Keilites and the Ziphites too, those false and treacherous friends. Take
them in order; The Edomites first, Those called SPIRITVALL Lords, They must be
discovered, how full of spirit they were. Their spirit was not sufficiently
discovered eight years ago, when they forced a cursed Paper to be read in all
the Churches, there to publish a Declaration for Sports and Passe-times on The
LORDS DAY: Their spirit was not discovered by all this; for this the people
liked reasonably well; They had an Advouson for liberty, To riot on the LORDS
DAY, and they were glad of that. The people had a grant from the Bishops, The
Bishops from the Archbishop, he from the King; and that should be sufficient
warrant for them, and every one of them, to riot on the LORDS DAY; And for
every Minister from the Pulpit, GODS mouth there, To command the people so to
do O abominable! Yes, they have justified the Heathen at this point. And yet
these Bishops are not discovered yet; They are in their white Robes yet, we
shall see them in Scarlet by and by. And yet not manifest to all the Christian
world, say they, how spiritual they were, when, with the Scarlet Whore, they
would have rode in the blood of Scotland up even unto their horses bridles by
the space of a thousand and six hundred furlongs. And yet their spirit not
discovered yet! Nor when they would have established themselves by an Oath, A
peculiar enstalment to the High Priest, the GOD of our salvation; as I shall
show in another Treatise purposely for them, To clear their Spirit to the
world, how spiritual they were. But they would not be discovered then! Nor by
all the good offices they did the Church in Scotland and Ireland, and their
mother Church here in England, who says of them, Bloody fathers have ye been
unto me; bloody fathers have ye been! And yet they are not manifest yet, not
yet! When they would have made void and null, as the phrase is, All the Votes
and Acts of Parliament for the Churches good. And was not their spirit
discovered now? I cannot say No, now, for all Israel said Yes; and they
themselves said Yes too^ when they cast themselves out of the Court with their
own hands. But yet they will be made more manifest. What bloody ways have
they prosecuted, what divellish projects to wrest themselves into their places
again? If any there are so divelishly minded, so forsaken of common Reason,
and light of nature, that they will give these spiritual men their right hand,
to lift-them-up to their chair again, though they make way thither through a
field of BLOOD, yet these Bishops will say, Blessed are ye of the Lord, ye have
compassion on us. These men are discovered sure, how spiritual they are. So
are the Temporal Lords too, all discovered, and fully manifest to all Israel,
by their deceit, guile, couzenage, their lying, not unto man, but to the LORD;
by their justifying the wicked, whom the Lord abhorres; by their Treacheries,
Treasons, more then bloody conspiracies: now they are manifest enough; Lord
Digby, manifest enough; What KEEPERS the Great Seal has, manifest enough; and
what a Recorder the City has, manifest enough: The LORD turn the Wheel over
them all, who would turn the Laws into wormwood, and justice into gall, and
would turn three Kingdoms upside-downe* and make Cities ruinous heaps: But
they are discovered, the Keilites too, the Ziphites also, friends in show,
bloody adversaries in deed. These must be convinced also, for the Churches
innocence must be made manifest, and they must put to silence the ignorance of
wicked men; and this is next to be considered on. The LORD brings Saul into
David's Cave; 1 Samuel 24.3.
there David and his men encompasse him round, as Saul and his men encompassed
David in the Chapter before: Now they come to Parley; David cleares his
innocence, stops the devils mouth, opens Saul's mouth for David, and against
himself, convinces Saul, makes him weep; That Is GODS end. They must come to a
Parley the second time, for the devil is not non-plussed yet, he shall be
anon. 1 Samuel 26.6, 7
GOD puts it into David's heart to go down to Saul's camp; He causes a deep
sleep to fall upon Saul and his company; then David does as we read; returning
back, and standing at a distance, he calls-out to Saul, and so they come again
to a Parley; and now the devil has not a word to say, the spirit seems to
depart a little, for then Saul hears David speak, and so speaks himself, as
if he would make David weep, and believe that there shall be a sweet agreement
betwixt them for ever, for Saul blesses his son David, and assures him he
shall do great things, 1 Samuel 26.25.
and also shall still prevail,

O that I could bring up this to this time! But I cannot: The devil is more
mighty now, and more shameless now, then he was then, if more can be, as
surely it can be: for as length of time, and experiences therein, may make him
more cunning, so more wicked, more shameless, as at this day.

I can say, GOD has brought the King, and His Parliament to a Parley, once and
again, but still the malice of this evil Council appeared, wickedness still
proceeded from the wicked man, but how wonderfully was the innocence of David
(the faithful servants of the Lord) cleared!

The LORD had this design now, He will make manifest the Adversaries
treachery, and His Servants innocence; and he brings it about thus: His
Servants shall, because they will, treat upon a way to accommodate a Peace: The
LORD left men to go their own way, not so warrantable by His Word, to treat
with implacable adversaries, that He might bring to pass His own will, and
bring good to His people. It was conceived by all rational men, that on the
Kings party nothing was intended really and indeed, but mischief and bloody
treachery, as is now manifest to the world; But GOD suffered it to go on,
brought sweet out of that sower, good out of that evil: The Evil spirit is
silenced now, the Malignants have not what to say; O blessed be GOD! He can do
what He pleases, and what He does is for the good of His Israel. This last
Treaty betwixt King and Parliament, has non-plussed the Devil, his MANAGERS
all are put to silence now, they have not what to say, and yet they are not
ashamed: True, the wicked cannot be ashamed: Were they (says the Spirit)
ashamed when they had committed abomination, oppressed GODS Poor to their
power, shed blood to their power; profaned the LORDS DAY by a Law, when they
endeavored to establish their cursed Hitrarchy by an Oath, were they ashamed?
Or when they decreed unrighteous decrees, and prescribed grievousnesse, were
they ashamed? When they had committed these and these abominations, Ier. 6.15.
were they ashamed? Nay, They were not at all ashamed, neither could they
blush. The wicked are discovered now; nay. they have discovered themselves, and
they are convinced, some of them carry a mighty conviction within their Bosom:
And the Devil is put to silence too, so I said, I did not say the wicked are
ashamed; I know well, they who have entered the path of the Destroyer, and will
pursue it, they are hardened and brawned in evil, They cannot blush.

But now, what great matter have we gained by all this? the wicked are manifest
now, (...)
they are convinced too, and yet, nor David, nor the Church, are delivered:
Delivered! nay, they are in as bad a case as before, and deliverance further
off, for ought we see! True, for David must be lower yet; and the Churches
deliverance further out of sight then now it is, for ought we know. But I pray
you make answer to this, and consider well on it; Has David been a loser by
any thing that has fallen out unto him all this long time (so he thought it)
of Saul's persecution? No, you will say, for indeed you must say so; David has
been a great gainer by all this, that has happened unto him in the day wherein
the LORD was pleased to exercise him with sore afflictions; he has gained
experience of his own spirit, how lying, warping, murmuring, hasty, proud, and
stout it was; all this he has gained, and I know not how much more. He has
gained a full sight of all his adversaries, their malice, treacheries, and
falsehoods, are all made manifest; his adversaries are convinced too, and the
Evil spirit silenced also. Why then the Church will trust in their GOD for
ever; and well they may, the LORD deals so and so with David, His faithful
servant: He delaied David's deliverance; it stayed, as a Child coming to the
birth, when there is no power to bring forth; but yet all this slacknesse (as
we call it in our haste) was but to open David's mouth the wider, that he might
be more filled with MICHTAMS, and with MASCHILS. Blessed be GOD then, that the
Churches deliverance does seem to linger, to be long a coming; Blessed be His
Name, it is GODS doing, and he does all things well; and this He does now
(deferring His Churches deliverance) is best of all: Is it not best of all,
that the Church sees now more clearly into the way of their own spirits, and
more through into the Path of the destroyer, and into the very intents and
purposes of her Adversaries? Certainly, if her deliverance be longer delayed
(as we call delay) it is best for the Church still, for all her straits shall
be a means to open her mouth the wider, to let in, and give forth her
MICHTAMS, and her MASCHILS; If deliverance stays, it is because there must be
more discovery yet, even of Gods Right Hand with David; and this comes now to
be considered on, for it contains much.

David's case first, how wonderfully God made bare His arm toward him, though
he did not complete His deliverance yet; This will be quickly done. Then I will
bring it up to these times, even as it is at this day: where we shall see, the
Church had seen very little of God, had she been delivered after the manner,
and at the time they would have made choice of: But GOD delaying the time from
day to day, the Church sees much in God every day. See it in David first: Had
not Saul sought David every day to kill him, David had not seen GODS hand so
wonderfully reached-forth toward him in his salvation. How wonderfully was
David delivered from the Lions mouth at Nob! A wonderful hand is reached out to
David, when he is delivered from treacherous persons, that dealt treacherously;
Then in the wilderness of Maon, where the LORD wrought as wonderfully for
David, as He did for the children of Israel, when He set-up a pillar betwixt
the Egyptians and Israel, assuring their adversary, (but he will not understand
who must perish) that he must overcome GOD first, who looks to overcome
Israel. So here is a Rock of Separation (as was said before) so wonderful was
GOD in David's deliverance, as in Hachilah, and in the wilderness of Ziph,
where Jonathan helped David to strengthen his band in GOD, and then did David's
GOD strengthen His hand toward David; ever more strong toward His servants
then, when they are in a wood: So also in the Philistines Country, and when
David's City was burnt. But I must refer this burning of Ziglag to the last;
for it was his last refuge, and when David sat in ashes there, he was nearest
to his Crown.

To apply this to our times; 1 Samuel 23.26. 1 Samuel 26.
Had the Church been delivered with a deliverance as we had accounted a
deliverance, not a half deliverance; but had we been delivered so as would
have served our desires, (capacious and large, as the Sea toward the world and
things there, but straightened to better and higher matters.) When the Lords and
Commons went down into the North, three years ago, Then where had been our
Parliament? Yet was Gods Hand wonderful toward His people there. Had it been
granted to us from that high Court quickly after their sitting there, according
to the desires of our souls (feeling no burden, but what presses, and
pincheth the outward man) That the hurtful sword should not hurt us at that
time; that should be sheathed, our yokes should be taken off the shoulders,
shipmoney, and the like most illegal taxations; then had we (an ignorant and
brutish people) rested our selves wonderously contented; we had had enough:
And the Clergy also, a sound part of them, had been well enough too, had the
high Court freed them from that horrible Oath, but for the ET-CAETERA'S there,
there let them be, the Clergy thought not of those mischiefs, minding the Oath
only, that abominable invention. I might goe-on, but I must stand still and
admire too little: O the goodness of our GOD! He would not grant our desires;
He would give us a deliverance indeed; He will have things done in order; the
Prison-doores shall be opened to His servants, and fast shut upon His
adversaries: He will make His enemies, who said they were Bishops, and were
not; Spiritual, and were not; Rev. 2.9:
Lords, and were not, whose Blasphemy the LORD knows, He will make those
uncase themselves, and plucke-off their own vizards, and throw out themselves
too (at the last) with their own hands: He will turn His wheel over the head
that consulted against Him; and throw down those Powers, that exalted
themselves against His hidden one, GOD would have glorious things done, whether
we would or no; so as we can say now, we were too hasty. God has done all
things well, admirably well hitherto. He has cast on the ^^s^^ps, thrown down
their bloody Courts, taken away those cu sed Oaths; they shall be no more for a
sn^re, and a tra^. How wonderful was GODS right hand here! His people will
trust Him for after times. If He delays deliverance it is to make bare His
arm more, which is best for His people, if in patience, and with an holy
resignation of themselves into His hands, they can wait for Him. Wait! does the
hasty and impatient man say; the LORD is consuming his house in the fire of His
wrath and heat of His sore displeasure! No, no, let GOD alone with His house
and household; all that the LORD does do is but to exalt His own Right Hand in
all His peoples sight, in His Churches deliverance; and to open the Churches
mouth wide in praise and thanksgiving: So we will put the exalting of Gods
hand, and the exalting of His praise both together.

Davi^, his mouth had not been so wide open: nor his heart so enlarged to the
Praises of His GOD: If he had not been in the depths, he had not sung the high
Praises of His GOD. Now so many deliverances, so Many MICHTAM^; and how many
enemies were discovered so many Mas^^ils: these precious songs we find here and
^here, And some Psalms TO BRING TO REMEM^R^N^E. Psalm. 38.70.
It was necessary the Church should pass through these and those stra^ts: here
and there a Gulf, else she would not have made use of her ^reasure, which
Davi^ has prepared for t^em.

I might Refl^ct back now an hundred years, then Come-up taking in o our
Serious thoughts. That wonderful year of ^8. Then the 5th of November, 1605.
And then 1639. when the second Spanish Fleet was upon our English shore, from
which our Delive^an^e was more miraculous, then was that in 88. because from
this l^st we were delivered before we thought of the danger; and the snare
broken before we would see it, and so up all along to this day. But I shall
Recall but these three last years TO BRING TO REM^MBRANCE, how wonderful The
LORD was toward His People in Scotland and here three years ago. Indeed we
have need of all those straits we were in To bring to Remembrance The
wonderful works of the LORD The operation of His hand. in making TWA^^ONE so
making Peace, So^em^e^y Recorded on the Seventh of September, 1641. And Many
days of Thanksgiving, and opening wide the Churches Mouth Since and before, To
bring to Remembrance, The Churches Deliverance from bloo^y Courts; Cursed
Oaths, Sore oppressions, grievous yoakes, vexing Briars, grieving Thorns,
Divellish Machinations, horrid inventions, upwards to this day to this very
day, the 15 of June, 1643. To bring to Remembrance. What? Truly I cannot
express it, I see so much of Hell in it, such depths of Satan. That I cannot
express it; But to bring to Remembrance The Admirable kindnesses, Wonderful
Providence, glorious Discoveries. And now I can condemn my own hasty Spirit,
and I hope can more quietly Rest upon GOD for after Time: The Truth was. I
thought verily, and so did Thousands besides My self think. That if the high
Court did Propositi n it once more. Treat Spend Time, that may with implacable
Adversaries; If so, They will break us all in pieces, Thought I and wiser men
then my self, specially the best affected in the City. And yet truly, not to
belie my self, I did verily believe. That GOD is in heaven, and did LAUGH all
the while; and His Faithful Servants might laugh too; but yet so brutish My
thoughts were; Treat once more and break us all; So I thought and so though
many more not so well considering what GOD had done before, and what He might
do then with another Treaty. But now, having so many experiences, we can
quietly resign the matter into GODS hand; Let men alone to their work, and
GOD alone to His work, and let us do our duty. That is our work; GOD will
not break H^s people, not He, though men should proposition it again, as some
will go near to do, yet He will not break H s people, but He will break His
Adversaries, as it is at this day. Had there not been those offers to Peace
from the contrary side, fained and treacherous, There had not been a discovery
of those Right Men in Oxford, and London; Their fine devices, the depths of
Satan; our Adversaries had not so broken themselves, and we had not had our
good day, Thursday the 15. of June, To call to remembrance all the
forementioned, and our old Protestati^n, To humble, and shame us for it, and so
to enter into a New, a New Covenant, Vow and Oath. If that bloody design had
not been and been discovered which was to ruin King Kingdom, Laws,
Liberties, Religion, and all; [So horrid a design it was, and is acknowledged
to be by those, who should have been Actors in it, upon sound conviction, we
hope, true and deep humiliation for it;] If such a design had not been, and
been disclosed. Then had not Shecaniah. I mean the Nobles and Worthics of the
Land thought upon the way. ^zra 10 2.
The only way to recover, and save a distressed State and Church sinking into
the pit of destruction; We have done so and so yet there is hope in Israel
concerning these things: N^w therefore let us make a Cov^nant with our GOD, To
put away all persons and things, which have thrust GOD from us. Let us make a
Covenant to do so, and stand to it. So spoke Shecaniah then; So said in
effect, our Nobles, and Worthies now. And so they entered into the way, the only
way, to recover a sick and languishing State, to raise it up from the dead,
before the Pit close its mouth upon us. We know not what will become of it;
Not how we enter into it, nor how we shall stand to it. We know some will be
grieved, and have indignation against the Holy Covenant; And have intelligence
with them that forsake The holy Covenant. We must leave this to whom it does
belong and do our duty. Bless we GOD, who put such a prize into our hands. To
streng^^en our hands in GOD, by renewing our Covenant again. We entered into
Covenant formerly, and some of the chiefest amongst us have done wickedly
against the Covenant, Dan. 11.
corrupted by flatteries, and corrupting, and so are left to miserable
delusions. And we, the best of us all, have done weakly against the Covenant;
None of us have dealt truly; None have kept close to it, and to our GOD. And
yet is there hope in Israel concerning this; To make a Covenant with our GOD
firmer, and surer, laying our heart (a fleeting slippery thing) under Sacred
bands, and fe^ters stronger then Brass; That we will keep closely with our
GOD; We! Yes we, Mr. Call. Sermon.
and our house [As it has been excellently charged upon us.] will serve our
GOD, Who has done all these things for us. We are firmly resolved to serve
Him, not as we have served Him, but in Sincerity and Truth; And being so
resolved, we will put away all persons and things which stop-up the current and
stream of blessings, hindering good from comming-in. And we will advance those
persons, and do those things, which may procure good to our souls, and peace
to King and Kingdom. We will enter into Covenant upon this being firmly
resolved so to do, even as Israel, under grievous Adversaries, Number. 21.12.
oppressing some Israelites, and imprisoning other some, and vexing all Israel;
Then they vowed a vow unto The LORD, That, if He would be pleased INDEED to
deliver them from that oppressing Adversary, They would make sure work with
the Adversary, he should annoy and vex them no more, Then I will utterly
destroy their Cities. Nor will we make gain of the spoils, but devote all to
Thee, The giver of Victories. Now mark how well pleased The LORD was with this
Vow; And The LORD hearkened to the voice of Israel, and they did as they had
vowed, for they called the place. HORMAH, a curse, or utter destruction. Verse.
3.
Now The LORD be praised, and evermore blessed be His holy Name. Who has put it
into the heart of His Servants to do this thing, the ONE THING NECESSARY at
this time, an ONLY WAY to save a Nation as appears fully by the words of
Shecaniah, [YET THERE IS THIS HOPE;] and as clearly in the story of Asa,
[VVhere we read how the case was with Israel, when Israel were loose with
their GOD; how successful when the people made a covenant with their GOD; And
how miserable when they brake covenant with Him.] He that has put this purpose
of heart into them, (...) in the purpose of their heart for ever, and make the
heart of the people firm, stable, and upright with their GOD in this great
ma^^^r. Amen.

H^therto we have seen GOD working wonderfully for His people in their
straits, and grievous afflictions, discovering their hearts an^ (...) ^o
themselves; and if their afflictions continue yet longer^ it is that there may
be more discovery made of the way and p^^de of their spiri^s. That when GOD
calls them to mourning, they may not make then clothes so gay but be as those
whom GOD will humble.

2. Discoverin^ the adversaries to His people, their wiles, projects, and
b^^^d^ (...) signs against His Church; and if deliverance staves and is ^^^cke
in coming it is that more discovery may be made this way also; and that the
adversary may be yet more convinced.

3. That GODS Right hand may be more manifest with His people. And

4. His peoples mouths may be more open to sing the high praises of their GOD.
And because deliverance lingers, and is slack in coming, as we count
sl^cknesse, it is because there might be more discovery made of all the
particulars before mentioned. I will draw up to a conclusion of the Chapter.
Psalm 94.12.
Blessed is the man whom thou chastenest, O LORD, and tea^ est them out of thy
Law. We must not stop there, but read on in the Psalm, thereby to strengthen
our spirits, that we may stand st l^, and wait for GOD in the way of His
judgments: there are sad matters yet behind; we have scene D^vid brought very
low, but not yet at the lowest; we shall see him, and hear him out of the
depths, but he is delivered out of them all. David now, many the faithful
Servants of the LORD are in David's case, which we shall read by and by: their
Ziglags are smitten, and burnt with fire; we are sure in a sad case, if we
knevv it, and (which speaks sadly to our hearts) our case is like to be sadder
yet; we are low, and are like to be lovver, for un-answerable Reasons, which
we shall hear fully anon: This in short because we do not humble our selves
under GODS Almighty hand; He has laid us lovv, we are high, our spirits are
proud, and stout. How does that appear? As plainly as the nose in your face;
by the provision we make for our backs and bellies: I say no more here, but
this, we should not be more stout, but more humble, because our Ziglags (we
call properly ours) are not burnt yet. These are burnt round about us, the fire
has taken the State and Church-house, and we should (as men do in such a
case) pluck down every thing that exalts it self. I remember a note of
Master Ainsworths touching Israel, In Deuteronomy.
When the sword of GOD is abroad, war, famine, pestilence, though amongst
the heathen people, ^et it is GODS sword, and a calamity; we must pray, and
fa^t, we must (say they) humble our selves the only way to keep it from
e^^^ing our doore^. The sword is b^t^ed in heaven now, our own land is
watered with our blood, and dunged with our carcases; and we would have
the svvord to rest and be still: No, it cannot we must fall lovv in our
spirits, and rise high in our says, before this vill be. It is a true saying
also, Calamity knockes at that man's door, and will ente^, Calami^as illiu^
f^^^ pul^^^ qui alio (...) no^^movetu^.
w^^^ minalesse of the calamity upon his neighbor and brother. We conclude
now, we are like to see heavier times because we have not well observed the
way of our own spirits nor the opera^^^n of GODS hand, not the meaning of
^is Rod tovv^^^^ us all this while we are not humbled. Well blessed be (...)
vv^at ever it be, and blessed be His Name, who uses Princes and Nobles of the
earth, as Scullions indeed, to clear and vvash His Vessels app^^^^ to h^nour.
But that we may not faint in out ^^de^ b^t ex^ect with patience the salvation
of GOD; We vv l^ pro^^^^ (...), vv^^^^ we broke off, and give no rest to our
spirits ^^ll we have ^^xed them upon an everlasting ^^unda^^on, vvhereupon we
may stand still, and abide the rain and the vvindes, the storms and ha^^e,
even the st^^^s of great Waters, in David's assurance and confidence. Psalm.
94.22. Verse 23.
That the LO^D is my defense, and my GOD is the rock of my refuge: And He
shall bring upon my adversaries their own iniquity, and shall ^ut them off in
then own wickedness: Yea, the LORD our GOD shall cut them off. Amen.

CHAP. 6. David's troubles have a happy close; but his case is very sad first.
The Churches case now, is read in David's case then; therefore we record former
deliverances very wonderful, to strengthen our assurance in a deliverance to
come, which will be more glorious the longer it stays. Quere's touching David's
case, now at the lowest, with resolution from Gods mouth thereunto; which
speaks comfortable words to David, but sad things to us. Our strong hold^, as
well as David's, must be cast down before we are delivered.
I See the Land, said one, after he had been long upon the Sea, and escaped
many dangers there; We can say as much touching David's adventures (as a private
man) and what end God makes; That is, glorious still, but David must endure
first.

We read before. that David came to Gath; the King there respects him very
well, assigns him a City called Ziglag, which David might lay claim to,
I^sh. 14 31.
being assigned long before by I^shuah to the Tribe of Judah, and now fell to
David by lot. David was there, but he could not sit still there, he was for
action, the service of his GOD, and his Country, and abroad he goes; though
his body be among the Philistines, yet his heart is in Judah, and to do Saul
his Master all the good service he can, and his adversaries all the hurt he is
able. Hereon depends a very notable story, because of some very notable
circumstances thereabouts* specially touching the sword: An hurtful
instrument, but yet could do David no hurt, being wholly at Gods dispose; and
that is very comfortable, specially at that time: which I would have insisted
upon a little, but that I find my self prevented in a little Paper, called, A
staff of comfort, whereunto I refer the Reader, if please him.

That which concerns us here, is, David has put himself upon a very hot
service, and overcomes wherever he goes for he carries the Revenge of GOD
with him. After execution done, he retires to Ziglag; 1 Samuel 30.3.
coming thither, he finds it smitten, and burnt with fire: the Amalekites had
been there, had done as we read, and had taken thence all David's earthly
comforts, every one. Truly a very hard and sad case; Saul has hunted him from
all his strong holds, those in Israel, those in the Wilderness; and now by the
favor of Achish, he has one City of Refuge more assigned to him, David is
stepped aside, the Amalekites invade the City the while, Smite it, and burn it
with fire, and take away all his comforts, the desire of his eyes, and the
delight of his heart, all his comfort thence. He hears devouring words
besides, to add to his grief: Ah Lord! what a sad case is this! I shall
propose some Quere's about it anon, because the resolution thereunto will
instruct us very much: It will state, and resolve our questions too; and if not
satisfy us, yet will make us silent.

But first, observing my method all along hitherto, we must see how this
relates to the present time also: And blessed be GOD we see it very clearly; it
relates fully to our times, for our Ziglags are smitten and burnt with fire:
Yes, and our case is more like David's still; David hears devouring words from
those he put as much confidence in, as could be put upon men too much; These
talk of stoping him. It is our case too; we made lies our refuge, we put
confidence in men, because they are many, in that Arm, because it is strong.
And wha do we hear? Surely that which troubles us as much as it did David,
when his men spoke of stoning him; That men will prove themselves men,
deceitful and treacherous; That there is as much or more danger from them,
then from professed Adversaries. Well, yes indeed it is well, blessed be GOD;
let Him take what way He pleases, so He will cast down all our strongholds,
our vain confidences: I know the Adversary laughs now; Well; GOD laughes
also, and His People may laugh too at their own folly, and be ashamed also
the more, the more they looked to multitudes; Should not a people lo^ke to
their GOD? Stay themselves upon an Almighty Arm? Oh blessed be GOD, who by
every days experience of His faithfulness, and man's unfaithfulness,
instructs His people to discretion, To do now as David did then, encourage
themselves in The LORD their GOD. And they that can do so, are in a good case,
as David was here* and never nearer and closer to his GOD, then when the
creature was remotest from his eye; never more encouragement from GOD, then
when he had most discouragement from man: Therefore now, though there be a
casting down, yet these faithful servan^s of The LORD are near to a
raising-up, if not to a kingdom in this world, yet in a better world* which
shall not be shaken, and that is best of all. So now David's case, though it
relates not fully to our case, yet it tells us what The LORD will do for His
people in after time, we hope, shortly, raise them out of the Ashes, so soon,
(not sooner) as their strongholds (All their vain confidences) shall be
destroyed. As these fall, so His people rise; wherein we shall have a clear
understanding anon. I would call-to remembrance first, how wonderfully GOD has
wrought for his Church and People, that so we might not faint in our minds,
but, (as doubtless Gods people do) encourage our hearts in GOD, to strengthen
us at the present, and in after time. He has wrought for His Church as strange
a deliverance, within these four years, as was that from out of Egypt; That
through the Red Sea; And the bringing-back from B^b^l^n, so strange a
deliverance has GOD wrought. I conceive, the Church has passed through her
greatest strait already; Before the sit^ing of the last Parliament, and a
month after, she went through the greatest gulf, wherein she almost wonders
at this day (but GOD in Christ is only wonderful) how she passed it ^ver, and
was not swallowed-up therein. Certain it is That then, at that time the Church
was brought to the brow of the hill, she, as her LORD before her p^ssed thr^ugh
the midst of ^er adversaries, she knows not how; nor have we* poor people well
and rightly considered on it how wonderful that deliverance was. Had we not
had comm n thoughts about it it had not been as t t^is day. I was a cheap
deliverance indeed, Isa. 9.5.
not b^ the battle of the Warri^ur, with whom is a confused (...) an^ garmen^s
rolled in blood. The LORD brought it about by His o^ne out stre^ched Arm. He
has b^oke the yoke of ^i^ bu^then* and the s^as^e^ ^is ho^^er* the rod of his
oppressor, as in the day ^f ^idian. And He put His people to little Cost all
this while. But because the cheapne^^e of that del^verance has taken awa^ very
much from the worth and w^^^ht of the sa^e, therefore sure it is, that The LORD
will not deliver H^s Church now. But by t^^ battle of the Wa^^^o^^, with
conf^s^^ nois^ and garments ^^lle^ in bl^^d. I purposely insist upon this
wonderful deliverance the Church has had* the more to strengthen our hand in
GOD against the time to come.

I do not well understand who G^g ^n^ Magog are, who are her secret, who are
the Churches open enemies. Nor can I ^ell whether the Tu^ke may no^ molest her,
before she be taken from the earth or made a q^iet ^abitation there. But this I
conceive, an^ ye^ I will not call it a conceit That as David's deliverance was
most a^^^rable, which yet, at present he took least notice of because the
d^nger was over before he knew it, covered, and kept close under sh^wes and
pretenses of extraordinary favors, and acts of grace: So were the Churches
deliverances also, all these three years, before the war against her was open
and manifest: but more particularly admirable about three years ago. And I
verily persuade my self, the Papists shall never have the like advantages
against her as they have had; She has escaped their great snare that is broken;
And though she was ^n her Adv^rs^ries teeth, as a prey there, (they were sure
of her, and made no more conscience to devour her, then to eat bread,) yet
she is delivered. O wonderful! Truly as wonderful I think every whit as her
deliverance will be then, when her open Adversaries shall think verily to
swallow her up quick, for then, when her enemy has prepared his Instruments of
death, is big with expectation, Then the LORD will smite his bow out of his
left hand, Ezekiel. 39.3.
and cause his arrows to fall out of his Right hand. Will it be surely so?
Yes, it is as sure as if it were done; Behold, it is come, and it is done,
says the Lord. Surely the Churches deliverance three years ago is as
admirable, as this will be; And mark how the LORD has followed His victory
over His Churches adversaries ever since; Then He sent in the Heads of the
Tribes, and He has covered their heads with His own wing ever since; Their
abode was among Scorpions, yet were they not stung; their soul was among
Lions, yet not devoured; they were amongst those that were set on fire, yet
they were delivered: O wonderful! Yes, when GOD begins to deliver, in
delivering He will deliver; He will deliver indeed.

And see how graciously He has dealt with His Servants, that serve Him with a
willing mind! He has given them success ever since, even to admiration, and
sent-them-in supplies, and prospered those supplies after a wonderful manner:
They have been in straits so often, but these have served to make their way
more passable, and their enlargement more glorious. I have recalled all this,
recording the years bypast, and remembering the Right Hand of the Most High to
strengthen and fortify our spirit, that we may not faint in the day of
trouble, when our Ziglags are smitten, and burnt over our heads: GOD is He, who
has delivered, 2 Cor. 1.10.
(says the Apostle) And so he concludes comfortably for the present, and for
after time. But give me leave to reason a little, as flesh and blood will,
whether we will or not: Though GOD has delivered, it does not therefore follow,
that He will deliver; He had delivered His People from these and these enemies,
yet when His People had provoked Him by their images, and strange vanities, the
LORD tells them plainly, He will deliver them no more: And why may not we
expect to hear the same words; Ye have rebelled more and more, therefore I
will deliver you no more: We might indeed expect to hear the same words, if
the LORD in showing mercy to a land did consult with the People of the Land,
with their deservings, and the merit of their works: which he does not do,
but with His free Mercy, Goodness, and loving Kindnesses; consulting with
Himself, He has delivered us from SO GREAT A DEATH (mark that, SO GREAT A
DEATH, for we had it not before) when the righteous were pressed out of
measure, above strength; when they were brought to the brow and brinke of the
hill, purposely to throw them down headlong thence; when they despaired even
of life: when the sentence of death was received in themselves; when GOD does
deliver after such a manner as this, such an unexpected glorious manner, which
heaven and earth stand wondering at (from so great a death) when He turns the
cap ivity of a People as Jordan, back; when He works so strangely, so
wonderfully, this is an evident token, that, though the deliverance be not
perfected yet it is perfecting: The LORD does watch over it and is working and
contriving what way to make it more glorious, for His Name is engaged upon it:
It may goe-backe till it be out of sight; it may have many stops in comming-on
again; it may fall into the depths, where we can find no bottom, nor any
humane help whereby it may rise again. Notwithstanding GOD is working
gloriously all this while; so as we may say even now, Now, when they that hate
the Lord lift-up the head, why yet deliverance goes-on; the LORD watches it.
and promoteth it, and, as it is in the Text. He dot^ deliver, while He is
fitting His servants, and making them MEET for deliverance: And the more we
shall see the Pit opened before us, and hell there; the more the way to
deliverance shall be opened, and the more of heaven we shall see there; to doubt
thereof, were to provoke the LORD, as they did at the SEA, even at the RED SEA.
And now I suppose we are better fitted by all this, to read over David's case,
and therein our own anon, when I have given (or rather, not I, but the Lord) a
resolution to certain Quere's touching David's case, why the LORD dealt so
bitterly with him. Indeed David was greatly distressed; a great desolation
before his eyes, but his eyes are to The LORD, and that will help all. David
is as low brought as can be, yet not too low for GOD to raise again; if He
puts under His hand, it is done; and it is His glory to put forth His right
hand at a dead lift. David has said, Try me (O LORD) and prove me; the LORD
will do it, he shall be tried as silver is tried, but God, his God, will stand
by him, while he melts: David shall be at no loss, only the dross shall go
forth and his scum: David had said, Thou art my portion, O LORD; he had not
said so, had he not found what poor portions of comfort the creature yields us
here below, in the day of trouble. David had prayed, The LORD bring me to the
rock that is higher then I; The LORD will do it, by unbottoming him of all
creature confidences. Alas how are we deceived! we fools build our house here,
as if so be we expected always fair weather; No, we must build so, as those
who know the Rain will fall, Winds will blow, stormy hail will beat upon our
house: Heb. 11.10..
We may read, Abraham looked for a City that has foundations, but not before
all his strongholds were down, and he was driven from all his foundations,
his creature comforts here below. We see already excellent Reasons, why David
was laid so low, but I will speak of them very briefly, in this order.

First, David is in a strange land, he looks for peace there! No, he had no
peace in his own land, and expects he to have it amongst the Philistines! GOD
will not give David rest from all adversity in the Philistines land; David must
not sit down at rest, till he be returned to his own People: And there is not
the place of his rest neither; our expectations from worldly things will
deceive us; it is good to learn how uncertain these things are, betimes, that
we may put no trust in them.

2. David's Ziglag is smitten, and burnt with fire; That David might now well
understand, what kind of thing his Ziglag is, casual and hazardous. He smote
Amalecks town a few days ago; Now Amaleck smites David's town; These are the
changes here below, up and down; The Adversary was smitten yesterday, David to
day; a great difference in the stroke, because GOD ordered it; we can conclude
neither love nor hatred from these things. Do we hear that the Adversaries
Right hand is lifted-up, has smitten and burnt David's City; and he goes on
valiantly, as if he would carry all before him? Be not dismayed at this, it is
no new thing; David's case he is low now, but he will be up again, and confound
the Adversary anon, and be more then conqueror. It was said of the Romans.
They were put to the worse in many skirmishes, and light battles, but never in
a War. They were worsted in the world many times* never conquered there, but
they conquered the world. This truly relates to David and his Warriors; They
are worsted in the world, but yet (in Christ) they have overcome the world; and
shall be more then conquerours there anon, after they have endured, like good
soldiers, a little hardness.

3. David's Ziglag is smitten, all his delectable things taken captive thence,
but not one slain. The Sword is in the enraged Amalekites hand, yet does
drink no blood, nor eat flesh. I told you before, GOD would stand by David,
when he was in the refining pot, melting there; His presence would be with him,
as with the three Worthies; He will moderate the fire, (if He does not quench
it) the extreme heat of the enemies rage against David; he shall do David no
hurt, blessed be His Name. But yet behold the Ci^y is burnt with fire, wives,
sons and daughters taken captives, David's wives too. Learn then,

4. How corruptible our Ziglags are, how uncertain our comforts there; (like
Jonas Gourd) they cast a shadow in the morning, and we sit contentedly under
them; at night they are withered. David and his men a very few days ago, had
every man an house, wives and children round about them, and David had a City,
a place of refuge to go unto; Now their houses lie in ashes, and all their
delectable things taken thence: Let us consider well on it, and read the Case
once more. David and his men are gone from home, they return in ashes, their
houses smitten and burnt, all their comforts taken thence It was David's case
and theirs whose hand was with David. Then why man it not be ours? LORD teach
us, by this example, not to set our eyes upon our Ziglags, not our hearts upon
our comforts there. A great lesson for this time; and because of our dotings
that way, a maine reason why The LORD, infinitely wise, and exceeding loving to
Davi^, suffers his Ziglag to lie in ashes before his eyes; happily David and his
men had set their eyes upon that place, and their comforts there; they had
delighted in them too much. Whosoever does so, David must not, therefore his
Ziglag shall be smitten, and burnt with Fire.

But we do not see the worst of David's case yet. His City is burnt, it is
possible for David, a valiant man, to get another. His wives are taken
captives, he may recover them again; but he cannot do all this without his
men; and (see h^s case!) they will turn from him, or turn against him, for they
spoke of stoning him. It is the saddest case that ever I read, I mean an
outward case, and so every man will say that observes it. David is in a strange
Country, he has a shelter there, It is burnt with fire, all his comforts taken
thence. O for a friend now to comfort him! he has not one; They that should
comfort him are miserable comforters; Their soul is grieved, every man for his
sons and daughters; then they spoke of stoning David. Isreal's old doings; Their
fathers dealt little better with Moses; If they wanted bread or water, or were
in danger, then presently they blamed Moses: So here, these men are smitten:
whose ever was the hand, it was GODS rod, and they speak of smiting David.
Surely David is in a sad and a darksome condition; he walks now in the shadow
of death, but GOD will be a light unto him, and David looks for Him, even for a
light to rise in this obscurity. I remember, there was a Kingdom which wanted
an heir, Competitors there were enough. It was agreed upon amongst the Nobles,
That he should be King, who could first spy the Suns rising. You will imagine
now, that many eyes were turned eastward, intent that way, for they looked for
a Kingdom; and yet not all; one amongst many, and but one, looked as steadfastly
westward, and got a Kingdom by it for without controversy he spied the beams
of the rising Sun first, striking upon the high places of the earth westward.
Here is the patience of the Saints. They can wait upon GOD, stay His leisure,
leave Him to His own way and Time, Who created the light, and formed the
darkness; His servants expect now, the clearest manifestation of the light of
GODS countenance toward them. there, Isa. 58.10.
where the Sun of all their outward comforts set. Thy light shall rise in
obscurity, and Thy darkness shall be as the noone day. Every man expects light
in the morning, and to see the Sun rise in the East; But to expect light to
rise in the West, where the Sun of all our comforts here below, sets, here is
the wisdom and patience of the Saints also. And it is a wonderful Promise,
In the morning it shall be light. Are those the words? No; for that runs along
with our sense too; but when we think the time will be darkest, as now in
David's case, when the Sun of all his comforts is set, now to expect light,
there is the wisdom, and patience of the Saints; and they have a vvonderfull
promise for it, (praised be His glorious Name:) But it shall come to pass,
Zech. 147.
That at EVENING, IT SHALL BE LIGHT. It shall be the lightest Time (with
David) when he expects it will be darkest; i.e. When he is in the shadovv of
death, AT EVENING IT SHALL BE LIGHT, which David's GOD will create for David,
and that is a glorious light. We can now resolve our selves, why The LORD
will have it night with David; why He will have the Sun of all his
(outvvard comforts) go down and set all at once. Why? To indeare light unto
him. While the Sun shines, and it is day with us, light is but an ordinary
thing; and but an ordinary rate set upon it, (an excellent creature though it
be.) But when neither Sun, nor Moon, nor Stars appear, in the night of our
affliction; then to have light come-in unto us (as to Paul and Silas in the
prison) this indeares light, now it is light indeed; To have a light arise in
obscurity, that is comfortable indeed, in this evening, (of our distractions)
in the night of our affliction, it shall be light; That is a glorious promise,
and it is a new Creation.

The LORD suffers the adversary to overpower David, to take from him all was
his; all below, that David could take delight in: Now (would we say) David is
an undone man: No, we are deceived, the enemy cannot undo a man, he may
distress him for a minute, or an hour, but he cannot undo him; the enemy
cannot take GOD from a man, and till that be done, till GOD be gone from a man,
he is never undone. Nay, the more fierce and violent the enemy is upon David,
the nearer GOD is to him: as we are nearest our children when trouble and
pains are upon them, then we are nearest them; so is GOD too; and He is the
Fountain of Light; be it Even-tide, or Midnight with us, He makes it day
wherever He is. And now His Servant David will set his face more steadfastly
to look after this light, now, that his shadow is so dark: If his comforts be
not removed from his eye, the stream of his affections will not run clear,
toward the Springhead. The Living Fountain of light and comfort. David must
find a nothingnesse in the creature, before he can find all in GOD. He cannot
be taught that great lesson, but by losses, after losses. David must be a King,
just and merciful; therefore he must feel oppression; and groan under it; He
must see affliction, and be acquainted with it; David is rising a pace to his
Crown; It must be from the lowest bottom; and when he was there in dust and
ashes, (though he thought not so) the Crown was hastening to his head; For he
did not faint in his mind: But David encouraged himself in The LORD. Mighty
words, and they make David strong and mighty in his GOD. All was gone; All the
discouragements that the world could lay upon David, lies now upon him; yet he
can encourage himself in GOD, and so makes-up all his losses in one GOD.
Indeed GOD is all-sufficient; And now GOD turns the heart of his men unto
David again; And they march forth against the enemy in the strength of The
LORD, and fetch all back again. If David can encourage himself in GOD, he
shall see the stream turned presently, as the rivers in the South. If we can
believe, trust perfectly. That, which we think cannot be, is possible, and
shall be; That which we think is gone, shall all turn back again. If we can
be patient, we shall receive all again with advantage. This in passage, I
would rather set a mark upon the time, when David was delivered.

David was delivered, but not before he was driven from all his strongholds;
not before his-last place of refuge was smitten, and burnt with fire; not
before all his comforts were taken from him, and his men spoke of stoning him;
Then he was delivered when, to the eye of Reason, deliverance was farthest off,
clean out of sight. I conclude from hence, that David now, all the faithful
of the LORD, shall be delivered, but not yet; deliverance is comming-on, and
perfecting every day, even by those means and ways, whereby we think it is
set further back; but it will not be perfected, not completed (as it shall be
in time, and as we call complete) before all strongholds and brest-workes, are
cast down and destroyed. I cannot be mistaken here, I do not mean, that all
the strong holds, forts, and brest-workes before our eyes, must be destroyed,
before the Church shall be delivered; no, the Church is always allowed the
wisdom of the serpent, to stand upon her guard, and in her watchtower, to
fortify and brest-worke themselves against an insulting adversary, who (if he
should prevail) will tread upon the head of the righteous, more heavily then
ever yet they were trod upon so as their necks shall bow down to the foot of
pride* shall be trod upon as the mire in the streets. Blessed be GOD, His
servants have so fortified themselves; and His blessings be upon the heads of
those, who have given forth their heart and hand to the raising these works;
for I verily believe, these will be very serviceable to the Church till the
very time when her LORD will make her a quiet habitation; all the time before
is like to be Troublous. The meaning then is not, That these forts and
brest-workes, before our eyes, must be destroyed, before the Church is
delivered, [though it is very notable, that so it was with David; all was down
before he was raised; quite forsaken before GOD took him up;] But all the
Churches strongholds within must be destroyed, their vain confidences, their
brest-works within, raised there by these without, making the Church confident
and secure, trusting in them, these must be destroyed, before the Church can be
delivered. Nay, if these brest-workes and strong holds within, be not
destroyed, they will destroy us, they will put deliverance further back, and
destroy these without: I mean, our trusting in them, expecting salvation from
them, will destroy us and them; it will bring a curse upon all; the sword shall
impoverish thy fenced Cities, says the LORD: Ier. 5.17.
Why will the Lord suffer the Adversary to do so? Because His People set
their hearts that way, and departed from the LORD; they expected salvation from
their fenced Cities: it is as idolatrous every whit, as to expect salvation
from stocks and stones; therefore the LORD would impoverish their fenced
Cities, wherem thou TRVSTEDST with the sword; their trust in these things,
destroyed the things and persons too. But more of this in the eighth and last
Chapter.

Our deliverance is delayed, we shall see reason why it is so; we are very high
now and exalted, but GOD must be exalted in that day. We do (indeed) many of us
lie among the Pots, like as Scullions betwixt the Raunges, (i.e.) sore troubles
are upon us, Psalm 63.13. In summis angustiis, sordibus, and squalore vixeritii,
Metaphora a calonibus castrensibus. Iunius.
and our eyes have seen adversity; and yet, because our outsides show forth no
such thing, our outward garb is so unsuitable to Mourners, to those that are
sultied among Pots; because our faces do not change color yet, nor our
clothes, we do not take shame unto our selves: Therefore GOD will not take off
our reproach, we shall see more adversity, before GOD will put glory upon us,
before we shall be as the wings of a Dove, covered with silver, and yellow
gold. But more of th^s anon.

Now David is delivered, for all his strong holds are down and he can
encourage himself in the Lord, when all the discouragements that could be were
upon him; when he was weakest, then was he strongest; when he was driven from
all his strong holds, when all his comforts were removed, when his men turned
themselves against him, then GOD comes in; when no help from earth, there is
much from heaven; GOD loves to show himself for David, when they can see
nothing but His right hand put forth in their salvation: Blessed be GOD, a
refuge that never failed David, He comes-in, when all goes out, a present help
in trouble; Refuge failed me, (said David in his Maschil when he was in the
Cave) no man cares for me, Psalm. 142.4.
my own servants speak of stoning me, did he say at that time; but then he
encouraged himself in the LORD his GOD, and said, Thou art my refuge; O!
blessed be GOD! Be the Nations never so angry, and the earth unquiet, Ier. 3.23.
the Sea of this world never so tempestuous, yet His servants eyes are ever to
the LORD, they can put-in into that harbor, and they are secure.

I conclude; Truly in vain is salvation hoped for, from the hills, and from
the multitude of mountains; Trul^ in the LORD our GOD is the salvation of
Israel. Isa. 29.19.
The meek shall increase their joy in the LORD, and the poor among men shall
rejoice in the Holy one of Israel. In the way of thy judgments. O Lord, Isa.
26.8.
have we waited for thee: the desire of our soul is to thy Name, and to the
remembrance of thee. Amen.

CHAP. 7. A grave Question resolved, Touching the manner how a Spirit is to be
resisted; If he acts like a Spirit, then by the spirit of Prayer, wherein
Israel neither was nor is wanting: If he acts by the hand of an Edomite, then
he must be resisted by the sword of an Israelite, wherein Israel now must not
be wanting neither, but do as Israel did, and as their Brethren in Scotland
have done of late, and in ancient Times.
DAvid, greatly distressed, has encouraged himself in The LORD his GOD; then,
enquiring of The LORD is commanded to pursue after his enemies, and assured
without fail to recover all. His army is but in an ill case for service, six
hundred in all, two hundred so faint, that they could not go. Notwithstanding
GOD, who hangs the greatest waights upon the weakest wyers: does the greatest
matters by the weakest instruments, has done His work by these weak men. But
yet, that all Israel may attest David's innocence, and secure him from Saul's and
his Edomites insolences, GOD sends them all-in now, to help David; And in they
come with a blessing in their mouths, Peace, peace be unto thee, and peace be
unto thine belpers, for thy GOD helps thee. 1 Chro. 12.18.
Here is a grave question now touching the manner of resistance.

If the Tribes come-in not to resist Saul, Obj:
but (as affirmed before) his private will or spirit, like a strong man keeping
possession in Saul's heart, and holding his tenure therein more firmly by the
activity and effectual working of the evil spirit, which came upon Saul, and
never left him to the day of his death: If so, Then me thinks this kind
should have been cast forth by Prayer and Fasting. The meaning is, Israel
should not have taken Bow and Arrows, Shield and Buckler into their hands, but
have fallen down upon their knees, and have prayed for their Master, and so by
mighty-wrastlings have dispossessed Saul of his own spirit, so by mighty in
him: This had been according to the Rule and word of The LORD Christ; Matthew.
17.21.
This kind is not cast forth but by Prayer and Fasting.

To this I reply first, and do grant,

1. That this kind, while it does act as a spirit, is to be resisted by the
spirit of Prayer, and so always has been cast forth. But when his actings are
more open and visible upon any person, as upon that Lunatic there; Then, if
there had been force enough to resist him, the father of the child, would not
have called it a Resistance of his child, which was but the restraining of the
child from falling into the fire, and into the water. So we see in this case,
There might have been a resisting of the devil, which had had an affiance and
good agreement with duty. Much more then, had this Lunaticke Person played the
Edomite, flourished with his sword, slain all he met, man, woman, and child,
sucklings too, beasts also; made Cities ruinous heaps. Should Israel go to
prayer now? Pray the devil to be quiet; So they might have been killed upon
their knees. Israel knew the devil well enough, and the Edomite too. That the
more they prayed them, the fiercer they would be, as Rabshakeh cried the louder
in the Jewish language, the more he was prayed to speak in the Syriacke
tongue; 2 Kin. 18.28:
When the devil has put a sword into an Edomites hand, we must not use
supplications, but put force to force, and conjure-out the devil with the
Sword. If the devil make you bleed, try a conclusion, whether you cannot make
the devil bleed; which is very poffible, says Zanchie, and he has a large
discourse upon it, and touching the methods of Satan. The devil acts now by
the hand of an Edomite; he must be resisted by the hand of an Israelite. This
first, I affirm,

2. That Israel, Priests and People there, went by their Rule; doubtless they
had used all fair means before they took the sword in hand. They had prayed
for Saul, and to make their prayer the more fervent, they fasted for him also.
But here was a sad case (you read it before.) Saul has murdered those Priests,
who were the likeliest men in all Judah to pray and fast for him; he murdered
them. Indeed it was as sad a case, as (I think) is imaginable; for, whereas he
might have had groans and Prayers put up to the throne of grace in his
behalf, from the Priests mouth, he makes the good Priests groan because of
his oppression: The good Priests would have cried for him, spoke good for him
before his and their LORD night and day: Saul regards not that, he has shed
their blood, and now their blood cries against him night and day, How long
LORD, how long ^er thou do avenge our blood that is shed. Truly this is an
heavy case; certainly Israel went by rule, they prayed for their King they
were not wanting in that point. Indeed there is one thing touching this matter,
which seemed strange to me; All this time which Soul has cast away, and worse
then lost, in persecution of David, I hear not one word of counsel or Prayer
from Samuels mouth that good old Prophet. It is true, before this persecution
begun* we read, Samuel came no more to see Saul, 1 Samuel 15 35.
till the day of his death. Yet me thinks it is very clear and express
(though not in words) that Samuel prayed for Sau^; Nevertheless Samuel mourned
for Saul (says the Text;) Then he prayed for him sure. 1 Io^n 5.16.
There is a sin unto death, says Saint John I do not say that be shall pray
for it: But, says another, If thou may not pray for him, yet may thou
grieve, Si non ores, gema tamen; sortassis gemitus tuas penet^et quo oration non
p^aesumat tendere.
and ^^^urne for him; perhaps thy sighs, groans, and in urnings of thy
s^irit, may ascend thither, where thy prayer presumes not to come. Samuel
MOVRNED for Saul; That was a servent prayer: And certainly the LORD answered
Samuels Prayer touching Saul, though not as Samuel desired yet as best pleased
the Lord. He answered him, and in a very effectual way and manner of
answering; for thus we read; So David fled, and escaped the hands of Saul and
came to Ramih, 1 Samuel 19 18.
and told him all that Saul had done to him; all Saul's ungodly deeds and hard
words, committed against David, he told Samuel all, and they dwelt together at
Naioth. Saul hears of this thing, and where David's abode is and he sent
messengers to take David; GOD prevented them, Verse 20.
and made a change of them quickly; no sooner came they thither, but they do
(for the time) as others did, they prophecy. Saul hears all this, he will
have his Will, sends more Messengers, and thither they came; and it was with
them, as it was with the former, Ver. 21.
they prophecy also. Then Saul went himself to Ramah, for he will have David
whether GOD will or no; But when he comes thither, he is changed for that
season, and does as all his messengers before him, and then it became a
Proverb. How was this sudden change made in Saul's messengers* and in himself?
It is answered, The Spirit of GOD came upon them: That is true; but sure there
is something in this, Ver. 20.
and Samuel standing as appointed over them: Doubtless this change upon Saul
the restraint of his bloody hand, the thrusting-backe of his sword three times
successively, was the fruit of Samuels words, and answer of his prayers, for
an in behalf of David, and to withhold Saul from shedding innocent blood. I
make mention of it here, To show, that all fair and warrantable ways were
used, prayers and supplycations were put-up for Saul, while there was time for
it, and persons fit for that service, which did properly belong to Samuel and
the Priests, not to the Heads of the Tribes. It was their time now to appear
in the Field, there to hold up their hands, with their Swords; for Saul in
pursuance of his own way, and to satisfy his will, has commanded the Edomite,
and Nob is destroyed, and Saul is hasting to Keilah, and has called together
five thousand men. David and his men must look to have the roughest hand put
out against them, that ever was put forth* for it is Saul's hand and his
Edomites, as it is at this Day: Therefore, I will clear Isreal's duty, now,
touching their prayers for their King now, (as I have cleared their practice in
taking-up Defensive Arms) That they have performed their duty at that point
just as belongs to the Israel of GOD.

Armies appear in the field in a seeming opposition to the King, yet not so
indeed, but in opposition to his wicked Council, carried on, and acted by that
evil spirit, who now works so effectually all over all the Christian world;
Now the Objection is, That Christians should make no Resistance, no not of the
Devil, but by prayer and fasting. I have denied that and made it clear; That,
when the Devil acts by the hand of an Edomite, then he must be resisted by the
sword of an Israclite; We must make him bleed (a spirit though he be) if he
makes us bleed. Yet I say; as Israel then, so have Israel now, taken the old
way of disposessing the Devil by prayer and fasting; They have made petitions
to their King, prayers and supplications have been put-up to him; So many and
so servent, That Israel may be said, in this behalf, to be, a praying people,
wrastlers with GOD for their King; and their King may be said to be a King of
prayers. But yet there is no Answer of prayer. Yes; there is: as shall appear
by and by, though yet not such an Answer, as Israel could desire with all their
hear^s; And for this it is a sad thing to consider, Whether the sighing of the
poor under his oppression has not thrust-back the sighings and groans of the
poor, for, and in his behalf: whether the blood he has shed (for he has
given a commission to the Edomite, the Papist, an old Adversary to Israel)
whether this blood he has spi t like water, cries not louder in the ears of
the LORD for Revenge, Then the prayers of his faithful servants can do for
mercy? we cannot resolve it but it yields a sad consideration. Yet certain it
is, The true Israel of GOD, Ministers and people, may see a Return of prayer,
for and in behalf of their King, which appears thus; The King by the motion
of his evil Council, pursued a way not good; he sent a cursed Book into
Sc^tland, worse then a Sword against David; This destroys the body, That the
soul; This Book was rejected by the best Law and Reason that ever was read;
Facile est quic. quid in presenti faculonocet illud grave, etc. Salv. de Eccl.
lib. 2.
yet the King was pleased to force it upon them; and they forced it away: The
King, pressed by an evil Council, pressed-on, and sent Messengers again and
again, and then the Sword pressed on; Then he went himself to the borders, as
often as Saul sent Messengers to fetch David-in: The third time he went
himself; And what he did there, for, and in behalf of David, (I mean the
true servants of GOD) he knows, and GOD knows, and more then two or three in
the world; for his own hand has made it legible pursuing David with the
Sword, and those that have an hand with David ever since. His heart could not
be with David, the faithful in the LORD in one Kingdom; and his hand against
them in another. But how comes it to pass, that the King (we must speak out
now or never) has driven on-vvard furiously, more then 4. years together,
pressing-on against the drawn sword, and yet the svvord has not taken him off
from the earth? We must say, GOD is exceedingly patient, and long-suffering;
but sure the prayers of them, whom he persecutes, has hitherto been as a
shield over his head to keep off that deadly shower we read of, from falling
on his hayry scalpe; Psalm. 116.
Prayers have turned back from him the svvord of the destroyer, vvherevvith he
assayed twice to have destroyed his native people, or to make their necks
stoop to an iron yoke; Prayers have vvithheld from his lips, That horrible
draught, (the portion of their Cup, who walk in such vvayes) fire, and
brimstone and an horrible tempest. His good people have put up prayers for
their King, they are not wanting therein: If they are wanting to their King, it
is in reproves, in telling him in plain and downright words (as the Prophets
before him) That he is in a perishing way: Certainly, if they are wanting to
their King, it is in this, they have not sent him a writing, such as Iehoran^
received, wherein was written; Lamentations, Mourning, and Woe. 2 Chro. 21.12.
They have sought GOD for their*King, and they have not sought Him in vain;
therefore it is that he yet drives-on furiously to destroy David, and those that
have an hand with David, and against the Angels sword in his way, and yet the
sword has not cut him off from the earth. And his good people are not a weary,
they will continue seeking GOD for him still; though he revile them, they will
bless him; See Thank-off p. 83.83.
though defamed, they entreat; being persecuted, they will suffer it: For this
is his good Peoples duty, theirs, whose duty it is to lie on their face; but
not theirs, to whom GOD says now, as unto Joshua, GET THEE UP, there is an
accursed thing, which has thrust you from the Lord, and it must be thrust away;
they must be cut off from the earth, who have taken peace thence, and have put
forth their power to dethrone the LORD Christ. Ioshus then, and the Worthies of
the LORD now* must not lie upon their faces, but (according to the power that
GOD has put into their hands) they must oppose these actings of the evil
spirit, working effectually with the Princes of the earth.

I Remember now what the Scots did, not 3. Years ago, but almost as many
hundred; Their King, James the third, lived an idle life from the beginning of
his Reign, which was the Seventh Year of his Age: He was no sooner Married,
but he Doted, and had a special gift in flattering himself. Exclu^a
Nobilitate.
And those about him (few or none) of the Nobility the worst he could pick from
cut of the Cities or Country) quickly learnt the Court-Art, and could flatter
as well as their King: but none more accurately then the Priests could do;
They told their King, he might do what he listed; he was King, and his will
was the Law, Thereafter he might punish, and might pardon, and bestow his
honors, as he would, and not as the Common Law wills; but, says the Author,
all as he wills, so it must be; will was Law and King both, and Commands all.
What a miserable Confusion was here? The face of the Kingdom quite changed;
Nobles could not be heard, nor the Law neither, and good Men were Silent. Some
base Men, or quite degenerate, had the ear of their King and his heart, and
commanded his hand; and they did all till they had almost undone all, for they
Monopolized the Common good of all the Subjects, their King; They Engrossed his
heart, that dear Commodity; So as That, which should be as Rivers of water to
Refresh the whole Kingdom, they made as a sealed fountain, quite shut-up to
all honest Men, and open to, etc. In the Nick of Time, there came an
Ambassador out of England (if I well remember) to treat of Peace, and to seal
it with a Marriage, when the Prince and Princess should come to age. So great
a business required consultation; The King calls a Parliment; He (with his
wicked Counsel) has his end; satisfaction of a Private will; and to enlarge
Private wealth; The Nobles and Commons have their end, the Commonwealth, the
public Faith, and Trust of the Kingdom. They are all assembled; the Lord
Douglasse (a faithful Minister of State) is their Speaker; his Speech is long,
that which relates to the present is short; He tells them wherefore they were
called together, what their Kings end, what theirs; the Kings business
requires no haste, the matters of the Kingdom does: he opens unto them the
sink of the Court, shows the Nobles and Commons their Vassalage under these,
the vilest persons, who stanke all the Kingdom over. We are Nobles, says he,
ye and we are a free people, yet if we look not to it quickly, we must be made
servants to the basest Masters, the lusts of our King and his favorites, who
have stolen away our King; his heart is gone, quite alienated from his
friends, and betrayed to his enemies. No sooner this was spoken, and his speech
ended, but out he and the rest went, Nobles and Commons, and to the Court gate.
What is the mattes, says the King? We will pluck the evil Counselors from
your side, said they. The Question was quick; the Answer was as quick: They
will have their demands, and they have them; those evil Counselors, the
Plague and Pests of the King and Kingdom (all but one, and he was a youth, too
ingenuous to learn the art so quickly, is spared at the request of the King
but all the rest) are given over unto them; and they as quickly hang them up.
How did they do for Ropes? That might be a question indeed, being so near the
Court gates. Vt c^m funes in re sub^ta decsse^^.
They made an honest shift, for they hanged these evil men up with their
horses bridles* Perfidious Scots, said some, three years ago: Honest Scots,
say I and shall say so, till I read and find the contrary: They will bestirre
themselves, when they see a Kingdom near to ruin. There is not the like
story but a very notable one of Dursthus their eleventh King, mentioned before:
he was slain in battle by his ow^e subject^; They ^re blamed for it to this
day, that they brake their Oath with their King: No* they did not, he brake
with them, and was the most perfidious King that you shall read of in any
Chronicle. The case is plain and the manner of resistance, cleared to be as
becomes Israel then and now: But all Israel comes not in now as they did
then, to help the LORD against the Mighty: There will be excellent Reason given
for this in the next Chapter.

CHAP. 8. Man's extremity is Gods opportunity. David had a glorious deliverance
when he was made meet for it: So shall the Church have, when their adversaries
have filled up their measures; When Gods People are purified in their furnace,
then their God will send them glorious Saviors, and a glorious Salvation: In
the mean time they hold fast their confidence.
David's helpers came-in, he was raised to a glorious condition here on earth,
the Crown was set upon his head presently; and there is mighty Reason why it
was so: His head was made meet for a Crown, he was fitted for deliverance: All
his strong holds were down; all his Altars (the lying vanities whereto he
trusted) were as Chalk stones, that are beaten asunder. Isa. 27.8.
He was greatly distressed, forsaken of all humane helps, refuge failed, all is
gone, and all the discouragements in the world were upon him; yet at such a
time he fainted not, but encouraged himself in the LORD his GOD; Then he could
exalt GOD in that day, Psalm. 18.12.
he could say of Him Thou art my strength, my Rock, my Fortress, etc. he
called upon the LORD in that day, SO he was saved from his enemies, and from
the hand of Saul. 2 Samuel 22.
Our case is otherwise, our helpers come-not-in, as to David, all as one man;
we are yet greatly distressed. True, you will say, in some quarters of the
Land, but it is not every man's case; and God forbid it should be so all the
Land over: So say I too. Amen. And yet it must be every man's case, I mean not,
to suffer all alike, the spoiling of our goods, but to be affected and
afflicted for what others our Brethren and Sisters do suffer that way; this
must be every man's case, to have a sympathy, a fellow-feeling of what others
do suffer; we must suffer all in compassion, before we are d^livered; every
man must bear his part; Heb. 10.33.
partly (says the Apostle) whilst we were made a gazing stock, both by
reproaches and assli^^ions; and partly while ye became companions of them that
were so used. If we examine our case by this Scripture, it will tell us how fit
and meet we are for deliverance, which we wonder does linger so long.

The sword has greatly distressed our land, how has it wrought upon the
oppressed therein, or what compassion in those, who have not yet been oppressod
by it? Surely it may be answered, Perdidistis utilitatem calamitatii, and
mise^rimi f^cti estis, and pessimi permansistis. Aug. de Civis. l. 1. c. 33.
that the most of us have lost the fruit of all this sore wrath, which has lion
upon our neighbors these many years, and upon our own land these few
months, which yet we have reckoned years: We are very miserable, (that is
every man's complaint) and yet we continue very wicked, and that the fewest lay
to heart: We are far from seeing this fruit of our punishment, The purging of
our sin: But this we must see before we are delivered; By this shall the
iniquity of Jacob be purged, Isa. 27.9
and this is all the fruit, to take away their sin. These words contain
much, we will give our minds to understand them; Then we shall observe, That
there is but one means, even by the blood of Christ, wh^reby the iniquity of
Jacob is purged; He only takes away sin, immediately by Himself; our
repentance does not merit salvation, nor can our many Plagues satisfy for one
sin: GOD forbid we should think so; Nay, GOD forgive, if any such thought
should take hold of us. The intent of the Prophets words is this, That the
People of GOD ought not to murmr and repine under the plagues and strokes of
GODS hand.; These are intended for remedies, and means to pluck down, and
humble the stout heart under Gods Almighty hand, to make His People fall low
before Him, in the sense and humble confession of all their provocations
against Him; and that He is righteous in all He has inflicted upon His People,
wanton evermore in their prosperity, and more hardened in their way. They must
bless GOD therefore for His plagues, and sore judgments, and pray unto Hime,
that as He lays the stroke upon them, so He would sanctify the same unto
them, to the beating down of all their strong holds, (which in the day of
their prosperity they have raised) for the consuming of all their Idols, set up
in the heart, or before the eyes, that they may moulder away like Chalk-stones,
that are beaten in sunder, that they cannot stand up. This is sound repentance,
a sorrow after a godly sort; and hereby, as by a sanctified means, the
iniquity of Jacob is purged. Repentance, that which is sound, is a secret
thing, the very inward affection of the heart, deeply humbled for sin; yet is
the truth thereof discovered by outward signs and tokens, which the spirit
calls fruits meet for repentance; Matthew. 38.
and in this place, A taking away of sin. It is vain to talk of repentance,
till we see these fruits; or to think of removing the plagues, till by (such
a) repentance we have removed our sins: When is that? or how can we know we
have repented? When our Idols are mouldered away like Chalk-stones, that are
beaten in sunder; and our lying vanities stand up no more. Thus we have the
purpose of these words, and of Gods dealing with His people at this time: They
are greatly distressed; Let them thank God they are so, and say, The LORD is
righteous, GOD intends them good by all this, and He stays His rough wind in
the day of His East wind; (i.e.) He moderates His Judgments, He corrects in
measure, that His people may debute about it, That thereby the iniquity of
Jacob may be purged, and this may be all the fruit, to take away their sin.

Three Consectories shall be cleared from hence; Then I conclude,

That our evil of punishment (as of sin) is from our selves: GODS own
people make their adversaries strong.

That the LORD lifting-up the right hand of his adversaries, giving them
success in the world, does this the more to confound them, so perfecting His
own Praise, and His Churches good.

when His People are meet for deliverance, then it hastens as upon Eagles
wings. I will read these over again very briefly.

Malignancy in persons, and things, do give check to great proceedings, and
do hinder the comming-in of unspeakable mercies. We are deceived: the LORD,
the Churches GOD, never graced His adversaries, (whether Spiritual Lords or
Temporal) so much as to hinder the comming-in of deliverance to His People, or
to retard it for an hours time. Their opposition does now, as it ever has
done, rather hasten deliverance; their extreme rage against it, rather puts it
forward. The Ancient of days does not like the days, lengthen and shorten,
yesterday and to day He is still the same, His Power the same, His Love the
same. But Iniquities, these make the wall of separation; Sins, these hide His
face from us. And these are the sins and iniquities of His own people,
theirs, who with desire do desire That deliverance might go on, and that The
LORD would appear in His glory; their sins are the let and stop in the way;
The provoking of sons and daughters, these are the mountains in the way.
Deuteronomy. 32.19. Isa. 48.18.
O that thou would have hearkened to my Commandments, says the Lord! What
if he had hearkened? Then mercies had followed mercies; deliverance after
deliverance* loving kindness upon loving kindness, Then had thy peace been
as a River, and thy righteousness as the waves of the Sea. Hear again what
The LORD says; Psalm. 81.13.
O that my People had hearkened unto me, and Israel had walked in my way. Had
they done so, then it had followed; I should soon have subdued their enemies,
Verse 14.
and turned my hand against their adversaries; The haters of the LORD should
have submitted themselves.

It is a conclusion of experience drawne-up from the Time, See Dan. Harald. 2.
p. 25.
the Danes came in, after them the Normans, and now the Turks (I mean Beasts
in the shape of men) That never any enemy came-in to our Island, before he was
called-in by Divisions: And, being come-in, They thrived by our Factions, and
were strengthened by our Sins. I will add this to it; That never any
adversary from that time to this day, (for I will go no farther back)
strengthened himself against the Church, but by the sins of the Church.

Hierom resolves a question greatly for our profit, What is the Reason, That
the Heathen people rage, as now they do; See 2. Sect. p. 24. ser. 2.5. 2 Chro.
19.7.
That a Barbarous Nation is so strong and prevailing as now they are? Our
sins (says he) against a good GOD, in whom we found no iniquity; Who has
done us good all our days; These our sins have stirred-up our adversaries,
given them heart, made them strong against us. The sins of the Church
strengthens the Adversary mightily against the Church. It is of eternal use
to consider, what and where that thing was, which gave check to Ioshuahs
Battalion or Militia. It was not any favor The LORD bore to them, for they
were the people of His Curse; It was not any power of the Adversaries, they
were not a considerable company, a few, says the Text, Josh. 7.3.
and why shauld all the people labor thither? Yet we read how those few
prevailed, for the evil was from themselves, the accursed thing is in Isreal's
Camp. There is a deep matter in it, said Job; A root of wickedness, it must be
discovered, and rooted out, before The LORD will take off His hand. Who gave
Jacob for aspoile, and Israel to the robbers? Did not The LORD, Isa. 42.24.
He against Whom we have sinned? For they would not walk in His ways, neither
be obedient to His law: Verse 25.
Therefore He has poured upon him the fury of His anger, and the strength of
battle. The anger of the LORD is kindled against His people: and He has
stretched forth His hand against them: and their carcasses were torn in the
midst of the streets. Then the LORD was pacified toward His people, was He
not? No: for all this His anger is not turned away, but His hand is stretched
out still. The Syrians before, and the Philistines behind, and they shall
devoute Israel with open mouth. Now The LORD is pacified: No, not yet; For all
this His anger is not turned away, but His hand is stretched out still. And the
very same reason now as then. For the people t^rneth not unto Him, That smites
them, neither do they seek The LORD of bosts. Therefore His hand is stretched
out still; It is repeated again and again, to assure us, if we proceed in our
sinning before The LORD, He will proceed in punishing before all Israel and
before the Sun; till we repent of our sins, He will not repent of His sore
plagues; He will proceed to smite till our uncircumcised hearts be humbled;
till we can accept of our punishment, and say from an ingenuous and humble
spirit, The LORD is righteous in all that He has done against us: Till this be,
we shall find it will be thus; His anger is not turned away, but His hand is
stretched out still. I will punish you seven times more for your sins, and I
will break the pride of your power: Levit. 26.18.
i. e. If you will walk contrary to Me, I will walk contrary to you: And now
consider we with all our hearts how contrary we have walked. We think the
wrath that lies upon the land is sore and heavy, and indeed it is so. But
consider we; was it a light provocation, to profane The LORDS day? to mar the
beauty of it, more then any other day! The Bishops gave command for that, you
will say. That is true; Therefore the land has spewed them forth; You shall
hear more of their rough hand and bloody designs; But never any more of their
unrighteous decrees, and grievousnesse: Be the Nations never so angry, they
shall never prevail to bring in Bishops again. But the people were content to
have it so, to have The LORDS Day so profaned; to have such a scorn put upon
it; And therefore, if we be trod-upon all the land over as mire in the streets;
And if the land should now lye-fallow, and keep her Sabbaths, we must acquit
The LORD and say, He is righteous. But I will not reckon up particular sins,
for they are infinite. We are conluded; Great and mavelous are Thy works
LORD GOD ALMIGHTY just and true are Thy ways, Thou King of Saints, for Thy
judgments are made manifest. Rev. 15.3.


2. The LORD makes His Adversaries successful, gives them power over His
people, to put forth all their wrath against them as at this day; I say all
their wrath; never was there such a wrath, boiled to such a height of rage as
now it is at this day; for it is ag^i^^^ David, and his men, put forth by
David's King, and his men, which will be a scorching wrath, and it shall be put
forth to the utmost extent, because under specious shows, and formal
pretenses, to maintain our Laws by lawless men; our Liberties, by companies
of Robbers; our Religion, by Papists, the bloudiest men that are, or ever were
in the world, haters of GOD, and the power of godliness: This will be a bloody
persecution, the roughest hand will be put forth now, that ever was put forth
against the Church, for it is put forth against David and his men (as was said)
by David's King and his men, for Reasons so specious and formal (in some men's
eyes) as aforesaid.

Never any Popes were greater oppressors then those, that had the most specious
names: Pope Godly (Pius) Pope Harmless (Innocent) Pope Civil (Urban) these
were wicked Popes, yet not more wicked then they, who have a form, and specious
pretenses: They will make a people free by oppressing their Laws, and them
under the foot of pride, etc. and their King glorious (so they say) by making
him a Lord over a conquered Nation: Vnum alique^ voluptate ac deliciis fl^ere
gementibus undique ac lament antibus alii^, hoc non est Regni sed carceris esse
custodem, Th. A^^. V^^p.
and that (says Sir Thomas Moore) is not to be a King over men, but a Tailor
over Captives; To be a Keeper of a prison, and not chief Guardian in a
Kingdom. Yet the LORD may suffer these men, or rather beasts in the shape of
men, to goe-on (to the length of their chain) and to prosper; so as it may be
said, The Tabernacles of Robbers prosper, and they that provoke GOD are secure,
into whose hand the LORD brings abundantly. GOD is righteous, so we are
resolved; But why is it so? For excellent Reason; That their Adversaries may
fill up their measure apace, and heighten their destruction, which will be in
all His peoples sight, as lifted-up even to the Skies: Their rage reaches to
heaven, so shall their judgment also. Secondly, GOD uses the wicked as
Scullions, to try His people, and to purge, and to make them white* so
perfecting His praise, and His Churches salvation; to make His people MEET for
deliverance, as we shall hear by and by. GOD does not suffer this viperous
generation to run at large, ( laxis habenis, as a best with reins on n^ck)
that they might satisfy their lusts upon His people, (though so they do, and
GOD suffers it to be done) but that is not Gods end, this God intends, The
purifying, the purging* the humbling of His servants* that their lusts may be
subdued, the lusts of the Eye, of the world, and Pride of life. This is Gods
end, the very purpose of His heart, to make a people meet for deliverance; when
this is done, the Rod shall be cast into the fire, the tabernacles of the
Robbers shall be destroyed, and they sent to their own place. We wait, and God
waits; We have waited three years, God has waited eighty yeare^.
we wait for deliverance, GOD waits for glory, in waiting to show mercy; we
shall have our waitings in good time, when His people shall be truly humbled
for then they shall see their desire upon their enemies, and give GOD the glory
of all His work, even of His strange work^ for.

Thirdly, When His people are meet for deliverance, they shall be delivered
suddenly; then the Lord will send them meet Saviors. It is true, GOD can work
by what instruments he pleases; but He will not use base and inglorious
instruments, to work forth a glorious salvation, such as He has now in
design: not such as pretend to have an hand with David, and work all the
mischief they can against David, and those that have an hand with him; and
drink the health of those, who have sworn the destruction of David, and in
pursuance of that* shed blood to their power. These men, who have drunk a way
their wits, and their valor, and their healths, and cursed away their souls,
the Lord has rejected; they shall not, if they would, do^ Him service in this
war; He will purge His Armies, as He has done the Courts: He will have Noble
Instruments (I mean faithful, such as fear GOD above many) to carry on these
designs, and to bring about a work of this nature; Certainly they must be
Mosesses and Joshua's, and David's, by which He will work forth this glorious
deliverance; when GOD does glorious things, we shall see they are done by
glorious instruments; so it was in ancient times so it will be now. We smote
Og, and all his people, till there was none left to him remaining; And a huge
fellow this was, King of Bashan, who remained of the remnant of the Giants; and
we took all his Cities at that time, Deuteronomy. 3.3.4, 5.
there was not a City which we took not from them, threescore Cities, and
these were fenced with high walls, gates, and bars, besides unwalled Towns a
great many. Who was he that was so victorious? Moses the faithful Servant of
the Lord. It is as notable, how successful Joshua, Moses Successor was (when
the accursed thing was removed) we never read the like until this day: He came
upon his enemies like a tempest, destroys all as he goes; he passed-on to that
strong-hold, looked upon it, and took it upon that day, says the Text: That
is the account he gives us, He came, looked upon Makkedah, Libnah, Lachish,
Eglon, Hebron, and Hazor, the heads of the Kingdoms, took them on that day,
destroyed them, neither left they any to breath. Some adversaries melted before
him, others submitted, others stood-it-out, and quickly fell to his foot, which
Joshua set upon their necks, and gives Israel assured confidence for ever,
Thus shall the LORD do against all the enemies against whom you fight.

But when are a people meet for such Saviors? Quest.


When the people can love such Saviors, Ans.
and not dote upon them; When they can pray for them, but not trust in them;
when they can use them as glorious Instruments in Gods hands, but not lean
upon them, for that is to depart from an Almighty Hand, (the Church LEANES upon
her BELOVED;) When they can give them their due thanks, honor, and praise,
and God all the glory: O how faulty have we been at this point! therefore how
has The LORD plucked some of those instruments from us* those that were most
faithful: If we give Gideons sword the pre-eminence, we undo him, and
overthrow all.
and weakened the strength of others, because we looked so steadfastly toward
them. How has he discovered the treachery of others? And all this that we may
take our hope wholly off from the creature, and six it fully upon Him, who is
faithful. If The LORD show us no more, blessed be His Name, that He has
shevved us so much* and, that He has strengthened the hand of any of His
Servants, to bring salvation to His Israel, notvvithstanding Israel is so prone
to idolize Men. I must give resolution to one question more.

When are a people fit and meet for such a salvation GOD has now upon
design? Qu.


When their uncircumcised hearts are humbled; Ans.
when they can indeed and in truth acknowledge their contrary walking, It is a
sad relation I read from 2. great persons, who had traveled all Germany over;
that they found the Protestants there sarte more wicked under their pressures
and calamity, then when they were in their ease and prosperity. Ier. 6.29.
and accept of the punishment for walking so contrary to the rule and will of
GOD; when their dross and scum is sod forth in the furnace of their
affliction; this must be before we are delivered; GOD does not deliver out of
the furnace, before His people are purified therein. We think we have lain long
in the furnace; But what have we profited by lying there so long. Is not he
that was proud, proud still? he that was filthy, filthy still? Is not the great
scum sod in, and are not the Bellows burnt? As The Lord complains. We are
Brass and Iron indeed; an ordinary fire, (ordinary affliction) will not melt
us. And though some are more tender, and, with Josiah, will quickly melt, at
the very hearing of wrath denounced, yet these things must be soberly enquired
into by all, before we be delivered.

2. A people are meet for deliverance, when the accursed, whether persons or
things, are destroyed from amongst them; then Ioshuah was mighty and prevailed,
and not before. Josh. 7.11.
Till the accursed were destroyed from amongst Israel, Israel were accursed;
and lying on the face could not help them. That is a resolved Case.

3. A people is meet for deliverance, when all their Strongholds are down. I
do not mean those before our eyes, though this may he: All our Forts and
^reast-workes must be destroyed before our eyes also, as David's was; I say, it
may be so, and likely so, because it is so hard a matter to have them, and not
to Trust in them. And if we do trust in them, then they must be impoverished,
says The LORD. All our strongholds must down. All wherein thou trustedst,
that is out of question; Every thing that exalts it self against GOD must
down, for GOD will be exalted in that day. It will be a glorious deliverance;
His people shall be greatly exalted; Their enemies all shall be strangely
confounded; None of the glory of this wonderful salvation shall be given to
the Arm of flesh. GOD will have all, He is dainty at that point, He will not
give His glory to another.

To conclude, we think GOD is long in coming, and salvation sleeps. No, GOD
will come in the fittest season; His salvation shall come, and not stay; It
shall come, and in such a season, and in such a glorious manner, as His people
shall say, Salvation could not have come in a fitter time. It is certain, that
the Servants of The LORD shall acknowledge, they could not have wanted any one
thing, Their LORD has done in show and semblance for their Adversaries, and
against them, His own people; their falling before their enemies, has made them
fall low before their GOD, and rise high in their faith; and to hold their
confidence the faster. They could not have wanted those blows in the North, no
nor those blows in the West, which were like those stones thrown against Saint
Steven, They did knock them closer to their GOD. They could not have wanted
that unfaithfulness in some, nor the treacheries in others, or the weaknesses
of others, they could not have wanted any of all this; for all this has greatly
advanced the Wisdom, Power, Goodness, and Faithfulness of GOD. All has made
His people wise in the wisdom of GOD, and strong in the power of His might.
If they had not been so weak once, they had not been so strong now. If they
had not seen what fools they were, they had not been so wise now. If they had
not been filled with sorrow once, their joy had not been so brim-ful now. Their
salvation could not have come sooner, if it had, it had not been so well; their
hearts had not been so prepared for mercy, for such ordinances, so agreeable to
His holy will. If they had not been hewed and hacked, they had not been
polished stones so fitted for a spiritual building. In a word, their sickness
has been better to them then their health; their war better to them then
peace; their prison better then liberty; their fallings before their enemy, has
made them more victorious; and in deaths often, has made their lives more
glorious in the face of heaven and earth. Now blessed be GOD. Who do all
things well, and in the best time, as shall be best to advance Thy glory, and
Thy peoples salvation! Blessed be GOD! Why then do with Thy people what Thou will; take Thine own Time, and Way, to do with them what Thou please. Will Thou suffer the Plow-men to make yet longer surrowes upon the backs of the
righteous. Blessed be Thy Name, Thou will make the field of Thy Church more
fruitful thereby. Shall there be a treading down by the foot of pride yet
longer? It is that Thy people may rise in their faith more gloriously. Shall
Thy people lie yet longer in the deeps? it is, that one deep may call upon
another, the depth of misery to the depth of mercy. Shall Thy people lie longer
amongst the Pots? It is that they may be more glorious, as are the wings of a
Dove, Psalm. 68.13:
covered with silver: and her feathers with yellow gold. Will Thou keep Thy
people longer in the furnace? It is that Thy people may come forth as silver
seven times purified in the fire. Thou will do Thy people good by all this;
blessed be Thy Name. Yet remember LORD, Thy Servants are flesh too; their
strength is not the strength of stones, nor are their bones of brass. Let not
the rod of the wicked lie always upon the backs of the righteous, lest they
also put out their hand to wickedness; lift up the foot to the perpetual
desolation. The spirit will fail before Thee; LORD hasten Thy work; LORD
strengthen the hands and the hearts of Thy Servants, for they are called by Thy
Name, and their trust is in Thee. Thou will save, Thou will deliver, for it is
Thy promise. Thy Servants will not be beaten from Thee, but by their blows
closer to Thee. They are well content, since Thou art pleased so, to see the
Tabernacle of David fallen down. Now they look, Thou will bind it up firm
and stable, as a quiet habitation, Act. 15.16.
a Tabernacle that shall not be taken down, not one of the stakes thereof
shall ever be removed. Isa. 33.20.
what Thy Servant Jacob said once, the seed of Jacob will say ever, Genesis 49.
I have waited for Thy Salvation, O LORD! It shall come at the fittest time,
and by the fittest means: Even so Amen.

Hab. 3 17.18.19. Although the Figtree shall not flourish, etc, yet I will
rejoice in The LORD, etc. Isa. 12.1. And in that Day thou shall say, O LORD I
will praise Thee: Though Thou wast angry with me, Thine Anger is turned away,
and Thou comfortest me.
Finis tertiae Sectionis.

