England's Triumph: OR, A POEM ON THE ROYAL CAMP At Hounslow-Heath.
HEre, here the Blessed Albion's Glory see;
Here, here the Blessed Albion's Worthies be;
Here may you see God Mars's Seat of Pride,
And the Unconquered JAMES in Triumph Ride,
Who all Great Europes Monarchs has Out-vy'd.
Jove seems pleased to be; yet seems to Wonder
He should so briskly immitate his Thunder!
But hold! See how our Monarch gains Renown,
When with His Mart'al Pomp Encircl'd Round;
But if They cover all the Spac'ous Plain,
And add ten thousands more to fill the Train,
Yet Mighty JAMES, not half Your Army's here,
Heavens Guard'an Angels in the List appear,
They lead the Van, and Yours bring up the Rear.
It Is true, Mortals we know Yours are, but when
We them behold, we scarce can think 'em Men.
In them Immortal sparks of Heavenly Fire
Do glow: And their Heroic Souls aspire
At Nobler Acts than e're their Sires Achiev'd:
Their Courage is far Greater than believed.
Thou now for State they are Encamped in Peace,
They breath all Fire and Conquest, never to cease.
How would the mutual Shouts of Joy Accord,
To see Great JAMES unsheath His Conquering Sword,
To Quell some Mighty Foe, that all might see
The Worlds Great Worthies Crowned with Victory;
While each that in the meanest Rank does stand,
Is able in a moment to Command.
The Earth whereon they stand seems proud to grow;
The Trees at every Word do Cringe and Bow;
The Hills and Valleys all rejoice and Sing,
And seem to Echo forth, Long Live the KING;
Thames views the Field, and passing by, does say,
I Will surely Wait upon You twice aday.
Neptune Himself and Thetis are afraid
Great JAMES should his Unconquered World Invade.
Droop, Grinning Envy, droop, no more disgrace
The Royal Line, nor fly in JAMES's Face;
Confounded be; and Horror pierce thy ^reast;
In lasting Agitation take no Rest;
Nor let thy Bas'lisk Eyes the Sume're see,
Till thou'ast disbanded all Disloyalty.
Nay Weep more Tears than drops of Water be
Within the Briny Sea, to think that He
Whom thou have Cursed, and Crossed, and so much wronged,
Now Soars above thy Reach, and Great, Desies
What ever thou can basely Enterprise.
O never, never more thy Prince provoke,
But Grace from all the Powers of Heaven Invoke.
See Lucifer in the deep Abyss of Hell:
Be Warned by him, thou wilt never more Rebel.
England's Great King on Earth so Reigns in Peace,
As shows us all our future Happiness.
But former Hero's I perhaps offend,
In striving thus our Caesar to Commend:
For here is required a Stren'ous Homer's Quill,
A Spencer's Pen, and brave Apelles Skill;
But should all these attempt, and thousands more,
Their Verse would look but like to Gold in Oar:
For as the Sun above the Stars do shine,
Drawing its Luster from the Powers Divine;
Even so does He above all Mortals Sway:
Heaven with a Greater never Crowned the Day.
Stay, stay, and to the CAMP return again,
Once more to View that Great and Glor'ous Train.
Where Thousands more do daily hither come,
To see the Terror of all Christendom.
But now, just now, came flying to my Ear,
Orders were come, that all must disappear;
The Horse, I see, are all Decamped and gone,
The Town cries out, O Lord, We Are all Undone!
Come, come, let each his Hand lay on his Sword,
Ready to Draw, when JAMES shall give the Word.
Then, then despond not, but All Faithful be
To Grac'ous Faith-defending Majesty:
By Victory gain Honor to our King,
While Echo's to His Mighty Triumphs Ring.
FINIS.
This may be Printed,

Aug. 13. 1686. R. P.

LONDON, Printed, and are to be Sold by Randall Tailor near Stationers' Hall,
MDCLXXXVI.


