ENGLAND'S JOY, FOR LONDON'S LOYALTY; Expressed in so freely furnishing His
Sacred MAJESTY'S Occasions, To the great Joy of all Loyal Subjects.
Hark, hark, how loud the Golden Trump of Fame
Throughout the Universe sounds LONDON's Name;
Renowned Metropolis, whose Ancient Glory
Receives new Luster from the present Story;
Not to be heard, without an Admiration,
As would incite all Cities Emulation.
Her Peace, Strength, Plenty, Government, at Home,
Already sounds throughout all Christendom:
Abroad, her Trade, and Traffic daily swells,
Among Christians, Turks, Barbarians, Insidels.
But Fame of London's Loyalty, shall run
No shorter Circuit, than the Glorious Sun;
Shall all the Earth surround with such a Praise,
That Everlasting Monuments shall raise,
Where Legibly, Posterity may read
With what Alacrity she served her HEAD.
Obedience so exact, appearing still
The Counterpart unto her Sov'raigns Will;
His Royal Pleasure known, in every Street
Her Strength, her Treasure prostrate at His Feet;
Not squeez^d by Taxes out, There needs no more
But Prince's Smile, to open all her Store.
So free Contribute All, Each Company
Ambitious to devote a Treasury,
To Service of His MAJESTY; From whence
Whole Nation tasting happy Influence.
So large, so free this Loan, this City tenders,
^ets value on the SUM, More on the Lenders:
Nor can We reach how high the Estimation,
But by our Sov'raigns Gracious Acceptance.
Like Precedent, no former Ages tell,
'Twill honor future TIMES to parallel.
How pleasant Sight, to view the Harmony
'Twixt LONDON's Duty, and her Loyalty?
How well her Actions, with Profession suits,
Of True Reformed Religion, shows the Fruits;
The Laws and Gospels Precepts thus obeys,
Fears God, whilst honors Him, the Scepter sways:
How well these Retributions do express
Her Sense of Prince's Merits, ask no less.
That thus these Channels flow, late drein'd so dry,
All Thanks to Heaven restored right Monarchy;
And therewithal a KING, of whose wise Care
London's Commerce partakes so deep a share:
Long may She boast, with such a Prince is blessed,
Long may HE Joy, of City such possessed:
Inseparably may this UNION last,
By Loves Reciprocal, still knit more fast:
To mutual Comforts Both, whence Joy extends
To Native Subjects, and to Neigh'bring Friends;
But shall a Terror strike among our Foes,
Shall Both (since cannot One alone) oppose.
May dread to meet a CHARLES, who, with the Nine
So famous Worthies, shall for ever shine,
Assisted by this City, shall not want
Old Carthage, Rome, nor Troy, in Troynovant.
Long may it flourish thus, at Home beloved,
Renowned abroad, whilst feared, yet approved:
All Confluence of Blessings on it flow,
May never by their Want their Value know.
Still may She grow more Good, more Wise, more Great,
More rich, more strong, till every way complete:
Still may She 'bide secure, by Heavens Defense,
From Sword, from Famine, and from Pestilence.
No Fire consume her Buildings, nor (what is worse)
Rebellion, Schism, Faction, prove her Curse.
But as She grows more Populous, may Peace
And Concord, still within her Walls increase:
Her Citizens here blessed, till shall remove
To New Jerusalem, and dwell Above:
Whilst Sun and Moon endures, may never This
Be said; Thus Happy LONDON was, but Is*
With ALLOWANCE.

LONDON, Printed for the AUTHOR, 1664.


