ENGLANDS THANKFVLNESSE, OR AN HVMBLE REMEMBRANCE Presented to the COMMITTEE
for Religion in the High Court of Parliament, with Thanksgiving for that happy
Pacification between the two KINGDOMS. By a faithful Well-wisher to this
Church and Nation. Wherein are summarily discovered, A maine and most subtle
Plot of the Pope and his Conclave against Protestancy. Their true Method and
Policy how to undermine the same. The best and principal means of
re-establishing the Palatin House, and preserving all Evangelicall Churches. As
likewise, Three special Instruments of the public good in the ways of
Religion, Learning, and the preparatives for the Conversion of the Jews.

LONDON, Printed for Michael Spark Senior, dwelling in Green-Arbour, at the
sign of the blew Bible. 1642.

ENGLANDS THANKFVLNESSE.
Right Honorable,
WHen I consider, what the Blessings are, which God has of late bestowed upon
this Nation, the end wherefore he gives such things, the duty of thankfulness
due unto him for the same, and the present occasion offered by his providence,
which calls upon every one of us, but chiefly upon you to discharge this
Duty: I cannot contain my self, but needs must use with all dutifulness and
humility this freedom, which I take to put you in Remembrance of that, which
highly does concern your farther settlement, in a safe, prosperous, and
peaceable condition, which as from my heart I truly wish unto you, so I daily
pray for it unto Almighty God. Give me leave then, because I have been, and
will not cease to be instant to call upon him on your behalf, to call also
upon you on his behalf; that you may be moved to call upon the rest of the
Elders of this your Israel, to the end that some joint purpose and resolution
may be taken, how to answer the merciful calling of your heavenly Father, by
making use of the occasions offered unto you in this acceptable day of his kind
visitation.

You know that the Blessings bestowed upon this Nation are of no less worth,
then is their spiritual and temporal life and liberty, and all the comforts
belonging to the same. We see that the Gospel of Christ was in a manner lost;
but now is found again. The Liberty thereof was wholly suppressed, but now is
enlarged more then ever. The Gates of the Kingdom of Heaven were shut toward
the State, but are now set wide open, and all the comforts and liberties of
this present life, which no man enjoys freely, or could promise to himself
hereafter in this Kingdom any more, are now miraculously by the free mercy of
God restored unto every one, and will be, as we hope, transmitted unto our
posterity, and continue many ages; so that whereas a little while ago, we were
in confusion and disorder, now suddenly we find all composed in a comfortable
condition: whereas we were all in woeful distress and anxiety for the sense of
evils present, and in dreadful expectation of worse things to come; now we
find our minds refreshed, and our spirits free from troublesome apprehensions,
and our mouths filled with laughter: whereas we had all as it were, received
the sentence of death within our selves, like a people given over, and that by
our selves to work our own destruction; yet now behold we live, and instead
of desolation, the breaches of old are repaired, in stead of confusion, the
foundations are laid for many Generations to build upon, and in stead of fear,
a great door of hope is opened to us, that we shall be firmly and fully settled
in all abundance of peace and truth; when by your wisdom the abuse of our
Christian Liberty in some matters of consequence shall be taken away, lest in
many other things, by little and little it may turn into a licentious
dissolution of all true Government.

Now I beseech, you consider first, if any greater Blessings then these can be
named. And then if ever blessings were more seasonably, more unexpectedly, more
acceptably, and perfectly bestowed upon any Nation then these are upon us. But
this is not all; for as the end in all things is better and more to be regarded
then the means, so in these blessings the perfection of their excellency is
the unspeakable goodness of Gods aim in giving them unto us. For God is the
only good, he can aim at nothing but at himself, and himself: his chief
aim is the manifestation of the glory of his good will to mankind in Jesus
Christ. Therefore I conclude that his end in pouring forth such great streams
of Blessings upon you, is to impart himself wholly unto you, and to cause the
glory of his goodness to shine forth powerfully in you and over you, through
the Love which he bears unto you in Jesus Christ. He does intend then, that
the world should perceive that there is verily a God in Heaven, who rules over
all; That this God does see the actions of all men, and considers their
thoughts, that he laugheth to scorn the counsels of the wise, and takes the
crafty in their own devices; that he executes justice and judgment in the
whole earth against the wicked, and shows abundantly his loving kindness
toward those that fear him, and hope in his mercy: That he is a God that can
make at one instant, all the enemies of the Gospel to lick the dust like
Serpents: That he is a God that readily pardons iniquity, and passes by the
transgression of the remnant of his inheritage: That he does all this for his
own name sake, lest it should be profaned amongst the Heathen; That he does
it to uphold the Kingdom of his Son in the Church of his election, and that
he would have the world to take notice, that he who does all this is our God,
in doing all these things for us, and consequently, that we are his people,
even a chosen Generation, called to be his servants, to propagate unto all the
world the glorious goodness of his Kingdom. This then is your great felicity
and glory at this time, that by the means of your deliverance you have a Call
from God to impart unto others the knowledge of the perfect and acceptable will
of God toward the children of his Kingdom; that all may find and taste with
you through the communion of Saints the unutterable sweetness of his love, and
his truth, of his faithfulness, and of all his gracious goodness.

From whence it may easily be gathered what the duties are, which in
thankfulness you owe unto him. For that which we know he will have us to
intend in the work of his service, that is our duty to resolve upon, and take
in hand. Now if we are not altogether destitute of the life of God, we must
needs know, find, and feel in conscience, that he will have us to intend to
show our selves his servants; that is to say, to dedicate our selves wholly
unto him. So that from henceforth we should not any more live as private men of
this world unto our selves; but should offer our selves by all rational
endeavors as a living Sacrifice unto him who has so mercifully and
miraculously saved us, so highly honored us with such a Calling, and now
makes the glory of his Love so evidently to rest upon us. Here then the
question is to be made concerning you (for it lies more upon you, then upon
others, to take this matter publicly to heart) what should you do for the
propagation of Gods glory? wherein should ye at this time intend to do him
service, that you may show your self dutiful and thankful? Give me leave to
show you how you shall be able to resolve this quest. Consider then with your
selves what your abilities are: where they can be employed, with best
advantage: and what opportunity you have to settle upon the work at this time.

Your abilities are two fold, National and Personal: your National abilities
are supposed to stand; First, in the abundance of all manner of men, fit for
all kind of employments subordinate unto Gods service. Secondly, in the plenty
of outward means and helps, whereby these men may be comfortably maintained
in any task, which may be laid upon them. So that to make these abilities
profitable, there is no more requisite, but to set those that are now idle a
work, that their Talents may be useful unto the Commonwealth of Israel in a
public way. And this may easily be done, if you recommend unto them some task
in a work of a public and profitable nature; and use means to join in one
way toward the same scope all their endeavors. For this will be requisite
that the business which shall be intended may be done effectually; and to
some good purpose. As for your personal abilities to intend public works,
and set others upon them, they stand, first in the soundness of your
judgments to discern the objects fittest to be undertaken, and to make choice
of persons ablest to be employed therein. Secondly, in the Authority and place,
wherein at this time God has put you, whereby you have power not only to
recommend the undertaking of public works to men of able parts, but also to
ordain and name that which should be done, to order the manner of doing it,
and to give encouragements toward the performance of the duty. These are all
eminent and excellent abilities, which ought not to be without use, like the
unprofitable Talent, that was hid in the ground. Therefore they should be set a
work there where they may become most advantageous to the Kingdom of our God.

Now we know that there a thing is most useful, where the effects thereof may
be extended unto most men for their best advantage in the best things. For
seeing our goodness, Psalm. 26.2, 3.
as David says, cannot be extended unto God himself, but only unto the
Saints that are on earth, and to the excellent ones, in whom should be all our
delight; Therefore you should look upon the State of the Church of God on
earth to improve the use of these your Talents toward it in the communion of
Saints; that all the Members of his Church, as well those that make profession
openly of his truth, as those that in secret belong to his election, may
receive benefit by your means in the way of public edification.

Here then I mean by the Church of God chiefly and in the first place, those
that are called Protestants, and then also all other Christians, that may be
disposed to embrace the same truth which they profess.

Now, by Protestants, I understand those men who have protested against Popery
for the truths sake, and desiring to be ruled in Faith, and practice only by
the will of God alone, have renounced all Doctrines, and traditions of men, and
all superstitious Ordinances of worship, which God has not revealed in the
holy Scriptures. And I conceive to be useful unto these men, and in this very
thing (which is the fundamental property of their standing) is to pitch upon
the best object that can be taken in hand for the advancement of the Kingdom
of God; and you may be sure, whatsoever you shall intend to do toward others
in this kind it will redound, as well in the very undertaking, as in the
progress, and chiefly in the event, unto your own benefit and advantage. For
if you sow to the spirit in the Kingdom of Christ, you shall reap of that
spirit the fruits of that Kingdom, even life everlasting. And if your
endeavors be not stinted to such particulars, as do concern your selves
alone; but be as the spirit of Christ is without partiality, bent to the
universal good of the whole Church; then the fruits of those endeavors by the
working of the same spirit, will first rest upon your own Commonwealth, and
from thence be conveyed unto all the rest. Whatsoever then you mean to
rectify; as being amiss, or to make more complete, as being defective within
your own Body; if you settle a course to do it in an universal way, which
shall be free from all partiality, you shall in doing good to many, benefit
your selves to the full. For as a Conduit-pipe is filled with the water which
is conveyed from the Fountain unto a common receptacle; so it shall be with
you, if you aim not at your selves in the use of your Talents, but at the
common good of many. God will make you his Conduit-pipes of Grace, and you
shall be first filled with the fruits of his Blessings upon your labors, and
then also be fitted to transfuse the same unto others. But if you neglect the
universal aim, and choose another more particular proceeding, then is appliable
unto other Protestants, you shall be found unprofitable unto the Church of God,
undutifull in the communion of Saints, and withal, either perhaps fail of
your purposes, or if you gain them, yet remain in a case no better then you
were in before, because in so doing you shall go at a venture, and changing
one particular way for another, find perhaps no rest in both, at least you
shall not be sure to find any rest before you have made a trial. But if you
would make sure work, choose the way which cannot fail to bring us at last
unto a full Reformation. Choose Gods way, for he is the Author of all
perfection, and in following it, you shall be sure to gain your purpose,
through his Blessing. Gods way does abstract and raise our spirits above all
selfe-seeking intentions, and out of his own way he does not accompany any
man's undertakings with a Blessing. But even as he has called us unto Christian
liberty, not that we should use our liberties to serve our selves, but that we
should serve one another through Love: not that we should seek our own
profit, but the profit of many for edification: so he does pot send forth his
Blessings, but upon the undertakings which are ordered according to this Rule.
Pardon me if I seem to press this point somewhat home, and to dwell upon it;
For there is a necessity in it, to raise your thoughts beyond your selves if
ever you should be profitable unto your selves, or truly thankful unto God for
all his benefits at this time bestowed upon you. For as God is not the God of
one man alone, but of all; so he gives not his gifts unto any one in
particular, but by every one unto all. Thus also he is not the God of one
Church, People, or State alone, but of all: and therefore when he gives unto
any Church, State, or Nation, extraordinary Blessings and Deliverances, he does
it not, that they should enjoy the same by themselves alone, and live at their
ease without the care of others; but rather that they should impart and dilate
his goodness unto their neighbors, that by the communication of his Graces
unto many, manifold thanksgiving may redound by many unto his glory. And the
more this Sacrifice of thanksgiving shall be offered unto God on your behalf
by others, the more his blessings will be increased and multiplied upon your
own heads. Now the more you help to enlarge and disperse his goodness; the
more this Sacrifice shall be offered: But if you should go about, as it were,
to ingrosse his good gifts, and make them peculiarly your own; they will vanish
and be taken away from you, even as fire shut up without a vent is quenched.
There is then a necessity in this, that you resolve upon a larger aim, then
that which is only useful unto your selves in your particular Commonwealth.
And when you have looked on all sides beyond your selves, you shall find none
so near, as these whom I have named, to be the fittest object of your charity,
even your Brethren the Protestants. Not that I would have any that can partake
of the Grace of God by your means excluded or neglected: (for we must suffer
the Sun to shine upon all) but I would have you to aim at these expressly,
because I know that you are more obliged to extend your bowels unto them then
unto others, because they are more capable of the increase of Gods Kingdom by
your influence, then others are; because they have more need of the assistance
you can give them, then others have: and because through the communication of
your good things unto them, all the rest may be more benefitted, then if you
should at once set your mind alike toward all indifferently. For in these
respects they ought to be ranked in the first place before all others in your
intention. Seeing the whole world would be a scope too large to be embraced as
one time: and Papists cannot be dealt withal in this nature, nor is it wisdom
to graspe too much at first, lest nothing be taken hold of, and the burden
exceed your strength. But the state of Protestant Churches is an object
proportional unto your Talents and most fit to receive the Testimonies of your
thankfulness; and yet the duties which ought to be performed toward those,
should be such as in due time may be dilated unto all, not only Christians,
but even Jews and Pagans, that the Kingdom of Christ may have a full
progress, until? he possess all Nations, and the ends of the earth for his
inheritance. For except our endeavors come home to this end at last, and be
made fit to watch it; we do nothing to any purpose, but labor in the fire, as
it were, for that which shall be consumed, when his Kingdom shall appear. But
here the question will be, what are the endeavors which may reach thus far
from Protestants unto all men in the Kingdom of Christ.

To which, that I may answer, I must suppose, that if Protestants were but
united so far as to leave crossing one another, as hitherto they have done,
and could be made to draw one line in the ways of propagating Humane and
Divine knowledge, that then they could easily ferment thoroughly the rest of the
world with Learning and Reformation. For they being so great a party, as they
are, and having so much commerce with all the Nations of the world, as they
do, it would be easy for them to work first upon the rest of Christians a
more perfect Reformation, and then to propagate toward all other men the
helps of Learning and Religion, which may be much bettered and improved above
what now they are; if some real assistance were given to such as elaborate the
ways thereof. Now, that they may be so far united and be brought to draw one
line in the ways of Knowledge and Reformation, the possibility hereof may be
made manifest by the principles of their States, by the plain tenor of their
public profession and practice, and by the preparatives of their union
already, far advanced both in Religion and Learning. The principles of their
State are to maintain the Right of Magistrates as well over Ecclesiastical
and Civil persons, as in all affairs of a public nature concerning the
outward profession of Religion, and to stand to the Liberty wherewith Christ
has made them free in the profession of the Gospel, and the Government of
their Churches within themselves.

The tenor of their profession is to be seen in the public Confessions of
their Churches, which are not different one from another in any fundamental
matter, and their practice of Reformation is very evidently settled upon the
same grounds of public Edification, and of opposition to Popery; so that it
seems not to be a hard matter to bring them (being already so far united)
to leave jarring about matters not fundamental, and crossing one another for
things of no necessary consequence. And so much the rather this may be done,
because the preparatives to bring them from the cross course wherein hitherto
they have walked both in Learning and Religion, have been in agitation these
good many years not without some profitable and effectual disposition,
wrought upon both sides toward a better intelligence of each other in these
matters; which in due time may be made very evident unto your Wisdoms (if this
motion be not altogether slighted and neglected) in many particulars, whereof
I will not make any mention at this time. Only the endeavors themselves
whereby this great good may be brought unto the state of Protestants, must
here be named somewhat more distinctly, and they are but two or three.

The first is concerning their Schools, and the learning to be delivered in
them, to bring the constitution and frame of their Schools, and the matter and
manner of delivering Learning and teaching virtue therein to a true and
fundamental Reformation, which may facilitate toward the younger sort the
perfect ways of education, and toward the more ancient the true advancement
of Sciences, which my Lord of Saint Albanes has wished and saluted afar off.

The second is concerning their Churches and Churchmen; that a better
correspondencie may be brought to pass amongst them for their mutual
edification in the the truth of Religion, and for the taking away of Scandals,
which hinder greatly the propagation of the Gospel of Jesus Christ. To which
two endeavors, if a third were added, namely, A care to make Christianity
less offensive, and more known unto the Jews, then now it is; and the Jewish
State and Religion as now it stands more known unto Christians: it could not
but prove a great means in due time to advance the truth of the Gospel, and
help mightily to consume and abolish the man of sin, who is as the maine
hinderance of their conversion, so of all other true Reformation and saving
knowledge. The Jewish Nation is neither the smallest Nation of the world in
number, nor in respect of Gods Counsel revealed concerning them, the smallest
of esteem, although hitherto very little regarded. Therefore also in the
thoughts of advancing Gods Kingdom, which now we make bold to press upon you;
we think it very expedient that they should not be forgotten, but rather taken
up in the care of building up Protestants within themselves: because none are
fit to deal with them to bring them to Christ, but Protestants. This then
ought to be a special part of the endeavors of Protestant Reformation, to
perfect within themselves that part of knowledge and learning, which is
necessary to prepare a way for their conversion. Here you see the objects most
fit for your abilities to undertake; most profitable, if not altogether
necessary for the Commonwealth of Israel in general, and your own state also
in particular; most honorable, commendable, and laudable in respect of the
thankfulness you owe unto God for all his blessings upon you, and no ways
difficult to be advanced in some good measure if a right and real course be
taken without worldly ends and by-respects to do what may be done for the
public at this time therein.

If now you ask, what may be done at this time by you herein? I will tell you
first the occasion that put me upon these thoughts, and then that which I would
entreat you to do. The occasion that put me upon these thoughts, was the
consideration of some things, wherein I thought I saw a special providence of
God: namely, that at this time should be brought together into this Kingdom
(and that in some sort against most of their own intentions) three men, that
have been these many years without outward helps and encouragements very
diligent to work out the three taskes before named, merely through zeal to
Gods glory, and for the good of Protestancie and true Christianity. Two of
these men I suppose are so well known, Mr. Dury.
that I need not to name them: he that has prosecuted the Ecclesiast call
business, having been here already five or six months, to sue for help in
his work, wherein he gets none, is ready to be gone from hence, and to
leave you, although he minds never to leave his negotiation. He that has
applied himself to the work of Reforming Schools, Mr. Comenius.
and perfecting Pansophicall studies is lately arrived here; somewhat
backwardly, and besides his own intention: yet at the earnest persuasion of
others, who have invited him for love to your State he is come. The third man
whose studies and conversation has been these twenty years wholly spent
amongst the Jews of the East, Mr. Rittargel.
and some of the West, to know all the mysteries of their learning, and what
course may be taken for their conversion, who speaks their language more
readily then his mothers tongue, and who is perfectly versed in their Authors,
is come hither by a mere providence; wholly against his own purpose, and
without all men's expectation that knew him, having been evil entreated by the
Dunkerkers, and robbed at Sea, whiles he was going to another Country. The
consideration then of these three men's meeting together so unexpectedly at this
seasonable time, did move me to think that God might have some purpose in it
to keep the first here so long, till the other two should be drawn to meet
with him; that they all three might confer and join counsels and endeavors
together to advance the public good; with some relation and help of one
toward another: For so I find that their spirits are led and really bent to
do; which when I saw, I fell into sad thoughts over this age, conceiving it to
be a matter of great grief, that such public works and so profitable
instruments therein should have been so little regarded all this while by
those who are so able to advance such enterprises, and could so easily set
these men apart for their proper undertakings. Therefore in continuance of
these sad thoughts, I fell upon the contemplations of Gods favors unto this
State, at this time, whereby it is as it were new begotten again unto the world
of Nations; and so conceiving you exceedingly bound to advance the glory of
your God, my zeal did kindle a resolution within my breast to imbolden my
self, to put you in remembrance of this duty, which hitherto has been
mentioned, beseeching you that you would lay it to heart, and suffer this word
of exhortation to take place, for the public, and your own welfare.

But still you may say, what should then be done? for hitherto we see not what
is required of us to give assistance unto these intentions.

If then I should speak my mind, I would advise and entreat you to
countenance these endeavors, at least so far, as to desire these Gentlemen
whilst they are yet here together, to set down each of them in writing their
counsel concerning the means and ways of bringing that to pass, which so
many years they have endeavored to prepare and advance, that when you shall
perceive what their experience upon good grounds will advise to be done in
these excellent works, your godly zeal and prudencie may judge and resolve
how far either to undertake the business, and make them your own, or
otherwise to give assistance, countenance, and encouragements unto the Agents
thereof; that they may without difficulty, more readily and comfortably proceed
therein hereafter.

I am loath to enlarge my self any farther in this discourse, lest I should
seem to be presumptuous and tedious; yet because it is a thing most important
unto all Protestant Churches, therefore I am not able to restrain, but of
necessity must add some farther considerations to induce your zeal, not to
despise this matter; or to neglect it, although it be thus suddenly and
abruptly proposed. The considerations shall be few, because I will not now
mention that which might be largely insisted upon: How beneficial the fruits
of these endeavors would be unto your selves: What great need there is in this
Kingdom of the Reformation of Schools, for Languages and the Liberal
Sciences: What dangers there are of irreconciliable breaches and divisions
about matters Ecclesiastical; for the composure of which these undertakings
will serve: and what defects there are in all the parts of humane and divine
learning both here and elsewhere: which may be supplied by these means; if
they be entertained and made use of. Nor will I amplify the laudablenesse, the
honor, and the credit of undertaking such a work, which will redound unto you
whatsoever event thereof be.

But I will present unto you besides these religious, profitable, and generous
motives, some reasons of State which I think should induce you to countenance
these undertakings. For consider the plots of your adversaries, consider their
working here at home against you, and their intentions abroad: you will
confess this, wherein your Adversaries greatest advantage against you is; that
chiefly therein you ought to meet with them, to take that weapon out of their
hand. Now herein is manifestly their greatest advantage, that they can easily
divide you amongst your selves at home, or keep you from having any friendly
relation to other Protestants abroad, therefore it would be wisdom in you to
disappoint them of both these intentions; and to do this really, nothing can
be imagined so fit as to entertain effectually these purposes.

I suppose this State is willing to take the Palatin cause in hand to some
purpose. But how shall this be done? Shall it furnish the Prince Elector with
an Army, and repossesse him in his Lands? Suppose this were done; yet the
Palatin cause is not gained, for the true Palatine cause is not the recovery of
Lands, but the estalishment and conservation of the Protestant Religion and
Liberties in Germany. If this cause be gained, the Palatinate cannot be lost
unto the house of Palatine. But if you gain not this cause, although the
Palatinate were never so much regained this year, yet the next year the cause
of Religion and Liberties being still lost on the Protestant side, a new
quarrel will be made, and all that was gained will be lost again. What should
then be done to gain the cause? Take the answer from God himself. This is the
word of the Lord unto Zerubbabell, Not by might, nor by power, but by my spirit
says the Lord of Hosts. The might and power which may be used, may perhaps
regaine the Palatinate, but the effects of Gods spirit must gain the cause,
that is, establish Protestancy in Germany, for which the Palatine house does
suffer. So then, to maintain this house in Germany, mothing can do it but the
cause, and to maintain the cause, nothing is so fit as to reconcile their
divisions about matters of Religion, and to reach forth unto them as soon as
may be the ways of Educating their children in the true principles of Divine
learning, and of reforming the defects of Sciences in those that are come to
riper age. This endeavor will make you truly considerable amongst foreign
Protestants, and breed a common interest betwixt you and them, which all the
devices of your adversaries will never be able to dissolve. This endeavor will
disappoint all their plots both here and there in due time, and make the cause
which they fight against invincible; because God will stand for you in it,
seeing it will be his cause, and not yours, if thus you take it in hand.
Another consideration may be taken from the resolutions determined in the
Papal Conclave, which now are set aworke, whereof the dangerous effects here
in Great Britain are already discovered, and by Gods Grace thus far
disappointed. But elsewhere in France, in Polonia, and in other places are
breaking forth. These resolutions are the same which in former times have been
practiced with good success against the Hussites in Bobemia, for when they
found that by violence of war they could not prevail against them, they
took another, and more friendly course to deal with them by Treaty, wherein
they transacted (by yielding certain easy conditions) with some that were not
the soundest, but the greatest part, and then prosecuted the rest by force,
constraining them to yield to that which others had consented unto. This same
counsel is now a foot, and has been practiced toward us, and is still
prosecuted toward others by amiable treatises, wherein they have dealt
underhand by Agents and Emissaries toward all parts with the leading and most
considerable men of the Protestant party to dispose them unto a friendly
transaction of debates by a mutual yielding in some matters whereunto they
profess themselves to be inclined.

This was gone so far on amongst such of our Leaders, who took upon them to
rule and unrule all for the making up of this agreement without consent of
their brethren, that it is a great miracle from Heaven that their counsels have
been so speedily without more disturbance disappointed. This is now manifestly
agitated in France, where the Card. de Richelieu does set publicly his
Emissaries a work toward Protestants to incline them to a transaction; and
this has in Germany and Polonia been practiced by diverse, but chiefly by one
Valerianus Magnus, who is the principal negotiator of that business in these
Quarters, where the King of Polonia and the Emperor do furnish him abundantly
with all means and assistants to entertain correspondencie to that effect.
His scope is to discover what the most important grievances are of Protestants
against Popery, that when they are known a course may be resolved upon to yield
unto a Reformation thereof Salvo jure and honor Pontificio, by some general
Council which the Emperor should call, with the consent of other Princes.
This plot is of late strongly prosecuted, and how far, upon what pretenses,
by what grounds, to what purpose and issue, all Protestant Princes by their
chief Counselors have been dealt withal; may be gathered from circumstances
and carriages of affairs, which need not to be mentioned in this place. But it
suffices to know that the plot is still in agitation, and that it will at
least tear the Protestant Churches more and more to pieces, which in end will
be their utter overthrow, if no course be taken to prevent the effect thereof.

Now, if need were, it could be made good at large, that no course can possibly
be taken to do this better, then to make speedy use of these preparations,
which God does offer to reconcile Protestants fundamentally amongst themselves
in matters Ecclesiastical and to sow the seeds of true Human and Divine
reformed learning in the understanding of their Scholars both young and old.
True it is, that this latter kind of remedy against the danger of their plot is
slow, but yet it is the only sure one, whereby in end it will be infallibly
disappointed, because there is no true way to maintain Religion but this: in
the mean time the matter of correspondency for to reconcile Ecclesiastical
differences may instantly be effectual and useful, and will be of necessity
to be used without delay. For if the Papal faction can bring either by fair
or foul means any considerable party of the Protestant Church any where out
of Germany to yield unto the plausible proposals which they intend to make; or
but to listen to any treatises which the Pope will salvo jure suo, suffer the
Emperor to institute before they can come to correspond one with another, and
settle some agreement about their fundamentals in Religion; I say if the
Papists can effect this any where before this be done amongst Protestants, they
will be able to constrain the weakened party of Protestants in Germany, and in
France also, to yield unto what they list afterward, by gaining a better
pretense of quarrel against them, then ever as yet they have had, and having
mastered the great Body of Germany, where first Protestancy begun, they will
subdue by little and little, all the rest at their leisure. But if we can take
a course to make Protestant Divines correspond one with another to settle
matters belonging to their fundamental agreement in Evangelicall truths; then
we shall be ready to treat with them any way at a free Council, if it can be
called, and by the grace of God they may be beaten at their own weapon, and
confounded by their own plot.

Now then seeing this is a most certain truth, that this is their plot; and
that it cannot any other way but thus be disappointed: seeing also you know
that this is so, not only by this slight invitation, but by your own
observation; if therefore now you should neglect the opportunities, which God
does put into your hand to prevent so great a danger when you are able; and
without trouble easily can do it; If I say you should now neglect this Duty,
you shall not be guiltless; but have much to answer for unto Him, who perhaps
has given you this great deliverance only for this end, that you might be
herein steadable unto his afflicted and persecuted Churches. But if you should
not at all care to prevent this danger, God is able to send deliverance another
way; and you and your houses will not escape the judgments denounced unto
those that stand not up for the Lords cause, to help him against the mighty.

The last consideration may be taken from the apparent works of God in the
world at this time, who evidently does intend to bring forth a new birth of
States in Europe: for what else can become of those sudden great, and mighty
changes which he brings upon these Nations; and chiefly upon the aspiring
State of Austria? Now in these great changes of States, to think that the
outward condition of the Church will remain the same, is to deceive himself
against the experiences of all ages, and to take no notice that God does all
that is done in this world toward States, only for to prepare the means of
advancing the Kingdom of his Son unto its perfection: for certainly Babylon
must fall; and therefore as you have eyes to see the works of God, and minds
to consider the operation of his hands; you must needs perceive that the Church
also is traveling in her pangs to bring forth the Man-child, who should rule
over the Nations, when they shall be quieted. Now then if you will neither be
as a barren and unfruitful member of the Church to bring forth nothing after
so great a shower of Blessings; nor as an unmercifull Midwife to withdraw your
hand from helping the Church in her pangs, when you are able without trouble to
your self to further her in her delivery (for behold the eyes of all other
Churches, and chiefly those of Germany are upon you, and require help at your
hands;) if therefore I say you will neither be found to be barren within your
self; nor cruelly unmercifull toward your sister Churches, you must needs lay
these endeavors seriously to heart, which I have thus freely, as in the
presence of God proposed unto you. Believe it, I am free from humane respects,
God is he that tries the hearts, therefore I take him to witness, that all
the interest I desire to have in this matter, and all the aim I have in it, is
merely the discharge of a good conscience; first toward him, then toward his
whole Church, and lastly toward you, for the blessing of your present
deliverance, whereof I am also participant, although I am afraid it will not
prove in end a Blessing, except those effects be wrought out by it.

Thus then I have performed on my part what at this time I am able to do in
this duty as a testimony of my thankfulness unto God on your behalf, that you
may (all whom it chiefly does concern) be provoked also to do your duty
toward others according to the ability which God has given you in your
places; entreating you that you would take my earnestness in good part, and
not think it a bold importunity; but rather an effectual zeal to Gods glory
and your own happy State, the continuance, the increase, and the full
confirmation whereof as I do wish from my heart, so I shall never cease by
servent prayers unto Almighty God, and by the best abilities which his Grace
shall supply unto me, to procure the same. Thus I take my leave, beseeching the
Lord to rule in this matter, and in all other things, to his glory, all your
thoughts and consultations, Amen.

FINIS.

