ENGLANDS REMONSTRANCE TO THEIR KING Wherein is declared, the humble Desires of
His Majesty's loyal and faithful Subjects within the Kingdom of England, To
the Kings most Excellent Majesty, now resident in the Isle of Wight.

Containing the very sense of all the true, hearted of the Kingdom, touching
His Majesty's Royal Person; but because the way to the Kings ear is stopped, is
now sent to London, and published for general satisfaction of the whole
KINGDOM.

CR


Printed for G. Horton, and are to be sold at the Royal Exchange in Cornhill.
MDCXLVIII.

To the Kings most Excellent Majesty. The humble Remonstrance of your
distressed, and almost destroyed Subjects of your Kingdom of England.
Dread Sovereign,
ITs a double grief to our souls, that we should be constrained to beg for our
lives at your hands, who are bound by the Law of God and Nature, and by your
Oath, to preserve them, and that we should be forced to entreat you to spare
our estates, liberties, and blood, whose honor and strength depends so much
upon these our enjoyments: But extremity prevails, and drives us to you, and
c^steth us here prostrate at the feet of your Majesty: And let not your Majesty
be offended, if we speak more plainly then usually becomes us; for necessity
has no law: It is for our lives and more, and therefore blame us not to speak;
our friends, our wives, our children, our wants, our dangers, our country, our
blood, do all pierce our ears and hearts with their daily and doleful cries:
Oh that our requests could find as quick access to yours.

Surely! its impossible your Majesty should be ignorant of the doleful
conditions your two Kingdoms are in; Do you not know that our houses have
been plundered, and the fruit of our long labors taken from us; that men who
have heretofore relieved hundreds of the poor, have not left them a bed to ly
on, food to sustain them, or a house to put their heads in?

And the poor they were wont to relieve, are forced to become soldiers that
they may rob us by authority.

Know you not how many thousand distressed souls cry to God day and night, in
their anguish and m^sery, while they see you the Father of their Country,
having no compassion on them? Oh! where is now your Majesty's ancient clemency?
You were wont if we lost our estates by Pirates, or but a house by fire, to
grant Your gracious Letters Patents for our relief; but now the soldiery rob
us of all, and have burnt our houses to the ground, and this not only for
obtaining victory in heat of fight, but upon deliberation a^^erwards.

Know you not how our blood is spilt and the dead bodies of your subjects yea
many of your Nobles scat^ered as dung on the face of the Earth? Have not your
eyes seen it, and your ears heard the groans of the wounded gasp for life?
Is all this nothing in your eyes? To whom should your people go but to your
Majesty in this our distress? We have tried all other known means, and
profess in the sight of God, we know none but your Majesty, under God, that
can deliver us, without more blood and desolation; and the world knows it is in
your hands, you may do it if you will; and do it easily, and do it with
increase of your honor, safety and happiness. What if it were to part with
something of your right, yet should not your Majesty do it to save the life of
your people, srow whom, and for whose goo, You first received it?

Dread Sovereign, We beseech you consider, what has your Parliament and People
done, that deserves all this from You? Is it because your Parl. relieved us
from oppressing Courts, and illegal taxations? Was it not with your own
consent? and is it not your glory to be King of a rich and free people? Is it
because they prosecure Delinquents? Why, to what ends are your Courts of
Justice else? and are not they your chiefest Court? And can those be friends to
you, and worth the defending, that are enemies to your Kingdoms? For your Forts
and Navy, are they not yours for your Kingdoms good? And is not your
Parliament, the Kingdom Representative? We know your Majesty cannot manage
them in your own person, but by your Ministers, and those chosen by Council;
and can You or the Kingdom possible judge any more able, impartial, and
faithful to advi^e you in this then your Parliament? They meddled not with it,
till absolute necessity constrained; till they saw Ireland in rebellion, the
Rebels threatni^g England, the same spirits as malignant and active at home,
and their own lives and the Kingdom in present apparent jeopardy, and your
Majesty's consent to their Bill denied.

We cannot possibly conceive what your Parliament can do now to remedy any of
these miseries; they humbly seek your consent in vain; the offenders legally
proceeded against are defended from them, yea those that your Majesty has
proclaimed such; that is denied them which is yielded to every the lowest court
of Justice they desire nothing more then your presence and concurrence; and we
know if humble Petitions or loyal affections would procure it there would not
have been so long a distance. Neither is there any visible means left, but
either give up our states* Liberties and Religion to the dispose of your
two-long tried secret Council, and make your Majesty's mere will the only Law
and so betray their Country, and the trust committed to them; (which God
forbid) or else defend us by the sword.

And for us your people, what have we done that we are made a common spoil?
Would your Majesty desire us perfidiously to betr^y them whom we have trusted;
and desert them that have been so faithful to us? and to kill them whom we
have chosen to save us? and destroy those who are our selves representatively?
Then should we be the disgrace of the English Nation, the reproach of our
posterity, the very shame of nature, and should presently expect some strange
judgment of God, according to the strangeness of our offense. Its true, we
were forced to take, Antidotum contra Caesarem or rather to save our throats
from the violence of desperate persons about You; But we beseech you call not
this bearing Arms against you, it may be against your will, but if her ofore
your followers were more respective of your royal authority established by
Law, more truly tender of your person then we; then let not God prosper our
proceedings, but cause us to fall before them, and give us up into their hands.

We are fallen upon by the cruel, and because we would not dye quietly and
without resistance, we are accused as traitors and enemies to your Majesty.

We beseech your Majesty, consider in the presence of God, if your own Father
and King had run upon you with his drawn sword whether would you have suffered
death without resistance, or have taken the sword pro tompore ou^ of his hand;
and yet neither be a verse to his honor and person, or his propriety in his
weapon.

Does not nature teach us the preservation of our souls? will not the eye wink
without deliberation? and the smallest worm turn back if you tread on it?

And beside nature, we have frequent presidents in sacred Writ, for even more
then defensive resistance of Transcendent Monarchy, 1 Samuel 14.44, 45.

But if all this were nothing, yet we know your Majesty has passed and Act for
the continuance of this Parliament: and sure that Act must needs mean a
Parliament with its power and authority, and not the mere name and carcass of
a Parliament; Its not only that they shall stay together in London, and do
nothing, or no more then another Cour^; but that they continue your chief
Council, your chief Court, and have sole legislative power, which are your
Parliaments peculiar properties.

And if your Majesty has enacted the continuance of a real Parliament in its
power, who sees not that you have thereby joined with them your Royal
Authority, though not your person.

Does not your Majesty in your Expresses often Mention your self a part of the
Parliament? and that the Head without which the Body cannot live? and is the
Parliament valid without your authority?

Therefore, if your Majesty have formerly withdrawn from them your Royal
Authority, then you have broke your own Laws; which we dare not judge after so
many solemn Protestations to maintain and rule by the known Laws.

Wherefore, we hope your Majesty must needs discern that we fought not
against you, but for your known established Authority in Parliament.

And we hope your Majesty will not deny them to be your entire Parliament; for
is the Act recalled whereby they were established? If not, how can they cease
to be your Parliament? neither let the fault be laid on part of them; for we
all know the major part has the Authority of the whole; and if it were the
minor part, why did not, or does the major over-vote them.

And we beseech your Majesty, blame us not to think our Religion and all lies
at the stake while we look back by what a train Popery had been almost brought
upon us by that party, and see them still the chief in favor and when so many
Papists English and foreign have been in Arms against us, and know no one
Papist in the Land that is not zealous in the cause.

Wonder not, Dread Sovereign, if we hardly believe that those who would so
cruelly have destroyed us, should be most zealous in fighting for the
Protestant Religion. Blame us not, we beseech you, to fear, while we see no
contradiction appear to Mounsieur de Chesne his book, sold openly for many
years, not in Paris only, but in London, and read at Court, which records your
Maj. Letter to the Pope, promising to venture Crown, and all to unite us to Rome
again.

Dread Sovereign many Princes have gone astray through strength of temptation,
and after have been happy in repenting and returning; Oh that the Lord would
make it your case, and glorify his mercy on you and us, in making known to
you the thing concerning our peace, and not his justice in hardening you to
destruction: that it may never be read in our Chronicle by the Generations to
come, that England had a Prince who lived and dyed in seeking the desolation of
his people, and the Church of God. Your Majesty knows there is a King and a
Judge above you; before whom You must very shortly stand and give account of
your Government; We desire you in the presence of that God, to think, and think
seriously, and think again how sad it will be, to have all this blood charged
on your soul; Can your Maj. think of this when you are dying? Can those
Councillors that have set you on then bring you as safely off? Your Maj. may
despise wha^ we say, an^ judge us your enemies because we tell you the truth,
and speak as dying men in the sorrow of our souls; but you cannot so put by
divine justice, or quiet conscience at the last: As true as the Lord lives,
your Maj. will one day know that Blasphemers and Flatterers are not your
friends; but plain dealers, who do assure you, the ways you have taken, tend to
the utter ruin and destruction of your Kingdom. And can your heart endure, or
can your hands be strong in the day the Lord will reckon with you for his
people committed to your charge? O think of the low condition your Majesty is
now in, how your friends have left and forsaken you; and in stead of commanding
three Kingdoms, confined to a petty Island. Suppose you now heard the blood of
your people already spilt, crying in your ears, and saw the many thousands yet
living a life worse then death, lying in their sorrows at your feet, crying for
pity, help, O King help, or we lose our liberties, laws, lives and Religion;
help, that you^ Self and Royal Posterity be not Princes of an impoverished
desolate Nation: help as ever you would have God help you in the day of death
and judgment, when your Self shall cry for help and pity; help, that
deliverance come not some other way, while you and your Fathers house are
destroyed. The Lord God of our hopes, who has for our sins most justly
afflicted us in You, give Your Majesty a discerning eye, a holy and tender
heart, to yield to the Desires of your distressed Subjects, To return to and
concur with your Parliament, that God and Man may forget your mistakings, and
you may be the blessed^st Prince that ever reigned in our Land, the terror of
your real enemies, the joy of your people, and the glory of posterity; Such
shall be the daily and hearty prayers of

Your Majesty's loyal (however esteemed) Subjects, etc.
POSTCRIPT.
GOod Friend, We would have you know this Remonstrance was intended only for
his Majesty's view, but because plain dealing is seldom well taken, and his
Majesty so guarded from the requests of his Subjests, we are therefore forced
to submit it to your common view, and to turn it out, in hope his Majesty may
light of one Copy, and seriously read it, and lay to heart the distress of the
miserable: if you censure it as the work of some few discontented persons, Know
you it is the sense of the North and North west of England, and if you will
promise us freedom, and hopes of success, we will soon return it you with the
hands of 1000000. If you condemn us for speaking too plainly, know that misery
makes men forget good manners, and dying men use not complements; We are in the
case of the Lepers, If we sit still we perish; therefore, we will move in the
way of hope, and go in to the King, though it be not according to law, and if
we perish we perish. Yet know, we will come far short of the plainness of
better persons and times, 2 Samuel 12.7. 1 King. 18.18. etc. etc. etc.



Febr. 16. 1647.
Imprimatur,

GILBERT MABBOT.

FINIS.

