Printed for Robert Harford at the sign of the Angel in Cornhill



ENGLISH MILITARY DISCIPLINE. OR, The Way and Method OF EXERCISING Horse and
Foot.

According to the Practice of this PRESENT TIME.

WITH A TREATISE of all sorts of Arms and Engines of War; Of Fireworks,
Ensigns, and other Military Instruments, both Ancient and Modern.

Enriched with many FIGURES.

London, Printed for Robert Harford of the Angel in Cornhil, near the Royal
Exchange 1680.

To the Right Worshipful Sir JONAS MOORE Knight, Surveyor General of His
Majesty's Ordnance and Armories.
Honored Sir,
BE pleased to accept the Patronage of these few Sheets; which as they contain
a Treatise of Arms, etc. can no where more securely shelter themselves than
under the Banner of Your Protection: For being cherished by Your Allowance, the
World may well imagine that there is something more than ordinary comprehended
in them which may merit a serious Reading and a generous Practice; especially
at such a time, as this, for Warlike Preparation.

The Epistle Dedicatory.
I must confess the Trust You have, deserves far Nobler Presents of this nature
than what here I make. Nor am I ignorant how far my Presumption has carried me
in this attempt. In excuse whereof, I have only, with Your kind Permission to
plead the Encouragment of Your continual Favors, and Advantagions Obligations
to a Young Beginner; of which should I be once ingratefully forgetful, when the
least Mite of Opportunity offers, I should incur a crime that would deprive me
of one of the chiefest happinesses whereto I aspire; which is to acknowledge my
self Sir

Your most Obedient and most Obliged Servant R. H.

The Contents:
AN Elogy on the Profession of Arms, and the Original of true Nobility. p 1.
The First Book.
CHAP. I. Of Sharp-Weapons. SEct. 1. Of the Sword p. 9. Sect. 2. Of the Shable
and Cimeter, p. 12. Sect. 3. Of the Bayonet and Poniard, or Dagger p. 13. Sect.
4. Of the Espadon or Two-handed Sword, p. 14.
CHAP. II. Of Firearms. SEct. 1. Of the Musket p. 15. Sect. 2. Of the Fusil or
Fire-lock p. 19. Sect. 3, Of the Musket p. 20. Sect. 4. Of the Pistol p. 20.
Sect. 5. Of Carabines p. 21.
Of Staff-Arms. Sect. 1. Of the Pike p. 24. Sect. 2. Of Spoutons or Half-Pikes
p. 26. Sect. 3. Of the Partisan p. 27. Sect. 4. Of the Halbard p. 28. Sect. 5.
Of Sythes, Forks, Axes, and Clubs or Macesibid. Sect. 6. Of the Quarter-staff,
with a Pike at each end p. 30.
CHAP. IV. Of the Arms of the Ancients. SEct. 1. Of Swards, Shables, and
Cutlasses p. 31. Sect. 2. Of the Pike p. 33. Sect. 3. Of the Lance p. 35. Sect.
4. Of the Javelot or Dart p. 35. Sect. 5. Of the Sling p. 38. Sect. 6. Of Bows
and Arrows p. 39. Sect. 7. Of Cross-Bows. p. 40.
CHAP. V. Of Defensive Arms. SEct. 1. p. 42. Sect. 2. Of the Coat of Mail p.
44. Sect. 3. Of the Buff-Coat p. 45. Sect. 4. Of Casks or Head-Pieces p. 46.
Sect. 5. Of Cuirasses p. 47. Sect. 6. Of Bucklers and Shields p. 49.

The Second Book OF Powder and Artificial Fires.
CHAP. I. Of Powder p. 53.
CHAP. II. Of a Mine. p. 56.
CHAP. III. Of Artificial Fireworks. SEct. 1. Of the Fuse p. 59. Sect. 2. Of
the Sulphur Match p. 60. Sect. 3. How to make the Quick Matchibid. Sect. 4. How
to prepare the Matter of Fire-Rockets p. 61. Sect. 5. How to charge Fireballs
p. 62. Sect. 6. How to make a Fire-Lance p. 62. Sect. 7. How to make Tourteaus,
to show Light or Port Lights p. 64. Sect. 8. Of Burning Fagots p. 64. Sect. 9.
Of Fire-Hoops p. 65. Sect. 10. How to charge Grenades p. 66. Sect. 11. How to
make Artificial Fireworks that burn under Wateribid. Sect. 12. Of Provision
for Artificial Fireworks p. 67.
CHAP. IV. Of the Roman Fireworks. p. 68.
The Third Book
Of War-Engines. p. 71.
CHAP. I. Of the Casting and Framing of Pieces of Artillery. p. 72.
CHAP. II. Of a Canon, its Carriage, its Vtensils and Service. p. 74. SEct. 1.
Of a Canon p. 74. Sect. 2. Of the Charge of a Piece p. 76. Sect. 3. How to
Level or bring a Gun to pass p. 76. Sect. 4. Of the Ammunition and Vtensils of
a Canon p. 77. Sect. 5. Of the Carriage of a Gun p. 79.
CHAP. III. Of Pieces of Calibre or Size. SEct. 1. Of the Canon p. 80. Sect. 2.
Of the Culverin p. 81. Sect. 3. Of the Bastard Canon p. 81. Sect. 4. Of the
Minion p. 82. Sect. 5. Of the Faucon p. 82. Sect. 6. Of the Fauconet p. 83.
Sect. 7. Of the Effect and Execution of the Canon p. 84. Sect. 8. The way of
Nailing up a Canon p. 85.
CHAP. IV. Of Mortar -- Pieces, Arquebusses a Crock, Bombes, Bullets, the
Carcass, etc. p. 86. SEct. 1. Of Stone-Guns p. 86. Sect. 2. Of the Arquebuss a
Crock p. 87. Sect. 3. Of Mortar-Pieces p. 87. Sect. 4. Of Bombes p. 88. Sect.
5. Of the Carcass p. 90. Sect. 6. Of the Grenades p. 91. Sect. 7. Of Hollow
Bullets p. 92. Sect. 8. Of Red Bullets p. 93. Sect. 9. Of Cartouches p. 93.
CHAP V. Of Petards, and of the Way how they are to be used p. 94. Sect. 1. Of
Petards p. 94. Sect. 2. Of the Arrow and Flying Bridge p. 97. Sect. 3. Of the
way of using and applying a Petard p. 98. Sect. 4. Of Tortoises p. 101.
CHAP. VI. Of the Warlike Engines of the Romans. p. 102. SEct. 1. Of Machines
or Engines in General p. 102. Sect. 2. Of the Tortoise or Testudo p. 103. Sect.
3. Of Ladders p. 105. Sect. 4. Of Bull-warks p. 106. Sect. 5. Of Towers p. 107.
Sect. 6. Of the Battering Ram p. 108. Sect. 7. Of Counter-Engines p. 109.

The Fourth Book Of Ensigns, Trumpets, and other Instruments of War, p. III.
CHAP. I. Of Ensigns p. 112. SEct. 1. Of the Oriflamme p. 115. Sect. 2. Of the
Goufanon p. 118. Sect. 3. Of the Banner and Penon p. 118. Sect. 4. Of
Banderolls, Panonceaux, and Faillions p. 119.
CHAP. II. Of the Roman Ensigns, p. 121. CHAP. III. Of Trumpets, Drums, and
other Instruments of War; p. 123.
CHAP. IV. Of the Instruments of War used by the Romans, p. 125. A Particular
Chapter of the Arms which are at present in use as well among the French as
other Nations p. 128. Of the Arms of the French Cavalry p. 129. Of the Arms of
the French Infantry p. 131. Of the Spanish Cavalry p. 133. Of the Spanish Foot
p. 133. Of the English Forces p. 134. Of the German Forces p. 134. Of Hungarian
Forces p. 135. Of Polonian Troops p. 135 Of the Turkish Cavalry p. 136. Of the
Turkish Infantry p. 136. Of the Persians, Moors, and Arabians p. 136. Of the
Arms of the Ancient French Militia, and first of the Infantry p. 137. Of the
Cavalry p. 139. Of the Cavalry under Henry the Fourth, and Lowis the Thirteenth
p. 141.

The Author's Design.
IN the Profession of War there are Three things only requisite, Men, Arms,
and Fortifications. So many able Men has already treated of Fortifications,
that I thought it would be to no purpose to speak on that Subject, unless I
intended to be an Echo, and repeat what others have already said. I have
spoken of Men lately in a Book, which I called, The Art of War; but if I
mistake not, no Man has hitherto treated of Arms. And therefore that these
Three Parts may be complete, I thought fit to publish this little Treatise,
wherein I shall explain as clearly, and in as few words as possibly I can, the
use of all Arms, which are at present to be found in Armies, as well as of
those that were heretofore in use among the Romans.

AN ADVERTISEMENT
FOr the better understanding of all that is said in this Treatise concerning
Arms; you must know (Reader) that the French Pound contains two Marks, the Mark
Eight Ounces, the Ounce Eight Gros or Drams, the Dram three Deniers, and the
Denier Twenty four Grains.

The Fathom contains six Foot, the Foot twelve Inches, and the Inch twelve
Lignes.

The Cubit of the Ancients consisted of two Hands and three Fingers breadth.

The Hand of twelve Fingers breadth, and the Fingers breadth of eight Lignes.

The Talent weighs Threescore Pounds, the Roman Pound ^^^tains twelve Ounces,
the Ounce, eight Drams, the Dram three Scruples, the Scruple six Siliques, and
the Silique one Grain.

The small Sexterce weighed Twenty four Pounds.

The English MILITARY Discipline.
Of the Exercising of the FOOT.
WHen a Body of Men are drawn up to Exercise, the distance of their Ranks must
be at Six Foot, and their Files at Three Foot, that they may have liberty to
use their Arms.

The Officers of the Body (he only excepted that is to give the Words of
Command) are to draw off to the Right and Left, forming a Rank on each Wing,
opposite the one to the other.

The Officer Commanding is to place himself before the middle of the Pikes,
about ten Foot distance from them, the better to observe what is done, and to
be the more easily understood by the whole Body.

The Words of Command must be given leisurely, that the Soldiers may perform
their Postures without confusion.

The Officer must first command Silence, and then proceed (as follows) to the

Exercise of the Musket.
SHoulder your Musket. Lay your Right Hand on your Musket. Poise your
Musket. Rest your Musket. Handle your Match. Cock and try your Match. Guard
your Pan. Blow your Match. Open your Pan. Present. Give Fire. Recover your
Arms. Return your Match. Clean your Pan with your Thumb. Handle your Primer.
Prime your Pan. Shut your Pan with a full Hand. Blow off your loose Corns. Cast
about to Charge. Handle your Charger. Open it with your Teeth. Charge with
Powder. Draw forth your Scowrer. Shorten it to an Inch against your right
Breast. Charge with Bullet. Ram down Powder and Ball. Withdraw your Scowrer.
Shorten it to a Handful. Return your Scowrer. Poise your Musket. Shoulder your
Musket. Order your Musket.
Exercise of the Pikes.
ADvance your Pikes. Charge to the Front. To the Right. To the Right. To the
Right. To the Right. To the Right about. To the Left about as you were. Charge
to the Left. To the Left. To the Left. To the Left. To the Left about. To the
Right about as you were. Advance your Pikes. From Advance, shoulder your Pikes.
From Shoulder, Charge to the Front. Shoulder as you were. From your Shoulder,
Charge to the Right. Shoulder as you were. Charge to the Right about. Shoulder
as you were. Charge to the Left. Shoulder as you were. To the Left about.
Shoulder as you were. From your Shoulder, Port. From your Port, Comport. From
your Comport, Charge to the Front. From your Charge, Trail, Facing to the Right
about. Charge as you were. Advance your Pikes.
Exercise of the Musket and Pike together.
SHoulder your Musket.

Musquetteers make ready.

At which time the Musquetteers must leisurely and distinctly perform every
particular Posture of the Musket together.

The Musquetteers being ready, the Pikes are to Charge as the Musquetteers are
Faced.

To the Right. To the Right. To the Right. To the Right. To the Right about. To
the Left about as you were. To the Left. To the Left. To the Left. To the Left.
To the Left about. To the Right about as you were. Advance your Pikes. Return
your Matches. Shoulder your Muskets. Order your Arms. Pikes to your Inside
Order. Lay down your Arms.
Which Posture is to be performed with their left Legs, and stooping all
together, their Arms being upon the Ground, they must take care to Rise all
together, every one observing his Right Hand Man, at the Word of Command.

Quit your Arms. Face all to the Right about. March clear of your Arms. To the
Left about to your Leader. March to your Arms. Handle your Arms.
Which must be done stepping forward with their Left-legs, and stooping, laying
their Hands upon their Arms, expecting the Word of Command.

Order your Arms. Pikes, to your Outside Order. Poise your Muskets. Advance
your Pikes. Shoulder your Muskets. Muskets, March.
This way of Exercise is not altogether the same with what has been hitherto
in use, wherein it was thought fit to make some Alteration, by leaving out some
Words as Superfluous, and Changing some of the Postures, for others that are of
greater Use and Readiness.

Closings and Openings.
Ranks, Close forward to Order. Ranks, Close forward to Close Order. March.
Ranks, open backwards to Order. March. Ranks, open backwards to open Order.
March. Ranks, open backwards to double Distance. March. The Ranks fall back
without changing Aspect. Files, Close to the Right. Files, Close to the Left.
Files, Close to the Center. Files, Open to the Right. Files, Open to the Left.
Files, Open from the Center.
For performing of which, the Body Faces to the Hand named, and moves. If to
the Right, the Second File from the Right first takes its Distance by moving
slower than its Leader. The rest of the Files do the like successively, and the
Left Hand File moves not at all.

Doublings.
Ranks, to the Right Hand Double. March. Ranks, to the Left Hand as you were.
March. Ranks, to the Left Hand Double. March. Ranks, to the Right Hand as you
were. March.
The Ranks that Double are to observe their Right Hand Man, to move at the same
time with him: They begin their Motion with the Foot next the Hand named, and
are to come into their Places at Three Steps. In this Doubling, the Even Ranks
double into the Odd; and if you would have the Odd Ranks also double, Face the
Body to the Rere, and the same Words of Command will perform it.

To Reduce the Ranks.
The Ranks that Doubled, are first to Face to the contrary Hand, then beginning
with the contrary Foot, at Three Steps to come into their former Ground. Files
Doubling is performed in the same manner, and is the same thing with the
Reduction of Doubled Ranks: The Reduction of Doubled Files is the same thing
with Doubling Ranks.

Doubling of Half-Files with the Reduction.
REre Half-Files to the Right, double your Front. March. To the Left about as
you were. March. Rere Half-Files to the Left, double your Front. March. To the
Right about as you were.
March. If you do it upon a March, let your Rere Half-Files move into the Front
with a quicker Motion; the Front Half-Files still continuing theirs. And for
Reduction, let the Rere Half-Files, without Facing about, stand till the Front
Half-Files have passed them, and then fall after their proper Leaders.

Firings by Two Ranks Advanced.
THe Commander in Chief gives no Command nor Direction besides, Make Ready.
Present. Give Fire.
And the First of these he uses but once.

The Soldiers are to be Instructed and Minded by Subaltern Officers, that when
the Two first Ranks make Ready and Advance forward; The Body of the
Musquettiers is to make good the Front of Pikes, and the Two next Ranks
Unshoulder and make Ready, without any Word of Command; And when the last Rank
Presents, or both; if both Fire together, to Advance; and this also without any
Word of Command. If the Ranks be at Six Foot, they are also at their Advancing,
to close forward to Three Foot, without any Word of Command.

If you Fire by single Ranks, the First presents at three Motions, beginning
with his Left-foot, which as he Advances, he Blows his Match: At advancing his
Right, he opens his Pan, presenting at the Third Step. Afterward they File
into the Rere within Three Foot of the Body. Every Soldier is to be careful to
place himself in his own File, which is also taken care of by the Officers in
the Rere.

Firing to the Flanks.
TO the Right and Left, Present, falling off after your Bringers up. For this
you leave Six Foot between your Divisions of Musquetteers and your Pikes; which
the Officers must have a great care to keep open, by causing the Musquetteers
to incline to the Right and Left after every Firing to the Flank; the Two
outermost Files are to make Ready, keeping along with the Body, and not to
Present, nor Face to the Flank, till ready; as soon as they have Fired, they A
Soldier on his Guard.

depiction of swords The Efpadon or two Handed Sword.

The Shable.

The Cimeter

The Bayonet.

The Poniard.

Face to the Rere, and are by an Officer led athwart it, and so up between
their own Division and the Pikes. As soon as the Outermost Files face to the
Flanks, the Two next Files are to make ready without any Word of Command, and
keep along with the Body, till the Outermost Files be Wheeled clear off them.
The Files that Fire to the Left, are to Blow, Advancing with their right Leg.

Firing to the Rere.
LAst Rank make ready. To the Rear present. The last Rank makes ready, keeping
along with the Body; the Musquetteers Advancing with their right Legs, Blow,
Advancing with the left; Open their Pans, then turning upon the Ball of their
left Foot to the right about; cast their right Leg backward, and Fire then
immediately at a good round rate; within Three Foot of their Body March up into
the Front. As soon as the last Rank faces about to Present, every other Rank of
Musquetteers falls back to the Rank of Pikes that marched behind it, so to keep
the Rere full, and leave a Vacancy of one Rank in the Front of the
Musquetteers, for the Rank that fired to place it self.

The Word, Make Ready, is made use of but once; afterward when the last Rank
faces about, the next to it is to make ready, keeping along with the Body.

Firing the Street-way.
WE that have fewer Pikes, should cause the Half Files of Pikes to double, that
they may Cover the Musquetteers.

The Colors and Drums are to be between the Pikes and Musquetteers; the
Captains with the Pikes, and the Lieutenants with the Musquetteers.

Lieutenants or Sergeants cause the two first Ranks of the Musquetteers to Face
to the Right or Left, and make ready; then Two and Two to File up to the Front,
and March athwart it; then to Present. The Pikes ought to be Charged, and the
Musquetteers to stoop very low, and be careful to carry the Muzzles of their
Muskets low: When they have Fired, they pass away, still stooping to the
contrary Flank; and within three Foot of it, into the Rere of the Musquetteers.
As they move away by the left Flank, the next by the right succeed them. If the
Horse give you time, let the Pikes Port or Advance to ease themselves. That you
may always reserve some Fire, it is best to fire but one Rank at a time; as
soon as that Wheels off, the Second steps into its place, and a Third Rank
comes in between it and the Pikes. If the Street you are to defend be very
broad, you must of necessity make an Interval, besides those on the Flanks,
wide enough for Two Men Abreast, One to March up, the other down; for
otherwise the long Intermission between the Firings, will give the Horse
opportunity to Attaque you. The Musquetteers in presenting are to fall back
with their right Legs, and by no means to Advance.

Swedes Way.
REre Half-Files of Musquetteers to the Right or Left, Double your Front; Then
divide them into equal Sub-divisions to Rank even with the Front of the
hinder-most; the Rere of the hinder-most with the Front, one Half Advancing
Interchangeably. Great Care is to be taken that they return well their Rammers,
lest they hurt those that stand before them: Presenting either all Three Ranks,
or Two only, and One standing Guarded; they which have Fired rise up, and make
ready on their Ground, and the Rere Sub-divisions passing through the
Intervals, fire in like manner.

The Intervals to be very little wider then to permit passage to the
Subdivision of the Rere. They are also to fall back with their right Legs,
without Advancing.

Swords of all Sorts.



Reduction.
MUsquetteers to the Right aabout. March all till even with your Rere of Pikes.
To the Left about all. Front Half-Files; March till even with your Front of
Pikes.
A Solid Square.
TO draw a Solid Square, make it first Equal on all Sides by the Square Root,
then Girdle it with Shot, which is speedily performed by these Words of
Command, Rere Half-Files of Shot, to the Right about. Musquetteers March all
till clear of the Pikes. Face Inwards, and March till you Close in the Center.
Musquetteers that are Clear of Front and Rere, Wheel into the Flanks.


Reduction.
MUsquetteers that Wheeled into the Flanks, Wheel into Front and Rere: Face all
Outward, and March till clear of the Pikes, then Face in Opposition and Close.

To make a Square.
PIkes, Face to your Four Angles.

The Intervals between the Half Ranks and Half Files divide the Body into Four
Parts; if there be an odd File it Faces with the Right Half Ranks.

To your proper Front.

In all Facings, the Soldiers are to keep their left Foot fixed, turning round
on the Ball of it, and bringing about their right.

The Armiture of a Musketeer presenting to fire.

depiction of guns The Musket.

The Fire Lock

Double headed shot.



To make a Hollow Square.
LEt the Three outermost Files of Pikes of each Flank stand. Rere Half Files,
to the Right Hand about. Front and Rere Half-Files. March. Flanks of Pikes Face
inwards. March. Rere Half-Files of Musquetteers to the Right Hand about.
Musquetteers, March All till clear of the Pikes. Musquetteers, Face Inwards and
March till you Close in the Center of the Pikes.
Musquetteers that are clear of your Pikes, Face in Opposition, and Flank your
Pikes.

Reduction.
MUsquetteers that Flank the Pikes, Wheel into Front and Rere. Musquetteers
Face to the Right and Left outward, and March till clear of your Pikes, then
Face inwards and Close. Pikes of the Flanks, Face outward, and March till clear
of the Front and Rere Half-Files. Front and Rere Half-Files, Face inwards and
Close.
For greater Expedition, the Words of Command may be given at the same time to
Pikes and Musquetteers by Two Officers.

Of Marching.
In Marching, the Officers are to Observe that the Ranks be at Twelve Foot
distance, and that the Files be closed Shoulder to Shoulder; unless when a
Battalion marches in a Body, in which case the Files must keep such a distance,
that they may have the Liberty of their Arms.

The Soldiers must always begin to March with their Right-foot first, which is
Observed to conduce most to keep the Ranks even.

The Captains are to March with their Pikes shouldered; a Lieutenant to March
with a Patizan; and an Ensign to March with his Pike Comported, which is to be
the Distinction between the Captains and other Officers.

Sergeants have no Place assigned them in Marching, but are to be moving up and
down, to observe that the Ranks and Files be at their due Distance.

Of Drawing up a Body of Men, and the Place of the Officers.
WHen a Regiment is to be drawn up, the easiest and readiest way of placing the
Companies is, that the Eldest Company Draw up on the Right Hand, and the Second
Company on the Left, the Third next to the First, the Fourth next to the
Second, and so consequently to the Youngest, which is to be in the Center; for
which the Words of Command are; Musquetteers, to the Right and Left outward.
Pikes, to the Right and Left inwards. Interchange Ground. March.


When a Regiment has so taken its Ground, to place the Officers, you must
divide the Lieutenants, equally placing one Half at the Head of the Right Wing
of Shot, and the other at the Left: The Ensigns are to be at the Head of the
Pikes, upon the same Line with the Lieutenants and each of them at Four Foot
distance from the Body.

The Captains are likewise to be divided equally, and placed on each Wing Four
Foot before the Lieutenants: None must stand before the Ensigns, but he only
that Commands in Chief, he is to be Ten Foot before the Pikes; There must be a
Sergeant placed at the Right and Left of every Rank, and the rest of the
Sergeants are to be in the Rere, at Twelve Foot distance from the Boly, making
a Parallel Line to the last Rank.

The Drums must be Divided likewise, one Half on the Right Wing, and the other
on the Left, and are to ^tand on the same Line with the First Rank of the
Soldiers.

It is to be understood, that this way of placing the Officers, is one^y for
ordinary Drawings out, either or Musters or Parades; For upon any occasion of
Service, they are to be otherwise placed, as shall be shown hereafter.

But if the Regiments march in a Body, this Order of the Officers must be
changed; for then the Lieutenants are to be removed from the Front to the Rere,
the rest of the Officers keeping still their same Post: and the Sergeants that
were in the Rere, must be moving up and down, to see that the Ranks and Files
March according to the Rules above given.

And if the Regiment March in Division, the difference is yet greater; for then
one Half of the Captains are to March at the Head of the First Division of
Shot, and the other in the Rere of the Last Division: One half of the
Lieutenant's likewise are to be in the Rere of the First Division of Shot, and
the other at the Head of the Last. The Ensigns are to March before the Pikes,
and no other Officer at their Head.

The Armature of a French Trooper.

depiction of guns The Musqu^^^^^

The Pistol.

The Carabine.



The Armature of a Pike man on his Guard.

depiction of pikes and spears The Pike.

The half Pike.

The Quarter Staff.

The Halbard.

The Partisan.



The Officers in Marching are to Observe the same Distance from the Body, as
when they were drawn up.

Of Salutes.
WHen a Regiment is Drawn up, the Officers are to Salute one after another, as
the Person passes by whom they are to Salute.

If the Regiment March in Division, the Officer that Commands must begin first
to Salute, and the Captains that March in a Rank just behind him, must not
Salute till he has done, and then they must Observe All One Motion; The
Lieutenants likewise when they Salute, must keep the same time, as also the
Ensigns; which is much more Graceful than doing it one after another.

The Ensigns must further Observe in their Salutes, to bring their Colors all
the same way, otherwise they will be apt to Meet and Entangle.

In making a Guard when the King or Queen passes by, the Pikes must be
Advanced; Otherwise only the Drums Beat, the Musquetteers are Shouldered, and
the Pikes Ordered.

When the King or General comes, in the Rere, the Colors or Officers are not
to March through the Ranks, but to keep still at the Front. If it be in the
Field, and the whole Army Drawn up, then as the King Marches by, every
Battalion is to Charge their Pikes, and rest their Muskets; which is a Posture
of more Guard.

depiction of pikes and spears The Pensioners Halbard

The Hungarian Partisan.

The Battle Axe

Partisans and Halbards according to the Swisse and Ancient Custom.

Pole Axes



Of Wheeling, when a Body Marches in Division.
When the Word of Command is given to Wheel (if it be to the Right) the Right
hand Man is to keep his Ground, and only turn upon his Heel; whilst at the
same time, the Left Hand Man moves about quick, till the Officer bids him stand.

The Second Rank does not begin to Wheel till they have taken the Ground of the
First; so every Rank is to take the Ground of that which is before them: upon
which depends this way of Wheeling.

Of the Exercise of HORSE.
THE Exercise of the Horse consisting in fewer Words of Command than that of
the Foot, is more generally known, and there is little need of any Alteration
to be made therein, but what is rather for Show than Use.

When a Troop or Squadron are to Exercise, they must first have Charged their
Carabins and Pistols; and when the Corporals have been through the Ranks, and
seen that they are all ready, the Officer must Command Silence, and proceed as
follows. Lay your Hands upon your Swords. Draw your Swords. Put your Swords
into your Bridlehands. Lay your Hands upon your Pistols. Draw your Pistols.
Cock your Pistols. Hold up your Hands. Give Fire. Return your Pistols.


Note, after they have given Fire, they must still keep their Hands up, till
the Word of Command be given to return their Pistols.

The same Words of Command are given for the other Pistol, and then as
follows. Lay your Hands upon your Carabins. Advance your Carabins. Cock your
Carabins. Present your Carabins. Give Fire. Let fall your Carabins. Take your
Swords from your Bridlehands. Return your Swords.


All which Motions the Officer must take care to see done exactly at the same
time, and therefore must not give the Words of Command too fast.

When a Body of Horse is Drawn up, the Officers must stand close to their Men;
only he that Commands must be a Horse length before the rest of the Officers:
And they must Observe the same thing in Marching; for nothing is more unseemly,
than to see the Officers at too great a Distance from their Men.

It is thought necessary to make a Difference or Alteration in the manner of
Wheeling of Horse: For, whereas formerly, when a Squadron of Horse was
Commanded to Wheel, (if it were to the Right) the Righthand Men closed to the
Left; which way was found subject to put the Ranks out of Order: And therefore
the Practice now is, That the Righthand Men should keep their Ground, only
turning their Horses-heads to the Right, whilst the Left comes about: In which
Motion they must Observe their Left Hand Man.

When a Squadron of Horse is to Charge another, it is better they should do it
with their Swords drawn in their Hands, than either with their Pistols or
Carabins.

Advertisement.
AS for the Way and Method of Conducting Armies, Encamping, Besieging, and
giving of Battle; with the particular Duties and Functions of all the Officers
of Horse and Foot, Artillery and Provisions, from the General of the Army, to
the Private Soldier: I Refer you to a small Treatise called THE ART OF WAR,
lately Printed for Robert Harford at the Angel in Cornhil; Where you will have
it very Largely Explained.


