ENGLANDS MONARCH, OR A CONVICTION AND refutation by the Common law, of those
false Principles and insinuating flatteries of Albericus, delivered by way of
Disputation, and after published, and dedicated to our dread Sovereign King
JAMES, in which he labors to prove by the Civil Law, our Prince to be an
absolute Monarch; and to have a free and Arbitrary power over the lives and
Estates of his people.

TOGETHER WITH A General confutation (and that grounded upon certain
Principles taken by some of their own profession) of all absolute Monarchy.

LONDON, Printed by Thomas Pain, Anno Dom. 1644.

To the Reader.
THis work (after so much labor and expense of time by others in the like
subject) may now be thought vain and superstitious, scarce deserving the
vacant hours of a man's time; much less those oppertunities, which necessary
occasions and employments call for. But Reader let not this make you vilipend
or undervalue his endeavor; who does here present you, with such a piece of
Sophistry that hapily you never read, nor heard off; and that is Albericus,
published in latin, the great propugnor of our King to be an absolute Monarch;
which he would mainetaine too by the Civell Law; and who but our good King
JAMES must be made the Patron of these absurd Principles. Give me but your
patience, I will not acomagere, tread in others steps, the Author has lead me
into a large field of novelty; where if you please to solace your self but a
while; you shall find it more apt to inform your judgment, then confirm
your memory; which if made good unto you, let him have your favorable censure,
who ever was, and will be a faithful servant to his Country.

ENGLANDS MONARCH.
HAving by accident met with a Book full of the fallacies of these times, and
yet dedicated to our late Sovereign King James; and for ought I can be
informed passed over in silence without the least reproof. I thought it my
duty out of that faith and loyalty that I owe to my King and Country to
publish its principles to the world, and by the way as I go to give a
particular answer to every one of them.

The Authors name is Albericus; what Country man I know not, but his name as
also his principles seem to speak him a stranger by birth, and a Civilian by
his profession.

His Book is entitled, Three Regal disputations. Regales Disputationes tres.
And the first is; Of the absolute power of the King. Depotestate Regis
absolutae
And this is the task that I have at this time imposed upon my self, to
debate and refute the absurdity of this principle; being a Tenet utterly
repugnant and absolutely destructive to the Laws of England, and the Liberties
of the Subject.

I am not ignorant that the greatest part of the unhappie heretical principles
of this Book, are at this day defended by force of Arms, by such as would be
called Royalists, or if you will the Kings friends; while in the mean time
they sell their Birthright and inheritance for a poor mess of Pottage; and
become Actors in this sad Tragedy of the ruin of their King and Country. But
to begin with the Author, who in the very first position of his Book, were it
Orthodox in this Kingdom, would quite confound all our Laws and Liberties.

That which pleases the Prince (says he) has the force of a Law. Quod
Principi placvit Legis habet vigorem page 5.
I this is that which your Prelaticall flatterers and Parasiticall Courtiers
persuade his Majesty; and this piece of poison they have sucked out of such
unworthy underminers of their own Liberty, as my Author is.

And this he says, to be Page 5.
a regal Law brought in by his Empire, for that the people have conferred upon
him all their rule and power. That is, the people have given power to their
Prince to be a Tyrant, and tread them under feet at liberty, a principle so
void of reason, that it carries not the least color or probabality with it;
but of this hereafter.

But this position Quod Principi placuit, etc. That which pleases the Prince
has the force of a Law. He says, is to to be understood of the Roman
Emperor, Page 5, 6, 7.
for his excellency above others; as also for other reasons that he renders. If
this be so Albericus, what have we that are English Subjects and live under a
Municipall Law to do with that? or why did thou dedicate this unsound and
unwarrantable piece of flattery to our King? could thou imagine so learned
and so wise a Prince would be wrought upon to subvert the Laws, and enslave
his Subjects: who can make as good a Title by the Law to their liberty as the
King to his Crown? But Albericus well knew that the best Princes might be
corrupted; and that ambition may captivate the Crown, as well as the Peasant.
I even in those days, our Liberties were invaded by the infusion of such false
Maxims as these are; And to this hour we groan under that heavy burden; my
little finger shall be heavier then my Fathers Loins.

And though we live under a Municipall Law, which utterly denies and condemns
these flattering positions of the Civilians; as absolutely destructive to that
freedom we were borne under; yet my Author does affirm that all interpeters
(that is of the Civil Law) without any difficulty do attribute this power to
all supreme Princes. Page 7.


Now hence he raises a question who those supreme Princes are? Page 7, 8, 9.
And the some of his definition of the supreme Princes may be reduced shortly
to this; They are supreme Princes, who neither have, nor acknowledge any one
above them but God, and to him only are bound to render an account; who are
free from all Law, whose willis a sufficien treason; and whose reason is as an
absolute law. And he says this is no barbarous Law, but the Roman Law. If so
Albericus, why do such Sycophants vent their poison here in England. Sir, God
be thanked we have a Law of our own, whose fundamentalls cry down this
definition as paradoxicall to sense and reason; whose light is so great, that
it need not borrow of others to add to its perfection.

But here we may see that the same Doctrine is preached to our King at this
day; that was to his predecessor; what else meant the long discountinance of
Parliaments, the only assurance we have of the continuance of our Laws and
Liberties? I and what means the taking up of Arms too against them? But yet
to come nearer to this definition of the Civilians of an absolute Prince, what
means that frequent expression of His Majesty in His Declarations, that he is
responsible to God alone for his actions? I am certain this is Lex Romana, the
Roman Law.

But when he had shown what is not this supreme power, and who are not these
supreme Princes, (he says,) Page 10.
That our King is amongst the other Kings, that is, the supreme Princes, who
are free from the Law, which is (says he) of an absolute power and this is not
subject either to the rules of necessity, or public Law. Then he says that
there is potestas extraordinaria and libera, an extraordinary and free power,
which he says, in England we do signify by the name Regiae Praerogativae,
of the Royal Prerogative. And further he says, That the interpreters of their
Law do commonly write that there is a double power in a Prince; the one
ordinary bound by the Law; the other extraordinary, free from the Law; and he
says, that they define that to be the absolute power by which he may take
away another man's right, though it be great, and that without a cause too.

Is this that extraordinary power which we by the Law of England call the
Royal Prerogative? I wonder at the madness and the ignorance of the Author,
that should publish a thing so absolutely contrary to the known Laws of the
Realm: but I will refute him by our Law, and not by railing, though he
deserves no better.

First, that our King (according to their own definition) is not one of these
supreme Princes, or absolute Monarchs, nothing more pregnant or plainly
demonstrable in our Law: For he is under the Law, and so says Bracton and
Fleta, two of our ancientest Law Books in several places commonly known; so
that I need not to cite them. But Bracton goes further, Bracton de acquirendo
rerum Domino. fol. 34.
that not only habet legem superiorem; the Law is above him, but also curiam
suam viz. Comites, Barons, etc. (which can be understood of no other then the
Parliament,) that that likewise is above him: why then if both Law and
Parliament be above him, he can be no absolute Monarch according to themselves.
But further by the Laws and constitutions of this Kingdom, the Legislative
power does not reside in the King alone (for he cannot create a Law, or
destroy, or disanull any Law, by his Patent or Proclamation) but in the three
estates jointly together assembled in one body in Parliament; and therefore to
maintain our Prince to be an obsolute Monarch is utterly to oppose and
overthrow the fundamentalls of our Law. But how satte this is labored at this
day, I leave it to the consciences of al honest men to judge; for if the King
might have power to discontinue Parliaments as long as he pleases; or being
called, to have a negative Voice to all their reasonable demands, will not this
be a compendious way to bring all the Legislative power into his own hands?
But then he sais, that by this extraordinary or absolute power, (which he would
have our Prince to have) He may take away any man's right, be it never so great.
For he says, Page 13.
That the Prince by his Empire possesses all things, that he has an imperial
and universal dominion, though the particular and private be in the
proprietor. Which in plainer English, is to tell you, that the King has an
interest and power over every man's particular property, which is as absolutely
false, as can be imagined; and stands as much in opposition to our Law, as one
contrary can to another, for what then would become of our Petition of Right?
Or how could we say that we had right to any thing, when the King at his own
pleasure, might dispossess us of all? this were a ready way to inslave us, and
to make us hold by that base tenure of Villeinage. I do not deny, but that
the Common wealth has an interest paramount the property of every private man;
but this is not left to the sole disposition of our Prince, but the Parliament,
who may dispose of the general interest, for the good of the Common wealth,
and in such case we our selves are the free dispensers of our own; for it is not
more their power, then our own consents that binds us. But thanks be to God,
that every man by our Law, (let Court Parasites say what they will) has as
absolute a right in that he enjoyes, as his Prince claims in his Crown, nay
I may be bold to affirm (without prejudice to the royal interest) that he
has a greater: for that the King is seized or possessed in the right of his
Crown only; the people in their own right. What one principle more
aumenticke in our law then this; that the King cannot take away any man's
property without his own consent; and how is this consent to be purchased? why
no otherwise then by Act of Parliament, with whom the general property (which
is above every man's particular interest) is entrusted. And therefore those that
will have the King to be an absolute Monarch over his people, must instruct him
how to repeal Magna charta, and all the other Laws made in confirmation of
it, and the Subjects liberty, before they can court them into slavery.

But here it will be objected, that the laws of this Realm do avow and
maintain our King to be an absolute Monarch; very just, and with this
difference we shall allow him to be so; that is, as to all foreign power,
authority, or jurisdiction what soever, he is an obsolute Emperor within these
his dominions: in plainer language he is no dependent or tributary Prince: but
is (as he is acknowledged to be by the statute of 24. H. 8. ca. 12,) Furnished
with plenary, whole, and entire power, preeminence, authority, prerogative and
jurisdistion, etc. So that no foreign Prince or Potentate whatsoever, can
challenge or exercise the least authority in these Kingdoms; but this does no
way conclude our Prince to be an absolute Monarch in the exercise of his
jurisdiction over his people. It Is true that my Lord Coke says our King is an
absolute King: but how? not over his people: and that is cleared by the case
that he puts, which is this. Artold King of Man sued to King H. 3. to come
into England, etc. upon which my Lord Coke observes, Lib. 7. fo. 21.
that seeing that Artold King of Man, sued for a license in this case to our
King, it proves him an absolute King, which is evident, as to any foreign
power or authority whatsoever, but not to his own Subjects. For as to them, he
has but a qualified, limited power, confined to the rules of law, and the
customs of his Kingdom. These things pondered on, I stand amazed at thy
brazen, confidence Albericus, that durst affirm our King to be an absolute
Monarch, and can prove it no better, then by the daubing principles of the
Civil Law: what else is this but to argue a case at Common Law, upon the
notions and grounds of the Civil; which were an absurdity next to madness. But
I stand most astonished, when I consider that our Prince must be made the
Patron of such dangerous absurd principles. This is that that has so much
advanced Prerogative, and depressed Liberty. And these times are become the sad
effect and consequence of such flattering falsities.

But now having clearly evidenced it that our King is no absolute Monarch and
so has no power over the lives, liberties, or estates of his Subjects, more
then the law allows. You shall now hear several reasons given in my Author
totally to oppose this opinion of absolute Monarchy, which with the favor of
the courteous Reader, are no way answered by the contra-disputant, and for my
part, I think that absolute Monarchy is much like Sir Tho. Mores Eutopiae, no
where to be found.

And first you shall hear how one of their own inveighes against this
opinion. Says he, Those things that are done by this clause of supreme power,
not by way of justice; but because it so pleased the Prince, and no man could
say to him Cur it a facis? why do you so? It is no other then violence; which
(says he) by a more honest title is called the supreme power. Page 15.


I must acknowledge it ever was, and shall be my opinion, that though Princes
are styled Gods here on earth, yet their power is so qualified, that they ought
not to live according to their own will, but the rule of reason and religion;
and if they pass these, let flatterers qualify their actions as they can,
more sound and honest judgments will say, that they are but violence and
tyranny. Again says the same Author, Page 16.
Your great Governors and Counselors lay snares every where in the way (that
is to catch and entrap their Prince) Your Divines they err (and make their
Prince do the like) And your Lawyers they faune and flatter; and all persuade
their Prince that all things are lawful for him, and that be has free and
absolute power to do what he list. And is not this the very dialect of these
times? Has not Bristow, Digby and Cottington and such like perfideous
Counselors, seduced his Majesty from his Parliament, and persuaded him that
it is lawful for him to take up Arms against them, and to state himself (if
possibly he may) in an absolute Monarchy? Do not your Divines preach
prerogative, in stead of Divinity, and by consequence detrude the Subjects
liberty? And now I could wish that our great Lawyers could puill their necks
out of the halter, the collar I should say. But it is sad news, that the
Ship-mony is again revived. The King must be sole Judge, (I and that in his
own case too) when the Kingdom is endangered, and so by this slight, might
dive into his Subjects purses, when, and as often as he himself pleased. Now
pray what does the negative voice in Parliament (so stiffely defended by our
Lawyres of Oxford) differ from this, if the King shall be sole Judge of the
necessity or convenience of any Laws presented unto him by his people? do but
support this ground of the Kings being Judge in his own case, down goes all
the fundamentalls of our Law presently. No way more exact or absolute to bring
in Quod Principi placet, etc. and to obtrude the liberty of the Subject. But
that you may see how far this absolute power is labored for at this day;
they have derived this very principle, from this unreasonable Law of liberty,
as I shall make it appear hereafter. But now let us reason the point, and
hear what is objected against this absolute power of Princes.

Sais one all Dominion or Soveraignetie is for the public profit of the
Citisent or Subjects, not of those that reign or rule. Page 16.
To this Albericus says, that it is a false foundation in those principalities
or dominions that are got by force; and not totally true in those who are
induced or brought in by the people; For he says, that due honor was given to
the virtues of those Princes that were chosen.

For my part I never read or heard Albericus, Page 16.
that a Prince who has gained a Kingdom by Conquest, is disobliged from the
rule of Reason; and Religion. The Scripture does no where warrant (that I know
of) any Prince whatsoever to be a Tyrant, which I am sure he must needs be,
that seeks his own, not his peoples good. This is but just, that due honor
should be given to the virtues of those Princes that are elected; but such as
reverence them, so far, as to attribute an absoluteness of power unto them,
and give them liberty to do what they list; do dishonor God, in ascribing
that power that was never given; and debase their Prince, by making him to
degenerate from true Soveraignety into Tyranny.

Though Aristotle by way of Dirision faith, Page 16.
that we make our Princes like Physicians, whose rule or power is for the sake
of those only, who are their Patients. My opinion is, that Princes cannot be
more properly compared or assimulated, then unto Physicians; the one is the
Physician for the body natural, the other for the body politic. A Prince
ought to purge out all ill humors; that is, ill members out of the Common
wealth; he ought to tender the lives and happiness of his people, as much as
a Physician the life and good of his Patient. Nay, as a Physician ought to have
an eye more to the good and safety of his Patient, then his own benefit, so
ought this great Physician of the Common wealth. The Princes happiness is
involved in the good of his people, and therefore they do but teach him how to
ruin himself, that instruct him to undo his people

But Albericus reasons further, by way of admittance, what sais he if all
Dominion or Power were ordained for the only benefit of Subjects? Ergo
plenitudo potestatis non est, is there not therefore a plenitude of power? Sir,
we do not deny but that Princes have full power and authority to govern
their people; but we do, and shall ever deny, that they have an absolute power
to Tyrannize over them.

But he says further, that it is for the benefit and profit of Subiects' that
a Prince should have this power. I marry Sir, witness the great utility, Page
16.
that accrues to the Subject at this day, by the exercise of the like power.
That their lives and estates should be at the sole will, beck, and command of
their Sovereign; this is for the benefit of the Subject. Pray give me leave to
put you a plain case in Law. A. gives land to B. in trust, and for the only
use of C. B. breaks the trust, and disposes of the Land at his own pleasure;
resolve me this question; is not this for the benefit of C? Such, and only such
benefit accrues to the Subject, by giving of an absolute power to the Prince.
But so much for this argument.

The next position that is discussed, Page 17.
is, that absoluteness of power is only in God, and is not communicable to any
other.

To this Albericus answers that this does not make the Prince equal to God;
Page 17.
for nevertheless he is under God, and is bound by the Laws of God: God
(says he) is simply absolute not bound to any Law; but the Prince only
absolute to some respects: for though he be above the Civil Law, yet he is
under the Law of God, of Nature, and of Nations.

We will allow this absolute power that you speak of, if you canevince us out
of holy Writ (to which Princes as well as people, owe subjection) that ever
such power was communicated to any just Prince that he might dispose of the
lives, and estates, of his Subjects at his own will and pleasure; what is this
but Tyrranny? and if God (who only has absolute power over his people) did
sometimes in his wrath for the sins of his people, put a Tyrannical King
over them, yet this is no warrant for others to be so. God who is the only
proprietor and free dispenser of all things; and gives what he pleases, and
to whom and when he pleases what he out of his bounty does bestow upon his
meanest servant; he does invest him in as pure and absolute a right, as he does
the greatest Prince in his Monarchy, and therefore it lies not in the power of
his Prince to dispossess him of it.

We have a most exact, and perfect description of a Tyrant in the word. of God.
1 Samuel 8. where, when the people of Israel, not contented with that
Government, that God had appointed over them, asked a King of Samuel; God in
his anger, and as a judgment upon the people for their sin, gave them a King
to rule over them, but such a one, who (according to the description of
Samuel) would make his will his Law; for says Samuel to the people, This
will be the manner of the King that shall reign over you, he will take your
sons and appoint them for himself, for his Charets, etc. And he will appoint
him Captains over thousands, etc. And he will take your daughters to be
confectioners, etc. And he will take your fields and your vineyards and give
them to his servants. And he will take your servants and cattle and put them to
work, etc. Here you have a complete delineation of a Tyrant. For mark,
Samuel tells the people what he will do, not what he ought to do; thus, and
thus he will do says he; and he will render no better reason for what he
does, stat pro ratione voluntas, his will is reason sufficient to deprive you
of your substance, and to inslave you and your postetity for ever. This was the
judgment of God, and therefore not to be drawn in example, or made a
president for others. And therefore let every unjust Prince take heed that
(whilst he is made the Rod and scourge of God for his peoples sins) he
himself be not at the last thrown into the fire.

But now you shall hear the duty of a good Prince set forth in Deuteronomy. 17 He
shall not multiply horses to himself, etc. Neither shall he multiply wives,
nor silver and gold. He shall write him a coppie of this Law in a Book, etc.
And it shall be with him, and he shall read therein all the days of his
life, that he may learn to fear the Lord his God, to keep all the words of
this Law, and these statutes to do them. Now mark what follows all, That his
heart be not lifted up above his brethren, etc. For my part I do not find here
that the Kings will is a Law, or that he has power to open, and shut the
purses of his Subjects at his pleasure. A just Prince must not multiply silver
and gold; why then doubtless he must not do it upon the ruins of his
Subjects. He must keep this law; and I am sure this Law does not make him
lawless, or justify Tyranny. And lastly his heart must not be lifted up
above his brethren, that is, he must not so exalt his own power, as to
depresse and destroy his people.

Another Argument is this, that the people did transfer this power to the
King, that by it they might be more commodiously governed, Page 24.
but this is not that supreme power, sic volo, sic jubeo, but an ordinary
power directed by law.

To this Albericus answers, with his distinction before taken, that there is an
ordinary and an extraordinary power in the Prince; and he says, that the
people sometimes by this extraordinary power (which is the supreme and
absolute power) may be governed more commodiously, for he says, That people of
indomitable and rigid spirits are better governed by this extraordinary, then
an ordinary power, and those Subjects are to be governed by an Iron Rod, that
will not yield to the ferula.

Certainly Albericus when he wrote this book, thought he had been tutering of
children. I confess that I have often read and heard that the government by
Monarchy, is much to be preferred and set before Oligarchy, Democracy, or
Aristocracy; but I never heard that tyranny might be more apt and commodious
then a just and lawful government; neither did I ever read of any people of
so savedge and barbarous a nature, who would not rather stoop to a just and
legal then an unjust and tyrannical dominion. No question it is most
commodious both for King and people, that the one should have a certain
positive rule by which he might govern; and the other by which he might obey.
And that Prince who governs his people by the rule of justice, shall find more
faithful and loyal Subjects, then he that swayes them by the Scepter of an
extraordinary and tyrannical power.

But hear what Albericus does determine to be tyranny. That says he Page 25.
is tyrannous, which in a tyrant is wonted and ordinary; in aiust Prince
extraordinary and casual. To take away famous and excellent men, to expel or
drive away those that are wise, to exterminate studies, to have and countenance
such about him as are envious, private calumniators and accusers of others, to
follow and delight in bloody wars, these and others of that kind, he says to
be tyrannous. How Albericus are these tyrannous? I thought the supreme power
had been unlimitted, why so it is: for he says, that even these very actions,
which imediatly before he styles tyrannous, Possunt aliquandoetiam esse justa,
may sometimes be just.

May tyrannous actions be just? what a diametricall contradiction is this? he
may as well call darkness, light, or light darkness, good, evil, or evil,
good. In vain does he labor to make this good, by strange and tyrannous
actions, (as he would have them) which are done by Princes for the good of the
common wealth, neither is this malum necessariun, a necessary evil, as he
calls it, for whatsoever is simply tyranous, cannot be said to be just, and
whatsoever is done (and in truth is so) for the common good cannot bear the
infamous scandal of tyrannous. But this saying of Albericus savours more of
Machavilians Politiques, then of just and legal government, Page 27.
That this absolute power of which he treats, and which be confesses to be at
will; must be taken ta the will of a good man. A very good distinction; why
then belike a prince that is an unjust and corrupt man, cannot use this
supreme and arbitrary power. O yes; for immediately after he does affirm, the
Prince to be this good man; As if it were an absolute and uncontrollable
consequence, that every Prince must be a good man, Whereas the Scripture holds
out clear testimony of the wickedness and corruption of Princes. Ezekiel. 45.9.
Job 34.30. Amos 4.1. And such was the tyranny of the Princes of Jerusalem, that
in Zeph. 3.3. they are called roaring Lions. Observe but his way of reasoning,
Every Prince that is a good man has this arbytrary power: But every Prince is
a good man Therefore every Prince has this arbitrary power. The falsest
Sillogisme, and the most pure implicit contradiction that ever was. For the
Major proposition, clearly implies that every Prince is not good, the Minor
concludes every one to be good. But here you may see the senseless daubing
Sophistry of these men; who are resolved to put a good gloss, upon the foulest
actions; and rather then their Prince shall not be, what they would have him,
they will most boldly affirm to be that which he is not. But woe be to you
that call good evil, or evil good. I shall say no more but this. Happy
England were greatness and goodness, inseparable concomitants.

But he steps a little neater to us, and says Though the Prince has a
plenitude of power, Page
yet the ought to use this justly; otherwise it will be a plenitude of storms
and tempests. And he further sates: That this clause of the fulness of power,
is under stood of a good and laudable power and not a power to ill or injury.

What strange and unparalled contradictions are these? How can this stand
with the former positions? that the King may do what he list, that his will is
a sufficient reason, and his reason a positive law, if the King may be said to
do that, which is unjust, ill or injurious. The doing of ill or injury, are
not things compatible to absolute Monarchy, give me leave a little to reason
the case out of Albericus himself. Those that have not power to do what they
list, have no absolute power. But Kings cannot do what they list: Therefore
Kings have no absolute power. But here the Minor preposition will be denied,
that Kings may do what they list. To this I answer with Albericus, that Kings
cannot do wrong or injury, therefore Kings cannot do what they list. And
hence the consequence is very evident, that Kings have no absolute power.

But he does yet approach nearer to us, in denying the opinion of some of their
own formerly delivered; for he says, Page 27.
That the Prince by this plenitude or absolutenes of power, cannot deprive his
Subjects of their dominions or properties, sine causa iusta, without just cause
tendered.

Why now Albericus secundumte, according to your own argument: if Kings cannot
take away their Subjects properties, but are bound to regulate their actions
according to the rule of justice; How can Kings be said to have an absolute
power? Why yes, you shall hear how, for he does afterward, (if what he says
would hold) make good whatsoever he has delivered: or indeed can deliver in
the defense of this tyrannical, absolute Monarchy. For he says, That of the
justness of this cause, this absolute Prince is the sole Judge and Arbitor.
Now you know upon what foundation that principle of the Shipmony was built;
that the King only ought to be Judge of the imminent danger then pretended.
This is that which was taught by evil Counselors, one whereof (with whom the
dominion of Ireland was entrusted) was wont to say, that he had the law locked
up in scrinio pectoris, in the closset of his own breast: which expressed in
plainer language speaks clearly this, that his will was a law. But he that
then thought to have advanced his Sovereign, (and by consequence himself)
above law, has sense undergone his just demerit; and the law still lives in
spite of its enemies. But who would have thought that our grave fathers and
sage determiners, the lex loquens, or walking Libraries of our law; should have
been so perfidious to their own principles, as to borrow grounds of the Civil
law, to make up a judgment so distructive to the Common. And that that was so,
give me leave to reason the case a little, I will make it evident. For first
they themselves say that to be the only discrimen or true difference
betwixtabsolute (if any such thing there be) and quallified or limited
Monarchy. For say they, the first does judge de causis, of causes; and the
latter ex legibus, by the laws. So that give but the King leave to be judge in
his own case, you presently mount him into absolute monarchy: if this were
law, the King might take away any man's estate upon just cause; I and whether it
were just or no, he would do it, for he himself should be judge of the cause
and then it would not be difficult to determine on whose side the judgment
should be given. It Is an undoubted Maxim that no man can be acompetent judge in
his own case, and it is all one to give the King libetty to take away his
Subjects rights uniustly; as to say he cannot do it, but upon just ground, and
yet to leave that to his sole sudgement, and determination. Might not the King
in that case, as often as he himself pleased, have exhausted his Subjects
treasure upon pretense of an imminent danger? and if he be sole Judge of the
necessity, who could oppose it? But you see the absurdity and ill consequence
of this principle, and therefore so I shall leave it.

But then speaking how far the law should be obligatory to the Prince, Page
2.8.
he takes these distinctions: says he, There is Lex honestatis, the law of
honesty; and Lex necessitatis, the law of necessity. The law of honesty that
binds the King; that is, the King in point of honesty may if he will observe
the law, if he will not he may make his will his law. The law of necessity,
that binds the Subject, so that will he, nill he, he must submit and give
obedience to it.

Others he says, say That there is the law of honesty, and the law of the
precept; and he says the one does not less oblige, then the other, yet there
is this difference, that the law of honesty depends only upon the will of the
prince: what an absurdity is this, to say that the one does as strongly bind as
the other, and yet that the one must observe the law and the other is at his
liberty, whether he will or no.

Others he says, say That there is necessitas rei, the necessity of the thing
and necessitas personae, the necessity of the person, so that though the thing
may be of necessity to be done, (as for the purpose the settling of the Militia)
yet that does not necessitare the person of an absolute Prince to do it.

What pure contradictions are these, first that Princes have Supreme and
absolute power to do what they list, and yet that they ought to do nothing, but
what is just and right. That they are above the Law, and yet by the law of
honesty they are bound to observe and keep it. I think it is almost
impossible to reconcile these differences, or to make Albericus agree with
himself. For my part, I shall not stick to defend that Princes by the law of
necessity, are bound to submit to the Law, as well as their people; For I am
sure that the divine precept does as strongly oblige the greatest Monarch, as
the meanest beggar; and that requires that justice be done to all men, and that
every man (which exempts not Princes) should do that, which he commands
others to do. Now it is but consonant to the rule of justice and good
government, that Princes should be necessitated to observe the Law as well as
their people; for if the King shall have power to make his will his law, what
justice or settled government can be exspected. Then this being an act of
justice to observe the Law, by that general precept of the word of God, that
justice be done to all men; Princes are as strongly obliged to it as the
people. Again, if the Divine rule requires that every man do that which he
commands to be done by another; why then no Prince can excuse himself of the
necessity of subjection to that Law; which he requires should be kept and
observed by his Subjects. I am certain it is the very letter of the Word and a
principal part of justice, that every man should do, as he would be done by;
and I am confident no Prince if he would state himself in the place of his
Subject, could hold it just or equali, that it should lie in the breast of his
Sovereign to vassalize him at pleasure. Now a man ought not to do that, or to
conceive it just to be done to another, which he would condemn as unjust,
being done to himself. I never complied with that distinction of some Divines,
who say the Prince to be subject to the directive, but not to the coactive or
compulsive power of the law; for though they may be exempt from the penal, yet
not from the coercive power; and without controversy, whatsoever God requires,
of that man may exact the just and due performance. And as I have said, the
word of God does rather bind over Princes by the law of necessity, to the
observance of the Law, then any way give them freedom from it, or power
against it.

Besides, you shall hear how some of their own argue; frustra sint Leges
positae nostro principi, nisi sit, qui ipsum in leges cogat; that is, it is in
vain to tie our Prince to the Laws, except there should be somebody to
compel him to the observation of them. And says another, why are not the
laws also abrogated, with which the Prince is said to be bound, if it can
never be, that he may be compelled to keep and observe them? Every Law
carries with it a coactive necessity of observance; and as good no Law, as no
power to exact the performance of the Law: But hear what a third of their own
says; The Laws are the conventions or covenants betwixt the Prince and his
people, and it is the nature of obligations to enforce the unwilling, and the
bond and obligation being mutual, it is but just and equal that Kings should be
necessitated to observe the law as well as their people. To conclude this, give
but Kings freedom from the coercive power of the Law; you make the Law as
vain and idle, as their covenants and obligations.

The last argument that I shall touch, is this; that if the people were bound
by their own Laws, so should the Prince, if the people confer their power
upon him.

To this it is said, that this power collated by the people to the Prince, is
interpreted of the people, of Magistrates, and of the Laws themselves; that
is, he has power over all these, then it is said, can he who has the Laws
in his power, be in the power of the laws? or can he that has the power of
the Laws, be detayned by the power of the Laws?

For my part Albericus I count it a flat absurdity for any man to maintain
that the people conferred a grater power or exemption upon their Prince, then
they themselves had, or exercised, for though they did transfer all the
Legislative power to the Prince, yet it must be clogged with the same
qualifications and conditions that they themselves had it. Neither can it be
imagined by sounder judgments, that people who had such experience of an ample
liberty, would give an absolute power to their Prince, and thereby subject
themselves to the bond of slavery. That the people did grant to their Prince a
power of making Laws; does not allow him an exemption or freedom from them.
Besides as the alterations of Government in any state are dangerous, and
therefore not to be attempted without mature consideration, so it has been
always the care and vigelancy of all States whatsoever upon their innovation
or alteration of Government, to reduce themselves to a better, not a worse
condition; and can we then conceive that the Nations upon the first election of
Princes, could be so stuped as to submit themselves to absolute Monarchy, and
live under the lawless power of Tyranny? and so avoiding one extreme to fall
into another much worse then the former. For my self, I must needs
acknowledge that it is a thing so opposite and disconsonant to the rule of
reason, and that freedom that all men naturally covet, that I shall as soon
renounce the fundamentalls of my faith, as believe it. But the long continuance
of the Monarchical government (which indeed is the most absolute of all
others, if it do not exceed the sweet mixtute of legal moderation) the
corruption of Princes, and the fawning principles of Court Parasites; these are
they which by degrees have insinuated these absurd and false positions, and
adulterated the original constitution of so pure and happy a Dominion. Thus
much against absolute Monarchy in general.

And now after all, let us who are English Subjects, and live under the golden
mean of mixed and qualified Monarchy (the most blessed dominion in the world if
not corrupted through the ambition of Princes or the base seducement of evil
Counselors) bless God for his goodness who has not only dispensed and
bestowed an equal portion of his bounty upon us, but has also made us
absolute proprietors of what we enjoy, so that our lives, liberties and
estates, do not depend upon, not are subject to the sole breath or arbitrary
will of our Sovereign. And I shall conclude all with a small variation of that
old verse

Non est Lex, Regi, sed Rex, obnoxia, Legi.

The lawe's not subject to the greatest King,
But does his will into subjection bring.
FINIS.

