THE English Prelates Practizing the Methods and RULES OF THE JESUITS, FOR
Enervating and altering the Protestant Reformed Religion in ENGLAND; and
Reducing the People to POPERY.

Plainly Demonstrated by a Reverend and godly Divine.

Take heed to thy self, that thou be not snared by following them, after that
they be destroyed from before thee, and that thou inquire not after their
gods; saying, how did these Nations serve their gods? Even so will I do
likewise,

Deuteronomy. 12.30. Though thou Israel play the Harlot, yet let not Judah offend, and
come not ye unto Gilgal, neither go ye up to Bethaven, etc.

Hos. 4.15. papal crown, topped with a crescent

Printed in the Year. 1661.

The English Prelates practicing the Methods and Rules of the Jesuits, for
enervating and altering the Protestant reformed Religion in England, and
reducing the people to Popery.
Quest. HOw does it appear that the English Prelates do design the alteration
of Religion amongst us here in England?

Answ. As face answers to face in a (...) so the practices of the Prelates in
England do symbo^ with the Rules and methods of the Jesuits, who hope to
accomplish that by sleight of hand, which they cannot effect by force and
downright Blows.

Adam Contzen a Jesuit of Mentz, and a great Politician, Contzen Polity. lib.
2. cap. 18.
in his second Book of Politics, has laid a Plot for the cheating of a people
of the true reformed Religion (which should be dearer to them than ten
thousand worlds) by sleight of hand, and the serving in of Popery again upon
them, by art of Legerdemaine; that they shall neither know nor see who hurts
them, till they be utterly ruined, Neh. 4.11.

The Method for accomplishing of this (which certainly is one of Satan's
methods) he lays down in certain Rules in his sore-mentioned Book of
Politics. Let Englishmen and Protestants observe how exactly, the late and
present Prelates of England, have moved and acted according to those Rules, and
then judge of their designs.

I. Rule.
The Jesuits first Rule is this; To proceed as Musicians Do, in tuning their
Instruments; who proceed gradually, straining their strings with a gentle hand,
and setting them up by little and little. Or as Physicians do in curing
diseases, who abate noxious humors by degrees and pauses.

This Rule has been diligently observed and practiced amongst us both for the
destructive and adstructive way; for the destruction of the true Religion, and
the advancing of the false, The English Prelates (though some of them are more
violent and hotheaded than others) have learned this policy, to proceed by
degrees and pauses.

1. And first for the Destruction of the true Religion, and cating out the
vitals and power of godliness, though that be their great design, yet as to the
execution of it, they must go warily and gradually to work: It would make too
great a noise (now that so much Gospel Light is broke forth) to suspend all the
Orthodox Powerful Preachers in the Land at once; and therefore they will
proceed by degrees; And first suspend all Lecturers, who boggle at the
Service Book, and P^ Ceremonies, then after a little pause, put down all Lect^
as an order of Vagrants, not to be tolerated in the Chu^^^. (Some of our
zealous Bishops have already presumed to suppress diverse choice profitable
Lectures) When this is done; they will forbid all faithful Ministers to preach
in their own Parish- Churches upon week-daies (the Jesuits and Prelates being
both bitter enemies to sound and powerful Preaching) Next, they will inhibit
Preaching upon the Lords Day in the afternoon under pretense of advancing
Catechizing by that means, and yet within a little while after, all
Catechistical exposition shall be inhibited by these Soul-destroyers, and able
men tied to the bare words of the Primmer-Catechism. Nay, have they not
forbidden all praying, save in the words of the Canon? and are they not of the
same spirit still? to wit, enemies to the Spirit of God, both in Preaching and
Prayer? What can any ingenious man think the design of all this should be, but
to rob us of true Evangelical Preaching and Praying? and thereby at length of
the Gospel and True Religion? Only these men will do it by degrees for fear of
noise and Tumult; they will do it so, as we shall neither know nor see.

2. And then for the Adstructive way, the Rebuilding of the Romish Babel among
us; do they not proceed by the same steps, as if the Jesuits and they were
animated by one soul?

First, They rigidly urge the practice of the old Ceremonies, beyond the
intention either of Law or Canon; yea, they bring in an Idolatrous fardel of
new Popish Superstitions, without warrant either of Law or Canon, but their own
paper Injunctions, imposing them on Ministers and People, but yet by pauses and
degrees.

The Communion Table must be first railed in.

Soon after it must be set in an Altar-posture.

Then all must be compelled to come and kneel before it, or not receive the
Sacrament.

Then it must be cried up as the Sanctum Sanctorum, the place of Gods chief
residence upon earth; the seat and throne of Gods Majesty.

And upon this Consideration, all men's faces in prayer must be turned toward
it. Men may, yea must, (say some) adore and bow before it, etc.

What (I pray you) should the design of all this be, but after the Altar, to
bring in the Popish Sacrifice, and with their wooden worship the Breaden God?
Only they will do it by degrees. They will reconcile us to Rome by degrees,
and in a cunning way, that we may neither know nor see.

Secondly, I may further add their making null and void the Ordination of so
many godly Ministers (who were ordained by Presbyters alone, without a
Diocessan Bishop) and their ascribing more virtue to the Popish Antichristian
Orders of the Church of Rome, than to Ordination by Protestant Presbyters; for
Popish Priests, when they turn Protestants, are not re-ordained. By this means
our English Prelates do undermine and supplant all the reformed Churches in
France, Holland, Scotland, etc. where they have no Diocessan Bishops to ordain
Ministers, and if their Ministers be not lawfully called, then they have no
true Churches, Baptism, Ordinances, etc. And will not this (think you)
contribute much to the rebuilding of Babel amongst us, and reconciling of
England to Rome? whither (at length) men will be forced to go for a lawful
Ordination (according to these men's Popish principles and practices) for if
Ordination by Presbyters, qua Presbyters be held unlawful (which yet the most
learned and judicious of the Protestant Bishops have proved to be lawful, and
therefore not to be iterated) then we must have recourse to the Pope and Church
of Rome (for a lawful ordination) from whom, as from the fountain our Lordly
Diocessans derive their exorbitant Ecclesiastical Power and Jurisdiction over
the Ministers and Flock of Christ, and not from the Scriptures, nor the Church
of Christ.

Again, as the Prelates have practiced the Jesuits Rule (for altering Religion)
in Discipline and Ceremonies, so they have likewise observed it in Doctrine.
First, they will bring in the Arminian Doctrine, and the Cassandrian-Grotian
Divinity, and then they know that downright Popish Doctrine will easily
follow. Let the Serpent but wind in his head, he will soon work in his whole
body: Let Arminianism but obtain Countenance and License in the Kingdom, our
Universities, Schools, Pulpits, Presses, will soon be filled with Popish
Doctrines. Witness the publishing of so many points of Popery one after
another, especially those two (which you may frequently meet with in the Books
of Dr. Hammond, Dr. Bramhall now Primate of Ireland, and Dr. Jeremy Tailor, now
a Bishop in that Kingdom, and of other High Prelatists) namely, That the Pope
is not Antichrist. And that the Church of Rome is a true Visible Church. Altae
sic surgunt maenia Romae. Thus according to the Rule of their Masters the
Jesuits, they seek to re-establish Rome by degrees here in England, and to do
it so as we may not know nor see. So much for Contz^ns first Rule.

II. Rule propounded by the Jesuit.
His second Rule is this, To press the examples and practices of some eminent
men, as a good means to draw on the rest.

And is not this Rule likewise well observed by our Prelatical men? They dazzle
the eyes of the meaner, and less judicious people, with the practices of some
noble and learned persons. If any begin to startle, or be troubled at the
matter, and cannot swallow down the Service Book and Popish Ceremonies and
observations, they presently answer, My Lord Bishop does thus and thus: and my
Lords Grace of Canterbury does thus and thus. The Knights of the most noble
order of the Garter-bow versus Altar toward the Altar at their Instalment.
His Majesty's Chapel is thus and thus adorned, many honorable Lords do
observe these Orders and Ceremonies. A. C. Speech (...) Star-Chamb. p. 47.
The learned Doctors of the Universities are conformable thereunto. Such a
zealous Minister, is Re-ordained by a Diocessan Bishop, and now reads the
Service Book. Such a strict Professor is present when the Service Book is read,
and the Ceremonies practiced: And what, will you be wiser than so many noble
persons, so many reverend Prelates, so many learned Doctors, so many eminent
famous Preachers and Professors? By these, and the like pretenses, they cast a
mist before the peoples eyes, and so dazzle them that they cannot, or will not
see that Jesuitical design that is carried on for Altering Religion.

III. Rule of the Jesuit.
His third Rule is this, That Arch-hereticks, and such as are teachers of
Heresy, must be banished the Commonwealth at once, if it may safely be done,
but if not, by degre^s.

It is easy to know who are the Jesuits Arch-hereticks (whom they would have
banished) even the most active, orthodox, conscientious Protestants, the
Calvinists (as they call them) who have eyes in their heads to discern and
discover their Antichristian designs, and will not be gulled by their sleights
as the ignorant people are.

For the extirpating and rooting out of these, the Jesuit prescribes a method
of twelve or thirteen steps, Contz. Poll. l. 2. c. 18 sect. 6.
for which I refer the Reader to the Book it self, such as will not Bow, they
must Break, such as will not comply with the Popish Design, must be crushed.
According to this Rule the Prelates have acted. By them the Puritan Preachers
have been counted the Arch-hereticks and teachers of Heresy in England, though
they teach nothing but what is consonant to Scripture, and the public Doctrine
of the Church, yet they are the teachers of Heresy. And being too many to root
out at once, it must be done by degrees. The Puritan party must be divided one
from another, and then they may be more easily suppressed. It may be done with
more case, and less noise.

And therefore first they did cast all those out of the Minister that were not
punctual and full Conformists to the old Ceremonies. This was the practice of
Prelates. Next (because there was a company of conformable Puritans as
themselves styled them) they procured an Edict for Recreations upon the Lords
day; and this must be published by Ministers, that such as could stand under
the Ceremonies (though groaning under that burden) might fall and be broken in
pieces under this: And yet because some men suspected of Puritanisme, might
have a latitude here beyond their brethren, they had a third Engine, and that
was the enjoining now Ceremonies and Adorations, that if any could swallow the
Book, yet they might discover, and cast them out by straining here. To this
they added a fourth, Prayers and Proclamations to be read against the
Anti-prelatical party in Scotland. And their last and greatest Engine which was
like the Powder Plot against the godly Ministry of the Nation to blow up the
Relics of them at once, was the Oath for Episcopacy, the Oath Etcaetera.

By these successive Stratagems, they made account utterly to extirpate those
Arch-hereticks. As it was sometimes said to Elijah, Him that escapes the sword
of Hazael, shall Jehu slay, and him that escapes the sword of Jehu, shall
Elisha slay, 1 King. 19. So had they said, Him that escapes the dint of the
Ceremonies, shall the Book of Sports slay, and him that escapes the Book of
Sports, shall the new Injunctions slay, and him that escapes the new
Injunctions, shall the Proclamations slay; and him that escapes the
Proclamations, shall the Oath slay. And this by degrees and pauses, that they
shall neither know, nor see till we slay them, and cause the work to cease. If
one snare do not entangle them, another shall: If one Engine do not batter down
this party, another shall. The Prelates have variety of means and engines to
ruin conscientious Ministers and Professors.

IV. Rule of the Jesuit.
The fourth Rule is this, That those which are adversaries to the true Religion
(which with him is Popery) be put by their Dignities, places, and offices, and
not trusted with power or public Employment.

I think none is such a stranger in England, but from his own knowledge can
witness this, The bestowing of all Offices, the collating of Benefices, the
election of Masters and Fellows of Colleges in both Universities, who have had
the overruling hand in them all, the power of Mandamus, but the Prelates and
their faction? and whom were they conferred upon usually, but upon men infamous
for, and impudent in Arminian and Popish opinions? protested Arminianisme and
bold-faced Popery has been the only speedy way to Church preferment. These
have been, and are still confided in (as to public trust and employment)
whilst the soundest and most zealous Protestants are discountenanced, by our
high Prelatists, whose practice suits well with the Jesuits Rule.

V. Rule of the Jesuit.
His fifth Rule is, To make the Protestant Religion odious, by laying load upon
such tenants as are most subject to harshest constructions, and rendering the
persons of those who maintain them contemptible.

In this our Prelates have not been sparing, Quot plaustra conviti^rum, have
they powered out upon some Doctrines of our Religion, specially the points of
Grace? The Pulpits of Italy and Rome, never spit more Gall and Venom against
the Protestant Doctrines of Election, Free Grace, Justification by faith,
perseverance, touching Antichrist, and the Exp sitions of the Protestants on
Daniel and the Revelation; and in a word against all those Doctrines wherein we
do in a special manner differ from, and are at an irreconcilable enmity with
the Church of Rome. N ver did the Popish B shops and Doctors, as Eecius,
Cocleus, Stapleton, Harding, Bellarmine, the railing Rhemists sweat more to
exaggerate the seeming absurdities, which carnal prejudiced men would draw from
our Doctrine, than many of the English Prelatical Clergy have done. And as for
the persons of the most famous reformed Divines; as Calvin, Beza, Pareus,
Whitaker, Reynolds, Perkins; It is well enough known how they have been, and
are to this day slighted and aspersed by this sort of men.

VI. Rule.
The Jesuits sixth Rule is, To foment the quarrels that are among the
Protestants, and strengthen that party that is nearest a compliance with Rome.
And, the wretched Jesuit has the unhappiness to prescribe one thing as the
proper means of Englands Cure. For who (says he) Quis enim non facile
puri^anos in Angli a ^edigat in ordi^em si Episcopo^um approbatio^em, ab iis
ex^orqueat. Contz. ubi supra paragraph. 9.
might not easily reduce the Puritans of England into Order (you know what the
Jesuits reducing into Order is) if he could extort from them an Approbation of
the Bishops. And had not the Prelates attempted, and almost effected this? They
had made us their Slaves before, and were they not about to make us swear we
would be so for ever? Certainly, though nothing but Episcopacy floated in the
surface of that Oath, yet Popery was in the (...), in the etc, of it, or
reducing the Puritans of England into Order sensu Pentificio. And do they not
to this day frequently speak for, yea strenuously endeavor after, and contend
for a general Conformity of all sorts and sexes, to the Prelatical Government,
Service Book, and Ceremonies, yea higher than was formerly attempted? none must
buy or sell, unless he receive the mark of the Beast; not only England and
Ireland, but Scotland, and the foreign Isles must bow or break before this Idol.
Our Prelates therefore have well observed this Rule of the Jesuit.

VII. Rule.
His seventh Rule is this, That all private Conventicles, and public Meetings
must be forbidden.

As for private Conventicles, you all know that to meet together to pray, or to
confer (which with them is a Conventicle) is peccatum irremissibile; a man may
at a better rate almost answer any thing than such a Meeting; The terrible
Canons of our Prelates are mounted higher, and more deeply charged against this
commendable practice of Christians, than against Drunkenness, Swearing,
Adultery, Sabbath-breaking, and the greatest abominations. Nor would the
restless spirits of these persecuting Prelates be quiet, till they had got all
such meetings utterly suppressed; men may meet together at Cock-fighting,
Horse-coursing, Stage Plays, to swear, and be drunk, and unclean; but they
must not meet to pray and confer together of the Scriptures, no, not in those
places and Parishes where the Ministers are no better than dumb Idols. Behold
here the Tyranny of our Prelates!

And then for public meetings, the ancient laudable exercise of Prophecy (I
mean not in that sense, the word is lately taken, for private spirits to
interprer Scripture.) But prophesying by men in office, peculiarly gifted and
called to that work; these must be banished, ejected, silenced; the public
and most frequented Lectures blasted; public fasts by consent of Ministers
(which had of long time been used in many parts of the Kingdom) are become
piacular; a Sermon at next Church the forbidden fruit, when they had none at
home, or worse than none. The Prelates have been, and still are very diligent,
to suppress holy Assemblies, under the notion of Conventicles and seditious
meetings, whilst they keep up their Cathedrals and Popish service.

VIII. Rule propounded by the Jesuit.
The eighth means to reduce us to Popery is, By severity of Laws and
punishments to compel the obstinate unto duty; and yet the rigor of the Law
must be slowly drawn out, and not against all, but only such as be most
dangerous.

Now what severity not only ad summum Jus, to the highest Apex of the Law, but
even supra Jus, beyond the extent and rigor of the Law has been used to such
as stood in the way of their great design, let the walls of their High
Commission Court speak; and if that Babell were once raised up again in England
(which the Lord in mercy prevent) not only the ordinary people, but the Gentry
of this Nation, (if they do but cross the ambitious designs of these men)
should drink deep of their cruelty and rigor.

Our Chronicles report, that when our Forefathers demolished the Abbeys, they
found in their Walls, and Vaults, and Ponds, heaps of skulls, and bones; the
Monuments of their smothered cruelties, I doubt not but the Abolishers of that
High Commission have found as manifest evidence of their cruel practices: heaps
of the blood of Innocents, whose skin has been flead from off them, M^c. 3.
and their bones broken, and they and their families chopped in pieces, as
flesh for the Caldron: And this fruit they reaped of their severity managed
with this Art which the Jesuit promised. That though compulsory Reformation
could do no good upon old standers, Itaque refor^atio quae prov^ctos non
ad^uvat, atatem tamen puerilem Catholicam raddet. Contzen.
yet it would render the younger sort Catholics.

IX. Rule of the Jesuit.
The ninth means, and (as he says) of all the rest most effectual is, That
such as are in authority, and have the public mannagement of Ecclesiastical
Affairs, do religiously practice and maintain Integrity of life, and purity of
manners. The Reformation of Religion (that is, the introducing of Popery into a
Reformed Church) will go on very slowly, and prove very difficult, unless the
Prelates and Doctors shall outshine the whole Commonwealth, not only in
innocence, but in reputation and fame of integrity.

Now, though this Rule be far from the practice of most of the servants,
followers, and adherents of the Prelates (who for the most part are profane,
Atheistical, and debauched persons, in whom there is little appearance of
morality, and less of Religion) yet some of the Grand Masters of this faction
do counterfeit much devotion and piety in their outward Garb, looks, gestures,
conversation: Or else it were not possible for them at any time to obtain so
far upon the hearts of Prince and Parliament (whose Interests do thwart the
ambitious designs of the Prelates) as to leave the disposing of all Church
Affairs wholly unto them: If they should not outwardly demean themselves as the
only Saints upon earth, as incarnate Angels, men wholly composed of Devotion
to God, Compassion to his Church, Quem ubi vident constanter Religions
adharentem, non adeo temerarii sant, ut direct calumnieutur and traducant apud
eum Orthodoxam Religionem: sed occasiones commodas accipiunt, quibus d^plorem
turbat^ pacem Ecclesiae, hortantur principem ad eam restituendam, id facile
esse dicunt auferatur modo contentionis studium, quod dissidium non sit in
rebus magai momenti sed exigui ponderis. Vedel. de prud. vet. Eccles. l. 2. c.
5.
grief for the Rents and breaches of it, Zeal for the peace and good of it;
they could not prevail with the Magistrate to trust them with so much power,
specially considering how often they have abused it in this Nation, and
entrenched upon the Royal Prerogative, and the authority of Parliaments, as
appears by above a hundred instances in the English Chronickle.

Doubtless it stands not with reason that a Protestant Prince should knowingly
and willingly give way to the re-establishing of the Popish Religion, and
therein ipso facto divest himself of his Supremacy, and lay his head at the
Popes feet for him to kick off the Crown from his Royal Brow, with a spurn of
his disdainful foot at pleasure. But why the Bishops (specially such of them as
have been observed to wish well to Popery ab Incunabulis) should contrive and
carry on such a Plot; some reason may be given; For could they but once obtain
this, That Popery should Triumph over the Reformed Religion, then they know
that the Miter would soon Trample upon the Crown and Scepter: Haec enim est
veritaes, etc. (says Bellarmine Bell. de offic. princip. Christi L. 1 c. 5.
) This is the Truth, whatever custom has introduced; That the Bishop is the
Father, Pastor and Doctor, as well of the Prince, as of the rest of the people.
And according to these Appellations the Prince ought to be subject to his
Bishop, and not the Bishop to his Prince. Swarez says, Swarez. D^fens. fid^i.
lib. 3. cap. 17. ss. 18. and lib. 4. c. 17. ss. 16, 17. cap. 15. ss. 1.
unusquisque Rex Subditus est, etc. Every King is subject to his Bishop in
spiritualibus, unless he be exempted by the Pope. Would not this be a brave
world for our Bishops, and the whole Clergy too, to be exempted from the power
of Laws, and civil Judicature? Leges non obligant Clericos, etc. (says Swarez
again) The Law does not bind the Clergy by virtue of any La^k Jurisdiction,
neither can Kings bind the Clergy by laying any special Law upon them; And
again, Ecclesiastical persus are privileged in Court, not only in case of
Ecclesiastical, but of Civil Crimes.

And therefore Reader, though thou can see no Reason why a Prince or State
professing the Protestant Religion (having sufficiently smarted under the Popes
and Prelates Tyranny) should decline to Popery; yet thou may see strong
reason why a proud Prelacy, and a corrupt Clergy should underhand endeavor to
bring it in, and thou may here take notice of the method and ways whereby
they may compass their designs, and neither Prince nor people shall know nor
see, and yet our Prelatical Clergy are so confident of the truth of their
Maxim, No Bishop, no King, That they would make us believe that it is as true
as the Gospel, whereas their great design is to make the Scepter subject to the
Miter, so much are they for the Royal Prerogative, and the Power of Parliaments.

It is well enough known (he that runs may read it) that the Jesuits Rules for
introducing Popery, have been practiced by our English Prelates of late years,
and still are practiced by them. Let any ingenious spirit judge of their
intentions by their actions.

I have only let you see from whose Quiver they have drawn their shafts; you
may hereby judge of the mark whereat they aim. You have seen whose Heifer it is
they plowed with: Judge by that of the seed they would have sown. If they never
knew that a Jesuit had delivered these Rules for the altering of Religion in a
Christian state, they were very unhappy in complying so exactly with them, when
they did not know them: And what can we think but that they were, and are acted
by the same Genius, or the same Angelus informans that the Jesuit was when he
penned them? But if they know (as it is most probable they do) that these are
the Rules, this the Art delivered by a Jesuit for the subverting the true
Reformed Religion, and the introduction of Popery again, and yet do knowingly,
and de Industria conform to them, and make proof of them, what can we think is
their intention, but to alter our Religion? But blessed be the Lord who has
said (and will perform it) That no weapon formed against his Jerusalem shall
prosper.

Give me leave (Gentle Reader) here to subjoyn the sayings of some wife and
learned men, as well Papists as Protestants touching the Grotian Arminian
Design carried on by the Prelates and their Adherents in England, for
introducing Popery and reducing England to the Church of Rome.

A Jesuit writes in a Letter to the Rector at Brussels thus:
Father Rector, etc. We have now many strings to our Bows, and have strongly
fortified our Faction, and have added two Bulwarks more; for when King J.
lived, we know he was very violent against Arminianisme, and interrupted with
his pestilent wit and deep learning, our strong designs in Holland: Now we have
planted the Sovereign Drug Arminianisme, etc. which we hope will purge the
Protestants from their heresy.

This Letter was seized in Archbishop Lands Study, and attested against him at
the Lords Bar.

An English Jesuit in a Book inscribed, A Direction to be observed by N. N.
printed 1636. p. 20, 22. Thus writes,
To speak truth, what learned judicious man can after unpartial examination
embrace Protestantisme which now waxes weary of it self? Its professors
declare themselves to love temper and moderation, allow of many things which
some years ago were usually condemned as superstitious and Antichristian: And
are at this time more unresolved where to fasten, then in the infancy of their
Church: for do not the Protestant Churches begin to look with another face?
Their walls to speak with another language? Their Preachers to use a sweeter
Tone? Their annual public Tenets in the Universities to be of another style
and matter? Their books to appear with Titles and Arguments which once would
have caused much scandal among the Brethren? Their Doctrine to be altered in
many things, and even in those points for which their Progenitors forsook the
then visible Church of Christ? Their 39 Articles, the sum, the confessions
and almost the creed of their faith are patient, yea ambitious of some sense
wherein they may seem to be Catholic? To allege wife and children in these
days is but a weak plea to compass a Benefice. Fiery Calvinisme once a Darling
in England, is at length accounted Heresy, yea and little less than Treason,
men in word and writing willingly use the once fearful names of Priests and
Altars; nay if one do but mutter against the placing of the Altar after the old
fashion, for a warning he shall be well warmed with a Cole from the Altar, etc.

That aspiring Prelate Dr. Laud in his Letter to Bishop Hall concerning
Episcopacy, has these words,
You do extremely well to distinguish the Scottish business from the state of
the foreign Churches; but yet to those Churches and their Authors, you are a
little more favorable than our case will now bear. What should be the
intendment of this word Now?

Bishop Carleton in his Examination of Mountagues Appeal, page 62.
What greater pleasure (says he) can a man procure to the exemies of the truth
than to speak evil and odiously of those men whose service God has used, and
made them excellent Instruments to make the truth known to us? Some take it for
a sign of such as are looking toward Popery, when they offer such a service to
the Papists, as to speak evil of them who have been the greatest enemies to
Popery, the greatest Propagators of the truth.

Dr. Robert Abbot Bishop of Sarum, in a Sermon preached before the University
of Oxford, 1615.
Men under the pretense of truth, and preaching against the Puritans (says he)
strike at the heart and root of faith and Religion now established among us;
This preaching against the Puritans, was but the practice of Parsons and
Campians counsel, when they came into England to seduce young Students, and
when many of them were afraid to lose their places if they should professedly
be thus, the counsel they then gave them was, That they should speak freely
against the Puritans, and that should suffice: And they cannot pretend that
they are accounted Papists, because they speak against the Puritans, but
because they are Papists indeed, they speak not against them. If they do at any
time speak against the Papists, They do beat a little upon the Bush, and that
softly too, for fear of troubling or disquieting the Birds that are in it. They
speak of nothing but that in which one Papist will speak against another; as
against Equivocation, the Popes temporal Authority, and the like, and perhaps
against some of their blasphemous speeches; but in the point of Free Will,
Justification, Concupiscence, being sin after Baptism, inherent Righteousness,
Certainty of salvation; the Papists beyond the Sea can say, They are wholly
theirs; and the Recusants at home make their brags of them: And in all things
they keep themselves so near the Brink, that upon all occasions they may stop
over them.

The University of Cambridge in a Letter March 8. 1595. to their Chancellor
subscribed unanimously by the Heads of the Colleges.
They desire his Lordship to use some effectual remedy for suppressing of
Baroes Arminian opinions, lest (say they) by permitting passage to these
errors, the whole body of Popery, should by little and little break in upon us
to the overthrow of our Religion. And a little after, Vouchsafe your Lordships
aid and advice both to us (wholly consenting and agreeing in judgment) and all
others of the University soundly affected: and to the suppression in time not
only of these Errors, but even of gross Popery, like by such means in time
easily to creep in among us, as we find by late experience it has dangerously
begun.

Declaration of the House of Commons to his late Majesty.
The hearts of your subjects are perplexed when with sorrow they behold a daily
growth, and spred^^^g of the faction of the Arminians; that being as your
Majesty well knows, but a cunning way to bring in Popery: And the professors of
those opinions, the common disturbers of the Protestant Churches, and
Incendiaries of those States in which they have gotten any head, being
Protestants in show, but Jesuits in opinion and practice.

The Noble Lord Falkeland in his excellent speech to the House of Commons,
printed anno 1641. page 3, 4, 5.6, 7.
Master Speaker, he is a great stranger in Israel, who knows not that this
Kingdom has long labored under many and great oppressions, both in Religion
and Liberty, and his acquaintance here is not great, or his ingenuity less, who
does not both know and acknowledge, that a great, if not a principal cause of
both th^se, has been some Bishops and their adherents.

Mr. Speaker, A little search will serve to find them to have been the
destruction of Unity, under pretense of Uniformity, To have brought in
Superstition and scandal under the titles of reverence and decency, to have
defiled our Church by adorning our Churches, to have slackned the strictness of
that Union which was formerly between us, and those of our Religion beyond the
Sea, an action as unpolitick as ungodly.

And again p. 7. As Sir Thomas Moore says of the Casuists, their business was
not to keep man from sinning, but to inform them quam prope ad peccatum sine
peccato liceat accecere; so it seemed their work (meaning the Prelates) was to
try how much of a Papist might be brought in without Popery, and to destroy as
much as they could of the Gospel without bringing themselves into danger of
being destroyed by the Law.

Mr. Speaker, to go yet further, some of them have so industriously labored to
deduce themselves from Rome, that they have given great suspicion, that in
gratitude they desire to return thither, or at least to meet it half way: some
have evidently labored to bring in an English, though not a Roman Popery: I
mean, not the outside only, and dress of it, but equally absolute, a blind
dependence of the people upon the Clergy and of the Clergy upon themselves: And
have opposed Papacy beyond the Sea, that they might settle one beyond ^^e
Water: Nay, Common fame is more than ordinarily false, if none of them have
found a way to reconcile the opinions of Rome to the preferments of England; be
so absolutely, directly and cordially Papists, that it is all that 1500 l. per
annum can do to keep them from confessing it.

And again p. 9. We shall find of them to have oath kindled and blown the
common fire of both Nations, to have both sent and maintained that Book, of
which the Author has no doubt long since wished with Nero, Utinam nescissem
literas: and of which more than one Kingdom has cause to wish, That when he
writ that he had rather burned a Library, though of the value of Prolomies. We
shall find them to have been the first and principal cause of the breach, I
will not say of, but since the Pacification at Barwick: We shall find them to
have been the almost sole Abetters of my Lord of Strafford, whilst he was
practicing upon another Kingdom, that manner of Government which he intended
to settle in this, where he committed so many, so mighty, and so manifest
enormities as the like have not been committed by any Governor in any
Government since Verres left Sicily. And after they had called him over from
being Deputy of Ireland, to be in a manner Deputy of England (all things here
being governed by a Juntillo, and that Juntillo governed by him) to have
assisted him in the giving of such Counsels, and the pursuing of such courses,
as it is a hard and measuring cast, whether they were more unwise, more unjust,
or more unfortunate, and which had infallibly been our destruction, if by the
Grace of God their share had not been as small in the subtilty of Serpents as
in the innocence of Doves.

FINIS.

