Novemberis Monstrum.

OR ROME BROVGHT TO BED IN ENGLAND. with The Whores Miscarying.

Made long since for the Anniversary Solemnity on the fifth day of November, In
a private College at Cambridge.

By A. B. C. D. E.

And now by conquering importunity made public.

For a small memorial of England's great deliverance from the Powder Treason.

By E. M. A. D. O. C.

Monstrum, Horrendum, Inform, Ingens, cui lumen ademptum. London, Printed by
F. L. for John Burroughes, at the sign of the Golden Dragon in Fleetstreet.
1641.

Frontispeece Discovered.
THe DEVIL plots, the POPE will owen
The JESVITE must act or none.
One God does SEE and SMILE, and BLAST,
What Hell, and Rome, and all forecast.
It Is not the blackness of the Pit
Can cloud this EYE from seeing it.
It Is not the deepenesse of the Pit,
Can strain this ARM from reaching it.
It Is not the terror of the Pit
Can scare this SMILE from daring it.
(...) eye can chase the thickest mist,
^eav'ns Arm can conquer, when it list,
One look, one touch, one Smile can quell
The Pride and Policy of Hell;
And let them yet more forces call,
^e God will be too hard for all.
I See

He ^last y^

I Smile

Prodigye

Tragidye

I plott

the actye

I own



Made long since.

FOR THE ANNIVERSARY SOLEMNITY on the fifth day of November In a private
College at Cambridge.

By A. B. C. D. E.

And now By conquering import(...) made public.

For a small memorial of Engla^^^ great deliveranc from the Powder Treason.

By E. M. A. D. O. C.

Monstrum, Horrendum, Inform, Ingens, cui lumen ademptum. London, Printed by
F. L. for T. Slater, at the sign of the Swanne in Duck-lane. 1641

THE DEDICATORY.
Go little Book, (my unlick't Poetry)
And be a Patron to thy self and me,
Shift it among the crowd, and never stay
To dress thy self, like other trim and gay,
^ith borrowed Titles, plucked from great Ones, who
Are honored by the Honor that they do,
^eare thy own clothes, and think it more to be
Known by thy face, then by a livery.
^e're trust unto fond fickleness, that may
Afford a smile at first, and then betray,
That hiss and kill, that by embraces smother,
With one hand take, and throw away with the other,
That ow'n a Book, because the (...) ownes them,
Or else they would never ow'n the Book again,
Let those that can warpe Conscience in a strain
And count it but a Poets Spencer vein
To fawn and flatter, and have learnt to call;
One Good, because he is Great, though worst of all;
Let those who can weigh virtue by the pound,
Where it is scarce by Drammes and Ounces foun^
Who make it then chief Masterpiece of wit,
To Banckrupt Honor by out-rayling it
Who can say I, or No, sweat, freeze, as he
Is hot or could, who is their Deity.
Let such Idolatours of Greatness show,
They dare not walk abroad unless they go
Under some He or Shee-Protection:
My Muse shall venture in another fashion
Make thine own license (little one) and be
Protection to thy self, a Pass to me.
And let such scratching Patron-mongers know
Thou Wilt not on stilts, nor yet on Crutches go,
On thy own feet thou wilt either run or crawle
And if thou ^ anst not stand on them, thou wilt fall,
Weigh neither smile nor froune, but when you see
Best usage say, this shall my Patronbee:
And as for others that disdain, say thou
My Master ownes me not, and why should you?
Vade (nec Invideo) sine me Liber Ibis*
To the Reader.
REader, go on; but first pray wash your eyes
Fom Criticisine curiosityes.
Then thou may see the clearer, judge the better:
^pend a licentious verdict on each letter,
^e peremptory to condemn or praise,
^ubscribe to this with boldness, and that race
With a judicious pen, and make it fit
For naught but Drugsters shops wast-paper it
And spare not (Reader) if thy courtesy
^id them peruse that, which it made thee by
There are but two I fear, and they shall make
My fear more careless for their empty sake
As for the the nicer, squeasy, wanton taste
That Is always picking, but still loves to wast,
^ weigh not his court fancy: let it be
Spent on his wanton Thais-poety.
And for that carping rout that love to be
Still following Momus in his livery,
That thinks their judgments never shine, until
They find some blots dropped from another quill
Let them still grin, and snarle, I Will sayno more
Then the Spart^n Prince to an Amhassador,
Who being found by him sporting away
The tedious hours of a Summer-day;
Amongst his little children did request
The Ambassador to let his censure rest,
Till he had children of his own, just so
Till thou have something of thine own to show:
Leave off, or if thou will still snarling be,
Let me see thine, I Will do as much for Thee.
The Introduction.
1.
WHere are those cristall floods, which from our eyes
Should make a second Sea? Those briny streams,
Which from the swelling veins of grief should rise
And flow like surgy Neptune, when he teames
His daily incomes to enrich his Bride,
And still with new revenewes swelles his tide
2.
Where are those gales of sighs, a windy gale
To drive my paper Pinnace that it may
Mounted upon a briny ocean sail,
And through a See of tears find out the way
Unto the sea of Rome, and there descry
Hells masterpiece of hell-hatcht villainy?
3
There rides the whore in state, that purple whore,
Mounted on high upon a scarlet beast;
That man of sin, quite surfetted with goare,
Gorged with the flesh of Saints at Plutos feast.
Bathed in Nectar blood, pancht with man's flesh,
As if it were high Jove's Ambrosia dish.
4
Four Cardinals coupled bears him up in state,
Lending their shoulders to support his pride,
No less then Kings and Emperors must wait
To hold his stirrup when he means to ride;
And for their pains perchance shall kiss his To^
Whether his highness do wear socks or no.
5
He bears his coat from truest Heraldry,
A Lyon-Rampant in a sanguine field,
Bulls the supporters, fit for cruelty,
A Drago in the crest, which flames does yield
Belsht from sulphurious lungs into a flood;
The word, or motto is, Nothing but blood.
6
His pastimes little else but cruelty,
To murder Princes is a recreation,
Spurning down throanes is sporting jollitie,
Nay to do all of these is true religion,
Gives marrow to their meritts, wins the prize,
And rids them soon to heaven with easy thighs
7
To curse to Purgatori's but the fashion,
And therefore it is a sin it should go down,
To find out tortur's but to wrack invention,
Worthy a Card'nalls cap, or Friars Crown.
An inquisition is a mercy seat
Pity, compared to their venom heat.
8
No fire burns so clear, or warmes so well,
As that, that is kindled at a stake to burn
Whole legions of Heretics to hell,
Who stubborn in the truth deny to turn.
The common bonfyre of a whole nation,
Is but a festivalls right celebration.
9
To strangle infant Majesty before
The cradle suffers it to wear the crown,
And dye it is mantle in a purple goare,
That it may never know a scarlet gown
Is but true doctrine at a Councellread,
And therefore must by them be practiced.
10
They Will fire whole solemnities, and burn
^he sacrificers to a sacrifice,
Thus make the Temple but a common urn^
To hold a quier of Martyr Saints, who dy^
Before they dye, seeing their destiny
March toward them before it comes nigh.
11.
To make of Church and people but one fire,
(Surprising them within that sacred wall,)
Is nothing but to kindle their desire,
Warming their zeal least it should faltring fall
Into a colder chillness, and so spoil
The blaze of their good works for want of oy^
12.
They whet the knife of cruelty and cut
The tongues from living men, that they may try
To tempt down heaven from heaven it self, and ^
The Gods unto a miracle, if they
Expect the praises due to Deity,
Well warbled from a tuned fidelity.
13.
They dig the infant from its living grave
(That fearelesse innocence, which does lie
Imprisoned in the parent womb until it have
Queen natures mandat for its liberty.)
And then they dandle it on a pike till it
Fall to its first and last sleep at their feet.
14.
Have not you seen a fettered prisoner loose
The burden of his shackled teathering,
And escape his uncouth dungeon-repose,
Only that he may be conveyed agin
Into some closer goal, where he shall lie,
Till death his iron cables does untye?
15.
^ else till with the hands of justice knit
^ faster twist (made for his destiny)
^eades him from the prison to that place, where it
^is soul and body must at once untie.
Just thus the infant from its prison womb
Is freed to be imprisoned in a tomb.
16.
^ut yet we are hardly half the way, put on
^de faster in the road of cruelty,
^u'l see perhaps a sucking babe anon,
which smiling to the mothers lullaby,
Hangs on her melting breast, and whilst it takes
The honey flowing from those milkie lakes,
17.
^me fist, that is brawnd with frequent cruelly,
^ite spoils the draught, snatching it from her breast,
and to complete determined villainy
^reeth the Parent for to do the rest.
Making her turn Medea, rend and scatter
The tender softness of that infant matter.
18.
^ yet, oretake but Tiger- Neroes trains,
^ose ten that nursed persecution,
^st with the blood that sprang from Martyrs veins
^u^ after gave it flesh to feed upon,
Till it outlived four ages, and did turn^
Three hundred years into an ash-heapt urne.
19
Could I but speak his butcher-crueltye?
Twould make my mouth spit blood at every word
Blacker then incke, and force my pen to dye
Each line into a scarlet thread: his sword
Learnt murder from him, whom it would not sl^
But first must try her skill another way.
20
When Nero knew not how to live or die,
(For dye he would not though he knew the way)
His venome's such, that when he does but try
To slay himself, he must another slay.
Then to his servant slay thy self said He
That I may learn to kill my self by Thee.
21
This Nero, grandsire of grand-crueltie
Begot that brat of persecution,
And seeming pious in impiety,
Left it to a succeeding guerdion.
Domitian, Hadryan, and Antonius verus
Trajanus, Maximinus, and Severus.
22.
Those Brother-Emperors of Hydra-Rome,
Who rise like ten heads from that dragon-beast,
And out of their enflamed mouths did foame
A venomed froath upon the Christian breast.
Hydra indeed! No sooner once was dead,
But in the room sprang up another head.
23
Next flames out Decius, who did commit
A sacraligious rape on chastity,
And in a ruder flame at once unknit
The chaster zoanes of pure virginity.
Commanding 40 vestalls for to turn
True virgin-Martyrs in one common urn.
24
What shall I speak of to other viper-brood
Galerius and Peternus, which did lead
The brat by both the hands, till it withstood
That stoutest Martyr champion, who did bleed
IN the face of persecution, Laurence, he
That taught the Gridiron to sing Poetry.
25
Next sprange Aurelian from that Tyrant race,
Who first did season his unnatural hand
For after murders, in that infant place
Where his own blood did run, cutting the band
That tied his sister unto him more near
Had but he prized her, as his sister, dear.
26
But heaven fate Judge, and censured; saw, that H^
^n this first act had spent snch blood, as might
Have fed ten persecutions, and be
^ull tyranny; Heaven therefore stops him quite,
And will not suffer him to quench his thirst,
That made himself quite drunk with blood at first
27.
Jove summons up his Cyclops, and commands
The thunder to proclaim an open way,
Breaking in sunder the clouds faster bands,
That the lightning may her brighter face display:
Thus frightened with the flashings of that eye*
Which glanced on him, He leaves his cruelty.
28.
Next raging as a whirlewind rises he,
That swept before him like the wanton dust
Whole Christendomes of Saints, and made them be
Like atom'd crummes under his footstool thrust.
Stay not to ask his name, Reader, go on,
You Will find him nothing but Ambition.
29.
It Was He, that crowded for the Imperial throne
Soaring on Eagles wings Ambition gave him,
Till he at length reached it, to rule alone,
By doing that his concubine would have him.
Druas commands, A wild boar must be slain,
He thrusts at Aper, and begins to reign.
30.
'Twas He, that dawbd Ambition ore with pride,
Being once an Emperor, he must be God;
He Is Phoebus brother, brother to his Bride,
He Will sway both earth and Heavens imperial rod.
Whenonce Ambition does begin to fly,
Like Icarus, 'twill either mount, or dye.
31.
^d now He poasteth out a swift decree
^led with wax, that cannot melt away)
^t he will be worshipped for dietie
^people kiss his feet, those stumps of clay,
And take him for a God; he will be no man:
^iddle his name; 'twas Dioclesian.
32.
^ who but Dioclesian could do that,
^h Pride commanded, with a prouder hand,
^low a furnace up, that might outdate
(...) years; and hotter then Ten could command
before him with their bloodyest decrees:
^e was the bottom, and so gave the lees.
33.
(...) Rome, look back and blush upon the guilt
^ose that marked thee on the forhead so,
(...) cruelty they sucked, it was thy breasts spilt,
(...) then they spend it on their foreign foe.
^hese, these were thy Decemviri, that made,
^n persecutions a ten-age trade.
34.
^act the quintessence of villainy,
^sie the horridst deeds, that ere were don;
(...) to the depth of Phlegeton and see
^t cruelties the furies think upon.
All is but sucking malice to that they
^oe execute on those, on whom they prey.
35
Cruelty's turned an Art, 't has got to be
Among the liberal sciences, most fit
For him, that would be rich in policy,
He Is the best Scholar, that is best skild in it.
The top of honor is to vale her throane,
Be without this you must let that alone.
36*
The Jesuit that climbs by step degrees
From his shorn crown unto a Card nalls cap,
And thence upon Ambitions pineon flees
To Peter's Chair that he may take a nap,
Winnes all by forging out some skulking trea^
Not by his judgment but inventi on.
37
Charity dwells not now in Hospitalls,
'Thath left her Country house, and's come to to^
Wintring her self within the frozen walls
Of some cold dungeon upon Tellus down.
Merits swarm thicker from a Lollards Towe
Then from the maint'nance of a beeds-man bow
38
He Will sooner pass for heaven, that dying leaves
A legacy to build an inquisition;
Or else his scrapt up silverlings bequeathes
To nurture up some tart invention.
Which may delve out new ways for villainy,
And teeme forth' the other bastard-cruelty.
39
To fly to foreign nations on the wind,
And cross the seas that they may cross the land,
So get more worlds, if more were left behind,
And with a paper bull them all command,
Is the Ambition burns within their breast,
And keeps their busy souls from taking rest.
40
To puff up States and Kingdoms at a blast,
To pluck down Crowns and Septers at one fall,
To swallow Realms to break a mornings fast,
And yet scarce satisfied there with all;
Is but course fare at a Lent ordinary,
Such is there raving-craving cruelty.
41
But soft a while, take fresher breath (my muse)
Leave off to lash her former whoredoms still,
She has bin scourged enough for old abuse,
And yet her fornication-cup does fill
With new-brew'd poison; spare thy whip that it
May take new strength, and not the latter quit.
42.
Had every persecution bin ten,
And each had burned longer then them all
Maintained with fresh fury, till all them
That were but Christened Protestants had fall,
'Thad made but a straw bonfier compared
With that hell-fuell they of late prepared
43.
Fuel in oil, which had but Plato seen
Heapt up, He, staggerd at the sight, would swear
Envy's Idea had existent bin,
And on the stage never durst before appear.
Fuel stored up to feed revenge, and be
A plot to puzzle all Hyperbole.
44.
Had but Pythagoras diviner soul
By ^ransmigration dwelt in other men,
And so out lived his own age, and then stole
unto another, and at length had bin
One of our own; He, seeing this alone,
Might well outvie all ages with this one.
45.
Call up Chronology, and bid her bring
Her bunch of keys to open History;
Ransack that cabinet, and view each thing,
That she has locked up from her infancy.
Call aged Time, and bid him search his file
That he this cruelty may parallel.
46*
Arrest the Sun, and stay his Coach for thee,
That thou may parley with him; ask him then
If riding all his circuit He could see
Such treachery, as in this age has bin.
Chronology must tie up History,
Time hang his file, and Phoebus silent be.
47
^en summon up the Furies from their cell;
^ock at the doors of darkness, and there see,
(...) thou can speak with Pluto, King of Hell,
(...) to Proserpina admitted be.
Sue for a Synod, and then try if they
Can match themseles agin, or match the day.
48
^ll stands amazed. Pluto is mad that he
^ould be outvi'd on earth: The Furies swear
^ey went beyond commission; and decree
^ll shall afford no more, if they come there.
Megera loathes her service, and decrees
To dwell on earth to learn new cruelties.
49
^berus howles for madness, and opes wide
(...) triple throat, from which a whirlewind came,
^^ich made the rivers rage into a tide,
^^d roared, as if they threatened all hells frame.
That Pluto thought therabble had come down
Missing their plot on earth, to get his crown.
50
^ld but the gelid fear, that freezeth me,
^d cloisters up my blood in coldest veins,
^ease my speech, and set my tongue but free,
^^uld unfold a treachery, contains
The Elixar of the bitterest druggs, that are
(...) Mong all the Apothecary Pluto's ware.
51
Then cease thy Styx-dy'd mantle (tragedy)
And buckle soon thy bloody busking on
Dipped ten grains deeper in their goary dye,
Do thou attend us, while we treat upon
Seven headed Hydra, hatched long since in Ro^
And what conceptions teeme within her womb*
52
But where is the quill that can drop lines of blo^
But where is the tragic pensell that can paint
Such hideous cruelty scarce understood?
Or fathomed with the thoughts of man or Saint.
But where is the fiery muse that can discribe,
The treachery of that infernal tribe.
53
Nor thoughts, nor words are ready to unfold
That hideous tragedy, whose plot was found
And first contrived in hell, but never could
With prologue once salute the English ground,
Although the stage was built, the scene was m
On which that Tragic act was to be played
54
That tragic act, the thought whereof does ma
My quivering muse afraid, my ague-quill
Shakes in desiphering it, my hands do quake;
My teare-drownd eyes a fresh supply d^still
And yet at length grow dry; my hairs to untw
And stand an end like quills of the Porcupin^
55
But soon my Muse recovered, and my quill
Obeyed the hand that guided it; mine eyes
Cleared up, and would no farther showers distill,
Then soon I set upon the enterprise.
Turn over the page, draw but the curtain, there
You Will see the Monster-Tragedy appear.
Argumentum.
Africa multa dedit, vix vix dedit Africa tanta
Quant a uno peperit Roma (...) monstro.
Nec miranda cano: Romae Lupa namque Noverca,
^lla dedit monstrum, cur non dabit Illaque monstrum
Sic canibus eatuli similes, Lupa Sicque Lupillo.
Primulus en monstri conceptus; Adultera matrix:
Tartareo spurcamspargit dum semine matrem
Roma ferox, caetae generatur Filia noctis.
Monstri fama fugit, tantae quoque Nuncius aurae
Pegaseis volitat pennis: mox qualia monstra
Roma dabit, dubio meditatur pectore quisque.
Cujus open proles latebrosis parta tenebris
Prodeat in lucem, Obstetrix e Tartare surgit.
Expectata dies celebranda est; Romaque gestit
Conceptu partus, sed mox prorepit abortus.
1 Proditionis conceptus. 1 Upon the first plotting of the Treason. 2 Matrix,
in qua pubescit embryon. 2 Upon the vault in which this Treason was hatched 1
Upon the buying of it. 2 Upon the digging of it.
3 Tempus quo generatur monstrum. 3 Upon their working in the night. 4 Ipse
generandi actus. 4 Upon the bringing of the Powder from Lambeth and laying it
in the Cellar. 5 Concepti fama. 5 Upon the Letter sent to my Lord Mounteagle. 6
Famae mercurius 6 1 Upon the quill that writ the Letter. 2 Upon the sending of
it to the King.
7 Partus determinatio 7 The Kings discovering of the plott. 8 Praeelecta
Obstetrix 8 Upon Faux, the Man-Midwife ready to deliver it 9 Natalis expectata
celebratio 9 The Match of hunting appointed to surprise the Lady Elizabeth. 10
Abortivum monstrum 10 The miscarying of the birth* 11 Parturientis periculum.
11 Romes Downfall in Blackfriars upon their fifth day of No vember.

PRODITIONIS CONCEPTVS.
Upon the first plotting of the Treason.
ANd see; the Pope has travailed once again
With a new Afric Monster, worse then came
From their she-popedome, when a woman proved
The Churches head, and all the body moved.
(Poor headless she-church, where was thy head then
When Ione did loose her maidenhead with men?
Oh she took care for that, least Rome should need
Succeeding Popes, she would her self popes breed)
But whither roves my muse? come back again,
And see another of that breeding train
Go big with envy, laboring with a birth,
Swelled with a plot, nay brought to bedith' earth.
Ready to teeme forth from a monstrous thigh
A strange delivery, the birth was nigh.
It Was coming forth, but had not the strength to give
So big a monster, as it did conceive.
Fie Rome! thou wantst a midwife, or a Ione
That can without an help bring forth alone.
II. Matrix, in qua pubescit embrion.
Upon the vault, in which the treason was hatched.
1. Upon the buying of the vault.
Down with price of blood, if you would feign
As you have sold out souls, buy in again.
The purchase you have got by emptying
Your purgatory may well fiil't again.
Look on this arched vault, how will it make
An high way passage to the Stygian Lake?
The price you had the last souls you did sell,
Will buie the Catholics this way to hell.
Where Is He that bears the bag, your Judas tro
That feeketh to betray his Mother so?
(...) the vault is sold
(...)oney told.
(...)ny you he will swear
(...)ne relic are.
(...), and we
(...) as he
(...); And be it so,
^
2 Upon the digging of the vault.
1
and what are you that Tribe, who do deny
Your black guard thus, the honor of a bed?
^ho make it death once with a bride to lie,
It Is Symony to buy a maiden head.
2
and yet forsooth you will dare to ravish all
At once your common mother, force a birth
^hether she will or no a monster shall,
Teeme from her womb out of the groaning earth
3
You Will rent her matrix else, which nature taught
By closing such an incest to deny:
As if she had foreseen, that Rome had thought
To grapple with her mothers secrecy.
4
What steepes your frolik spleenes in choler so?
What mooves your touchy blood to such a tide.
How came your pampred carcasses to do
Such ravished rapes unto your mothers side?
5
And must you needs with pickaxe, and with spade,
Threaten unless she grant your villainy?
Have you no milder Rhetorique to persuade,
And woe a yield to such a courtesy?
6.
What made you strike so deep? was your inte^^
To fathom Styx, or sound black Acheron?
To cast a causy to Don Vulcans tent,
Thus fetch provision he had wrought upon
7.
No no; you dreamt perchance that you shou^ find
Some iron vein, which nature minted there
Of purpose to help forward such a mind,
And run Art out of breath in a prepare.
8.
To such a stratagem; dream on, take out
A rib of iron from Dame natures side,
Fall in your dream again, then cast about
To make your rib the hottest brunt abide.
9
Dig deeper yet, perchance at length you will find
That nature has dung'd their Saltpeter too
And left her wooden legs and stilts behind,
To nourish up the flames, all these for you*
10
But hold your hands, sweat no more marrow now
Spend the earths ball no farther, nor your strength
I fear the proverb will prove true, below,
You dig'd so deep, there came a damp at length
III. Tempus, quo generatur monstrum.
Upon their working in the night.
1
Sleep Phoebus sleep;
What makes thee peep?
^oe not so soon thy sable curtains draw,
Lie down again in Thetis lap,
^was late before thou wentst to bed we saw,
O pry thee take another nap.
^f thou beginst to rise, these night owls then
^ust leave their work, when others do begin,
Then Phoebus stay,
You will but make an Holy day.
2
What made thee wake?
Could thou not take
Thy rest to night, thou heardst such knocking
Let not thy fiery steedes yet sup
Their mornings draught, nor run their full careere here?
Why do thou call Aurora up?
They plotted not against thy Deity.
Then Phoebus stay,
You will but beg another play.
3
Go drowsy droanes,
Make, make your moanes,
To your dead-living Saints; sigh prayers that th
May intercede for you and get,
The Sun to stand in the heavens, and so delay
The dawning of the morning, yet
Cry louder, let another beade yet fall;
Make up your prayers complete, or you will marr^
For want of sleep,
Your prayers awake you cannot keep.
4
See see, the day
Makes no delay.
Then Phaeton do thou mount up the coach,
Let loose the horses careless raines,
That they may run away the days approach.
On faster wheels, with easy pains
Whip on thy foaming fteeds, that we may fear
The rattling of thy coach like thunder here.
Come draw away,
That night she sooner hasten may.
5
It Is here, the night
Has scared the light.
^he day has new undrest her self, I saw
But now her under-peticoat.
^y thought 'twas dyed in a red more raw
Then any flesh of sheep or goat;
^ut as she stripped her self of that, she drew
^ modest Curtain, thick as night, to show,
She Veiled her head,
As Vesper sent her down to bed.
6
Now all the light
Is claspt in night.
^orpheus has woed all things to rest you see,
The'rs no dog moves unless it bark
^or madness at the Moon, least she descry
Their deeds of darkness in the dark.
^ut never fear: bid Phoebus kiss his Bride
that she may blush to see her evening tide.
Work while you may,
Then let him come to wake the day.
7.
Up Phaeton,
Up, up, be gone.
Go guide thy Father to his mate, that he
May court her with his rosy lips;
Then in conjunction go with her, till she
Embraced be to an ecclips.
Thus veil her face that she may never be
Privy to such a monstrous villainy.
Away, Away
Phoebus is rise to call the day.
IV. Ipse generandi actus.
Upon the bringing of the Gunpowd from Lambeth over the Thames, and laying it
in the Cellar.
1
Where is thy Legate (Rome?) Let him provid
His sparkling Spanish jennet straight,
Coapt in his trappings made of gold
When the golden fleece came from your fold
His feet well shod with Indy plate:
His crisping maine to twisted locks divide,
Fit for the riders pride.
2
See how the horses prauncing does foretell
How he expects his rider, see
In what a language he does pray
His master for to come away,
And deck him with his company.
Hear how he neighes, his neighing do but spell
It hastens his farewell.
3
^uicken thy legate then; do, bid him seal
His fiery steed, and winged poast
With thy Embassage unto hell;
There once arived let him tell
Don Pluto Primate of that host,
^at Charons footy keele must hoise his sail
Waiting a trusty gale.
4
and to thy tackling then (Styx-Ferry-guide)
The wind has sight a softer gale.
Lanch out, glide over the Stygian lake
A fairer harbor yo umust take.
Do but your beaten pinnece hale
^o our Thamefis, there it shall pride
It self in Neptunes tide.
5
Those silver streams shall wash hell from thy boat
And turn that dye, Styx left it last
Into a Cignets purer white,
By their reflection made more bright.
Who when they first thy ferry past,
Dabling in that thy keele there set a float,
Got there so black a foot.
6
But faster Charon; sweat a little more,
What makes Aeolus thus blow?
Me thinks he seems out of breath,
Or else his wind is pent beneath,
That he becomes shortwinded so,
On Charon, work the harder; you are sore
Expected long before.
7
See how the swelling barrells, stuffed with fire,
Are big with expectation:
They long until they see thy boat,
In which they must be set a float,
To take another station.
Srange contract, see the water slakes her ire
and entertaines the fire.
8
^t stay, what means those well grown vessels there?
What? have you poudred up your plot
In barrels, least it should not keep,
Or be discovered when you sleep?
Sure then some vent your treason got
that 'twould not keep so long, until you were
To set abroach November's beer.
V Concepti fama.
^^on the letter sent to my Lord Mounteagle.
(...) mystery enwrapt in mysteries,
^mment far obscurer then the text,
^fit that thou should meet an Eagles eyes
^h might pierce through the veil, and tell what is next
Never mount Eagle: gaze not on the Sun
Glance downe-wards to the depth of Phlegeton.
^loisterd up in darkness, hid in hell,
^tled with night, imprisoned in Acharon,
(...) barrel'd up in natures misty cell.
^e but the letter, and the danger's gone.
^trange plot! do burned: the blaze will let thee see
How to discover this dark mystery.
The letter burnt, the danger's past, and all
The mystery must then be over too,
And yet this burning makes it mystical,
How can I spell it when it is burned so?
However burnt it, in it burnt you will see,
That which you read not, when you read it ^
Dark letter! folded up in flames indeed,
And therefore needs no wax to seal it fast,
Let who will read, at most he can but read,
And whn h' has done, must burn it too at la^
Fire must tell thee what it means alone
And when the fyer*s out, the dangers gone.
VI.
Famae Mercurius.
1
Upon the quill that writ the letter*
What molting Seraphim did spill
That speaking, silent muttering quill?
That spoke yet spoke not, speaking parables*
Which kept and told the truth in miracles.
That two toung'd Orator that spoke
Still twice at once, and still did make
^ystery unknown by clearing it,
^d known by making it obscurer yet.
A quill, that could not speak the intent
Of him that writ, to whom 'twas sent.
^d yet could blab the secraest meaning too
(...) him, for whom 'twas maskt, and muffled so.
A pen that by discovering covered,
And yet by covering was discovered.
^anus face, that smiled one way now,
^d frowned the other with a furrowed brow.
A pen snatched from Apollo's hand;
That spoke pure Delphos language, and
^^uld vent naught else but pure Amphibolies
^king this that, and that this, this and this;
A danger great by lening it,
And none by making it so great.
^ckt from an Eagles wing, 'twas such an He,
^at brought it to our Sovereighng's Diety.
Or from that tatling goose which pratled
The foes approaches, when she cackled.
(...) from some Sphynx his standish it did fall,
^at it unriddl'd in a riddle all.
2
^^on the sending of the letter to the King.
A letter to the King is sent,
To riddle what the meaning meant;
A letter writ indeed from Babylon,
Speaking confus'on, in confus'on.
It Is true, one language, only came,
And yet that language languages transposed
A Letter in a Letter was enclosed
So that the same seemed not the same.
How well may Rome true Babell be,
That speaks thus in a mysterye?
A masked tongue kept Babell from her height*
And Rom's confused language spoils her quite
Plain English speak, when you write nex
Your letter meant, naught less then what it me^
Therefore 'twas sent, to whom it was not sent,
Pray henceforth comment on your text.
It Is brought unto the King we see,
That he may dive the mystery.
Why? what is the matter! Are our Island's eye
Grown dim with age, The Universities?
Why had not they the letter read?
They would at first strike deep; it is true, but s^
That they look through their Sovereign, y^ kn
The eyes are always in the Head.
VII. Partus determinatio.
Upon the Kings discovering of the plot.
that Kings are sometimes Prophets too we see,
What made our James else prophecy?
^rue virtue oftenn crowns Nobility.
^ow true was he the King of Scholars famed,
That Rome with her own sword has tamed?
^ell Scholars King, well King of Scholars named,
^he paper bids him burn the paper, so
The danger would be over to.
^e saves himself and paper with a No.
^ow so? we read the danger is not over
unless the Letter burnt before.
^hen burn it, and the danger is no more.
^ut read again, and then perhaps you will see,
How bravely you are danger free,
^t be so soon o're-past, how soon will it be?
^his made our James more nimble then the fire,
This thought did make his thoughts retire
^o search out what was tangled in that bryer.
He dived therefore somewhat lower yet;
And truly such a dive was fit,
To sound the intralls of so deep a pit.
His Nobles now as well as He must move,
And presently his verdict prove,
Searching out that below, he saw above.
They seek, but see not: Did you never hear
Too nigh an object is too near?
I can see better farther off then here.
The King sees yet: He bids them search agin:
They go, then bring the message in.
Nothing before, is now the very thing.
(Thus have I seen a beagle soon o'rerunn,
The newborn sent but now begunn,
Then counterhunt it when it is half donn.)
They, that made nothing of it, found it somethi^
Read backwards, if you mean the King,
Who making something of it, made it nothing.
VIII. Praeelecta obstetrix.
Upon Faux ready to deliver it.
^ut Monster-Tiger, a fell vipers brood,
that would such with thy milk, thy mother's blood
^awn'd with a Richards tush, not toothles borne,
^rawing the fountaine-breast, thou would have torn
(...) passage to her heart, gnawd that for food,
and like Prometheus Vultur sucked on blood.
^ou'lt suck, but so that thou may open too
^conduit-veine whence blood with milk may flow
^onder that thy mother weaned Thee not
^om her, whence thou this Viper-nature got.
^hy step-nurse, Rome I mean, that purple whore
those breasts milkt venom from a putrid soar.
^t see, Rome nursed Thee, therefore thou will be
^ her brought up unto this villainy.
^me once a Nero had to kill a mother,
^ast Rome should want one now, thou prov'st another.
^d has not she her Jesuits, that thou
^ust prove a Midwife to her treason now?
that would you have the whore when all is done
^y at our door her newborn bastard son?
^ant gross excrement: know thus much, that
^ngland does scorn to Father such a brat.
Upon the same.
Up night-owle, and break o'pe thy sealed eyes,
Venture to look upon the mantled skies.
Sol has removed his court, the glorious day
And all his followers have packt away.
Night is full mounted in her seat of jet,
And lies wrapped in her cloudy cabanet.
Fear not, Apollo's gone; his prying eye
Can neither see nor blab thy villainy.
Envy has gone her time, and does begin
To be in travel with her full-growne sin.
Up then, and see that all things ready be
It Is thou must hasten her delivery,
Pluto has sent his Pursivant away
To summon thy appeareance, make no stay:
Go, take thy charge, that thou may licenc't be,
And show a pattent for thy viilany.
Fetch thy darke-lanthorne, that true Gyges ring,
Which, thou unseene, makes Thee see every thin
Take that turn'd-Hypocrite, whose outward sho
Is night, but inward like the day does glow.
Foul as a mist without, all fair within,
Vice would seem vice sometimes to cloak a si^
Thy dark companion will still be true,
And by denying light, will lighten you.
Then down with have to that infernal cell,
Where fur ous envy, and hid treason dwell.
^ell them Hell's suffrage has elected you
^roome of that chamber, where death lies below
and you must call it up as soon as day
^e christened, as the Sun whips night away.
^ooke then unto your charge, and see that he
^eepe not beyond his time, but stirring be;
^se all his breakefast may be spoiled, and He
^ill miss his morning's draft of Majesty.
^or you (proud factors for the Netherlands,
^gent for hell) must suffer Morpheus bands
^ tie your eyelids up: what if the birth
^iscarry, e're the night expires her breath.
^ stead of being Sainted, you shall be
^rol'd for purgatory, and there made free.
Then girt thy self for Rome, and charge thine eyes
^at they like watchful Argus keep the prize.
^ thou an Heirogliphick to the hare,
^eepe waking with thine eyes unclos'd, and bare.
^d when the day begins to open her eyes
^ke Nilus with the rising Sun arise.
that though thou sail through the Aegaean sea,
^st up and down with fear's perplexity?
^inke every one thou see is come to bring
^ee tidings of a kingdom to a King.
^ou seek'st a throne: who would not think it
^ swim-unto it through a sea of blood?
^ut heaven looks on, and Love is coming down good
^s milkie pavement with a furrowed frown
Justice sits in his eye (and yet it is blind:
It sees but sees not; smiles that it should find
Such secreasie in Treason) vengeance lies
Wrapped in the wrinckles round about his eyes.
Next, down the Regent walk, Astraea came
Following high Jove to Judge the world again.
Justice took wing before, and left the earth,
But seeing cruelty recover breath,
And grow to such a Gyant-stature, she
Returns bedeckt with greater Majesty.
The Cyclops armed with thunder round about,
Attends them both to drive those Traitors out.
Then tremble treachery; treason unmaske
Thy muffl'd face; make bare thy knees, and ask^
A pardon of the Gods: hold up thy hand,
Guilt does indite Thee, and for guilty stand.
Justice is come to visit once again,
Tenders her hand to kiss, if you will reclaim.
Or else (by that impartial soul, that guides
Her hand) the sword your soul and clay divides
No no: (Grand Enginere of cruelty)
Never startle at the news: what is this to thee?
Thou have an Heliotrophian-stone, which will
Put out the eyes of Justice, blind her still.
Send for Don Pluto's shield, that thou may see
Approaching justice, and she not see Thee.
Stare in the face of vengeance, and outdate
Those executioners, that comes to skare
Thee from thy charge: Laugh at their thunder-peal^
And let them hear the Echo often from hell.
^hy? you are prepared for this; can this be newse,
^hen thou such prodigies thy self do use?
^rden thy cruel heart, until it grow
and like a Sea-calfe to withstand the blow
^hotter vengeance: crown thy head with bays,
^ scare the Cyclops from thy hidden ways.
^ll scarce do: with thine own plot begin,
^w them from earth up into heaven agin.
^ou know thy charg; what Rome expects from Thee;
^w she has crammed thee for this cruelty?
^rite after her, and when the coppy's writ;
^t all that read, see you are her counterfeit.
^like her, but more cruel in thy wit,
^rite by the coppie, but still better it.
^mulus sucked a wolf, and was as she,
^ou suckst of Rome, then thou like Rome must be.
that Romulus did suck, to Rome he gave,
that Rome from Romulus, that thou must have.
^tvie them all, Rome, Romulus, and Her
^at nursed thy cruel grand progenitor.
IX Natalis expectata celebratio.
Upon the match of hunting appointed o^ the birth day, where they intended to
surprise th Lady Elizabeth, but in the mean time they themselves were
surpised.
Actaeon's gone to hunt, the day we see
Appointed is, and where the game shall be.
Actaeon as he hunted glanced a side,
And there Diana in a thicket spied.
Diana? No, it was a fairer she,
Her Nymphs it may be might Diana's be.
And yet me thinks Diana it should be
Rather Diana's true Divinity.
For as Actaeon spies that beauty there,
Actaeon's turned Actaeon like a Dear.
He that came forth to hunt is hunted straight,
They lie in wait for him, that lay in wait.
The yelping Echoes of the hound's are done,
The Hue and Cry after the Hunter's gone:
I see that Poets now can prophecy,
And in a parable tell what shall be.
I see that fables are not always lies,
Time often does a fable moralize.
X Abortivum Monstrum.
Upon the miscarrying of the birth.
Often have I known a child prove Parracide,
Dividing soul and clay as't did divide
^e Parent's gasping womb, through which her soul
^ent with the body of the child for tole
^ pay the infant's passage, and repreive it
^om the falling prison, if not quite relieve it.
^mtimes a child the Parent's name does smother,
^lling the mother before it had a mother,
^t have I heard a woman travailed so
^at in the sigh her sonle did come and go.
^ange travel! when her soul is feign to take
^ far a journey for her infants sake.
^hen thus the Parent mother must begin
^ leave the world to bring her infant in;
^ust dye, to teach her child how first to live,
^d being dead in it learn to revive*
^ if Pythagoras had taught her soul
^s transmigration, And it knew no Pole:
^o Paradise, but presently did pass,
^d in the infant clay informant was.
that? did you never see a womb deny
^e burden, but unload it presently.
^me proves it self an Hierogliphick well
^ speak what I have spoke, and yet shall spell
^e truth once over to you more; if yet
^our cloak't-capaciti's are hid from it.
^deede their fruitful shee-Pope tarried not,
^t brought forth soon, as if she had forgot
^ce to bespeake a midwife, or else thought
^ brew as well as she had baked for naught.
And yet see, how she is brought to bed in State
How many thousands her congratulate
Being at her labor met. I wonder she
Was brought to bed alone in company.
But now there is no such matter; Rome would feign
Once travail with a second birth again.
And see, the Pope grows big indeed: How now
What, has not Rome had breeding Popes enough
How did your Card'nalls miss the chair, that they
Have let another she-Pope slip away?
Oh it is no matter, they will take care that she
Be not delivered now too openly.
The heaven no more shall prove a Canopie
The Market place no more a chamber be.
When this shall be delivered Rome will bye
A privie-chamber for this secrecy.
(Had not Pope Ione bin brought to bed so patt,
She would have found a vault too for her Bratt.
But see, the birth day's come; Conduct your who^
Unto her privie-chamber, where there is store
Of Pluto's Pothecarie drugs that be
Provided for her safe delivirie.
What? Is she yet in labor? has she got
Her Predicessors faculty or not?
Had she an harder travail then your Ione?
What has God sent her tro? what two or one
I fear she was so overbig, that she
With Bratt miscarri'd in deliverie.
that was the matter Rome? did not (...)
^oe full the time she reckoned on before?
^as this her first conceived bratt, that she
before her time met her deliverie?
that? Is the child still borne? It Is so I see
^he birth's abortive, though the mother be.
Thus have I seen an hasty apple drop
^bortive from the tree before the crop.
^ut then 'twas rotten, blasted, withered
^lthough the mother-tree was no way dead.)
^he still-borne batt has thus miscarried,
^was not delivered though delivered.
The womb that casts before the time does still
Threaten the Infant, if not always kill.
^her's now the Infant which newborn had slain
^t once both England and her soverainge?
which had spitt living coals as he begann
^o live, and died as they had dyed than.
that means November's fifth day and the store
^rovided for the birth so long before?
^he purple whore this day expected she
^ould have been blessed with her deliverie.
^his day once come, the birth was nigh indeed;
^t the Bratt was still borne, we delivered.
The child, which dies before it lives, does still
Threaten the Mother Parent, if not kill.
XI. Parturientis periculum.
Upon the whores downfall in Blackfrye^ on their fifth day of November.
What makes us then sigh prayers for Babel's fall
As if that Babylon never fell at all?
Where Is Rome's Armado Spain so stood upon,
No Navy but a wandering Babylon?
Is not that fallen? True; how could it stand?
It was a Babel, but 'twas built of the sand.
The wind's they whisl'd to the wav's a charge,
The wav's brake out, and roaring speak at large
Their message to the Sands: the sands obey
After the cap'ring waves they dance away.
When the wind thus blew, when thus the water co^
There Babel built upon the sands, proved lame.
What makes us then sigh prayers for Babels fa^^
As if that Babylon never fell at all?
But on, what means November's Holy Day?
Her fifth days chiefest royalty, which may
Be calculated with the reddest letter,
To speak their bloody Stratagem the better*
Rome then began to build a Babel too,
She dig'd for a foundation so low;
And then had thought to pluck down
Out of her ruins to repair their own.
But as they built they were surpised, that they The
Were feign to leave their Babel half the way.
Thus not to rise is nothing but to fall,
Who Will say that Babylon never fell at all?
But once more read, and then perhaps you will see
Babel a third time fall a third degree.
Water did once o'retop Rom's Babel's so,
That though 'twere Babel it did Rome over throw
Babell first fell by water, next by fire,
Not that it burnt, but that it slack't it is ire.
Fire and water, though they disagree
Become now sister Elements we see
And join their forces to enact heavens will,
The one by fighting, the other standing still.
What fire and water does, that earth will do,
For earth did swallow falling Babell too.
November twice saw Babel fall on day,
This makes her fifth day twice an holy day.
And Eighty Eight told Babell by her fall,
That, that was then her Climacteticall.
And yet is Babell still? where does she stand?
She fell by water, and she fell by land.
Thrice Babylon we see has got a fall,
But oh that she were fallen once for all!
Babel's so high it is no wonder she,
Is so long falling to her last degree.
(...) it is well that she three stories fell;
(...) but the fourth, 'twill bring her down to hell*
Me thinks I see those knotted rafters there
Like carv'd-out Atlases, which well might bear
A burden greater then the Spheres could lend
An Aetna if it once began to bend.
Enough to keep up mountains, and support
From nodding even Babel's stoutest fort.
And yet when Babel's Bratt loaded with sin,
Comes on the Stage to act her part therein;
It makes the oak to yield, the Cedar bend
And roots up the foundation from their end.
That which before did make the prouder walls
Sprout up to heaven, tript up by heaven, it falls
Down level with the earth, and that which knew
No crookednes, bends like a twig of ewe
Sin makes the creatures groan, and bowing down
Lie in the dust for that, man will not bemoane.
Fie purblind Rome! what-made your bald-pate crew
Outface the face of heaven in such an hew?
Did heaven your fifth days treachery betray
That you might turn it to an Holy Day?
Went on your plot so well, that you must call
A day a part for a set Festival?
What ignorance has brawn'd your fottish souls
That when the arm of strength stretched out controules
With a proclaimed defiance what you did,
Poynting out that from heaven, which lay so hid?
^ou nod at the finger in a triumph straight,
And shout the conquest being lead captivate?
What made you sound the Trumpet so and call
Such a rifie-raffle to your Stygian hall?
Was it that you might beltch out a defy
In open. Court upon the Gods, 'cause they
Opening the casements of the spangl'd sphere
Looked down from heaven, and so discov'rd there
That mantled project, which you thought to keep
From them; no, no, The gods are not a sleep.
Or was it *cause that Albion baukt your ire
You Would curse us to a Purgatories fire?
Rather purchance you felt an hell within
Still glowing in each conscience, which the sin
Had newly kindled; and despair had blowd,
Till it to a consuming fire glowd.
And therefore you must thither poast to take
The refuge of your holy water-lake;
Sprinking your self with it, that you might tame
The fury of your self consuming flame.
Or wash your hands in it, and so might be
As innocent as Eden purity.
Fondness! as if that niter could cleanse sin,
Which may show fair without, when foul within.
Or else to bless your selves from after losses,
Crossing your selves to keep your selves from crosses
Nor this nor that: you thought that rabble crew
(Which in a Catholic bravado threw
There careless lives a way, that they might get
More Kingdoms to your Triple Coronet)
Were hanged to Saints, and that their unjust doom
Was nothing but to suffer Martyrdom.
And therefore you would be sure the fifth day too
Should be as well an Holy Day to you.
Thus winged with a fault'ring zeal thy fly
Unto their consecrated Friery
To Adore those new-made Saints, and gratulate
Their safe arrival at the Eliz'an state.
And now to them, wh' alive were dead in fears,
Being dead, they pray to rid them of their cares.
Then by a general council they agree
To celebrate their yearly memory,
Thus rob the year of days, that so they may
Give to each Saint his several Holy Day.
Or' cause they jointly suff'red as one member
They give an All-Saints-day unto November.
Fond zelots! you had better turn the page,
Convert your feasts into a pilgrimage.
Walk with repentant feet to foreign Isles
Their sigh your selves to sadder syllables:
And every desert, that you softly tread
With naked penance feet, let fall a Beade.
That so all passengers in after age
May count the paces of your pilgrimage.
^ut down your Saints, that by their merits found
^ new way up to heaven, above the ground.
those ropes will serve for cords to gird about
^our hairie loins to do your penance out?
^r else preserve them, till you steal away
^he Poles, on which their head's march in array,
^hen send them over, I Will warrant you they will be
^ choicer Relic for posterity.
^ut whisper softly (muse) a while, you will drive
those empty droanes out of their borrowed hive.
You Will cool their hot divotion, put them out
Before their Ceremony's brought about.
You Will turn the Priest besides the cushion straight,
Make him scratch memory from his balder pate.
Before h'hath found it, he will loose the text,
And scarce the first word out, forget the next.
You Will make the other from his palsy fist
Drop down his wafer God-Emmanualist.
And then some saucy dog will snatch it there,
And transubstantiate it, I know not where.
The third disturbed, will sprinckle unawares
The Holy Water on the sacred sta'res.
Stand back a while, keep off, vengeance will come
And summon them to silence e're they have done.
Look what that right hand speaks unto the wall,
See there imprinted fairly Babels fall.
The hand from heaven has charged the walls, the the
Withdraw their shoulders, and the walls obey.
Nay there stands Sampson, him whom they bega
With sulphur'd lungs to spitt their venom on,
And like the wanton Philistimes to play
Some pranks upon him on their holy day.
But he the truer- Sampson verified
What Typically the other Sampson did.
He touched the posts with a command, they fall
Striking all dead into one funeral.
Perchance they thought He was as blind as He,
But henceforth see, the eye of heaven can see.
A Video rideo smiled on you before,
He saw you then how durst you tempt him more
But when the Ass, that falls into the pit
Will not take heed, He Will fall agin it it.
Who bolder then blind Bayard, who more blin^
Then such a sottish, stockish, rabble kind
Where ignorance does murder zeal, a brat
As blind as their carved God, as cold as that?
But now by this I hope they have learnt to see
They strike at heaven, that aim at Majesty.
Proud Gygantaean race, leave off to move
In Martial fight the unconquerd Gods above.
What? will you get against Jove your seiges lay?
And still before the walls of heaven display
Hells blacker banners, raise the siege at length,
Retrait, never stay to try out strength with strength
You felt the weight of his immed'tate hand,
Who beck'ning only just at his command:
Destruct'on posted plumed with Fury's wing
And stayed not for a solemn summoning
By Gods own pursevants which commonly
Do use to be destruct'on's Mercury.
Fire or water, storms, or darts of thunder,
These use to be his messengers of wonder.
Sometimes he post's to batle in array,
Wrapped in a whirlewind, fur'ous of delay.
Sometimes he rides upon a prouder wave
And thence he does his stoutest foes outbrave.
Sometimes again he marches through a cloud
Girt with a scarf of lightning, and aloud
^end's forth his watchword to the Cyclop's there
Who rank's the squadron's out, and keeps the reere)
Bidding them with as loud a voice discharge
A volly of thunder, which may rend at large
The duskish mantle of the skies, and make
^. passage through the clouds, that wrath may take
^ freer Aim to shoot her vengeance right
and execute what he decreed has quite.
Now this, and this, now that is his messenger,
^et always God has not a harbinger.
^ometimes his hand does smite without a sword,
^ometimes without an hand, he sends his word,
Whereof the softest accent is enough
^o rend the world if once sent out in wrath.
Then see (proud Rome) thy seeded villainy,
That Majesty it self must deal with Thee.
Creatures those Proxie-searjants of the King,
He Will hardly trust at thy grand suffering.
To rid a way thy execution,
He Will be in presence there to see it done.
He might have rent the bowels of the earth,
That roaring Bor'as with his blustering breath,
And whirle wind-nostrills might rush forth, and cast
The Fabric level at one rendering blast.
He might have op't the treasury's of the air,
And sling'd his hayle down, to untop it bare.
Thus made a way for thicker storms to fall
And fling down death on each in every ball.
He might have bidden Neptune call a way
His white plumed hills to march in set array.
And with his Trident-mace command each wave
To swell unto a tide, and thus out-brave
The proudest top that peirc't above the rest,
And swept thy building too a way at last.
He might have caused a shower of brimston fall
And rained down flames of Gunpowder withal
Not to blow up it, but to burn down all.
But neither fire did fall, nor water rise
Nor wind, nor storm joined in this enterpize.
The word, that with a word did make all these
Without them, can do when, and what he please
When he intends to make his glory ride
Tryumphant, shining with a sacred pride:
He lay's a side the means with his left hand,
And with his right does, what he please, command;
Then tremble Babylon to see thy fall,
It Was God himself was in the reeling wall.
He set himself to do it: that all might see
It Was his right arm that gate the victory.
His presence made the trembling stones to shake
(...) a quivering ague, and the rafters quake,
Till all their unknit joints were loosed, the wal^
Before his sacred presence down did fall.
He charged the finewes of the house to shrink*
And bid the pinns unty, that all might sincke.
They hear his voice, and at his voice obey,
Thus thus the crumbling fabric pines away.
What makes us then sigh prayers for Babels fal^
As if that Babylon never fell at all?
(...) fell, and sure the fall was great; it fell
^s if it had prepared away to hell;
^aking a passage with it is weight, to send
that rabble rout unto their Styg'an end.
^ fell, and in the fall below'd so loud,
^s if two rocks, falling at once, did crowd,
^ushing each others side, and strove which shall
^ccho the neighboring hills the louder call.
(...) fell, and struck so, it could not more harm
^ad it been hurled from a Cyclop's arm.
It fell but holloo'd out, so loud in the fall,
As if it would the dead, it killed, recall.
It fell; stop there! Lett's hear a while what Foam year
Can say unto this second Martyrdom.
Should they but pilfer out more days from the
To cannonize for those that suffered there
They must create new Alma nacks, and make
Their next year longer for their Martyr's sake.
Or else join two Saints to make up one day
A sunkin, and a gimkin Holy Day.
Now plodding Rome, what have your pie-ball trick^
Gendred in plotting against the Heretic kes.
Go, go, divide the spoil that is come in,
We Will cast up ours, and let them laugh that wi^
You thought to make us rise, by rising fall;
You fell at once, but never rise at all.
If we had fell, by falling we had rise
Hell's sometimes the high-way-roade to bliss.
Had you then rise, yet rising you had fell,
Heaven is sometimes the broadest way to hell.
You fell, we stand, heaven downward striks we s^
And hell aims upwards; what is the mystery?
Is Rome's America placed in the Air,
Their new found Purgatory founded there?
That Pluto plot's such stratagems to guard
The English Catholics up thither-ward.
It Is so I see; their Purgatory's there;
I thought it was a Castle in the air.
The Corollary.
STrange birth! the Pope he is the Holy Father,
The Earth the Mother is, the Master rather.
Pluto the Grandsire, and the Deputyes
Not two or four, but all the infernal fryes
Of Monk's, and Iesuit's, Priests, Mass Priests too
Intended are as witnesses unto
This Afric birth; would you the midwife yet?
Faux was appointed to deliver it,
It was begot in Hell, conceived in Rome,
And should have been delivered here at home.
But England would not lend that life, which fell
To be a Mongrell betwixt Rome and and Hell.
NOVEMBRIS. MONSTRVM.

OR The Historical narration of the damnable Pouder-Treason.

WITH The days Is for England's Miraculous deliverance.

PARS IIa.

London, Printed by Frances Leach.

1641.

To the Iuditious Reader.
NOt biting Satyr, nor an honey style
Dropped only from a Parasite I will.
A bitter sweet is good, wormwood in wine
Is to a Poet the best Hypocreene.
Thou art the Man uuto the man of Sin
Is the Musit'ans hitting the right string.
Here Is nothing whipped and stripped but Babels Bratt,
Which long ago has been condemned to that.
Thence all not bitter sweet, nor sweetness bitter
If you find both, you will find both together,
And so both mingled, both together shall,
Prove to bad stomachs a good Cordial.
Be but judicious in thy censure then,
And if thou relish gall dropped from the pen,
Conclude it is not honey, nor should be:
Or that thou bring a sick taste with Thee.
NOVEMBRJS MONSTRVM.
THus have I seen Ambition's Min'on soar
To teach the towering Mount of cobwed-fame,
Counting it Piety, t'imbrace in goare
His blood-renc't hands, so He may get a name.
Though He like Tantalus both live and dye:
Catch at the Apple, that does most Him fly.
2
Thus that proud Impe, that thought to ware his glory*
Before the fire of Diana's shrine,
And make his name blaze forth in his own story*
Brighter then did the glowing Temple shine,
Must needs attempt that sacrilege to have
His name and Him joynt-tenants of one grave.
3
Thus have I known a Monk and Friars pride
Iustle for the wall of cruelty, and see
Which of them should prove better Regicide,
That they for Saints may canonized be.
Whilst he that thinks to blazon forth their glory,
Blots out their names in setting out their story
4
He that does look, from honor's hands to have
The Laurel wreath, to crown his works withal^
Must with the hands of virtue it receive
Virtue gives scutch'ons to a funeral.
Else he, that would be heir of Fame, shall be
Excecutor of naught, but Infamy.
5
If Icarus do strive with borrowed wings
To reach the Sun, and graple with his bride,
You Will see how soon his false Ambition flyngs
Him down, and drownes his honor in the tide
He that makes wings to fly to fame, shall see
Fame will be ready to take wing and flee.
6
What did proud Phaeton's ambitious mind
(In coveting his Father's reins to guide)
Provide him for a Trophye, did he find
That was the rode, where Fame and glory ride?
No, Fame will never Ambition's yoake-mate b^
Hell must lend fire to light his infamy.
7
Then think no more (Proud Rome) of building stayres
That those may seal to heaven, and Sainted be,
Who were chief agents for thy hell-affaires,
In plotting treason, and hid Tyranny.
Thou can not raise a Babell half so high:
Never think to top those walls, or come so nigh
8
But if thou will needs have thy factors ride
Full mounted on the Pegasus of Fame,
We Will help them up, a Pegasus provide,
But winged with infamy, and plumed with shame.
Black deeds are Cronocled that they may be
Enrol'd for hatred, not for memory.
9
Then History fetch thy brazen pen, and send
For incke from blacker Acharon, that I
May (guided by thy hand) in brass commend
Rom's Monster-Bratt to all posterity.
That sager Time, may point out Rome to see,
And make her blush, at her own progeny.
10
Mauricius,
That dreaming Emperor, whose fancy proved
Truer then Phocas did, that did succeed,
Thought in his sleep he slept, and death was moved
By the murderous hands of Phocas to proceed.
Deames prove not always night-mayres, counterfie
Murderes awake, when we least dream of it.
11
This Phocas drank ambition's Mercury,
Which kindled such a fire within his breast,
Nothing would quench his thirst, but Dignity,
Mauricius must die, and His wife and his Daughters.
all the rest.
Thus waded through his blood unto his throne
This pro^'d a dream to him: the other none.
12
Once mounted to the high imperial seat
Brim-full of Honor, honor must run over,
Let but the Imposture Pope his consc'ence cheat^
With a full pardon, and quit murder's score
Phocas will open a sluice, from which shall flee
Supremacy to swell the Bishops See.
13
'Twas he, was Rom's grand Patron, and fir^
The Triple Crown to the Papal dignity,
And that Rome might as horrid treasons have gav
He left his murders for a legacy.
A cruel Monster must that honor be,
That Is got of murder, and full Tyranie.
14
Rome proves his will, and then makes have to tak^
A full possession, next he seeks to find
Some cruel skulking Jesuit to make
Him treasurer of what was left behind:
Where wars do naught, there treason mu^ begin
15
So have I seen a scattered army lie
(The conqu'rer's strength soon conquered by slight
And yet the next day rise with victory,
Getting by forging, what they lost by flight.
Our foe may teach us how to win the prize
By falling often times we learn to rise.
16
The Jesuit makes much of what h'hath got,
Phocas his lcgacy shall not be spent,
And yet he will be prodigal; but not
Spend on the Principle, *it is his intent
To trade with Hell, and put it out to use,
That, which the Feinds return, shall feed abuse.
17
And well he has improved what Phocas left:
For envy, Malice full inveterate;
For murder, Murders, mixed with skulking theft:
For Regicide, both King and kingdom's Fate:
To kill a king is petty treason, fit
For lay-murder, not a Jesuit.
18
Those poled Pates have quite impov'rish't hell,
And mate the Duke of darkness morgage all
His hidden plots to them, treason shall dwell
No more within Don Pluto's Stygian Hall,
All Is fell to them, they will turn the Feinds out quite,
And Hell shall be their own before the night.
19
With jaws as wide, as the vast arch of heaven
They gape for Kingdoms, royal blood's their draft
With treason's blacker feet they are headlong driven
Murder is counted but on handy craft.
See all in this one plot, which though but one
Has all in it, the other all are none.
1
WHen blessed Eliza swai'd proud England*s rod
And ballanc't in her hands the golden ball:
Peace sat by her, laid down her head to nod
Within her Princely lap, and there did fall.
Into a slumbring sweet-security.
Peace flies not Scepters, but dread Tyranny
2
This quiet Empress hardly could enjoy
The sweetness of that royal maiden bed.
But something would her present rest annoy,
And with a surly joy, divorce her Head.
Or treason's rage at home, or warr's abroad,
Kings must not always look for peace abode
3
But always as Queene-Peace ^awak't, she turned
Lending a glance to blessed Eliza still,
And smiling on her Angell-face, she burned,
And blushed, as if she longed to speak her will.
But plucked an Olive branch to give her still,
And so laid down her head to sleep her fil^
4
Then, then it was, that time looked young agin,
Wiping his hoary foretop from his eyes
He looked, and thought the golden age had bin,
And deeming of himself in paradise,
Began to count his age, and scarce believed
(Seeing Eliza) he so long had lived.
5
The earth was watered with a milder dew,
Which peace did sprinkle from her fruitful hand,
That Tellus in her sparkling coat did show,
As if sh'had on, that couler'd swaddling band,
Which wrapped her infancy with var'ous wreaths
Like those which lovely May, for Phyllis weaves
6
The plough-men earlyer then the morn, did rise
Whistling Apollo's steeds to watering,
Whilst with their cheerful notes, they did devise
How to divide the day with quavering,
Thus play themselves to work, and then divide
The earth to furrows, as the plough did glide.
7
They put Dame nature to the sword, and made
Her open wide her womb, to lodge the grain,
The plow never knew the share, the earth no spade
But Mars did make away for Ceres train.
New plowed with swords, they beat their armor out
For horseshoes, or to plate their wheels about
8
Neglected helmets then were cast away,
The spideres took them for their shops to weave
Their thinner-softer, Taffety, where they
Kept a continual working-day with leave,
And made them monuments, that they mightly
There, softly wrapped in their own destiny.
9
The hoarser throats of Cannons bellowed forth
Not for Bellona's sake to summon war,
But when soever they thund'red, 'twas the worth
Of some great triumph to be blowed far:
And that about the world, did give the fire,
Or celebrate Eliza's crowned desire.
10
The Taratant'ring sound was never heard,
Which when the horses e're once soopeth up,
It makes them mad for battle, and unscar'd
He runs at push of Pike, the flame does fup
Into his fiery nostrills, till it come
Out of his mouth like to a seathing foame.
11
The drum unbrac't lay speechless all the while
The flute had got a cold in the rusty throat:
Instead of these we heard the Philomele
Sing to the Music of the Lute her note.
Peace lay a sleep under her Olive tree,
Charmed with the winged Quier's Lullaby.
12
Devotion in her whiter robe, more white
Then the unborne Snow within her region,
Go's to the Altar with a soul more bright
Then the spotless spotted Bride of heaven, the moon
And there with holy-hands, and washed eyes
Offers her undisturbed sacrifice.
13
^straea keep her state; both eyes do see
and yet they both are blind: her ears both deaf
and yet both open too: she keeps a Key
^o lock out bribes, and open for relief
'Twas she that lasht Erynnis out and then
Came peace and calmed the troubled earth again
14
^ut night does close the eyes of dying day;
^ storm does always follow fairest weather
(...) never saw Proud Cynthia's array
^imselfe in glory for a Month together,
But sometimes mourn, weep in his Southern weeds
And glister sometimes in his Eastern beads.
15
^s constant is a Kingdom's fading state:
^ow Peace does shine on it from open Sphere:
and then a Counter-warre does change his fate
^rawing on it a gloomy cloud of Fear.
Fortune's Queen regent of all things below:
And Kingdoms, like the Moon, do ebb, and flow*
16
^once Eliza shine so bright that she
^n Earth is like the Sun in his own sphere,
^arting forth Glory from her Majesty,
enough to make the lesser Princes bleere;
The world will gather clouds to blind her too,
Least earth in glory should the heaven outgrow.
17
Envy, which cannot endure aequality
Never looks at parallels, she aims higher.
An Eagle scorns to make her game a fly:
Let the bramble take acquaintance with the bry
It Is the tall Ivy, that grows above the rest,
Is shaken with the wind, and most oppressed,
18
Malice still lays her seige against that tower,
Where virtue keeps the door, honor the ho^
One of them is not worth her mustred power.
A Cat does scorn to play with a dead mouse.
It Is cowardice to stick one on the grou^
Who falls to earth, can be no lower found*
19
Spain, envy's mother, Malice nurserie,
Squinting with both those eyes at her, that m^
This stripling I Will in strength the world outvie,
Building a walking wall, and fence to shade.
This little vine from foreign foemen's stren^
Summons her forces, and invades at length.
20
Have not you seen the wood's green God de^
Like a stout Amazon begirt with bays,
Marshalling all her troops of Trees to withstan^ sta^
The insurrect'on of the wind, that plays
With them, and makes them seem to march wi^
Whilst others seem to rise, and others fall.
21
^he places in the front the lofty Pine,
^he sturdy Cedar, with the Pine does go,
and then she calls the oak in his ball crine:
^hese march a breast to withstand the strongest
And keep out Aeolus from darting fear
At the young Artillery, which march in the rear. blow
22
^st thus Spain's Coronell did march away
before that wandering wood, which danced o'th
^s if that Orpheus had bin there to play,
and lead them, with his music, captive slaves. waves,
The little ships about the great, did dance,
As maids of May, about the May Pole prance.
23
^ollicy joins, with virtue, hands to help,
^he greater vessel rides before the less,
^hey set the Lion for to guard the whelpe,
^hat's couchant, whilst the other rampant is*
But all together seemed so vaft, we thought
Neptune had in his fist, an Island caught.
24
^he Captain of each ship, Ambition:
^he Master, Pride: Envy, the Gunner was*
^he Pilot, Ignorance her blinder son:
^he Sailers, pressed from Charon's keele, did pass,
Over his ferry, and arrived at Spain,
The Feinds were glad such pay to entertain.
25
Their sails did swell in hope of victory,
That made them bring so much of warehouse roo^
As if they meant the Island should not lie;
But they would ship it over into Rome.
They rid so proudly all, as if they all
Were of the narrow Seas, joint Admi rall.
26
They looked, when Neptune would give up his ma
And make them primate-lords of albion's court
They make no friends unto Bellona's pace
For war munition, but to Pluto's host,
They send for scorpion-whips, as if they mea
To whip us from our Island Tenement.
27
But mountains do often times bring forth a mou^
High towers weakly built the sooner dy^:
A Castle in the air is not an house,
Conquest in Arras is no victoy.
Bold confidence will never prove armor stro^
Who stands upon his own legs, stands not lo^
28
Heaven from the ships discry'd each towering m^
And feared they went Jove's Palace to invade:
For as the sailers climbed the ropes with have,
They seem*d to sail heaven's cristall walls, and man
A passage through the clouds to enter there,
And of her fpark'ling Diadems rob the sphere
29
and now the Gods began to count the war
their own, and joined their forces with us too*
^eav'n shootes a warning pen to end the jarre,
^r else to tell them their a common foe.
Then mustered up the sea*s, and pressed the wind
To join in battle; heaven and earth combind.
30
Aeolus with a gast break's open his den,
and ragiug sailly'd forth to graspe each wave,
^hen with his wider throat called Neptune's men
from calm security, and made them rave.
The winds over take winged ambition's flight,
Their I ride, a Prouder wave did swallow quit.
31
^ome hang on Neptune, fawning on his ceck,
^oping to bribe wit'h prayers their enemy,
He straight receives them with a foaming check,
Yet with his full embraces makes them dye.
Some drown'ed in drinking seas never see the land
Some feel the land, but sinck in drunken sands
32
Others before they are drowned are drowned in
And therefore fly to harder rocks for pity,
The rocks do borrow brine to drop down tears fears
That they may mourn for them, but lends no pity.
Those, that enjoyed the mercies of the seas,
Are cast away upon the rocky lays.
33
Some fly, and ferry over the news to Spain,
Some yield, as glad to veiw our conquering Isl^
Though they dye Captives here in living pain ^
Some sharke away by some preventing wile,
But all being conquered all together yield
To wind or war, to rocks or England's sheil
34
Have you not seen how in the Olympic game,
After the Conqueror has won the prize;
The people raise the dust, to choke up fame:
Unless she tell the world his enterprise.
One plucks from Daphnes head a lock of bay
Another tunes his victory in lays.
35
So loved Eliza came from Tillbury
Attended with her conquering loyal train,
Led by the Gods, who did descend the sky
To lead her forth, and bring her back again;
That tongue be silenced, which cannot keep
Her memory from an Endineion's sleep.
36
Glad peace revived, and decked with the spoil,
That came from Spain's Armado, she did stand
At London's prouder gates, and with a smile
Welcomed Eliza home, then kissed her hand,
Who greiv'd, that peace had hurt her waiting eye^
Sat down, that she might rest upon her thighe^
37
^e slept, and for her former watchings took
^e license of a longer granted sleep;
^iza reckning her, would often look
^on her face, and still for joy did weep.
^rinces love peace, and should their combats measure
^o keep their own, not get a foreign treasure
38
^ace slept, but as she slept did often start,
^s if some dream mudded her fancy still,
and in her sleep, she took Eliza's part,
^s if she had foreseen approaching ill
March toward her, and then within hersleeep
She Would prate Eliza's name, and closer creep.
39
^t slept she, 'till amazement made her rise,
^hen in her sleep she wak't, till Morpheus took
^r heavy shackles from her leaden eyes,
^rst op't her sluice of tears, and then awoke.
Eliza melting ask't what feinds oppressed
Her start*ing fancy, scared her from her rest.
40
^his Empress with a milder voice
^om Philomele, when she did prostrate lie, then came
before the bryer ravished with the same)
^eplyed thus: (Heroic Royalty)
I dreamt, and thought I saw Rom's Synod set
In a close celler, full as dark as jett.
41
There sat sad envy with thin-chapt despair,
Dull Ignorance, with superstition,
And nexr Erynnis with disheav'led hair
Like to uncombed Snakes: Devotion
The incestuous brood of blinder zeal, wa^ ther^
Which turned the Synod like the wandering
42
Me thought I heard their council deep as Hell sphere
They did decree to act on hidden sage,
Where treason Prolouge was, and scene as wel^
And thus make England's Throne go equipage.
With lower earth, and yet no eye should kno^
The hand that struck, nor yet the hidden blow
43
I saw the Feind, that drew the Tragic plot
With buried eyes, Lent-cheeks, in Less'us plight
I knew not what he was, a man or not,
But by his ball-pate seemed a Jesuit.
Hell gave a Plaudit to the Tragaedy,
Which clapped me from my sleep security.
44
But Innocence straight came swing'd from Jove,
And bid Eliza shake off drooping fear:
The Gods of late did in their armor move
Fighting for her, and will they now forbear:
No, no, the Dove shall fly with careless wing
And never fear the Co^hawkes to wreing.
45
Then Poast from heaven Iov's chiefest Herald came
Mounted on Plumes plucked from a Cherubin:
His coat was azure, spangled with the train
Of Vesper's glittering-crue: which late was seen
About Orion, for he snatched it thence,
As he came down from Lov's high excellence.
46
Passing through Heavens rich wardrobe in his flight,
Where stars enameled round with blew appear
He took a longer robe more bright then light,
But as he past the purer fiery Sphere,
Dipped in the Element his robe, did seem
Like flaming Phabus yellow Saphton beam.
47
As he came downward in his journey lower
He overtooke the gloomy host, that shrouds
Heavens face in darkness: Phoebus sent before
His beams to mix a Rainebow in those clouds,
That he might take it for a scarf, and tie
About his arm, in sign of Victory.
48
Next as he cut the lower Region,
His wings struck Music in the airy Sphere,
^hen all the feathered Queristers began
and strove, to raise a consort with him there,
Thus played heavens herald with their musiek down
Directing him the way to Albion's Crown.
49
Arrived at length with loyal feet, he goes
(Faith and good ^speede are wings for Mercury)
Unto Eliza's Court, there to disclose
His whole Embassage from Iov's Majesty.
Eliza drank the news: appoynts a day
To hear, what Iav's Ambassador shall say.
50
And now her busy soul is full possessed,
Wrapped in the deepest robes of richest glory,
She 'dornes her self, against Jove prooves a gues
That with a real acted fuller story
Of brighter Majesty, she might receive
Old Atlas Nephew, and more luster give.
51
Thus have I seen the lovely Nymphs trip 'ore
The Mountains from Pactolus sand,
Laden with all the treasure they there store,
All following Hymen at his first command.
Then round about the lovely bride they g^
To crown hor, with a wedding Coronet:
52
One does unfold her richer lap, a shop,
Where Coral, Crystal, Amber, Rubye shine,
Another takes them from her Indy-lap,
And does them into cunning bracelets Coin,
Placing them with such art to such a twist
That evry one lends glory to the rest.
53
One curles her tresses with rich Diadems,
Another sends a pendent to her ears,
Her neck, one binds with a lace of Gemmes,
A fourth to deck her robes the glittering Spheres
But on Diana's careful breast there be
An Onyx, friend to purer Chastity.
54
Thus Amphetrite met her bridegroom going
Decked with those Diadems fond Neptune sent
As tokens to her; when He went a woing:
Thus girt with luster, Goddess Juno went,
When first she came in all her wedding state
With open lap high Jove to recreate.
55
But brave Eliza's glory did not shine
^om her own Sphere alone, she round about
^as circled with a luster more divine,
^hen that of Sols, which does the Stars put out.
Thus Cynthia have I seen Queene-Regent ride
Whilst all her court of stars shine by his side.
56
^^e sister Graces were her virgin-maides
^ honor, clad with full variety,
^ee did for them with chaste Diana trade
^ho spunne a thread of flaxen purity.
Then wove it into roules more white then white*
And broyder'd them, about with various light.
(...) 89
Thinks earth, I fear her troops by land* or sea
Thinks Heaven tho Cyclops battle I do fear?
My forces are as strong as both can be,
I care not for those claps, that mock the air.
Iov's thunder will but drown our bellowing noi^
His flashings will bnt light our dark'ned joye^
90
You, you are our beloved; we repose
Great confidence in Rome: and with full joy
We Will lay our Scepters at your fee^, depose
And pawn our Kingdoms for you to annoy
Those that disturb your peace: It Is you defen^
Our right, and we will ours to you intend.
91
Thus said (Dear Empress, dearer to the Gods
Then Rome to bell) their Legate sallyed forth,
And riding with the wind, did get the ods,
He poasted on so fast to tell the worth
Of his Embassage to his Lord from hell,
And greet his Highness from the infernal c^
92
Gladness now plumps their veins, their bones are fraugh
With marrow's fatness: Bacchus runs so free
He with his staggering feet light Venus caugh
The stews keept open house: and patents flee
With a new license from the Pop's broad-sea
To admit all, to that she commonweal.
93
Have you not heard how proud Darius steed,
With open neighings did his Lord proclaim
King regent, just as if he meant indeed
To show in his new kind of laughing strain
How glad he was that day to celebrate
Which chose him Iennet for his riders state.
94
^hen at the horses suffrage all the rest
With shouting give their voices to the King,
As if they would join triumph with the beast
To guil'd the day with making up the thing
One throws into the air his frolic cap,
That it may dally in her wanton lap.
95
Another from his purse dilated wide
As his free heart, let us fly a mint of gold
that the poor commons there, may see him ride
^ull mounted on his horse in printed mold.
Whilst every cottage brings it is fagget mite
To eake the day with a lent bonfiers light.
96
^ust thus the Roman crew
^ere pricked up with the Message Hell returned after their ears
from their God Pluto's darker-clouded spheres)
^ith joy begun to rage with envy burned.
Their hearts run over their hogs head found a vent,
^ith brimfil'd hearts, and full cups not content.
97
Now their exchange is tossed with no discourse,
Bur who shall be installed Monarch here,
Who Prince of Wales, and who in royal cour^
Shall orderly succeed each royal Peer?
What Jesuit or Bellarmine shall be
In Canterburies Arch-ship, or York See.
98
With what a couching plott, and hidden bate
They Would catch the Realm: nay England is their own^
To their Infernal King it is confiscate
They Would only come to take possession,
Not ^or to fight or conquer) and they will bring
Nothing but Peter's Keys to make them King
99
But is Jove deaf, because he has no care,
Or blind because no eye to see withal.
The waking eye, to which all things appear;
The open ear, in which each thing does fall,
Saw what he heard, and heard what he did s^
The eye, and ear in God's his Diery.
100
Seeing what envy had conceived in Rome,
Hearing what treason whispered in the dark,
The God into their councels-chamber come
Zealous to fence this swimming Island bark,
Opening the book of life, they cast up the
Eliza's virtues Chronocl'd in heaven.
101
and thus Conclude: what shall Eliza be
^o loyal to the Gods, so true to men,
^aith's shield in making Faith her shield, shall we
^rowne her to stand and fight for truth, and then
Suffer Rebellion from our common foes
To Snatch both Crown from her, and truth depose?
102
^o, no, Eliza is to us more dear:
^ur truth's as dear to her: we will defend
^he Faith's defender from all foreign fear
^et us to her a love-ambassage send.
Go Mercury, said they, to Albion's Throne
Unfold Heaven's secrets unto her alone.
103
and now (dread Queen) know thus much, all was true
that fell from heaven in that prophetiek dream,
which grace unfolded in his sleep to you,
^he boiling fury of your foes did steeme
Into a fog, and all the heaven's over spread,
But by Jove's brighter shine it is scattered.
104
^he Gods have lent you as their choicest gemme
^om heavens rich cabanet to England*s front,
that you might shine within that Diadem,
and quite blind Envy as she looks apon't.
Spain Sees, and covers, fame would steal it thence
That England's faith might loose her reverence.
105
But at Jove's councell-table it is decreed,
The world no longer shall this gemme retain,
'Twas only taken from the richer breed
To show the world and put it up again.
Jewels of richer prize are not long worn;
Virtues unto more crowns then one is borne
106
Kings have their change of robes: Eliza shall
Have change of crowns, and royal Scepters to
If earth will not suffer her to shine at all
In her unborrowed brightness here below,
The Gods will place her as a fixed star
Shooting forth glory from a richer sphere.
107
No (blessed Eliza) Rome shall not circumvent
With buried treason or coucht policy
Thy Majesty or state at Parliament;
The Gods decree Eliza first shall dye
They all are set in Parliament above,
Unto the upper honse thou must remove.
108
At their late Synod thou were chose to be
With the joint sufrage of that royal house
One of Jove's privy-councellers, that he
His royal secrets might to. The disclose,
Heaven has prepared a crown, that thou man reign
Among the Gods to judge both Rome and Spa^^
109
^his measured out the length of heaven's decree;
^his was Jove's A^iassye in full gommission.
^ humble pride (...) the Queen as she
^eceiv'd the news (...) renewed condition,
And straight shee*s sick of love, sick to enjoy
Her chang, her crown, her all, then dye for joy.
110
^ut first before death did divorce her soul.
^r heaven espouse it to another bridegroom.
^s peace did by the lovesick bed condole
^er dying Patron in the fainting Room;
^ Eliza turning but her eye (her eye
Through which death looked out with majesty.)
111
^id there espy her ancient servant peace,
about to dye for grief, as if she would feign
^oe with Eliza to the grave, de^case
^liza dead, and with her still remain.
She saw her, and then said I must leave thee
Unto my kingdom as a legacy*
112
^ake from my fainting head this fading Crown
That I may lay mine honor in the dust)
^hen from thy facred hand present renown
unto our dearest James, whilst you entrust
His honored temples with our Diadem,
And with thy presence still attend on him.
113
With this Eliza ended: For her soul
(As if it meant to go along with peace)
Departed flying to the highesti Pole
Translated to a crown of ^liffe, and case
Death opened wide a gate of life to her
That she through Death might escape both dea^ and fear
114
Have not you seen a palsy fear possess
The guilty Traitor, as he dying stands
In expectation of a Death that guess
Made over to him from the Judges hands,
Fear making suite to death, that stands by
Death bring a Pardon, that he may not die.
115
Just thus when Rome and Spain rid circvitejud
Of lise and Death on Englands Sovereign,
Both bribed to falsehood by a festred grudge
She sentenced was to dye, but all in vain
Jove sends his privy seal the death, and he
Brings her a parden, that she may not dye.
116
She dies; yet dies not, dying does escape
Thy tyranny, which hovering over did move
Upon death's borrowed wings, to make a rape
With fastened tallys on this virgin dove.
Jove takes Her from his Crown, that so her Crow^
May not be took from her, e're she go down
117
and now Eliza's dead; who did bequeath
^ir virtues as a royal shrine to Crown
^uceeding James with a true noble wreath,
^ommending peace to him as Guardion.
All shined in him with so full a bliss,
As if her soul had been espoused to his
118
and these had bin her portion: Can you tell
What was full Regent in her royal breast,
Which was not in our Solomon as well
Say what in her, and that in him was best,
As if that nature kept her mol'd to fash
Him after her in each proportion.
119
and so this Peer did reign, that had not she
^rst swayd the Scepter with so full a grace
Thad bin a sin to think that sex could be
^o Masculine to keep him equal p^ce
But Jove did disinherit all their Kin
To make this woman, and this Masculine.
112
^haebus can do no more then call the day,
and Phebe less, she can but guild the night,
^or he can lend the night an helping ray,
^or She put out to use a minut's light.
Night gives to day, and day to night the way
But these maintained still a constant day.
121
As soon as blessed Eliza did go down.
James rise with glory on our Hemi-spheare.
Thus Scepters yield to Scepters, crown to crow^
In constancy is always constant here
Kingdoms like Ianus have a double face;
They look on both sides with an equal grac
122
Have you not seen the ray enous Lion run
With roaring stomach for to seek a prey,
Snuffling the until'd forest once begun
With hunger-biting nose to find the way
Rending the air now, with a thundering throa^
Then bounding over the Hills, bequeath's a no^
123
Of terror to the trembling vallie by,
Where innocence shroud's it self for fear
Among the little lambs, that there do lie
And frightened often do their food forbear,
Then when in hot pur suite sh'hath lost the da
She follows night more eager for a prey.
124
Thus, thus the Lion of the infernal tribe
Out run Eliza's days in hot careere,
Thinking his ya wning stomach thus to bribe
By making her a prey; and feign would tare
Her self and throane in sunder, till they be
Made Morsells for his whelpish pedigree.
125
and then once loosing his desired prey,
^is cheated stomach barks with hotter rage:
^ow nothing will go down, but Majesty
^e rounds the Island to renew his age
With some well married prey, at length he saw
Another game provided for his paw.
126
^he buried Embers of that ash-heapt treason,
Which lay like quenched coals in sawdust hid,
^ome rakes up with the hand of blinded reason
and blows them with false zeal, until they breed
With hatching heat a treason, which may be
A plot-forme unto all co^nspiracy.
127
What though proud England lately lost her head
The crown has luster still: the right hand's gone,
But where is the Scepter though? Eliza's dead,
But James is from her Phaenix-ashes sprung
Stars rise and fall; the clouds are low and high
Princes decease, but kingdoms never dye,
128
The crown is placed on a sager Head
Shining in golden Fleece: From thence will spring
More rays of wisdom: deep fetched councel's breed
And nimble policy where reigns a King.
A stronger arm the Scepter now does sway,
A woman's but a warrier for a day
129
Yet stout Eliza like a Giant rose
And with an heart hoopt in, with valor stoo^
At Tillburie our forces to appose
And scattered like the wind the Armade wood
But now we meet both strength and wisedom^ doo^
Policy may, but both must overcome.
130
If once their Queen was such a whip to Spain tam
Their King will be a Scorpion: was she
Rom's fear? he will make Hell shake and Pluto
Strength must not guide the stern, but Policy
Close wrapped in treasons must sit there, if w^
Or hope to get, or get the victory.
131
And now that treason, which did seem to sleep
And slept, Eliza sleeping; they awake.
The Goaler-Iesuite, which her did keep
Close Prisoner in his dungeon, now must take
The fetters from her, let her loose, that she
May range about, and sit on Majesty.
132
Thus have I seen foul guilt, and sad despair
Making the Malefactor guilty cry,
And after they condemned Him to fear
Forced the Judge to sentence him to dye,
And yet at length has sue'd his pardon too,
Which granted, he more villainous does gro^
133
What though the treason slept, the Traitors still
^ept scouting eyes, and watchful heads from fleep:
^asting so long from villainy, they will
^reake up their Lent, a cruel Easter keep.
And murder innocence, that they may
Really cellebrate that Holy Day,
134
When slight and strength do in a Duel fight,
^rength seems the conqueror, flight fears that day
^o takes her heels, and with a Parthian flight,
^ee kills her foe by running thus away;
So have I seen a Ram retreat, that he
With stronger horns may butt his enemy,
135
^he aged hoary Winter now had seen
^ummer thrice wrapped in her winding sheets,
^hree races Phoebus with his steedes did win
^ut running the fierce Lion at three sweats,
That he was feign to get the crab to pace
His horses back, as he came from the race.
136
and all this while hid treason buried lay,
and never knew a resurrection;
^t length Rome thinks to call a judgment day
and summon James to know his censured doom.
A Spanish twigg shall strike the Poppys head.
The royal seed be sown in Romish bed.
137
The Heroic top-bow of that noble stem
Shall wither at the root, the branches fall.
The twiggs stripped off, shall grafted be on them
That grow in Rome, till fruit sprout forth like g^
Fed from the sop that fats the Iesl^ite
Forgetting all the former nurture quite.
138
They Will reign over them that reign or not at a^
They Will have more crown's then one or else have no^
Lets tripling trees for them or rise or fall;
They Will aim at Cedars or let all alone
They weigh not London's mace, that pretty staff
They Will write at once all Englands Epitaph.
139
At length the Gates of Darkness open wide
Through which Hell's Ministers do sally out
Though night-shades, sainted Devils, very pri^
Those putrid poasts with false zeal gilt about,
With them their arch-ringleeder Jesuit,
Who vows allegiance to the Prince of migh
^40
He like his predicessor Judas well
Comes compas't round with his riffe-raf^e rout,
The excrement of earth, the scumme of Hell;
Who er'e has brawny hands, hearts steeled abo^
For rapes, for murders, and new cruelty
Are his assistants in this villainy.
1^1
^n Euglish seed, which with rebellious lungs
^pit venom in their mothers face, and then
^un over to Rome, and their bound heart and tongues
^o serve Aprentiship, sent over again:
At home they toil in journey work for Spain,
^'entrap both mother, and her Sovereign.
142
^his done, He calls them round about to unclose
His sealed heart: But first he makes them swear
That none shall prove a comment to their foes
On this obscurer text: That all should fear
The unmanlike forfet of fidelity
If they intend to feed on Majesty.
143
Before he does unlock his mind, he will first
^ast bolt it too, and bar it with an oath:
^reason's companions are guilt, Fear, mistrust:
^ telling it to tell it he is loath:
And yet he will tell it blabbing guilt alone
first fears himself, then her companion
144
^e brings the book of life that they may seal
^eaths warrant with it: they straight with a kiss
^o close both heart and lips, that neither tell
^he secreacy, that now delivered is
Thus making Heaven subscribe to Hell in sin,
And seal the bond that they are all bound in
145
After wi^h sacrilegious hands he steels
The Priests blood wine, and gives the Laitye;
They kiss the cup, and with a kiss each seals
His closest heart to keep this secrecy
Thus life to Death just transubstantiating
Whilst they in one cup life and death suck i^
146
And now they stand pressed vassells at the nod
Of Pluto to exact what e're he will,
He must serve Hell, that will not serve his God;
One servant cannot have two masters still
Their Captain Jesuit conducts the way,
They lead by that false fire go astray.
147
Thus, thus those Hell combined Feinds do me
To satisfy blood thirsty appetite.
They march like threatening Comets through ^
Which once appearing to the amazed fight
Presage some bloody deluge or the Fate
Of Majesty or overthrow of state
148.
At length their greedy feet overtake the place
(Revenge does seldom creep, but poasts awa
That place where treason stood to end the race*
And did for them in expectation stay.
With death presaging engines that did show
Their foes had not a guard for such a blo^
149
^th* English Troy-novant they pitched the treason;
That royal seat, which bears the mother name,
England's Pernassus, where diviner reason
Has built her Throne, and honor raised her fame
The City, which this day has Europe set
Above her sisters in full glory dight.
150
that, which commands the Indys, France, and Spain
^tripping them all of all their choicest treasures
^f wine and Spices, of the golden chain,
and yet to all the world her bounty measures.
Feeding the hungry with a belly full:
The naked clothing with her nappy woo^
151
^l countries worship Her, strive, and which shall
^esent her with the richest offering;
^rabia comes with her perfumed ball
and gives it her as to the fairest Queen:
Hydaspes flatters her with Odours too
Striving Arabia's sweetness to outgoe
152
^aine drinks to her, and then send over the cup
^at she may pledge her in the self same grape;
^e Parthians richer Diadems put up,
^d come to her, with a rich laden lap.
Virgeinia sends Her that diviner weed,
Which had Jove tasted, he would beg the seed
153
Her streets no stree^s but pleasant gardens are
Where little Hyacinth that lovely boy
Sports up and down with young Narcissus fair
Tell me what is not there for Palate joy?
First fruits are duly paid to her, as if
She were Queen mother, of all Cities chief
154
There you shall see the bloodbright cherry gro
With blushing ripeness, e're Dame nature can
Color her sister's paler-cheekes, which grow
In other places, with a faintish wan
The unprest wine full bottel'd you may se^
In forward bunches, tempting of yonr eye
155
Their various flowers dress the rising spring,
As she has new got up, and make her show
So glorious with her frequent varying,
That Juno's bird being by would seem a crow
Nay forward Hiblas top may well confess;
To that, she is but a wild spread wilderness
156
Tell me (Brave Citizen) if e're the day
Got up, Arabia did not call on thee:
If whilst on tender down each member lay
Thy bed seemed not a Phoenix-nest to thee:
Thence from that gathered garden did aris^
Such odours for thy morning sacrifice.
157
There planted is within her fruitful wall
The tree of life, which spreads fair branches over
Her confines, and with fatness feeds them all;
Their sprouts the tree of knowledge more and more,
No worm, nor canker in the apple is:
It Is not a garden, but a paradise.
158
Close by Her swelling Thamasis does glide
Fencing it with a snakelike twinning wall:
Neptune does every day come down the tide
And brings his Bride to see those stately halls
who veiwing them amazed such state to see
Sincks down into an ebb, and back does flee.
159
^ust on her smelling breast a Town does floate,
The arched bridge (...) thickset double row
Of houses hedge it, through it boats do shoot
As swift as arrows from the Parthian bow.
With whose vast weight the river's pressed so soar
It Is forced with louder murmurings to roar
160
Beyond it you may see along her side
That monument of grace antiquity,
Londons chief fort, the towning towers Pride:
Where Mars, and his munition prisoners lie:
Till peace disturbed by her foes put in
Sufficient bale to fetch them out again.
161
Next neighbor to it stands oath sandy mold
That house, which with her daily customs fills
The excheqnor with refined fleece of gold
Richer then Jason brought from Causa's hills,
Thither the Indian ships their riches bring
Unloading yearly tribute to their King.
162
Where Thamisis is broader set below
Running in deeper waves with lesser noise,
There you may see a navy proudly go
Whilst full mouthed Zephjrus their sails does hoise
Thamis is London wall: the ships are all
The watchmen, London sets to keep the wall
163
Some lie returned from their two years race
And bring the prize with them which they did
By tilting with their Masts, running apace
At the golden line to cut the Ecliptique string. win
Some overcharged with wine begin to recle*
But some discorging it they save the keele
164
Some after they the fowler feas do scower
Licking his slimy filth on either side,
Rerurne with crazy ribs, beat with the power
Of thunder tempests, and a raging tide
And there all furred with grass in harbor lie*
That they may cure their green-fick mala dye*
165
Whilst others round about them sporting play
Not troubled with that lazy sloth defease)
^amaskt about their decks with glittering ray
^atched with beauty like Jove's cristall lays,
Sounding the trump to welcome Thetis down
Whilst she conveys the Echo to the town.
166
^ut on, and see that wooden Giant rise
^ith such a Monster crest, and threatening front
^ou'd think he would wage new wars against the skies
and like the Giant race soon set upon it
A ship so vast as if ten woods had been
Cut down to build it, when they did begin.
167
(...) ship, enough even of it self to make
(...) navy, and hold stoutly out in play
^ith an Armado: had it bin oth' lake
^ith it, alone 't had frighted them away.
When once it plowes the feas, ^*le boldly say
Neptune will dive that he may give it way.
168
(...) palace fit for Majesty where he
^ay keep his court, and did he deem it meet
^ight ride a progress in it: should it be
^sieged, with an host, till all their mea^e
Provided were devoured, they might plant
Plough, sow within it to supply their want.
169
Bnt yet come back again, and with the tide
Recover London bridge, that you may pass
(Whilst on a smoother wave you thorough glide
With safety on the equal tract of glass,
Then feast your eyes on each side by the way,
Veiwing those frames, that cast so bright array
170
Leading to that, from whence Apollo spoke
In Englands Oracle, renowned James;
Where once that Prelate Monarch Woolsie took
His Primate dignities, those swelling names,
Which flowed, and ebbed at last like the Emble^
That rise, and fell so often by's palace side.
171
White Hall, where he once sat upon a Throne
Without a Crown, and kept a Court, as if
His king were Prelate, and he King alone
Swaying both King and Scepter; till his life
Proclaimed him Traitor, and his Pride proved s^
Not lifting him so high, as't left him low.
172
On either side fair Fabrics beautified
With Dedall cunning border it about:
On this the Minster mounts her facred head,
Where Britains Kings in Christened pomp go o^
Being then first crowned with the Diadem
After dead Caesar yields up his stem
173
There lies the royal dust, and quiet bones
Of all our Henry's, the Marble their
Weeps over our famous Edwards and bemoanes
Eliza's urne, paying a tribute tear
To her dead Sovereign; till all the store
Quite spent, it drys to stone, and weeps no more
174
On that side stands a Frame whose prouder spires
(Guilt on there crests with a deep Saphron beam)
Do court the clouds, and kiss Jove's taper fires
Go equipage with Heaven. and often seem
To lend themselves to Atlas, while they bear
(To ease Him) on their tops the moving sphere
175
A goodly Hall, which dares vye stateliness
With all the patterns of our former days,
Brazen Colossus, tall Pyramides,
The Ephesian temple shrin'd about with bays.
That high-fam'd structure, and that polisht frame
Founded, and finished by the Assyrian dame
176
A well knit unity this house divide
unto an upper, and a lower region,
^o planets in their several spheres abide
^et keep a constant and united motion
The King like Titan from his flaming crest
Sparkles his mutual glory to the rest.
177
With him, the Pawn of England's hopes, those twiggs
That sprouted from the aged royal Sire,
Shrin'k, as if Phoebus lent them pery wiggs;
Budding forth glory, which was blown there
To fuller bightnesse, sitting next the King,
Like Venus next Sol more light borrowing.
178
With him, those two tops of Pernassus Hill,
Those tapers, which upon our altars stand
The two Arch Prelates, who with luster fill
The senate; luster, which poor oil maintained
Sincerer wisdom shined in them so bright,
Like the greater put-out honors lesser light.
179
With him, the rest of Brittain's noble train
Those scarlet troops, that shine in royal blood
Arrayed in spotted Furs, richer then can
Be dapple dyed in Assyrian flood.
Glittering in brisker gemms then e're was set
On best of Parthian King or Coronet.
180
With him, the Judges all in cloth of goare
To Emblem that they sit on guilty blood;
Vnbrib'd Astraea bears the sword before,
They must not strike till justice think it good,
And draw the sword: She guides both blade and hand
Judges condemn, but it is at her command.
181
^ll these with full united glory meet
^ike tapers mingled lights, which stronger shine^
^he trumpets Echo triumphs to the street
^s they ride on with majesty divine.
The thronged commons twist their votes 'ith rear
Teaching the birds to sing an Ave there.
182
^hey're ready now to mount that judgment hall
^here Justice sword stands bare, her balance even
^ce shink* her head, and Impudence looks pale
^aring Astraea is come down from Heaven
^here stands Romes whipping post; the Iefuite
^lucks in his horns, and thinks of couching slight.
183
^ow prayers Elysinm seal with winged flight,
^natius cannot rest within his grave
^ey howl such votes to that grand Jesuit,
^ith prayers both whipped and stripped his aid they crave
At length the Devil does a plot infuse
And they sing Hymns unto Ig^^atius.
184
under that stately house sly cellars creep
^o adders under fairer flow ^s sh^ou'd)
^ere Bacchus does in drov^sie hogsheads sleep,
^enus there his bottel-nose does crow'd
Night spreads her sable wings in dismal fort
Over the vault, and keeps continual court.
183
Pluto that treason-Patron from deep Hell
Seeing the Caverne with convenience set
So nigh his confines; and so apt a cell
To further their design, he does them greet
With larger sums from his own treasury
To Stock the treason, and the cellar buy.
184
Then summons all *pon pain of Hel's displea su^
To midnight silence, whilst with equal dole
He does his royal charge to each deliver,
Which did from him like louder thunder role.
They shiver all in cold amazement, while
They hear the thing, and yet they do it toil.
185
It Is thus (Heroic souls, our royal breed,
Borne for no mean disignes) let crackling bays
Whize out their slender fame, who only bleed
In an Armado, that is not worth our praise
We Will build our Trophys on a Kingdom's rui^
Or we will have none: The iron's hot, be doin^
186
It Is red for striking* Opportunity
Just now hangs out her bush, catch hold on tha
Or else occasion's gone, sh'ath wings to fly:
If once the Synod rise, Time shows his pate,
Then fasten on his lock, and make him stay
To see and Chronicle November's day,
187
Just when that furnished fabric shall begin
To swell with Pride, because in her the flower
Of dressed nobility is compast in,
When Majesty sits under her spread bower,
Shining like Phebe in the azur plain
Amids bespangled Uesper's glittering train.
188
When every state is plact, begin your play,
Strait draw the curtain from the Tragic s^eane,
Let hell appear in her own shape that day;
And let destruction sally forth unseene
When the King with sugared speech is charming al^
Send him a plaud it from the infernal Hall.
189
Then bullet up from that munition'd cell
Thy splintred bars, and broken rocks to tear
The prouder walls in sunder, let all feel
What sands the banks of Acharon do bear.
Blow up the bottoms of their towers to heaven
Level their prouder top with Tellus even.
190
Each haves his charge, all like the bait so well,
They chew upon it with a full delight:
Thrice watery stomachs long, until they fill
Themselves with Majesty, they long for might.
Hope claps them on the back, and cheeres them so
They fear not, care not what they undergo.
191
Have not you seen how aged summer casts
His shedding hair by handfulls from her head;
Her leaves tossed up and down by Autumn's blasts
Fall in full shoales till earth be covered:
Just so in swarms Hell's Harbingers do fly
Sent to take up this shop of cruelty.
192
And now as soon as night gave day the fall
They creep into that caverne vaulted deep,
But yet, not nigh enough to Pluto's Hall,
Where they they their engines and munition keep
They must delve deeper yet, it is their intent
To borrow Vulcan's forging tenement.
193
With spades, and mattock forces they go down
Like Hannabal they will find or make away;
They then besiege earth's closed dungeon
And carve out trenches in the mangled clay.
Break through resisting rocks, tear up the ground
The rivers trembling back at the noise resound.
194
With beamy-yron-rowes they stick the heart
Of Mother earth, that neigbouring Thamis grew
Sill to have shaking fits as day did part,
The earth so quak't with a quotidian ague.
They dig'd so far Pluto was feign to ^^nd,
(Fearing an undermine) to bid them end,
197
and now they are within Hell's liberties
^rrived close at black Cocytus lays
^hey hear strong neighings, which do mock the skys,
^hundring from steeds, that on Cocytus gaze.
They like the Omen, and petitiones make
That they that harnest teeme from Hell may take
196
^ell grants commission, that they may unteather
^he Stygian brood, and knock their fetters off,
^he coale-blacke double brace come up together
^urvetting over Aetna's hilly roof.
All hooft with thunder, prancing as they came
They make each flint with lightning flashes flame
197
Aethon throws mist into the thickened air
^om furnace-lungs breathing forth Sulphur fogs
^icteus with bushy tail does sweep it clear,
^ill it all lies on earth in scummy bogges.
Orphaeus staring eyes with fire glow.
And in the air like kindled Meteors show.
198
^lastor like swift Pegasus does flee,
^is wings deep dipped in the Stygian book
^oe drop down clouds of darkness, which do
^he I Will in sable black, and makes her look,
As if sh'ad bought her mourning, which she went dye
To hang on England's funeral monument.
199
Treason's wide warehouse now prepared, they yoa^
This blackbread brood unto Hells midnight ^a^
Whose axletree well loaded 'gins to croake
Like death's Ambassador, as Ravens jarre
In untuned harmony, and croaking tole
A passing bell for some departing soul*
100
Full stuff't out barrells press the groaning wain
Whose rising wombs, and empty nerves are fill'
With black blue Peter, that ^nkindled gain,
Which is through Stygian salted sand distilled.
A little seed scattered on Erebus,
And there to dryer mould, was parched thu^
201
The fiery horses draw this load of sin,
With staring maines, and racked joints so long
Till foaming sweat does dapple their black skin
And quite wear out the carmans whipping thon^
At length th'unload the wain, that they may loa^
Bacchus, whil's they with these his barrels crou^
202
Thus adding fire to that tinder-fuell,
They strive to lick up with this dryer dust
That oily liquor: feign would make a duel,
Whilst these, at those well marshalled barrels thru^
But straight conclude their private quarrel so
That they join forces 'ganst a common ^oe.
200
and now the Horses draw with easer thighs,
Wantoning back to hell with frisking limbs
^pitting forth boiling foame abroad, which flies
from their unruly chaps in hizzing hymns.
Quench in the colder air like cinders bright
Which in the water hizzing, quench their light.
201
^hey feed on provinder of Stygian grains,
While Sterops and Pyracmon are at jarrs
and sweat in blood of yellow S^ythians,
^triving who shall beat forth more Iron bars.
Great store of sturdy Thracian Iron's sent
To forge at Vulcan's furnace-tenement.
202
With this large mineral the second time
^hey load the cart, and weigh so ponderous
^t made hells baited horses blow again:
^ike slow Boots now from Erebus
They creep along; their fiery metal dies
Yet night bring's all into their treasuryes.
203
^here in that cavern's deep abyss, they heap
^n Iron Pyramid, the Basis laid
upon the barrells, but the top shall creep
Forced up wards) to the heavens, and Jove invade
Had you but seen that monster you would have thought
Peryllis there his brazen bull had brought.
204
They stay not, but with Pegasean speed
(Treason's suspicious always of a vent)
They lash their horses back with twining reed
Who swift as thawing winter's current went;
Then cut down woods to billets, batter down
Their rotten wooden Gods to bring to town^
205
Cast down their images, all gnawne within
To putred worme-holes, but daubed over with pain^
That emblem, nay there God head, trunk divine*
These they build over for fuel coverment.
You would have sworn had you that pile but seen
The wooden horse had entered Troy agin.
206
With pickaxes as sharp as those that break
The tougher ye of glazed Tanais,
They next into some craggy paved creek
(Where angry seas against foaming rocks do rise)
Launch forth, that they may cut Don Neptunes warts
Hew down I mean those raving rocks in parts.
207
Digging whole quarryes from his monstrous side
Then dashing them to lesser thunderbolts,
Next down the banks of Phlegeton they glide,
And there take Captives all the damned doubts:
Make the day laborers to gleane the land,
Gathering the stones lie on the unpav'd sand.
208
^hilst others with rude mattocks dig up all
^els regent-walke, and level it alone
^ith cinder dust, which from their forge does fall;
^ay they will not leave for Sysaphus a stone:
All join to build a fort for envy's hall
And hedge in treason with a rampant wall.
209
^d now it is built: they first dig deep to lay
^ strong foundation, with a mixed rout
^f barrels stu^t with wine, and pouder-clay
^ake up, they build upon that bottom stout
Upon the fire they heap on fuel wood,
Upon the fuel bars of Iron stood.
210
upon the Iron, stones their forces send
^ixing a quarrye with a Mineral:
^ast with a faintish flame the fire send
^t coldly upward Iron keeps down all:
And, least the Iron with a falling ^it
Sinck down, to blow it up the fier's set.
211
^us strength resisted grows the stronger still,
^us contradicted passion rages more:
^ Cammamell trod down grow upward will,
^ bended bows fly up, and strike more soar,
They hide the treason; darts foreseen will
Not hurt so much, forewarned forearmed still.
212
Now match the pattern: Let me see who dar^
Discover his rank blood, and say that he
Is of that kindred, envy will not share
With them, or take in more affinity.
These have ingrost the sail of blood; no fees
Can bribe up hell to grant more Patentees.
213
Now treafon's ready dressed to go abroad,
And Faux has borrowed Plutos livery
To manne her: He Is the Pimp to help her trad^
She never stirrs but in the night, and he
Is feign to snatch a firebrand from Hell,
Which his dark-lanthorne-lights to guide h^ sti
214
^aux, whose black blood stood in his face, and the^
Emblem'd the color of his filthy heart
Sooted with blacker vice, and swarthy fear,
Yet blood-red pampar'd with raw flesh: his pa^
At every meal was wovsh milk, which ^ame
From those two soar breasts, festred Rome an Spain^
215
With too officious duty he prepares
To lay his mistress clothes against she rise;
Marshalls the barrels, rancks the Iron bars,
Then primes the powder, trains it till it lies
Close by the barrells mouth, ready to broach
The Treason: lights, and blows the kindled matc
217
and now he calls on ^lowpac't aged Time
^hinking his waxen wings are melted quite,
^ach minute seems a day, each day as nine,
^he houre-glasse is stop^, or runs not right.
He swears the clocks do lie, and Sextons fee's
Greasing their fists, that they the wheels may grease
217
^hen sends to Time that oily ju^e, the Moon
upon her Heifers sprinkles; bids him anoint
^is stiffened limbs with that, which Phaeton
^upples his steeds; and chafe each sleeping joint.
And yet Times crazy-staffe does softly go,
And yet his tired legs as lazy show.
218
At length he offers daily mattins to him
^ropping as many beads as words do fall:
He knitts both prayers and promises to woe him,
Come (Nimble Time) come to our Stygian hall
I Will let Thee in to see a Tragedy
Where the Spectators act; The standers by
219
Shall neither see nor hear; nor act, nor scene
Do measure it; no sugared words collouge
With peevish ears to beg a plaudit in:
The proloug here, shall be the Epiloug
And clap it self: a Tragaedy just done
As soon as it is but in thought begun.
220
We Will hang no false lights out to entertain
The actors that their luster may more shine:
The candles here shall be the Tragic flame
Not lighted 'force the Tragedy begin.
A thought both light them shall, and put the^ ou
So quick an exit brings the Scene about.
221
No music here shall call the Prologue in,
But thunderclaps, and shreeking cries (which com
From tortured Princes to those Ecchoing,
This ceac't the play begins not, but it is done.
Nay, whilst the Scene is acting you shall see
The stage plucked down: My sterious Tragedy
222
Chief actors are but three, and they all dressed
Just in the whores attire like puppet Rome:
Dull Ignorance comes out before the rest;
Her maids are Error, Superstition.
These follow ignorance still but on this stage
They all go hand in hand just equipage.
223
The stage is rudely built as low as Hell,
Hanged round about with darker clouds and mists
The walls thick mud, carved out of Natur's cell
The roof for Majesty fair bowers twists.
Set up in England, but the Actors come
Out of the attyring house of puppets Rome.
224
Ignorance enters first, a wizled Dame
Wrapped in the seamelesse coat her Savior wore:
So old, she is in her dotage; blind, and lame
Led by the Church, on crutches of the whore
In one hand there is a Bible clasped fast,
In the other a dim light, which can not last
225
Next Error staggers in, drunk with the wine
Of Fornication, reeling up and down;
Tossed with the wind of Church-faith varying
Walking with naked feet all scurfy grown
With dirty penance: In one hand's a pardon,
The other a purse to pay for his salvation.
226
After her gaudy superstition
In chang of costly clothes still varying:
Her maid is counterfit Devotion,
Who carrys after her some holy shrine
Stole from the Virgin Ladies sacred brows,
To which with supple knees she humbly bows.
227
She proudly walks with tinckling feet, and shines shrines,
In that same purple robe Christ once put on
Hung round about with beads, and crowned with
Wearing the God sh' adores with such renown.
In one hand ther'es a candle never goes out,
A bell in the other cursing all about.
228
Sometimes she is loofely dressed in Hermit leaves,
Girt with that cord about her hairy loyne,
With which, Christ whipped those buying selling
Out of the ^emple, who did there conjoyne (theeve^
Both God and Beliall in one house together,
Thus girt for pilgrimage, she wanders thither.
228
Where all the sacred relics treasur'dlye
To see the Angel Gabriel's plumes, who brought
The first news of her Lords Nativity,
The thirty pieces which her Savior bought,
The cross, the nails, the tomb, the sponge, reed,
The very vinegar, which he drank, is there (spear
229
These three lead forth an old, black, meagar wight
With fatted eyes, blown cheeks, and brothel crown,
Wrapped close in weeds of darkness life grim night,
With neck into his shoulders shrouded down,
With fleering chaps, his gag-teeth threatening all.
His very image was Heretical.
203
Ignatius eldest son, an Epicene,
Proteus in doctrine; a just courtier Priest;
A wolf in wool; a glow-worme that does shine
Most in the dark: a Sainted feind at best:
Rome in a Surplice, rank hypocrisy,
Rotten, but painted over divinity.
130
A Jesuit; that monster pharifie
That fasts with sweet means, keeps a box forth' poor,
But Judas like them fills his treasury.
What not? A just dark Lantern and no more.
Whose tongue is nothing but equivocations,
His heart made up of mental reservations.
231
He brings a map upon the stage wherein
Crowns pictured are, and Scepters cast array:
But close by swords are draw'n by coulering,
A cup of poyson's placed in the way.
Dashed brains, rent limbs, blood spiltly's pictured by
Thus Crowns they win, and wear by cruelty.
232
With that, he soon descends a loathly cell*
And sets him down just like Diogenes
In's hogshead, where full barrels round Him well
And there upon a plot he showing is,
Thinking to compass more in's tub alone,
Then Alexander can upon his throne.
232
At length he calls those Three, that set him on
Upon that hideous task^ to do this deed,
Ignorance, Error, superstition;
They 'plaud the deepenesse of his reaching head,
Promise to raise assistance, who shall cry
Out of his plot to make a Tragedye
133
One error bribes, another Ignorance,
But Superstition with her conjuring charm's
Commands them all, straight after her they dance*
Hypocrifie religion soon takes arms
The chief were those three furys sent from Hell
To stand for treason, and keep sentinel
134
Faux, Percy, Catsbey, Romes Trium-viri
Those Parri-regick people-regnicides;
Spirits incarnate, abstract blasphemy,
Who thrust at Jove through kings and Princes sides
White gunpowder, who kill without a noise:
True lime who seeming quenched, then most a nnoyse.
135
A trebble twisted courd of relatives
Bound Percy over both to king and state;
And yet with masked zeal he falsely strives
Guarding the King, the King to captivate:
A fence has thorns, and he chose Pensioner
(Honored, with lending Majesty such honor)
236
Made his strict homage a back door, where He
Might let in treason and rebellion:
Over much zeale's a blast of policy
To blow up parisite presumption.
Thus an ungrateful snake does often string
The breast, that warmed it, once recovering.
137
Faux strives to cloth his couching villainy
In Percys livery, goes for his man,
Waits on him in the road of Tyranny,
But rides before him, striving to out ^u^ne
His master, and his mate; they softly came,
Whilst he in hot careere pursues the game.
238
A traitor to himself, that would betray
(Posing the air, that breathed Him a soul)
The Patron of his life, before his day
Hastening to Pluto's file, and their enrole
Himself for darkness, and present his King,
His Country too for a burnt offering
139
These are the true borne of that Father Feind,
A Cadmus brood sprung from the scattered seed
Of that true serpent's teeth, and now they bend
Their forces that they may dissentions breed.
The purer blood of long lived unity,
Which ran in Englands veins, they will now let fly.
240
So are they taught by theit Trivertick Father,
Such doctrine howles forth triple Cerberus;
Mad wisdom! puddle knowledge; mudded ove^
Like flimy streams of filthy Erebus:
Religion in the Lees! divotions mire!
A cold, false, foggy, wandering, fatuate fire
241
Oh it is the cause, that is so Catholic,
Rome's almost ready for her matyrdome*
Our miters have been shook, if England strike
The second time, down comes our Triple Crown.
Religion calls, whilst her cause we cry,
It Is virtue for to Sin, a price to dye
242
Aleaprous Church, a Church from scars as free
As it is full of wounds; one only soar:
Festred corruption springs and runs from thee,
So full of spots, incapable of more
What horrid Tyranny dare show it is head,
That has not first at Rome, been licenced.
243
These, these, that joined to bear that common yoke
Fettred together with her sacrament:
Was by her sacrilegious hyre bespoke
To call up Tyranny, and they consent.
Let Us on: the danger's sweet* a Bull shall be,
Our pardon; merit, our security.
244
We I go no common road, away with that
Prefumption, which is obvious, what e're
Has once been heard shall never in our plot
Iugredient be: Presumption shall despair
When she first hears of it; nay death shall be
Amazed to hearc of such a prodigy,
246
We Will take up hearts of steel, and triple brass
Shall hoope them in: Then dastard Tyranny
To follow us to Hell; and there we will pass
With confidence toth' Stygian diety;
So learn new magic that we may extract
Sulphurian sands from Styx his Cataract.
247
Some scattered Atom's dust we will gather thence,
Which with impetuous rage, shall blow up all;
An Omnicidian blast to recompense
The fury of that thronged Capital.
Nor shield, nor bullwarke, nor that Iron coat
Which fenceth thunder, shall this blow keep out.
248
Nor strength, nor care, nor both, nor all shall be
A Remora to stop the full careere
Of instant ruin; which well armed shall flee
With close revenge, and bring a weapon with her,
Will all the acts of murder soon overcome,
Put an whole Kingdom to a martyrdom
249
That burning hill that keeps continual sire
Casting live coals into Calabrias breast,
Does but an hatching milder heat expire,
And rages with a fury quite suppressed
Compared to this; a furnace, had it been
But kindled, Hell had had less fireing.
250
Nay Phoebus sealding beams (though he or'etake
The fiery Lion at his raging den)
In scorching Libya could never make
So hot a Solstice, burn as this had then
Wept over the flame they had not quenched this
Had with their running sives the Bel^ides
251
A fruitful age; barren in all but some,
Fruitsull in sending forth a forward spring
Of ripe impiety. What gulf within
The deep Abyss of Tartarus can bring
Bring forth such monsters with a direful hand
Against anointed holiness to band.
252
Nor choleric Seytha, nor yet Concanus,
He that was pampred up with horses blood,
Nor he of Dacia servile Davns-Dacus
Such Tyrant Mysteries e're understood:
Nay the Sicambri that red pated-race
Poisoned with slaughters at this vale their face:
253
The affrighted air with cold amazement shook
Fearing the thumping blows it should receive,
The stars do quench their flames in the misty brook
Of Acharon, as if they would bereave
The Snblunary orb of all it is light
Loathing so black a deed so strange a sight.
251
Phoebe began her palsy head to shroud,
And seared at the sight plucked in her horns*
Apollo's steeds did start into a cloud
And each with strange reluctance suborns
The guider, that he would let loose the rain
That they might draw the day quite back again
252
Phoebus invests himself in sable black
Mourning to think upon so foul a birth.
The Axle-tree of heaven begins to crack
Fearing some new forg'ed thunderbolts from earth
The heaven's begin to weep, and with their tears,
Would make a deluge for to drown their fears
253
The unwreath'd snakes of the Eumenides
Stood bolt upright upon the Fury's heads:
The hundred-headed beast at the news of this
Hangs down his ears, his tail like twinig reeds
He twists betwixt his legs, runns howling out,
The Ghosts in strange disorder range about
254
The heaven stands still, the Earth seems now to round
In her diurnall circuit: the whole frame
Of nature seemed unpin'd: disorder found
Her order now came in, and took the same
The world amazed, thought Jove had suffered
Or that the world now at an end had been then,
255
The sands of Bosphorus begun to groan,
They heard of it and murmr of the news.
The Libyck Syrtes feign their heads would drown
In Afric sea, but Neptune does refuse
The Arminian waves do roar, and carry thus
The news to Taurus, and to Caucasus.
256
The Hyperborean mountains, which retain
An equal portion of the day and night,
Half year in day, and half in night remain
Scared from their course keep a continual night
The Oaks on Gargon on their tops look far
As if for madness they had toare their hair.
257
The aged Alps dissolve their frozen snow
Filling up Rhodanus with their melting tears,
And Rhodanus does her rising bancks o'reslow
Blabbing to France and Italy our fears.
Acturus will go down, Aericthon rise,
That they may leave tempestuous seas and skies.
258
And yet, and yet, that hell-hatcht crew controles
Both heaven and earth, go equal with the stars,
With proudest heads confront the highest poles
Promise to warm with flames heavens coldest cars
Hark, hearken, Hell applauds us then they cry
And so applaud themselves in villainy.
259.
And now the day's their own, that glad-sad da^
That dear, that raising, that foule-faire weather,
Which must both raise a tomb, and Trophy lay
For England, and yet not for England neither*
Britain's sad Epitaph hangs over her hearre,
And Romes false Iubile is turned in verse.
260
And now some pen that is Jesuitical
Must form a letter of equivocations,
Indicted by a head political
To keep the truth in mental reservations,
It Is sent unto some culled Nobility:
Go one, and riddle me the mystery.
261
My Lord that Catholic affinity,
Which knitts relation betwixt me, and those,
Which are so nigh to you, makes me untye
What sacrament to you, which should keep close
The dearest secreat of my breast, but see
How near I prize your safe security.
262
Then as you love that soul, which is espoused
In such a fellowship, so near your breast,
Let it not be divor^t: you are exposed
Unto a common danger with the rest:
Take up some forged excuse ontrust, which may
Sue at your absence on the Senate day.
963
The God's decree is past, and man consent
Both have conspired, and sealed their minds, that they
Will muster up revenge to punishments,
This iron rusted age shall battered be.
A blow with sudden terror there shall be:
And yet the hurt, who hurts them, shall not see
264
No motions these commotions shall betray;
Vshering the sequel with a prolog^e in,
No trumpe shall sound initialls to the fray
To tell the foeman when he shall begin.
A thunderclap shall fall with such a blow
The left hand here, shall not the right hand
265
Nor slight you now this warning piece, you may know.
Escape the ruin horrors over your head,
Withdraw your self, take wing, and fly away,
Or else your life's already buried.
You may outlive the Fates; know, it is no more
But burn the letter, and the danger's over.
266
Heaven warn's you, be sore-arm'd: I hope that she
That guided has the hand, and pen to write,
Will ope'you eyes to read the mystery:
He that does read, and understands not it
Is ready to neglect; neglect will make
An Index to it, let care keep what you take.
267
The Aenigma's tied in a Gordian knot,
The letter writ and sent, but who can spell
The meaning drawn in Ony'on juce, that is not
Reveal d at all unless the fire tell.
Burn but the letter, then perchance you will see
And yet that burnt, tell me the mystery
268
Who with the nimble strength of Daedall wit
Can loose these tangled lines? what Lynceus eye
Can sift the bottom of so dark a pit,
And there those hidden mineralls descry?
Who can this Labyrinth find out, and trace
That Minotoure in this Meander maze?
269
None but that eye, that sees without an eye,
None but that sun, that shines in midnight dark.
Could either see or read this mystery,
Or quench this fire in it is ember spark.
None but that Oracle, which never spoke
By Oracles could this transparent make,
270
God speaks by men, the Devil speaks, but by
His wodden carcasses, God speaks the truth,
The Liar teaches stocks, and stones to lie,
And yet a miracle does breath from both.
The Devil's raines hangs loose sometimes, but so
That there is a curb commands him, too and fro.
271
Let hell begin to open wide his jaws
Thinking to swallow heaven with yawning thro^
Hell shall prepare his stomach, but for those
Of his own Tribe, that bear her branded note.
A pit is often dug for other men,
But he that diggs, shall sometimes first fall in
272
If Diomedes traynes his horses up
With living men in stead of fodder food,
An Hercules shall rise, and fill the cup
To drench an horse with Diomed^s blood.
Peryllus may prepare a Bull, but he
Shall first in his own Bull tormented be.
273
Let hell send forth her paler Pegasus
That treason may ride poast on it to bring
The news of winged ruin unto us,
Yet Jove can hang a plummet on the wing,
And force the fates to hover till he hit
Under there wings, and make them fall in the pit
274.
Jove calls his bird, that royal Eagle forth
Makes him his winged Mercury; go fly
To Albions court, that Synod of true worth,
And there this mantled monster-brat discry.
Give James the Clue, that he may find the way
Like Theseus, and that he Minotaure betray.
275
This Lord soars on the wings of loyalty
And faithfully conveys that riddle spell
To Caeasars council, where true royalty
^ate Judge on it, and censured, each does tell
His several verdictt, but the meaning still
Was tied fast within the knotty spell.
276
Till heaven sent down a light, and did infuse
The truer spirit of an Oracle
Into our Monarch's soul, to tell the news
Where dire Reveng does, with hid treason, dwell.
He reads the letter, and the language knows
That confused Ideome of his Babel foes.
277.
And now the miners soon are undermined,
Vulcan's discovered in his loathly cell
Sitting with other Gods, who there combind
To summon ruin from the depth of hell.
Vulcan sits next to Bachus caskye throne,
And Pan is mounted on a rock of stone.
278
The wooden God is first plucked down, and then
Vulcan and Bachus are descried there
Calling toth' rocks to cover them from heaven,
Shrouding their Hogsheads under stones for fear
The fuell's snatched from the unkindled fire
The foul es^^ps, the fowler's hanged in the bryer.
279
What candle was it, that could guide the eye
To spell the meaning of so dark a spell?
What hand could catch at treason, and fast tie
That captive, to remove him from his cell?
A light not lighted did those lines unfold
An hand, without an arm, the foe controld.
280
That hand, which once did write without an arm
Printing full terror upon Babels wall,
Guided this hand to write that hidden charm,
Which proved their's, as that did Babels fall.
This did Vriah in his letter bear
The sentence of his death, ere, death came near
281
That hand, which guided both, pluck me a quill,
From the choice pineon of a Seraphin
Dipped in diviner inck, that't may distill
Full characters of praise, in charoling
The wonders of that arm, which could command
And loose fast treason from so dark a band.
282
Infuse fresh Anthems in my duller muse,
That so it may outrunne a Poets strain
Lending the world new wonders to perufe.
My Muse wrapped up beyond Apollo's vein.
Then in one Halelu-Ile sing a consort
Shall drown a quier of Angels full report.
283
Where lodges now that true authenticke soul,
Which was never out of tune iu David's breast,
But kept continual harmony, the pole
Still heard him in the quier above the rest.
Where Is that sweet singers glory, who did make
Each string of his own glory to partake.
214
Warbling his makers praise? where are those toungs,
Which run division out of breath, while they
Strove who should first outsing themselves in
And with a Cignets chame call death a way
All striving thus one consort for to make
Breaking the consort, each a consort take.
285
Were but that old Philosophy in season,
Which makes the soul remove her lodging still,
Tuning in this, and then in the other mantion,
By transmigration lending the same will
And power to enact, there were some hope,
I might have David's soul for David's scope.
286
A way fond hopes! Blind nature is no guide
Elisha cannot Elija's soul inhearit,
Then look not where the Prophets soul does hide,
Without his soul thou may have David's spirit*
The wind blows where it lists, Olet me find
In the right corner of my heart the wind.
287.
Thus'winged with the wind my soul shall rife
To tune her Maker's praise, far, far before
The early Lark does charm the dawning skies
My glory shall get up and open the door.
That from my enlarged breast a quire may go*
And learn the Spheres to play Novembers 10.
FINIS.

