THE English Spira: BEING A Fearful EXAMPLE OF AN APOSTATE, Who had been a
Preacher many Years, and then Apostatized from his Religion; miserably Hanged
himself, October the 13th. 1684.

GIVING An Account of his Despair, and Diverse Conferences had with him, by
several Ministers and others of his Friends.

TOGETHER With his Answer; and Papers Written by his own Hand.

Left Attested by Mr. T. Plant, Mr. H. Collings, Mr. B. Dennis. Mr. B. Keach.

Second Edition.

TO THE READER.
THAT which has prevailed with us to publish this Treatise, is, that we might
give those many who have desired it, and all that shall vouchsafe to read it,
an impartial Account of what has come to our knowledge concerning the Dreadful
Horror of Conscience, and Deplorable End of Mr. John Child: In his Youthful
days, a zealous Professor of Religion; in his Riper years, a Backslider from
God, under pretense of Change of his Opinion: A Neglecter of Public Worship,
not only in the way he had formerly professed, but in that also which of late
years, in his Discourses and Arguments, he preferred before the other.

Under the specious show of promoting a more full and firm Union amongst all
good Protestants; a great Calumniator of his Brethren, publicly charging many
of them in general, as guilty of such Crimes and Blasphemies, as his own
Knowledge and Dictates of Conscience, at the season when he did it, could and
did testify they were clear of.

What prompted him hereunto, (besides the Hypocrisy, Pride, and Malice of his
own heart) we certainly know not; but have some ground to suspect, when he was
about this evil work which caused his downfall, he conversed with some persons,
who rather promoted than cautioned him against it.

Under his Temptation, we fear, he did not consider that anciently-approved,
useful, and necessary Caution, which the Apostle mentions, Be not deceived,
evil communication corrupts good manners.

After he was once thoroughly awakened with the sense of his Sin, he fell under
those Horrors of Conscience, which have not been paralleled in any other that
we have heard of, since the Case of Francis Spira, being so dreadful,
permanent, and prevalent over him, as to resist all Friendly Endeavors used to
appease his grief; which after several months abiding in the highest extremity,
at length tempted and prevailed with him, by his own hands to end his miserable
Life.

Upon this occasion we have also given some brief Hints of the Nature and
Office of Conscience, and the Obligations we are under to it. All which we
recommend to the Readers serious consideration, with our fervent Prayers to
God, that what we have herein done, may succeed to his and our own Souls
advantage, and peace of Conscience, both here and hereafter.

It may be in many respects useful to take notice that the Pamphlet which was
Written and Published by Mr. John Child, and which, with respect to the bitter
Reflections and Calumnies therein cast upon his Brethren, did afterward fill
him with so great Horror of Soul, as to destroy himself, bare the Title of as
charitable an Argument, as could be undertaken by the best of Christians.

For a more full and firm Union amongst all good Protestants.
But though in this Title his Words were (as the Psalmist speaks) softer than
oil, (...). 55.21.
yet were they drawn swords. He put forth his hand against such as were at
peace with him; his Equals, his Acquaintance, who had walked with him to the
House of God in company. The sense whereof when he was awakened to see and feel
in his own Conscience, the heinousness of his Crime in slandering his Brethren,
did so terrify him, that it could not be discerned (either by his Relations,
or any of those many of his Brethren whom he had offended, who came to visit
him, and endeavored to pour Balm into, bind up, and heal his deep wounds) that
at any time afterward he enjoyed any peace in his Soul.

The principal inducement to publish a Narrative of this Man's Trouble of
Spirit, and Miserable End, is to give an Impartial Account to many who desire
to be truly informed thereof, what Conferences were had with him, what Papers
on this Subject were left behind him, and that the whole may be a seasonable
Caution to all who read them, to take heed how they do in any case whatsoever
presume to sin against the clear Light, Knowledge, and Dictates of their own
Conscience: for which end it is intended to say something briefly concerning
the Nature and Office of Conscience, and that attendance which every man is to
give to it.

But for the avoiding of all sinister Reflections on what is herein undertaken,
the Publishers hereof do declare,

First, That they do not ascribe this Man's Miserable End to any Conscientious
Change of Opinion in Matters of Religion or Worship, or to any Endeavor of his
to propagate Union amongst Christians in a candid way, by proper Arguments; but
they lay the stress of his Miscarriage where he fixed it himself, that is, upon
his Backsliding from the Ways of God, forsaking that which was Good, doing that
which he knew to be Evil; and upon his Hypocrisy, Pride of Spirit,
Covetousness, and his unjustifiable Calumniating, Reproaching, Reviling, and
Accusing many of his Brethren of such things as he knew they were not guilty:
All which he acknowledged in his own Papers, and frequently charges, himself
with.

Secondly, We are so far from Censuring any Attempts that have been made in a
Christian manner for a more full and firm Union amongst all good Protestants,
that we heartily wish we could see more Hearts (and such Hands as are fitly
qualified for it) at work on this Subject: for blessed are the Peacemakers,
and the Fruits of Righteousness are sown in peace of them that make peace.

Thirdly, To show our good Will to such an Undertaking, we shall upon this
occasion, after we have made some brief Reflections on the Nature and Office of
Conscience, and finished the Narrative of this Man's Troubles, assume the
Argument, and according to that measure of Faith and Knowledge which God has
given us, speak the Truth in Love, in order to the obtaining (if it may be upon
a right Foundation) a better Understanding, and from thence a more full and
firm Union among all who love the Lord Jesus in Sincerity.

REMARKS UPON THE Nature and Office OF CONSCIENCE.
HERE we have a recent and pregnant Instance of the powerful and perpetual
prosecution of an offended and an awakened Conscience, Jer. 2^ 2, 3. Ps. 119*
the Horrors whereof were so dreadful and unapeasable, that all Attempts,
either to divert the Thoughts to other Subjects, or apply the Mind to the
receiving or using of mitigating or healing Remedies, were altogether
ineffectual.

Herein we may also perceive, how the Terrors of such a Mind are aggravated
beyond the rate of Natural Impressions, proportional to the help which Natural
Light receives by Education, Heb. ^^ 26, 27*
Conversation and Acquaintance with Divine Revelation.

The Philosopers, (whom we esteem Heathens) as being strangers to the Will of
God revealed, and Covenant of Grace treated of in the Scriptures) from the
dictates of Natural Light, comparison of Good and Evil, Moral Virtues and
Vices, Tranquillity and Perturbations of Mind, which ensued the reflection upon
good and evil Actions, went very far in describing the proper Office of
Conscience, and those Horrors which were the Consequents of Heinous Offenses.

But this Man has so much the more exceeded them all, by how much the Remedies
properly applicable to a peninent sinner (through the Benefits of a Mediator)
were more known and oppugned by him than by any of them.

They could, and did, write of an universal and immuatable Law engraven on the
Mind of Man, as that there was one eternal righteous God to be worshipped, and
with respect as well to future as present Rewards and Punishments, was to be
reverenced and feared, Parents to be Honored, our Neighbors not to be injured
in their Persons or Properties, and that what we would not have done to us,
that we should not do to another. (...)
That this Law was known to the generality of Mankind by its effects, and by
natural anticipations and common notions of Good and Evil imprinted in Humane
Nature.

And although by the introducing or intermixture of some Notions, as the Rule of
discerning and judging the Morality of Actions, which are not proper and
adequate Rules for the directing of Conscience to make a right Judgment, as our
own good Intentions, other Men's Example or Doctrines, and the like, Conscience
may be mis-guided, and from such Premises make wrong Conclusions, as it may
also happen (through Ignorance) by a wrong application of the proper and
adequate Rule, yet that Rule remains a fixed and permanent Faculty in the
rational Soul, a connate Habit in the Practical Understanding, in such manner
as that when the Mind and Memory are awakened and stirred up rightly to discern
and apply that Rule to Actions past, it will be made evident, that it is above
the power of any man to give himself or any other an absolute dispensation from
this adequate Rule and Law of Conscience, which God has erected in our Hearts,
as his Tribunal; and our neglect of this Rule, or suffering our Consciences to
be mislead by any other, will (when the Vail is taken off) be no excuse, but
rather an aggravation, (at least if it proceeded from a voluntary Ignorance)
that we did not according to the power of natural light remaining in us; by a
right application of the proper Rule, discern, measure and judge our own
Actions, whether they were morally good or evil.

These Philosophers discerned, and by unanswerable Arguments from
Demonstrations, evinced, that God created all things in order, and that
therefore every created Being, together with, and in itself, ^ 148.
(as the Psalmist also in the written Word of God declares) had its proper Law
and Limit, without which that Order could not be considered, and that Humane
Nature which was endued with a faculty or power of election, to do or refuse,
was under the inspection of God to be encouraged and assisted; curbed,
corrected or punished, as Men observed or acted contrary to that Law which was
inscribed in their Natures.

Hence they affirmed, (even as by Divine Ordination) the Reward of Virtue to be
in itself, and that it was therefore to be followed, as that which always
carried with it, and left behind it a singular profit, also that whilst the
Mind was quiet, as not being conscious of any crime, it would restrain and stop
the Mouth of passions, and prevail to the silent bearing of whipping, cutting,
torturing, etc.

Horat.
Justum and tenacem propositi virum
Non Civium ardor prava jubentium
Non vultus instantis Tyranni
Mente qualit solida: neque Auster
Dux inquietae turbidus Adriae
Nec fulminantis magna Jovis manus
Si fractus illabitur Orbis,
Impavidum ferient ruinae.
The just man's judgment and resolved will,
No fury popular injoyning ill,
No urgent aspect of a Tyrant's face
Does shake, in settled Mind on solid base,
Nor the tempestuous South-Winds, which command
Rough Adria's Seas, nor Jove's great thundering hand,
If Ruins overwhelm, and cracked World fall,
Undaunted like he bears the shock of all.
But on the contrary, that a notorious wicked Conscience was like an Ulcer in
the Body, and that none could ever impose upon a hot burning Conscience, or
persuade, that such an one should not cry out, or not tare his hair, or not
smite his breast, so much more violent is the sense of having done evil, than
that of Fire and Sword.

Exempto quodcunque, malo committitur ipsi
Juven.
Displicet Authori; prima est hec ultio quod se
Judice, Nemo nocens absolvitur improba quamvis
Gratia fullacis Praetoris vicerit urnam
-- cur tamen hos tu
Evasiste putes quos dire conscia facti
Men's habet attonitos and Jurdo verbere caedit
Occultum quatiente animo tortore flagellum
Nocte dieque suum gestare in pectore testem
Perpetua anxietas, nec mense tempore cessat.
What e're by ill example's done amiss,
Troubles the Author, the first revenge is this:
Himself being Judge, his Guilt he cannot discharge,
Though the bribed Judge and Votes, set him at large.
How think thou then, that those escapes confined,
Accused of high Crimes by their conscious Mind,
'Stonisht, trembling, tortured within they stand,
Severely punished by a secret Hand:
Both night and day he bears within his Breast,
Perpetual Anguish, at his Meals no rest.
Hence that vulgar saying, Dat penas quicunque expectat: They can never be
happy, who always live in suspicion and fear of Punishment: for that fear of
punishment will haunt a person, that sins heinously against his Conscience, so
long as it cannot be beyond contradiction proved and demonstrated, that there
is no just God to avenge his Crime.

Thus far have the learned Philosophers and Poets proceeded upon the Principles
of Natural Light, and common Experience, in the Description of Conscience, its
Office and Effects, as not consisting in, and arising from a bare speculative
knowledge of things, but in and from a practical knowledge of the rule applied
to the particular Fact done, or to be done, wherein the Divine Authority of the
Lawgiver, the rectitude of that uniform and universal Law written in Humane
Nature, the quality of the Action, and intention of the Person, as known to
God, and which might and ought to be known and considered by the Actor, with
its consequents, are all comprehended.

Others by their conversation with Holy Scripture, improving this Natural
Light, have, according to the Laws and Rules thereof, confirmed, and in their
Discourses enlarged upon this subject, concerning the different qualities of
Conscience performing aright, or neglecting its proper Office, in judging
according to present understanding, of things morally good or evil, by that
Divine Law or Will of God manifest in them, or made known to them, which is and
ought to be applied thereunto, and observed as the proper and adaequate Rule
thereof.

And these say that Conscience, (...). 2.15,
assisted with a summary of Principles contained therein, is by its Office to
search into, and discern the lawfulness or unlawfulness of things, and to
direct and order how things lawful in themselves may be performed in a right
manner, and to right end; and how things, either evil in themselves, or of an
ill tendency, ought to be forborne and avoided; also to reveiw and examine
actions done by us, both as to their matter and form, whether they be good or
evil: and that every man is highly concerned to take good heed to this Rule by
which his Conscience ought to be guided, because its determinations are like
unto those of a supreme Dictator, speaking Oracles within us, and exercising an
Authority over us, having in that respect some kind of coordinate power and
authority with God; and for that also, as Conscience without Divine Authority,
will not justify an action, so God will not accept it, without the concurrant
authority of Conscience; without the one, our pretended service is unlawful,
without the other unreasonable.

The perfect, and that which is to every Christian the only adaequate Rule of
Conscience, being the Will and Law of God written in the Heart, and revealed in
the Scripture; it is hence presumed, that every Christian is endued both with a
natural and an enlightened Mind and Conscience: and this Will and Law of God,
comprehended under these two general branches, has an immediate and sovereign
authority over their Conscience. It is God alone who knows the inward workings
thereof, and he only can punish it when it sins; and the obligation which
lies upon the Conscience of every Christian to observe Humane Laws and
Constitutions, as they correspond with this Divine Law, is because God has as
well by his Law written on the Heart, as his revealed Will in the Scriptures
commanded it should be so: and hence it is that natural Obligations, 1 Pet. ^
14, 1^ Romans ^^ 1, 5.
and such humane Constitutions as correspond with this Divine Law, are not
infringed, but corroborated by Christianity; for that discharges no man from,
but better informs every man in the knowledge of his Duty toward God and Man;
and binds the Conscience of every Christian to the discharge of all relative
Duties in his station amongst Men, as he will answer it (not only to those who
have Authority on Earth, but also) to God himself, if against the light and
obligation of Conscience he therein transgresses the Will of God.

In this respect Christians have a double advantage, and are under a double
Obligation above all others. For, 1st, They partake in common with other Men of
the universal Law of Nature, engraven on the Heart, 1 Ti^ Hos. 6^ 1 Pet.
which no positive or revealed Institution discharges any Man from. 2ly, They
have the Written and Revealed Will and Law of God in the Holy Scriptures, with
which, by Divine Grace and Providence, they are privileged above others, and,
through Faith, enabled to make a more clear and distinct Judgment of the
Principles and End as well of Divine as Moral Actions; (...). 2.6, (...), 9,
10. ^^^r. 1.12.
as they tend to the Service and Glory of God, the Good of their Neighbors,
and their own Peace and Happiness.

Hence also it is, that the Peace, Comfort and Joy of a Christian, proceeding
from the discharge of a good Conscience toward God and Man, (...). 4.7.
exceeds all that can be apprehended by a mere natural light, as having some
savor and relish in its Soul of that love of of Christ, (...). 3 19.
which passes knowledge, and of that peace of God which passes understanding.

For though the fredom from the accusation of conscience be not his complete
justification before God, ^^or. 4.4.
yet it gives him confidence toward God: and on the contrary, the confusion,
darkness, perplexity, horror and despair of a person acquainted with the Will
of God, revealed in the Scriptures, wilfully sinning against Knowledge and the
express dictates and judgment of his own Conscience, ^om. (...). 20. (...) 13,
14,
do far exceed all that can be spoken by such who have no other but a natural
light; for though that extends itself very far, yet the severity of God against
such transgressions is more clearly and distinctly represented in the Holy
Scriptures, ^^^h. 1.14, ^^ 17, 18. ^^e 9 25. (...). 2.2, 3. (...) 2.25. ^^es.
5.3. ^^et. 2 1. (...). 16.26,
than in any other Writings; for as the sin of such a person has in it all
manner of aggravations to render it most heinous, so the Judgments of the
righteous God therein revealed against such an impenitent sinner, are of all
others declared to be the most dreadful, intolerable, unavoidable,
irremediable, endless.

It is not our intention to speak any thing herein more largely concerning the
Nature and Effects of Conscience, than what is to our present purpose; many
entire and useful Discourses of very learned and pious Persons are extant on
this Subject, wherein is observed, (that which we are all obliged to take
notice of) that God by his providence has preserved in the innermost seat of
our hearts some (scintillulae) little sparks of that greater light, wherewith
the mind of man was invested before his fall; that these sparks of light are
continued with us, that they may be publishers of the good Pleasure and Will of
God concerning us, and monitors of our obedience. 1st, To those common
Principles of his Law written in our Hearts, (to do Good, and eschew Evil)
which by reason of their highest evidence, instantly as soon as they are
offered to our mind and thoughts, command our Faith, and compel our Assent.
2ly, To his revealed Will, contained in the Holy Scriptures, so soon as through
his grace, either by the Discourse or Writings of others, or by our own search,
we have the knowledge thereof.

And by how much any man does frequent and exercise his natural Light in the
study and search after the knowledge of this revealed Will of God, his Creator
and only Lord and Lawgiver, 2 Cor. ^ Joh. 7^ 17. Hos. 6.^ 2 Timothy 14. to (...)
end. Ephesians. 4.^ 18, 19 chapter 5. (...) Judge. ^ 11. (...) 1 Timothy 4, 5. (...) 2 Pet. to
the (...) 2 Cor. ^
and thereby square and order his Inclinations, Affections, and Conversation,
by so much the more shall he be secured from, and strengthened to resist the
raging tyranny of his own inbred Lusts, and blind and lawless Appetite, and the
enchanting Flatteries, Inticements, Discourses, and Examples of men of corrupt
minds, and destitute of the truth; who for the more effectual razing out of our
minds (as much as is possible) the little remains of natural Light, and
blinding the mind, and hardening the heart against the perception and reception
of supernatural Light, do all they can to set the Conscience free from all
Obligations to the Will and Law of God, by introducing and setting up in the
mind another Rule, viz. that of their own Appetite, private Interest and
Utility: Than which, nothing can be more rebellious against God, pernicious to
humane Society, or destructive to him that has drenched in such a damnable
Delusion.

For as that first and great Command of God, scilicet, Mat. 2^ 37, 38, ^^ Mat.
1^ 30.
To love him with all the heart, and with all the soul, and with all the mind,
and with all the strength; and that second, which is like unto it, To love our
Neighbor as our selves, are the principal Branches of that Universal Law of
God, Tim. ^ to the (...) 1 John ^ 6, 7.
whereby all other Branches thereof are to be interpreted, and on which all the
rest depend: so by Obedience thereunto in Faith, out of a pure Heart and good
Conscience, our Union, Fellowship, and Communion with God the Father, and his
Son Jesus Christ our Lord, and one with another, is maintained, confirmed, and
enlarged; Phil. 3. 2 Timothy 2, 3, 4 Phil. 3.19. Romans 2 8, 9. Jam. 9. 2 Timothy 9,
10. 2 Pet. ^ 2, 3.
and we thereby brought to have our Conversation in Heaven whilst we are on
Earth, and prepared for everlasting Habitations with the Saints in light. And
on the contrary, they which are lovers of Pleasures more than lovers of God,
who make their God their Belly, glory in their shame, mind earthly things, stop
the voice of their Conscience, act contrary to its Dictates, and strive to
thrust from them, as long and as far as they can, the terrors thereof, are,
whilst they remain upon Earth, on the very borders of Hell, and every moment
ready to sink into Destruction and everlasting Perdition.

We have made this brief Reflection on the Nature and Office of Conscience, as
deeming it may be now, and at all times, useful to our selves and all that read
it, whilst remaining in the state of the living; but we make not, so much as in
our thoughts, any Reflection upon (or Application of any thing we have herein
said to) the state of him that is dead, further than to declare how sadly he
experimented in the course and issue of his Life, what has been here spoken of;
the horror of an offended and awakened Conscience, and to exercise the Judgment
of Charity, which only appertains unto us concerning his sorrows for his sin,
fervent desires to be forgiven of those he has injured, attempts after a
public Recantation of his Evils, endeavors to repent and pray for forgiveness
of God. The final Judgment we leave to him who is the proper and only Judge of
the secrets of his heart, with our fervent Prayers to God, that we who have
heard, and all that shall read the ensuing Narrative, treasure up in our hearts
what is therein instructive to us, so as to have it always ready in our minds,
as a seasonable Warning, never in the like or in any other case, wilfully to
put to a peradventure the Eternal Salvation of our precious and immortal Souls.

A brief Account of the Life of Mr. John Child.
HE was born at Bedford, about the year 1638; and, when he was grown up, put
Apprentice to an Handicraft Trade, which when he came of age he followed for
some time: afterward he betook himself to another Calling, and removed to
Newport-Pagnel, where he lived diverse years, married twice, and by his last
Wife (of honest Parentage, and good Report) he had several Children; after his
second Marriage, in appearance he increased in his Estate. About five years
since, he removed to London, and in October last he ended his days by hanging
himself in a House he had taken the last Spring in Brick-lane near
Spittlefields.

He was endued with a competent measure of natural Parts, and vivacity of
Spirit. In his youth he applied himself to the reading and study of the
Scriptures, and attained to a greater knowledge in matters of Religion, than
many of his Equals in years and Education. In his Opinion and Practice he was
for the Baptism of Believers, and consorted with some of us, who are called
Anabaptists, for about twenty years; and for diverse years, at seasons,
exercised himself in Preaching.

He was observed for some years before his dreadful Fall, to be very remiss in
Religious Exercises; and in his ordinary Conversation, to frequent other
Company than he had done in former times.

He was of a very haughty Spirit, and peremptory in asserting his Opinions. He
sought to exalt himself above what became either his Profession or Seize.
All which, when the Hand of God was heavy upon him for his open sins, he freely
acknowledged with severe Charges against himself for his Pride and Hypocrisy,
as you will find in the following Relations.

A Narrative of Mr. John Child's Trouble of Spirit, and Deplorable End. Of some
of the Conferences had with him in the times of his Troubles: and of such
Papers as were written by him on this Subject.
SOon after the said Mr. John Child had published his forementioned second
Argument, which was about the latter end of the year 1682, he signified to some
of his intimate Acquaintance, that his mind was perplexed, for what he had
therein done; but yet bare the trouble so, as not to make any great show of it
in his general Behavior, until about the beginning of July 1684. when he could
no longer bear or conceal the horrors of his mind, but spoke of it to some that
came accidentally to see him, and sent to several others of his Acquaintance to
come to him, to whom when they came, he disclosed the miserable Condition into
which he had brought himself, and the occasion thereof, in such manner, as that
it became publicly known to many of his Acquaintance and Neighbors, and
occasioned many, besides those sent for to visit and discourse with him, and
others to write to him, the substance whereof, with his Answers, you have as
follows.

Some Account of Mr. John Child, by Mr. -- D.
MY Acquaintance with Mr. Child was of about fifteen years standing. About two
years since meeting with a Book which I was informed he had caused to be
published but two days before I saw it, I went presently and gave him a visit,
and found him in his Chamber in a very pensive posture, his Eyes red with
Tears, he immediately acknowledged he was the Author of it, and bitterly
exclaimed against himself, that he wrote it in malice, and by the instigation
of the Devil, from very ill principles of Pride, Vainglory, and Hypocrisy. I
quickly found the wound upon his Spirit was very deep, and therefore forbore
all Aggravations, and endeavored to administer some spiritual Relief to him*

After this, in his Discourse to others, he seemed not to have so sharp a sense
upon his Mind; but for ought I could observe, the Sore continued festered
inwardly, from the first time he reflected upon his publishing that Book, to
the end of his miserable Life, though it brake not out openly, till about July
last. About August last I gave him another Visit, and then found him (though
naturally of a strong Constitution and lively Spirit) so exceedingly shaken,
that the horror of the sight made such deep impressions, as I think will at
seasons recur, and set it self before me afresh, as long as I live. His Speech
was very regular, which discovered his Memory to be good, and that his
Distemper had not seized his Head, but his Heart. He freely discoursed the
grief of ^is Mind, expressing and setting forth his Condition to be most
deplorable, as having no hopes of salvation. I laid before him, with the
greatest tenderness, the freeness and riches of Gods Grace, choosing to argue
from his own former declared Opinion against limiting of it, but could fasten
no word of consolation or hope upon him.

With some Reluctance he granted me liberty to pray with him; but said, his
Spirit was shut up, he could not pray; and while I was praying he often
groaned, and after I had ended, told me, God would make him a terrible Example
to this present Age, and though he was full of benignity, yet he was also a
terrible God, being provoked. These Expressions, and the horror that appeared
in his Eyes and all parts of his body, drew many tears from mine Eyes, and
rendered the Spectacle so dreadful that (I cannot say as is reported of one that
visited Francis Spira, that he would go a thousand miles to see another Spira;
but on the contrary) I desire I may never see the like Spectacle again, whilst
I live in this world.

He told me he thought (either in a dream, or when he was awake, he could not
tell which) that I should say to him, If he died the common death of all men,
the Lord had not spoken by me: I answered, He better knew the temper of my
Spirit and Principles, than to conceive such a thought of me, or that I should
take up the words of the Prophet of God divinely inspired, and apply them to
him: but all I could say, abated nothing of the horror of his Soul, that I
could perceive.

This Comment I make upon it, that if any Atheist in the world, who had
formerly known this man, and had conversed with him in these his Agonies, he
would have seen sufficient to have convinced him that there is a Power besides,
and so much above Nature, as can with a touch shake and disorder, and turn into
confusion the strongest constitution of body, by ministering and fastening
terrible things upon the Soul.

That when God wounds the Spirit of a man, neither he himself can bear it, nor
can any other aid him. Therefore it is a fearful thing to fall under the Wrath
of the living God, who is a consuming Fire, and can at his pleasure awaken a
stupid Conscience, and revive upon it the memory and horror of such sins as
seem to be past over and forgotten.

My Prayer is, that this man being made as a Pillar of Salt, may warn the
present and future Ages of the danger of sinning against the present Light of
their Understandings.

The Effect of a Conference between Mr. John Child and Mr. B. K.
ABout the middle of July 1684. Mr. B. K. went to see Mr. Child, not hearing
the least report of any trouble he was then under, and after some discourse
which passed between them, Mr. K. occasionably mentioned that Book called, A
Second Argument, telling Mr. Child, he was reported to be the Author thereof:
which he presently acknowledged, and cried out against himself in a bitter
manner, saying, What he had done therein, was out of Malice and Revenge against
those People; and seemed to abhor himself for casting such abominable
Reproaches upon them, whom he said, he knew deserved it not; and presently
desired Mr. K. to go up stairs with him, which he did: and then he farther
signified to him his deplorable condition, and what horror and anguish of Soul
he lay under, and that there was no mercy for him. And Mr. K. being on a sudden
surprised with his deep expression of horror, of which he had heard nothing, it
did amaze him; yet he endeavored with the utmost of his ability to comfort
him, by showing the greatness of Gods mercy to true penitent persons, together
with the infinite worth and value of Christ's Blood, telling him withal, that
he was glad to find he had the sense of his great Evil on his heart, or words
to that effect, and that he hoped this breaking, was in order to healing: But
Mr. Child said, he doubted of that. And all the Words and Arguments Mr. K.
could use to satisfy him, were in vain: so that at that time, it being late at
night, he took his leave of him.

Mr. K. Soon after, he came to seek me at my house; but then I could not stay
long with him. -- But a few days after, when he sent for me, I went, and found
him in bed rolling and tumbling up and down in a lamentable manner, enough to
pierce ones heart. I said to him, Mr. Child, I thought by your deportment, when
you was at my house, the burden was pretty well off; or to that effect.

Mr. Child. No; no; my burden is greater than I can bear -- I would fain be
satisfied as touching one thing.


Mr. K. What is that?


Mr. Jo. Child. Whether my sin may not be that against the Holy Ghost.


Mr. K. I hope and believe it is not.


Mr. Child. But I wrote the Book out of malice.


Mr. K. There is a great deal of difference between doing a thing out of malice
and prejudice against the Lord's People, and acting out of malice against
Christ himself, or doing despite to the Spirit of Grace. I do not doubt, but
that you always had holy and reverent dread and respect to the Name of God,
though you might take up a great offense against some of his People.


Mr. Child. I have often had* that Scripture brought to me, Psalm. 50.19, 20.
Thou give thy mouth to evil, and with thy tongue thou forgest deceit. Thou
sit and speak against thy brother, and slanderest thy mothers son. And
of that which follows: Consider this, ye that forget God, lest I tear you in
pieces.


Mr. K. But pray observe, though you should be guilty of that great evil there
mentioned, yet there is ground of hope in that you are exhorted to consider --
I used many Arguments to persuade him to rely on the mercy of God through Christ,
mentioning that passage of the Prophet David, Forgive me my sin, for it is
great; and how wonderfully he had manifested and magnified the attribute of his
mercy, in pardoning great and bloody sinners.


Mr. Child. (Breaking forth into bitter tears, cried out) I know that the
Majesty of Heaven is a good and gracious Being, yet when provoked (stretching
forth his hands in a frightful manner) he is a terrible God.


Mr. K. I think it is necessary that you retract what you have written in that
Book, for that I think nothing short of it will be a demonstration of the
sincerity of your heart; and proof of the truth of your repentance.


Mr. Child. I have begun to write, but I cannot write, neither have I any one
of the Books.


Mr. K. I will see and get you one of them, and send it to you.

At another time I advised him to consult some Physician about his health. --
To which he made no answer.


Mr. K. Shall I acquaint any persons with your condition? (mentioning some
worthy Ministers to him, whom he knew Mr. Child formerly had a great esteem
for.)


Mr. Child. I should be glad to s^e, Mr. P.


Mr. K. assured him he would do his endeavor therein, and accordingly did, and
made known his fearful state to diverse others; by which means Mr. J. sent him a
comfortable Letter, and many godly persons went to visit him.


Mr. K. at another Visit not long before his death, perceiving the anguish of
his Spirit was rather greater than ever, asked him, Have you not yet any more
light?


Mr. Child. No, nor never shall.


Mr. K. Shall I and two or three more, such as you shall best approve of, come
and spend some time in Prayer to the Lord for you? -- To which he gave no
answer, though much pressed to it.


Mr. Child at another time said, I have touched the Apple of God's Eye -- I am
damned.


Mr. Child's Wife said, That she found sometimes in the night-season, that the
very ends of his Hair did stand in drops, through the anguish of his Spirit,
continually crying out against himself for writing that Book. --


A Letter in July 1684. from Mr. J. to Mr. Child.
I Am informed that your Soul is greatly afflicted in the sense of your Evil: I
design not to add to your grief, but as I ought to pity the afflicted. Our Lord
will not break the bruised Reed, nor quench the smoking Flax: And I have
learned from him my part, the duty of a true Neighbor, to do what I can for
cleansing and healing the Wounds you have made in your own Conscience.

Thereforefore, I pray you consider, 1. God's own Children are sometimes guilty
of backsliding. 2. That it is the Will of God, they should return to him from
whom they have revolted. 3. That he is ready to receive and heal them upon
their return; and I pray God you may be helped to say the next words in
sincerity of heart: Behold I come unto thee, for thou art the Lord my God.

Consider, upon repentance and returning, Isai. 55
God will abundantly pardon such as have abundantly sinned. The Lord help you
to plead as David did, For thy name sake, pardon my iniquity, for it is great.
Psalm. 2^


Consider, Christ is able to save to the utmost, Heb. 7.
them that come unto God by him. Let these few Lines be acceptable to you, from
him who prays for you, and remains

Your Cordial Friend, J. J.


Upon the receipt and reading this Letter, Mr. Child was heard to say, What! is
J. J. whom I have so greatly envied, so kind to me? and presently set Pen to
Paper, and writ, and in some few days sent a doleful Letter to the said J. J. A
Copy whereof follows.

Mr. J. July 30. 1684.
YOurs I received this day, but without date, the latter part of which has
attained its wish and desire; for it is very acceptable unto me, and can be no
otherwise, where the least degrees of gratitude do remain. And for the
Expressions of your Christian love, and desires of my happiness in all
respects, lays a double obligation upon me to esteem your friendship. What you
have been informed of, my Souls affliction, is true, and I think no small cause
for it, dishonor to God, grieving his Spirit, sinning against Christ,
blaspheming his Tabernacle, persecuting the Saints, grieving and wounding
thousands dear to Jehovah; stumbling the Weak, shortning Life, weakening Senses,
destroying rational Powers, giving occasion to the wicked to blaspheme, and the
uncircumcised to rejoice; the destroying inward Peace and outward Felicity, the
turning Light into Darkness, and the Noonday into horrible Night; the provoking
God to make the Heavens Brass, the Earth Iron, and the Rain nothing but Powder
and Dust; the shutting a man out from the comforts of the Promises, and
bringing of him under the most dismal Threats that ever an Almighty Being gave
forth; marring all Comforts, spoiling all Joys, making the Life a Burden, and
Death a Terror; the putting besides Duty, and all acceptable improvements of
Talents; the giving the Devil advantage, and bringing the Salvation into
imminent danger; the being possessed with Doubts, Fears, and Tremblings night and
day; the sad savor of Gall and Wormwood, and harsh relish of Gravel-stones;
the sad apprehensions of Curses, Blasting, and Mildew, of Caterpillars,
Locusts, and Cancer-worms; the dismal sound of the mad Prophets words, I shall
see him, but not now, I shall behold him, but not nigh, is a sufficient ground
of Soul-affliction. Your tender aim and charitable design in the balmy
Application you sent, I have reason well and kindly to resent, and wish they
had been high enough to hit the mark, and have answered the design. Had I been
a Backslider of an ordinary size, they might have had an effectual Operation:
but to that it is vastly different; I have a Voice behind me, or dire Texts,
that make a dreadful sound. To love and to make lies, is a qualification for
the Lake. He shall have Judgment without mercy, that showed none. To offend one
little one, is a sin against Christ, and a condition worse than to have a
Millstone about the neck with a cast into the Sea. To slander the Mothers Son,
is near destruction by a tearing to pieces; but what is prepared and justly
deserved, for condemning many Generations of the just; branding and wounding
and grieving Thousands and Ten Thousands of good and just Men, by charging
Consequences upon their Principles, beyond the sense of their minds, and
rendering them not only mislead and deceived, but no Church, no Christians, vile
Monsters, Infidels, Robbers of God, my, Murderers of the worst sort and highest
order, great Enemies to their Native Country; but the aching of my Heart, stops
the progress of my Hand, upon the repetition of these astonishing things. I
thank you for your kindness; I beg pardon for my own shortness, and conclude
these Lines very sad and hopeless.

John Child.


After the receipt of this from Mr. J. Child, J. J. wrote again to him to this
effect:

Mr. John Child, Aug. 1. 1684.
IN continuance of my tender Compassions, because of your Soul's Afflictions,
and being encouraged by your kind acceptance of those few Lines I sent you
before, I now write again, taking notice of your many doleful Expressions,
wherein you highly, and, I hope, humbly aggravate your Backsliding from God,
wronging his Servants, and toward the close, that my application of God's
healing backsliding Children, might have hit the Mark, had you been a
Backslider of an ordinary size; Now therefore, that I may be a little helpful
to your distressed Soul, (if the Lord please to support you from sinking into
the sad Gulf of Despair,) 1st. Consider the greatness of David's sin of
Adultery, and contriving the Death of Uriah, yet being truly penitent, he was
graciously pardoned. 2ly, The greatness of Manasseh's Sins, his Idolatry,
causing his Children to pass through the Fire, using Enchantments and
Witchcrafts, dealing with Familiar Spirits, filling Jerusalem with Innocent
Blood; yet humbling himself in his misery, he obtained mercy of God. 3ly, That
God has offered mercy to scarlet and crimson sinners. 4ly, Not only to
ordinary but extraordinary backsliders. 5ly, To Peter, after he denied his
Master with Cursing and Swearing. 6ly, Christ came to save the chief of
sinners. 7ly, He will in no wise cast off any that come to him, and is able to
save them to the utmost. Submit therefore to Mercy upon a probability; upon a
perhaps God may forgive; Go to Christ as one condemned, and deserving to be
executed, and plead, that you have heard the King of Israel is a merciful King.
Thus, with my Prayers for you, I am

Your Soul's real Friend, J. J.


After Mr. John Child received this Letter, Mr. J. F. and other Friends
visiting him, he read it to them, trembling and paraphrasing thereon, sadly
bemoaning himself, saying, that the mercy that David, Manasseh, and Peter had,
did not belong to him, and wept biterly.

Mr. J. F. advised him to write an Answer of that Letter, to Mr. J. J. which in
few days he did, and sent it by Mr. F. but before it was delivered, Mr. Child
came himself to Mr. J. who gave him a friendly welcome, and asked how it was
with him? he answered, I am very bad; it is very bad with me. Mr. J. replied,
But God is very good, yea, abundantly good to them who have been abundantly bad
to him. Mr. Child laid his hand upon his breast, and said, I shall never lose
those Notions of God's goodness, but what is that to me? I cannot make any
application of it to myself, and as he was walking to and fro, greatly
disturbed in his mind, he made a sudden stand, and said, I think I am damned.
To which Mr. J. returned to this effect: God's thoughts are not as Man's
thoughts; (...). 8 41,
sometimes Men think of themselves better than God thinks of them; sometimes
Men think worse of themselves, and of their state, than God thinks: I hope
God's thoughts concerning you, differ from your thoughts in this latter sense;
think on that Text, Isa. 55.8. My thoughts are not your thoughts, neither are
your ways my ways, says the Lord. Mr. Child said, I have Preached from that
Text formerly, and presently repeated these words: Esau found no place for
Repentance, though he sought it carefully with Tears. (...) ^0.12.
Mr. J. replied, Esau could not prevail with his Father. Then Mr. Child sat
down very sad, and said, I cannot repent. Mr. J. replied, Christ is exalted as
a Prince and a Savior, to give repentance and forgiveness of sins; Therefore
cry to him to give you this repentance. Mr. Child (after a little time of
silence) repeated that word, He shall have judgment without mercy, that showed
no mercy.

It is observable, that Mr. Child's design in coming to Mr. J. was to engage
him not to show the Letter which he had sent him by Mr. F. but to conceal it;
and while they were reasoning together, Mr. F. came in, and delivered the
Letter to Mr. J. but after he had read it, he told Mr. Child, it was not
convenient to conceal the matter of it, because it would engage godly persons
to pray for him; but Mr. Child, with a dreadful look, fixed his Eyes on Mr. J.
snacht the Letter out of his hand, and then was troubled he had so done;
whereupon Mr. J. consented to his carrying it away, that he might not increase
the trouble of his mind; which Mr. Child took kindly: and so they parted.

After the death of Mr. Child, that Letter was found among his Papers; a Copy
whereof take as follows.

Mr. J. J.
YOur kind and Christian Letter I received, and I thank you for the great Pains
you took to comfort me, and keep me from immediate desperation; but still my
Burden remains great, and mine Iniquities are great date, and many Old Sins, as
well as some of late, come to mind; -- Wrath is coming to the utmost: I am
forsaken of God; Good Men are mine Enemies; I hate my self; I am afraid and
ashamed abroad; I am confused and distracted at home; The Scriptures look
dreadfully upon me; I have not only taken up a Reproach against my Neighbor,
which excludes a man God's holy hill, Psalm. 15. but have raised Reproach,
invented Reproach, and by it wronged multitudes; slanderously reported it to
the Nation: It Is just by St. Paul's sentence, Afraid I am to live, afraid I am
to die; Judgment I fear will be terrible in this World, and more in the World
to come: Some men's sins go beforehand to judgment, and those that do not,
cannot be hid when we come before the great Tribunal; I cannot give an account
of my Actions to Men, how much less to God, my Heart condemns me, and he is
greater, and knows more; I think I have not only out done Cain, Balaam, and
Judas, but many of the Devils themselves; What I acted against Men was at an
ill time; there is all bad Circumstances attended my Actions; I could not have
thought I had done such things, till I lately looked them over; I dread
Damnation, but can see no way to escape; I know God's mercy is great above the
Heavens, but it is barred up and cannot pass to me, I cannot perform the
condition of obtaining; I have dismal Temptations, they have almost broken me
to pieces; I am not reconciled to those I have offended, how then shall my gift
be accepted; If I am justly sentenced on Earth, it is bound in Heaven; how then
shall it be reversed? my Friends will not be reconciled and at peace with me:
Much more I could write, but want time. I remain him that calls himself, a
Devil incarnate.


To which Letter of Mr. Child's -- Mr. J. upon the memory of what he had read,
might before Mr. Child took it out of his hand, return an Answer to this
effect, That he simpathiz'd with his Sorrows, and was very much concerned at
the dreadful charge therein laid upon himself, which by all the Arguments in
Scriptures he could think upon, he endeavored to remove the weight that
oppressed his mind from their influence, and particularly, that his Brethren whom
he had offended, were ready with open Arms and Hearts to receive him, and
forgive any wrongs he had done unto them. Much of the Matter of the Letter we
have omitted, because of its similitude with what he had formerly wrote.

The Effect of several Conferences between Mr. Child, and Mr. H. C.
MR. C. I am come, Mr. Child, with a design to serve your Soul, if it lie in my
power.


Mr. Child. God has for several Years past, been rending and tearing me in my
Estate, cursing and blasting all I have put my hand to, and prospered me in
nothing, (and, in much horror, clapping his hands to his Heart, said,) Here it
is, and I shall die.


Mr. C. I am informed your Trouble arises from the publishing a Book,
entitled, The Second Argument for a more firm Union amongst Protestants. What
part of that Book troubles you most?


Mr. Child. (Taking up the Book in his hand, began to read where he says, the
greatest Number of Dissenters do hold Principles dangerously heretical, and
most abominably abusing the most holy and blessed God, etc. but before he could
end that Paragraph, being under extreme agony of mind, and weeping bitterly,
put the Book from him, and spoke to this effect, viz.) I have represented those
of Calvin's Principles beyond whatever they conceived, strained their Opinions
beyond their Intentions, and drawn such Consequences as never were in their
minds, and, striking his breast with much anguish, said, These Words lie close;
I shall never get over this; I writ in prejudice against them, calling them a
villainous body of People, which was unjust.


Mr. C. said, Are you not heartily sorrowful for writing this?


Mr. Child. Oh that I could repent; I cannot repent.


Mr. C. If it were now to do, would you do it again? the best part of
repentance is to turn from evil.


Mr. Child. I know there is in Repentance three things; Confession, Contrition,
and Restitution.


Mr. C. We are not capable of making God restitution, he pardons and justifies
for his own Name's sake, and Christ's sake; but restitution is to be made to
our Neighbor; and if you are sensible God has been dishonored, and his
People wronged in that Book, your next work is to make restitution in like
manner, by a (...)


Mr. Child. This is the opinion of some others also, and I think it ought to be
done; (and walking about the Room, with great horror of soul, said,) I have
been guilty of many Evils: I have for several years lived a very ungodly Life,
neglected Family-duty, Closet-duty, Publick-duty in the Church of God; I have
been greatly guilty of Pride, endeavoring to run every man down in dispute; I
have made this World my God, and been guilty of that Idolatry, Ephesians. 5. I have
not been a little guilty of Hypocrisy; I have endeavored by all ways and
means to shake the Cross of Christ from off my shoulders; and I fear I have
been guilty of Blasphemy: I have wronged many a poor Soul by writing as I have
done; I have wished myself in their condition, and would have given many
Thousands of Pounds, (had I had it) to have been in as good a condition as some
of them I writ against: I have discoursed you, and Mr. B. and J. and have
thought to run down your Opinion by a Spirit of Insolency and Pride, but the
Judgments of God have followed me; he has rent and torn me for these things,
and now I shall die, I am struck with death.


Mr. C. Suppose you should die to Night, (as we know not how it may be with any
of us) can you contentedly sink into the Abyss of Misery, without striving for
Salvation? would you not run to Christ? strive to take hold of him and his
purchased blessedness.


Mr. Child, (with a very grim countenance said,) I shall go to Hell; I am
broken in judgment; when I think to Pray, either I have a flushing in my face,
as if I were in a flame, or I am dumb and cannot speak, or else I fall asleep
upon my knees; all the signs of one whom God has left forsaken and hardened.


Mr. C. If God should impute to you the righteousness of Christ, would it be of
any advantage to you?


Mr. Child. If God would be so gracious, as to impute Christ's righteousness to
me, it would make me a happy man.


Mr. C. Did you do what you did, in writing that Book, against the light of
your Conscience, or motions of the Spirit?


Mr. Child. I think I did not formally sin against the light of my Conscience
and Spirit of God; yet what I did, was mixed with malice, with this cheat in my
heart, It may be it may do them good. The Night before the Book was published,
I had some reluctance and gripes of Conscience.


Mr. C. Why did you not call them in before they were published?


Mr. Child. I fell ill upon it, and found myself more and more entangled and
ensnared; one door was opened, and another door was opened to my ruin, as if I
were a man designed for damnation.

After some reasonings about Baptism, Conformity, and the Troubles which
Nonconformists were under, (he said,) I have abundance of carnal fleshly
Reasonings, I am under the power of unbelief and distrust; for these are my
Arguings in me, Should I stick to the Church of England, then those I have
written against, would account me the greatest Hypocrite in the world, to make
so much ado about despair, for what I have done against them; Should I leave
the Church of England, and stick to the Dissenters, and with full purpose of
heart cleave to the Lord, then, if ever I am taken in a Meeting, they will have
no mercy on me, and triumph, This is the Man who made his Recantation, and then
ruin me to all intents and purposes, and I cannot bear the thoughts of a Cross,
nor a Prison.


Mr. C. Two things are essentially necessary to the peace of your Soul, with
all speed to publish your Recantation, and set your self to know the truth of
God, and cleave to it.


Mr. Child. What an astonishing consideration is it for a man to die in this
condition I am in; To be under horror for writing such things, and yet have no
power to renounce it; for should I do so, I should be quickly ruined in my
Estate; I had a fancy the other morning, that the Sheriffs and their Officers
were coming to seize all that I had; and about a week since I had that word,
Can thine heart endure, or thy hands be strong, in the day I will contend with
thee? I think I am now able to satisfy any Atheist in the world, that there is
a God; for I find the Arrows of the Almighty sticking in me, and he runs
upon me as a Lion. I thought, that I could go and fall at the feet of those I
have wronged, and beg their forgiveness, and wished often, Oh that I could
repent! O that God would wash me in the fountain of his Son's blood! O that I
had faith, that I could believe!


Mr. H. C. (Taking leave of Mr. Child,) Can you not desire my Prayers?


Mr. Child. This is a hard Question; (and, after a little pause, taking Mr. C.
by the hand, said,) for the sake of the Lord Jesus Christ, pray for me at
night, if there be any mercy yet left, that I may yet lie in the way of mercy.


Mr. C. (Finding the Troubles of Mr. Child still continuing and increasing, ^g.
21.84.
) What do you think would give you relief?


Mr. Child. If I were in Heaven, it could not relieve me; for there I should
behold the face of a holy God, holy Saints and Angels, (as now I behold the
face of good men upon Earth) with shame and confusion of face.


Mr. C. If God would take you into his favor, that would relieve you.


Mr. Child. His wrath is come upon me to the uttermost.


Mr. C. To despair, reflects upon the Sovereignty of God's grace.


Mr. Child. For those whose day of grace is not gone, God will multiply to
pardon, but it is too late for me, my day is gone.


Mr. C. Did not you write a Book before the second Argument? Aug. 3^ 1684.



Mr. Child. I did.


Mr. C. Did not a Gentleman write some Animadversions upon it, by way of Answer
in a Manuscript.


Mr. Child. He did.


Mr. C. Was it a sufficient Answer.


Mr. Child. It was rationally answered.


Mr. C. Yet you printed this Book afterward.


Mr. Child. I did.

After some time of calm reasoning, Mr. Child began to be again in a great
horror, and spoke to the effect following.


Mr. Child. I am one of the greatest Hypocrites that ever lived upon the Earth,
and shall be so accounted; God has done his will, and will do his will upon
me. The wicked shall fall into mischief, and the backslider in heart shall be
filled with his own ways; He that says he shall have peace, and walks in the
imagination of his evil heart, the Lord will not spare him, but then the anger
of the Lord, and his jealousy shall smoke against that man. Oh he thunders
upon me! should God let out the sense of my sins on me, (as he will) I should
houl like a Dog, roar like a Lion, bellow like an Ox, mine inward parts would
melt within me, as the brass melts in the flaming furnace; I shall lie lower
than Judas, lower than Judas, I have sinned worse than Judas.


Mr. C. You make application of the Curses in the Book of God, but not of the
Promises; Consider Isai. 55. Psalm. 34.5.


Mr. Child. Promises are Bread for Children; They looked on him, (...) were
lightened; I look unto him, and am darkened; he knows, (...) I have committed
such wickedness as never has been done.


(...) C. Do you not sometimes find an inclination to Pray?


(...) Child. Seldom or never; only about an hour before you (...) went about
it* but the end was dismal* That day you were here with Mr. W. I attempted it
three times, but could do nothing.


Mr. C. Shall I pray for you?


Mr. Child. No, no; it is too late: neither Men nor Angels can relieve me.


Mr. C. Job says, Though he slay me, yet will I trust in him.


Mr. Child. About two months since, I thought I had comfort and relief from
thence, but now I cannot tru^^^ in him; God says he will deal in a singular
manner with me here on Earth, and in Hell also.

Afterward quoted against himself those Expressions, Heb. 10.26. For if we sin
wilfully, after that we have received and acknowledged that truth, there
remains no more sacrifice for sin. 2 Pet. 2.20, 21, 22. For if after they have
escaped from the filthiness of the world, through the acknowledging of the Lord
and the Savior Jesus Christ, are yet tangled again therein and overcome, the
latter end is worse than the beginning; For it had been better for them, not to
have acknowledged the way of righteousness, than after they have acknowledged
it, to turn from the holy commandment given unto them: But it is come unto them
according to the true proverb; The dog is returned to his own vomit, and the
sow that was washed, to the wallowing in the mire. And Mr. Child said, When I
am faint and low, I now take somewhat to refresh me, but in Hell there is no
refreshment, not a drop of water to cool my tongue. I wonder that my Head (tho
it do not ache) does not burst asunder; it is filled with dismal Cogitations.


Mr. C. ^ept. 13. ^684.
with one Mr. R. gave Mr. Child another visit, and Mr. R. put him upon saying
the Lord's Prayer.


Mr. Child. I have thought of that, but I dare not say it, for these Reasons:
1st, I cannot call God, Father. 2dly, I cannot say, Thy Will be done. 3ly, I
cannot say, Forgive me my Trespasses as I forgive them that trespass against
me. -- All that I have is cursed to me; I cannot give God thanks for what I eat
and drink.


Mr. C. Have you a desire to be saved?


Mr. Child. Yes, upon my own terms, and not according to God's.

It was then asked Mr. Child, what those terms were? but he would make no
answer; so we parted.


A Conference of some Friends with Mr. ^ctob. 12. ^684.
John Child.
Company. THE last time I saw you, you said, you had a peradventure to depend
upon, and that was all; I hope you have


Mr. Child. No, all is gone.


Company. Is God gone, and Christ gone?


Mr. Child. All is gone; I am undone.


Company. I hope the Lord will return again.


Mr. Child. You cannot hope so concerning me.


Company. Where Christ begins a good work he will perfect it.


Mr. Child. If I had any; but all is gone (if ever I had any).


Company. You would do well to use the means of Grace, and frequent the Society
of God's People, and desire their Prayers, though you say you have no mind to
pray nor desire their Prayers, yet if you go among them, you know not what God
may do for you. Consider 2 King. 7.4.


Mr. Child. I have been so great a sinner against God and the People of God,
that God will have no mercy for me.


Company. If God bring you out of this condition, it may be more to his honor
and glory, and to your strengthening and establishing of his People, than all
you have done in times past.


Mr. Child. God will glorify himself by me, and make me an Example for the
strengthening and establishing of his People; but it shall end in my destruction.


The substance of some Conferences held between Mr. John Child and Mr. E. P.
who was frequently with him in the year before he died.
THE first time he saw Mr. Child, after he had declared his Trouble, he seemed
to be in a very great Agony, often spreading out his Arms, lamentably
expressing himself several times, and said,

Oh that I might be a good man; but there is no hopes for me! It is now too
late: I am the greatest Hypocrite in nature.

Mr. P. Pray you, Mr. Child, instance in particulars.


Mr. Child. I have been a dreadful Hypocrite in offering Repentance, when I had
none.


Mr. E. P. I am a stranger to any Repentance you offered.


Mr. Child. I have pretended such a thing, though you know it not.


Mr. E. P. Do you intend any Repentance you have offered for the printing and
publishing that Book?


Mr. Child. Yes.


Mr. E. P. It seems you confess you ought to repent of the publishing of that
Book.


Mr. Child. Yes: it requires that Repentance that I shall never be


Mr. P.'s Friend. Do you think that God is able to pardon you?


Mr. Child. No.


Mr. P. What is your reason?


Mr. Child. God has sworn in his wrath, that I shall never enter into his Rest.


Mr. P. How do you know that God has so sworn concerning you?


Mr. Child. (Setting himself down, said) I confess a man should not affirm that
which he has no reason for. -- But rose up as one discontented, and gave no
further Answer.


Mr. P. Pray you let me be more inwardly acquainted with the state of your Soul.


Mr. Child. The wrath of God is kindled and burns within me -- It is impossible
for you to imagine my torment, and this is but an earnest penny of my eternal
damnation. -- I have guilt enough upon me to sink seventeen Kingdoms; and I
know the Earth would open its mouth and swallow me up alive, like Corah,
Dathan, and Abiram, were it not that God has reserved me to be a more public
Spectacle of his Anger and displeasure, both to Angels and men. -- God has
taken away my Tallent from me, and the influence of the divine Spirit has
altogether left me: I can neither pray, nor desire others to pray for me; my
heart is perfectly hardened.


Mr. P. Could you wish that those that have an interest in God, should improve
it for you?


Mr. Child. How should I, when I cannot desire Jesus Christ to pray for me? I
am now out of hopes, for the Prayers of the Godly are recorded in Heaven
against me, (floods of tears flowing from his Eyes.) Dear bought Experience
has taught me, that it is not a small thing to trifle with the great Concerns
of Religion and Eternity, as most men account it. I have made a God of this
World, and neglected God and his Christ; and therefore these things are justly
come upon me. I have been a loose and carnal Professor; and if I were in the
place of God, I should meet the same measure that God does to me. My Calamity
is even at the door, and all men in a little time will justify Gods dealing
with me.


Mr. P. Pray you explain your self in these things.


Mr. Child. (Evading further Discourse) you shall have the full Account of it
in print.


His Wife. Who shall print it?


Mr. P. I suppose Mr. Child intends some signal Impression by Divine Vengeance.


Mr. Child. Though what you have said is true, yet it is not what I intended;
for I have resolved to give the World an Account of my Condition in a printed
Paper.


Mr. P.'s Friend. This is an humbling Dispensation, that you are exercised
under.


Mr. Child. An humbling Dispensation, do you call it! I tell you it is a
hardening Dispensation, and I feel it to be so.


Mr. E. P. I hope there is mercy yet reserved for you.


Mr. Child. I know I shall have mercy, such as the damned have. I do highly
justify God in his dealings with me.


A Friend. Your justifying the dealings of God with you, is a good sign.


Mr. Child. God can open the mouths of Reprobates to justify his proceedings.


Mr. P. I hope that God will appear in a way of mercy to your Soul, if you
sincerely and heartily apply your self to him.


Mr. Child. The most Judicious men know that I am a damned and lost man.


Mr. P. (Walking with him in the Fields) You seem now to be more settled in your
mind.


Mr. Child. Though no consideration can yield me peace or comfort, yet the
violence of my Torments admits of some intermissions; and therefore I am not so
sensibly afflicted at all times, if I had but such a sense of my sin as I ought
to have, I should burst asunder, or (like Judas) use extremity toward my self.


Mr. P. What mean you by that passage (blaspheming his Tabernacle) in your
Letter to Mr. J.


Mr. Child. By it I intended reproaching and scandlizing the Church.


Mr. P. (Taking the Letter out of his pocket) Do you own the Contents of this
Letter?


Mr. Child. Yes, and it was written by me as with the Pen of a ready Writer. --
I would fain believe, but all power is taken away from me.


Mr. P. I have discoursed with Mr. M. about your Case, and it is his opinion,
that a Recantation is your first step in order to peace in your mind, and spoke
it with much concern of your Soul.


Mr. Child. (Shedding many tears and expressing a passionate inquiry) Is this
true, that he is concerned for me? By which expression, with the manner of it,
Mr. P. collected that it gave some ease to the mind of Mr. Child, to have his
condition entertained in (...)


The substance of another Conference between Mr. John Child and Mr. H. D. Mr.
E. M. Mr. F. and Mr. J. B.
Mr. D. HOW is it with you, Sir?


Mr. Child. I am in great confusion and disorder in my Spirit -- I have sinned
against so much Grace, that I am without hopes of receiving mercy.


Company. If your trouble is in respect of the Book which you have written,
whereby you have done so much injury to the suffering People of God, the best
way we can advise you to, is to free your Conscience from guilt, will be to
make your Repentance and Recantation as public as your sin is, Jo. 7.19.


Mr. Child. I must confess I stand greatly indebted to the Public, but I am so
confused in my mind, that when I think of doing it, I can do nothing. -- There
are three things which are a burden to me; my sin against God, which is
impardonable; my sin against God's People; and another thing --


Company. What is that other?

To which he made no Answer.


Company. Do you think that impardonable sin you mentioned, is the sin against
the Holy Ghost?


Mr. Child. I cannot tell.


Company. Was what you did, done maliciously against God, Christ and the holy
Spirit, and God's People?


Mr. Child. No.


Company. Then it may comfortably be concluded, you have not sinned that sin,
and therefore you may take encouragement from the comfortable words of Christ,
viz. that all other sins and blasphemies may be forgiven you, (quoting many
proper Scriptures:) Consider the instances of David, Manasseh, Peter, Paul, and
the Jews who were guilty of crucifying our Savior, and imprecated the guilt of
his Blood upon their Children, to whom yet our Savior in his rich mercy
commands his Disciples first to preach the Gospel. Is your condition worse than
theirs?


Company. It may be your Endeavors heretofore, too much to advance Free Will,
and the power of the Creature, may be one reason why the Lord has permitted
you thus to fall.


Mr. Child. You have hit it, Sir; I once thought there was a power in man, but
now I find it otherwise, for I cannot pray; the Lord has taken away the gift
of Prayer from me -- I have no desire after any thing that is good. I cannot
repent.


Company. Christ is exalted to be a Prince and a Savior to give repentance and
remission of sins. -- Shall we now pray for you?


Mr. Child. Yes.

Then one of the Company prayed, and upon parting, Mr. Child thanked them for
their Visit, and said to this effect: -- All this will make against me.


A Conference between Mr. John Child, Mr. T. W. Mr. A. B. and Mr. F. M.
Company. AS Physicians visiting their Patients, so Friends, one that is
wounded in Spirit, enquire what is the cause of his grief: We pray you declare
your mind herein. -- To this, for about half an hour, they could obtain no
Answer.


Company. The Apostle Paul endeavored to recover such again as had fallen from
an Article of Faith, 1 Cor. ^^ 12, 13 2 Tim^ ^^ 25, 2^
without which they could not be saved; and counseled others in meekness to
instruct such as oppose themselves, if God peradventure would give them
Repentance to the acknowledgement of the truth. What do you think of Spira's
condition?


Mr. Child. Spira's condition was nothing to mine; for wrath is come and coming
on me to the utmost, because I have forsaken that which I believed to be true,
to embrace that which I knew to be false, through slavish fear to keep my self
from sufferings. -- I sought to be great in the world, but God crossed me therein
in all my designs. And since the hand of God has been upon me, my Spirit has
oftentimes risen against God that gave me nourishment by food and sleep. (And
looking to the Ceiling, said,) I see as it were a little light through a cranny
or crevise, as if I would desire to pray. (then Tears came down his Cheeks
abundantly, and he said,) If it would please God to manifest himself to me, I
should be such a Monument of Mercy as never was in the world, to be a warning
to all others.


Company. It Is the Apostles council, that we confess our faults one to another,
and pray one for another, that we may be healed.


Mr. Child. (With Tears said) I cannot get this base heart to open it self
farther.


Company. Shall we pray for you?


Mr. Child. No, no, no.


Company. It Is desired you would set down in Writing the heads of your chief
Trouble.


Mr. Child. I did write something to that effect; but when I had done, I
destroyed it.


Some Passages between Mr. John Child and some of his Friends, collected by Mr.
H. C.
Mr. Child. (with Mr. R.) I Had a turn in my Spirit the last week, as a result
of that warm discourse I had with you and Mr. H. C. concerning the eminency and
sovereignty of the grace of God, but it is now gone again.


Mr. R. Implore again the Throne of Grace.


Mr. Child. I regard iniquity in my heart, and God will not hear my Prayer.
(And said to another) If God should send an Angel from Heaven to inform him, he
should not believe it.


Mr. Child (to Mr. W.) I cannot pray.


Mr. W. How can you, so long as you have a Lie in your right hand? Retract what
you have done publicly, or else you cannot expect to have an heart to pray.


Mr. Child. (To Mrs. M.) How deplorable a thing is this, that I who have
preached so much of the Glory of another World, should now be deprived of it
all! -- You will as surely see me damned, as you now see me stand here.


Mrs. M. Have you no intermission? -- Do such thoughts always attend you.


Mr. Child. I have intermission sometimes.


Mrs. M. Do you think God cannot save you?


Mr. Child. Yes, he can; or else I might desire to be in Hell immediately.


Mrs. M. Do you think God will not save you?


Mr. Child. I cannot believe that he will.


Mrs. M. What is the cause of all this trouble?


Mr. Child. That cursed Book.

Being at one Mr. C.'s, in discourse concerning Francis Spira, Mr. Child said,
I am an hundred times greater sinner than Spira, a thousand times ten thousand
times, yea, a hundred thousand times a greater sinner than he.


Mr. C. Do you love me?


Mr. Child. I love you. (And taking Mr. C. by the hand, said) I conjure thee by
the eternal God, that thou take care of my Wife and Children: I would give ten
thousand worlds for a God, and often -- Oh, what an ungodly Family have I!
Husband cannot pray, Wife cannot pray, Children cannot pray, Servants cannot
pray; while others are serving their God, we do nothing.


Mr. P. Mr. F. Mr. L. giving him a Visit, asked if they should pray with him?


Mr. Child. No, it is too late -- The company of good men are a burden to me --
They pressed him to publish Repentance for his Book that had caused him so much
trouble.


Mr. Child. I have sometimes thought so to do; but I am so confused and
confounded in my mind, that I know not what to do: I can do nothing to purpose.


Mr. L. (Offering him some good Counsel, and he returning no Answer, said) Do
you think what I speak is insignificant? is there no weight in what we say?


Mr. Child. There is not only enough in what you say to raise a man from Earth
to Heaven, but from Hell to Heaven, unless such an one as I, who have an heart
of a Devil -- I have no heart to read or pray, all good is departed from me.


Mr. Child, to Mr. M. asking how it was with him, answered, Very ill.


Mr. M. Mean you in body, or mind?


Mr. Child walking up and down the Room very disconsolate, looking much
downward,


Mr. M. said, Why do you look so much downward? Look up; for Salvation is not
from beneath, but from above.


Mr. Child replied, I would look upward, but I cannot. -- To another he said,
That hellish Book would ruin him in Body and Soul.

Another said, The learned Dr. Twist in his Vinditae Gratiae, confesses there
were depths in the Controversy between Calvanists and Arminians, which he
could not fathom, yet he believed the truth against the Arminians.


Mr. Child. Oh I thought I could have dived to the bottom of it by parts, but I
see I cannot. -- And then, and at many other times said -- I am broken in
Judgment, I have no consistency in my self: Adding -- I have trifled in
Religion, trifled, trifled many times: I am lost; there is no hope, no hope.

Another Friend present with him, had mentioned and turned to Prove. 1.25, 26.
Ye have set at naught all my counsel, and would none of my reproof: I also will
laugh at your calamity, I will mock when your fear comes.


Mr. Child took the Bible, put his finger on the place, showed it to us, and
said, That Is my Portion.


Mr. P. speaking to Mr. Child concerning Redemption and Forgiveness through Faith
in the precious Blood of Christ, and exhorting him to trust to it.


Mr. Child answered, Oh I cannot reach it, I cannot come at it. -- Again (with
a deep sigh) said, The black Token of Reprobation are upon me.


M. You are obliged to stoop to the Sovereignty of God.


Mr. Child. Oh I cannot, I would be above him. Oh that there should be an
eternal blessed Being, and I sure never to enjoy him! That there should be an
eternal Wrath and Punishment, and I sure to fall, to fall under it! -- I shall
be an eternal Monument of the Wrath of God!


The Effect of a Conference had with Mr. John Child, by T. P. between whom
there had been for diverse years more than a common Intimacy and Conversation.
MR. Child signified by a Friend, he had a great desire to speak with T. P. and
sent a short Letter to him to that purpose, concluding it thus: [ It may be of
advantage to the wretched Soul of him who was formerly known to you by the name
of John Child.]


T. P. gave him a meeting, and found him in a very dejected and despairing
frame, full of horror and confusion, crying out, (as soon as his Tears would
give him leave) that his condition was exceeding bad; that he was a miserable
wretch; that he had sinned at an extraordinary rate; that there was no mercy
for him; he had been guilty of those things spoken of Psalm. 50.19, 20. and that
the 22th verse was a dreadful word to him; for as God had there threatened, so
he would do to him, even tear him in pieces.


T. P. God there calls upon men who had forgotten him, to consider in order to
Repentance.


Mr. Child. Yea, so it was, and that sometime gave me a little hope; but it was
quickly over. (And rising up and walking, smote his breast, saying,) Sir, I am
damned, I am damned; it is most certainly so! my day is over. Oh that it were
with me as in days past! but it is too late: The Decree is gone forth, it is
sealed in Heaven, and it is irreversible: Jesus cannot now save me; he will
not, he cannot mediate for me, I have so much offended him, in maliciously
abusing his People. -- Oh what a Wretch was I! what a (...)


T. P. Remember the goodness of God to Mankind.


Mr. Child. That is a truth still, that is a truth still, but I cannot lay hold
on it: and by how much the more I have believed and asserted it, so much the
greater is my Sin and the aggravation of my Condemnation.


T. P. Remember what the Prophet speaks, Jer. 3.5, 12, 13. Will he reserve his
anger for ever -- Behold, thou have spoken and done evil things as thou
could, Go and proclaim these words -- Return thou backsliding Israel -- I am
merciful, says the Lord, I will not keep anger for ever, only acknowledge
thine iniquity --


T. P. Knowing his former temper of Spirit, told him, he feared his Pride and
Ambition had prompted him to do and publish such things, whereof he now felt
the unsupportable smart.


Mr. Child. This is true, Pride and Covetousness has ruined me, it has undone
me, I have been too much influenced thereby; I have been an Hypocrite; I am so
now; I seem to repent; I do not, I cannot repent.


T. P. I advise you to take care of your health, and consult with some able
Physician, lest this distress and horror of mind bring you under such
Distempers as may render you more incapable of receiving that advice and
comfort that may be offered to you from the Word of God.


Mr. Child walking to the end of the Room, turned back with a very stern
countenance, and striking his hand on his breast, said, No, Sir, I cannot
pamper this Body, for God will have it made a remarkable Example to this
Generation.


T. P. I advise you to frequent hearing the Word of God.


Mr. Child. I have no inclination to it.


T. P. Offered that some should come and improve some hours in Prayer to God
for him; but to this Mr. Child gave no answer.

This is the substance of what passed betwixt us about the beginning of August.
And soon after, going a Journey, I saw him no more.

Many other Passages, to the like effect, were uttered from Mr. Child, with
which his countenance, gestures, and whole behavior, bore such a proportion,
as were sufficient to evidence to all persons of understanding and sobriety,
who had formerly known him, and then heard and beheld him, that he apprehended
the Arrows of the Almighty to stick fast in him, and that the troubles,
darkness, confusions, horrors and affrightments of his Soul, were not less, if
they were not much more, than his Tongue expressed. In the dread and fear of the
righteous Judgments of him who is the searcher of all hearts, whom this Man had
so highly offended, in sinning against the light and checks of his Conscience,
I suffer not my thoughts to run out concerning his Eternal Estate. His remorse
of Conscience, self-condemnation, frequent asking forgiveness of his offended
Brethren, begging the Prayers of others, and attempts to pray himself, seemed
to savor of that which himself would not allow to be called repentance,
perhaps because his public recantation of the injuries done to his Brethren
(which he acknowledged to be just, but by reason of shame, and thereby exposing
himself to sufferings and losses, he could not bring his heart thoroughly to
consent to it) were by some made the terms of it. And however it pleases God,
in his long-suffering, to permit, without an open rebuke, such as make it a
trade, for gain sake, without any distinction of persons, as ignorantly as
maliciously to brand and calumniate a whole Society, with the high Crimes
committed by some few that bear their Name, to the scandal and grief of all
their Brethren, yet our God is a terrible God, that accepts no man's person,
nor takes rewards, but is known by the Judgments he executes; and in this
Person we have a dreadful Instance of his High Displeasure against such, who by
their Conversation amongst their Brethren, know how to distinguish between the
guilty and the innocent, and yet will dare presumptuously, for private and
selfish ends, hypocritically, and against the dictates of their own Knowledge
and Conscience, maliciously to accuse a whole Party, as guilty of such things,
whereof he knows, (if there be any) it is but here and there one among
thousands, that have ever administered any occasion for such an accusation:
which may be a warning to us all how we offend in the like kind.


Mr. John Child's Aspersions in his printed Plea of the Nonconformists for the
Conformists, to which, as we suppose, his Paper, written with his own Hand,
transcribed in the other Colume, refers.
Mr. Child's Recantation in his Paper, written with his own Hand.
That it is a dishonor to the Church and Clergy of England, to have such an
one, that has no more Wit, so little Justice, Reason and Conscience, plead for
them; that the Author of this Libel is worthily so represented, appears by
diverse base, false, devilish and most scandalous Passages therein contained.

Page 5. THE Nonconformist have no Order at all, especially the generality of
Mechanical Preachers in that Way; for either they leave their Callings, and
Concerns of their Families, and run up and down Preaching of their own Heads,
upon a phansical supposition, that they are able to Preach; or else, at most,
have but the consent and connivance of a few weak persons, like themselves, who
are altogether incompitent Judges in such a weighty Case. The Case being truly
thus, as we are able to make it good.

THey are represented as a People weak and phanatical, and not rendering a
tolerable Reason for their differing from others, which is a devilish stroke
made by a back blow; to assert the Nonconformist have no kind of Order in
sending forth their Ministers; that Preachers run on their own heads, upon a
phansiful supposition, that they are able to Preach, or, at most, have but the
consent and connivance of a few weak persons, is a Devilish Lie, as thousands
can witness; to say, it is a true state, or the Case being truly thus, as we
are able to make it good, Is a Lie, if possible, more than damnable.

Page 6. I durst undertake, upon a sober debate, to make good, that that loose
kind of way, made use of by them, is above measure more intolerable and
inconvenient than that of the Church of England.

To suggest again, that he is able to make good a loose kind of way amongst
them, more intolerable than those they descent from, is a wicked and base
reflection, and indeed a downright lie.

Page 7. To hear some Ministers of the Church of England, is not to the
dishonor of God, discommodious to the Souls of Men here, nor hazardous of
their Salvation hereafter.

Once to suppose, that the Nonconformists in general do hold, is a dishonor to
God, discommodious to the Souls of Men here, and hazardous of their Salvation
hereafter, to hear good Ministers of the Church of England, is most weak and
devilish.

Page 11. How shall we believe our Nonconformists have such a reverence for
those good men that are dead -- when they disdain and reject those now alive
that are under the same circumstances.

To declare, that the Nonconformists do disdain and reject the good Ministers
of the Church of England, now alive, is a vile slander unjustly cast upon them.

Page 14. We do say, though the Nonconformists may be honest and well-meaning
People, yet, for the most part of them, they are far below some Ministers
aforementioned, both for Learning, Parts, Prudence, Policy, yea, and Piety too.

To say, though they are well-meaning People, yet they are far below some
Ministers of the Church of England, is monstrous foolish, for so are the most
part of the People of the Conformists below some Ministers of the
Nonconformists, for Learning, Parts, Prudence, and Policy too. At what a
learned rate does this wicked Scribler argue.

Page 17. To say, there is greater Learning amongst them than the generality of
others.

To say, there is greater Learning with the Church-Ministers, than with others,
is a base and unworthy Comparison; it being well known, there are learned and
worthy Men amongst the Nonconformists, as most are in the World.

Page 18. Take two or three Mechanics in a Town, and put to these so many
Priests and Jesuits to dispute, and what fearful bafling work will they make
with these poor Mechanics or Lay-Preachers.

To put Lay-Preachers to dispute with Priests and Jesuits, when there are Men
learned and able to match them besides these, and then to suppose the victory
on the Papist-side, is base and disingenious.

Page 19. 1. For their Institution and Ordination, they have, 1. Persons of
ripe Age, great Learning, and much Experience, to come before, who have Power
and Parts to examine and try their fitness. 2. They have afterward
Congregations to preach before, for the approbation or dislike; and if they
shall be found fit to pass an induction, then there is a comfortable support
and maintenance for them, to encourage and carry them on encourage and carry
them on in their Work. Now of this useful Order, there is in a manner a total
vacancy amongst the Nonconformists -- No Maintenance for them, in case found
fit -- The Poor better provided for under the Ministers of the Church of
England, than elsewhere.

To condemn the Party, for shortness in a few, in respect of the Ministers and
the Poor, is horrible Injustice; To say, there is a total vacancy of any useful
Order amongst the Nonconformists, in respect of Proof, Trial, Ordination, and
Maintenance, is so grand a Lie, that the Devil himself cannot have confidence
enough to aver it.

Page 20. The Nonconformists in their carriage, are very surly and dogged, sour
and morose.

To say, they are in their common carriage, surly, dogged, sour, and morose, is
so grand a lie, that thousands and ten thousands can attest against it.

Page 21. The Doctrine of many Nonconformists has been to set out God to be a
vehement, rigid and severe Being, ready to take advantage, nay, to make them,
rather than fail, instancing the Epist. of Jude, that some are made to be taken
and destroyed, and that Esau, with the generality of others, were hated by him
that made them, without respect to any cause on their parts, intimating the
unmercifulness of God to the most part of Mankind, making of (...)

To charge an ill chain of Doctrines and Principles upon a Party, when not one
in a thousand do hold the same, is a kind of Justice and Charity that comes
from Hell.

Page 22. And that because we are all as dead (whilst we are alive) as a Stock
or a Stone, or, as a Mechanic had it lately in his Pulpit, as dead as a Corpse,
that lies by the Walls in a Coffin, ready for burial; That there is no
necessity for obedience to please God, or work out our own Salvation: Nay, as
one Mr. B -- phrased it, not long since in a Pulpit, It is Devilish, yea,
Witchcraft and Sorcery, for any to preach up doing for the obtaining Life and
Salvation; and that love to God himself is not necessary to a man's being saved.

When one man shall preach a groundless Notion or Doctrine, and a Party shall
be abused for it, it is very hardly less than damnable; many thousands do hold
noble Principles that have not affinity with a wronging God, Man, or the Gospel.

Page 24. I do profess, since I have allowed my self a little liberty to hear
the Ministers aforesaid, I have been greatly ashamed to think how ill I have
spent my time, to sit under the preaching of pitious weak Souls of the other
side, and am not at all pleased, to see well meaning People expose themselves
for suffering for so ill a Work.

To spend time in sitting under pitious weak Souls, is better than to spend it
in damnable lies and slanders against good men.

Page 25. For by this means they may come to see by an easy rule of comparison
the weakness and insufficiency of those that they formerly adhered to, and
admired, together with the great worth and value, that is in the other, whom
they before so slighted, and esteemed as the Sons of Beelzebub, the Merchants
of Babylon, or, at best, but the broken Army of Magog; the sight and
understanding of which (I doubt not) be an effectual means to cure them of that
distemper, which, for the extravagancy of it, may be called a Vertigo or
Calenture.

To set forth the Nonconformist setting light by Church-Ministers, esteeming of
them Sons of Beelzebub, Merchants of Babylon, or broken Armies of Magog, is
highly devilish, full of poison, and calls for great damnation; to affirm, that
the generality of the Nonconformist-Preachers, are weak, shallow, illiterate
and inconsiderate Men, is a damnable lie, for they are generally sober and
thinking men; to call them Brethren, with such blasting and poisonous breath,
is the Serpent, and worse than a Dog.

Page 26. If the Nation should be influenced by such men (as the flocking to
them, and leaving the other tends thereunto) then down goes our Schools of
Learning, the famous Universities, and not only so, but down goes our Churches
and Public Meeting-places, which are the best conveniences for solemnizing of
Gods Public Worship. As I knew a mechanic Brother once, that wished, that all
the Parish-Churches in England were of one entire body, and that he was able
with a Cable to draw them into the Sea, he would do it, tho he perished with
them. And this not all neither, but down goes the Ministers Maintenance -- I
might enlarge here, but I spare the weak. 1. They deny Learning. 2. They
trample Tradition. 3. Reason itself; this noble and renowned Soul falls under
the same misfortune, with its good old Friend and Neighbor, Tradition. Oh!
what Clamours have we raised against it, calling of it carnal Reason, corrupted
Reason, blind Guide, and what not, and blows struck ready to break the Pulpit,
that they may thump it down sufficiently.

To bring in one person that might be mad and mislead, and Enemy to
Parish-Churches and desire their downfall, and to lodge this at the doors of the
Party, It makes the Author a grand Devil. That passage [I might enlarge here,
but I spare the weak] savours of contempt and hellish pride; to say, that they
deny Learning, trample upon Tradition, and beat down Reason, is so grand a lie,
that the Author can never stand under it, when God comes to judge for it.

Page 28. They tolerate men incapable of the former, and very defective in the
latter, such whose learning never made them capable of reading with a didinct
and proper pronunciation.

They slight, undervalue, and reject men of the best parts and learning in the
Land, as might be made appear, nor only by the surly carriages they show
toward them, but by shunning their company, and at all times refusing to hear
them.

-- To set aside more private disorders, we have them that are open to the
sight of the Sun; viz. forty distinct Sects, some say twenty at least. --

That they tolerate Men incapable of Tradition, and defective in Reason, slight
and reject men of the best parts and learning in the Land, and show it by such
carriages, and shunning their company at all times, refusing to hear them.

This is so notorious and foul a slander, that declares the Author to be a
blind and besotted Devil.

To number up the Sects to twenty or forty, carries a secret malice in it, that
must be accounted for.

Page 29, 30. That such do most abound and we are most certain to have them in
the Ministry of the Church of England; for the clearing of this, the experience
of many years tells us, that out of the Ministry of the Church of England, we
have had Men fit to Preach before great and mighty Princes, the high Courts of
Parliament, the grave and reverend Judges of the Realm, the Magistrates and
Courts of Aldermen in great Cities and Corporations; yea, their Learning and
Education has been such, as has rendered them fit to be Counselors of State,
to give Advice to Princes, to go Ambassadors upon grand Messages (for their
Countrey's good) into Foreign Parts: But where have any arose out of the
Mechanic Preachers of the Nonconformists? And is not this for the honor of a
Nation, where Science shall so flourish) that a sort or rank of men, which
commonly is below the Gentry, in point of descent, should, by Learning and good
Education, become able to deliver God's Message to their Princes and Rulers,
and their Princes Ambassages to Foreign States; and would not all this be lost,
if the Nation should be suffered to lose its Learning, and to be immersed into
dull and clownish Illiteracy?

There will be a freedom from a needless charge, in contributing to the
maintenance of weak and silly Men, who carelessly leave either their civil
Callings, (and expose their Families to ruin and decay, and to depend upon
others to be provided for) under a pretense of being called to Preach, when God
knows they do not understand their A,B,C, in Religion, can hardly speak common
sense, and are so far from being able to convince critical Gainsayers, as that
they know not how to teach the Ignorant, or to form one right intelligible
Notion of Points fundamental, nay, such they are, as often preach Nonsense,
Confusion, and sometimes Blasphemy.

It is suggested, as if the learning of the Nation, and men's being made useful
thereby, was in danger of being lost, if the Noncons should prosper; That many
Preachers leave their Gallings and Families, under pretense of being called to
preach, that understand not their A,B,C, can hardly speak common Sense, that
often preach Nonsense, Confusion, and sometimes Blasphemy, that have not an
habit of Knowledge, nor Books, nor allow themselves time to study.

A further Account of the sad State of Mr. John Child, as it was written with
his own Hand, being found in his house after his death, and delivered by his
Wife to Mr. H.C. take as follows.
Pride, Folly, Madness, Villainy, and great wickedness retracted.
THat Satan may fill the hearts of men as to make them forget God, grieve his
good Spirit, sin against Christ, offer horrible violence to the light of Grace,
the sacred Law of their Maker, and the rational powers of their own Souls, as
well as cause grief and piercing sorrow to the hearts of their dear Brethren,
is not only verified and confirmed by variety of bad Examples, and instances
both from Scripture and History, but has also appeared notorious and evident
in a late unparalled instance of one who has been a Professor of the
Christian Religion, and that after the most strictest manner of these latter
times for many years, viz. The Author of the Second Argument; who forgetting
God, and the great Obligation he stood in to Him and to all Mankind, especially
the good and best part thereof, did suffer himself so far to be acted by a
diabolical influence, and the ministry of Darkness, as not only to desert those
persons which he did believe and knew to be God's Jewels, (choice and good) but
with a hard heart, and bold, impudent, and steeled forehead, a most poisonous
breath, and viperous tongue, did set forth, to the great dishonor of God, and
the unspeakable grief of multitudes of good and pious Souls, a profane and
scandalous Libel, under pretense of persuading to Peace and Unity; whereas the
chiefest design of it was to advance his Pride, to vent his Spite, and
maliciously to spit forth the very Fire of Hell against some, yea against many
that he had taken offense at: which with shame and great confusion he desires
to confess both to God and Man, and especially to such as knew him, and were
sorely grieved and offended by him.

1. He confesses his great pride, foolishness, and presumption, in daring so
much as to offer at a Method to Unite such different Parties, with whose
Wisdom, Parts, and Learning, he had nothing to compare; for which he is bowed
down, and asks pardon.

2. In giving the least touch, glance, or intimation, as though God's Ordinance
of the Holy Supper, were so low and indifferent a thing, as might be made use
of to answer a carnal end, or secular design.

3. That he should render men odious to the Nation, as being Enemies to the
Ministry and their maintenance, and the provision made by Law for the poor; for
this he accuses himself of being injurious, and prays for pardon.

4. That he should basely reflect upon men's Callings in a way of lightness and
disdain; he thinks it great madness and folly, and begs pardon both of God and
man for it.

5. That he should so boldly and presumptuously pry into the Decrees of God,
and so abusively set forth the consequences of men's Opinions about them, in
such horrid, harsh, and unsuitable Language, charging the Authors of those
Opinions with the highest strain of Murder, even of God himself, he is
unfeignedly sorry, and begs pardon. And that he should render the Body of the
Nonconformists weak, foolish, and contemptible to their Enemies, he thinks were
great wickedness, and that he should call them a villainous Body of men, he
confesses with a bleeding heart, so high a strain and degree of wickedness in
it, that it is like blaspheming God's Tabernacle, and them that dwell therein;
for which he is sorry a thousand fold, and begs the pardon of God and all good
men. That he should give occasion of stumbling to any, whereby he may be guilty
of their blood, at the thoughts of which he trembles, and begs pardon with his
whole Soul. That he should speak against his Brother, and slander his Mothers
Son, making the hearts of the Righteous sad, that God would not have made sad,
and pain and grieve all that were acquainted with him; this he confesses to be
a sin of a deep dye, and his heart is ready to rend asunder for it, and with an
agony begs pardon of God and all good men. That he should bring such shame and
confusion upon himself, as to exclude him the comfortable society of good
people, and render him both afraid and ashamed to do his duty in visiting those
that are under affliction; for these great wickednesses and damnable villainies,
and any other that may be contained in that detestible and accursed Pamphlet
aforesaid, which for want of the sight of, I cannot enumerate. I confess my
self a monstrous Wretch, a great Transgressor, an horrible Actor of wickedness,
a Gratifier of the wicked and worst of men, a prime Enemy to many godly people,
a Promoter of the Devil's designs, a great Provoker of God and his Son, an
Enemy to my self, a Procurer of the ruin of my Family; for which I pray that
my Soul may escape the damnation of Hell. Amen and Amen, O God.

Another Paper written as a Postscript to the former, by Mr. John Child's own
hand; a Copy whereof take as follows.
HAving met with the vile and accursed Book called the Second Argument, and the
Author being filled with horror and astonishing confusion, at the perusal of
it, could not well transcribe the first Paper, and put things into an orderly
method; therefore thought fit to write this by way of Postscript.

First, He thanks God that he is not yet in Hell, lamenting his folly,
wickedness, and violence with Cain, Baalam, and Jud^^; but has a little time to
leave this Account of things, in respect of the first design and progress of
the ill-contrived, infamous, reproachful, and scandalous Libel.

1. That the very beginning in these words, [it has been our endeavor to
correct, etc.] is devilishly proud and insolent; 2d. part [a sight of their
folly in being debarred of their Civil Rights, for groundless Scrupulosities in
Religion] this is bold, saucy, and uncharitable. The 2d. page, and part of the
3d. a silly trifling Presumption. 4. The 4th page, the suggesting any thing of
an undervaluing nature, touching the Holy Sacrament being a civil thing, of a
dangerous tendancy. Declaring in page 9. to the greatest number of
Nonconformists to hold Principles dangerously Heretical, and abominably abusive
of the blessed God.] This he confesses not only to be a rash, injurious, and
uncharitable, but a devilish, spiteful, and malicious Slander; to be not only
hard Measure, but hellish Cruelty and Injustice; to stretch the consequences of
men's Principles, beyond the sense of their minds, and then charge wickedness
upon them is against Justice, Mercy, and all good Nature; to impute such ill
things to the main Body or greatest number of them, that is contained in the
two following pages; as it is bold and desperate to report the matter, so it is
most horrible Injustice, and malicious Envy, to fix the Crime, to declare them
upon a wicked foundation to be no true Church, to pronounce them a One of the
Passages he here ^^^lects upon, is his printed Se^^^^ed Argument, expressed in
^^ese words, page 11.
Villainous Body of People, to be bloody Murderers of God their Maker in the
attributes of his Wisdom, Holiness, and Goodness, to proclaim them Monsters, to
be giddy and foolish, to want Wit and Policy, is such a venomous Language, Now
if a sound and true Notion of God be the first and foundation-Principle of
Religion, and consequently of a true Church, then such as have it not, but the
manifest and direct contrary, can be no true Church, because upon a wicked and
false foundation. Such I am sure there are among the Sectaries: and if such a
Villainous Body of People is the best and true Church, that even in their first
and main Principle thus bloudily murder their Maker in his most admirable
Attributes of Wisdom, Holiness, and Goodness; I do wonder in my mind what kind
of People the World is.
that Hell could not exceed. Being in very deed horribly wicked, abominable,
and devilish; justly deserving damnation, and for which the Author doubts he
shall hardly escape. And page 13. to represent them Enemies to the Bishops and
Clergy, Underminers of the Schools and Learning, and against the Law for the
Maintenance of the Poor, was spightful, devilish, and malicious and had a
tendency to stir up Rage and Persecution; for which a deep Repentance is
required. To mention men's Callings in a way of lightness and contempt, to
expose them to Hate and Derision, was highly base, devilish, and full of
poison. Publicly to discover Nakedness, though matters of fact were true, is
against all good Nature, and a very great piece of profaneness. To reflect upon
them as Deniers of the Faith, and worse than Infidels, not fit to be trusted
with a National Church, nor to be a true Church themselves, is a condemning to
so high degree, and carries so much of the rank poison and venom of the Devil,
the Accuser of the Brethren, in it, that renders forgiveness of the Crime much
doubted of: for all the base Reflections, Slanders, and most astonishing
Accusations and Censures, I beg Pardon of all good men, and their Prayers to
God, that I may obtain Pardon and Forgiveness at his Hand.

POSTSCRIPT.
THis NARRATIVE was prepared for the Press soon after the Death of Mr. Child,
but the Severity of the Times were such, that no Printer would undertake it,
nor durst the Compilers appear to own it; not that the Matter of Fact, in any
respect, wanted of truth, or the Language harsh and reflecting on the Church of
England; we hope we may, without vanity, say, that it is written with a Temper
suitable to the Profession we have always made of Love and Charity to those that
differ from us, and though the face of Affairs in this Nation be since changed,
through the Goodness of God, and the gracious Favor of his Majesty toward us,
we purpose in all our Actings, to show the same Spirit and Temper toward all
Christians, of what Persuasion soever, and we would by no means have this
Construction pass upon the Publication of this Narrative at this time, as if we
designed to make the Church of England odious, by refreshing the Memory of so
dreadful an Accident, which was the natural effect of some of their
Persecutions: God is our Witness, our naked Design being only to Arraign the
Practice of Persecution it self, without reflecting on any who have been the
Instruments, hoping Time, and this Glorious Design of his Majesty's, will have
such an happy issue, as to put all that profess to be the Followers of Christ,
into such a condition, as to see it is their Interest, as well as their Duty,
not to Contend for Persecution, and if our Passions be cooled, by wanting Power
to do Mischief, the thing its self, viz. the Doctrine of Persecution, may be
safer discussed in the lawfulness of it.

We had a Design to have Published something in this Postscript, tending to a
Hearty Union and Love among all Christians, which is also intimated in the
beginning of the Narrative, but the present Temper of some Men's Zeal, which
sets their Passions on fire, will render a Discourse of this Nature, of little
use, they contending to preserve the Instruments of our Ruin, and we the
removal of them; and we believe all thinking Men will agree with us, that we
have ground for this Apprehension: All we shall say to it, at present, is, that
we hope our Actions shall constantly witness to the truth of this, that we
design nothing, but to be in a capacity of living quietly by our Neighbors,
and showing how much we love and value those that differ from us, by forgetting
Injuries, and striving who shall show most of the Spirit of the blessed Jesus,
which consists in Meekness, Forgiveness, and Forbearance.

That which we shall add, with respect to the Narrative its self, is this, That
it is a true and dreadful Instance of a Man scared into Conformity, by the
Severity he saw on others, and in part felt himself; that the Temptation met
with his Corruptions, (which, if his own charge on himself be not too severe)
you see verified by his own Papers; yet this excuses not the Doctrine and
Practice of Persecution; if so Satan might wash his hands also of the Sins of
Men, and though some Men may know the beginnings of Sins, yet none knows the
bounds of it: so, after his Conformity, he drew his Pen, and dipped it in Gall
against his Brethren, going on to do violence to his Conscience, till God in a
dreadful manner awakened it against himself, so as proved terrible to all the
beholders, as well as to himself, the Particulars whereof shall not be
repeated; we account it a loud Voice against Persecution, and durst not silence
it, lest we should betray this Witness of God against it; we know Authorities
of Scripture and Reason are best to work upon the Judgment, to convince the
World of the error, of doing that to others, that would not they should do to
them: but a Fact of this Nature may move the Affections, and corroborate that
Light that Men receive from thence; and for this end it was at first intended
to be published. It Is a dreadful thing, not only to break in upon the Civil
Rights of Men, on account of Religion, but far more to be Instruments, to put
any upon such ways, which not only endanger their Peace of Conscience here, but
their Eternal Welfare hereafter; and this Evil we are bold to charge
Persecution with, and have evidence enough for it in this very Instance.

The Discourse of the Nature and Office of Conscience, that you find in the
beginning of the Narrative, was written by a worthy Brother of ours, for
Private Satisfaction, which we have presumed to publish, we humbly conceiving
it to be for Public Good.

The Conclusions that we think are natural from the foregoing Narrarative, is:

First, That all Men be exceeding careful of bidding Defiances to their
Consciences; out of it may come a strong Wind, that rends the Rocks: however
some Men may not taste that severity this Man did, but go to the Grave with
their Bones full of Marrow, yet it is certainly the Duty and Interest of every
Man, to take diligent heed to keep a Conscience void of offense toward God and
Man, that they may escape that Shipwreck that this Man, and other Instances of
the World, of the like nature, have met with. God sometimes makes some Men
Pillars of Salt, that the secure World may be awakened, and that Atheists and
Profane Persons may tremble at the living Instances of the Sovereignty of the
Divine Majesty, in and over the Consciences of Men, which they would outbrave
or deny the Almighty God can create a Hell on this side Hell in the Consciences
of Men, the Fire of which, neither the Artifice of Men, nor Time, not the
Application of the Promises of the Gospel, (though the fittest Mediums) can
extinguish. An Instance of this you have in what the Friends of this Man did,
who with great tenderness endeavored to do all they could in this kind, but
without success, and, as is apparent in the precedent Narrative, they had not
the humors of a Man under Natural Melancholy to deal with, but a Man purely
under the dreadful Terrors of a guilty and an enraged Conscience; a Man of so
sound and strong a Constitution of Body, that all that knew him, even to the
last, could and did easily discern his Disease was purely Spiritual.

Secondly, We conceive, at this time of day at least, it may put our
Countrymen, who have hitherto been of a contrary Opinion, to a serious
thought, whether that Practice be of God, that is attended with such dreadful
Instances of this Nature, and we the rather conceive this Narrative useful at
this time, because the Eye of the whole Nation are upon, and their Thoughts are
at work about these Instruments; we mean; the Penal Laws, which have made such
havoc on the Liberties, Persons, and Estates of Men; and on the Consciences of
many others, who yet, by the goodness of God, have not felt the Dreadful
Effects this Man did, and we pray God they never may.

And above all, since his Gracious Majesty, by the goodness of God, has
published His Royal Declaration, for Liberty of Conscience, and upon such
Grounds and Reasons, as we conceive are unanswerable, out doing all King and
Princes, not only in the Fact of his Clemency, but in the Reason of it: and as
it is that that will be to his immortal Honor, so we hope, that it will have
that Perfection by Law, that may for ever deliver this Nation from the
Convulsions and Evils it has labored under in former Years, and render us so
happy, as not any more so much as to dispute what her Persecution be agreeable
to the Divine Law.

We confess we most willingly fall in with his Majesty's gracious Designs, and
shall, to our utmost, endeavor to carry them on, not knowing a greater Service
we can be capable of, rendering to God, to our Prince, our Country, or Religion;
we certainly believe, that if once we were on even ground with our
Fellow Subjects, it will be easy to let them see the goodness and benefit of
Liberty of Conscience, and how just it is, that Religion should be left to him
who is the Object of it, to correct the Errors of Men about it, and we have not
only the Authority of Scriptures, and right Reason, but also Suffrage of his
gracious Majesty to this Assertion.

We conclude, humbly imploring the Divine Blessing on the Person and Councels
of the King, by whom we sit under our Vine and Fig Tree, and pray he may live
to see the Top stone of this glorious Fabric of Liberty of Conscience laid,
and that He and his People may long live to enjoy the Blessings of it, and that
Piety to God, and that Charity to Men, which we believe are natural Fruits of
this Liberty, may flourish in this Kingdom.

FINIS.
Some BOOKS Printed for Tho. Fabian, at the Bible in S. Paul's Churchyard, a
Corner-Shop, next Cheap side, 1688.
A Sermon taken out of an Oxford Scholar's Pocket, who was found Dead in
Bishop's-Wood, near High-gate, on Monday, F^b. 15. 168^. Together with a True
Relation of the Manner of his being Discovered there. Now Published for the
Public Good. Quarto.

The Packet of Letters. Quarto.

Bishop Usher's Method of Teaching true English. Octavo.

Gouges Word to Saints and Sinners. Octavo.

The Spiritual Guide, which Disintangles the Soul, and brings it by the Inward
Way, to the getting of Perfect Contemplat^^^, and the Rich Treasure of Internal
Peace. Written by Dr. (...) Mol^nos, Priest. With a short Treatise concerning
Daily Commumunion, by the same Author. Translated from the (...) Printed at
Venice, 1685. Twelves.


