ENGLANDS REPENTANCE Englands only REMEDY: Religiously propounded in a Serious
Resolve of this ENQUIRY, Q. What is to be desired by all such as wish well to
England?

In a Letter written by a Minister in London, in Answer to one sent from a
worthy Member of the late Long PARLIAMENT.

Entered according to Order.

London, Printed by D. Maxwell, 1659.

Honored Sir,
YOurs of the 18th instant I received; whereby I discern your sense of the sad
hand of God upon these Nations, in the many sad Revolutions to which they have
been subject. And now you seem studious of the way of its recovery, in which I
rejoice. Though, Sir, your Enquiry does a little amaze me; not so much for the
matter, as that you should press me to it in this juncture of time. You well
know, Sir, I have not declined to let you know my thoughts of all the late
transactions of those who called themselves, The Long Parliament. Did I not
much presume on your Faithfulness never to use it to my damage (however God
deal with you) I might burn my pen and paper for fear of a Treason and High
Court of Justice. But I will not fear to write at his request to whom I have
often spoken freely, and yet met with the fidelity of a Friend.

Sir, your Enquiry is serious and seasonable, and calls for a better Resolution
then I can render.

It is this,

Quest. What is to be desired by them that wish well to England?

I understand your Enquiry as grounded on the present sad state of the Nations
affairs; and so my resolution is, as of a Minister of God, that of Israel;
Repentance promised in Hosea 3.5. Afterward shall Israel return, and seek unto
the Lord their God, and unto David their King, is the unum necessarium, one
only thing to be desired for England as her sovereign Remedy against all her
maladies by the hand of God inflicted on her.

On serious observation of England, I cannot but judge her the parallel of the
ten Tribes in sin and sorrow, and wish she may precede them in a serious and
seasonable Repentance. Methinks Sir, the Prophet Hosea his Prophetical Marriage
of an Harlot, and leaving her a long time with this charge, To abide for him,
and not to play the Harlot, Hos. 3.3.
or be for any other, is a lively Emblem of Englands state and duty.

England, Sir, as Israel, have gone in the way of Jerobeam, and have sinfully,
against all Natural, Civil and Religious bonds, Englands Disease.
cast off and shut out their Lawful Governors and Established Government left
them by their Progenitors, and under which she long flourished, unto the
Enriching of her self, Envy of her Neighbors, Nations, and Encouragement of
the Reformed Churches: And that after many Declarations, Protestations, Vows,
Oaths, and the Solemn League and Covenant for the defense and preservation of
the Kings Majesty's Person and Posterity, the Privileges of Parliament, and
the Liberties of the Subject, and that Sworn in a day of Extremity, when they
seemed to be in danger, and men were Jealous (the subversion since effected)
was intended. Nay, and after a vast expense of Blood and Treasure in the
defense of them; and when under an Obligation inviolable and never to be
dispensed withal, wherein we have sworn to God, Not to suffer our selves by
any comminations, persuasions or terrors whatsoever, directly or indirectly to
turn aside to the right hand or to the left, or to make defection from this
Cause. Yet have our Nation, to the Scandal of Religion, Reproach of the Nation,
and Blasphemy of God, and Provocation of his Justice, with Israel, made
defection from their Lawful and Natural Prince, nay, and altered their
unalterable Government at the Lusts of men subverting very Foundations. Only,
Sir, I must be free to let you know, that in two things Englands defection has
been more vile then that of Israeis, in that it was made by a violent, base,
unjust, extrajudicial, barbarous Regicidee with an hypocritical pretense of
Justice. Secondly* In that Members of the Parliament have been to themselves an
H^rod Ascalonite to violently break up their own Sandedrin; and Guido Faux, to
blow up King, Lords and Commons in Parliam^^t assembled, to the everlasting
blemish of the Protestant Religion, and in the room thereof have been subjected
to usurpation and self-created Governors, with whom most of the Nation have
concurred, and to them consented. And for the support of this Usurped
Magistracy, Calves have been set up at D^n and Bethell, all falsehood in
Religion Tolerated, the Ministry laid common, who will becomes a Priest unto
the Lo^d. So that, Sir, Schism and Sedition, Rebellion unto Regicide, Perfidie
and Perjurie is become Englands Guilt and impiety written in such legible and
indelible Characters, that all men must say, She is become an Harlot, and see
Repentance absolutely necessary to prevent her ruin. Nay, Sir, give me leave
to tell you, Englands sin (like Isreal's) has been pointed out by her Sorrows;
Englands Distemper.
for she having shamefully shaken off her Rightful Governor and Government,
has been prostituted to the Lusts and Ambition of particular men, and proudly
trampled on by Military insolency, in so much that our very Bell men can
reproach us as we lie in our Beds. Shall I, Sir, make bold to insert a
Bell-mans sound which I heard with my own ears. It was this,

Whilst you securely Sleep, I Ring my Bell,
Which lately has Rung out your Freedoms Knell.
Your Soldiers, now, your Sovereigns are become,
Your Laws and Liberties command by sound of Drum.
Nor is it strange, for they read no Commission,
Regard no Bonds, but prosper by Transgression.
By Pride and Perjury, these Saints most rude,
Have Cut off the King, and Parliament subdued.
Your eyes have seen't, vile Slaves, yet in this season,
You are Rid like Asses, and not Ruled by Reason.
Oh, Sir, how many sad and shameful revolutions have passed upon us, and yet we
are full far from Settlement? Authority, like a Tennis-Ball, has been cast up
and down for him to catch that catch can, and has been tossed between a
republican pack, and single Person, whilst both are plain and palpable
usurpers; for indeed in nature, and by Gods just judgment, Revolution is the
constant Attendant on usurpation; the Globe of Magistracy must roll up and
down, whilst off its Pin, and from its Center, it only rests in right
subjects; and now we are covered with confusion, and left without King, any
lawful, nay, without Prince, any unlawful Governors without any establishment
in Chair or State, Civil and Religious order, and this was the punishment of
Isreal's, now is of Englands adultery: the estate of her widow-hood, the time of
divine desertion; for Civil Order is Gods presence in the world, and Religious
Order his presence in the Church. The very heathen conclude from the confusions
in the world, the Gods have forsaken the Earth; so that, Sir, he must have no
Religion who sees not in Englands case to conclude and cry out, Righteous art
thou, O Lord, and just are all thy judgments.

Now, Sir, I have showed Englands disease and distemper; it remains that I
direct the cure and remedy, and that I say is, Repentance, true and hearty,
General and Universal Repentance. Englands Cure and Remedy.
Let the Ministers of God lift up their voice, and cry, Repent, England,
repent, repent; let all that wish well to England, pray that God would pour out
a Spirit of Repentance, that from Dan to B^ersheba all Israel may return and
seek unto the Lord, and to David their King.

Sir, Repentance is the end and errand of all Afflictions, Isa. 27.11. Men cry
out of doing the Work of God, nor do I deny it in all our strange revolutions;
only I desire it may be noted, it is Gods strange work, speaking his
displeasure, and summoning his Peoples Repentance: a relenting heart, a
returning spirit shall no sooner be effected, but these sharp rods will be
rejected, God will walk contrary to a stubborn People, Levit. 16.
until their uncircumcised heart be humbled, but no longer for, then his end is
effected.

Repentance does engage divine return; for he has promised, that when ever he
speaks against a Nation, to pluck it up, or root it out, if that Nation repent,
he will repent, Jer. 18.8. He ever meets relenting Ephraim with Repentance for
inflicted judgments; his method is to give Repentance and Remission of (...):
Je^. 31 18.
The greatest good intended for Israel is contracted into the promise of
repentance; the Sun does not more certainly follow the morning star, then the
return of Gods presence does attend repentance:

Nay, Sir, in this case repentance is an actual re-enjoyment of blessing, not
only a quality disposing to it, but an act putting into the possession of it;
as your Armies late repentance for their backsliding, put your Members actually
into the House, to rule and govern, and their counter repentance put you out
again, so the repentance of your pretended Parliament, and the People of
England puts lawful Governors into their proper places, and sixeth Authority in
its right Center, which sin unhingeth and expels. You may observe, Isreal's
Repentance was an actual and ardent Contest to bring ^^me the King. Repentance
breaks open the Bar of Sedition and Rebellion which shuts out lawful
authority; will but God give Repentance, the Restitution o^ Englands Government
will be very feasible and speedy. For this Repentance consists in two parts.

1. To abide for rightful Governors, however expelled, and at present
excluded; and not to be for any other Magistrate, by any act of Allegiance,
First part of Repentance.
or acknowledgment of Loyalty; strike not hands with, consent not to any
self-created Governors, by Pride, Perfidy, and Rebellion, slipping into a
Chair of State; play not the wanton with any self-advancing Absalom, be not
seduced by every seditious Sheba: If proud men have power and profaneness to
catch a Scepter, and stamp Authority upon themselves, let men maintain their
Chastity, deny their Allegiance, court them not as rightful Governors: Men's
giddy unconstancy is ^he (...) that n^^^risheth Rebellion: resolved chastity is
the rebuke of adul erous attempts; if with Mephib^sheth, men cannot follow
their exiled David, let them bid^ in their widow-hood, and retain their Loyalty
until her^^^^^. According to Nature and Scripture a ^^ople may better be
without ary Prince, then strike hands with a usurpt^, for i^ that is sorrow,
but in this is (...). I should Sir, wish that (...) and blind affection may not
engage any to commit lewdness with any the Members of Englands late Husbands
body; let not any the Members of our Collective Body now beheaded, and
bemangled, cheat us with the claim of Allegiance by pretense of Relation, and
cry of a Long Parliament; but rather let these Members be dispersed throughout
the Tribes of Israel as evidences of that unheard of violence, and
unparalleled cruelty which has been acted on our Espoused Lord. Englands
Subscription of sinful Engagements, and shameful Addresses to unlawful Powers,
has been the breach of her chastity; let us abide for lawful Government, when
we can do no more, evidence our integrity, and assert our duty and relation,
when we cannot enjoy our right.

The 2d Act of Repentance to be done is to return unto the Lord, Second ^a^t of
Repentance.
and to David their King. Return to God, is the formal act of true Repentance;
Sin and Repentance have the same object, though some sin is more immediately
against God. yet all sin is a transgression of his Law: the same God that said,
Thou shall have none other Gods before my face, said also, Thou shall honor
thy Father and thy Mother; and, Thou shall not commit adultery: Isreal's
Rejection o^ Samuel, was a Rejection o^ the Lord; as light as men make o^ Civil
Right and Order, it is Gons direction in the second Table of his Law: The
complaint of the Penitent for any sin, is unto God, Against thee, thee only
have I sinned; seeking to the Lord, will spur a seeking unto David their King;
sense of God offended engages a return from all sin, not only from last, but
first acts o^ violence done unto Authority; not only the interruptions made on
you in 1653. but those chiesly made by you in 1648 and that with fullness of
Resolution to backslide no more; a return to God will awe the conscience, and
obviate all the difficulties and discouragements of Repentance; danger sinfully
created by rebellion shall not deter repentance, because it is a return to God,
ready to forgive; let me say to England as God to Israel, If thou will return,
return unto the Lord, who enjoined your duty; Jer. 4.1.
whose law has been violated by your impiety; unto the Lord, to whom you swear
in the day of your distress; who is a God of Jealousy and will avenge the
quarrel of the Covenant; sad is the Repentance which is but an exchange of sin,
or of sins object; a bewailing of one rebellious act, but maintaining and
proceeding in a series of Rebellion, violence, and sedition. Sir, whatever
Soldiers do, Saints must not thus return. Isreal's return to God must be with a
return to David their King; by David is generally understood the Messiah the
Lord Jesus Christ, nor do I deny it, only Sir I wish it may be noted, the
Messiah is called David for Relation and Succession sake, because the same seed
and rightful successor of David, as the Pharaohs of Egypt, and Caesar's of Rome;
he is their King, not only as the Messiah, but by a lineal descent from, and
lawful succession to the Crown of Israel; so that a return to David their King
is mentioned with an allusion unto their Apostasy from, and Rebellion against
the House of David, which must be repented in their return; for they must
embrace their Lord Jesus not only as the Messiah, but as their natural Prince
and lawful Sovereign; and therefore Calvin cries out, Aliter vere and ex animo
Deum quaerere noli potuit, quin se etiam sub^jceret Legitimoimperio oui
astrictus erat; they could no way seek the Lord in truth, but by becoming
Subject to their lawful Sovereign.

Englands Repentance must be according to this, they must seek the Lord,
through Christ, by subjection to their lawful Government and Governors, from
which they have revolted; the formality of Repentance from Rebellion is a
return to Loyalty. Sir, Restitution is an essential act of Repentance; the only
restitution made for repented of rebellion, is a re-establishment of authority,
and a return to Loyalty, becoming subject for conscience sake: Israel repenting
the rebellion into which they run after self-advancing Absalon, they sell to
strife among themselves about fetching home their King: 2 Samuel 19.
Nay, Shime^'s Character o^ repentance is this, Thy servant does know that I
have sinned, therefore behold I am come down the first of all the House of
Joseph to meet my Lord the King; if God will do England good, he will give them
hearts to give God the things that are Gods, and Caesar the things that are
Caesar's, which have been too long held back with violence.

I wish Sir that none may pretend an inconsistency between this act of
repentance, and the good Old Cause of God and his People, for whoever shall so
do, must sell themselves unto positive blasphemy, and perpetual profaneness,
pretending that to be the Cause of God which is expressly repugnant to his
revealed will, and resolving rebellion is the honor of Religion, and only work
of Saints; and wilfully shut their eyes, that they may cozen their consciences:
For Sir, is not the Kings preservation, honor and happiness* the Privileges
of Parliament, the Liberty of the Subject, and defense of the Government by
King, Lords and Commons, written in such Legible Characters in the Parliaments,
C^ties, and Armies Declarations, Remonstrances, and Protestation; in all our
Vows, Oaths, and Covenants, as the good Old Cause for which so much blood and
treasure was expended, that none but the wilful impenitent can choose but run
and read it; I shall for more full conviction refer you to Mr. Prynns Good Old
Cause truly stated, which I know you have seen.

Neither Sir would I have the hazard of any man's life or estate, threatened by
this repentance, be any bar unto it; for Sir, this hazard is self-created, and
sinfully procured; which, should it be inflicted, were but the proper effect of
justice, better to be undergone here then hereafter unto eternity; happy may be
the stroke of justice which may save a Soul from Hell; the sinful escapes of
humane justice will one day be found exceeding sad: running away rom the rod of
correction, is an heightning rebellion, and note of a reprobate; and whether
will such fly from Gods all-seeing eye? or will it boot any to contend with
God or impunity? Oh no, it will not.

But Sir, such men may be worse feared then hurt; repentance is the sponge of
Guilt in the sight o^ men, as well as in the sight of God: God who has the
hearts of Kings in his hand, and turns them as the rivers of water relents
toward a repenting Ephraim, and makes David relent toward a rebellious
Absalon; Royal Clemency never shines brighter then in returns from violent
exile; Shall any be put to death this day in Israel? for do I not know that I
am this day King in Israel? is David's answer to the son of Zerviah provoking
against Shimei, who had full well deserved it; any indifferent Politician can
give assurance of indemnity for general delinquency, especially, when true
repentance is the spring that does enforce it.

Lastly, Sir, let none stand up against this act of Repentance, and cry, It is
dangerous to Religion, a Free Parliament will call home the King, and he is
rude and profane, and converseth among Papists, and will bring Popery into the
Land with him. To such I say in short, How came they into Gods Chair to become
solicitous of Event? Is uncertain fear of an issue any ground of bar to duty?
Where is our Faith should carry us on in duty against all dread? Needs God our
Sin to preserve the Sanctity of his holy Name? Will not this prove a sad
support unto Religon? But is not this fear groundless? Is not the King a
Protestant born and brought up? bound in the same Solemn League and Covenant
with our selves? Has not our sin subjected him to the saddest temptation to
turn Papist that ever poor Prince underwent? Does not Mr. Prynn tell us plainly
and upon good demonstration, That his exile is the great propagation of the
Catholic Cause, and high courtesy to Rome? Sir, these obstructions are all
frivolous, and so will appear, if ever God pour on the Nation a Spirit of
Repentance.

Worthy Sir, I have with the plainness of a Minister, and freedom of a Friend,
given my thoughts on your Enquiry, and that not Rashly, but as having consulted
the Oracles of God. And I cannot but beg that you persist no longer in your way
of sin: Oh that God would give you and your fellow. Members hearts to give him
Glory, and after your success, to take to your selves shame for your sinful
subversion of an Established Government, and that with pretense of Law, calling
your selves a Parliament when your own Consciences tell you, you are no such
thing. Sir, England is inclining to repent, if your House prove not a Sheba to
sound again the Trumpet of Rebellion. However, my advice is, Let the Ministers
of God cry out, Repent, England, Repent, Repent; and let all the people of God
pray, That England may return and seek unto the Lord, and to David their King:
Then shall we be established enjoying our Princes as at the first, and our
Rulers as at the beginning. I have no more, save with the Prophet Ezekiel,
They, whether they will hear, or whether they will forbear, for they are a
Rebellions House, yet shall know there has been a Prophet among them, Ezekiel.
2.5.

FINIS.

