Englands Triumph.

A MORE EXACT HISTORY OF HIS Majesty's Escape After the Battle of WORCESTER,
WITH A Chronologicall Discourse of His Straits and dangerous Adventures into
France, and His Removes from place to place till His return into England, with
the most Remarkable Memorials since, to this present SEPTEMBER, 1660.

LONDON: Printed by J.G. for NATHANIEL BROOK, and are to be sold at the Angel
in Cornhill, 1660.

THE PREFACE BY WAY OF ARGUMENT.
NEver did any age (in this Nation most especially of all the rest of the
Christian world,) afford more matter for a full and copious History then these
12. last years have done, wherein after a Mysterious war waged for and against
the King, (if we look at what was pretended and what was acted,) the after game
was played by a party not the same with those who at first undertook the
business; for the servants taking it out of the hands of those that hired them
and set them on work, and drawing it on to a far higher pitch of violence then
was at first intended; brought their King (a most Noble and Pious Prince) to an
untimely death, and utterly rejecting and proscribing all the Royal race,
subverted the ancient government of the Nation, and changed it into a kind of a
Free State, as they called it* or Commonwealth, during which the most
remarkable affair that happened was a war with the Dutch, and that carried on
with no bad success; but not many years did this form of government hold; for
Oliver Cromwell General of this new States army, having subdued the Scotch
Nation, and by too unequal strength of arms forced the then heir apparent to
the Crown, His Now gracious Majesty, (who came with arms, after all fair means
used in vain, to assert his just claim,) to quit the Kingdom, violently
usurped the supreme authority into his own hands, which having kept with much
ado by a high hand for his own life time, he also used such means at his
death, that he procured to have the chief Magistracy of the three Nations
transferred to his Eldest Son Richard, which he held for a little while, till
the Soldiery wanting other action to divert them, or an Oliver to keep them
under, took an occasion to mutiny, and making use of Protector Richards
authority to dissolve the Parliament he had called, laid him aside and invited
in again the remnant of the long Parliament, which Oliver Cromwell had some
years since dissolved to make way for his own advancement to the Supreme
Authority. The Common wealth interest thus restored, there seemed now no other
hopes, but a Free State must seize us without any redress; yet neither had
this convention sat many months ere Lambert, spirited with his success against
Sir George Booth, (who rose in Cheshire for a Free-Parliament,) and thinking to
have traced Olivers steps, he took the same course with the Members at
Westminster as he had done before, that is, he turned them out of doors; and
while he Marched into the North against General Monck, who had declared
against these proceedings, he left affairs to be managed by the Council of
Officers at Wallingford-house, these sitting upon a Model of Government, at
length there was framed a thing called a Committee of Safety, which taking upon
it the government of the Nation, brought in a great disorder and confusion upon
the face of affairs, till by a strange turn of fortune, all the Army on a
sudden deserting Lambert and his party, being inveigled thereunto by the
policy of some of the late dissolved Members, way is made hereby to the
admiration of all men, for the re-entry of our little Parliament, which growing
still more and more odious to the people, came at length to be generally styled
in derision The Rump. Immediately after which General Monck hastens out of
Scotland with his Army toward London, to make room for whose entrance the old
Army is ordered to march out, and dispersed into several quarters, the City
manifesting discontent, and disowning the present authority, Monck is commanded
to pull down the City gates, which he unwillingly performs; but at the same
time his commission being out, and commissioners appointed for the government
of the Army, and Monck nominated the last, he closes with the City, and after
a while causes the old Members who had been secluded by the Army in 1648. to
be readmitted to their seats in Parliament, yet limits them to sit only for a
short time, and to make preparations for the calling of a Free-Parliament; no
sooner is this Parliament assembled, but they receive a Declaration from His
present Majesty King Charles the second, which unanimously they own, publicly
Proclaim Him King, and invite Him to a speedy return and exercise of His Royal
trust. The King immediately comes over, is received with incredible joy, and
brought in great glory and triumph to His Palace at Whitehall, and long may He
there reign with peace and tranquillity to the Nation: and thus you have a brief
analysis of all the grand and remarkable revolutions of this Nation in this
strange and capricious age, which are more at large though with brevity enough
delivered in this present History: and although there are already made public
several relations of the same nature, yet nevertheless we could not
reasonably be discouraged from committing this History to the Press, in regard
we have a just confidence to promise a more exact and punctual account in all
the most remarkable passages then is to be found in any of the rest, as namely
for the manner of His Majesty's escape from Worcester, his transactions during
his abode in several parts beyond the seas, his joyful reception into
England, and his magnificent entry into his famous City of London, with all the
material passages that have happened since His Majesty's restoration to his
government. And furthermore our chiefest aim in this History is to lay a
foundation for the continuing from time to time the relation of all material
passages that shall happen in this Kingdom for the future; which of how
general a concernment it is, cannot but be apparent to those who diligently
inquire into the advancement of the public good.

ENGLAND'S TRIUMPH: A MORE EXACT HISTORY OF KING CHARLES the II.
AS to the writing the affairs of these late times, an Historian never met
with more variety of subjects, so for the right understanding and delivery of
those events, he will find it a matter of much difficulty; such strange changes
and mutabilities of State, of which no other Country can show a parallel, nor
England it self produce a president; A well ordered Monarchy turned into a
confused Anarchy, Religion hewed down by the axe of Schism, most horrid
villainies acted under Religious pretenses; Having not only Priests (as in the
time of Jeroboam,) but Princes also of the lowest of the people. Wat Tylers,
Jack a Leydons, and Knipper dollings; as may appear by their usurping
governments, which I shall endeavor to deliver unto you in the transactions of
England from the death of King Charles the First, to the re-establishment of
His Son King Charles the Second, wherein the Reader may see in the fall of the
House of Cromwells, that Greatness built upon perjury is of short continuance,
and that what ever aspiring Phaetons pretend, None but Apollo is able to guide
the Chariot of the Sun.

Charles the First of Glorious Memory, being by a part of the Parliament (who
had usurped to themselves the power of the whole or more:) sentenced to death
by the mouth of that audacious Traitor Bradshaw, was the 30. of January 1648.
in pursuance of their designs most execrably murdered before His Palace at
White Hall by severing His head from His body. A Prince, whose virtues far
exceeded any Eulogy we can bestow upon Him, His own pencill best pourtraies
Him, the greatness of His worth being best expressed in the many miseries
sustained by His loss.

But the end of their malice rested not here, it reached also to His posterity,
whom by Proclamation they deprive of all Right in the Government of these three
Kingdoms, and vote the Kingly Office quite down, contrary both to the Word of
God, and the Fundamental Laws of the Nation: Yet though they cast a fair gloss
on the matter, every ones Comment did not agree with their Text; and first
Ireland (saving only Dublin and London Derry) show their dislike by revolt,
for the Marquess of Ormond and the Lord Inchiquine having made a peace with
the Quondam Rebels, with a joint consent Proclaim His Eldest Son King, by the
name of Charles the second; solemnly inviting Him to come over to them being
then in France with His Mother. But the King, though against the advice of His
Mother, as plausibly as he might, waves this invitation; because he was
unwilling to distaste His better friends in England and Scotland, by seeming to
countenance those with His presence, whom they supposed he had already too much
countenanced with His commission. And indeed it fell out much for the best,
considering the sudden ill success of His friends there. For their numerous
Army (amounting to no less then twenty two thousand men,) with which they were
then beleaguering Dublin, either by the carelessness of the Commanders, or
security of the Soldiers, was beat from before it by the besieged, and utterly
routed by the third part of their number. Soon after Cromwell also arrived
there with an Army, sent out of England to perfect their work of deformation,
who soon made the Conquest complete, putting many of the Irish to death,
especially at Tredagh, where he continued Killing in cold blood for four days
together, pretending they were Rebels, quite forgetting what himself and his
masters were.

In the year 1649. a part of the Army falsely and undeservedly by Cromwell and
his Faction called Levellers, make a defection from the rest; for they
observing the exorbitant Counsels of Cromwell and his Council of State, were
resolved not to be instruments of b^inging the kingdom into further slavery,
but rather to assert their own and the Nations liberty, and it is thought to
join with the King whom they had fought against, rather then lose their
enterprise. Whether such were their intentions or no I shall not debate, but
sure it is that those differences did not make ill for the Royal party, who
seeing the opportunity, were not idle; so that in a short time their designs
were rendered so probable, that His Majesty was resolved to transport himself
into Jersey, then in the safe hands of the Earl of Yarmouth, to attend the
success. Whence if occasion served he might with more ease waft himself into
the West of England, which part it is said, that upon notice of the Southern
disorders he was to have fallen. While His Majesty stayed in Gersey he summons
Guernsey, but in vain, and because that seemed not to be misfortune enough, he
received the news of the Levellers being utterly quelled through the treachery
of Aeres and Reynolds, (for which piece of service Cromwell was not
ungrateful,) the forces of Cromwell falling upon them, while they were in
treaty, suspecting nothing l^ss then force of Arms. Upon this the King
retired again into France, though he were the sooner forced to do it, because
he had certain intelligence that the Enemy was sending a fleet of ships to take
from him that small remnant of His large dominions that yet remained unreduced.

But from Scotland far greater dangers threatened the Parliamentary Juncto, for
though the Scots had sold their King before, yet feigning an abhorrency of the
English proceedings, and that the world might take notice they were innocent of
His murder, they likewise Proclaim Prince Charles, King of Great Britain,
France, and Ireland; and thereupon send Mr. Windram Lord of Libberton, to
treat with His Majesty about sundry articles before His reception to the Crown;
who having received his dispatches, hasts unto Him, being then in the Isle of
Jersey.

The sum of their desires was to this effect.

1. That His Majesty would graciously be pleased himself to sign the solemn
League and Covenant, and that he would pass an Act in Part that every person
in that kingdom might take it. 2. That He would pass diverse Acts of the
Parliament of Scotland, which was concluded on the two last Sessions,
1. For approving of their disclaiming Duke Hamiltons last return for receiving
several Acts made by the English for the Militia. 2. That the Kings of
Scotland may have no Negative voice. 3: That His Majesty would recall the late
Commissions given to Montrosse. 4. That He would put away all Papists from
about Him. 5. That He would appoint some place about Holland to treat with
their Commissioners. An Honorable company of the most noble Lords in Scotland,
being to be appointed to attend His Majesty, to whom likewise they send a
sufficient provision to maintain Him, a train suitable to His birth and
deserved greatness. 6. That He would be graciously pleased to give a speedy
answer to their desires.
By these pro^ositions the Reader may perceive, that notwithstanding their
pretensions, they intended Him a King only conditionally: and indeed those
bitter pills they afterward made him swallow, may give the world just cause to
think that their self ends bore greater sway with them then Love and Loyalty to
His Majesty; However (nowithstanding the Lord Cleaveland and others alleged
their Treachery unto His Father, that they were Scots still, and might do the
same unto Him: That the Marquess of Montrosse (who had lately received
Commissions to assault the North of Scotland,) was raising forces in Holland,
of whose valor and fidelity he need not to doubt of,) the Majority of voices
carrying it for a Treaty, it was resolved on, and this answer returned to their
Propositions. That as to what was acted in the two last Sessions of Parliament,
He was content a general Act of Oblivion should be passed, but could not
approve it. That neither those of Montrosses, nor Duke Hamiltons party in his
last engagement should bear Office in State without consent of Parliament. That
He had appointed Breda in Holland for the place of a solemn Treaty, for the
making of a full accommodation and agreement between Him and His Loving
Subjects of Scotland.

Notwithstanding these large condescentions, which to reasonable men might have
given satisfaction even to supererogation, the arrogant Kirk-men would not have
had Him admitted into Scotland, but upon conditions, which should make Him
wholly subservient to their Commands, and much scuffle was betwixt the State
and them about it: At length a mediation is concluded on betwixt them, and the
Earl of Castles, the Lord Lothian, Burley, and Libberton, Sir John Smith, and
Mr. Jeofferys, for the Estates; and Mr. Broady, Lawson, and Wood, are appointed
Commissioners for the Kirk.

March the 19. 1649. at Breda aforesaid they came before His Majesty, where
after obeisance, the Lord Castles in behalf of the Estates, and Mr. Lawson for
the Kirk made each of them a speech, candied over with many expressions of
Loyalty, and unfeigned obedience, but their real intentions may be better
preceived by these Propositions, which then they delivered to His Majesty.

1. That all those who had been excommunicated by the Church, and still
continued so, should be forbid access to Court. 2. That all Acts of the
Parliament of Scotland, should be by him ratified and approved of. That the
Solemn Leauge and Covenant, the Presbyterian Church Government, the Directory,
Confession and Catechism should be enjoined in Scotland; and the same used and
practiced in His family, and an oath to be taken by Him that He would never
oppose it, or endeavor to alter it. 3. That He would by solemn oath, and
under His hand and seal declare and acknowledge His allowanne of the solemn
Leauge and Covenant, and the National Covenant of Scotland. 4. That He would
consent and agree that all civil matters might be determined by subsequent
Parliaments in Scotland, and all Ecclesiastical matters by the General Kirk
Assembly, as was formerly granted by His Royal Father.
No^withstanding the unreasonableness of these Propositions, yet working on His
Necessities, the more willing they found Him to condescend, the more impudent
were they still to propose; for not long after they sent the Earl of Carnwarth,
and Mr. Murrey, with new instructions and pro^ositions to this effect, viz.

1. That His Majesty should confirm all Acts done in some late Sessions of
Parliament, without any exception. 2, That neither Montrosle nor any of his
adherents be admitted to come into the Kingdom of Scotland.
These Propositions were very stiffely debated amongst the Kings Counselors,
some of them persuade His Majesty to an utter rejectment of them, alleging,
That the Covenanters horrid perfidiousness to His Father, might be a sufficient
motive and inducement for Him not to trust them. That should He accept of their
conditions, they would so tie up His hands that He would be then but a King
only in Title, which He was without them. That there was no reason why He
should be forced to relinquish the Religion of His Fathers, and whilst He
permitted to His Subjects Liberty of Conscience, to be denied the same Himself:
That the Covenant tendered, and so earnestly pressed upon Him by them, was an
obligatory Covenant to bind the Subjects to Him, and not for Him to swear to;
and therefore it was judged sufficiently satisfactory if He passed an Act for
the pleoples taking it. On the other side, those who stood for an
accommodation, urged the necessity of His Majesty's affairs, which both in
Ireland under Montrosse, and in the Navy under Prince Rupert, were in so weak
and tottering a condition, that no help could be expected from them; That all
the Princes in Christendom, were so embroyled in wars of their own, that it
was in vain to crave any foreign aid; and that therefore there was no way
left for His Majesty to re-gaine His lost Rights and Kingdoms, but by
complying with His Sub^ects of Scotland; and though it were upon such
conditions as would at first seem harsh, those Curbs might in time (possession
once got) be thrown off by degrees.

Whilst matters were thus debating, ne^s was brought the King of the Marquess
of Montrosses ignominious death, who having gotten together about six or seven
hundred men, with those small forces makes an attempt upon Scotland, but was by
them unfortunately defeated, himself treach^rously betrayed into their hands by
the Lord Aston; and at Edinburgh hanged drawn and quartered, with all the scorn
and ignominy an insulting enemy could invent. This act of theirs, considering
the juncture of time, might seem to be ^one as in affront to the treaty, and
could not but highly incense His Majesty, not only for the loss of so brave a
person, whose valor and magnaminity all Europe admired; but in their carriage
toward him His Leiutenant, He might read Lectures of disloyalty against
Himself. Many judged the death of this Marquess would have put a period unto
the Treaty, for those who were averse to it before, now opposed it with might
and maine, telling the King, That they had by thus murdering His Leiutenant,
demonstrated to the world what they would do to Him if they had Him in their
power; That it was an act of Rashness and desperation to trust them, or to have
any more to do with such a perfidious generation. That they only cunningly
and subtly endeavored to entrap Him that they might destroy Him. But
notwithstanding their high words, the Kings affairs were in so low a condition,
that it forced Him to embrace those conditions which He utterly detested, and
to put a conclusion to the Treaty by condescending to most of their desires.

But though the King stooped thus low even to admir^tion, yet so impudent were
they, that after the Treaty was concluded with Him, in the Parliament at
Edinburgh, it was debated by some of them, Whether they should make any further
addresses to Him; but the Major part carrying it in the affirmative, a message
was sent to Him, inviting Him to make all possible speed to His Kingdom of
Scotland, with a great many verbal expressions of obedience, but to let Him
know what rule they intended He should walk by, they debar Him from having
those whom He chiefly favored to wait upon Him, and nominate such persons as
they thought fit out of their own gang to be Officers of His Household there.

But the King was resolved to overcome all difficulties, and having provided
things in a readiness, about the beginning of June 1650. set sail from Holland,
and after a dangerous storm, and narrow escape of some English vessels which
lay in wait for Him, arrived at Spey in the North of Scotland: the Parliament
hearing of His arrival sent down some Lords to receive and accompany Him to
E^enburgh; but before He could be admitted to come unto them, they send Him new
Propositions to Dundee to sign, which with much regret (seeing He could do no
otherwise,) He at last condescended unto.

But this was not all, for being in His way presented with several sums of
money, the Committee of Estates and Kirk fearing such diet would make Him too
unweildy, fet forth injunctions, that what ever moneys people had to bestow,
they should bring it in unto such Treasuries as should be appointed by them; a
very neat device not only to bring gain unto themselves, but to make Him the
more conformable to their pleasures.

However, they pretend great matters for His service, an army is to ^e raised
of 16000. foot and 6000. horse, of which the Earl of Leven is made General of
the foot, and Holborne Major General; David Lesley Leiutenant General of the
Horse, and Montgomery Major General; His Majesty (whom I name last, because He
had least command,) had the Title of Generallissimo reserved for Him, and
indeed only the Title, for He never went into the field with His army.

Being come to Edinburgh, He is received by the Parliament and Committy of
Estates and Kirk with infinite expressions of fidelity and affection, the
Common people like Echoes answering their superiors, the whole City sounded
nothing but VIVE LE ROY. In this Condition we will leave Him for a while, and
cast an eye upon the affairs of England.

Whose Juncto (by the treachery of some that sat in the Parliament of
Scotland,) had certain intelligence of all these proceedings; and now seeing
things were grown to this height, they send for Cromwell out of Ireland, making
him General in the room of Sir Thomas Fairfax, who (say some) refused to
engage against the Scots, others say his Commission was taken from him to
gratify therewith their Creature Cromwell, though this their Idol afterward
proved their scourge; so just is God, that those who would not endure a mild
King, should suffer under a mereiless Tyrant.

Having received his Commission he matches into Scotland, but upon his approach
the Scots in two letters, one to himself, and another to the Parliament,
complain of the invasion. To which the Parliament in a declaration, and
Cromwell in a letter, much to the same effect reply,

That the Scots had once already invaded England under Hamilton, and were now
ready for a second, so that the English did now not so much invade as prevent
invasion.

That they had made peace with the Common enemy, and had not only restored Him
to their own Kingdom, but promised to give Him all assistance as to His
restoration to this.

That they were not content to enjoy their own liberty in Religion, but would
restrain them from theirs.

Thus from words they fall to blows, and first Cromwell at a place called
Muscleborough encountereth with the Scots, under the command of Montgomery,
whom he worsted, and afterward gave them a total overthrow at Dunbar, Sep. 3.
1650. a day very remarkable in the passages of his life, having on the same
obtained two signal victories, was on the same chosen Protector, and on the
same day died, the most fortunate of the four, and deserves to be Rubrickt
with red letters, for deliverance from so bloody a Tyrant.

Soon after he had a dangerous fit of sickness, from which if God had been
pleased in mercy to have delivered him by death, I believe he had not been
guilty of so much perjury, blood and apostasy, as afterward he contracted.

Sad was the condition of the Scots at this time, being not only perplexed
with a foreign enemy raging in her bowels, but were themselves also miserably
divided into a Tripartite Schism; one party in the West under Strangham and
Ker declared for the Kirk against the King, another party in the North under
the Command of Huntley, Atholl, Seaforth, etc. for the King against the Kirk, a
third being the Parliament, and Committy of Estates, and Kirk, for the King and
Kirk; with these last was His Sacred Majesty; but so imperious and insolent
were they over Him in extorting declarations from Him against His own party and
proceedings, in usurping the whole government of affairs to themselves, and in
placing guards of their own Creatures upon His person, etc. That not able
longer to suffer such intolerable affronts, he went secretly away from them to
the Lord Dedups house in the North Confines of Fife; The Parliament and
Committy of Estates and Kirk, fearing He would have gone to Huntley, sent Major
General Montgomery after Him to entreat His return again to S. Johnston's;
which at first He refused, but afterward upon several Propositions granted
Him, He returned. And now, the Common enemy endangering all, they unite in
affection, and a general meeting is resolved on to be held at S. Johnston's,
which should consist of King, Lords, Barons, Burgesses, and the Assembly of
Ministers; several Lords formerly in disfavour with the Kirk are received into
command in the Army, and have Libe^ty to sit in Parliament, such as Hamilton,
Landerdale, Leith, Bucheim, Dedup, and Crawford, Major General Massey of the
English was admitted to a Command in the Army. Thus did their soars begin to
heal, their breaches again to be made up, and now it was well hoped these
clouds of divission being blown over, a serene sky would follow, and the Sun of
prosperity shine upon their proceedings.

January the first following, with as great solemnity as the indigency of their
affairs would permit, was the King Crowned at Scone, the ancient place for the
Coronation of the Kings of Scotland, to omit the Ceremonies which were not
many, as not fit to be used in so reformed a place: The King having the Crown
set on His head, endeavors to maintain the same against all opposers, in
relation whereunto. He resolves upon the raising of an Army with all possible
speed, to which effect he sets up His Standerd at Aberdeen, intending to be
Generalissimo thereof Himself, Duke Hamilton is made Leiutnant General of the
Army, and Sir Thomas Middleton Lieutenant General of the Horse. The Town of
Sterling is ordered to be fortified, to which His Majesty went often in
progress to view the works, and encourage the Pioners.

And high time it was for Him to bestirre Himself, Cromwell (that successful
Rebel) having gained all on the other side Fife, takes the Earl of Eglington
prisoner, every day drew nigher and nigher to them, whereupon His Majesty
removed His Court to Sterling, most of the Scotch army quartering about it,
whither not long after Sir Tho. Middleton brought 8000. men out of the North,
and more were expected every day from Argile, Huntley, and Seaforth, who were
gone to their several territories to complete the Kings Levies.

Cromwell desirous to fight them before they were united, used all his
endeavors to bring them to a field battle, which His Majesty for the reasons
aforesaid declined, whereupon on a sudden he draws off his army and transports
1600. foot, and four Troops of Horse over into Fife, and with an unparalled
expedition faced again the Royal Army, with a r^solution to fall upon their
Rear if they should attempt a motion thitherwards, yet could not this make them
to stir; In the mean time Sir John Brown Governor of Sterling with 4000.
Horse and Foot, marches against that party of Cromwells already landed in Fife;
Lambert and Okey having intelligence thereof, with two Regiments o^ Horse and
two of Foot, waft over to reinforce their party, with which additionall aid
they routed Sir John Brown, took him prisoner, with near 1200. more, and killed
2000. upon the place. Crownwell flesht with these beginnings, pursues his
advantages, and transports his Army over Fife, marches to S. Johnstons, and
takes it almost upon the first summons.

His Majesty not able to force them back, resolves with all speed to advance
into England, well hoping the justness of His cause would have incited the
English to have joined with Him, as experienced also of the Scots valor,
expressed better in other Countries then the own. Cromwell hereupon re-crosses
Frith, and sends Lambert with a select party of Horse and Dragoones to fall
upon their Rear, himself following quickly after. By the way of Carlisle the
Royal Army enters England, marching with that Civility and Obedience to
military discipline, that 'twas thought the Country was not endamaged six pence
by them; but whether it was that their former villainies had left such a deep
impression in the hearts of the people, or that they were now dulled and
besotted with slavery, content with Issachers ass to couch under their
burdens, or rather being overawed by an armed power, few or none came in to
their assistance, saving only the Lord Howards Son of Estwick with a Troop
of Horse, notwithstanding His Majesty's earnest invitations.

The Juncto at Westwinster hearing of the Kings march, raised all the Counties
against Him, and made it high Treason to aid Him with either men or moneys; But
the Loyal (though unfortunate) Earl of Darby not fearing their Bugbear,
brought Him a supply of 250. Foot, and 60. Horse, out of the Isle of Man, and
having raised a considerable force in Lancashire, set upon Col. Lilburn,
(intending to have hindered him from joining with a Regiment of Cromwells,
which was sent for that purpose toward Manchester,) but was by him
unfortunately defeated, the Lord Witherington, Sir Thomas Tilsley, Sir William
Throgmorton, Col. Boynton, and sundry others taken prisoners.

At Worcester the Royal army made a stand, resolving to abide all opposition,
Cromwell having joined himself with the Country forces was quickly at their
heels, his army consisting of 50. or 60. Thousand, the Scots not 10000. at
most; yet adding courage to their small number, resolved to fight it out to the
uttermost; the King though of a Lambe-like disposition, yet here acted the part
of a Lion, encouraging his Soldiers both by precept and example; after
several sallies, and much courage shown on both sides, September 3. (an
unfortunate day for the Scots) it came to a field fight, wherein though the
Royalists valor exceeded even to admiration, yet multitude overmatching
courage they were overthrown. The King (whose Horse was twice that day shot
under Him,) could not be induced to quit the field, until He saw all the field
almost cleared.

The battle being thus absolutely lost, toward three of the Clock Thursday
Morning the 4. of September the King in Company with the said Earl of Derby,
Earl of Shrewsbury, Earl of Cleaveland, Duke of Buckingham, my Lord Wilmot, and
others to the Number of fourscore, came to the place called White-ladies in the
parish of Tongue in the Confines of Stafford and Shropshire, being 25. Miles
distant or thereabouts from Worcester, which space of ground he had Rid that
Night.

This White-ladies was a house belonging to one Fitsherbert, where George
Penderil (the youngest brother of five, who were all severally isntrumental in
the Conducting and Preserving His Majesty,) hearing some body Knocking at the
Gate so early, opening the window and Espying there the aforesaid Francis Yates
who was his brother in law, together with Mr. Giffard, the first thing he asked
of his brother Yates was, what News from Worcester, who answered that the King
was defeared, and the Enemy in pursuit of Him, therefore bid him to make have
and put on his clothes; but ere he could do that, the King with most of His
Lords had entered the house, and were come into the hall, where after a very
short debate, the Earl of Derby called for William Penderil the Eldest brother,
(for my Lord of Derby had taken this place for his Shelter, after the defeat
given him by Col. Lilburn near Wigan in Lancashire, and was acquainted there,
and was by them conducted to Worcester to the King, it had also been a
Sanctuary for several other Gentlemen,) who being come, George was sent to Tongue
within Five miles of Wolverhampton, to one Robert Beard a very honest person,
to enquire of him whether there were any scattered Troops of the Kings
thereabouts, or if any of the Enemies appeared thereabouts; who returned and
brought word that there were no parties at all to be seen; return-in he met
with his brother Richard.

Richard being come in, Mr. Giffard called for him, and bad him bring his best
clothes, which were a jerkin and breeches of course green cloth, and a
Doe-skin Leather doublet, they borrowed an old Gray hat of Humphry Penderill
the Miller, the course he open shirt was had of one Edward Martin, with George
Penderils band, and shoes of one William Creswell; which His Majesty
unstripping Himself of His own clothes, nimbly put on, His buff-coat, and
linen doublet, and gray Breeches, which were the cloth; that He put off, He
gave into the brothers hands, who immediately buried them under ground, where
they lay five weeks before they durst take them up again, the Jewels of His
Arm He gave to one of the Lords, who was then going away.

Then Richard brought a pair of shears, and founded the Kings hair, which my
Lord Wilmot had Notched before with a Knife; and the King was pleased to take
notice of Richards good workmanship, so as to prefer it before my Lord
Wilmots, and now His Majesty was esteemed to be the complete wood-man.

Hereupon William Penderil was presented to His Majesty by the Earl of Derby,
and the care of His most Sacred Majesty committed to his charge, and the rest
of his brothers: After this all that were present took their leaves, and
departed, every one shifting for himself, only my Lord Wilmot was carried by
John Penderil, to the house of one Thomas Whitgreaves; as they were going
along, seeing some men coming behind them which proved to be friends, (though
my Lord suspected the Country to rise upon them,) they hid themselves in a dry
pit, where they stayed till Evening, and then arrived safely at Mr. Whitgreaves.

The Company being all gone, a wood-bill was brought to the King, and so He and
Richard went out into the wood; William went home, and Richard and George went
out to scout, and lay hovering in the wood to hear or see if any one approached
that way; the King had not been above an hour in that wood, but a troop of the
Enemies horse came to Whitladies and enquired after the King, the towns-folks
answered, that about three hours ago there was a party of horse came thither,
and they supposed the King with them, but that they made no stay: they were
hereupon so eager in the pursuit when they heard which way they took, that they
made no more search there; the King had notice of this by the aforesaid scouts,
who were ever and anon straggling for intelligence into the town. All this day
being Thursday the King continued in the wood, sometimes lying on the ground,
Richard Penderil constantly keeping Him company; but being a rainy-day, Francis
Yates his Wife came into the Wood and brought the King a blancket, which He
threw over His Shoulders to keep Him dry, she also brought Him His first meat
He eat there, viz. a Mess of Milk mixed with Eggs and Sugar in a black Earthen
dish, the King guessed it to be milk and Apples, saying, He loved it very well,
after He had drank and eat some of it with a pewter spoon, He gave George the
rest, and bid him eat, telling him it was very good; the King then exchanged
His woodbill for Francis Yates broom-hook, being it was something lighter.

Toward five of the clock that Evening, the King, with Richard, Humphry, George
and Francis Yates, left the wood and went to Richards house, under the Name of
William Jones a wood-cutter newly come thither for work; against His coming the
good wife for His entertainment at supper, was preparing a Fricasse of Bacon
and Eggs, and while that was doing the King held on His Knee their daughter
Nan, after He had eat a little He asked Richard to eat, who replied, yea Sir, I
will, to which His Majesty said, you have a better stomach then I, for you have
eaten five times to day already; supper ended, the King having resolved to
depart in the dusk of the Evening, before He went, Jane Penderill the Mother of
the five brethren came to see the King, before whom she blessed God that had so
honored her children in making them the instruments (as she hoped) of His
Majesty's safeguard and deliverance. Here Francis Yates offered the King thirty
shillings in silver, the King took ten, bidding him put up the other; Humphry
would have gone before to see and view about, but the King would not let him,
it being now near night, they took their leave of the King upon their knees,
beseeching God to guide and bless Him.

His Majesty and Richard departed, intending to go to one Mr. Francis Wolf of
Madeley, thence to take pass into Wales; on the way as they were to go by a
Mill at a place called Evelin, as they were going over the bridge, it being
near nine a clock at night, the Miller steps forth and asked, who goes there?
having something that looked like a good Cudgel in his hand, to which Richard
being foremost, thought it not safe to reply, and therefore the water being
shallow, he leaped from the bridge into it, the King did the like, following
Richard by the Rattling of his Leather breeches; the Miller was glad he was so
rid of them, for as it afterward appeared, some of the Kings scattered
soldiers were in his Mill, and he thought the other to be Parliament party.

Being come to Madely late that night, they understood the danger of passing
into Wales, the Country being every where laid with Soldiers, and that he
durst not entertain them into his house, but showed them a Hay-mow where they
might lodge, where the King and Richard continued all that night, and the next
day being Friday night with the conveyance of a Maid of this Mr. Wolfs, who
brought the King two miles on His way, they retreated back again to Richards
house; however, to show his Loyalty, Mr. Wolf lent the King some small sum
of money.

This design being crossed, Saturday morning without any stay, the King and he
went to a house of Mris. Giffard called Boscobel, where William Penderil and
his wife dwelt as housekeepers, who received Him joyfully; but the Kings feet
were so blistered with Traveling in such course and stiff accountrements as
He wore on His feet, and lying in them, that He was scarce able to stand or
go; which Williams wife perceiving, she stripped off His stockings, and cut the
blisters, and washed His feet, and gave the King some ease.

The same time or near thereupon, that Noble Col. Careless, who as it is said
before made good the Kings passage at Worcester, and had fought his way
through; after he had been two days at one David Jones living in the Heathin
Tong-parish, and there by him secured, was brought by one Elizabeth Burgess to
this same house of Boscobell, where he had layn obscure three quarters of a
year before, and there His Majesty and he met; but the Colonel was so
over-joyed with the fight of the King His Master in such sure and safe hands,
that he could not refrain weeping, which kindness of his forced the King to
something of the same passion.

After a short conference touching the Kings most probable means of Escape, it
was Resolved by them to betake themselves to the wood again, and accordingly
about nine of the clock that Saturday morning they went into the wood, and
Colonel Carles brought the King to that famous Oak where before he had himself
been lodged: this tree is not hollow, but of a found firm trunk, only about
the middle of the body of it, there is a hole in it about the bigness of a
man's head, from whence it is called hollow; by the help of William Penderils
Ladder, they got up among the boughs of the tree, which were very thick and
full of leaves, so that it was impossible for any one to discern any thing
through them.

Being both up, William gave each of them a pillow to lie upon, between the
thickest of the branches; the King being over-wearied with his travel began to
be very sleepy, so that the Colonel to accomodate Him as well as he could,
desired His Majesty to lay His head in his lap, and rest His body upon the
pillow, which the King agreed to, and after He had sleept a good while, He
awaked very hungry, wishing He had something to eat; whereupon the Colonel
plucked out of his pocket a good Lunchion of bread and cheese which Jone
Penderil had given him that day, and had wrapped it up in a clean linen
cloth, of which the King fed very heartily, and commending it highly for good
Cheer, some other small relief He had which was put up into the tree with a
long hook-stick.

At this time Richard Penderil was sent to Wolverhampton some three miles from
thence, to buy wine and bisquet, and some other refreshment for the King, and
withal to speak with one Mr. George Manwaring a peron of known Integrity and
Loyaly from Col. Cares, to know of him whether he knew of any such privacy, for
two persons of the Kings party fled from Worcester: To which he sent word back
that he had not himself, but he would enquire if a friend of his, one Mr.
Whitgreave of Moseley could do it; with this answer Richard returned with his
wine, etc. to the King, who toward the Evening came down from the tree, and was
brought into the Garden of Boscobel house, where in one of the bowers He sat
and drank part of the wine till toward Night.

In the mean time Humphry Penderil the Miller was sent to get intelligence, and
the easier to come by it, he was sent to a Captain of the Rump, one Broadway,
formerly a Heel-maker, under pretense of carrying him twenty shillings for the
pay of a man in the new raised Militia of their County; for their Mistress being
there, in comes a Col. of the Enemies, asking for Captain Broadways, that he
might know what further enquiry had been made at Whiteladies, for the King;
telling Broadways the story of it; to which Broadways replied, he knew nothing
of it further then Rumor, but that there was one of that place in the house
that could give an account of it; Hereupon Humphry was called, but he evaded
all the questions put to him, only confessed that the King had been there as
was supposed, but that there was no likelihood He should stay there, there
being three families in the house, all at difference one with an other; then
the Colonel told him there was a thousand pound that would be given to any that
should take or discover Him, and that they questioned not but within a day or
two to have Him delivered into their hands.

Humphry coming back related all the passages, omitting not to tell His Majesty
of the price His Enemies had set on His head; at the relating whereof the King
looked somewhat dismayed, as having trusted his Life into the hands of such
poor men, whom such a sum as that might pervert from their fidelity. This
caused Humphry to be exceedingly troubled for His rashness, but Col. Carles
assured the King if it were a hundred thousand pounds it were to as little
purpose, and that he would engage his soul for their honesty, which Humphry
also was not backward to second with many solemn Affections.

It was now late, and the King being very hungry, was desirous of a Loin of
Mutton, and being come into the house, asked William if he could not get it
Him? William told Him that he had it not of his own, but he would make bold on
such an occasion with one of his Masters sheep in the Coat; which presently he
did, and brought it into the Cellar, where the Col. impatient of delay stabbed
it with his dagger: the sheep being fleyed, the King fell presently to Chopping
of the Loin to pieces, which the Col. clapped into the pan, while the King held
it and fried it.

This passage was an occasion to the King of much mirth: in a discourse after
His arrival in France, where the question was put, who was Cook, and who was
scullion, the resolution of the doubt, when it could not be decided by the
Lords then present, was referred to the Judgment of His Majesty's Master Cook,
who affirmed that His Majesty was Hic and Nunc, both of them.

When this nimble collation was ended, the King was willing to betake Himself
to His rest, His chamberlain William brought Him to His Lodging, it was a place
made between two walls on purpose for secrecy, contrived at the building of the
house, thither they let the King down, where He slept very Incommodiously, the
place not being long enough for Him, and therefore the next night they laid Him
a sorry bed upon the staire-case, as they used to do for strange wood-cutters,
that the meannesse of His Lodging might secure Him from suspicion.

My Lord Wilmot as is said before, was all this while safe at Mr. Whitgreaves,
only his care of the King made him full of Trouble, his hiding place was so
sure an one, that at his first coming to it, he wished so he gave twenty
thousand pounds that the King were either as secure or there with him: full of
such thoughts, he therefore dispatched away John Penderil (who had attended him
all along) to the Whiteladies, to enquire for the King, and to give Him no^ice
of the convenience that was at Mr. Whitgreaves; but when he came thither, which
was on Friday, the King was then gone to Madely to Mr. Woolfs; the next day he
was sent again, and by Richards Wife directed to Boscobel, where he told the
King his Message, which the King agreed unto, and resolved to remove thither.

Monday Night Sept. 8. at eleven at Night was the time resolved on for the
Kings Journey to Mosely, but a Horse was hard to be got, but remembering that
Humphry the Miller had one, he was called and desired to lend him for the Kings
service; it was a Horse that used to carry nothing but sacks, but now he put
upon him a bridle and saddle, that had out-worne its tree and irons, and at the
time brought him to the gate.

The King Mounting, Colonel Carles and the six others Guarded Him, two before,
and two behind, and one of each side armed with clubs and bills, Humphry
leading his horse by the bridle; and so they began their Journey, it was five
Miles from Boscobel to Mosely Mr. Whitgreaves, and the way in some places Miry;
where the horse blundering caused the King to suspect falling, and bid Humphry
have a care, to which he answered, that that now fortunate horse had carried
many a heavier weight in his time, six strike of corn, but now had a better
price on his back, the price of three Kingdoms, and therefore would not now
shame his Master.

Their travel was soon and safely ended, and the King brought the back way to
a style that led to the house; when the King was to alight, Humphry led the
horse into a ditch, and the King alighted off upon the style, but forgetting
that most of His Guard were to return home, He went five or six steps onward
without taking leave of them, when suddenly recalling Himself, He returned
back, and took His leave of them in these words. I am troubled, that I forget
to take my leave of my friends; but if ever I come into England by fair or foul
means, I will remember you, and let Me see you when ever it shall so please
God: so they all kissed His hand and departed, but the Colonel, john, and
Francis Yates, who conducted His Majesty to the house.

There Mr. Thomas Whitgreave received the King with an extraordinary duty and
affection, and brought Him in to my Lord Wilmot, who with an unspeakable
gladness Kneeled down and Embraced His Knees, after some small conference His
Majesty was had to His Lodging, and the Cunning Intiques of it shown Him, where
after the King had rested Himself that night, they consulted about His Escape,
which had been contrived by the Lord Wilmot before.

Thereupon the Lord Wilmot having thus by a strange providence met with His
Majesty, sends away John Penderil to Mrs. Lane, who had before promised to
serve His Majesty even to the hazard of her Life, who sent him back again with
a parcel of Leaves of Wallnut-tree boiled in spring water, to color His
Majesty's hands, and alter the whiteness of His skin where it was most
obvious, and withal gave notice by him to the King, what time she should be
ready.

Which when John had related to the King, He prepared and fitted Himself for
His Journey, and one Mr. Huddlestone and Mr. Whitgreave, accommodated Him with
Boots, Cloak, Money, etc.

On Thursday Night the eleventh of September Col. Lane came with his sister to
a field adjoining, and there they put the King before her, John having the
honor to hold the Kings stirup while He mounted, and presently they two set
forward, having taken direction to know the Country, and my Lady Lane having
several recommendations to the allies, friends and acquaintaince of her family
that lay in her intended road, if any untoward occasion should put them to the
trial.

The first place where they attempted to get the King on shipboard was at a
place called Crods and Peet hard by Bristoll, in order to which design Mrs.
Lane conducted His Majesty to the house of Mr. Norton a relation of hers, since
Knighted by His Majesty, which is called Leigh, His Majesty Riding before her
in the habit of her servingman.

To relate each several accident which happened to them in their way, might
seem too tedious to the reader, as the Sermon was to those that were
constrained to hear it. I shall therefore only for Illustration of the story
touch at some passages which were most remarkable. His Majesty being something
indisposed in body, complained to Mrs. Lane that the cloak wearied Him,
whereupon she desired Mr. Lastell to carry it, but long had they not rid so
when they met her Brother in Law upon the road, who amongst other questions,
asked her, if her Father must carry her man's cloak, she to wipe off all
suspicion made him this ready excuse, (which if a sin certainly a Venial one)
that it was so big, it often endangered the throwing her off the horse, and
therefore she had desired him to carry it.

Scarce were they rid of this danger, but they met with a far greater, being to
pass through a Town where a Troop of horse was drawn up, as if in opposition
to hinder their passage: the Lamb though innocent fears the Woolf, and a
dangerlesse fear is better then a fearlesse danger, but the Captain was Civil,
took them for honest travelers (as indeed they were,) and commanding his Troop
to open to the Right and Left, gave them quiet passage.

Hitherto has our Story been Tragical, but seldom is a day so cloudy that
the Sun makes no appearance: Diogenes though Cynicall would sometimes smile,
and His Majesty surrounded as it were with misfortune, yet met with one passage
which made Him to laugh; coming to Leigh as before is said, He was left in the
Kitchen under the notion of a Serving-man, with whom the Maid enters into
discourse, asking Him where He was Born, what Trade He was of, with many other
questions suitable to a Kitchin-Maids Curiosity; the King answers, He was Born
at Brumingham, and a Nailors Son; after some other discourse the Jack being
down, the Maid desires Him to wind it up, which He undertakes, but being
unskilful therein, goes the wrong way about it, and somewhat prejudices it;
the Maid herewith highly incensed, (Cooks being most part of a chollerick
disposition,) vents her passion in scolding terms, asking Him where He was
bred, and telling him He was the veriest Ignorant fellow she ever saw in her
life, that could not tell how to wind up a Jack, with other such Language as
came first to her tongues end; which being uttered with much vehemence made His
Majesty notwithstanding His present condition to go out of the room smiling.

Being in the same place, because the Gentleman Keeping a Noble house, His
Majesty feared the great resort thither might occasion a discovery of His
Person, he feigned Himself sick of an ague, and so keeps His Chamber all day,
coming down only at nights; now that disease naturally making men cold and
thirsty, His Majesty to possess them that His distemper was real, desires of
the Butler a glass of wine, who courteously invites Him into the butlery,
where the Butler forces Him to drink two or three Healths; one to His Majesty,
and another to His Mother: But at length notwithstanding His disguise,
suspected Him to be the King, and thereupon falling on his Knees he begged His
Majesty's pardon, and assured Him that he would be faithful to Him in whatever
He should command Him, of which the King seemed to take no notice, but having
drunk off His wine went out; but the Butlers suspicion increasing further, to
satisfy his Curiosity, went up to Mr. Lastell, asking him how long he had had
that servant; Mr. Lastell though angry at the Butlers inquisitivenesse, yet
would needs know a reason of him for his demand, who whispe^ing him in the ear,
told him he did believe it was the King. Whereupon fearing a discovery, sends
immediately up for His Majesty, acquainting Him with the Butlers suspicion, the
King though angry that He made Him not first acquaintest with it, yet putting
confidence in him denied it not, and afterward found him very instrumental in
His conveyance through the Country.

His Majesty willing to be freed from these dangers, was very desirous to be
gone; but though there lay a little Bark there, deemed very fit for the
purpose, yet the Master would for no reward transport a single person;
whereupon His Majesty not willing to tempt providence too far, desired to go
further Westward, to a Noble Gentleman whom He knew to be a trusty friend, and
being conducted thither by Mr. Lastell and Mrs. Lane He there takes His leave
of them with many thanks for their care and kindness, till God should enable
Him to require them better.

Having with due respect been carefully concealed in this house for a week, at
last preparation being made of a passage for Him, but coming to the place where
it was provided, He chanced to dine with a Parliament Col. then there;
wherefore fearing His Embarking singly might breed suspicion in him, He rather
chose to lose the benefit of His passage, then after so many storms and
tempests to be split upon a rock within sight of harbor.

Wherefore returning back to the place from whence He came, He concealed
Himself there three weeks longer, and then was conveyed through by-ways to a
Gentleman's house in Sussex, where having continued some few days, he heat of
search after Him being pretily well over, He was at last furnished with that
small Vessel, which is now to be seen riding at anchor over against
White Hall; the Vessel being brought, His Majesty went to Shoreham a little
Creek in that County, and there took shipping; when the skipper saw it was His
Majesty, for it seems he had seen Him often before, he was a little daunted. But
afterward recollecting himself, he said, he was resolved to Venture hanging
for His Majesty; to which His Majesty replied, that he need not put himself
upon that Venture, for that he might go along with Him, where he should not
want as long as He was able to provide for him; thus setting Sale from
Shoreham, they in a small time came to Land near Havre de Grace in Normandy.

But to look a little back, great was the List of prisoners taken at Woreester,
and many taken in the pursuit, insomuch that the gleanings were almost
answerable to the Harvest; but more considerable to them who were publicly
suffered to make a gain of, by felling them beyondsea to perpetual slavery:
this made the Sectarian party Cock a hoop, and to make it the greater, public
days of Thanksgiving are appointed, to make God the patronizer of their
Villainies, Murders, Tyrannies, and Treasons. And now say they, were not people
blind, they might see God himself owning our cause, in those wonderful
successes he bestows upon us: an argument scarcely worth the answering, yet of
great weight amongst their filly Proselites. Then might the Turk boast of the
purity of his Religion from the largeness of his Territories, and his several
victories over Christian Princes. Ovid though a Heathen could have taught them
better Divinity then so.

-- Careat successibus opto,
Quisquis ab eventu facta notanda putat.
-- May he never speed.
Who from the event makes measure of the deed.
Not long after, the Juncto had knowledge how the king escaped, whereupon they
vowed to make Mrs. Lane exemplary, (Oh the grievous crime of Loyalty!) But she
having notice of their intentions, puts her self into the habit of a
Country-maid, and so crosses the Country on foot to Yarmouth, where she got
shipping, which conneyed her safe into France: His Majesty having notice of her
arrival, sent some persons of quality in Coaches to conduct her to Paris;
Himself with the Queen His Mother, and the Dukes of York and Gloucester, going
some part of the way to meet her, entertaining her with this grateful
expression, Welcome my Life. And so taking her into His own Coach, conducted
her to Paris, where she was entertained with the applause and wonder of the
whole Court. The Juncto in the mean time had sent Soldiers to search after
her, but missing their prey, they in revenge burnt down to the ground that poor
Cottage where His Majesty first took shelter after His escape from Worcester.

Yet one Note more may I conceive be thought not unworthy of our Story; Many
there were who had got rich prizes in the plunder of the City of Worcester, by
which they imagined themselves enriched all the days of their life's; but this
wealth was to them Aurum Tholosanum, being not only consumed in a few days, but
wasted with it the rest of their Estates. And for the City it self, she quickly
exalted her self again, and is said to be now in a better condition then she
was before.

But let us at last proceed from the battle to the effects which it produced.
Cromwell heightened with these successes, began to think of putting his
ambitious designs in practice; and first he turns the Juncto out of doors, a
thing he knew would be very acceptable to the people, as being the original of
all our Calamities; but his ambition was to make himself great, not to give
relief and take away the tyranny, therefore in stead of those he pulled down, he
sets up another of his own arbitrary Election, who knew what they had to do
before they met; for having sat a while without doing of any thing
considerable, they resign up their power to him, and by the help of the
Officers of the Army and Lamberts instrument, make him (the Lord protect us)
Lord Protector, (The Commonwealth being in its Infancy) yet in this were we
happy, that in his Reign one Tyrant only Lorded it over us, but in the Long
Parliament many.

Now though Oliver had often sworn against the government by a single person,
he could easily dispense with such trivial things as oaths, and thought them
binding no further then conducible to his own interest: and because he could
not crave a blessing from God upon such wicked practices, he seeks to establish
himself by humane policy; Being of no Religion, he gives a toleration to all;
so that what was once said of Amsterdam, (that if a man had lost his Religion,
there he might find it,) might now as fitly be applied to England, here being
Presbyterians, Independents, Anabaptists, Quakers, Ranters, Adamites, Fifth
Monarchy men, and such a Rabble more, that I want a Dictionary to find out
their names. The two first indeed having not much fault besides their Pride and
Ambition, of which one writes of them, That Pope John in his Chair never
thought himself so big as a Cynicall Presbyter amongst his Lay Elders, or as an
Independent in a Committee of Tryers, etc. Neither did Pope Joan in her State,
over think so well of her self as a sanctified Presbyterians wife, dressed up in
her best attire. The Anabaptists are a bloody people, fatal both to Kingdoms
and Commonwealths; and although England felt not much of their Cruelties,
being timely prevented by the Divine Providence, yet woeful Germany was a long
time a Stage for their Tragedies, being died red with many horrible murders
and massacres. The Quakers are of a sour Generation, who defy all Learning,
of a crabbed disposition, looking rather like Fantasms or furies sent from Hell
to deceive the world, then Christians. Yet grew they extreme potent, boasting
in their Schismatic opinions, and seducing many poor and ignorant people to
their own damnation. But should I give you an account of every particular Sect,
'twould take up an age to describe them: No day but produced its Schism or
Heresy, no Cobbler but would presume to make himself the head of a Sect or
Faction, glorying in thundering the holy word of God out of his profane lips to
his she-Auditors, (for so for the most part they were;) who listen to him as to
an Oracle, and he presuming his confidence to be knowledge, carries himself as
proudly as if he were their Ghostly father.

But to proceed. He knew that what was acquested by force must be maintained by
violence; and therefore he had a care in raising such indigent persons to
preferment, as might if not for love to him their Governor, yet for the
preservation of their own interests, spend their blood in opposing any that
might make resistance. And as he raised valleys, so he leveld mountains; Great
men being like metled Horses, (if not well looked to) may chance to cast those
young Riders, who are scarce settled in the sadle. Those who would not
acknowledge him to be their Head, he made no more to do but cut their heads
off; to recite all those who suffered under him, would make a fourth volume to
Foxes Martyrology; not any who had the least appearance of Nobleness and
worth, but suffered by death or sequestration, whilst his own Mushrom'd
Gentility, sprung up in a Night of Rebellion, were the simple nothings then
adored.

His spies (of whom he had many) were very useful to him, the charges of whom
amounted to no less then two hundred Thousand pounds per annum. These were not
only distributed about all places of England, but very conversant in the
Courts of most Christian Princes; by this silver hook he gained intelligence
from most places, and seldom are any secrets so close locked up that a golden
key will not open. Then for Soldiers he took such a course that he had always
enough of them, having brought the Commons so low by want of Trade, that they
must either take up Arms or starve; nor would he want occasion to keep up an
Army on foot, for when he had no cause he could soon create one; witness the
war he made with Spain, ( Englands fast friend in all the late troubles,) by
which the Trade of England has been more detrimented then by all the wars we
have had since 1638.

Having thus tyrannized over England the space of five years, he at last made
his exit in a most horrible tempest, we may well say that God was not in that
wind, though we have cause to praise his blessed and holy name for that
wind-fall. As he lived unbeloved, so he died unlamented, breathing out his soul
with the sin of perjury, for at his being chosen Protector, he called God to
witness he was against Englands government being made Hereditary; abusing to
that purpose the saying of Solomon, Ecclesiastes 2.19. Who knows whether his
son shall be a wise man or a fool? Yet at his death he endeavored all he could
to settle it in his posterity, leaving his Son Richard Protector of England,
and his Son Henry Lord Lieutenant of Ireland. And though at his death the
Commonwealth was indebted some millions of pounds, yet never was any King of
England buried in that state as was this grand Tyrant, the charges of his
funeral amounting to no less then sixty thousand pounds, besides that he was
presumptuously interred among His Majesty's Ancestors at Westminster, in that
very place where His Majesty had intended for His own rest, as if he had
resolved not only to detain Him from His right when He was alive, but when He
was dead also.

The Protector being interred among the Kings and Queens at Westminster (at a
vaster charge then had been used before in the richest times) his Son Richard,
an honest private gentleman well beloved in Hampshire, ascended the throne by
the invitation and encouragement of Fleotwood, Desborough, Sydenham, the two
Jones's, Thurlow and others, the relations and confidents of his father, and by
the contrivance of the Court received congratulations prepared at Whitehall
from most of the Counties and Cities of England, and from the Armies of
England, Scotland and Ireland, with engagements to live and dye with him, with
addresses from the Independent Churches brought by Goodwin and Nigh their
Metropolitans.

This introduction being made to transfer the Government from the line of the
Stuarts to the line of the Cromwells, it was conceived by some who had
proceeded thus far, that a Parliament chosen by influences from Court, would
easily swallow what was so well prepared to their hands. Accordingly it was
resolved by the Protectors Juncto, that a Parliament should be called, who
being met at the time and place appointed, they first declare Richard Cromwell
Lord Protector and chief Magistrate of the Commonwealth of England, Scotland,
and Ireland.

Then they vote, after 14. days opposition from the honest party in the house,
to transact with the new House of Lords. Other things they did not so pleasing
to the Protector and his party. For they order a Committee to look after the
accounts of the Nation in order to retrenching and lessening the charge of the
Commonwealth. They had also by a saving vote asserted their interest in the
fleet, and had under consideration an act for taking away all Laws, Statutes
and Ordinances, concerning Excise, and Tunnage and Poundage, after three years.

Proceeding thus successfully with much satisfaction to the Nation, the
Protector and the Officers of the Army, who before were jealous of one another,
grew now jealous of the House of Commons, and therefore they thought it
seasonable to contend for the power, before the People should recover it from
them both. In order hereunto the Officers of the Army keep their Councels at
Wallingford-House, and the Protector with his party countermin'd them at
Whitehall. The result of the Officers debates was a Canting Representation,
written in such an equivocating language, that the sting was easily visible
through the Honey.

Hereupon the Protector begins to think of securing himself, and forbids their
meetings, but in vain; Wherefore both sides keep guards one against another day
and night. In this divided posture affairs continued till Friday the 22. of
April 59. on which morning early the Protectors brother Fleetwood, Disborough,
his Uncle, carrying the greater part of the Army with them, and the Protectors
party flinching, the conquest was obtained without one drop of blood, and the
Protector forced to consent to the dissolving of the Parliament, contrary to
the best advice, his own interest and promises.

Far different was the courage of this young Protector from that of our
magnificent Hero Henry the 5. who having hastily taken the Crown from the
pillow of his not yet deceased father, and being by him with a sad sigh told
that God knew how unjustly he had gotten it; replied, That since his father had
by his sword attained it, and being now at his death by Gods Providence
devolved on him, that therefore his sword should maintain it as his Right
against all opposers. But our pitiful Protector wanted both his wit and
valor, for having by fortune gotten a Crown without the effusion of either
blood or treasure, yet was loath to do so much as to draw a sword for its
preservation, thus according to the English Proverb, Lightly come, lightly go,
men seldom prizing that which they never sweat for.

The fathers servants being now grown the Sons Masters, allow him some
thousands of pounds, and order him to retire into the Country; but the turning
out Richard was not all they had to do, his Brother Henry was still possessed
of Ireland, who was looked upon as a man of a more courageous spirit, and
doubtless they had found him so, would the Officers of the Army have stuck
close to him as at first they promised, but they (according to the course of
the world) left him when he had most need of them, and so made him incapable
either of assisting himself, or restoring his Brother.

The Protector being thus divested of all power and authority, Lambert comes
again upon the stage, a person of so large a spirit and undaunted courage, that
Oliver fearful of his great endownments, had deprived him of all command in
the Army, only making him a member of his pageant house of Lords; during whose
Protectorship he lived as 'twere retired, knowing it in vain to struggle
against one who had got so settled a power; but he being dead, and an
opportunity given him to present himself again upon the Theater, his ambitious
spirit would not let him lie still, but attempts to make himself Commander of
these three kingdoms, as Oliver (by his means) had done before; which design
of his in the sequel ruined him, and discovered those grand cheates and abuses
which that party had put upon the Nation, endeavoring to enslave them to their
own Arbitrary power, whilst they pretended to wear those glorious yet
strangely wrested names of Religion and Liberty.

But to proceed, having pulled down one Government, they are enforced to set up
another, well knowing the people would not be contented to be ruled by the
sword, of all Governments the most unjust and arbitrary, and since they must
have one, they resolve to have one like themselves, even those men that
murdered the King, and had for some years enslaved their Native Country. This
Rump or fag end of a Parliament do they pitch upon; So these Tyrants cement and
knit together again like a Snakes tail, and for color called themselves the
Revivers of the good old case, and were as busy as if they had another King and
three kingdoms to destroy. Thus by Gods permission that old rotten Government
which was the f^r^t cause of Englands ruin, is new vampt and set up again, to
bring the people into a far worse then Egyptian bondage and slavery.

Two things are to be wondered at in this transaction, First, how the Rump
durst credit or give any trust to the army, having formerly turned them out of
doors, and likewise so lately deserted their young Protector; And secondly,
how the Army durst trust them whom they had so grossly abused, with a full
power over them to place and displace whom they pleased. Certainly the Rumpes
intention was no less, then to serve the Army as they had formerly served
them; but the Army were as cunning as they were crafty, and having knowledge of
their design, inhibited their usurped sitting, as you shall hear anon.

Upon notice of the sitting of the Rump, those members who had been secluded by
the Army in 1648. for refusing to dip their hands in the blood of their Prince;
now demand an equal interest with the others to sit and Vote; but as they had
formerly been violently thrust out, so are they now forcibly kept out by the
Officers of the Army. This affront is highly resented by them, Mr. Pryn one of
those secluded members writing strongly against them; proving them by several
reasons to be no Parliament, but only a tyrannical and illegal authority:
they being first dissolved by the death of the King who summoned them, he being
Principium, causa and finis Parliamenti. Secondly, they not being the fourth
part of that number which ought to constitute a Parliament, the rest of their
fellow members being at several times turned out of the house, according to
the pleasure of the factious army; so that most Shires and Corporations in
England being unjustly deprived of their Burgesses, had no power nor interest
in the government of the Nation. Thirdly, their power being again devolved into
the people, who having by their Votes chosen another, did disannul the
autherity of this Representative. But it was in vain to talk of Law to those
who would be ruled by none; However for the security of themselves they proceed
vigorously to change the Officers of the Army, causing them to take commissions
from Lenthall whom they made General, making all the have they can to settle
themselves under the notion of the Good old cause. In the mean time the
secluded party of the House joining with the Presbyterian party, who were now
kept under by the predominant faction of Anabaptists and Independents, they
combine together, and seek to gain by force what by fair means they could not
attain; and this their design they make almost general over England, that as
the ruin threatened the whole Nation, so was the whole Nation concerned in the
redress. August the first, (the day appointed by the Rump for the banishing
the Cavaliers out of London) was the time set for them to rise; But by the
treachery of some of the Confederates, most places of their randevous were
discovered, and so the design for the most part disappointed. Yet Sir George
Booth with diverse other Gentlemen in Cheshire and Lancashire, raised a
considerable force, and having secured Westchester and some other places,
declared for a free Parliament, and to maintain the rights and privileges of
the people, the whole Nation (saving only the Sectaries, and such who had
raised themselves by the ruins both of Church and State) praying for their
success, but few or none stirring to their assistance.

It is a thing to be taken notice of even to admiration, that those very people
who made their lawful Sovereigns raising a little ship money (which
nevertheless was expended for the benefit and security of the Nation) without
authority of Parliament, one of the chief pleas for their raising wars against
him, yet could now be contented with such unparalleld impositions and
tyrannies, as no History can acquaint us with the like; The Sicilian Tyrants
being but mere shadows to these, whom we may justly call the very quintessence
of all tyranny and oppression.

But to return to our purpose, the Rump had soon notice of this rising, and
immediately send out forces to oppose them, making Lambert head of the party,
which gave him as fair an opportunity to put in execution his ambitious
designs as possibly could be; He in ten days marches to them, faces, fights,
and overcomes them; re-takes those holds which they had possessed, and so returns
again victorious. Sir George Booth soon after was taken in a woman's apparel at
Newport Pagnel, and committed prisoner to the Tower of London.

The Rump in token of their gratitude to Lambert for his good service, order
him a Thousand pound to buy him a Jewel, which he as frankly bestows amongst
his Soldiers, intending they should require him at a dead lift; this lesson he
had cond of his Master Oliver, to lay an Obligation upon the Soldiery, who now
were grown altogether mercenary. This act of his dis^leased the Rump, who now
began to find out his design, but were not able to hinder it.

Whilst Lambert was thus acting in the North, the Rump were as busy in
consulting all ways for their own secu^ity, as well from being supplanted by
the Army, as to suppress the peoples insurrection; to this purpose they setle
the Trained Bands in London, with six Troops of Horse, and began to raise the
Militia in the Counties, appointing such Commanders over them as were
fanaticall, yet assertors of their interest. Those Governors of Garrisons who
held for the Army they put out, placing others in their Rooms, whom they could
confide in; and raise three new Regiments, composed for the most part of
Anabaptists, Quakers, and fift-Monarchy-men, whom they call the Congregationall
Brigade, and now they hope in short time to be strong enough, not only to keep
the people under, but in due time to curb the pride of the insolent Army.

But all their endeavors were to little purpose, Lambert heightened with his
success, scorns to subject himself to any superior power, and was resolved
to leave no stone unturned till he had set up himself; and indeed his hopes
were great, having besides an obliged Army, many of the Rumpers themselves his
friends; the chief of whom was Sir Henry Vane, or rather Sir Humerous Vanity, a
mere Proteus in opinion, the chief ringleader of all the frantic Sectarians;
of a turbulent spirit, and working Brain: a strange composition of Choler and
Melancholy, who having given himself wholly to whimzies in Religion, would find
out crotchets in State too, and those the strangest in the world, as well his
Model testifies: Which we have thought fit to insert, that men may see the
danger which the nation has escaped.

The first position was,

That all men being by nature free, are equally free from an overruling
Magistraticall power.

If there be any excess in the sufferings of a suppressed party, they are not
to consider what the prevalent party does, but what moves them to give them
such actions, seeing that inconsistency of principles justify a scrupulous
severity.

Where there are two or more parties disagreeing as to the Erection of a
government, and but one agrees to this determinate form, there the Magistrate
has only a direct power only from and over them; his power over others is
indirect, and in order to the safety of those that empowered him.

That they are only the people of a Country who upon the Erection of a
Government have empowered the Legislators to act, being avowedly ready to stand
by and uphold them, and not every one that either farms or actually possesses
lands therein.

Those distenting people ought to be only as the Helots to the Lacedaemonians.

To be in the pay of the State, does not render an army Mercenary, or deprive
them of their share in being the people.

That those are most truly the people of this Nation, who owned the Parliament
in that day of Trial, when Sir George Booth was up in Cheshire.

Neuters in any part and constitution of Government, are not to be considered
as the people.

That the Presbyterians are excluded from being the people.

That the Sectaries are all included both by their previous and subsequent
services to the Parliament.

That there is no Religion, which can lead a man to renounce the performances
of such actions, as render him capable of civil or political society.

That the faithfulness of the Sectaries, is that whereby the State has been
and must be secured, and is sufficient to discharge satisfactorily, whom an
equal Toleration can make them capable of.

Silence is not to be taken for consent, where a party is under force.

Good orders do not secure a Commonwealth, wherein the Major or more active
part is out-spirited for such a form.

It is not the making a Commonwealth by force that destroys a Commonwealth,
but their not making it natural afterward.

To make a Government Natural, the Circumstances of affairs must be so
disposed of, that they may necessitate to such a posture.

That those who have adhered to the Army and Parliament in the last conspiracy,
be every one of them registered as liberators of their Country, and that they
be the prime Gentlemen, and only capable of places of power and trust, and
that their posterity shall claim if of equal abilities, pre-eminence before
others.

That all these be put into a military posture under a faithful commander, and
let none else have the use of Arms.

That the Armies of Scotland and Ireland, be included in the number of the
Liberators of the Commonwealth of England, and registered accordingly.

That this body of the Militia of England, Ireland, and Scotland, choose a
proportioned number of deputies at their Musters, who may elect out of their
number some persons who are to make up the select Senate, or Conservators of
the Liberty of England.

That this Senate be for life, only that there be determinate number to be
inquisitors into the Senate.

That this Senate be chosen out of the several parties called Independents,
Anabaptists, Fift-Monarchy-men and Papists.

That Papists, Episcopal men and Presbyterians be excluded.

That the forces now in being continue for ever, as guards to the Parliament,
Council of State, and select Senate.

This is the Chief part of Sir Henry Vanes Model, by which the Nation may see
the massacre which was intended to be made of their ancient Laws and Liberties.
And indeed as one writes of this Pseudo-Lyeurgus, he was the fittest man to
advance any interest to the ruin of Government, who can but sooth him with the
conreit that he is pleased with his Chimeras; such an one both Cromwell and
Lambert found him, and accordingly made him subservient to their designs.

But to come to the matter, Lambert having finished his work in the North, in
his march back to London begins to set his design on foot; and herein he
imitates the Ivy, which being not able to support it self, mounts up by the
Oak, and at length kills it; so he makes use of Fleetwood as a stirrup for his
ambition to climb up withal, meaning to pull the stairs down when he was
gotten up, as Oliver before had shown him the way. To this purpose the
Soldiers by his instigation send up a paper to Fleetwood, to be by him or Col.
Cobbet presented to the Juncto, under the name of the humble Representation of
the forces under the command of the Lord Lambert in the late Northern
expedition; The effect of which Paper was, that Fleetwood might be made Captain
General of all the forces in England, Scotland, and Ireland; and that Lambert,
Desborow, and Monk, might likewise be made General Officers; and that Sir
George Booth, and the rest of his accomplices, might be brought to speedy trial,
etc. Fleetwood having received the Paper, calls a counsel of some officers to
consider of it, and not sounding the depth of Lamberts design, communicates it
to Sir Arthur Haselrig and Sir Henry Vane, members of the house; Haselrig being
a person of a turbulent spirit, acquaints the Juncto with it, tells them there
was some design hatching by the Army, suspects Lamberts ambition to make
himself chief in the government of the Land, and rashly advises to send him to
the Tower.

The Rump netled herewith, send to Fleetwood for the Paper, he gives them a
Copy of it, but pretends the Original was in Cobbets hands, who being sent for
would not be at home when it should be delivered; this incenses them more then
before, therefore to let them know that servants ought not to prescribe rules
to their Lords and Masters, they immediately Vote, that the making of more
General officers was needless, chargable, and dangerous to the Commonwealth.

The Army though angry at the Juncto's votes, were yet so wise as to dissemble
it, and in stead of breaking out into fury, in an humble Petition protest their
Resolutions to be still true and faithful to them, what ever theirs and the
enemies of the public good might suggest against them; desiring them not to
believe that they had any intentions to dissolve their power, or to the setting
up of a single Person, which they had so solemnly and freely declared against,
concluding with several Propositions, pretended for the Nations good, and
reiterated promises of their fidelity.

Thus did they strive to outvie one another in dissimulation, yet durst not
trust each others fidelity; the Army conscious of having wronged their masters,
especially in so high a degree, their guilty consciences fed ever on a fearful
distrust of revenge. The Juncto on the other side had to their cost seen by
former experience the danger of making a General over their Armies, who should
have full power to give Commissions to their officers, and place and displace
whom he pleased; they knew that from such a preferment there was but one step
to a single Person, and so by consequence sequence they should be bereaved of
their authority. Thus did the Cocks of both factions peck at one another, and
both of them wanting true worth in themselves, would make a Ladder of mischief
to climb up to promotion.

Yet the Juncto receives their Petition with a seeming hearty thanks, but gave
no credit to what they said, well knowing that whatever Oaths or Protestations
the Army made, if once they opposed their interest, they were utterly void;
therefore to secure themselves, they seek to draw to their adherence what part
of the Army they could, and thought they had assured to themselves two
Regiments of Horse, and one of Foot; which with their Congregationall Brigade,
the Trained Bands of the City of London, and the Militia of the several
Counties, they hope they shall be able to deal with the Army.

But by the treachery of Vane and some other false Brethren, their whole
designs are betrayed to the Army, who now think they have a just occasion to
dissolve them, and which might likewise afford a fit plea to the people.

Yet the Juncto thinking themselves secure, doubt not but to frustrate their
intentions, and make void the Commissions of Fleetwood, Lambert, and seven
other ring-leading officers, ordering a Committee for the government of the
Army, and Vote it High Treason to raise any money but by Act of Parliament,
etc. But the Army in stead of quitting their power to the Juncto, resolve that
the Juncto shall quit theirs to them, and once more from servants intend to
turn their Masters.

And now the game begins to work, the Rump gather what force they can about the
House; a Regiment of Foot, and four Troops of Horse appear, who are appointed
to convenient places adjoining to it, three Troops are sent unto the City to
crave their assistance, but are denied, only in Southwark they make some
appearance.

The Army on the other side are as quick in their preparations, and assemble
what force they can about Whitehall; they likewise send to the City, but in
vain, it resolving to stand Neuter, having great cause to wish the destruction
of both; and that they might not want wherewithal to do it, the Tower of
London supplies them both with Ammunition, and now had the Soldiers been true
to each side, there might have been some bloody noses amongst them, but what
Lucan said of old was true of them, Nulla fides pietasque, etc.

Nor Faith nor Conscience common soldiers have. And first the Rumps own
Lifeguard desert them, upon sight of a pistol presented to their Captains
breast by Lambert, and joining with their enemies, force back their Speaker,
that old Fox William Lenthall, who like a sponge has sucked up much of the
Commonwealths treasure, but may we hope in time be squeezed out again. The
Congregationall Brigade (or the trust that is in Sectaries) revolt likewise
from them, and join with the Army.

The speaker Lenthall coming to the House, and finding the opposition of the
Soldiers, commands them as their General to return to their obedience to the
Parliament, as he then called it, and to acknowledge him their supreme
Commander; but Lambert riding among them, though rather like a Hagler then a
General, and awing them with his presence, they returned him no answer, but
what he might understand by the Language of Brickbatts. Which opposition though
he like not well, yet he pressed to have gone forward; till Lambert coming up to
his coach, whispered him such a word in his ear, that he was glad to wheel
about and retire back to his own House. So that the Rump, by such affronts as
these, taught the weakness of their force, and the unwillingness of their
soldiers to fight, were forced to pull down their proud Stomachs, though
utterly averse at first from harkening to any Composition, and to surrender
their power into Lamberts hands, though to palliate the compulsive cause of
their condescension; the Council of State seemed to interpose as mediators, and
both sides were said to withdraw to their quarters upon their command. But
their partiality soon appeared, the cause going clearly on Lamberts side, so
that the poor Rumpers were quite shut out of doors for that bout.

Thus those men who had but some few months before solemnly protested their
deep sorrow for their wicked Apostasy and backsliding from the Good Old cause
(as they called it,) and deviation from the way of God, (which without doubt
they never intended to walk in) in the year 1653. when they interrupted the
Rump, which were so grand Assertors of the peoples liberties, had taken such
pains, and acted such glorious things (as they said) for the (good but indeed
inglorious for the bad) of the Nation; those men who had with such seeming
hearty (but indeed feigned) expressions, declared their repentance for their
former disturbance, and their now Resolutions to be steadfast to them, thus soon
forgot both the one and the other; and in so small a time relapsed into what
they then acknowledged for an error.

Those Officers who had assisted the Rump are by the Army suspended from their
Commands; they likewise by their Declaration disanull all those Votes which
were displeasing to them; thus did they overthrow all Government which
corresponded not with their will and interest.

And now both Rump and Army put forth their Declarations, accusing each other
of a great deal of knavery, (of which they were both sufficiently stored;) but
as it often happens, when Thieves fall out true men come by their own, so by
their appeaching one another, they discovered to the world the grand cheats and
abuses they had put upon the Nation, which made the people to detest their
horrid villainies and tyranny, and to wish the restoring of the rightful Heir,
of whom since his miraculous escape from Worcester, we will in the next place
undertake to discourse.

His Majesty after his arrival in France, lived there for some while a retired
life, during which time hap^ened that notable debate betwixt the Prince of
Conde and Cardinal Mazarine; the occasion whereof was the Cardinals great
^ower, and abuse thereof, not only miserably oppressing the people, but also
depriving the Princes of the Blood of their Right; whereupon they charge him
with several miscarriages of State, to which the Cardinal makes a defensive
answer. The King also by the instigation of the Queen his Mother, (during whose
Regency Mazarine arrived to that height) enclines to his side, alleging That
he had approved himself both a faithful servant, and an able Minister of
State. But the Princes were so exasperated against him, that nothing but his
banishment will serve their turn, which finding the King averse unto, they
resolve to accomplish their desires by force, and to strengthen their faction,
desire assistance of the Duke of Larraign, then in service of the Spaniard with
ten thousand men.

These differences arriving to such a height, caused His Sacred Majesty of
England to use his utmost endeavor to cement the breach, and bring them again
to a reconciliation; but all his undertakings proved fruitless, and in stead of
producing a pacification, contracted an unjust odium upon himself, both the
Princes and the Cardinal surmizing he counseled the King against them.

This false aspersion coming to the ears of the vulgar, who were great adorers
of the Princes, as those whom they imagined stood for their Liberties, so
incensed them against the English Princes, as to the threatening violence
against their persons; whereupon His Majesty (knowing the madness of popular
commotions) to avoid their fury, retires himself for a while to Saint Germans.

But the Cardinals malice was more then the peoples, though he hid it under a
politic veil, (as the deepest waters carry the smoothest brow,) which he
afterward found opportunity to express, persuading the King of France to make
a peace with Cromwell, and most unworthily to dissert his royal kinsman.

But what is affinity or former courtesies in competition with self interest?
the thrice valiant Duke of York, who under the Marshall of Turine had
performed such eminent services against the Spaniard, as has made his name
deservedly famous, yet was by them ungratefully expelled, with a Complemental
Apology for his departure. This Magnaminous Prince who at eighteen years of age
had done Acts answerable to the ancient Hero's, whose valor and prudence were
in high esteem with the most Renowned Princes throughout all Christendom,
nowithstanding his many Remarkable services, yet was by this his near kinsman
who styleth himself The most Christian King, most unchristianly deserted, to
ingratiate himself with an usurping Tyrant.

The most illustrious Duke of Gloucester, who had a long time been detained by
the Juncto in the I Will of Wight, and was at last per^itted by them to go to his
Sister the Princess Royal in Holland; being now likewise come thither for
succor and relief, was also forced out of France. This pious Prince whom
neither the persuasions of great men, temptations of Riches and Honor, nor the
severe commands of his own Mother of never seeing her face again, could alter
nor move from the Protestant profession, could find no Harbor there in his
distress; Cromwells interest out weighing Majesty, valor, piety, and
consanguinity.

These afflicted Princes being thus unworthily forsaken by the French King, His
Sacred Majesty took his journey into Germany, where the Lord Wilmot had long
been Ambassador for him to solicit aid and assistance. The Duke of Gloucester
followed him not long after, (accompanied with his Royal Sister the Princess
of Orange,) whom they found at Collen. Having staid there a while, these three
Princes, together with the Marquess of Ormond, the Earl of Norwich, the Lord
Newburg, and several Ladies and persons of quality went in progress to the
Fair at Franckford, being complemented in all Princes Countries thorough which
they passed, by their chief Ministers of State, and saluted with their great
guns from their Towns and Castles.

During His Majesty's abode at Frankford, Christina Queen of Sweden, (who had
some time before voluntarily resigned her kingdom into the hands of Carolus
Gustavus her kinsman,) was pass^ng that way in her intended journey to Italy:
of which His Majesty having notice, (there being some si^pathy in their
fortunes, only with this distinction, the one a voluntary exile, the other
forced from his kingdom by tyranny;) he with the Duke of Gloucester, and a
gallant Train, gave her an interview at a Village called Conningstein, not
far from Franckford; where betwixt these two Potentates passed many
Ceremonious Complements, each thinking themselves obliged to the other for so
grand a favor.

After some short stay at Franckford, His Majesty returned again to Colen,
being by the way most sumptuously entertained by the Elector of Mentz: During
his stay at Colen was found out the Treason of one Captain Manning, who under
pretense of waiting on His Majesty, discovered all his designs and councels to
Cromwell; This unhappy wretch confessed his sallary from the Protector was a
hundred pound a month: by which one may guess the vast profusion of Treasure
spent upon these Villains. His Treachery being discovered, he was by His
Majesty's command sent to a strong Castle adjacent to Colen, there to be ke^t
close prisoner. But his perfidiousness was so highly resented at Court, that
one of His Majesty's servants (though contrary to order) pistol'd him as he was
lighting out of the Coach at the Castle-gate, which though it came far short of
his desert, yet was not so well done, in sending the Devil his due before his
time, and wronging the Hangman of his labor.

Not long after upon the Breach betwixt Cromwell and the King of Spain, Don
John de Austria, Governor Royal of the Low Countries for his Catholic
Majesty, sent the Count de Fuensaldagne his Ambassador to our King, solemnly
inviting him into Flanders, assuring him in the name of His Royal Master all
possible service and assistance; which invitation His Majesty kindly accepted,
and leaving Colen came to Bruges, the place appointed for his reception, where
for the most part he remained till such time he was treated by the English for
his return, finding the Spaniard of a generous Nature, and far more constant
then the fickle French.

Hither not long after came his Brother the Duke of York, who in regard of the
great command which he had in the French Army, had staid there till the
conclusion of the League with Cromwell, but then was warned to depart with all
his retinue (consisting of a gallant number of young English Gentlemen, bred up
under his valor and conduct,) having but a short time respited for their stay.
( Cromwells hatred to the Royal family never ceasing time nor place for their
persecution,) during which time he was visited by the Duke of Modena then in
France, and other French Grandees, especially the Marshall of Turine, who bore
an Honorable respect toward him, and was very sorrowful for his dismissement.

In his way he touched at Brussels, where he was magnificently entertained by
Don John, to whom he freely proffered his service in the wars, which was with
a great deal of thanks accepted: and long wanted he not occasion for his
valor, the English and French forces (according to the Articles concluded on
betwixt them) beleaguering Dunkirk; which being a place of great importance,
(an inlet into Flanders by sea,) cate was taken how to raise the siege: to
which purpose Don John levies what forces he could either by his own or His
Majesty's influence, which joining with those noble Spirits under the thrice
valiant Duke of York, make up a considerable Army. Himself in person, together
with the Dukes of York and Gloucester, marching with them toward the Besiegers;
who having notice of their approach, left such forces in the Leagure as might
secure them from a salley, and with the rest drew up toward Don John; The
French and English (notwithstanding those they had left in the Trenches) were
more numerous then the Spaniards both in Horse and Foot; whereupon adding
confidence to their number, with undaunted resolution drew up a forlorn hope
of English Infantry, and desperately charged the Sp^nish Foot, and being
seconded with Lockharts Regiment, after a hot dispute gave them a total rout,
in this conflict L. C. Fenwick lost his life. The Spanish Cavalry seeing their
Foot overthrown, fly with them for company, nor could by any persuasions be
induced to stand; whereupon the French Horse who all that while stood still,
with a full Carreir pursue their flying enemies. But the Duke of Yorkes
Regiment not used to show their backs to an enemy, gave them a desperate charge
and made them to stand, whilst their flying Friends saved their lives: But
after a noble and gallant resistance, overpowered by numbers they were
overthrown, very few of them escaping, amongst which were the Dukes of York
and Gloucester, though the first was not heard of till three days after,
whereupon some have conjectured that he was taken by the French forces, but by
Turine after at a fit opportunity nobly releast.

But to return again to our English affairs from whence we have made a long
digression. Great was the joy of the people at the exit of the Rump, not only
rejoicing inwardly, but breaking out into open laughter for joy: but nullum
commodum sine incommodo, there is no pleasure without a displeasure. No sooner
had the Rump left riding us, but up gets the Committee of safety into the
sadle, consisting of these persons following.

Charles Fleetwood. John Lambert. Genesis Desborough. Mr. Steel. Lord Whitlock.
Sir Hen. Vane. L. Genesis Ludlow. C. Sydenham. M. Saloway. L. Strickland. Col.
Berry. L. Lawrence. Sir James Harrington. Lord Wariston. L. Major Ireton. Col.
Tichburn. Mr. Hen. Brandrith. Mr. Robert Thompson. Col. Hewson. Col. Clerk.
Col. Lilburn. Col. Bennet. Mr. Cornelius Holland.
Such a pack of fools and knaves, that had Lambert studied seven years he could
hardly have found such another. Wherefore this government was far more the
scorn and derision of the people then the former, who now begin to see the
difference betwixt being ruled by a gentle Prince, and many Rusticks. The most
remarkable thing that happened during their sitting, was the death of that
grand Regicide President Bradshaw, (all their doughty acts besides for the good
of the Nation scarcely affording matter enough for Needham to make a penny
Pamphlet of,) October 31. 1659. he made his exit, cheating thereby the Hangman
of his due; But that there might be some show of sorrow made at his funeral,
the Gallows (as related to him) was arrayed in mourning. And Needham writes his
Elegy, when 'twould make a man smile to see the soft and tenderhearted Villain
weeping (like Niobe till he turned stone) over his Tomb: To see him cry with
one eye and laugh with the other, (as one that could fit himself to all humors
if gainful,) and yet the Tragiecomicall Rogue keep his countenance. The tears
of such a Saint (as one writes) falling like drops of Lambeth ale upon the
tongue of Dives; but enough of this filthy subject, we will take our farewell of
him, and leave him with his fellow creatures, Judas, Ravillack, Catesby and
Noll.

But though the Devil was merry at his Company in Hell, England was still
troubled with his Companions on earth, The Committee of safety were now Lords
Paramount, whilst the City of London for want of Trade was become a Cage of
Broken Merchants, and Tradesmen being ready to perish for want of business, and
their families for want of bread, nor had the poor any other employment then to
curse the causers of their miseries. Their Longanimous patience being now worn
out with a tedious expectation of a change, but seeing no hopes of any period
to their miseries so long as this usurped government lasted, they resolved to
petition the Common Counsel for their assistance toward the obtaining of a
free Parliament, according to which Resolution a Petition was drawn,
subscribed, end presented; but by reason of some pretended informality in the
address, it was laid aside. However they resolve the re-enforcement of it, but
the Gentlemen at Westminster not willing to hear of any things of this Nature,
ordered part of the Army under Col. Huson to march into the City, and by
violence to hinder it as he marched in the boys hooted at him, reviling his
public appearance for such whom he might now perceive how the people generally
hated; he minds them not, but goes on; and being come to the Old Exchange,
draws up his Myrmidons, where the boys persisting as they began, the incensed
Colonel causes his men to shoot among them, so that two or three of them were
killed, and among the rest one of the Colonels own calling, a cobbler, who was
accidentally standing in the Crowd. The Kings party seeing these tumults,
expected now that something might be done, and therefore they walk the streets
in great numbers privately armed, with a resolution to fall on, when they saw
the Citizens begin. But the Major, then in great favor with the tumult, part
by promises and part by entreaty kept all things very quiet; for which he was
afterward undeservedly blamed by those who were over-cholerickly loyal.
Neither was Huson idle, marching up and down the City with that insolence and
barbarism which is not to be expressed, for besides those killed at the
Exchange by the Colonels direction, (for which he was afterward indicted and
convicted at the Old Bailey,) his soldiers took the Liberty in other places to
maime some, and murder others; others to seize and carry away prisoners.

But this was nothing to what they intended, the City must be burnt too, to
make it a complete sacrifice of their indignation; to which purpose a
prodigious quantity of fireballs were laid in at Paul's, and Gresham College,
which two places they had made Guards of, converting the house of prayer to a
Den of Thieves. Thus was the City designed for fire, sword, and pillage, had
not God by a timely period prevented their designs.

Thus while these men's miscarriages do invest His Majesty with the love of his
people, he lives retiredly at Bruges, expecting either what his loyal subjects
might, or what the success might be of that treaty which was then in agitation
between France and Spain. His Majesty having some hopes to believe that those
two Crowns united might join to his relief. In order to this treaty the two
grand favorites of both Crowns being met upon the frontiers, His Majesty was
also invited thither by Don Lewis de Haro. His Majesty received this invitation
at Dieppe in Normandy, whither he had withdrawn himself to attend the success
of Sir George Booths business, his friends in England having given no small
encouragement to his hopes: But seeing the ill success of affairs in England,
he hasts to the Frontiers; being come to Roan he takes post, accompanied with
the Marquess of Ormond and the Lord Digby, and being at length arrived near the
end of their journey, he sends to give Don Lewis notice of his approach, who
presently with a noble train came forth to meet him. When they came near, Don
Lewis alighted from his horse, and kneeling down, though in a place by reason
of the dirt somewhat inconvenient for that purpose, he clapped his hands about
His Majesty's knees, and with a great deal of humility and affection kissed
them. From this place Don Lewis accompanied His Majesty to the place provided
for his accommodation, riding bare-headed before him; where he was all the
while of his stay nobly and sumptuously entertained. Many propositions are made
by His Majesty to Don Lewis, as to the giving him aid and assistance for the
regaining of his right, to all which Don Lewis returns civil and pleasing
answers, behaving himself with that respect to His Majesty, as if he had been
his Master himself.

His Majesty having spent some time here returns to Paris where he staid with
his Mother some few days, and so returns to his retirement at Brussels: what
the success of His Majesty's private and personal negotiation, we make no
question that time would have discovered not a little to his advantage, had not
his long drooping affairs received new life from an unexpected alteration of
the scene.

For as his enemies were busy in their endeavors for the destruction of the
Nation, so was General Monk the Governor of Scotland as s^udious how to save
it. The peoples eyes were all fixed upon him, as their Moses to deliver them
from this iron yoke of Egyptian bondage. He having received intelligence of the
Armies proceedings, weighing the miseries attending such Anarchicall
confusions, resolves with himself by the divine assistance to put a period to
these unhappy distractions, by settling the government on its right Basis or
Foundation. To this purpose having first declared his dissent from their
proceedings, he secures diverse strong holds of that Nation, as also those
Officers of his own that concurred not with him in his resolutions.

Having done this he sends a letter to the Officers of the Army at London,
importing something of dissatisfaction in himself, and some Officers of the
Army in Scotland in reference to the things newly done in Englang. The Council
of Officers having received this Alarm had a nocturnal consultation, the
result whereof was, that the regiments should forthwith march Northwards, and
that Lambert should go to command them; but knowing too well the person with
whom they had to deal, or whether it were that the soldiers would not fight
one with another, Lambert and the rest thought it their wisest course to see
whether they could undermine him, by the pretense of a treaty and a few fair
p^oposalls. Hereupon Whaley, and Goffe, and Carill, and Backer, are sent away
to remonstrate to Monck the State of Affairs in England, and thereupon to
mediate with him under the fair pretense of avoiding the effusion of more
blood. The Officers also wrote unto him and his Officers, to expostulate with
him touching a necessity of a brotherly Union. Morgan also takes a journey out
of Yorkshire into Scotland, to see if he could bring the General to a
Composure. But during these overtures, the thoughts of action were not at all
laid aside, wherefore Lambert follows his commanders, beginning his journey on
the third of November, and quartering at Ware that night. General Monk also
begins to look about him, He removes those Officers which he had secured in
Tintallon Castle unto the Cross Hand, draws his forces together, secures
Barwick, and sends Major knight with a Party of 500. Horse into England as far
as Morpeth, as it is supposed to see what parties there were in that Country to
join with them, which is the rather conjectured, because they retreated so
suddenly without making any further attempt, not was it safe for them to stay
there, in regard that Lamberts more numerous forces were gathering together
about New Castle. However to amuse his adversaries he sends three Commissioners
to London, viz. Col. Clobery, Col. Weeks, and Major Knight, to treat with the
same number of persons on their side; They arrive, enter into a treaty, and too
hastily conclude upon these particulars following.

That the title of Charles Stuart be renounced.

That the three nations shall be governed by a free State and not by a single
person.

That a learned and godly Ministry be maintained.

That the Universities be reformed and countenanced.

That the Officers and Soldiers be indempnified for what is past.

That the armies retire and be disposed of into their respective quarters, most
advantageously against the Common Enemy.

That Whitlock, Vane, Ludlow, Saleway, Berry, be chosen for England, That Saint
John, Wareston, Harington, Scot, and Thomson, together with the Generalle three
commanders be chosen for Scotland.

That Steel, Barrow and Dobson, be elected for Ireland, to give their
assistance in determining the qualifications of such persons, as are to be
members of succeeding Parliaments.

That two field officers of the regiments in the three Nations, and ten on the
behalf of the sea officers shall meet on the sixth of December as a general
council, to advise touching the model of civil government that should be then
ready to be presented to them.

These were the chief heads of the agreement signed by the Commissioners on
both sides, and sent immediately away likewise unto Scotland for the Generals
consent. But General Monck instead of consenting, summons a Convention to meet
at Edinburgh, and sends away a letter to the City, yet so contrived that both
the character and the speech seemed suspicious; which was delivered by Col.
Markham, and Col. Askin, in behalf of the Long Parliament, not seeing the depth
of the design. To the Convention he proposes three things,

That having received a call from God to march into England for resetling the
Parliament, they would during his absence which would not be long, preserve the
peace of the Nation.

That if any troubles should arise they would assist him in the suppressing
thereof.

That they would raise him some money.

To which the convention answered, that for the raising of money, they were
ready to do it.

As to the other two demands, they replied that they were in no condition to
perform his desires, being that they wanted arms; However that they would
endeavor it. Preparations therefore for war still go on, and the Horse
after some endeavors, wherein Major General Morgan was very active, were
persuaded to sign the Engagement, which was offered to them by General Monck.

Some weeks had passed when General Monck thinking it now necessary to return
some kind of answer to what his Commanders at London required from him, as to
his consent to those articles which they had among themselves agreed upon,
wrote a letter to Fleetwood, bearing date from Edinburgh November. 14. wherein he
signified, that he was very glad to find his Lordship and the Officers of the
Army of so complying a spirit, and so tender of the public peace; but because
he was desirous that the agreement should be full and firm, and because he did
conceive that some things did remain untreated of and unagreed upon, that
therefore 'twas the resolution of himself and the rest of the Officers there,
to add two more to those that were already commissionated, to treat with the
same number of such as should be appointed by his Lordship for the putting a
final end to this unhappy business; and that the place if his Lordship would
permit should be at Newcastle; which being granted General Monck managed the
occasion of delaying them so prudently, that while they were eager to entrap
him, they never perceived the advantages which the other gained upon
themselves. While they are debating at Newcastle, the Committee of Safety and
the Council of Officers have many debates at home. They labor much to satisfy
the City, Whitlock to his praise be it spoken, together with Fleetwood and
Desborough being very industrious to that purpose; but the Citizens having with
much struggling chosen an honest and resolute Common Council, at length disowned
them, and desire, though it were a sound most ungrateful to the men at
Wallingford-house, that they may have a Free-parliament, which animosity of
theirs was much augmented by Husons insolence and the murders which he
committed, in the midst of their City on the 5. of December.

The second thing they so much endeavored was to bring forth the form of
government, of which they had so long been in travel, and at length they
conclude upon seven unalterable principles or fundamentalls as they name them,
which were,

First, That no kingship should be exercised in the nations. Second, That they
will have no single person to be chief Magistrate. Third, That an army be
continued and maintained, and conducted so as to secure the peace of the
Nations, and not be disbanded, nor the conduct altered but by consent of the
Conservators. Fourth, That no imposition be upon the Consciences of them that
fear God. Fifth, That there be no House of Peers. Sixth, That the Legislative
and Executive powers be distinct and not in the same hands. Seventh, That both
the assemblies of the Parliament shall be elected by the people of this
Commonwealth duly qualified.
But neither this piece of confusion, nor Husons regiment could appease the
City; so that by mere necessity constrained, the Council of Officers most
graciously condescend to the calling of a Parliament, and the Committee of
Safety order the issuing out of wri s accordingly, thinking to stop the breach
which they had so over-hastily made.

The Rump seeing these confusions, were not idle for themselves; They knew that
of the two, General Monck inclined to their side then Lamberts, and that in
Lamberts army they had also many friends, if they could but show themselves.
The first Alarm which the Committee of Safety and the Officers received was
from Portsmouth, where Harslerig, Walton, and Morley had made sure of the
Garrison, and so dealt with Viceadmirall Lawson, who gave the second Alarm,
which rung like a knell in the then more amazed ears of these people; for he
sent them a declaration in his own and the name of several of the
sea-commanders, insisting upon several reasons why they conceived it necessary
that the long Parliament should sit again. Hereupon Vane, Saloway, and Salmon,
were sent down to confer with him, but Scot being there with two bolsters,
one for each elbow; kept him so steady, that 'twas impossible for them to hale
him on one side. So that at length he positively declares for the
Long-Parliament, the Soldiers also which were sent to block up Portsmouth
submit to Harslerig and Morley, declaring positively for the Rumps re-sitting.
Desboroughs regiment, which was by the Committee of Safety sent for, to
strengthen their party, being come as far as Saint Albans, when they heard how
things went, make a halt, and pause upon it. Hereupon Harslerig with what forces
he had marches for the City, and those regiments which were about the town,
being rendevouz'd by Okey and Alured, declare their resolutions to live and dye
with the Parliament; which being done, the Speaker Lenthall takes charge of the
Tower, and delivers it to the Care of Col. Fitch. The Rump being now absolute
masters of the field, give the conduct of the Army to Popham, Thomson, Scot,
Okey, Sir Ant. Ashley Cooper, Alured, and Markhnm, and the custody of the Tower
to Sir Ant. Ashley Cooper, Weever, Scot, and Barners. They also order Lamberts
forces to repair to their quarters, and send Letters of thanks and
acknowledgment to General Monck for his fidelity and good service. Ireland
also submits, and Lockhart courts them in a Letter from Dunkirk; but at length
comes the welcome news of the submission of Lamberts forces, who seeing their
General either so baffled or disappointed, forsake him, and he thereupon sends
a letter of submission to the Parliament. General Monck also humbly
congratulates the recovery of their power; These fair gales blowing so briskly
in their poop, they think they have the world in a string, and therefore having
spoke their friends fair, they begin to think of talking with their enemies. In
order to which they ordain an act for the public sale of Sir George Boothes
Estate; They also discharge Sir Harry Vane from being a member of the House,
and order Lambert, Disborough, Ashfield, Berry, Kelsey, Packer, Cobbet, and
Creed, to repair to their most remote habitations from London during their
pleasure; but finding them to stay in town, give order to the Council of State
to secure them. General Monck they desire to come as speedily as he can to
London, for else they saw he was resolved to come without bidding, whereupon he
advances into England, and at Morpeth the sword bearer of the City meets him,
with a letter from the Lord Major and Common Council, whom he speedily returned
with an answer. The Parliament for all their complements being not well
satisfied in the intentions of General Monck, send Scot and Robinson under
pretense of congratulating with him for the good success God had given to his
endeavors, to pry into his actions, and to make discovery of his proceedings.
And to curry favor with the Nation in general, they put forth a Declaration,
wherein they promise to this effect, first, they declare their resolutions to
perfect what they had begun, for settling the government of these Nations, and
the people thereof in the way of a Commonwealth and free State.

That all proceedings touching the Lives, Liberties, and Estates of the free
people of this Commonwealth should be according to the laws of the Land.

That they would make effectual provision for countenancing an honest godly
ministry, and that impropriations and augmentations should be continued.

That they would uphold all the Schools and Universities in the land, and
continue their privileges.

That they would apply themselves with all speed to such Counsels and means as
should be found most proper for the speedy increasing of trade.

Lastly, as to the present burdens, that they were very sensible thereof, and
that it was one of their greatest cares to give the people ease.

But the people were now grown too wise to believe those who had so often before
deluded them, and now seeing them fall to their old tyrannies afresh, under
pretense of restoring them their long enthralled liberties, begin to rouse up
themselves, and to show their general hatred toward them. To General Monck
therefore as a person whom they saw to be of a free and ancient English spirit,
they resolve to make their applications, laying before him the infidelity,
treachery, and tyranny of the Rump, beseeching him to assert their libertie^,
and promising him to stick by him in the maintenance of their freedom. The
Devonshire men, as being his own Countrymen, began; the substance of whose
address, and the Generals answer we shall insert, being indeed the full scope
of what all demanded, and of the answer which all received. The substance of
the address was this; That they found their Countrymen groaning under high
oppressions, and a defect of trade: that though there was an alteration in the
State affairs by the reassembling of the Long Parliament; yet that they found
themselves but in part redressed, and that therefore the chief expedient would
be to recall those members that were secluded in 48. that they may fill up the
vacant places, and not be obliged to oaths before their sitting: for which
things they should defend him against all opposers with life and fortunes.

To this the General answers, That the government was monarchical before the
war, that since there have been several interests, that these interests are
interwoven by marriages and purchases, and all engaged against the King as to
Civils, and therefore that no government can be good that does not rationally
comprehend the preservation of all the said interests. That Monarchy cannot be
admitted because its support was taken away; and besides that it is exclusive
of all the Civil and Spiritual interests now in being: which premises being
granted, to admit of the secluded members, as being monarchical, and such as
would abolish the laws made since their seclusion, would engage the Nation in a
new war upon the account of self-preservation; that therefore he thought
'twas better to submit to the present Parliament.

Such doubtful answers as this, as they pleased the Rump, so they did not
dissatisfy the other party, but gave cause to both parties to think well of him.

At Northampton he received another address from the hands of Sir John Norrice,
to whom he replies that he was but a servant of the Parliaments, with whom he
ought not to interpose in matters of Highest concernment.

On the 28. of January at Night the General arrived at Saint Albanes, where he
had several addresses made to him from Norfolk, Suffolk, Buckingham, and
Leicester; being come thither he sends to the Parliament to send their forces
out of town, and quarter them according to the lists which he had sent them;
which they readily ordered the Commanders of the army to see performed
accordingly.

General Monck being now not far from London, those forces quartered in the
City were ordered to march from thence, to make Room for his Excellencies
Soldiers: but they having learned of their Masters to be Rebellious, refused
to go; and having cast off their Officers, a considerable party of them
engarrisoned themselves at Somerset House. That night also the Apprentices drew
themselves into a party in the City, intending (no doubt) to have joined with
the discontented Red-coates, which had they done, they might have given a
shrewd Alarm to the Rump; but before their joining they were dissipated by a
part of the Army-horse. The Mutiners upon a false Alarm were got out of the
Town, and having their mouths stopped with a little pay, were commanded away,
leaving the Town quiet, and in condition to entertain honester Guests.

February 3. His Excellency marched in the head of his Army to his Quarters at
White Hall; On the 6. of the same Month he was by Scot and Robinson, Squires of
the Rump, conducted to that Image of Authority, assembled in the House where
the Parliament usually sits; where he was by their pretended Speaker
complemented with a fawning speech, candied over with Scripture-phrases to make
it the more plausible. To which His Excellency returned a more pertinent
answer, informing them of the several applications, and numerous subscriptions
he received from most Counties in his March from Scotland; the chiefest Heads
of their desires being for a free and full Parliament, a Gospell-Ministry,
encouragement of Learning and Universities, admittance of the Members secluded
before 1648. and that they would determine their sitting, etc. But these were
matters they loved not to hear of, much less resolved to practice; yet seeing
the peoples earnestness was such, and that it was in a manner the agreement of
the whole Nation, they at last most graciously condescended to promise a full
Representative, but no secluded Members to be admitted, nor in effect any other
then Phanatiques.

The supreme Trifle was now come to a forced put, moneys must be raised to pay
the Soldier, and the pride of the stubborn Citizens taken down that would not
let the Rump to ride them, or the Good Old Cause would be totally ruined; in
order to both, out comes a Tax of 100000 l. per mensem; this being debated in
Common Council, they agreed in the Negative, which so incensed the Backside,
that they adjudged the affront intolerable; and immediately poured out their
indignation upon the City in these following Resolves.

Thursday February 9.

The House received a report from the Council of State, of some Resolutions
taken by the Council, in relation to the City of London.

Resolved, That the Parliament does approve of what the Council of State has
done in Ordering, that the Commissioners for Government of the Army, do appoint
forces to be and continue in the City of London, for preserving the peace
thereof, and of the Commonwealth, and for reducing of the City to the
obedience of Parliament.

Resolved, That the Parliament does approve of what the Council of State have
done, in ordering that the Commissioners for the Army do take order that the
posts and chains in the City of London be taken away.

Resolved, That the Gates of the City of London, and the Portcullices there be
forthwith destroyed.

Resolved, That the Parliament does approve of what the Council of State, and
Commissioners of the Army have done, in seizing and apprehending of Mr.
Vincent, Merchant in Bishopsgate-street, and Thomas Brown, Grocer in
Wood-street, Daniel Spencer in Friday-street, Laurence Brompfield in
Tower-street, Major Chamberlain, Mr. Bludworth, and Richard Ford, in
Seethinglane, Major Cox at the Swan in Dowgate, Mr Penning in Fanchurch-street,
and Lieutenant Colonel Jackson.

Resolved, That the present Common Council of the City of London, Elected for
this year, be discontinued, and be and are hereby declared to be Null and Void,
and that the Lord Mayor of London have notice hereof.

Ordered, That it be referred to a Committee to bring in a Bill for the Choice
of another Common Council, with such Qualifications as the Parliament shall
think fit, with order to meet at eight of the Clock in the Speakers Chamber to
morrow morning.

These Resolves they send to the General to put in execution, intending with
this stone to kill two Birds, not only to bring the Citizens in subjection,
and to make them pay in their money, but also to create a hatred betwixt them
and the General by this odious employment, of whose uniting they had more then
an ordinary jealousy. However his Excellency in obedience to their Commands,
marches into the City with his whole Army, seises on diverse of their
Common Council, and sends them to the Tower, digs up their Posts, and breaks
down their Gates, and all done with such a seeming compliance to the Rump, that
the stupefied Citizens having now fear added to their slavery, durst hardly
murmur, but with sighs and nods bid adieu to their liberty.

Whilst His Excellency was thus busied in the City, the Rump were as busy as
Bees at Westminster, for notwithstanding the General had so lately preserved
them, yet they most ungratefully sought his ruin;

First they enter into a secret combination with the Sectaries, who upon their
instigation present unto them a representation and address, wherein was so
little of divinity, that there was hardly any morality; however with much
formality it was brought them by Barebone and others of the same gang: but this
instead of doing good did hurt, for the people now plainly descrying the
ruinous tenants of these people, were rather the more resolved against them,
then terrified to see the Rump mounting up a faction against them.

And then also seeking to cast Monck to who^ so lately they were so ocurteous,
out of power, they passed a Bill for the Army to be governed by five
Commissioners, viz. General George Monck, Sir Arthur Haslerig, Col. Herbert
Morley, Colonel Valentine and Walton, Colonel Matthew Allured, and that the
Quorum of the Commissioners be three. Had they brought this to pass, they
might have had hopes to have held the peoples noses still to the Grindstone;
But His Excellency abhorring their perfidiousness, and seeing their design was
to fix themselves in a perpetual Counsel, all their qualifications with which
they kept such a stir, tending only to bring in such as had been the Kings
Tryers, Excisemen, Sequestrators, Close-Committee-men, Major Generals, Buyers
and Sellers of the Church and Crown Lands, etc. in brief, such as lived upon
the ruins of the Commonwealth, and feared they should go naked, should every
Bird claim again his feather; so that the peoples Representatives must
represent them in all their tyrannies, else they were not to be admitted
Statesmen.

Hereupon General Monck having on Friday February 11. performed the Votes of
the House for breaking down the Gates, and pulling up the Posts, and being come
back to Whitehall, upon advise with his Officers, thought it fit to return
again to the City on Saturday Morning with his whole force; but before he went,
sends a letter to the Parliament signed by himself and his Officers, wherein he
signified his desires to the Parliament for the speedy filling up the House,
and for putting a period to their sitting. In the afternoon he drew up his
forces in Finsbury, and repairing after dinner to Guildhall, he had a
conference with the Lord Mayor and Court of Aldermen, which being ended, the
conclusion thereof was such as caused all the Bells in the City to ring, and
all the streets to blaze with Bonfires: Such a sudden change, History cannot
tell us of its parallel; wise men grew mad upon it, and mad men sober; The
Cries, the Bonfires, and the sum of Roasted Rumps did quite take down the
Legislative Stomach; Both men, women, and Children, Old and Young, Rich and
Poor, all sung forth the destruction of the Long called Parliament; the whole
City was as it were on fire with Bonfires for joy; And now those who formerly
threatened the fireing of the City, were burnt at every door, for all the people
cried out, let us burn the Rump, let us roast the Rump; yea such an odium had
they contracted to themselves, that they roasted Carrion before the door of the
House where they usually sat, no less then thirty eight Bonfires were made
between Fleet-conduit and Temple-barre: To be short, there was scarce so much
as one Alley in the whole City wherein there were not many Bonfires. Next day
being Sunday, all the Churches ecchoed forth praises and thanks to God, private
devotion not being wanting: nor was this joy confined only within the Walls of
the City, but since a public mischief was removed, a public rejoicing
overspread the whole Kingdom, and all the people with one accord, shouted,
clapped hands, and poured out joyful thanks for this great deliverance. So the
wearied Hare is delighted, and cheareth her self, when she has shook off the
Bloody Hounds, and so a Flock of Sheep are at rest and ease, when the Ravenous
Wolves have newly left them.

Yet was not all this enough to put the Rump out of Countenance, they met again
as formally as ever, and acted with a Confidence that might excuse the
Common-peoples Jealousy over the General. Their grand design now was to
frustrate the hopes of a Free-Parliament, no stone was left unturned in order
hereunto; The Bolder and more ingenuous sort of honest men were gathered up by
flying Troops that they had every where dispersed to hinder a Conjunction,
threatening Banishment and sequestration to the whole party of declarers. Nor
did they want their specious pretenses to insinuate with the vulgar, The House
should be immediately filled, the form of the Writ was already published, the
Qualifications agreed upon, and in fine they would instantly proceed to a
settlement of Church and State, and was not this enough? what would they have
more? The Common-wealth-men they were a Birding too, telling their pretty tales
of Rome and Venice, O the Gallantry of those ancient Romans that banished
Tarquin out of Rome! In the mean time the Presses are at work, by Libells
against the King, wherein he was sufficiently abused, particularly by a feigned
letter from Brussels by Arguments of interest, and by false intelligence to
corrupt and deceive the people. Yet would not all do, the Country were too
sensible of the gross Abuses and Cheates they had put upon the Nation.

The General willing they should be overcome as well by Argument as Force,
easily yields to a proposition, that both sides might meet and speak what they
could for themselves. The Rump chose for themselves St. John, Haslerig, Col.
Morley, Col. Thomson, Sir Ant. Ash. Cooper, Mr. Weever, Col. White, Col.
Hutchinson, Mr. Raleigh, Col. Fielder, on the part of the secluded members
came, Col. Popham, Sir Will. Lewis, Sir John Holland, Sir Gil. Gerrard, Mr.
Knightley, Mr. Annestey, Mr. Crew, Mr. Trevor, Col. Harley, Col. Norton, Sir
John Temple, Col. Brich. These met at Alderman Wales House, then the Generals
quarters, where they had a long conference together before him; but when the
General came to weigh the reasons on both sides, he found those of the Rump
much too light for the other parts. The General being now satisfied in the
Justice of the Secluded members cause, quits his headquarters in the City, and
returns to White Hall, February 21. where met him in his Lodging most of the
secluded Members in town, to whom he spoke to this purpose.

Gentlemen,

You are not I hope ignorant what care and endeavors have been used and means
assayd for healing the breaches of our divisions among our selves, and that in
order thereunto diverse conferences have been procured between you, yet having
a fuller satisfaction from those Gentlemen that were secluded then formerly, I
was bold to put you all to the trouble of this meeting, that I might open my
self to ye all with more freedom then formerly. But lest I might be
misapprehended or mistaken, as of late it befell me, I have committed to
writing the heads of what I intended to discourse to ye, and desire it may be
openly read.

After which a Paper was read to the Members by the Generals Secretary to this
effect:

That by what he had heard the settlement of the Nation lay in their hands, and
that he was assured they would become makers up of its woeful breaches, in
pursuit whereof he would think nothing too dear. That he would impose nothing
on them, but took leave to mind them, that the old foundations were so broken,
that in the eye of reason they could not be restored but upon the ruin of the
Nation. That the interest of London lay in a Commonwealth, the only Government
capable of making her the bank for the trade of Christendom, that he thought a
moderate not rigid Presbyterian government, most acceptable to the Churches
settlement; therefore he exhorted them to settle the conduct of the Army, and
maintenance for the forces by sea and land, to summon a New Parliament and make
a legal dissolution of this.

This read, the Members took leave, and repaired to the House, which they found
open for them with all freedom, above four score appearing at the first
sitting; They were no sooner entered but fell instantly upon the Nulling of
those spurious orders which related to their first seclusion in December. 1648.
proceeding thence, to the Enlarging and Confirming of the Generals Commission:
and the disabling of the Rumps Commissioners for the Government of the Army,
the discharging of prisoners illegally committed, and the appointment of a new
Convention April 25. 1660. The Militia's they placed in good hands, and
empowred a Council of State to govern in the next intervall; which being done,
and provision made for a new Election, March the 16. they dissolved themselves.

Thus by the great blessing of God was the design of the Rump happily
prevented, who intended to have held the people at gaze in expectation of a
further satisfaction, till diverse Troops (which they had ordered to that
purpose) should have seized all the considerable persons of the Kingdom; Nay,
they were so impudent as to tempt the General himself into a complication with
them, but his Noble soul was too Generous to be wrought upon, to prostitute his
Honor, his Safety and all, to preserve a violent and restless faction. Nor
were they wanting in other shameless villainies, falsifying the Lists of the
Militia, soliciting Petitions from the City for their Continuance, juggling the
Army Officers into a Tumult, Employing their instruments to destroy the
General, Mutinying the Army and the City, and finally engaging a great part of
the Soldiery to remonstrate against the rest of the Nation, so desirous they
were to have perpetuated their tyranny, though all their endeavors proved too
little to prevent their dissolution.

Yet notwithstanding the fruitlesseness of their endeavors, their restless
spirits were never quiet, having their Agitators very busy in the Army, though
the Council of State put forth a Proclamation against them; these cursed
firebrarnds, more fatal to England then Paris was to Ilium, having with their
Machiavilian doctrine poisoned a considerable party of the Soldiers, to Head
their faction, Lambert (by what means I know not,) makes an escape out of the
Tower, to which place not long before he had been committed, for refusing to
sign an Engagement of living peaceably; hereupon the General placed four
companies of his own Regiment in the Tower, and the Council of State issued
forth a Proclamation against him and his accomplices, requiring all persons
whatsoever to be assistant to the suppression of them, and that whosoever
should bring him in should for his reward receive a hundred pounds; the
Citizens repaired their Posts and Chains, strengthened their Guards, and (in
short) the whole Nation was as vigilant as possible to disappoint the grand
Conspiracy of the Phanaticks.

At last the Hue and Cry overtook the Thief; Lambert is heard of with a party
near Daventry, consisting of four Troops of Horse, viz. Colonel Alureds, and
Major Nelthrops, (which two Gentlemen were then in London, and not in the least
acquainted with their Troops defection,) Captain Haslerigs, and Cap. Clares,
besides several Anabaptists, Quakers, and other Sectaries. Colonel Ingoldsby
having notice where he was, resolves to give him a visit; in his way his
forlorn hope meeting with Captain Haslerig took him prisoner, but upon giving
his parol, and a promise to send his Troop to them, he was dismissed; which
according to his engagement not long after came in, led by the Cornet and
Quartermaster.

The Enemy seeing himself too weak in Arms, seeks to gain by Art, and desires
a parley, thinking thereby to increase their party; which they (being armed
against the temptations of the Fiend) are not unwilling to admit of, the main
business they drove at, was under pretense of security to all interests, to
persuade a readmission of the Lord Richard to his Protectorship; which was
well answered by a stout Officer, telling them their only end in that was to
set up one again whom they themselves had already learned to pull down; that
they were under command, and knew it their duty not to dispute; but to submit
to what orders they received from their superiors, which they likewise wished
them to do. The dispute being ended, they prepare for action, but Col. Alureds
Troop deserting them, Lambert seeing himself forsaken, seeks to fly: but
providence had so ordered it, that notwithstanding he was mounted on a Barbery,
which might have hastened him in his flight, yet being on ploughed land his
Horse was of little advantage to him; And now he who before had gained the name
of stout and valiant in many battles, when he saw Col. Ingoldsby ride up to him
and demand him prisoner, was presently taken without drawing his sword, and
driven to that pittyfull shift to cry out, Pray my Lord let me Escape, Pray my
Lord let me Escape. There were taken with him Colonel Cobbet, Major Creed,
Lieutenant Colonel Young, Captain Timothy Clare, Captain Gregory, and Captain
Spinach, and some other private soldiers, Colonel Okey, Colonel Axtel, and
Captain Clear, Okeys son in law escaped, though pursued four miles.

April the 24. (the day before the Parliament sitting) they were brought up
prisoners to the Council, who after examination, committed Lambert, Cobbet, and
Creed, close prisoners to the Tower. The same day the Militia forces of the
City Trained Bands and Auxiliaries, according to an Order of the Council,
marched into Hide Park, the Mayor in his Collar of S's, with the Mace, Sword,
and Cap of Maintenance, the Aldermen in Scarlet, and the Commissioners of the
Militia in handsome equipage going before them to a place erected for their
entertainment. Each Col. had his Tent, and their Regiments very full, several
of the Nobility and Gentry of great quality going as Volunteers; in Alderman
Robinsons Regiment were 250. in the rest very many; The Regiments were all so
gallantly accountered, as did sufficiently speak both the riches and strength
of the City, there being little visible difference betwixt the Trained Bands
and Auxiliaries, but only in their age. This certainly was an happy Omen of
our future settlement, that the day before the sitting of the Parliament, there
should not only appear so gallant a Body of able Citizens to defend them, but
the Chief of that faction that endeavored the disturbance of the Nation should
be delivered into their hands, and the rest of his Accomplices timely
discovered and dispersed.

April 25. both Houses of Parliament met at Saint Margarets Church in
Westminster, where Doctor Reynolds preached before them, taking his Text out of
Mal. 4. ver. 2. The Sermon ended they repaired to their Houses; The Lords made
choice of the Earl of Manchester for their Speaker, the House of Commons of Sir
Harbotle Grimstone. This was a great joy to the whole Nation, to see our Grand
Council restored again to their former priveledges, a large step to our ancient
freedom; yet not comparable to what the first of May produced, when both
Houses of Parliament and General Monck received each of them a Letter from his
most Sacred Majesty King Charles the second, with a gracious Declaration to all
his Loving Subjects, brought by Sir John Greenvil, since made Earl of Bath. His
Letters speak his piety, and unwearied care for his Subjects prosperity;
desiring rather to prepare and improve the affections of his Subjects at home
for his restoration, then to procure assistance from abroad (though then
propounded to him) to invade either of his kingdoms. Our intended brevity will
not permit us to give you the exact draught of his Letters, though deserving to
be Registered in Letters of Gold; take a view of his gracious expressions of
piety, goodness, and love to the Nation, in this his following Declaration.

CHARLES R.
CHARLES by the Grace of God, King of England, Scotland, France, and Ireland,
Defender of the Faith, etc. To all our Loving Subjects, of what degree or
quality soever, greeting. If the general distraction and confusion which is
spread over the whole kingdom does not awaken all men to a desire and longing,
that those wounds which have so many years together been kept bleeding may be
bound up, all we can say will be to no purpose: However after this long
silence, We have thought it Our duty to declare how much We desire to
contribute thereunto; And that as We can never give over the hope in good time
to obtain the possession of that Right which God and Nature has made our due:
so we do make it our daily suit to the Divine Providence, that he will in
compassion to Us, and Our Subjects, after so long misery and suffering remit
and put Us into a quiet and peaceable possession of that Our right, with as
little blood and damage to Our people as is possible: Nor do we desire more to
enjoy what is Ours, then that all Our Subjects may enjoy what by Law is theirs,
by a full and entire Administration of Justice throughout the Land, and by
extending Our mercy where it is wanted and deserved.

And to the end that the fear of punishment may not engage any Conscious to
themselves of what is passed, to a perseverance in guilt for the future, by
opposing the quiet and happiness of their Country in the restoration both of
King, Peers and People, to their Just, Ancient, and Fundamental Rights: We do
by these presents declare, That We do grant a free and general pardon, which
We are ready upon demand to pass under Our Great Seal of England, to all Our
Subjects of what degree or quality soever, who within forty days after the
publishing hereof shall lay hold upon this Our grace and favor, and shall by
any public Act declare their doing so; And that they return to the Loyalty and
Obedience of good Subjects, (excepting only such persons as shall hereafter be
excepted by Parliament.) Those only excepted, let all Our Loving Subjects, how
faulty soever, rely upon the word of a King, solemnly given by this present
Declaration, That no Crime whatsoever committed against Us, or Our Royal
Father before the Publication of this, shall ever rise in Judgment, or be
brought in Question against any of them, to the least endamagement of them,
either in their Lives, Liberties, or Estates, or (as far forth as lies in Our
power) so much as to the prejudice of their Re^utations, by any Reproach or
term of distinction from the rest of Our best Subjects. We Desiring and
Ordaining that hence forward all Notes of Discord, separation and difference of
parties be utterly abolished among all Our Subjects; whom We invite and conjure
to a perfect Union among themselves under Our Protection, for the Re-settlement
of Our Just Rights and theirs, in a free Parliament; By which, upon the word of
a King We will be advised.

And because the passion and uncharitableness of the times have produced
several opinions in Religion, by which men are engaged in parties and
animosities against each other, which when they shall hereafter unite in a
freedom of Conversation, will be compossed, or better understood: We do
Declare a liberty to tender Consciences; and that no man shall be disquieted or
called in question for differences of opinion in matter of Religion, which do
not disturb the Peace of the Kingdom: And that We shall be ready to consent
to such an Act of Parliament, as upon Mature Deliberation shall be offered to
Us for the full granting that Indulgence.

And because in the continued distractions of so many years, and so many and
great Revolutions, many Grants and Purchases of Estates have been made to, and
by, many Officers, Soldiers and others who are now possessed of the same, and
who may be liable to Actions at Law upon several Titles: We are likewise
willing, that all such differences, and all things relating to such Grants,
Sales, and Purchases, shall be determined in Parliament; which can best provide
for the just satisfaction of all men who are concerned.

And We do further declare, that We will be ready to consent to any Act or Acts
of Parliament to the purposes aforesaid, and for the full satisfaction of all
Arrears due to the Officers and Soldiers of the Army under the Command of
General Monck; and that they shall be received into Our service upon as good
Pay and Condions as they now enjoy.

Given under Our sign Manual, and privy Sgnet, At Our Court at Breda, this 4/14
day of April 1660. In the twelfth year of Our Reign.
Never was Letter from absent Lover received with more unfeigned affection then
these, never was message entertained with a more general consent, nor did the
House ever more truly appear the peoples full Representatives then at this
present. The Letters being read with that accustomed Ceremony and Reverence due
to Majesty, produced these Resolves, Nemine contradicente.

Resolved by the House of Lords, That they do own and declare, that according
to the Ancient and Fundamental Laws of this Kingdom; the Government is and
ought to be by King, Lords and Commons.

Resolved, that a Committee of eight Lords, do join with a Committee of the
House of Commons, to consider of an answer to His Majesty's Gracious Letter and
Declaration.

Resolved by the House of Commons, That a Committee be appointed to prepare an
answer to His Majesty's Letter, expressing the great and joyful sense of this
House of His gracious offers, and their Humble and Hearty Thanks to His Majesty
for the same; and with professions of their Loyalty and Duty to His Majesty,
and that this House will give a speedy answer to His Majesty's gracious
Proposalls.

Resolved, that the sum of 50000 l. be presented to His Majesty from this
House.

Ordered, that the Letter from His Majesty to the House and His Declcration, be
entered at large in the Journall Book, as also that to the General, to be kept
amongst the Records of this House for His Honor.

This compliance of the Parliament with His Sacred Majesty, surcharged the
Citizens hearts with joy, those beams of Majesty which enliven Trading, having
been long absent from the City, the presence of the Prince being one principal
cause of a Cities greatness: The Bells and Bonfires made outward expression of
those indelible Characters of Loyalty written in their hearts; the great guns
from the Tower thundered forth Vive le Roys, whilst each County in England
strived to outvie one another in expressions of Loyalty.

The Soldiery who had hitherto made Clubs trump, resolve now to enthrone the
King of Hearts in their affection, expressing their Loyalty to His Sacred
Majesty, in this following address presented to his Excellency the Lord
General Monck.

Although we cannot doubt of your Excellencies confidence in our affections,
and our faithfulness to your Excellency, and that discipline which by your good
and prudent conduct has been exercised over us, whereby we are instructed to
an entire obedience to your Excellency, and that Authority which the Lord shall
place over us, which we hope we have manifested in our last actings under your
Excellency against all persons whatsoever, in any ways disturbing the peace and
settlement of the Nation, although some of thom have been our Brethren,
formerly engaged in the same cause with us, as also in our last Remonstrance
and address to your Excellency, wherein as it becomes us in daty, we have
solemnly declared to acquiesce in what the Lord shall bring forth from the
consultations of this present Parliament.

Yet in regard your Excellency has been pleased to communicate a Letter and a
Leclaration from the Kings Majesty, full of Gracious expressions, we cannot but
acknowledge that the matter of it gives a great measure of quiet to our minds,
and more then ordinary expectations of the enjoyment of much tranquillity and
happiness under His Majesty's government.

The free and general Indemnity offered by His Majesty, with a liberty to
tender Consciences, satisfaction of Arrears, and his readiness to consent to a
confirmation of Sales, and other Grants and Purchases of Estates, to all
persons now in possession of the same, is that of which as we cannot doubt of
the real performance, being left by His Majesty to the Parliaments
determination, so we bebelieve it is the most probable way to bring the Nations
to their desired settlement.

And we hope to evince to His Majesty, and all the world, that we and all those
that have been engaged in the Parliaments cause, are His Majesty's best and
most real Subjects; and that your Excellency and the Armies under your
Command, have complied with the obligations for which they were first raised;
for the preservation of the true Protestant Religion, the Honor and Dignity of
the King, the privileges of Parliament, the liberty and property of the
Subject, and the fundamental Laws of the Land.

Sir John Greenvile who brought His Majesty's Letters had the thanks of both
Houses given him for the same, and 500 l. given him as a testimony of their
respects to him; the Speaker of the House of Commons delivering himself in
these pathericall expressions.

Sir John Greenvile,
I need not tell you with what grateful and thankful hearts the Commons now
assembled in Parliament have received His Majesty's Gracious Letter, Res ipsa
loquitur: you your self have been Auricularis and ocularis testis de rei
verita^e, Our Bells and our Bonfires have already begun the Proclamation of His
Majesty's goodness, and of our joys. We have told the people, that our King,
the glory of England, is coming home again, and they have resounded it back
again in our ears, that they are ready, and their hearts are open to receive
him; both Parliament and people have cried a^oud in their prayers to the King
of Kings, Long live King CHARLES the second.

I am likewise to tell you, that the House does not think fit that you should
return to our Royal Sovereign, without some Testimony of their respects to
your self; They have therefore ordered and appointed that 500 l. shall be
delivered unto you, to buy a Jewel, as a Badge of that Honor which is due to
a person whom the King has Honored to be the messenger of so Gracious a
Message: and I am commanded in the name of the House to return you their very
hearty thanks.

And as at land, such was the affections of the Seamen; where General
Mountague having received two Letters, the one from His Ma esty, the other from
the most Illustrious Duke of York; as also those others sent to the House of
Commons and his Excellency, together with His Majesty's Gracious Declaration;
he immediately caused a great gun to be shot off, the usual summons to call
his Officers together; who coming aboard, he communicated His Majesty's Letters
unto them, which being read, with anunamimous consent they declared themselves
for His Majesty, professing their exact Loyalty, to live and die in his
defense: de^^ring the Generals of the Fleet humbly to present the lame to His
Majesty.

But no sooner did the under Seamen hear thereof, but their overjoyed hearts
burst forth into loud acclamations of joy; this news was more welcome to them,
then had they taken the wealth of the West Indies for prize: And now to
express their Loyalty, the General himself fired a great Gun, crying God
bless His Majesty. Then might you see the Fleet in her pride, with Pendants
loose, Guns roaring, Caps flying, and loud Vive le Roys ecchoed from one ships
Company to another, which were answered with the great Guns from Deal and
Sandwich Castles. The Noble General gave two pipes of Canary to the Commanders
and Gentlemen in his ship.

And as at sea, so in Ireland was seen the same compliance; for the Convention
there, hearing what was done in England, send a Declaration hither, wherein
they first express their disclaim of the sinful and exemplary force put upon
the House i^ 1648. and whereas also the said persons did presume to erect a
high Court of Justice, and by an ugly and execrable sentence condemn the King
to death; they do declare their detestation of the fact, and protest against
those inhuman, unparalleled, and barba^ous actions, as being the foulest and
highest assassination that ever prot hane or sacred History ever recorded.

May the 8. 1660. His Majesty was solemnly Proclaimed by the Lo^ds and Commons,
the Lord Mayor, etc. in the Cities of London and Westminster, with an
universal testification of Loyalty from all degrees of people; The manner
whereof being so remarkable, (each ^erson in his proper Sphere contending to
out-vy each other in expressions of obedience to His Sacred Majesty) take as
follows.

Between one and two of the Clock, the Lords met in the Painted Chamber, where
they continued till they were placed in order, the Earl of Manchester Speaker
first, then the Duke of Buckingham, the Earl of Oxford, etc. Thus they walked
all along with the Heralds before them, through the Court of Requests, and
Westminster Hall, to the Palace, where they staid before the Hall gate,
whither also presently after came the House of Commons: Being placed in order,
both Lords and Commons stood bare, whilst Mr. Bish dictated, and Mr. R^ley
king at Arms, with a loud voice Proclaimed Charles the second, in these words.

The Proclamation.
Although it can no may be doubted, but that His Majesty's Right and Title to
His Crown and King^omes, is and was every way completed by the death of his
most Royal father of glorious memory, without the Ceremony or solemnity of a
Proclamation: yet since Proclamations in such cases have been always used, to
the end that all good subjects might upon this occasion testify their duty and
respect; And since the armed violence, and other the Calamities of many years
last past, have hitherto deprived us of any such opportunity, whereby we might
express our Loyalty and allegiance to His Majesty. We therefore the Lords and
Commons now assembled in Parliament, together with the Lord Mayor, Aldermen,
and Commons of the City of London, and other freemen of this kingdom now
present, do according to our Duty and Allegiance, heartily, joyfully, and
unaminously, acknowledge and proclaim, That immediately upon the decease of
our late Sovereign Lord King Charles, the Imperial Crown of the Realm of
England, and of all the Kingdoms, Dominions, and Rights belonging to the same,
did by inherent Birth right, and lawful undoubted succession, descend and come
to His most Excellent Majesty Charles the second; as being lineally, justly,
and lawfully, next Heir of the Blood Royal of this Realm; and that by the
goodness and providence of Almighty God, He is of England, Scotland, France,
and Ireland, the most potent, mighty, and undoubted King: And thereunto we most
Humbly and Faithfully do submit and obliege our selves, our Heirs and
Posterity for ever.

God save the King.

The Proclamation being ended, the Lords and Commons took their Coaches,
proceeding to the further solemnity of proclaiming His Sacred Majesty as
follows. First the Head Bayliffe of Westminster, and his Servants riding with
White staves to prepare the way, then followed a gallant Troop of Officers of
the Army and other Gentlemen with Trumpets before them, then the Lifeguard
very stately mounted, and richly clothed, after them a Class of six Trumpets
and three Heralds, then a Herald between the Sergeant to the Commons and the
Mace of the Council, next Mr. Ryley king at Arms, in his rich coat of the
Kings Arms, between Sergeant Norfolk and Sergeant Middleton, after whom came
the Usher of the Black Rod and Mr. Bish together. These ushering the way, in
the next place came the Earl of Manchester Speaker to the House of Lords in his
Coach and six Horses, then the Speaker of the House of Commons in his, then his
Excellency the Lord General in his, after which followed both Houses of Lords
and Commons in their Coaches, and last of all a Troop of Horse. In this manner
they came to White Hall, where they Proclaimed His Majesty a second time, and
then in like order proceeded: Being come to Arundell-House, they made a stand,
where Mr. Ryley king at Arms taking one of the Heralds and six Trumpets with
him, advanced forward toward Temple Bar; which (according t^ agreement) being
shut, he came to the gate, knocked, and demanded entrance; being asked who it
was that knocked, he replied, that if my Lord Mayor would come to the gate he
would deliver his Message to him, who accordingly coming, the Trumpets sounded,
after which silence being made, it was demanded of the king of Arms, Who he
was, and what was his message; to which he answered, We are the Heralds at
Arms, Appointed and Commanded by the Lords and Commons in Parliament
assembled, to demand entrance into the famous City of London, to proclaim
Charles the second, King of England, Scotland and Ireland, and we expect your
speedy answer to this demand; to this they answered, Sir, if it please you to
have a little patience we shall speedily give you an answer to your message.
After some little conference between the Lord Mayor and Aldermen, the Gates
were opened, and the king at Arms entered, with Trumpets sounding before him,
and was joyfully received by the Lord Mayor in his Crimson Velvet Gown and
Hood, the Aldermen and Sheriffs in Scarlet, and the Officers of the Militia
gallantly accoutred on Horseback.

Both sides of the streets were guarded by the Mililia forces of London from
Temple Bar to the Old Exchange, and stood all with their swords drawn, as also
the Officers, and several spectators in windows. The City Horse fell in next
the Lifeguard, then the Lord Mayor and Aldermen, after whom the Herald and the
rest as formerly. When they came to Chancery Lane end they proclaimed His
Majesty a third time, where at the word Charles the second in the Proclamation,
the king at Arms lifting himself up with more then ordinary cheerfulness, and
expressing it with a very audible voice, the people presently took it, and on a
suddon carried it to the Old Exchange, which was pu sued with such shouts, that
is was near a quarter of an hour before silence could be made to read the rest
of the Proclamation. After this they went to Cheapside, where His Majesty was
proclaimed a fourth time, the shouts of the people then being so great, that
though Bowbells were then ringing, yet could not the sound of them be heard.
Thence they went to the Old Exchange, where His Majesty was again proclaimed
with the loud shouts and acclamations of the people, and so the solemnity
ended. But to recount the numberless number of Bonfires, the ringing of Bells,
shooting off Guns, and the joyful expressions of the people that attended this
gallant and well ordered procession, would wear a pen of steel to the stumps,
and tire the hand of the most unwearied writer.

But this joy was not confined within the walls of the City; the whole Kingdom
participating of the benefit, so did they also share in the triumph: Our
Chronicles make mention (even to admiration) of the solemnities at the
Coronation of Richard the first, but no History can show a president of such
transcendent joy as was at the proclaiming of Charles the second. Take a view
of their solemnities at Sherborn in Dorsetshire, by which you may give a guess
at the rest.

On Monday May 14. the Kings Majesty (after solemn prayers, praises, and a
seasonable premonition at the Church by Mr. Bampfield to prevent exorbitancie,)
was with high expressions of joy proclaimed by Mr. Birstal, Master of the kings
School there, to whom Sir John Strangways High Steward of Sherborn-Castle did
read the Proclamation, himself not being able by reason of his age, to utter it
with so loud and audible voice as was requisite. The performance was attended
by diverse persons of quality, viz. Mr. George Digby, second Son to the Earl of
Bristoll, Esquire Fulford, Esquire Rogers, one of Judge Mallets sons, and many
other Esquires and Gentlemen, who brought with them as many Horse and Foot well
armed, as together with the Town Forces made up between five and six thousand.
Besides the melody of diverse Consorts of Loud Music, there were the Martial
Noises of many Drums and Trumpets, innumerable Volleys of shot, the continual
ringing of Bells, and loud acclamations of many Thousands of Men, Women and
Children, had that thwack'd the streets so full, that thousands of people, as
well in Arms as others, were constrained to stay in the fields for want of
room to receive them. The very Earth did seem to quake, and the Air to tremble
at the mighty rending shouts that were at that irerated. On the top of the
Tower of the Ancient Cathedral were four large white flags with red crosses in
them, displayed on high poles: The Conduit that day and the next ran with
Claret, besides many Hogsheads of March-bear, and large Baskets of white loaves
set out in the street for the Poor. In the close of the day, some of the witty
wags of the Town, did very formally represent an High Court of Justice at the
Sessions Bench, whither by a formidable guard was brought a grim Judge or Lord
President, in a Bloud-red Robe, and a tire for his Head of the same Hue; who
being gravely set down in the Chair of Judicature, with sundry asseslours, the
Crier in the Name of the Supreme Keeper of the Liberties of England did command
silence. After the appointing of an Attorney General, a Solliciter General,
and other Officers for the due constituting of so High a Court, and the
empanneling of a Jury, John Bradshaw and Oliver Caomwell, whose Effigies were
artificially prepared and brought thither by a Guard of Soldiers, were
indicted of High Treason, and murdering of the King, commanded to hold up
their bloudy-hands, which for the purpose were besmeared with blood: They were
asked, Whether they did own the Authority of the Court? which being silent, the
whole multitude present cried out, Justice my Lord, Justice, on these bloody
Traitors and Murderers. They were asked again, whether they owned the
Authority of the Court? and upon refusal, sentence was passed upon them, to be
dragged to the place of Execution, to be there hanged upon two Gibbets forty
foot high, on both sides the States Arms, which had lately been erected by
Captain Chasee, one of Lamberts Champions: which sentence was accordingly
executed. The Honest Officers that dragged them to Execution from the lower
part of the Town to the upper, had many a blow with Fists, Swords, Halberts,
and Pikes, which were aimed at the execrable Malefactors. As they hung upon the
Gibbets, they were so hacked and hewed, so gored and shot through, that in a
short time little remained besides Cromwells Buffe-coat and Bloody scarf, that
was worth the burning; yet would nor the people be satisfied till they had made
a fire between the Gibbets, and burnt all they could get of their garbage or
garments; and at last tore down the States Arms to help make up their funeral
pile. At night besides the multitude of Bonfires, there were three huge piles
of faggots fired on the brows of three of the Highest Hills about a mile
distant from the Town, which were visible over all the Marshes of
Sommerset-shire, in part of Wales, and the greatest part of Black-moor. This
extraordinary joy of the people of this Town might perhaps proceed from the
native Genius of the place, which having enjoyed formerly the residence of many
a King and Bishop, and the felicities that attend those Governments in Church
and State, did cause them to be even transported with joy at the restitution of
the one, and fair hopes of restoration of the other to these so long harrased
Kingdoms and Churches.

And now the Parliament and City (like the men of Israel and Judah, when David
was forced from Jerusalem by Absalon,) strive who shall be forwardest to bring
the King home. The Parliament ordered 50000l. to be presented to His Majesty,
as also 10000l. to the Duke of York, and 5000l. to the Duke of Gloucester, as a
testimony of their respects to the Royal Family. the City of London likewise
ordered a present of 10000l. to be sent to His Majesty, who is desired to make
a speedy return to the exercise of His kingly office, and these Honorable
persons from the Lords, Commons, and City, ordered to attend him in his journey.

For the House of Lords. The Earl of Oxford. Earl of Middlesex. Lord Brook.
Earl of Warwick. Lord Viscount Hereford. Lord Berkley.
and Dr. Charleton their Physician.

For the House of Commons. Lord Fairfax. Lord Bruce. Lord Faulkland. Lord C
stleton. Lord Herbert. Lord Mandevil. Sir Horatio Townsend. Sir Anth.
Ashley-Cooper. Sir George Booth. Denzil Hollis Esquire; Sir John Holland. Sir Henry
Cholmley.
and Mr. Bowls their Physician.

For the City of London. Sir James Bunce Baronet Alderman Langham. Alderman
Reynardson. Alderman Brown. Sir Nicholas Crispe. Alderman Tomson. Alderman
Frederick. Alderman Adams. Recorder Wild. Alderman Robinson. Alderman Bateman.
Alderman Wale. Theophilus Biddolph. Richard Ford. Will. Vincent. Tho.
Bludworth. Will. Bateman. J. Jews Esquire; M. Chamberlain. Col. Bromfield.


And now since we were come again under a Regal Government, the States Arms
were ordered to be taken down in all places, and the Kings Arms set up in
their room; the Standerts, Flags, and Jacks, Colors for the Fleet, to be used
as before 1648. their carved and painted works altered, etc. The Statue of His
late Royal Majesty, that was formerly taken down at the Chapel in Guild Hall
yard, was set up again. Thus was all endeavors used to obliterate as much as
could be the very memory of our State-juglers, who promising to bring us into a
fools Paradise of liberty, brought us into a real bondage and slavery.

Yet notwithstanding the great hopes of a happy settlement, the knipperdoling
Fifth-Monarchy-men, and others of that loose principled gang, would needs have
another firke to re-erect their Babell; their design was (having prepared
saddles and arms,) to have stole the Horses and Mares at grass about the
Town; and having mounted their Proselites, intended with them to perform
wonders; but their Conspiracy was rotten before it was ri^e, giving to those
that were Loyal this advantage thereby, before the Stead was stole to shut the
stable door.

Before I pass any further, having discovered a Cheat, give me leave to have it
pillory'd. The Parliament being informed of the sum of seven thousand, nine
hundred, seventy eight pounds, eight shillings nine pence, heretofore paid into
the recei^t of the Exchequer, of the moneys collected for the relief of the
Poor Protestants in Piedmont and Poland; but by the Quondam Statesmen
converted to another use, they detesting and abhorring the diversion of the
said money, from the charitable uses to which it was originally intended.
Ordered the said sum to be paid out of such moneys as should come into the said
receipt upon the moity of the Excise, at the rate of 2000 l. by the month, till
the whole were satisfied, unto Alderman Viner, and Alderman Pack Treasurers for
the said moneys; by this we may see the large Conscience of our pretended
zealots; whose insatiable Covetousness extended so far as even to the robbing
of the spittle.

May the twelfth, several goods which were kept at a Fruiterers House in
Thames Street were seized on, they being found to have belonged formerly to His
Majesty.

While His Majesty resides at Breda with the Dukes of York and Gloucester, the
ministers of Spain and France congratulate him: The King of Spain presents him
very largely; The States General also desire audience of His Majesty, and
being admitted, they invited His Majesty to the Hague, and present him with
6000l. Ster. and in further testimony of their kindness, the States of Holland
and Westfriesland order several Commanders, as soon as any public address
should be made to the King, to signify their serious and sincere affections to
His Majesty and to His Family, and their desires to settle a firm and
everlasting alliance with him.

About this time the Army in Ireland send an Humble address to the General,
showing, That as they were amazed at the former changes and revolutions, so
they could not but with joy now observe light breaking out of darkness, and
order out of confusion. That whereas the Parliament had manifested their
joyful sense of His Majesty's gracious offers, they did also testify their joy
and contentment therein, and were resolved to observe the commands of his
Excellency, desiring him to improve this real and cordial engagement of
theirs, both with His Majesty and the two Houses.

But to return to the Commissioners sent to attend His Majesty; they having a
prosperous wind, and smooth sea, (Eolus) in short time arrived at the Hague,
whither soon after came His Sacred Majesty, the Dukes of York and Gloucester,
with the Princess Royal, attended by a Regiment of her Horse, being Royally
entertained all the way from Breda, at the charge of the States General; The
next day the Commissioners had audience, the Earl of Oxford delivered the
message from the House of Lords, Denzill Hollis from the Commons, and the
Recorder of London from the City. His Majesty conferred the Honor of
knighthood on all the Citizens sent as Commissioners, with the Lord Gerards
sword. The Ministers of London had some conference with him, who received much
satisfaction in his Religious discourse. The States General during His
Majesty's stay there (which by reason of cross winds was the longer)
entertained him with a Costly Banquet and Royal presents, among the rest they
gave him the gold plate wherein the first Course at one of their feasts had
been served up, valued at 60000 l. and table-linnen to the value of 1000 l.
also a bed worth 7000 l. and 600000. gilders; and as a further addition to the
satisfaction of His Majesty, they presented to his Nephew the Prince of Orange,
a full confirmation of all Honors and profits his Father enjoyed. At last the
weather growing calm he went aboard, where taking his leave of the Queen of
Bohemia, the Princess Royal, and Prince of Orange, (who accompanied him into
the ship) they set sail for England, His Majesty in the Royal Charles (formerly
the Naseby,) the Duke of York in the London, and the Duke of Gloucester in the
James, before called the Swift-sure.

The Gods did guide their sail and course, the winds were at command.
And Dover was the happy place where first they came o^ land.
May 25. they arrived at the Beech near the Peer of Dover, whither not above
two Hours before, was come his Excellency the Lord Cenerall Monck, to
congratulate His Majesty's happy arrival. Now did all persons put themselves
into a posture for to observe the meeting of the best of Kings, and most
deserving of Subjects: The admirers of Majesty were jealous on the Kings behalf
of too low a condiscention, and the lovers of duty on the other side of an
ostentation of merit; but such an humble prostration was made by his Excellency
kneeling, and so fitting a Reception by His Majesty kissing and embracing him,
that all parties were satisfied, and the General now taught by the sight of
his Sovereign to make perfect mixture of Hephaestion with Cracterus; so that
what has hitherto been done out of bounden duty to his Liege Lord, will
hereafter be continued out of Loyal affection to his Gracious Master. His
Majesty to demonstrate the High esteem he had of his Excellency, put the
George on him with his own hands, the Duke of York and Duke of Gloucester put
on the Garter, all these three Royal Princes joining unanimously together to
honor him, several other persons also received the Honor of Knighthood, as
Major General Massy, Alderman Robinson, etc.

In his passage he was met by the Mayor and Aldermen of Dover, with Mr. Redding
the Minister, who, after a short speech, presented His Majesty with a large
Bible with gold clasps. From thence His Majesty, accompanied with a numerous
Train of Nobility and Gentry, went to Canterbury, where he was met by the
Mayor, Aldermen, and Mr. Recorder Love, who after a Rhetorical speech, with
many expressions of Loyalty to His Majesty, presented him with a gold Tanke^d,
and so conducted him to his Palace, where he remained till Monday May the 28.
on which day he went to Rochester, and having something refreshed himself, he
went to Chatham to see the Royal Sovereign, and the rest of his Ships, (
Englands Bulwark against their foreign enemies,) where having satisfied
himself, and honored Commissioner Pell with his presence at a Banquet, he
returned to Rochester, and lodged at Col. Gibbon his House; who presented to
His Majesty a very dutiful Address, signed by himself, and the Officers of
his Regiment; which His Majesty received very Graciously, and by many
expressions to the Colonel, gave a testimony of his affection to him in
particular, and to the rest of the Army in general. The Mayor and Corporation
of the City presented His Majesty with a Basin and Ewer of silver guilt of a
good value, which was kindly accepted. May the 29. being His Majesty's
birthday, (a day to be had in everlasting remembrance, as well for his return
to receive the Crown, as being born that day Heir to it) He took his Journey
toward London, the Militia forces of Kent lineing the ways, and maidens
strowing herbs and flowers, and the several Towns hanging out white sheets.

At Dartford this following address was presented to His Majesty, subscribed
by the several Regiments of Horse under his Excellencies command, viz.

To His most Excellent Majesty, King Charles the second, our most Gracious
Sovereign: the humble address of the Officers of the several Regiments of
Horse under the Command of his Excellency the Lord General Monck, as it was
presented by them.
With such a joy as flows from Reverence and Love, we humbly present our
selves before Your Sacred Majesty: Besides our reflection on the Common good,
which in this happy change relates to our particular, intends this joy, and
renders it sincere: for we can now please our selves in our selves, while we
are really performing that duty for which we were first raised. And with all
thankfulness we acknowledge that care Your Majesty in Your late Letter and
Declaration has expressed of our necessary intent.

We bless God to see that day, when the serenity of every man's Countenance
discovers the tranquillity of his mind, for this shows Your Majesty to be the
true soul of the people, since during Your absence the whole Nation was cast
into such distractions, as we have no pleasure to remember; but had rather turn
our thoughts and grateful acknowledgments to the happy conduct of our Noble
General, who has thus far led us in our duty to Your Royal Person: yet as we
cannot attribute too much to his merits, so neither can we deprive our selves
of that Honor and Comfort which we find in the accomplishment of his just
design.

Therefore in plain and souldier-like (though humble) terms, we say, Your
Majesty has made us and the Nation happy in Your return to this Your Native
Kingdom; which doubtless will, nay we may say, has produced a settlement upon
the foundation of our ancient Laws: By the due Execution of which, together
with Your Majesty's pious inclinations, we trust Libertisme and Profaneness
wholly suppressed, the Protestant cause and true professors of it encouraged,
to the comfort of all Your religious and good people.

Your Majesty will now have Your great Council about You, who have already
given proof of their Loyalty and Wisdom, both to Your Majesty and them. We
profess and declare, That as we have not been altogether useless in the
Restoration as well of Your Sacred Majesty to Your Crowns and Kingdoms, as
Your people to their just Rights, so we shall in the future cheerfully
sacrifice our Lives, and whatsoever can be more dear to us, in the service of
Your Majesty, against all oppositions whatsoever; and by a ready obedience to
Your Majesty's commands, Express our selves,

Your Majesty's most Loyal Subjects and obedient Servants.

At Black Heath the Army was drawn up, to whom His Majesty delivered himself in
many gracious expressions of his favor and protection, which was received of
the Soldiers with the loud acclamations of the Drum and Musket, displaying of
Ensigns, and other Milita y rejoycings. From thence (the Army being placed
according to his Excellenies order) His Majesty marched toward London,
several Bonfires being made all the way as he passed along, one more
remarkable then the rest for its bigness, wherein the St^tes (Butter-print,
alias their) Arms, were consumed to ashes.

When His Majesty came to St. Georges fields, the Lord M^yor and Aldermen were
in a Tent ready to receive him; There the Lord Mayor delivered the King his
sword upon his knees, which His Majesty returned him. After a repast taken
there, His Majesty set forward to White Hall in this manner. All the Streets
being richly hanged with Tapestry, and a lane made by the Militia forces to
London Bridge, from London bridge to Temple Bar by the Trained-bands on one
side, and the several Companies in their Liveries, and the Streamers of each
Company of the other side by the Railes: from Temple Bar to Westminster by the
Militia forces, Regiments of the Army, and several Gentlemen formerly Officers
of the Kings Army, led by Sir John Stawell, first marched a Troop of Gentlemen
led by Major General Brown, brandishing their swords, in Cloth of silver
doublets, in all about 300. besides their servants. Then another Troop of about
200. in Velvet coats, the Footmen and Liveries in purple. Then another Troop
led by Sir John R^binson, with Buff-coats, Silver sleeves, and Green scarves.
After this, a Troop with blew Liveries and silver lace, colors red, fringed
with silver, about 130. After that a Troop, 6. Trumpets, 7. Footmen in
seagreen and silver, their colors pinck, fringed with silver. Then a Troop
with gray and blew Liveries, silk and silver laces, 30. Footmen, and 4.
Trumpets, consisting of about 220. their colors sky, f inged with silver.
Another of gray Liveries, 6. Trumpets, colors sky and silver, of about 105.
Gentlemen. Another Troop of 70. Gentlemen, 5. Trumpets, colors sky and silver.
Another Troop led by the Lord Cleveland, of about 300. Noblemen and Gentlemen,
colors blew, fringed with gold. Then another Troop of about 100. having black
colors fringed with gold. After them another Troop of about 300.

After these came two Trumpets with His Majesty's Arms, the Sheriffs men in
red cloakes and silver lace, with half pikes, 79. in number, then followed the
several Companies of London, with their several Streamers, all in black velvet
coats with gold chains, every Company having their footmen of their several
Liveries, some red and white, some pink and white, some blew and yellow, etc.
Three Trumpets in Liveries richly laced, and cloth of silversleeves went before
the Company of the Mercers. After all these, came a kettledrum, 5. Trumpets,
and 3. streamers, having very rich red Liveries with silver lace. The number of
the Citizens, were about 600. After these 12. ministers, another kettle-drum,
4. Trumpets, then His Majesty's Lifeguard, led by the Lord Gerard, another
party led by Sir Gilbert Gerard, and Major Rosecarron, and the third division
by Colonel Pragurs; Then 3. Trumpets in rich coats and satin doublets. The
City Marshall with 8. footmen in French-green, trimed with crimson and white,
the City waits, the City Officers in order; Then Dr. Warmstry, the two
Sheriffs, and all the Aldermen of London, in their scarlet gowns and rich
trappings, with footmen in Liveries, red coats laced with silver, and cloth of
gold. The Heralds and Maces in their rich coats. The Lord Mayor bare, carrying
the sword, his Excellency and the Duke of Buckingham bare: Then the glory of
all His Sacred Majesty rode between the Dukes of York and Gloucester: afterward
followed a Troop bare with white colors, then the Generals Lifeguard; after
which another company of Gentry, having sky colors, fringed with gold; after
which 5. Regiments of the Army-Horse led by Col. Knight, viz. His Excellencies
Regiment, Col. Knights, Col. Cloberr^^s, Lord Fauconbergs, Lord Howards; Last
of all came two Troops of Nobility and Gentlemen, with red colors, fringed with
gold. Never did Hiperion the worlds bright eye, behold a more gallant sight of
Nobility and Gentlemen then marched then, brandishing their swords all along.
Soon after His Majesty was passed, all the musquetires that had lined the
streets gave many volleys of shot.

Thus was His Majesty conducted to his Royal Palace at White Hall, where after
the Lord Mayor had taken his leave, His Majesty went unto the Lords, to whom
the Earl of Manchester their Speaker addressed himself in these words.

That this day may prove happy to Your Majesty, is the hope and Expectation,
and the earnest desire of my Lords the Peers, whose Commands are upon me to
make this humble tender to Your Majesty of their Loyal joy for Your Majesty's
safe Return to Your Native Kingdom; and for this happy Restoration of Your
Majesty to Your Crown and Dignity, after so long, and so severe a suppression
of Your just Right and Title.

I shall not reflect upon Your Majesty's sufferings, which have been Your
peoples miseries; yet I cannot omit to say, That as the Nation in general, so
the Peers with a more personal and particular sense have felt the stroke that
cut the Gordian knot which fastened Your Majesty to Your kingdom, and Your
kingdom to Your Majesty.

For since those strange and various fluctuations and Discomposures in
Government, since those horrid and unparalled Violations of all Order and
Justice, Strangers have ruled over us, even with a Rod of Iron: But now with
satisfaction of Heart, we own and see Your Majesty our Native King, a son of
the wise, a son of the ancient kings, whose hands hold forth a golden Scepter.

Great King! Give me leave to speak the Confidence as well as the desires of
the Peers of England: Be you the powerful defender of the true Protestant
faith, the just assertor and maintainer of the Laws and Liberties of Your
Subjects; so shall Judgment run down like a River, and Justice like a mighty
stream; and God, the God of Your Mercy, who has so miraculously preserved
You, will establish Your Throne in Righteousness and in Peace.

Dread Sovereign! I offer no flattering Titles, but speak the words of truth:
you are the desire of Three kingdoms, the strength and the stay of the Tribes
of the people, for the moderating of Extremities, the reconciling of
Differences, the satisfying of all Interests, and for the Restoring of the
collapsed Honor of these Nations. Their Eyes are toward Your Majesty, their
Tongues with loud Acclamations of Joy, speak the thoughts and Loyal intentions
of their Hearts; their Hands are lift up to Heaven with Prayers and Praises:
and what Oral Triumph can equal this Your Pomp and Glory?

Long may Your Majesty live and reign, a support to Your Friends, a terror to
Enemies, and Honor to the Nation, and an Example to Kings, of Piety, Justice,
Prudence and Power; that this Prophetic Expression may be verified in Your
Majesty, King CHARLES the second shall be greater then ever was the greatest of
that name.

His Majesty having returned a gracious answer to the Lords, went from thence
unto the Banqueting House; where Sir Harbotle Grimston Speaker to the House of
Commons, delivered himself in this speech to His Majesty, the Members of that
House being there present.

Most gracious and dread Sovereign,

If all the Reason and Eloquence that is dispersed in so many several heads
and tongues as are in the whole world, were conveyed into my Brain, and united
in my tongue, yet I should want sufficiency to discharge that great task I am
now enjoined.

The restitution of Your Majesty to the exercise of Your just and most
indubitable Native Right of Sovereignty, and the deliverance of Your people
from bondage and slavery, has been wrought out and brought to pass, by a
miraculous way of Divine Providence, beyond and above the reach and
comprehension of our understandings, and therefore to be admired, impossible to
be expressed.

God has been pleased to train Your Majesty up in the School of affliction,
where You have learned that excellent lesson of patience so well, and improved
it so much for the good of the people, that we have all just cause for ever to
Bless God for it, and we doubt not but Your Name is Registered in the Records of
Heaven, to have a place in the highest from amongst those glorious Martyrs, of
whom it is reported that through faith in Christ, and patience in their
sufferings, they converted their very Tormentors, and conquered those Barbarous
bloody Tyrants, under whom they then suffered, insomuch as they themselves were
many times enforced to confess and cry out, Sat est, vicisti Galilaeus, they
had their (vicisti) and that deservedly, but Your Majesty must have a treble
(vicisti) for with the same weapon, Faith and Patience, You have overcome them,
and conquered the Hearts and Affections of all Your People in three great
Nations, the Hearts and Affections of all that are worthy the name of good
Christians, or reasonable men.

It Is God and God alone to whom be the glory that has made Your Majesty so
great a Conqueror, indeed Your Conquest is incomparable, no story can instance
the like, or furnish us with an Example to parallel it withal; 'Twas a use and
custom amongst the Romans, when any of their Commanders had done eminent
services abroad, at their returns, to honor them with Triumphs, and riding
through their streets, there they received the praises and applauses of the
people, with this inscription upon their Laurel Crowns, (Vincenti dabitur.)
But Your Majesty's victory is of another Nature, and as it differs much from
theirs in the quality of it, so Your Triumph must differ as much from theirs in
the manner of it: They conquered bodies, but Your Majesty has conquered souls;
they conquered for the honor and good of themselves, but Your Majesty has
conquered for the honor and good of Your people; they conquered with force,
but Your Majesty has conquered with faith; they conquered with power, and
therefore God himself has written with patience; and therefore God himself
has written Your Motto, and inscribed it upon Your Royal Crown (Patienti
dabitur.) Their triumphs were in narrow streets, but Your Majesty's triumphs
must be in large hearts; their triumph lasted but for a day, but Your Majesty's
triumph must last for all Your days, and after that to triumph in Heaven to all
Eternity.

I have read of a Duke of Burgundy, who was called Carolus Audax, the Historian
tells us that his Father was called Carolus Bonus, an Observator has this note
upon it, That Goodness does ever produce Boldness; Sir, you are the true Son of
such a good Father, and so long as You serve our good God, He who is goodness
it self, will give You B^ldness; a Princely virtue, and the best foil Your
Majesty can use to set out the true luster of all Your other most eminent and
lovely Graces.

Most Royal Sovereign! I have yet a few words more, and to doubt of Your
patience, who is the mirror of patience, were to commit a crime unpardonable,
and fi^ to be excepted out of that Act of Oblivion, which Your Majesty has so
graciously tendered unto Your people; therefore with an humble confidence I
shall presume to acquaint Your Majesty, that I have it further in command to
present You at this time with a Petition of Right, and humbly upon my bended
knees to beg Your Royal assent thereunto. Sir, it has already passed two
great Houses, Heaven and Earth, and I have Vox populi, and Vox Dei, to warrant
this bold demand. It is that Your Majesty would be pleased to Remove Your
Throne of State, and to set it up in the Hearts of Your poople, and as You are
deservedly the King of Hearts, there to receive from Your people a Crown of
Hearts: Sir, this Crown has three excellent and rare properties, it is a sweet
Crown, it is a fast Crown, and it is a lasting Crown; it is a sweet Crown, for
it is perfumed with nothing but the incense of prayers and praises; and it is a
fast Crown, for it is set upon Your Royal Head, by him who only has the power
of Hearts, the King of Kings; and it is a lasting Crown, Your Majesty can never
wear it out, for the longer You wear this Crown, it will be the better for the
wearing; and it is the hearty desire and most earnest prayers of all Your
Loyal, Loving and Faithful Subjects, that You may never change that Crown
till You change it for a Crown of Eternal Glory in the Highest Heavens, And
the Lord say Amen.

The solemnity of the day was concluded by an infinite number of Bonfires, by
the flames whereof the Rumpers might see how detestable their tyranny was unto
the people, for as if all the houses had turned out their Chimnies into the
streets (the weather being very warm) there were almost as many fires in the
streets as houses throughout London and Westminster. And among the rest, in
Westminster a very costly one was made, where the Effigies of Oliver Cromwell,
with the Commonwealths Arms, were set upon a high post, which having been
exposed there a while to public view, with torches lighted, that every one
might take better notice of them, were burnt together.

Friday following His Majesty went the private way to the House of Lords, the
Yeomen of the Guard making a lane, the Heralds at Arms in their rich coats,
the maces, and the Lord General bare. When His Majesty came to the House, the
Usher of the Black-Rod went to the House of Commons to acquaint them that His
Majesty desired them to meet him at the House of Lords; when they were entered,
His Majesty made a short speech, and gave his Royal assent to three Acts, viz.
First, the Act for confirmation of this Parliament, Second, for the Tax of
70000 l. per mensem, Third, for the continuance of Process and Judicial
proceedings; after which the Lord Chancellor made a speech more at large. The
same day a Proclamation was published against vicious, debauched, and profane
persons.

His Majesty being thus restored the next thing most considerable was the
settling of his Privy Council, a work which he was not long about, their Names
being as follows.

The Duke of York. Lord Chancellor. M. of Ormond. Lord High Chamberlain
Leudsey. Earl of Barkshire. Earl of Southhampton. Earl of Norwich. Viscout
Seymor. Lord Say and Seal. Lord Wentworth. Sir Ed. Nicholas. Sir Ant. Ash.
Cooper. Duke of Gloucester. Lord Genesis Monck. M. Hertford. Earl of Manchester.
Earl of Northum. Earl of St. Albons. Earl of Leicester. Lord Culpeper. Lord
Roberts. Sir Will. Morris. Mr. Annestey. Mr. Den. Hollis.
The Clerks of the Council.
Sir Richard Brown. Sir George Lane. Sir. Ed. Walker. Mr. John Nicholas.
While these things are done at White Hall, The House proceed to the naming of
these persons which they resolved should be out of the Act for pardon, and
agreed upon these seven,

Col. Harrison. Will. Say. John Jones. Tho. Scot. Cor. Holland. Joh^ Lisle.
John Berkstead.
To which they afterward added Peter's and Hulit, both suspected for the Kings
Executioners, Cook, Dendy, Broughton, Phelpes, More.

On the seventh of June a Proclamation was published in His Majesty's name, to
resummon all those that sat and gave judgment, in that horrid and detestable
murder of His Majesty's Father, to appear and render themselves within 14.
days after the publishing thereof, to the Speakers of either Houses, the Lord
Mayor, or the respective Sheriffs, and that no person should harbor them under
misprision of treason; which being published, many presuming on the charity and
goodness of His Majesty, did accordingly submit themselves to his mercy. Such
were Heveningham, Penington, Adrian Scroop, Austin Garland, Mr. Smith, Col.
Downs, Col. Dixwell, Hen. Martin, Sir Hard. Waller. Mr. Meir, Col. Wait, Col.
Temple, Tichborn, Fleetwood, Col. John Temple, and some few others.

Nor could His Majesty want employment; having enough to do to receive all
these addresses which were made to him from all the Shires and Towns of
England, which though they thronged in so fast, yet His Majesty was still ready
to entertain them, with so much grace and favor, that he gave satisfaction to
all.

Nor was this joy confined within the limits of England, other Countries
partaking thereof, and making themselves concerned in our great alterations,
particularly at Heidelburgh, Frankendale, Worms, and Herldbron, in all which
places was a day of public prayers and thanksgiving, for the restoration of
His Sacred Majesty of Great Britain. The King of Portugal also when he heard
the news thereof, presently gave order that the same night all the great guns
of the Castle, and Forts of the Town and Harbor should be fired; The whole
City was adorned with lights, and in every window of the Kings Palace were set
two great Torches of white wax, besides Bonfires and Fireworks in the streets;
the King and Queen next morning with the Infanta and Nobility, went forth in
solemn manner to the Church of St. Anthony's of the Capuchins, all the bells in
the Town ringing the while. By which it was plainlyseen with what real joy and
satisfaction the people of this Court and Nation received the welcome tidings
of so happy a change.

And now we are beyond sea, it may not be from the purpose to relate something
of the great Marriage between the King of France and the Infanta of Spain,
which happened much about this time; especially the King of France being a
Prince so nearly related to the Crown of England. The King of Spain being now
after a tedious journey arrived at Fintarabia, the Ceremonies of the Marriage
being the same with the Ceremonies of ordinary marriages but more pompous, were
celebrated and performed by the Bishop of Pamplona, with the assistance of the
Patriarch of the Indies, in the Church of said Town: Before the performance the
Infanta kneeled twice before the King her Father; first to ask him blessing,
and secondly before she gave her consent to the Marriage. The Ceremony being
ended, the King of Spain gave her all the respect due to so great a Queen,
giving her the right hand both in his going out of the Church, and as they rode
together in the Coach; He likewise gave her his own lodgings and took hers,
where though she had not been seen before, she then did ride in public; within
a day or two after the two Kings had an interview, where both Kings were
uncovered, that the grandees of Spain might not take an occasion to be
covered. Then the King of Spain having delivered his daughter into the hands
of the King of France, the Queen Mother took her away in her Coach, which done,
the two Kings parted with all demonstration of amity and affection. Afterward
the young Queen was presented with several presents from her Father, and
Monsieur the Kings Brother and Cardinal, which were so rich, and so
magnificent, that never were more Royal presents seen.

In the mean time the Parliament to show the value of that pardon, from the
benefit of which they were excepting so many persons, came to His Majesty and
in the name of themselves, and the Commons of England, laid hold on His
Majesty's gracious pardon mentioned in his Declaration from Breda; wherefore on
Monday being the 25. of June, His Majesty published a Proclamation in pursuance
of his former Declaration, declaring that His Majesty did graciously accept of
the address of the House of Commons.

After this the House proceed upon the Act of Indemnity, and having resolved
that those persons before mentioned should be excepted from life, they agree
upon 20. more, which, though yet excluded from death should suffer all
penalties and forfeitures excepting life; concerning which business after they
had had many debates, they conclude at last upon these persons following,

William Lenthall. Sir Hen. Vane. Sir Arthur Haslerig. Col. Sydenham. Col.
Disborough. Ald. Ireton. Col. Axtell. Mr. Keeble. Capt. Blackwell. Major Creed.
Charles Fleetwood. Alderman Pack. Col. Pine. Col. Cobbet. Capt. Dean. Oliver
St. John. Will. Nigh. Ministers John Goodwin. Ministers
But as the King saw them quick in their justice, so he thought them too slow
in their mercy; and therefore having often pressed them to perfect the Act of
Indemnity and nothing yet finished, he goes himself to the House to hasten
them, telling them with what impatience he did expect that Act to be presented
to him for his assent, as the most reasonable and solid foundation of peace and
security; That he thought the House of Commons too long about it, thanking God
that he had the same intentions and resolutions which he had at Breda; and then
reading what he had then writ to them he added afterward, that if they did not
then join with him in extinguishing the fear which keeps the hearts of men
awake, and apprehensive of safety and security, they would keep him from
performing his promise. He then thanked them for their justice to those who had
been the immediate murderers of his Father, and assured them he never thought
of excepting any other; and at length conjured them that setting all
animosities aside to pass that Act without further delay.

His Majesty having thus put them in mind of their clemency, was not forgetful
himself of that gratitude which he thought due to those who had served him with
a meritorious loyalty; and there casting an eye of grace upon his Excellency
the Lord General Monck for his faithful service, he was graciously pleased to
create him Duke of Albemarly, Earl of Finington, Baron of Potheridge, Beaucham
and Teyes, Captain General and Commander in chief of all His Majesty's forces
both in England, Scotland and Ireland, Master of His Majesty's Horse, Knight of
the most noble order of the Garter, and one of His Majesty's most honorable
privy Council. Whereupon accompanied with the Duke of Buckingham, and other
personages of high quality, he took his leave of the House of Commons, and went
to take his place in the House of Peers.

Genesis Mountague also created Earl of Sandwich, Viscount Hinchimbrook Baron of
St. Needs, Master of the Wardrobe, one of the Commanders of the treasury, and
Knight of the Garter, not long after took his place in the House of Peers.

Sir John Greenvile who adventured first to bring His Majesty's Letters over to
the Houses and the Lord General, His Majesty was pleased to create Earl of
Bath.

Nor was His Majesty unmindfull of Col. Carles, to whom with a small alteration
of his name, he gave a new coat of Arms, which will always be a significant
record of that service wherein his Loyalty was so useful.

Nor did the Penderils His Majesty's faithful servants in his shelter at
Boscobel go unrewarded, of one of whom named William, it is reported that
being in the Park of St. James's, and meeting His Majesty, he run to the King
and took him by the arm, with such an unadvised rudeness to kiss his hand, as
made His Majesty more severely then ordinary demand who he was; but when he
replied that he was that William that fed His Majesty in the Oak, His Majesty
was graciously pleased to give the Marq. of Ormond charge of him to see him
well provided for; for something before that in Reference to the settling of the
Kings Household, the Marquess was made Lord high Steward of His Majesty's
Household. Other offices were also disposed of to others. The Earl Manchester
was made Lord Chamberlain. The Earl of Barkshire one of the Bedchamber, but the
treasury was still let to remain in the hands of Commanders.

And as the King is now ordering of his household, so is the Duke of Albemarly
making alterations in the Army to His Majesty's best advantage, the commands of
most of the Regiments both of Horse and Foot being conferred upon the
Nobility. Col. Smithsons Regiment is given to the Earl of Oxford, Col. Faggs
to John Viscount Mordant, Col. Purys to the Lord Herbert, Col. Twistletons to
Sir Edward Massey, the Lord F^lkenbridge's to his Highness the Duke of York,
Sir Ralph Knights Regiment to the Duke of Gloucester, Sir Ralph Knight
Commanding as Lieut. Col. under him, Col. Streaters Regiment to the Lord
Bellasis, Col. Gibbons's Regiment is Commanded by the Duke of Buckingham, the
Lord Ossory Commands another, and the Lord Widdrington another. Hereby it was
provided by the army's being put into such safe hands, that it should no more
be subject to the rebellious contrivances of agitators, or any others who
should seek to stir them up to rebellion or sedition; nor was this all, for his
Excellency not only altered their commanders, but strictly charged that every
soldier should take the oaths of supremacy and allegiance to His Majesty, and
that none should be new listed, or pass the musters that refused it.

The City about this time calling to mind the injury which the Rump had offered
not only to the person but the effigies of His late most Sacred Majesty, which
they had taken down from all the public places in the City where it had been
set up, caused another statue to be set up in the place of that which was taken
down from the Exchange with this Inscription.

Monarcharum Mag. Brit. Secundus
Franciae and Hiberniae Rex,
Martyr, ad coelum missus
Penultimo Jan. Anno Dom. 1648.
The Scepter in his right hand, A Church in his left, A Globe at his left foot,
and on his Shield MAGNA CHARTA.

As also another to be set up representing the pourtraiture of His Sacred
Majesty that now is, with this Inscription.

Monarcharum Mag. Brit. Tertius
Franciae and Hiberniae Rex,
Aetat. suae Anno tricesimo, Regni duodecimo,
Restorationis primo,
Anno Dom. 1660.
The Scepter in his right hand In his left the Globe, and on his Shield
AMNESTIA.

Mis Majesty also set forth a Proclamation for recalling all Commissions at
sea, granted by himself or his Royal Brother before the first of May last;
willing and commanding every of them to forbear further execution of the said
Commissions, under such penalties upon disobedience as may be legally inflicted
upon pirates, and likewise requiring all his Subjects employed in sea affairs
by any foreign Prince to repair home to His Majesty's service.

It was now time seeing His Majesty restored, to think of restoring him his
revenues, but the Parliament seeing them so wasted and imbezeled by the
devastations of the times, are willing to supply that want by grant of that
imposition commonly called Tunnage and Poundage, which they prepare with all
speed, together with an Act for Pole Money and continuing the excize till the
20. of August, to all which three Acts His Majesty soon after coming to the
House gave his Royal assent and confirmation. Which as it was their own Act, so
was His Majesty willing that no other Act of theirs should seem to proceed from
force or violence upon them, and therefore at length to take away any such
suspicion, the guards were discharged from their attendance on the Houses, who
being now upon the performance of their duty to His Majesty, and the honorable
service of their Country were not thought to want any other security then the
hearts and affections of the people, who think they must have an esteem for
them, who are so ready to serve their Sovereign, from whom they receive such
benefits not only in health but in sickness, His Majesty having since he came
into England touched and heald above 2000. persons.

On the 13. of August several proclamations were procaim'd, one against
fighting Duells, whereby His Majesty strictly commands all his Subjects, that
they do not by themselves or any others, either by message, word, writing, or
otherwise, challenge or cause to be challenged, any person or persons to sight
in Duel, nor to carry, accept or conceal any challenge, nor actually to sight
or be a second to any therein.

That the offenders shall not only incur His Majesty's displeasure, but be
incapable of any office or preferment;

That persons that know and conceal such challenges, shall be liable to the
same penalties.

In the conclusion His M jesty does deny and forbid any intercession to be made
for such offenders, declaring that his pardon shall not extend to them.

The second was for the discovery of goods concealed, belonging either to his
late Father, Queen, or himself.

The third for calling in and suppressing of two books written by John Milton,
the one entitled Joannis Miltoni Angli defensio pro populo Anglicano contra
Claudes Anonymi alios Salmasii defensionem regiam; the other in Answer to a
book entitled, The portraicture of His Sacred Majesty in his solitudes and
sufferings, and also a third book written by John Goodwin, called the
obstructions of Justice.

Nor as His Majesty, while he is doing justice and settling the government
here, unmindfull of securing Ireland, to which purpose His grace the Duke of
Albemarly is constituted Lord Lieutenant, His Majesty thinking it no way
prejudicial to entrust the security of one of his Kingdoms in those hands,
which have been the safety of all three.

About the 21. of August was published an Act for the continuance of the Excise
till the 25. of December.

Saturday August 25. His Excellency to ease the burden and charge of the
Kingdom, did dispatch express orde^s to the several Regiments of the Army,
to take no more Officers or Soldiers into any place vacant by ^eath or
otherwise.

Upon the eight of August His Majesty went to the Parliament. At his coming
into the House of Commons, the Speaker made a speech to His Majesty, wherein he
first took notice how great a blessing God had powered upon the nation in
restoring His Majesty to his Dominions, and lawful inheritance.

That the eminent virtues and excellent qualifications which God had bestowed
upon His Majesty, to make him every way sit for government, did invite the
Parliament to give His Majesty a cheerful account of their proceedings.

Then he reckoned up those bills that did already attend for His Majesty's
Royal Assent.

The first was an Act for the confirmation of Judicatory proceedings.

The second was an Act to prevent the taking of excessive usury.

The third was an Act for a perpetual Anniversary thanksgiving to be observed
and kept upon the twenty ninth of May.

The fourth was an Act for a speedy provision of Money to pay off and disband
all the forces of this kingdom by sea and land.

The last was an Act of free and general pardon, Indemnity and Oblivion.

In the conclusion of his speech, they made known to His Majesty that they had
nothing more to ask or offer at that time, but that as soon as His Majesty's
occasions would permit them to adjourn and go into their own Countries, where
they should make His Majesty's Subjects sensible of the Happiness they had in
having such a King, to Rule and Govern over them.

His Majesty having given His Royal assent to all these Bills and passed them,
made a short Speech to the House, Wherein he told them that no man had more
impatiently longed to have those Bills passed, then he had done to pass them;
as the foundation of much security and happiness to the Nation. That he did
very willingly pardon all that was pardoned in the Act of Indemnity. But for
the time to come the same discretion and Conscience, which had disposed Him to
the Clemency which he then expressed, which was most agreeable to his nature;
would oblige him to all rigor and severity, how contrary soever to His nature
toward those who should not now acquiesce, but continue to manifest their
sedition and dislike of the Government. That never any King valued more the
affections of His people then he did; nor did He know any way to make Himself
sure of His peoples affections, then by being just and kind to all.

He thanked them for the Pole-Bill, not that it came into His Coffers; but for
the other grand intent of disbanding the Army, and discharging the Navy which
above all things he earnestly prayed them to dispatch. He hinted to them the
unestablishment of His Revenue, yet told them that that was not the thing which
did trouble him, and therefore bid them but take care of the public, and for
what was necessary for the good and quiet of the Kingdom, and take their own
time for His own particular, which he was sure they would provide for with as
much affection and Franckness as he could desire.

The chief heads of the act of Oblivion were as follow. That His Majesty taking
into consideration the long and great Troubles, Discords, and Wars which had
been for many years in this Kingdom; and that for that reason diverse of His
Subjects had incurred several penalties; and being piously disposed to put an
end to all Controversies, which by reason of these late troubles might happen
between His Subjects; and to the intent that no crime committed against His
Majesty or His Father may rise in ju^gment for the time to come against any of
the offenders to endammage them either in their Lives, Liberties, Estates, or
Reputation by any reproach or term of distinction; and to bury too for the time
to come all the seeds of divisions, that they may be obliterated both in His
own breast, and in the breast of every one of His Subjects: And for the
fulfilling His Royal Word given in His Letters and Declaration sent to the two
Houses of Parliament. His Majesty with the advice and consent of the Lords and
Commons assembled in Parliament does declare, that all sorts of Treasons,
concealment of Treasons, Murders, Felonies, Offenses, Crimes, Miscarriages,
Misprisions, Commanded, Counseled, Executed or Committed since the first of
January 1637. by any person before the fourth of June 1660. (except the persons
hereafter excepted by name) by virtue, or under color of the Authority of the
deceased King, or of His Majesty now Reigning, or of the two Houses of
Parliament, of any Convention calling it self a Parliament, of any calling
themselves Keepers of the liberty of England, of any one calling himself
Protector of the Re-publick of England, or Magistrate in chief, shall be
pardoned, acquitted, discharged, and be forever forgotten, and all the said
Persons, their Heirs and Executors, are discharged from all pains of death and
other Penalties, Accusations, Convictions, judgments, etc. which are annulled
by these presents, and the said Persons are established in their possessions,
inheritances and goods forfeited to His Majesty for the said offenses. That no
arrerages of Rents of any Lands or Tenements received, paid, or disposed of,
during the said Troubles under the said Authorities, or pretended Authorities;
except those of the Farmers of the Customs and Excise, and others afterward
excepted; be demanded back again. That the Act shall be as availeable to all in
general, as if it took notice of every man's name and crime in particular: That
those who shall molest any person for any of the Offenses already pardoned in
the Act, shall be obliged to pay the Plaintiff treble damages and the charges
of the suit; and shall pay to His Majesty 10. l. ster. for every such false
actions, and all the proceedings upon such suit shall be made null and void.
That all Murders, Papacies, Sodomie, Rapes, Stealing and Marrying young women
without consent of their Parents, marriage of two wives, or having two
husbands, invocations of spirits, conjurations, witchcrafts, enchantments, and
charms shall be excepted out of this present act; as also those that are
accountable for subsidie-mony, Customs, Taxes, Excise, Sequestrations, or for
any of the rents of the King, Queen, Prince; or for the goods of the Church, or
of Papists, Recusants after the year 1642. yet shall not their Heirs or
Executors be charged at all, unless there be any sums of money yet remaining
in their hands unpaid after the stating of the account. That no man shall be
charged for money received by way of Salary, though under an illegal
Authority. That the acquittances of the Exchequer shall be of force from the
year 1642. That perjuries, subordinations of witnesses, detentions of any of
the Kings, Queens or Princes goods, excepting the Ships and Magazines shall be
excepted out of this act of pardon, as also offenses committed by Priests,
Jesuits, and Seminaries against the Statute of 27. Eliz. That the Act shall not
extend to discharge any obligation not yet received. That all acts of hostility
shall be pardoned, and all names of distinction utterly abolished; upon the
penalty of ten pound to every one that shall use them: That the persons guilty
of the Rebellion in Ireland shall be excepted, as also those who have received
any money upon the act for Decimation, of which they shall give an account:
that those who have been employed by His Majesty, and have proved traitors and
corresponded with His enemies shall be excepted, being convicted in two years.
That Sir Mich. Livesey, Mr. Walton, Harrison, Whalley, Lisle, Say, Scroop,
Okey, Huson, Goff, Berkstead, Holland, Ludlow, Tho: Chaloner, Carew, Jo: Jones,
Corbet, Smith, Clement, Scot, Cawley, Love, Dixewell, Blagrave, Cook,
Broughton, Dendi, Hewlett, Peter's, Hacker, and Axtell, Sir Hardresse Waller,
Mr. Row, Garland, Harvey, Smith, Martin, Titchburn, G. Fleetwood, J. Temple, P.
Temple, Wait, Main, Heveningham, Pennigton, Lilburn, Millington, Potter,
Wogan, and Downs, and the two persons that were disguised upon the Scaffold,
when the horrible Murder of His late Majesty wa^ committed, shall be wholly
excluded from pardon; and in case any of them shall be attainted and convicted,
that execution shall be delayed in regard of the said Sir Hardresse Waller, and
the 18. nominated after him, till new orders from His Majesty and the two
Houses of Parliament. That O. Cromwell, H. Ireton, J. Bradshaw, and Tho: Pride,
deceased, shall be also excluded from this pardon, and their goods and the
Goods of Sir John Danvers, Tho: Maleverer, Sir Will. Constable, G. Norton, Sir
John Bourchier, deceased, and the goods of I. Eure, G. Purefoy, J. Blackeston,
R. Deane, F. Alleyne, P. Pelham, John Moor, J. Allured, H. Edwards, J. Venn, T.
Andrews, A. Stapeley, T. Norton, J. Foy, and T. Hammon shall be under such
sequestrations as the Parliament shall order. That Mr. F. Lastells shall pay a
years Revenue of his Estate, and be incapable of bearing any public Office;
as also Sir John Hutchinson. That Sir Gilbert Pickering, Mr. W. Lenthall, G.
Burton, O. St. John, J. Ireton, W. Sydenham, J. Desbrough, J. Blackwell, C.
Pack, R. Keeble, C. Fleetwood, J. Pine, R. Deane, R. Creed, P. Nigh, J. Goodwin,
J. Lister, and R. Cobett shall be incapable of any public Office, and they do
except them, they shall lose the benefit of this present act. That Lambert and
Vane shall be wholly fore prized out of the said act. That all persons sitting
in illegal high Courts of Justice, and that gave sentence against His Majesty,
shall be incapable of bearing any public Office, except Col. Ingolsby and Col.
Tomlinson. That Sir Arthur Haslerig shall not be excepted for life. That the
Kings, Queens, and Bishops Lands shall be restored.

Some few days after the coming forth of this Act, Hugh Peter's a most
notorious incendiary, and of most mischievous principles, was taken lurking in
Southwark. His apprehe^sion is the more considerable in regard of his intimate
acquaintance with Cromwells designs, who is thought employed him in the
detestable butchery of His late Majesty, or if not him, some other whose name
and person he is able to discover.

As to foreign affairs relating unto this Kingdom, there was not much which
happened remarkable, only the coming of Ambassadors from several parts, as
from Holland, Denmark, France, and Spain, who were sent by their several
Princes to congratulate the return of His Majesty into England; though there
was nothing so pleasing to the Merchant as the Peace like to be with Spain,
(in regard that the Protectors War with that Nation being ill-manag'd had
proved very fatal to them) and therefore they were not a little joyful, to
think they should recover their former losses by a new Peace; which we must now
believe cannot be long unconcluded, in regard that about the beginning of this
month, a cessation of Arms between both Kingdoms was publicly Proclaimed in
London, to the great content of the whole Nation, who before these Wars were
no small gainers by their Peace with that Country.

Thus have I given the Reader a brief draught of the series of our affairs,
from the murder of Charles the first to this present time, wherein may be seen
how the Nation has been ridden these dozen years at switch and spur in a
Commonwealth saddle. I shall sum up all in a brief Character of His most
Sacred Majesty, though what I shall say herein will come as far short of his
admirable Endowments as the Light of a Candle to that of the Sun.

He is of stature somewhat tall, yet so exactly formed, that the most Curious
Eye cannot find one Error in his shape; his face is rather grave then severe,
which is very much softened whenever he speaks. His complexion is somewhat
dark, but much Enlightened by his Eyes which are quick and sparkling; his hair
which he has in great plenty is of a shining black, not frizled but naturally
curling into great Rings, that it is a very comely Ornament for his acquired
Endowments; he understands Spanish and Italian, speaks and writes French
correctly: he is very well versed in Ancient and Modern history, has read
diverse choice pieces of politics, studied some useful parts of the
Mathematics, as Fortification, and the Knowledge of the Globe, he is well
skilled in Navigation: in b^ief, he is a true friend to Literature and to
Learned men.

During his expulsion he has Traveled through and Lived in the Countries of
three the most potent Princes in Christendom, viz. The Emperors of Germany,
and the Kings of Spain and France, and so to the Germans Resolution, the
Spaniards Prudence, and the Frenchmans Expedition.

He is of a very solid judgment, not carried about with every wind of Counsel;
so that it may be as truly said of him as of his prodecessor Henry the fourth,
He that would corrupt his Council must first begin with the King, or as it is
written of Noble Fabritius, that he could resolve well, and having once
resolved, you might as soon have put the sun out of his course as Fabritius
from his resolution, witness his stedfastness and constancy in the Protestant
Religion, notwithstanding those many specious overtures made unto him by many
subtle and plausible arguments pressed upon him to pervert him from it.

FINIS.

