ENGLANDS JUSTIFICATION FOR HER RELIGION.

Wherein it is maintained to be the same our Savior Jesus Christ has taught
us.

Presented to the High Court of Parliament.

By a Well-wisher of Peace in the Church, and happiness to the Kingdom.

Acts. 24.14. This I profess unto thee, that according to the way which they
call Heresy, so do I serve the God of my Fathers, believing all things which
has been written in the Law, and in the Prophets.

Vigilius against Euryches: lib. 1. This is the Catholic Faith and Profession
which the Apostles have delivered, which the Martyrs have confirmed, and which
the Faithful preserve even to this present age.

Printed at London. 1641.

The Contents of the several Chapters of this Book.
CHap. 1. The sum of our Religion professed in England. page 1. Chap. 2. The
particulars of our Religion professed in England. page 3. Chap. 3. Divine
Service is to be administered in a language which the people understand. page
18. Chap. 4. Of the reading and expounding to the people, the word of God, and
not the Legends and Fables of men. page 29. Chap. 5. Of Preaching. page 35.
Chap. 6. Of Sacraments. page 41. Chap. 7. Of Baptism. page 43. Chap. 8. Of the
Lords Supper. page 44. Chap. 9. Of Prayer. page 56. Chap. 10. Of Martyrs. page
68.
FINIS.
The vvriting occasioning this Treatise.
I Desire to have it proved, that the Religion now professed in England is the
same which our Savior Christ taught his Apostles, and they preached over all
they world, and converted thousands at one Sermon unto.

Jf it be the same, then there may be some named that suffered for it: For it
is not likely that so many thousands which were converted to the true Faith
should all be destroyed, and no mention made of them in ancient Histories.

A JUSTIFICATION OF THE RELIGION NOW PROFESSED IN ENGLAND.
CHAP. I. The sum of our Religion professed in England.
TO prove that is here desired, had been sooner done, if the matter had
concerned only some particular points of our Religion professed in England,;
but now the proof required being general without any limitation and restraint,
and extending it self to our whole Religion, it must first be showed what
Religion we profess; and then such proof is to be made of the same as is
here demanded, both summarily, and in some principal parts thereof: First,
that our Savior and his Apostles taught the same; then that the Martyrs
mentioned in ancient Histories gave testimony to the same by their death.

For clearing of the former point, it is here to be understood, Acts 24.14.
First, that Religion is the way and immediate duty whereby men serve God: And
further, that true Religion and the right way to serve G d, is that only which
God has revealed to men. Now God spoke to the Fathers in old time by the
Prophets, declaring his will herein by peece-meale or by sundry parts, and in
sundry manners; but in these last days (says the Apostle) he has spoken to
us by his Son, Heb. 1.1.
that is, by Jesus Christ. In which words the nature of the opposition of these
two revelations of the will of God, declares that by Jesus Christ his only
Son, God has revealed his will concerning true Religion, and the right way
to worship and serve him, not any more by parts, but wholly and fully, nor in
any manner that may be after changed, as was the worship of the Fathers, but in
a manner certain, unchangeable, and to remain for ever.

This Religion our Savior Jesus Christ first taught in his own sacred person,
as it is declared in the history of the Gospel written by four witnesses, two
Apostles and two Evangelists: after by his commandment, his holy Apostles
preached and published the same Religion to all Nations. For the preaching
whereof unto them while they yet remained at Jerusalem, Acts 1.5, 8.
according to his promise they were baptized with the holy Ghost and with fire.
By which holy Spirits inspiration, Acts 2.3, 4.
they being clothed with power from above, and having received the miraculous
gift to speak with strange languages, and a mighty increase of all spiritual
graces needful for that service, so spoke of the great works of God to the
Jews, that from all parts of the world were come to Jerusalem, that the same
day there were added to the Church about 3000. persons. Acts 2.4.1.
Acts 8.1.
After by reason of the persecution that was raised against those that received
their doctrine, and other occasions that God disposed, their doctrine was
published in diverse Countries; Acts 11.26.
and at Antioch in Syria so prevailed, that there first the Disciples were
na^ed Christians, of Christ whose Religion they received; of which beginning
and proceeding of the Gospel, to the time of the Apostle Paul's imprisonment at
Rome, the Evangelist Luke has written the undoubted certainty in his history
of the Acts of the Apostles, which story is enlarged by that was written also
hereof by some of the Apostles themselves in their Epistles, and also in the
Revelation.

By which sacred books of the new Testament, it most certainly and manifestly
appears what the religion and doctrine was which our Savior Christ and his
Apostles taught, and Christian Churches after professed that continued in their
doctrine: And this is summarily that most holy faith and true Christian
religion which is now professed in England, and established by public
Authority. Thus summarily answers is made to that is here desired.

CHAP. II. The particulars of our Religion professed in England.
NOw for further satisfaction in the particular points of our Religion now
professed in England, it is to be understood that there are two books
established by public and highest authority amongst us, wherein are declared
the particular points of Christian Religion, as they now are received and
professed in England; the one of these is entitled the book of Articles of
Christian Religion agreed in the Convocation, in the year of our Lord 1562. In
which book is declared shortly in several Articles, the whole doctrine of
Faith, and of the Sacraments which we profess.

The other is the book of divine Service and common Prayer, wherein is set
down the whole order whereby we serve God publicly in our Churches. In these
two, or in either of them (for substance) is contained the declaration of our
Religion: wherefore if the Religion delivered in either of these b^e proved to
be the same which Christ and his Apostles taught, and that which for any part
whereof true Martyrs of ancient time have suffered, then is that proved which
is here desired, which proof at this time it seems most convenient to be
made, especially of the book of divine Service. For the Law with us requires
especially to serve God, according to such form as is established by
Authority, and set down in the book of divine Service and common Prayer.
Therefore to yield satisfaction to such Roman Catholic Recusants as are
offended at such parts thereof as differ from the Liturgy of the Church of
Rome, such principal parts of the said divine Service are here to be
justified to be established amongst us according to that Doctrine which our
Savior Christ and his Apostles have delivered.

For performance whereof, it is to be understood, that there are sundry points
of Religion set down in the said book, whereof no pretended Catholic is
supposed to make any doubt: Of this sort it is that the said Book appoints
the reading of the holy Scriptures of both the Testaments, and particularly out
of the old Testament, of the Law of the two Tables containing the ten
Commandments of Almighty God; and out of the new Testament, of the Lords
Prayer. Of like kind also it is that in the same, our faith in many of the
highest and most sacred mysteries of Christian Religion, is declared and
professed in three of the most ancient and notable Confessions of Christian
faith that have been gathered out of the Scriptures in any former ages: Of
which Confessions or Creedes as they are commonly called, the first and most
ancient is that which usually is called the Apostles Creed, because it
contains many principal points of the Doctrine of the Apostles, and in a
great part, follows from one degree to another the Story of the Gospel,
concerning the sundry degrees of the humiliation and glory of our Savior
Christ.

The other two, are somewhat larger declarations of the same points of doctrine
that are in the former; of which Confessions or Creedes, the one is of
Athanasius, that resolute and constant Professor of Christ, worthy in honor to
be immortal in the Church according to his name.

The other, the Creed set forth by the first and most famous oecumenicall
Council of Nice: Besides these, though not expressed in this book, the Laws
of England so receive the holy determinations of all the first four general
Councels, in that they agreeably to the Scriptures determined of the doctrine
concerning Christ's two natures, of God and Man; and of the Unity of his Person,
and of the Godhead of the holy Ghost, against the damnable Heresies of Arius,
Nestorius, Eutyches, and Macedonius, as they ordain punishment by death upon
any that shall obstinately maintain the foresaid Heresies.

Moreover, the said book appoints the order for the administration of both
the Sacraments, instituted by our Savior Christ, as signs and seals of the
Gospel of Christ and of the righteousness that is by Faith; viz. Baptism, the
Sacrament of our new birth; and the Lords Supper, the Sacrament of our
continual nourishment by him to life everlasting. Finally the same book
contains (besides the Lords prayer, the true rule and direction whereby all
other are framed) many other godly prayers for all estates and degrees, and
applied to the confession of our sins, to the administration of the Sacraments,
and other like occasions of the Church. Thus far of such particulars as it is
to be thought no Christian doubts but that they are from God. Wherefore the
proof to be made seems needful only in such points as our Church has
reformed in the Religion and Liturgy professed and used in the Church of Rome.

Now therefore the principal things of difference between our divine S^ruice
and the Liturgy of the Church of Rome, follow to be considered in the
principal parts thereof, after that two points have been debated, which are
to be regarded in them all; whereof the former is, the subject or person, that
is to say, who it is that with S^ruice of Religion ought to be served and
worshipped by us: In the Church of England, God only is worshipped with divine
service; not any creature or dead things, as Images, relics, and su^n like.
in England by public Authority, with Divine service, the law intends that
only the true eternal God the Almighty creator of heaven and earth, and the
Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, is to be religiously served and honored by us.
For which cause it is ordained that the word of God be read and expounded, that
his Sacraments be administered, and that all our prayers be made to God, and to
God alone: And by like Authority there are learned Homilies set out declaring
and proving that to worship creatures in themselves or in their Images, and to
have them in Churches, is not lawful. Now in some former time by the authority
of the Sea of Rome our Churches and Temples in England were wont to be full of
Images, some representing God, and the sacred Mystery of the Persons in the
Godhead, and some representing Jesus Christ, both otherwise, and specially as
he was crucified; besides these, there was also almost an innumerable
multitude of Images representing the Saints departed out of this life, besides
many other, of whose Christian virtues there appeared little proof.

And as these Images were brought into the Churches, so they were by like
authority served and worshipped, with garments, ornaments, kissing, kneeling,
creeping, candlelight, censing, reading their Legends, finging Anthemes, and
making prayers to them, and to their honor, or at least to their honor that
were represented by them.

Which being so, it is to be considered what our Savior Christ and his
Apostles taught concerning the subject of diuin^ Service, that so it might
appear that our Religion and manner of serving God in England, is the same in
this respect that was taught by them, and that the other of the Sea of Rome is
directly contrary to their Doctrine.

Our Savior Chist taught that God is a Spirit, Ioh. 4.23, 24.
and that whosoever will worship him aright, must worship him in spirit and
truth: whereby it is plain that the Godhead or any person of the Godhead,
cannot be represented by an Image. For if no Art of a man, can truly represent
the soul of a man, because it is a spiritual substance which no bodily thing
can truly represent, much less can the spiritual substance of God be
represented, which without all comparison is more simple. Romans 1. verse 18. to
24, 25.
For which cause the Apostle says that the Gentiles representing God by
creatures, were guilty of lying, and turned that which God truly is into a
false resemblance. In which respect also the Prophets call such Images teachers
of lies, Hab. 2.18.19 Ier. 10.8.
which is manifest so to be; because it is a false representation to represent
Eternity by that which had a beginning, incorruption by that which is
corruptible, the creator by the creature; and that more false, then if a man
would rep^esent the day by the night, light by darkness, and life by death.

Moreover, Romans 1.24. to the end.
the Apostle there teaches, that God held himself so highly dishonored
thereby, as for that cause, he gave them over to their own lusts to dishonor
themselves with all kind of shameful dishonor and abominable iniquities.

Whereunto the some Apostle does add in another place, 1 Cor. 6.9.
that Idolaters shall not inherit the Kingdom of God: Revel 21.8.
Likewise in the Revelation it is said, that Idolaters, together with dogs,
I^ chanters, Harlots and Liars, shall not enter into the City of God, the
heavenly Jerusalem. Moreover, our Savior Christ teaches concerning the
worship of God agreeably to the Law, saying, it is written. Math. 4.
Thou shall worship the Lord thy God, and him only shall thou serve. By which
words he declares it to be utterly unlawful to worship any creature with the
worship that is due unto God; and further that all religious kneeling and
adoration is to be yielded to God only. Which is agreeable to the ancient
commandment that so commands God to be worshipped, Exodus 20.4.
as it forbids by way of Religion and to worship with religious worship, the
likeness of any creature either in heaven or in earth, or in the waters under
the earth; against the transgressors of which commandment the Lord declares
himself most provoked to vengeance in comparing his anger to the anger of
aiealous man, that will not be pacified by any means, but will be a^enged
upon the adulterer. Likewise in that he adds further a terrible commination
against Idolaters, whom he there declares to hold for his enemies and such as
hate him, in threatening to visit, that is, to punish their sins in their
children, and also in their childrens children to the third and fourth
generation.

For which cause the Apostle John exhorts all Christians to beware of Idols,
saying, 1 John 5.21.
Little children keep your selves from Idols, or take ye heed and beware of
Images. 1 Cor. 10.14
So the Apostle Paul writes to the Corinthians, saying, My beloved fly from
Idolatry. 1 These. 1.9.
Likewise the same Apostle in all his ministry sought to withdraw as the
Corinthians and the Thessalonians, so all other gentiles from the service of
Idols to serve the true God. Acts 17.16.
For which cause also being at Athens and greiued in spirit to see their City
wholly addicted to the service of Idols, did most zealously endeavor both in
the Synogogues of the Jews, and in the market place upon all occasions, and in
the highest Court of Justice, to dissuade them from those vain and impious
services, and exhort them to worship only the true God the creator of heaven
and earth.

To which end also in another place he showing that true Christians (because
they are the Temples of God) ought to have nothing to do with Idols, says,
What participation has Justice with iniquity, 2 Cor. 6.14.15.
or what communion has light with darkness, or what communion can Christ have
with Belial, or what part can a faithful man have with an Infidel, or what
agreement can the Temple of God have with Idols? Wherefore go ye out from the
midst of them, and separate your selves says the Lord, and touch no vncleanc
thing, and then I will receive you, and I will be your father and you shall be
my sons and daughters; says the Lord God Almighty. This is that our Savior
Christ and his Apostles taught concerning the worshipping of God only, and the
avoiding with all zealous detestation the service of Idols, and Images, and
relics, and of any creature.

Now in times past, contrary to this doctrine, our Churches were full of Idols
and Images, and such religious adoration and service was yielded and done unto
them, adoration in bodily gestures of uncovering the head unto them, of kissing
them, and bowing the body and the knee unto them, and such like service; in
covering them with garments, adorning them with ornaments, incensing of them,
burning candles before them, bestowing gifts upon them, making vows, and going
of Pilgrimages unto them, with other such like services.

But the Lord vouchsafing us mercy, stirred up the spirit of our renowned
Princes, to reform such enormities, as many virtuous Kings of Judah had done
the like before them; and having caused the Temples and Churches to be
cleansed from all such Idols and Idolatry, straightly charged and commanded all
their Subjects, abandoning all these vain and most impious services to Idols,
to worship the true and living God, and to yield religious adoration and
service to him only.

On the contrary, in all places yet subject to the Sea of Rome, the Temples are
full of Images, yea private houses, public streets, and highways, and
nothing either so private or so public, where these Idols are not. By which
comparison it manifestly appears that our Religion in England, for this point
of the subject of divine Service, is that which was taught by Christ and his
Apostles; and the service of the Sea of Rome is directly contrary to it, and
full of Idolatry. But some think to avoid all that the Scriptures speak
against Idols and Idolatry by a distinction or two; for which end
distinguishing between (...) and (...), they say that this latter only, that
is, (...), is forbidden to be given to creatures; but the former, that is,
(...), may be given to some creatures, yea and to some also a higher worship
which they call (...). But this distinction cannot serve to excuse the worship
and service done to Images by such as are subject to the Sea of Rome: For the
people ignorant of this distinction (if there were any such in the Scriptures)
could not possibly be kept from Idolatry by it, but would be in continual
danger to pass the bounds of worship prescribed, and to give to their Images
the honor of Almighty God. But the Scriptures make no such distinction at all,
but indifferently use both these alike, to note the sernice and servants of
God. Our Savior says, (...).
Ye cannot serve God and mammon. Likewise the Apostle Paul calls himself,
The Servant of Christ. Romans 1.1. Gal. 1.10. (...).


Likewise in the Acts of the Apostles, all the Apostles call themselves by the
same word, the Servants of God. Of the Thessalonians it is said that they had
been turned to God from Idols, Acts 2.29. 1 These. 1.9. (...).
to serve the true and living God; and in like manner in diverse other places,
whereby it is plain, that this distinction has no ground in the word of God.

Moreover, by the same word it appears that such services as the Sea of Rome
ordains to be done to their Images, are such as are due to God only, and for
yielding whereof to Images, their worshippers are charged with Idolatry. This
is proved by that the law speaking of all similitudes of things says, Thou
shall not bow down to them nor serve them, And in the first book of the
Kings. 1 King. 19.18
19. ver. 18. it is said, I have left 7000. in Israel which have not bowed the
knee to Baal, and whose mouth has not kissed him. To. 11.4.


Further in the second book of Kings, chap. 18. ver. 14. it is written of the
virtuous and zealous King Ezekias, that he took away the high places, brake
down the Images, cut down the groves, and that he beat into powder the brazen
Serpent which Moysus had made, because the Israelits to that day had offered
incense to it, and called it Nehustan, that is, a piece of brass. By which
places it appears, that for the services of bowing the knee to the Image of
Baal, and of kissing his Image, and of censing the brazen Serpent, such
worshippers are reproved as Idolaters. And these with many other like are the
services that by the ordinances and practice of the Sea of Rome are daily done
to Images, by those which cleave still to that Sea; whereof it follows, that
for the same causes they are justly charged with Idolatry. On the contrary part
it appears, that our Religion yielding all religious Service only to the
true eternal God, and giving no such service to any Image or creature
whatsoever, is the same that was taught by our Savior Christ and by his
Apostles.

Yet for excuse of such Idolatry as has been mentioned, there is yet further
alleged, that the Images of the heathen men only are Idols, and not the
Images of Christians and holy men set up in the Churches subject to the Sea of
Rome. But this is plainly confuted by that the Prohibition of the law
forbids bowing down of the body, or any manner of religious service to be
done to the likeness of any thing is heaven, in the earth, Exodus 20.
or in the waters under the earth. Now the Images set up in all the Popish
Churches, are similitudes of some such things, therefore they are by that law
forbidden. Besides, the law commanding God only to be adored, served, and
worshipped religiously, excludes alike from that honor all creatures
whatsoever, Esaias 42.8.
according as it is said I will not give my honor to any other: In regard
hereof the Lord making mention of his Iealousey, Exodus 20.5.
compares with adult^ry that offense done to him in communicating such
adoration and service with any other. Therefore as the wife is no less an
adulteress, that communicates the honor and benevolence due to her husband
alone, with the chief servant he has, as the wife of Potiphar would have done
with Joseph, then if she yield the same to a stranger: So the Idolatry is no
less that is done in communicating these honors with the chief servants of
God, then was the Idolatry of the heathen in yielding of the same to the Lords
of the Gentiles. Sometime the Lord in this respect compares himself also to a
King. Now in like manner they are no less guilty of high treason against a
lawful King that yield his proper regalities and honors to any of his own
subjects, then if they did it to strangers. For the alleagiance being
communicated with any other, high treason is committed, whatsoever the party be
to whom it is yielded, whether it be an enemy or a friend, a stranger or a
subject, one that is far off, or of the nearest about him, and of cheifest
dignity in his Court.

For these are duties that will not admit of any participation and fellowship
with any other, but are to be yielded wholly and only to the sovereign King
and lawful Husband. And as whatsoever is otherwise is adultery and high
treason; so in the case of religious adoring and worshipping, whatsoever is
yielded to any creature, or to the Image and likeness of any creature, is the
sin of Idolatry. Therefore the difference betwixt the parties represented by
the Images, cannot excuse the matter. Moreover, that such adoration and service
is not to be excused may appear, in that often times the people of Israel and
others, are reproved for worshipping the Sun, the Moon, the Stars, and
all the host of heaven. Likewise in that the censing of the brazen Serpent is
accounted Idolatry, notwithstanding that at the beginning it had been set up
by Gods express commandment for another purpose, and that it in a sort
represented Christ Crucified, and lifted up on high by the preaching of the
Gospel, that all which should look upon him and behold him with the eye of
Faith, might be saved from the power and sting of Satan the old Serpent.

The same may be also proved by that the Apostle Paul, Act. 14.14.
when they would have sacrificed to him (which was no more then offering
incense to this effect) rent his clothes, and with great zeal detested it,
that any such thing should be done unto him. The Apostle Peter also being
respected and reverenced by Cornelius, Acts 10.25, 26.
with so much reverence as seemed to him might be dangerous to prove offensive
to God, withdrew him earnestly from it, and acknowledged himself to be his
fellow servant.

The worship of Angels is likewise reproved in the Epistle to the Colossians:
and the Apostle John, Col. 2.18.
ravished upon the sudden with admiration of the Angel that had revealed so
great Mysteries unto him, and worshipping him, was forbidden by the Angel,
Revel. 19.10.
acknowledging himself to be fellow servant with John, Revel. 22.8, 9.
and exhorted to yield that honor to God only. And if such honor be not to
be given to the Apostles of Christ, nor yet to the Angels in heaven; surely it
is not to be given to any other creature, much less to their Images.

Hereunto may be added, that the Images of Christians, are as well the
workmanship of men, as those of the Heathen were. Further also, that the
Images even of the Apostles and of Christ himself, were for their matter like
to the Images of the Heathen, being made of wood, stone, metal, or such like
matters. The outward shape also is no other. Likewise it ^s to be said as well
of them as of the other, Psalm. 115.4, 5, 6, 7, 8.
That they have eyes to see, yet they see not; ears to hear, but they hear
not; feet to go, but walk not, but stand in need to be lifted up to the
place where they stand, and to be nailed to it least they fall down; Therefore
no such Images are to be honored, nor to be suffered in Christian Churches.

For these and such like are the reasons for which the worshippers of Images
are reprocued by the Scriptures as Idolaters: viz. because they worship the
works of men's hands, they worship things that are dead, as stocks and stones,
false representations, and lying shapes, that have likeness of senses and
life, and yet are endued with no seen nor power of life; and finally, such
things as can neither do good nor hurt to men, but need men's help to stand,
and may be burnt or otherwise consumed by them.

This is the doctrine of our Savior Christ and of his Apostles concerning this
point, that God only is to be religiously worshipped, and that no creatures or
their Images are to be adored. After that also a long time, the same doctrine
was acknowledged, and the worship of Images reproved. For declaring whereof it
may suffice here to set down that which is reported by Epiphanius himself,
and is translated by Jerome. Epiphanius in his letter to John the Bishop of
Jerusalem, writes hereof in this manner: I found in a Church at Anablatha, a
veil hanging in the door of the Church, stained and painted, and having the
Image as of Christ, or of some holy man; for I do not well remember whose Image
it was: Therefore when I saw the Image of a man to hang in the Church of
Christ, contrary to the authority of the Scriptures, I cut it in pieces, and
gave counsel to the Keepers of the place, rather to wind it up, and carry out
to burial in it some poor man deceased. And a little after, I pray you
command that such veiles be not hanged in the Church of Christ, which are
against our Religion.

Here might be showed the story, from what beginning and by what degrees this
corruption entered and prevailed in the Church, till at length the second
council of Nice directly against the word of God and all ancient practice of
the Church, decreed the setting up of Images in the Churches, and worshipping
of them

For that the Doctrine of our Savior Christ and of his Apostles was contrary
hereunto, and the same which our Church in England does teach and maintain,
whereof here is question, has been already declared. Therefore touching the
first point of our religion in divine service, which concerns the subject,
which is, that God only is to be religiously worshipped, and not Images, or
yet any creature whatsoever: Thus it has been proved which was disired, that
our Religion herein is that which the Lord Jesus himself and his most
faithful ministers the Apostles taught and delivered.

Now follows the second point of those which are common to all divine
Services, that is, in what language or tongue it is to be performed: wherein
the doctrine and practice of our Church in England is, that it be administered
in a speech known, and understood by all the people.

In which practice it is now to be showed that we have our Religion in this
respect, in like manner from Christ and his Apostles, teaching and ordaining
such administration of it.

CHAP. III. Divine Service is to be administered in a language which the people
understand.
Our Savior Christ performed his own Ministry in a speech understood by all
the people; for he read and expounded the Scriptures to them in a tongue which
they understood, as it appears, Luke 4. He prayed also in like manner, John
17.

Further also in saying, Hear ye Moses and the Prophets, he commands the
reading and exposition of their writings to be performed in a language that
might be understood; for otherwise they could not hear them with any
understanding, but should be as deaf men; whereas his meaning there is, that
they should so hear, as they might be taught thereby, and forewarned to govern
the course of their life, as they might avoid the torments of hell. Likewise
he taught his Disciples to pray in a tongue which they understood, and in
them, so instructed all other that should be his Disciples after, to call upon
God in a speech known by them, both in the Form he taught them saying, When
ye pray, say thus: Our Father, etc. and by the direction of that prayer, to
make all our petitions private and public.

Instituting also the Sacrament of Baptism, he commanded his Disciples, Math.
28.
To preach the Gospel unto all nations, and to baptize such as should believe;
which teaching and believing necessarily implies the use of a speech known in
the administration of Baptism.

In like manner he instituted and administered the Sacrament of his Supper
amongst his Disciples in a speech which they understood, and charged them as
often as they should do the like, to preach his death until his coming again;
wherefore it is plain, that he intended the Sacraments should not be dumb
shows and spectacles, but that they should be so administered as the people
might know and understand the meaning of them. Finally, after his ascension,
amongst other spiritual graces, Acts 2.
he endued the Apostles with the gift of tongues, whereby the same day they
spoke to the Jews that were then from all nations assembled at Jerusalem, the
great acts and mighty works of God.

For it is expressly written, and that the people marvelled that they heard
them speak every one in the language of the Country wherein they had been
borne.

By which miraculous gift, bestowed first upon the Apostles, then after upon
many other, and by such use of it in teaching the people of every nation in
their own language, it is manifest, that our Savior Christ's ordinance is,
that divine Service should be administered in a speech understood by all the
people.

This is also confirmed in that the Apostle Paul in his former Epistle to the
Corinthians Chap. 14. says, that the ordinances set down by him in that place
(amongst which this was one, that no man should speak in the Church and
Assembly of the people a strange language not under stood by them, except it
were interpreted) are the commandments of the Lord, that is, of Jesus Christ.
Thus then it appears to be the practice and ordinance of Christ, that divine
Service should be administered in a speech which the people understand.

Now that the Apostles taught the same is likewise manifest: for first, that
their practice was such, appears, Acts 2. Where having received the gift of
tongues they employed it rightly to that end for which it was given, and spoke
to men of diverse tongues in the language of the Country wherein they were
borne. And this was the general practice of the Apostles, as appears in the
book of their Acts.

Now the Apostle Paul debating this matter at large, 1 Cor. 14.
not only teaches manifestly, that all divine Service should be performed in
the Church in a speech which the people understand, but confirms this
doctrine by many reasons. In which discourse it appears that divine Service
ought to be administered to Gods glory. verse 47.
For it being the Lords commandment that it should be so performed, as the
Apostle there calls it, it is for the glory of God, that with all due
obedience it be so performed: Besides this, the reason of this commandment
does likewise prove it, which is, that by such means the knowledge of God is
enlarged; Acts 2.
the great and marvelous works of God, as his Creation, Providence, and
redemption of the world by his only begotten Son; his laws and his
commandments, the promises of the Gospel preached in the Word, and set out in
the Sacraments, which are of forgiveness of sins, of life, and immortality
to every one that believes, and such like; are made known to men, to Gods
unspeakable glory, as it was by the Apostles. By that means also the people
understand the prayers and thanksgiving which are made by the minister, yield
therein consent to such services of God, and together with him, do God that
honor, that thereby they acknowledge all good gifts to come from him, and
therefore that they ought to be desired of him by prayer, and that he is to be
glorified for them with all thanksgiving. Therefore that God may be honored
with all this honor, it behooves and is necessary, that he be served in the
Church in a speech that the people understand.

Furthermore, the edification of the people does require the same, 1 Cor. 14.26.
concerning which it is the Lords express commandment, That in the Church all
things should be done to their Edification.

By edification is meant their furtherance in the knowledge of God, in the
understanding of the Scripture, in faith, in obedience, in comfort, and all
Christian duties. But none of these can be furthered in the people, if the
Minister use a language which the people does not understand. Therefore it is
necessary for the instruction and comfort of the people, that the Scriptures be
read and expounded, the Sacraments administered, the Prayers and thanksgiving
be made in the Church, in a speech that all the people does understand.

On the contrary part, by administering of divine Service in a speech not
understood by the people, both God is dishonored, and the people are suffered
to perish.

For touching the first point, Gods commandments of the right use of his
gift: of tongues, of doing all things in the Church to edification, are
broken, God is also highly dishonored, in that the knowledge of him is kept
from the people, that his name is taken in vain, and Service profaned, and
his people suffered to perish in ignorance and disobedience. Concerning the
peoples perishing by this means it is plain, in that the blind led by the
blind must needs perish. By this means they do remain in their sins, and
namely, in the ignorance of God: which howsoever the adherents of the Church of
Rome teach to be the mother of devotion, the word of God teaches to be the
just cause of error, disobedience and destruction.

For it is said, Math 22.29.
that the servant that knows not the will of his Master shall be beaten, Luke
12.47, 48.
it is said indeed with few stripes in comparison of the many stripes wherewith
they shall be beaten which know their Masters will and do it not: but by those
few stripes are meant everlasting torments, 1 These. 1.7, 8, 2.
as the Apostle Paul teaches saying, And to you which are troubled, rest with
us, when the Lord Jesus shall show himself from heaven with his mighty Angels,
in flaming fire, rendering vengeance unto them that do not know God, and which
obey not the Gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ, which shall be punished with
everlasting perdition, from the presence of the Lord-and from the glory of his
power.

Now as the Church is edified by him that prophecieth, 1 Cor. 14, 3, 4.
and receives instruction, exhortation, comfort and direction whereby they may
join together in Prays and thanksgiving: So on the contrary they want all
these means when divine Service is administered in a strange tongue which they
do not understand. For the minister speaks not to them, that is, to their
understanding; and therefore whatsoever heavenly doctrine be read or delivered
in a strange tongue, the people is nothing instucted by it, but departs from
the Church as ignorant of God, and of all godlynes as they came to it. And as
he that is ignorant is not instructed in any thing, so he that is dull and
sloathfull in his duty to God or man according to Gods commandment, is not
furthered by exhortation, nor he that is heavy in heart is not comforted; verse
16.
likewise when the minister prays or gives thanks, he can neither pray nor
give thanks with him, nor answer firly to any thing he pronounces, because he
understands not what it is that he says.

For this cause the Apostle says, that their understanding remains
fruitelesse, and that five words spoken to their understanding, were more
worth then many thousands in that sort. And in respect of the Prophet or
minister he says, that in so doing, verse 2, 9.
he speaks (in regard of any benefit of the people) as if he spoke into the
air and his speech vanished away with the wind, without profit to any.

Furthermore he says, verse 7, 8, 9.
that the minister so speaking is like one that should sound a trumpet, or
strike a harp or anyother Instrument without distinction of sounds: whereby he
intends, that as the people not understanding could receive by it no
direction in battle, to march or retire, or in other actions what to do, or
whereunto to prepare and dispose themselves: So in the service of God, they
know not what they are directed unto, whether to pray to God, or to give him
thanks, or to what other part of the Service of God they are to apply
themselves.

Moreover, verse 11.^0, 23.
the Apostle affirms that where this disorder has place, they are as
Barbarians one to another, they are as little children in understanding, yea,
they will seem to be out of their wits, and destitute of common sense and
reason.

Finally, the Apostle adds, that to speak to the people in a language they
do not understand, is a token and sign of Gods wrath and anger to them. Which
may be easily understood by some like thing in our life with men. For if a
servant or a son that has offended his Lord and Father, or a subject that
has transgressed the laws of his Prince, should present himself to him to
crave pardon of his offense, and to pray to understand his pleasure, that he
may perform it in time to come; if that Lord, that Father, or that King shall
not graciously comfort his supplyant, but speak to him in a tongue that he
understands not, and so dismiss him, is not that a manifest figne of his
anger and indignation? Even so when any assembly of Christian people shall
gather themselves together, to present themselves to God, to crave of him grace
and pardon for their sins, to offer their petitions and service to him, it must
needs be an heavy and uncomfortable token unto them of Gods high displeasure
toward them, when he vouchsafes not to speak any gracious words unto them
that they can understand, but speaks to them in a strange language. Hereby
therefore it appears, that to have divine Service administered in a tongue not
understood by the people, is contrary to the doctrine of our Savior Christ and
his Apostles; yea, and that it is childish, barbarous, and contrary to common
sense and reason, unprofitable for the people, yea a hinderance to them, and a
means to keep them in ignorance, and all ungodliness, and a sign of Gods
indignation against them, and a high dishonor to almighty God by the
transgession of his commandments, and taking his name in vain. Contrariwise
hereby it appears, that to administer divine Service in a tongue understood
by the people, is profitable for them, and fit to further them in the
knowledge, faith, and obedience of God; and as honorable to God by making
known his goodness, mercy, Justice, greatness, and pe^fection in all
respects unto his Church and people. This is confirmed also at large by the
Apostle Paul, in his former Epistle to the Corinthians Chap. 14, as it has
beened clared. Hereunto may be added that it appears by the 33, and 36.
verses, that the Apostle ordained thus in all other Churches that were taught
by him, and that the Church of Corinth, in that disorder, differed both from
the Church of Jerusalem and from all other Churches that at that time had
received the Gospel.

Further also it appears, that in all ages before, the true Church served God
with knowledge and understanding of that was taught them, and yielded to God
their Service in such sort as they knew what duty it was, which they performed
unto him. For first almighty God himself deli^ered the two tables of the ten
commandments, in that speech which the people understood.

After also by his commandment often times repeated, both Moses, and the
Priests, Exo. 19, 9. Exo. 20.18.19. Deuteronomy. 5, 10, 11 28, 29.30, etc.
are charged to teach the people to hear and know, learn and observe, the low
of God. Particularly the law commanded that the King should write the copy of
the law in a book, coppied out of that book which was kept by the leuitical
Priests, Deuteronomy. 6.1, 2, 3. etc.
wherein he is charged to read all the days of his life, chap. 17.18, 19.
Deuteronomy. 12.1.27.1. etc. 29.1. etc.
that he may learn to fear the Lord his God, and to observe and do all his
commandments. In many places of the books of Moses, and especially in the
book of Deuteronomy. it is said, that Moses taught all the people the commandments
and statutes which the Lord had delivered unto him. Ios. 1.10, 11. etc.
Iosuah in like manner dealt with all the people, instructing and exhorting
them to the observation of the statutes which God had delivered unto them.

In the like manner did David, 1 Chronicles. 16.2, 4, 7, 35, 36, 37.
and all the Prophets, delivering Psalms and other books of Scriptures in the
Hebrew tongue for the public use of the Church of Israel, which they had
indicted in the Hebrew tongue, the common speech of all the people.

Likewise Solomon, 1 Chton. 25.2, 5, and 28.2, 8. etc. 1 Kings ^^, 55, 57, 58,
61, 62.
David's son, at the dedication of the Temple which he had builded, made his
solemn prayers and public supplications unto God, in the hearing of all the
people, in their own Hebrew tongue which they best understood.

And of Josias it is also particularly recorded, 2 Kings 22.11 and 23.2, 3. etc.
that he read in the hearing of all the people from the greatest to the least
of them, all the words of Gods Covenant which had been found in the house of
the Lord.

After the captivity also we read, Ezra 8.21. and 9.5, ^. and 10.1.
that Ezra at a public feast once or twice made his earnest supplication unto
God for all the people, they hearing and so understanding him, that men, women,
and children, wept and lamented exceedingly.

And in the book of Nehemiah it is written, Ezra did read the book of the
law of God from morning to midday before all the people, men, women, and all,
that for understanding were fit to hear, and that all the people was attentive
to the book of the law, and when Ezra blessed, all the people said Amen, Nehe.
8.2, 3, 4, 7, 8, 9, 10, etc.
Amen, with lifting up their hands, and bowing down their heads, they
worshipped God with their faces toward the ground.

In the time of our Savior Christ, the Apostle James says, Moses was read
and preached every Sabbath in the Synagogues, Acts 15.21. and 13.15.
of which custom we read an example in the 13 of the Asts, where it is said,
that after the reading of the law and the Prophets, Paul and Barnabas were
willed to exhort the people.

Of the example of our Savior Christ, it is expressly written, as has been
touched before, Luke 4.16, 17, 21, 22.
that he entered into the Synagogue of Nazareth upon the sabbath day as his
manner was, and there standing up to read, when the book of the Prophet Esaias
had been delivered to him, he opened it and read that which is written in the
beginning of the 61 Chap. of that Prophecy. And further that having delivered
again the book, he sat down, and the eyes of all that were in the
Synogogue were bent upon him. To whom having said, that that Scripture was
fulfiled that day in their hearing, they all bare him witness that it was so,
and marvelled at the speeches full of grace that proceeded out of his mouth.

The like practice of the Apostles in their Liturgy and public ministry in
the Church at Jerusalem appears in the book of the Acts, and namely, in
these places Acts 2, 4, 7, 8, 14, 22, 37, 38, 40, 41, 42, 46, 47. Throughout
the same book, and likewise in all Epistles of the Apostles it is plain, that
this was their practice amongst the dispersed Jews and the Churches of the
Gentiles, as of the Romans, Corinthians, and the rest; yea that they did so
ordain in all Churches in their time, 1 Cor. 14.33, 36, 37.

For the time succeeding, it appears by the Apologeticall writings of Justin
Martyr, Tertullian, and others, that the Liturgies in their time, were such as
the people understood. The like appears in Jerome, who was so desirous to
further the knowledge of Religion in the common sort, as he translated the
Scriptures, into the Dalmaticall, and Sclauonian tongue, for the use of his
Country men.

Origens Hexapla and Octopla books, setting out the Scripture in so many
diverse translations, witness the like care and desite in him. And of others,
Augustine writes, that the Latin translations were not to be num^red The
Liturgies that go under the name of Basil, and Chrysostom, declare also, that
in the time wherein they were written, when soever it was (for they cannot be
of their time, but latter) the Church understood the Scripture, Prayer,
Thanksgiving, and other parts of divine Service that was administered amongst
them. And in the East Church it continued so ^^long time, as app^areth by many
exhortations of Chrysostom, and other of the Greek Teachers, to the reading
of the Scriptures, and by some parts of the Liturgy, whereof mention is made
in their writings. So did it like wise long continue in the West Church, even
till almost all things were corrupted, and that darkness had over cast the
face of the heavens, and taken the light thereof from these parts of the earth;
namely, in the Church of Rome^ which howsoever it has prevailed and continued
a long time in diverse parts, and especially in these of the West; yet in this
blessed age of reformation, it has pleased God to drive away that darkness,
and to cause the light of his countenance so comfortably to shine unto us
again, as that now in our own tongue Gods holy word is read and expounded
unto us, the Sacraments administered, Prayers, and thanksgiuinges are offered up
unto God, and the whole Service of God in England is performed in a speech
which all our English people understand. In which respect it has been proved,
that our Religion in England, is that which was taught by our Savior Christ
and his holy Apostles. And thus much may suffice also for this point, being the
second general here considered in all Divine Service.

CHAP. IIII. Of the reading and expounding to the people the word of God, and
not the Legends and fables of men.
Now it follows to proceed to declare the like in the sundry parts of Gods
Service. The chief parts of divine Service (as the Apostles teach, speaking of
their ministry to whom first the dispensation of Christian Religion, and of the
mysteries of God, and the whole administration of Gods Service then was
committed) consists in the Word of God, whereunto belong the Sacraments as
visible words, setting out the same doctrine of the Gospel; and in Prayer
whereunto also thanksiguing is to be referred. For thus are performed
whatsoever the Ministers are to declare unto the Church in Gods behalf, and
what duty and feruice the Church offers unto God on the^ part. Wherefore all
Divine Service consisting in these two principal parts; and the former hereof
being the administration of the word, and that first in the reading and
expounding of the Scriptures: the next thing to be showed is, that our
Religion and service of God in England, in that concerns the reading and
expounding the word of God and no Legends or fables, is such as was taught by
Jesus Christ and his Apostles.

For clearing whereof, it is first to be understood, that in England it is
appointed that the holy Scriptures, the writings of Moses, the Prophets, and
Apostles, be read unto the people, and not any Legends of Saints (as they are
called) or other like uncertain or fabulous writings, as have been used and
commanded to be read in the churches subject to the Sea of Rome. Now thus to
serve God, that our Savior Christ, and his Apostles, have taught, may appear
by their doctrine and practice.

Our Savior Christ says by Abraham, Luke 16.29, 31.
They have Moses and the Prophets, hear they them. And again, If they hear
not Moses and the Prophets, they would not be persuaded, no although one
should rise from the dead. John 5.39. Math. 22.29. Math. 12.3.7. and 21.16, 41.
Again, he says, Search ye the Scriptures, and Ye are deceived because ye
know not the Seriptures. And how often does he say, Have ye not heard, how
read you? and with many like speeches referring them to the Doctrine of the
Scriptures, declares the ordinance of God, the duty of the people, and the
practice of the Church at that time, to have been such, as that in the
public assemblies that which was read and taught the people was the word of
God, Luke 4.16, 31
and not any fables of the Jews.

Further also the practice of our Savior was agreeable thereunto, for it is
noted to have been his manner and custom, upon the Sabbath days, wherein
Moses was read and expounded unto the Church, to enter into the Synagogues and
to teach the people.

Now this custom of his in one place, is so particularly reported, as that it
is said that he came to Nazareth where he had been brought up, and entered
according as he had been wont into the Synagogue upon the Sabbath day, and
stood up to read; then there was delivered unto him the book of Esaias the
Prophet, which he having unfolded and opened, found the place where it was
written, The Spirit of God, etc. verse 17.
Which text after he had read, he expounded unto them, and out of it preached
the Gospel of the kingdom of God unto them.

And it is further added, that the people heard him and the eyes of all that
were in the Synagogue were fastened upon him: verse 20.
By which place it is manifest that our Savior Christ by this example and
custom of his, did read and expound the word of God, the writings of the holy
Scriptures given by divine inspiration, which are the books that ought to be
read and expounded and preached upon in all Christian Churches, and not vain
discourses such as the Apostle calls old wives tales.

This also was the doctrine and use of the Apostles: For being followers of
Christ, all their Doctrine was out of the Scriptures, as it appears by that
is said Acts 2.42. That the Church continued in the Doctrine of the Apostles.

And in the same Chap. the Apostle Peter, is showed to have taught the Doctrine
of the resurrection of Christ, out of the Psalms: Likewise the same Apostle
writing to the dispersed Jews, 2 Pet. 1.19.
does commend them for attending to the words of the Prophets. Ephe. 2.20.
Likewise by the Apostle Paul, it is written, that the Church is builded upon
the foundation of the Apostles and Prophets, Jesus Christ being the low
cornerstone; which is spoken, in respect of their Doctrine preached by them, in
their time, and after for the substance of it set down in writing by the will
of God, for the use of the Church for ever.

This appears also, in that the Scripture given by the inspitation of God,
Romans 15.4.
is said, to be that which is written, 2, Tim. 3.16, 17.
to teach us, to comfort, to reform, to rebuke, and to instruct in all
righteousness, to make a man wise to Salvation by faith in Christ, and to make
the man of God perfect, fully furnished for any good work. Therefore according
to the ancient ordinance of God, Moses (that is, Act. 15.21.
the Law and books written by Moses) were used to be read (as the Apostle
James testifies) every Sabbath day in the Synagogues. The writings of the
Prophets also were so read amongst them, as it appears by that is written
Acts 13. that after the reading of the Law, and of the Prophets, the Apostle
Paul preached in the Synagogue at Antioche. And of the same Apostle it is said,
that he confirmed Jesus to be Christ; that is, the Messiah promised of God,
Act. 26.12.
by proofs taken out of the Scriptures, and as he testifies of him self,
he taught nothing besides that, which had bin taught before in the Law, and in
the Prophets.

Thus by all these enidences it is manifest, that our Religion in England,
concerning this part of the Service of God, is the same which was taught by our
Savior Christ, and by his Apostles, viz. in that the holy Scriptures are
publicly read unto the people, and also the people is taught Christian
Religion by the expounding and preaching of the same unto them; and that no
foolish fables, nor old wives tales, are read unto them, as they are read unto
the people under the Popes government, which ought not to be.

Of this sort are the Legends of Saints, and namely Legenda aurea, that is, the
golden Legend, containing a report of the Lives and miracles of Saints. But
howsoever they have named it a golden book, yet some of their own writers of
best judgment, (as Ludouicus Vines) censure it for a book written by a man of
a leaden heart, (which is for the baseness of the reports, that are without
wit or reason) and of a brazen forehead, which is for the shameless and
impudent boldness, reporting things so fabulous and incredible; It needs not
to prove this by sundry particulars.

This is plain, by strange devises and reports, concerning persons that never
were, for any thing that appears by any story of credit, as of St. George,
St. Christopher St. Catherine and such like fictions, devices for instructions
of life, as Esops Fables were for morals. It is likewise manifest in many other
of such as have been, and are mentioned by Historiographers, but the reports
there made of them, are so incredible, so fabulous, so homely, and so
ridiculous, as they are not tolerable to be read in any most base company,
much less in the Eclesiasticall assemblies, of a people professing to come
together to learn to know the will of God, and to offer unto him their service
and prayers.

Now that such things ought not to be read in the Church, is manifest, because
the Lord forbids to add to his word, Deuteronomy. 4.2.
and he has given no commandment of hearing any but his own Son, of whom
it is said, Math. 17.5.
Hear ye him. The Scriptures of Divine inspiration, are the only light that
God has given us to be directed by, in things concerning his Service; Psalm.
19.
For of them only it is said, That they are a Lantern unto our feet, and a
light unto our steps. That they are written for our learning, Romans 15.4. That
by patience and consolation of the Scripture, we might have hope. 2 Timothy 3.15.
Likewise, we are taught, That the Scriptures are able to make a man wise to
salvation by faith which is in Christ Jesus; and finally, that they are of use,
for doctrine, reproof, reformation, and instruction in righteousness, 2 Timothy
3.16, 17. 1 Timothy 1.4. and 4.7. 2 Timothy 4.3 4. Tit. ^.14.
that the man of God may be made perfect, and fully accomplished for every
good work and duty. But on the contrary part, there is express Charge given,
not to attend to fables, which are also called profane fables, Jewish fables,
and old wives tales, whereof the Apostle gives so much greater charge because
he did foresee and prophecy, that such times would come in the Church, that
men would turn away their ears from hearing sound Doctrine, and would turn
them to the hearing of tales and fables. And as this part of the mystery of
iniquities was then foreshewed, so after it mightily prevailed, and yet does in
the Church of Rome, but not of many ages after the Apostles time. For Justin
Martyr reporting to the Emperor Antonirus, the order of divine Service used by
the Churches of Christ in his time, says, that they read the writings of the
Prophets and Apostles, and after had exhortations made unto them, grounded upon
the same. Likewise Tertullian declares after his report of the Prayers of the
Church, Lib. apologet.
that they met together also to hear the reading of the Scriptures, for says
he, with such holy voices (meaning the Scriptures) we feed our faith, raise
our hope, fasten our confidence, and strengthen good order by often mention of
the precepts. and further faith, that they had also exhortation and reproves,
and exercise of divine Censures.

After when by process of time such corruption entered, as that other writings
besides the holy Scriptures began to be read in the Church, 2. Coun. of
Carthage, ca. 47.
a Council held at Carthage for the reforming of such disorder; ordained That
nothing besides the holy Scriptures should be read in the Churches under the
name of the holy books. Notwithstanding the mystery of iniquity so prevailed
with time, that in the Churches subject to the Sea of Rome, under pretense of
the lives and miracles of Saints, most sottish and foolish fables and tales
were publicly read in the Church unto the people, wherein it cannot be
uttered, what wrong was done to God, and to his Church. What has chafe to do
with wheat? says the Prophet Jeremy, Chap. Ier. 23.28.
23. verse 28. For the Lord has ordained, that his people should be fedd with
his holy word as with the finest wheat, yea, as with Manna, the bread of
heaven, and they withholding it from the people of God, and keeping it shut up
under a strange language, feed the people with such fables and follies as with
chafe, yea, as with draffe more fit for swine.

The word of God is also a fountain of living water, at which the people of
God may be refreshed with comfort, but they filled up those Springes of life,
Ier. 2.13
and sent them to drink at pits of their own diggings which could hold no
water, and as it were to the filthy channels of the streets, to fetch their
drink there. Should not a people ask counsel of their God? should they go
for counsel from the living to the dead.

Consult they with the Law and the testimony (says the Prophet Esaias) they
which advise otherwise, Esaias, 8.19, 20
is there any spark of light in any of them? Now to consult with the Scripture
which is given by Gods inspiration, is to consult with God, neither is there
now any other ordinary means to consult with God but by his holy word.
Therefore all other means to consult are forbidden and reputed, as if a man
that used them did ask counsel (as Saul pretended) of the dead.

I came unto you, says our Savior, in my Fathers name, and you did not
receive me, but if one come to you in his own name, Ioh. 5.43.
you will receive him: And thus it is with those that receive not the holy
Scriptures, that are the word of Christ, except it be in an unknown tongue;
but read fables and tales to the people, in a speech which they all
understand. It is a marvel that the Sea of Rome is not ashamed of this
enormity unto this day, but that in stead of Gods holy word, that conuerteth
and comfort the soul, they read to the people such ridiculous follies as
pervert and destroy the soul: But howsoever they do thus highly dishonor God
herein, it is manifest, by that which has bin said, that our Religion in
England, in this point also of reading Gods word, and not ridiculous tales to
the Church of God, is the same which was taught by our Savior Christ and his
Apostles.

CHAP. V. Of Preaching.
IN England as we have the word of God publicly read in the Church, and not
any tales and follies; so has it been always the endeavor of our Church,
that the same word of God might be also expounded unto the people, that so
they might be taught to know the Articles of true Christian Religion, with the
grounds thereof delivered in the holy Scriptures, and have it applied to their
instruction in godliness, to the reproof of the disobedient, to the comfort
of the comfortless, and to every good use for which God has ordained it. To
this end, at the ordination of Ministers, they are earnestly exhorted to the
performance of this duty, and there are many bountiful allowances in diverse
parts of the Realm assigned for Preachers to attend upon that Service.

In performance whereof there are also required two things. The one is that the
Doctrine be sound, Tit. 2.8. 2 Timothy 3, 4. 2 Timothy 4.12.
that is, holy, and grounded upon the Scriptures; The other, that this duty be
performed with all faithfulness and diligence. Now in all these points also,
our Religion is the same which was taught by our Savior Christ and by his
Apostles. For our Savior leaving his commission with his Apostles for
publishing of his Gospel, said, Math. 28.19.20.
Teach ye all nations, and Teach them to obscrue whatsoever I have given you
in charge.

Likewise before that time, he had said unto them, who is a faithful and
prudent steward, whom the Lord shall set over his household that he may give
them their portion in due season: Lnke. 12.42.43, 44.
Blessed shall that servant be whom the Lord at his coming shall find so
doing, I tell you truly he will let him over all his goods.

This appears also in the earnest charge thrice given and repeated at one
time to Peter, that as he loved the Lord, Josh. 21.15, 16.17. Tit. 2.8. Tit.
2.7.
he should feed his sheep. Likewise the Apostle Paul charge Titus to
preach the wholesome word that cannot be condemned, and to see that there be
integrity and incorruption in his Doctrine.

And writing to Timothy he exhorts him with a most earnest contestation
before God, 2 Timothy 4.1, 2.
and the Lord Jesus Christ, that is to judge both the quick and the dead at
his illustrous coming, and in his kingdom, that he preach the word, be
instant seasonably and unseasonably, and so forth. So the Apostle Peter with a
like contestation exhorts the Elders of the dispersed Jews to feed the
flock of God that was with them, 1 Pet. 5.1, 2.4.
willingly and with a ready and cheerful mind, and promising them so doing
to receive at the appearing of the Arch-Pastor a Garland that shall not wither,
or of Flower-gentle whose beauty and color does not fade nor wither away. Thus
it is proved that our Savior Christ and his Apostles have taught, that the
word of God should be preached to the people, and that the Doctrine delivered
out of it, should be sound, holy, and warranted by the Scripture, and that the
same ought to be preached with all faithful care, and diligence. Therefore
what godly care and endeavor is amongst us in these respects, is according to
the Doctrine taught by Christ himself and his Apostles.

And of such care, many Injunctions, Constitutions, Canons, Statutes, and Acts
of Parliament, made both for the advancement of preaching of Gods word, and also
for the faithful diligence of the Ministers therein, do plentifully testify.
But especially those are most worthy honor, which provide for the sincerity and
soundness of the Doctrine of faith, and of the Sacraments, set down in the
book of Articles, agreed upon in the Convocation, in the year of our Lord
1562. and in the 13 year of the reign of our late gracious Queen, ordained
to be acknowledged sound and holy, as it is by such as shall take ordinary
care and charge of souls within the Church of England. All which Articles have
been often Justified by many learned Treatises jointly and severally
concerning them. For which cause it seems not needful upon occasion to enter
into the debating and proving of them (which would ask a long time) especially
of the errors of the Sea of Rome which are very many, and were withal to be
confuted.

But if particular questions be moved of any one of them, no necessary duty
shall be wanting, to prove the truth and soundness of that may be doubted
of, and to disprove any error that may be maintained against it. For this
time, and the point that is in hand, it may suffice here to have mentioned the
care of our Church in England, that the word of God be not only read, but
also expounded unto the people, and that by warrant of the same, they may be
taught the truth of Christian Religion, and that with all faithfulness and
diligence, and that herein our Religion is the same which Christ and his
Apopostles taught and delivered unto us.

On the contrary part, exceeding great is the corruption of the Church of Rome
in this behalf. First, in that there have been of many ages so many errors
as have been discovered in their Doctrine, and yet they have confirmed the
same by their last Council holden at Trent, and do still maintain the same,
both by their continual writings, and also at such times as they pretend to
preach the Gospel of Christ unto the people; Further also, how violently
soever they contend that all their Doctrine is true, yet have they little care
to instruct the people in it. This appears, in that it is a Doctrine which
they teach and hold, that ignorance is the mother of devotion. Likewise, in
that they neither read the word of God publicly to the people in a known
Language, nor suffer them privately so to read it. This appears also by that
their parish Priests are generally so ignorant, as hardly one Preacher can be
found amongst them in a great Country. Finally their dispensations for non
residency, and for multiplying of benefices, and for attendance upon other
persons, and matters, are so ordinary, that it manifestly declares, as
experience also has taught, and yet does in most places, that it is one of the
least cares that they have by Preaching to instruct the people.

Whereby it is plain, that herein they are departed from the doctrine and
practice, institution and ordinance of Christ and his Apostles. Luk 21.37, 38.
and 4.16.
For of their continual attendance upon this duty, their earnest charges to
all Ministers of the Gospel, Act. 10.18.19, 20.21.26, 27, 28, 29.30, 31.32. 1,
Pet. 5.2.3, 4. 2, Tim. 4.1.2. Ioh. 21.15, 16.17.
there are manifest testimonies in the Scriptures, from whose examples and
commandments they swaruing so far, declare that they little remember or
regard the earnest obtestation of the Apostle made before God and the Lord
Jesus Christ, and with mention of his glorious Kingdom with coming to judge
the quick and the dead. They little regard the great charge given by our
Savior Christ to the Apostle Peter, that as he loved him he should feed his
sheep. Finally they smally regard either the promise of the Garland that never
withers, or the threatening of the punishment of the unfaithful servant, that
is to be cut in two, and to receive his portion with Hypocrites and Infidels.
Thus as these enormities are justly reproved, so our contrary proceedings in
England are justified in the care that is held, that the doctrine preached
should be holy and true, and that the preachers should faithfully and
diligently instruct the people in the same. And thus much of the word of God
both read and preached in our Churches in England.

CHAP. VI. Of Sacraments.
IT follows to consider of the Sacraments and of prayer. Concerning the
Sacraments, our Church in England does profess, that they are in nature holy
signs and seals of the doctrine of the Gospel, and of the righteousness
that is by faith thereof. In number also we profess that there are two: viz.
Baptism and the Lords Supper. And that our Religion herein is that which
Christ and his Apostles taught, is thus proved. That Jesus Christ ordained
these two Sacraments, is most manifest in the Gospel, wherein is declared,
both that Christ ordained these two, and in what manner he appointed them to
be administered. We read also in the Gospel, Math 28.19, 20. and 26.26
and in other books of the new Testament, that the Apostles accordingly did
administer them both.

But of any other Sacrament we read not, that either our Savior Christ
ministered and ordained any, nor that the Apostles did administer any other. As
for those five which the Sea of Rome adds to the number of the Sacraments,
some of them we acknowledge to be holy ordinances, and states of life,
allowed in the Scripture, but have not like nature with Baptism and the Lords
Supper; and some have been brought into the Church upon a corrupt following of
examples not intended for Sacraments.

But because this question is at large debated in answer to another question
concerning this matter, it may suffice to have said thus much in general
touching the Sacraments.

Concerning the Sacraments as far as we differ from the Sea of Rome and have
reformed the abuses thereof in the administration of them, we administer them
in the English speech, with declaration of the chief doctrines signed by them,
wherein our Religion and practice is according to the word of God. For it has
been Gods good pleasure always, that the Sacraments should not be as dumb
shows and spectacles, but so administered as the people might be taught to
understand what were the Doctrines that were signed and confirmed by them.

This was also the Doctrine of our Savior Christ, as appears by this that
giving charge to his Apostles hereof, he says, Teach all Nations, Math. 28.19.
baptising them, declaring thereby that the meaning and Doctrine for
confirmation whereof he ordained Baptism, should be declared. And of the
Sacrament of his Supper, says, As often as ye do this, 1 Cor. 11.26.
show forth the Lords death till he come. And again, Do ye this in
remembrance of me. Now Christ taught the Doctrine of that ordinance which he
there instituted and delivered. Such was also the Doctrine of the Apostles in
all places of the New Testament, that make mention of their Doctrine and
administration of the Sacraments of Baptism, Act. 2.38.41 and 10.47, 4^. Act,
^0.7.
and of the Lords Supper.

CHAP. VII. Of Baptism.
PArticularly concerning Baptism, we administer it without adding thereunto
exorcisme, or adiuring the devil to go out of the child. Because it is not
written that our Savior Christ and his Apostles used any such ceremony, or
appointed any such to be used in the administration of it. Further also because
it is a superstitious ceremony in sundry respects and grounded upon a false
supposition, that the infants that are to be baptized are possessed with the
devil. For our Savior says that Theirs is the kingdom of heaven. Math.
19.14. 1 Cor. 7.14.
And the Apostle Paul says that The children of Christian Parents are holy:
yea though but one of their Parents be a Christian and faithful.

And we administer Baptizme without exorcisme or adiuration; so do we
likewise without salt, spittle, cream, honny, oil, Chrisme, Candlelight etc.
Which Ceremonies we do not use in the administration of Baptizme. 1. Because
there is neither commandment nor example of the use of any of them given in
the Scriptures by our Savior Christ and his Apostles. 2. Because we have
sufficient commandment in the Scriptures for the administration of it, that
is, without any of these. 3. Because we have many examples in the Scripture of
such as were lawfully and duly baptized without the use of any of these. Act.
2.41. and 10, 48. and 16 33.
4. These are the devices of men, added to the ordinances of Christ, and to the
worship of God, according to which inventions it is not lawful to serve God.
Thus it appears that our Religion in this part also is according to the
Doctrine and practice of our Savior Christ and his Apostles.

CHAP. VIII. Of the Lords Supper.
IT follows now to speak of the Lords Supper, which is the other Sacrament
of the new Testament. In the administration of which Sacrament, the order used
by the Church of England, is, after due preparation by every ones trial of
themselves in faith and repentance, to administer it with declaration of the
institution of Christ, and of the doctrine signed and confirmed by it in the
English tongue, that all the people may understand.

We do also administer it in both kinds, of bread and wine. Further the
minister does take the bread and give thanks, break it and deliver it to the
communicants. Likewise he takes the cup and after thanksgiving, powers out
the wine in the cup to be delivered to all that are to be partakers of the
communion. The people that do communicate receive the bread and eat it, and
the wine likewise, and drink it.

Now the end and use of all this is added hereunto, which is in general the
solemn commemoration of the death of Christ. In particular, and that first in
regard of God, and of his Son Jesus Christ, to magnify the goodness of God,
in not sparing to give his only begotten Son for the redemption of the
world; and to give him most due thanks for such his unspeakable grace and
mercy. It is likewise to glorify our Savior Christ, and to give thanks for
his exceeding love to mankind, in that for our redemption, he has vouchs^fed
to humble himself to take upon him our nature and the form of a Servant, and
in that nature to humble himself for us even to the death, and that the
accurssed death of the Cross.

In respect of men viz, both of all other to profess our Christian faith; and
also in regard of our selu^s, that our faith and by i^ our Communion with
Christ may be increased, whereby we may be made more and more partakers of
him, and of all his benefits, both of grace in this life, namely of the
forgiveness of sins, of sanctification, of gifts needful for our particular
calling, and in the world to come of everlasting life and glory. Finally, that
these things being thus performed with thanksgiueings and petitions for our
selves, and the whole militant Church of Christ, agreeably to Gods word, and
that sacred action, the whole administration is finished to the glory of God,
and the edification of such as have been partakers of that holy table.

In all which administration there is nothing but that was taught and done by
our Savior Christ and his Apostles. Math. 26.26, etc. Mark. 14.22, etc. Luke
22.4, 19, etc. 1, Cor. 11, 22.23, etc.
For our Savior at the first institution of his holy Supper, delivered the
Doctrine which he intended should be confirmed by it, and that in a speech
understood by his Disciples, and gave commandment unto them to do the like,
and to show forth by it, the comemmoration of his death until his coming
again. In like manner did the Apostles. Act. 2.42.
For the Evangelist Luke reporting that the Disciples continued in the doctrine
of the Apostles in communication, in breaking of bread, and in prayers;
declares that the Apostles joined Doctrine with the administration of this
Sacrament, and with prayer, and all the actions of that spiritual communion
and society, which the Church of Christ at Jerusalem had together. The like
appears in the Apostle Paul, 1, Cor. 11.23.
both in that he professes to have delivered to the Corinthians concerning
this Sacrament, that which he had received of the Lord, and more particularly
by that long speech which he had at Troas, before the administration of this
Sacrament, Act. 20, 7. Act. 2, 42.
there also noted and comprehended under breaking of bread. Moreover concerning
the administration in both kinds, it is most manifest by the story of the
Gospel, and by the writing of the Apostle Paul, that lesus Christ took bread,
and brake it, and gave it to his Disciples; and likewise that he took wine,
and having given thanks, not only gave it to the Disciples to drink, but with
these express words, Drink ye all of this. Whereby it is most plain that
our administration of the Lords Supper, in both kinds, is according to that the
Lord himself did at the first institution of it. Yea it is also according to
that he commanded after to be done, in that he said, Do ye this in
remembrance of me; Mat. 26.27.
And more particularly concerning the cup; Drink ye all of this. Which being
the Doctrine, practice, and commandment of the Lord himself, it cannot be
doubted but the Apostles did both so administer it, and teach concerning the
administration of it; especially seeing the Apostle Paul professes (which
faithfulness is to be esteemed to have been also in all the other Apostles)
that he delivered to the Church that which he received from the Lord. viz. as
before has been declared, that the Lord delivered to his Disciples both bread
and wine. Whereby it is to be understood, that whereas sometimes this
Sacrament is noted or comprehended under the speech of breaking bread, that it
is not meant, that it was administered in bread only, but it is a speech that by
one part does note the whole Supper of the Lord administered in both kinds of
bread and wine; which is confirmed also to have been so delivered by the
Apostles, by the practice of the primitive church, which did so administer it,
as it appears by the Apology of Iustine Martyr, so reporting of the
administration of it. Now as this order of administration of the Lords Supper
used in our English church thus appears to have been received from the
Doctrine, practice and commandment of Christ him self and of his Apostles,
and so to have been used in the Primitive Church; so on the Contrary part, the
Sea of Rome has in effect abolished the Supper of the Lord in their Mass,
having neither bread nor wine in the administration of it.

For the bread they say, after Consecration is turned into the real body of
Christ, which being flesh and bones, it follows by their Doctrine, that there
is no bread left in the Sacrament as it is ministered by them: which errors of
the real, and bodily presence, and of the change and transubstantiation of the
bread into the flesh of Christ, are convicted to be most absurd and erroneous
both by the Scriptures, and by common sense and reason. For the Scripture (even
after the consecration and setting apart of the bread to that sacred and holy
use, to be a Sacrament of the Lords Body) does often call it bread, as it
appears in the first Epistle to the Corinthians, Chap. 11. where it is said,
The Bread that we break is it not the Cemmanion of the body of Christ?
Pillip. 2.6.7. Heb. 4.15.
And in the Chap. 11. As often as ye shall eat of this bread, and after diverse
times. This appears also in that the Scriptures teach that Christ became Man,
having the true nature of man like to us in all things sin only excepted.
Which proves that his body cannot be in the small compass of a wafer cake,
having the dimensions and measures of length, breadth and thickness, which
other men's bodies have. And whereas it is pretended to be so by miracle, this
is disproued two ways. First, in that the Scriptures which make express
mention of Christ's miracles, do never make mention nor observation of any
miracle to have been done by him, in this changing bread into his body.
Secondly the Scriptures making mention of any miraculous change of one
substance into another, do declare that the change has been such as was to
be judged, discerned and perceived by all means of understanding both of
sense and reason. As for example, when Christ changed water into wine, John,
2.9: 10: 11.
the wine was perceived to be wine by the sight and taste so discerning of it.
But in this case neither does the eye see any flesh, nor the taste discern of
any, but contrariwise that the bread remains bread still in substance
appears by the fight, smelling, savor, and the taste thereof; by the effect
of nourishing, by the place where it is on earth, and by the accidents of
whiteness, smalnesse, roundnesse, and by that it becomes in time to be
subject to be moldy, and that it may be eaten by Mice, and Vermin.

But it is most false, erroneous, and blasphemous, to affirm that the body of
Christ which is most glorious in heaven, can be subject to any of these
accidents. Besides, how great is that blasphemy whereby it is said under
pretense of this transubstantiation, that the Priest is the Creator of his
Creator, and maker of his maker; But it would ask a long time to lay out the
arguments and reasons that confute this absurd and damnable error, and this
labor is already partly bestowed in answer to another question of this kind.
Therefore thus much may here suffice to show, that by the error of
transubstantiation, there is not left any bread upon the Lords table, by them
that affirm the bread to be changed into flosh, and therefore that this part
of the Sacrament is wanting in the Mass. Now for the other, the same may be
said concerning the wine, which they do likewise teach to be turned into the
very blood of Christ. But it appears also further, in that they have
sacrilegiously robbed the Lords table of that blessed cup that belongs to it.
For although they suffer the Priest to drink of the cup, and the people also
to drink wine, yet the wine that they give the people is not consecrated nor
any part of the Sacrament. Therefore in such administration is committed a
sacrilegious abuse, in robbing the Lords table and his people of the cup of
blessing, which is the communion (as the Apostle Paul speaks) of the blood of
Christ: and contrariwise our administration of the Lord Supper in both kinds of
bread and wine, is according to the Doctrine, practice, and commandment, of
our Savior Christ and of his Apostles.

Furthermore as by this means the Sea of Rome has abolished both parts of the
Sacrament, so has it perverted the right end and use for which it was
instituted. For that being as has been declared, and as it is made known to
the people in our administration of it, to be a Sacrament, whereby we
celebrate the memory of the death of Christ for our sins, to the signing and
confirming unto us our spiritual communion with him, to the participation of
all his gifts, even to life everlasting:

The Church of Rome has transfigured this Sacrament into a sacrifice
propitiatory for the sins of the living, and of the dead. And to this end
they have brought into the Church of Christ contrary to his word, a Priest, and
an Altar, that nothing might be wanting to the offering of their sacrifice. In
which sacrifice they teach that the Priest does offer Christ enery day unto his
Father, as a sacrifice to take away sins. Of which propitiatory Sacrifice our
Savior Christ, and his Apostles have made no mention at all, but only of a
commemoration of the death of Christ, in the celebration whereof, we magnify
God and our Savior, for such unspeakable mercy and goodness, and so offer as
it were a Sacrifice of thanksgiving, pleasing and acceptable to God in Christ
Jesus. But of offering a sacrifice propitiatory to take away our sins, and
that daily, and by the Priest, there is no word in the Scripture for it.

Contrariwise the Scriptures teach directly the contrary, and declare this
Doctrine to be full of error and Blasphemy. For the Scriptures teach us, that
there is but one only Sacrifice that takes away the sins of men, which is
that holy Sacrifice which our Savior Christ offered of himself, that is, of
his humane nature assumed for that purpose, and that by his eternal Spirit,
and that also once for all, Heb. 9.14.25, 26, 28.
namely dying upon the Altar of the cross: and by the Sacrifice so offered, he
has obtained an everlasting redemption. Wherefore to affirm that the Priest
offers Christ daily in Sacrifice for sins, derogateth highly from the death
of Christ, whereby the sins of the faithful are taken away, as if that had
not been sufficient; contrary to the whole course of the Scripture,
attributing our redemption to his death and blood shed upon the Cross.
Secondly, This Doctrine highly derogateth from the virtue of the death of
Christ, in that it teaches, that Christ must be daily offered for sin;
whereas the Scriptures teach expressly the contrary, saying that Christ was to
dye but once, Romans 3.24, 25. Rom: 5.8.9. Gal. 2.14. Heb. 9.25.
and to be offered but once, and so to enter into heaven, and not as the
High Priest in the Law once every year offered sacrifice, and so entered into
the holy place. For then as the Apostle there teaches he should have suffered
often since the beginning of the world: But now says he, in the end and
consummation of the world, Christ was manifested to abolish sin, by the
sacrifice of himself. Moreover, it is said, that Christ offered his sacrifice
by his eternal Spirit, Heb. 9.26
whereby we are taught, that it was by the power of his Godhead, that his
sacrifice and blood, was of so precious, inestimable and infinite value, as
being the bloed of God, as the Apostle speaks elsewhere, which redeemed and
purchased the Church. Act. 20.28.
Therefore it is open blasphemy to affirm, that the Priest offers Christ
unto his Father a Sacrifice for sin, which the Scriptures attributes to
Christ's eternal Spirit and Godhead.

Furthermore, many other are the abuses committed by the Church of Rome, in
abusing this holy Sacrament, to sundry other ends, for which Christ did never
ordain it. For they abuse it to obtain bodily health, and prosperous success
of voyages at Sea, of battles, of marriage, and such like. They abuse it to
recover things that are lost, to the quenching of Fire, to the calming of
Storms and Tempests at Sea, and at Land; to ratify leagues, to trial of the
innocent in Criminal causes, and finally to deliver souls (as they feign) out
of Purgatory.

For these and such like ends, they have Masses said and sung, and pervert the
most holy ordinance of Christ, to their secular and profane desires. Moreover,
according to the Doctrine of our Savior Christ and his Apostles, this
Sacrament is with us to be administered, so as not only the Minister alone
receive it, but others with him. For so our Savior delivered it to his
Disciples, and said, Take ye, eat, and drink ye all of this. Likewise the
Apostle Paul calls the bread of the Lords table, the Communion of the Lords
body; and the cup of blessing, the Communion of his blood: Whereby it is
plain, that this Sacrament ought to be administered in a Congregation of the
faithful and Christian people, which together with the minister should be
partakers of the Lords table.

But contrary to this ordinance of Christ are all the private Masses of the
Church of Rome, in that the Priest alone having eaten up his host (as he
calls it) and drunk up his wine, sends the people empty away, after that
he has blessed them with the empty cup, to the high dishonor of God, and,
the intolerable scorn and derision of his people. Here unto is to be added
that horrible idolatry, that is the abominable fruit of the monstrous error
of Transubstantiation. For from hence came the elevation and adoration of the
wafer-cake, which the Priest with his back toward the people, lifting up over
his head, all the people present falling down upon their knees, and knocking
their breasts religiously worship and adore even with the same adoration which
themselves acknowledge to be done to God. And after the Mass finished and
ended, they relerue the wafer-cake remaining, whereas by the Scripture every
Sacrament, is a Sacrament only in the lawful use of it, and while that sacred
action be administered and finished. For as the water of Baptism, after the
use of it in baptizing such as are to be baptized, is not reserved; no more
ought the Sacramental bread to be kept and laid up in store: yet to the
elevation and adoration mentioned, they add also this reservation of the bread
and enclosing it in a pixe, and that also for idolatrous uses.

For both daily as occasion requires in visitation of the sick, they carry
this Idol with pomp throughout the streets, and compel all that meet it, to
worship and adore it; and once in the year, in the day which they have made
festival for that purpose, with great pomp and sol^mmity they carry it in
procession to be worshipped and adored by the people. Finally whereas our
Savior Christ has ordained this holy Sacrament, to be administered in that
sincerity, and simplicity, declared in his word; the Sea of Rome has devised
to administer it in such manner as is fitter for a play upon a stage, or some
pompous solemnity, then for the grave and reverend administration of that holy
Sacrament. For all furniture belonging to it, is costly and sumptuous, there is
music to please the ears, sweet odors and perfumes to smell, there are to
behold whatsoever precious Images decked with gold and precious stones, and
costly garments. The Priest clothed richly as Aaron, stands at the Altar
shining with burning lights, with his attendants in Sylke and fine Linen, all
the people being behind him afar off. There he plays many strange parts,
sometime he stands still, sometime he walks a little, one while he is
upright, another while he boweth himself; he seems to be asleep and to
awake again, he turns altogether, and half round; his arms are sometimes
spread abroad, sometimes drawn in again; sometimes lift up, and sometime cast
down: his fingers are still occupied in making crosses, he softly murmureth
something with himself, and he whispereth over the bread and the cup; at the
last when he has done playing, he eats up his host, and drinks up his
wine with great care that he leaves not a drop. Then having washed after
his banquet, he turns himself to the people, and blessing them with the
empty cup, bids them depart. What can be more unlike the sacred
administration of the Lords Supper, then this histrionicall service of an Idol
of Bread, which they worship and eat up?

Wherewith if our administration of this holy Sacrament be compared, and
either of them with the Lords institution, it will manifestly appear that
their Mass has no resemblance with the Lords Supper, and that for most just
and necessary causes, the manifold abuses of it are reformed in our Church. It
will also appear that the communion celebrated in our Churches: First, with
declaration of the Doctrine, signed by it in the vulgar tongue. Secondly, in
both kinds of bread and wine. Thirdly, in commemoration of the death of Christ,
with due prayles and prayers annexed thereunto. Fourthly, in that it is truly
a Communion, being communicated with the Assembly of Gods people. Fifthly, It is
freed from Popish transubstantiation, elevation, adoration, reservation, and
Pompous carrying abroad in the streets, Sacrifices, Sacrificer, and Altar, and
from many such other like errors, superstitions, Idolatries, Blasphemies, and
ridiculous sollies, as have corrupted, perverted, and transfigured into an
abominable Idol the most holy, sacred and comfortable ordinance and Sacrament
of our Savior Jesus Christ. And thus far of the word and Sacraments.

CHAP. IX. Of Prayers.
NOw it follows to speak of the Prayers of our Church in England: In all
which these two most necessary and excellent points are most worthy to be
considered. First, that all our prayers are made to God only; and Secondly
that they are all made by the only mediation of Jesus Christ. Of which two
points the former is such as our Savior Christ, and all the Prophets and
Apostles bear witness unto it.

For, First, there is not in them all, any precept, promise, or example for
Prayer to be made to any other. Secondly, All the commandments, promises and
examples concerning prayer, do expressly direct us to make our prayers unto
God. Psalm. 50.14.15.


In the day of trouble (says the Lord) Thou shall call upon me, and I will
hear thee, and thou shall glorify me: Math. 6.9. Luke 11.2.9.12, 13. Math
7.11.
When you pray (Says our Savior) Pray ye thus. Our Father which art in
heaven, etc. Likewise, Your heavenly Father will give good things to these that
ask him. The reason hereof is, because as the Apostle teaches, Iam. 1.17.
Every good grace and perfect gift proceeds from abone, even from the Father
of lights.

Now this being the honor of God, he endures not that it should be given to
any other, according as it is said, I will not give my glory to Idols, Esaias,
42.8.
nor my honor to any other. And in the second Commandment he calls himself
a Jealous God, Exo. 205.
and such as communicate his honor with any other, he calls his enemies, and
such as hate him, and threatens to punish their sin in themselves, and in
their third and fourth generations that shall come after them. So highly does
it displease God, that Prayer should be made to any other, not only for the
space of few days, according to the edict of Darius, Dan. 6.7.8.9.10.
but for any part of the whole time of our life. For such is the prohibition of
God, published in all the Scriptures, and the threatening of his displeasure,
and Indignation, which is more to be feared without all comparison then all
the dens of Lions. Therefore it is plain, that whereas in England all our
Prayers in divine Service, are directed and made to God only, that our
Religion herein is that which the Scriptures teach us, and namely which the
Apostles of Christ, and the Lord himself has taught and delivered.

In like manner, whereas all our Prayers are made in the only mediation of
Jesus Christ, we are thus taught to pray by the Scripture, even by Christ
himself and his Apostles. For Christ says, Whatsoever ye shall ask of the
Father in my name, John 14.13. Chap. 15.16. Chap. 16.23.24. 1 John 2.1.2.
will be given you. Likewise the Apostle John teaches us, that the advocate
we have with the Father is Jesus Christ the righteous, who is also the
propitiation for our sins. Likewise the Apostle Paul teaches, that this is a
principal part of the honor of his Priesthood, and that he lives now for
ever (as he was ordained a Priest for ever after the order of Melchisedech)
that he might make intercession for us. Heb. 7.24, 25
Moreover, he is said to have entered into the holiest place of the Sanctuary,
Heb. 10.12.
that is, into heaven by his own blood, Heb. 9.24.25.
having obtained everlasting redemption for us, Whereby it is declared, that
after that by the offering of himself once, he had redeemed his people, he
entered into heaven it self that he may now appear for us before the face of
God. Which doctrine does manifestly teach us, that to make intercession for us,
to procure, us and our Prayers grace and favor with God for ever, is the
proper and peculiar honor of our Savior Christ, and without high treason
against his dignity cannot be communicated with any other. For there is one
only high Priest of the New Testament, which is Jesus Christ; and therefore
there can be no other, neither can that office be made common to him with any
other, without high derogation to his Priesthood. Beside, that only high
Priest of the New Testament, is made Priest of the order of Melchisedech, of
whose order none can be, but he that is without Father and Mother and
genealogy, and therefore no other man whatsoever but he that is also God.
Again, he that is a Priest of the order of Melchisedeck, must have been made
Priest by the oath of God; but this agrees only to Christ, as it is said, Heb
7.21.
I have sworn and will not repent, that thou art a Priest for ever, after the
order of Melchisedeck

Further, whosoever is a Priest of that order, must be also King of the
Church, Heb. 7.21.
as Melchesedeck was a Priest, and also King of Salem, and as his name
imported, a King of righteousness. But this honor cannot without high treason
against the royal dignity of Christ be communicated with any creature
whatsoever.

Moreover, seeing there are two parts and duties belonging to this Priesthood,
and that the one which is to be the advocate that makes suite and
intercession for the Church, and the other to offer himself to make
propitiation for our sins; and that none can be our advocate, but he that
makes propitiation for us, it is plain, that we can have no other advocate
but the same that dyed for us. And that this is so, may be proved many ways.
The Apostle John says, 1 John 2.1.2.
We have an advocate with the Father, which is Jesus Christ the righteous, who
is the propitiation for our sins. By which words, it appears to appertain
to one and the same person to be the advocate, and to make propitiation and
satisfaction for our sins. But there is no creature that can make
satisfaction for our sins, this being of all parts confessed to belong only
to Christ Jesus. Therefore also to be advocate and intercessor, for the Church
cannot belong to any creature, either man or Angel, but is proper to Jesus
Christ. And if any should deny it to be proper to the person of Christ, to
make propitiation for our sins, it may be proved by this that the Apostle
Paul says, Act. 10.28.
That God redeemed the Church by his blood; so calling it the blood of God,
wherewith the Church is redeemed, because in the same person of Jesus Christ,
are both the nature of man, whose blood was shed; and the nature of God, which
made it of inestimable prize and value, to be effectual to redeem the
Church. But the blood of no other Person can be called the blood of God,
therefore no other person can make satisfaction for sin and reconcile us unto
God.

Now touching the intercession of Christ, it is to be considered, that it is by
the same his own blood, that he entered into heaven (as the High Priest entered
into the holiest place of the Sanctuary with strange blood) there to appear
always in the presence of God as our advocate, and to make intercession for
us. Which being the blood of God (as has been declared) whereby he entered
into heaven, and that because he is as it were sprinkled with that most
precious blood of inestimable value, he is worthy to obtain favor for all
his redeemed, and hearing for all their Prayers; It is plain hereby, that no
other Person whatsoever can be our intercessor, because they are not entered
by that blood into heaven, nor cannot present themselves sprinkled with it
before the presence of God, thereby to obtain favor with him for us and our
Prayers. Finally, that Jesus Christ and no other person can be our intercessor
with God, is proved by this; that it behooves him that should present our
Prayers, to know all the prayers of the Church: But this none other but God
knows, for this is a part of the high style proper to God, That he knows
the heart. Therefore no other person but Jesus Christ can be intercessor,
Psalm. 44.21. 2 Chro. 6.30. Act. 1.24. Act. 15.8. Romans 8.15. Gal. 9.6, Romans 8.26.
and to whom else can it agree but to him whose Spirit teaches us to call Abba
Father, and who only understands the meaning of the spirit, that teaches us
to pray with unspeakable gronings, as being his own Spirit that stireth up
those sighs in the faithful? By all which reasons it is proved, that no
person amongst all creatures can be our intercessor, to offer our prayers to
God, and by whom we are to offer them; but on the contrary, that it is only
by the person of Jesus Christ.

Thus both these points in the prayers of our Church in England are showed to
be grounded in the Doctrine of Christ, and of his Apostles.

Now it follows, to show that contrary to this Doctrine of Christ and of his
Apostles, the Church of Rome makes prayers to other then to God only, and by
other Mediators and intercessors, then by the only Mediator and intercessor
Jesus Christ the righteous, who is the propitiation for our sins; which is
first to be showed.

Now if the liturgy used in the Church of Rome be compared with the divine
Service in England in these two principal points concerning Prayer, it will
be clear to all that have eyes to see, that as our practice in them is
directly that which was taught by our Savior Christ and his Apostles, so that
which is used in the Church of Rome, is directly contrary to Christ's most holy
doctrine, and that was delivered by the Prophets and Apostles. For touching the
former point which is that all prayers, petitions, requests, supplications, and
thanksgiuings, are to be made and yielded to God only: In the Liturgy of the
Church of Rome, there are many prayers, petitions, and thanksgiuings, that are
made and yielded unto Creatures, and even unto the Images and representations
of them. They are made protectors and patrons to be prayed unto, for help by
several Countries, Cittyes, Kindreds, States, orders, professions, artificers,
houses, persons.

Their help is prayed for severally according to diverse states of men,
Knights, men of study, Physicians, Lawyers, artificers, as Painters,
Shoomakers, Smithes, Potters. Likewise according to sundry occasions of the
living Creatures they possess diversely, as for Geese, Sheep, Horses, Oxen.
They pray also to sundry Patrons, to be delivered from storms, and tempests,
from Earthquakes, Fyres and blastings. And in case of diverse fickenesses they
pray to sundry helpers against the Pestilence, Fever, Toothach, Gout, Falling
sickness and such like.

In their Letany and Masses they pray to Angels, to the Mother of our Lord
Jesus Christ, to the Apostles, to Martyrs, to diverse confessors, Bishops
Doctors of the Church, and to Saints of the Popes Cannonizing and saynting. In
their prayers to them they pray them to save their sinful souls, to destroy
their enemies, to heal them of their diseases, to deliver them from all
adversities, and all impediments of Soul and body, at the hour of death to
receive their souls, and to bring them to everlasting life. An infinite number
almost of examples of such prayers might be rehearsed, which they make unto
Creatures. And to them likewise they offer their thanksgiving, vows incense,
gifts and oblations, yea they say the Lords Prayer beginning Our Father etc.
Before every picture and Image of them in their Churches or houses, so
fulfilling that which was said to the old Idolaters, that they say to the
block, and to the stone, thou have begotten me. Esaias 44.17: Hab. 2.19.
But to the blessed Mother of our Lord Jesus Christ, they do more wrong in
this kind then to any of the souls of the faithful that are departed out of
this life, for they magnify her with the names of our Lady, the Queen of
Heaven, the Lady of the Angels, the mother of mercy, the hope of the Church,
our life, our sweetness, our hope; some of them say, that God has given her,
the one half of his Kingdom, that is, of mercy, and has reserved to himself
the other which is of judgment: they say also unto her, By right of a mother,
command thy son: they abuse the Salutation of the Angel, beginning in
latin with Aue Maria, as a prayer unto her, o^ to do her honor with the
rehearsing of it, and ordain that it be said at a knell of the bell. They use
Rosaryes in her honor, that is, saying Aues upon their beads, and for every
ten of them, one Pater noster, that is in all 55 to a Rosary. Of three such
Rosaryes they made a Psalter for her, wherein should be 150 Aues according to
the number of the Psalms.

There has also been made a special Letany to her, and a Psalter wherein
throwout all the Psalms, the name Lord is turned into Lady, and whatsoever is
spoken to God in all the Psalms, is attributed unto her. But it were endless
to rehearse all the means whereby God is robbed of this high p^rt of his
glory, of Prayers and praises, by such as are of the Church of Rome, and namely
by their psalters, canonical hours, Letanies, Collects, antiphonyes, missals,
and such like parts of their Liturgy, and divine Service.

This may suffice to show how that which was intended, that whereas in our
divine Service in England, we offer prayers and thanks unto God only
according to the Doctrine of Christ and his Apostles, they offer them to
Creatures, passing by the Creator blessed for ever, Amen. Wherein contrary to
the Doctrine of Christ, they have not only according to the number of their
Cities multiplied their Gods, as it is said, According to the number of thy
Cittyes are thy Gods O Judah; but of towns, streets, Churches, Chapels,
houses, persons, diseases, and other occasions, even to praying to dumb
stocks and stones, to the astonishment of heaven and earth, as it is in the
Prophet Jeremy: O ye Heavens, Iere. 2.12.13.
be astonished at this, be affrayd and utterly confounded says the Lord; for
my people have committed two evils, they have forsaken me, the fountain of
living waters, to dig them pits, that can hold no water.

The other point is like unto this. For whereas in our English Church, as
Christ and his Apostles have taught us, we have but one God to whom we pray,
and but one Mediator and intercessor by whom and in whose name and merits we
present our Prayers to God: So on the contrary part, the Church of Rome
directly contrary to the doctrine of Christ, and of all the Scriptures, prays
to men and Angels, as has been declared; so does it likewise offer up Prayers
to God, by the intercession of Angels and of men.

This appears in like manner in their Letanies, Missalls, Anthemes, Collects
and sundry parts of their Liturgy. For in them they desire all the Angels and
Archangels to pray for them, and by name Gabriel, Michaell, Raphaell. They
desire the mediation of all the Apostles in general, and of every out in
particular. This petition they make also to all the Martyrs in common, and to
di^ers by their proper Names; to the Doctors of the Church to Confessors, to
sundry Popes, Bishops, Abbots, and other Canonized Saints, both men, and women,
that they would pray for them to God, that by their intercession, yea and also
by their merrits, they may be freed from their sins, and the punishment due
for the same, and may obtain all grace to everlasting life. In so many sundry
sorts do they dishonor the Sun of God, and rob him of that high glory and
pre-eminence of his Priesthood, which stands in making intercession for his
people, in communicating it with so many others, to whom it cannot in any sort
belong. For it is he alone that was made the High Priest of the new Testament,
and that with an oath, and the same for ever, for which cause also his
Priesthood is said to be (...), such as passes not from his own person to
any other. Heb. 7.16.17.20.21. Heb, 7.23.24
He obtained this honor to enter into heaven, to make prayer and intercession
for us by the shedding of his most precious blood, by the merit whereof he
presents himself continually in the presence of God, Heb. 9.7.12. Ver. 12.14
to obtain all grace needful for his Church; which honor having been
obtained by blood, it cannot agree to Angels which are only spirits, and
neither have flesh nor blood. This blood whereby he obtained this honor, 1,
Pet. 1.19. John, 1.19.36. Heb, 9.14.
is the blood of the Lamb immaculate and undefiled, without spot or blemish,
that is, of one perfectly innocent and righteous in the sight of God, But such
is not the state of any man whatsoever. Esaias. 53.6. Psalm. 143.2.
We have all erred and gone astray says the Prophet Esaias: And the Propher
David likewise, Enter not into Judgment with thy Servant (O Lord) for no flesh
shall be justified in thy sight; Psalm. 14.1.3. Romans 3.10.
And again, There is none that does good, no not one: Which is also the
testimony of all the Prophets and Apostles: wherefore all men are subject to
death by reason of sin, and are not able to procure favor for themselves,
how then should they be mediators and intercessors to procure favor for
others, who themselves stand in need to be saved by the intercession and
merrits of Jesus Christ?

But if there were any of them righteous, yet the shedding of their blood could
no more procure favor for us with God then the shedding of the water in the
streets. For it is by the blood of God (as says the Apostle) whereby the
Church is bought and purchased, A and. 20.26.
by which blood as he made propitiation for our sins, so it is by the same
blood, (being of inestimable value because of the infinite dignity of his
person) by which he is entered into the presence of God, to make intercession
for us.

It is therefore of no use that is said, that he is the only mediator of
propitiation but not of intercession. For as it has been showed by these
reasons, he has as good right to be honored with this glory, to be the
only intercessor for his Church, as he has to be the only giver of all
satisfaction for our sins. Finally it behooves that our intercessor be God,
that he may know the necessities of this people, and understand their groans
which cannot be uttered; but this agrees not to any creature only, much
less to men. Thus then it appears in how high degree the Liturgy of the
Church of Rome is contrary to the Doctrine of Christ and his Apostles and
derogatory to the honor of God, and of his only Son, in that prayers are
made to any other then to God only, and that resting upon the Prayers and
intercession of many others and not only of Jesus Christ.

Contrary wise hereby it may appear, that our Religion and divine Service in
England, in these two last and excellent points concerning Prayer, is according
to the Doctrine of Christ and of his Apostles, that we pray to God only, and
that by the only mediation of Jesus Christ the righteous, who is also the
propitiation for our sins.

Thus it has been showed, both in the word whereunto the Sacraments are
annexed, and also in prayer, in which two parts principally consists the
whole service of God; that our Religion professed in England, is the same which
was taught by Jesus Christ and by his Apostles, which was desired to be proved;
and further that the Liturgy of the Church of Rome, in all the points here
debated, is directly contrary to the Apostolical Doctrine, and that which was
delivered by the Lord Jesus himself.

Which being so performed, here might be an end of this Treatise, but that it
is further desired to be showed, if any of the Martyrs have given testimony
to that Religion which in England is professed: For satisfaction wherein, here
is added that which follows.

CHAP. X. Of Martyrs.
MArtyr, is originally a Greek word, and signifies in English a witness,
which general signification by an elegancy of speech, is used by the Church,
to note such as testify and bear witness of true Religion, and of the right
Service of God, and of faith in Jesus Christ, even by the suffering of death,
rather then to deny the truth of God. So as in this sense, Martyr is a witness
of true Religion, by his suffering of death for it.

Such in the time of the Prophets were Daniel, and his three noble kinsmen of
the tribe of Judah. Dan. 3.20.21.
For these three rather then they would worship Nebuchadnezzars golden Image,
and yield to an Idol the honor due to the only true God, endured to be cast
into the furnace of fire. From which though God by miracle delivered them, yet
are they worthily accounted Martyrs, for their most constant resolution. Dan.
6.16.
Likewise Daniel, rather then he would not yield unto God the honor of prayer,
endured to be cast into the den of Lions for his noble Profession.

In the new Testament our Savior speaking of Martyrdom, says, Math. 5.11.
Blessed are ye when men persecute you for righteousness, and for my sake.
And forewarning his Disciples of such Persecution, says, You shall bear
witness of me, John. 15.27. John. 16.2.
and they will put you out of their synagogue; and whosoever shall kill you
shall think he does God good service. The Apostle Peter says, If any man
suffer because he is a Christian, 1, Pet, 4.16.
let him not he ashawed, let him rather glorify God on this behalf. Thus
also wrighteth the Apostle Paul, alleging it out of the Psalms: Psalm. 44.22.
Romans 8.36.
For thy sake are we put to death all the day long, we are accounted as
sheep for the slaughter. By these and many other like testimonies it
appears, that a true Martyr dies for no other cause, but for a good, just,
and holy cause, and namely, for witness bearing to true Religion; as for
refusing to worship Idols, and for professing himself a Christian, and one
that honoreth Christ, and (...) the Doctrine of the Gospel that he taught, and
professes to believe to be saved by him.

Which being thus proved, by these general testimonies, shall be likewise
confirmed by the examples of such true Martyrs, to the end that hereby it may
appear, that whosoever are to be acknowledged to have been true Martyrs,
have suffered for earing witness to some principal doctrine of the same
Religion, that together with all Christendom, is professed at this day in
England, and not for maintenance of any of the errors or false worships
maintained by the Sea of Rome, and wherein they being fallen away from the
truth of the Gospel, dissent from many nations of the Christian world.

They challenge indeed to themselves, that all the Martyrs that dyed in the
Primitive Church, dyed for their Religion. But it is not to be showed that
they dyed for that Corruption of Christian Religion, that is properly called
Popery, because it has been and is still maintained by the authority of
Popes; but only for refusing to worship Idols, and for professing to believe
in God, and in Jesus Christ our Savior.

Which being the holy faith now professed in England, and in many other nations
of Christendom, that agree with us therein, it will appear that all the
Martyrs of the primitive Church dyed for the maintenance of that Service of
God, and for that faith of Christ, which is now professed in England, which is
the other part that is defired to be proved.

Now for the proof let us first consider of the Martyrs recorded in the new
Testament. Whereof the first that obtained the Crown of Martyrdom was Steven,
who had been one of the Seven Deacons of the Church of Jerusalem: Of him it is
manifest, that he was stoned to death in a fury of the Jews, after that he
had given notable testimony to Jesus Christ. First, by his great signs and
wonders that he did. Secondly, his so wise and Zealous reasoning with men
ofthe Synagogues and schools of the Jews, of diverse nations that were in
Jerusalem, as they were not able to withstand the wisdom and spirit wherewith
he spoke. Thirdly, Act. 6.10. Act. 7, 2, etc. V. 52. V. 55: V. 59
by his notable Apology which he made for himself before the High Priest,
and the whole Consistory, his face shining as an Angel, concluding it with
charging their Fathers to have slain the Prophets, which had foreshewed the
coming of Christ, and themselves to have murdered Christ, that just and
righteous Person. Fourthly, by his constant testimony that he beheld the
heavens open, and the Son of man standing at the right hand of God. Finally
by his dying in the invocation of the name of the Lord Jesus.

By all which reasons it is plain, that Steven dyed, for no other cause then
only for professing Jesus Christ to be the Son of God, and the Savior whom
God had promised to send for the salvation of his people; and this faith our
Church in England by Gods mercy does constantly profess, with all that call
upon the name of the Lord Jesus, and houldeth it most honorable to dye
forbearring witness to that most holy faith. Which being so, it is clear that
Steven, whose head first had the honor to wear the Crown of Martyrdom, dyed
for that faith which is at this day professed in England, and not for the
Mass, nor the Popes Supremacy, nor any other Popish Corruption of Christian
faith whatsoever.

The like is to be said of the Apostle James whom Herod slew with the sword,
as it appears by that it is said, Act. 12.1.2.3.
that Herod vexed certain of the Church, and that he saw, that the killing of
James had pleased the Jews, who were the enemies of Christ, and by
apprehending and committing of the Apostle Peter in like sort.

In the Acts of the Apostles, the like cause appears of all the persecution
both of the Disciples and of the Apostles. Wherefore upon occasion the Apostle
Paul professes saying, I am ready not only to be bound, Act. 21.13.
but also to dye at Jerusalem for the name of the Lord Jesus. In the
Revelation, the like testimony is given of Antipas, where it is written; I know
thy works, Reave. 2.13.
and where thou dwell, namely where Satan's throne is; I know that thou
hold my name, and have not denied my faith, no not in the days wherein
Antipas my faithful Martyr was slain amongst you, where Satan dwells.

Of other Christian Martyrs whose names are not mentioned in the Scriptures,
the like appears both by the prophecies and performances of their sufferings.
In the second of the Revelation it is written in the 10 verse, Fear nothing of
that thou art to suffer; Behold the Devil will cast some of you into prison
that ye may be tried, and ye shall have affliction for ten days: Be
faithful unto the death, and I will give thee the Crown of life.

In the sixth Chapter, verse the ninth, where the first seal was opened, it is
said: I saw under the Altar the souls of those which had been slain for the
word of God, and for the testimony which they maintained. After to them crying
to God to revenge their blood, it is in the eleventh verse answered, That they
should rest yet a little time until their fellow servants, and their brethren
might be fulfilled, which were to be slain as well as they.

In the Chapter cleauenth, from the third verse to the twelfth, is foreshewed
the Martyrdom of the two Witnesses which bare witness to the Gospel of
Christ, for the space of 1260 days. Finally in Chap 20 verse 4. it is said, I
saw the souls of those which had been smitten with the axe for the testimony
of Jesus and for the word of God, and which have not worshipped the beast nor
the Image of the beast, nor have the mark upon their foreheads, or in their
hands; and they shall live and reign with Christ a thousand years. These are
the Prophecies that make mention of Christian Martyrs, by all which places and
the comparing them one with another it may evidently appear, that all such
Martyrs were to bear witness to the Lord Jesus Christ unto death, and to
suffer not for any tradition or for any ordinance of the Church of Rome, but
for the word of God, and for refusing to become Idolaters, and to take the
mark of the beast in their foreheads or in their hands.

Now the performance of these prophecies that have been fulfilled unto this
time, do likewise declare that the Christian Martyrs, which have suffered
hitherto have suffered death for professing that they worshipped only the true
God, that had made heaven and earth; and his only begotten Son Jesus Christ:
and refused to worship the Pagan Emperors Idols, and the Idols of the heathen,
that lived in any part of the Roman Empire. The certain and undoubted truth
hereof, is to be justified by the Apologeticall and other writings of the
ancient Fathers, by the history of Eusebius, and other writers of
Ecclesiastical story and namely of Martyrs; likewise by Aurelius Prudentius in
his book of the Crowns of Martyrs, and other of like argument.

By the testimony of these writers it appears for the time of the ten great
and cruel persecutions of the Roman Emperors, while they were yet heathen,
even to the reign of Constantiue the Great, which was the space of above 300
years, and namely, in the last ten years persecutions, under the five last
heathen Emperors, which time is thought to be forshewed by the mention of
ten days spoken in the 2 Chap. of the Revelation the 10 verse: For by all
these it is plentifully testified, that the Christians were put to death for no
other cause, but for professing themselves to be Christians, and refusing to
worship the Idols of the heathen.

The same is confirmed also by foreign and heathen writers, and namely, by
the edicts and proclamations of Emperors, by the commandments of their
officers in their several Provinces, by their proceeding in Judgment, the
voice of the crier proclaming, that they which suffered death, professed
themselves to be Christians, by a writing which was written in a table of such
their profession, which was borne before the Martyrs; and finally, by the
sentences of their Judges, for such cause only, adiuding them to suffer diverse
sundry kinds of exquisite torments and cruel deaths. To prove this by the
particular report of all the Martyrs that suffered in that time to the reign
of the Great Constantine, would be two long. But we may take a few for
example amongst those that are reported to suffer Martyrdom in that time.
Here may be remembered Polycarpus, Pastor of the Church of Smyrna, mentioned
in the Revelation, a tree that bare much fruit according to his name, and like
the Date, or Almond tree, which the more it is pressed, is the more fruitful.
For of him it is written, that after horrible threatenings of wild beasts and of
fire, growing in constancy, and perseuering steadfastly, in professing himself
to be a Christian, and refusing to worship the Idols of the heathen, the Crier
by commandment proclaimed and cried thrice, Polycarpus has confessed himself
to be a Christian: Likewise the people cried out upon him, This is that
Teacher of Asia, the Father of the Christians, the ouerthrower of our gods,
which has taught many that our gods are not to be worshipped. For these
causes Polycarpus dyed as a faithful servant of Christ, whom he said he had
served 86 years, and having found him always his good master and gracious
Lord, he would not now deny him.

Attalus, another Martyr, was lead about the Amphitheater, and a table borne
before him, wherein it was written, This is Attalus the Christian.

It is written of one Saphyra a virgin of Antioch, that as a fair Saphyre, a
Iemme, a Jewel, of great price, carrying her holy profession without any
stain; being commanded to sacrifice to the gods of the heathen, she
graciously answered that she was a Christian, and worshipped almighty God, who
had created all things; and that the gods of the Gentiles were no gods, but
devils; for which worthy profession she was beheadded.

Happy Faelicitas according to her name, a matrone and widow of Rome, the
mother of seven children, was accused to the Emperor Antoninus, by the
priests of the Idols, that she worshipped not their gods, but also persuaded
others, from doing them honor. She was exhorted to spare her self, and to
return to the old Roman Religion, and to forsake the new doctrine of the
Christians, and to testify the same by the offering of Sacrifice: But she
constantly professed that she was willing to dye for the faith of Christ.
After, being exhorted to spare her children, and to persuade them, to redeem
and save their lives by sacrificing, she answered the Magistrate, Thy mercy is
impiety, and thy exhortation cruelty. For if my sons should sacrifice to
Idols, they should not save their lives, but cast themselves into hell fire.
Then turning to her Children she said, My dearest sons, persevere in the
faith, and confession of our Lord Jesus Christ, he expects you with all his
Saints; fight for your souls, and show your selves faithful in the love of
Christ.

Thus for worshipping of Christ, and refusing to worship Idols, this happy
mother, having seen her seven sons first slain with sundry deaths, and
dying seven times in them, at the last was also crowned with Martyrdom and
received to everlasting felicity.

These few examples of almost an infinite number, may suffice to show, that the
Martyrs which suffered under the heathen Roman Enperours, to the time of
Constantine the Great, which was 300 years and more, suffered all for
professing themselves to be Christians, and refusing to worship the Idols of
the heathen Roman Emperors. Which being thus declared, hereby is that proved
(for the first 300 years after Christ) which was desired, that is, that the
Martyrs of the Primitive Church dyed for that faith, which the Church of
England, together with all the reformed Churches of Christiandome do profess.
For both these are in our Church so professed, as we hold it most honorable to
dye in maintenance of the faith of Christ, and refusing to worship any Idols,
either of old Rome that worshipped the Images of heathen men; or of new Rome,
that adoreth the Images of Christian men. For though the difference of a
heathen, and of a Christian man, be exceeding great; yet in worshipping of
them both religiously, and much more in so worshipping their Images, there is
no difference, but such Images are Idols alike, and the worshippers of them are
in like sort Idolaters. But this disputation belongs to another place.

That which is here to be debated is, that seeing our Church in England
professes the faith of Christ, and abhors the Idols of the heathen, as all
reformed Churches do; that all the Martyrs of the Primitive Church, for the
first three hundredth years after Christ, dyed for the same faith and Religion,
which is now professed in England. After the time that Constantine the Great
had prevailed against his enemies the heathen Princes which were partakers with
him in the Empire, the persecution of Christians in the former manner ceased
in all the Roman Empire, excepting the short time of Julian the Apostata; for
notwithstanding that there were grievous troubles which the true Christians
suffered also after, especially by the Arrians, and also by some other
heretics and schismatickes in their sundry Countries, yet was there not any
universal persecution unto death in any degree like the former, for the causes
above mentioned, or by the heathen.

Within the Church there arose indeed great troubles generally by the
authority of the Emperors, that favored the heresy of Arius, and by the Arian
Bishops, and other of that heresy, soliciting authority with all importunacy
against Athanasius, and other that maintained the sound Orthodoxe, and holy
faith of the Godhead of Christ of one and the same substance with the Father:
In which worthy cause, whatsoever was suffered by any, and namely by
Athanasius, worthy to be immortal, and to have his name preserved for ever in
the Church with high regard and honor, they and Athanasius suffered for that
faith that is also professed by all reformed Churches, and namely by our Church
in England, as may appear by Athanasius Creed, or confession of faith set
down in our book of common prayer, and appointed by public authority to be
openly read in all our Churches.

Other universal persecutions for any matter of Christian faith we read of
none. And as for such particular troubles as were r^ised in the Church, about
any heresy condemned by any of the four first general Councels, whatsoever
those Councels decreed against such heresies, is received and professed by our
Church in England. Thus it is proved that all the Martyrs of the Primitive
Church suffered for our Religion that is now professed in England.

And in all ages whatsoever, true and right Martyrs there have been, that is,
which suffered death for bearing witness to the word of God and to any part of
Christian Religion, delivered by Jesus Christ and by his holy Apostles (for it
is the cause and not the punishment only that makes a Martyr) they dyed all
for some Article or other of the Religion which is professed in England. And of
this sort, for some laterages, especially in this wherein we live, the
barbarous Cruelty of the Roman Catholics has been such, as in this age,
both England in some former times, and especially in the reign of Queen Mary,
and many other kingdoms and countries of Christendom, have flowed with the
Christian blood that has been shed by them. They boast indeed of Martyrs that
have dyed for the defense of their Religion; for which if our Christian Kings
and States that have restored the sincerity of Christian Religion, had made
laws for that purpose, and put them in execution upon some turbulent Persons
obstinately seeking to deprive us of the true worship of God, and to bring us
back again to the blindness, and ignorance, superstitions and will worships,
errors and heresies, Idolatries and blasphemies of the Sea of Rome, who could
justly reprove such proceedings? But it will be hard to show that our
Christian Princes and States have yet hitherto so proceeded.

Possibly in the wars, and in the rage of battle, and in the fury of
victory, some outrages may have been committed, which we do not justify. But
that in time of peace when laws might be obeyed, and the Judges sit quietly
upon their benches, it will not be easy to show that there has bin any such
course. Their shameless Legendaries report indeed, that we have put men into
Bears skins, and set dogs to worry them. But they that wrote such things,
had neither truth, nor modesty in so writing.

They complain much also of some Jesuits, Seminaries, and other Roman
Catholics, adjudged unto death in this Land. And it is true, that some such
have been executed, but not any, simply for any matter of Religion and divine
Service, but either for Fellonies, and Treasons, and that some such as the like
were never heard of in any age; or for such erroneous, and heretical points of
Doctrine as directly impugneth the Sovereignty of the State, and enforced a
necessity of such Laws, and execution of them upon some notorious Offenders,
and seditious practisers to seduce the subjects from their allegiance. But this
is cleared in many other places, and here it may suffice to show, that which
has been proved, That the Martyrs of the Primitive Church dyed for that truth
which is now professed in England. Which having been thus proved by this
Treatise, there has been performed whatsoever is desired. Which God grant may
be of as good use to such as have desired it: as the writer from his soul does
pray God may vouchsafe them.

FINIS.

