ENGLAND'S Remembrancer, For the Late Discovery of the Horrid PLOT: Found in a
Meal Tub, by Sir William Waller One of his Majesty's Justices of Peace for
Middlesex.
The Design of the Papists in this PLOT was, to put it off themselves, and lay
it upon the Presbyterians: making them the Designers of the Change of
Government, and the Murderers of his Majesty, etc.
EXperience shows whilst Godfrey lived here,
No formidable PLOT durst 'ere appear,
But what was quel'd as soon as well begun,
And made apparent unto every one,
In such clear Demonstration, that it is plain
He was the Coachman to great Charles his Wain.
And safely did secure from Popish Plots
All poor distressed threatened Hugonots:
Since whose inhumane Murder, Our great God
Has raised our Foes, full, as severe a Rod;
A man whose sharp prodig'ous piercing Eye,
Can plainly see their utmost Treachery.
And knows full well with such great Knaves to deal,
Witness the Papers found in Tubs of Meal.
That Roman scarlet Whore, he now will maul her,
This we expect from good Sr William Waller.
A PLOT contrived against Presbyterian Blood,
Whose Innocence the World has understood.
A PLOT forged by the chief of this great CITY!
And no man Punished, it is great Pity!
A PLOT contrived and no man knows yet what,
This is a Romish Devil of a PLOT.
But thanks to GOD, o KING, and Wallers care,
Their hidden Engines now discovered are,
For what they on this City would have laid,
Is by his Circumspection betrayed;
GOD'S Providence, and Wallers studious care
Has laid the Bottom of their Secrets bare:
And shows their Plot's of so deformed a hew,
As none dare own, but the bold Roman Crew.
Who neither fear their GOD, Honor their KING,
Their Romish Principles teach no such thing,
Slaughter and Murder are the only Books,
In which each Romanist devoutly looks,
And nothing is by them more understood
Than shedding Protestant (though Princely) Blood.
Though thanks to God their Devilish Romish Sport
Has not as yet prevailed upon the Court:
All Sovereign Princes are e'n Sacred things,
It Is Dangerous meddling with the Thrones of Kings.
And we still hope, whilst Waller lives we may
Find out those Drifts designed to betray
Both KING and Kingdom, I, and Nation too,
At one Blood-thirsty and revengeful Blow.
And not inferior is great LONDON'S Mayer,
Who to detect the same took no less Care,
When once the 'Curst Discovery began,
And his great Wisdom did each Matter scan,
Nothing like this ever reached the Heart of Man.
It did appear so foul, none present knew
How to believe the things, there sworn were true;
Until their Dangerfield declared, He
Would make appear what he did Certify.
All that remains is only fervent Prayer
For his Majesty's prosperous welfare,
Sir William Waller, and our good Lord Mayer.
We praise our God, though Papists did design
On Protestants to cast this Dismal Crime.
So good has our GOD been, to turn the Story
To their great Infamy and his great Glory.
Let therefore ENGLAND now once more rebound
With joyful Eccho's that may tear the Ground,
In Memory of his Great Mercy shown,
Than which, a greater scarce was ever known.
Cease then ye bloody minded Papists, cease,
Your only way will be to live in Peace:
Accept the Mercies of our Gracious KING,
Lest you do go to Heaven in a String:
Then 'twill be late Repentance, now you may
Have Mercy offered while it is called to day.
If this fair Proffer you reject, it is just
Ketch should conclude your Lives, and so he must.
LONDON, Printed in the Year, 1679.


