students listening to preacher in chapel A Plain and familier course of
Catechizing fitted for the Meanest Capacity


NIAYTS: OR, A Course of Catechizing; Being the MARROW Of All ORTHODOX and
PRACTICAL EXPOSITIONS Upon the Church-Catechism; And of all CONTROVERSIES Upon
the Church-Customes and Observances.

Digested into LII HEADS, For the LII SVNDAYS in the Year.

Useful for MINISTERS and their PEOPLE, SCHOOLMASTERS and their SCHOLARS,
PARENTS and their CHILDREN, MASTERS and their SERVANTS.


Imprinted at London by James Cortre^, for Hen. Marsh, at the Princes Arms in
Chancery Lane. 1664.

To the Reader.
THis method of Exposition was first designed according to the
Palatinate-Catechism by Scultetus, the Dutch form by Jo. Groaning, and is now
completed according to Bishop Gaudens general Directions to this purpose, in
his Consideration upon the Lyturgie, and the particular way of most Protestant
Churches, who have reduced their respective Catechisms to as many parts as
there are Sundays in the Year.

The Reverend Authors out of whom this Exposition has been gathered.
BIshop Gauden, who was the first Promoter of this Exposition. Bishop Andrews.
Bishop Nicholson. Bishop Hall. Bishop Reynolds. Bishop Usher. Bishop Downham.
Bishop Tailor. Bishop Prideaux. Bishop Morton. Bishop Davenant. Dr. Hammond.
Dr. Pierson. Dr. Heylin. Dr. Jackson. Dr. Boughen. Dr. Sherlock. Dr. Gouge. Dr.
Sparrow. Mr. Smith Mr. Nowel, Dean of St. Paul's Mr. Crook. Mr. Rogers. Mr.
Perkins. Mr. Dod. Mr. Leigh. Mr. Ball. Mr. Hooker.
Books newly printed.
A New Survey of the Turkish Empire, History and Government, completed: being
an exact and absolute discovery of what is worthy of knowledge, or any way
satisfactory to curiosity in that mighty Nation. With several Brass Pieces,
lively expressing the most eminent Personages concerned in this subject.

Florus Hungaricus: or, The History of Hungaria and Transylvania, deduced from
the Original of that Nation, and their settling in the year of our Lord 461. to
this dangerous and suspectful Period of that Kingdom by the present Turkish
Invasion, Anno 1664.

The School of Wisdom, dedicated to his Grace James Duke of Monmouth, with his
lively Effigies. A Piece truly useful to all, but especially the young Nobility
and Gentry.

All sold by Henry Marsh.

Injunctions for Catechizing since the Reformation.
King Edward the sixth his Injunct. 1547.
ITem, That they shall in Confessions every Lent, examine every person that
comes to Confession to them, whether they can recite the Articles of their
faith, the Pater noster, and the ten Commandments in English, and hear them say
the same particularly; wherein, if they be nor perfect, they shall declare
then, that every Christian person ought to know the said things before they
should receive the blessed Sacrament of the Altar, and admonish them to learn
the said necessary things more perfectly, or else they ought not to presume to
come to Gods board, without a perfect knowledge and will to observe the same:
and if they do, it is to the great peril of their souls, and also to the
worldly rebuke that they might incur hereafter by the same.

Queen Elizabeth's injunct' and Articles, 1559.
Item, That every holy day through the year, when they have no Sermon, they
shall immediately after the Gospel, openly and plainly recite to their
Parishioners in the Pulpit the Pater Noster, the Creed, and the Ten
Commandments in English, to the intent the people may learn the same by heart;
exhorting all Parents and Householders to reach their Children and Servants the
same, as they are bound by the Law of God and conscience to do.

Item, Whether they do not every holy day, when they have no Sermon,
immediately after the Gospel, openly, plainly and distinctly, recite to their
Parishioners in the Pulpit, the Lords Prayer, the Belief, and the Ten
Commandments in English.

Item, Whether they do charge Fathers and Mothers, Masters and Governors of
youth, to bring them up in some virtuous study and occupation.

Can. 59. 1603.
Every Parson, Vicar or Curate, upon every Sunday, and holy day before Evening
Prayer, shall, for half an hour or more, examine and instruct the youth, and
ignorant persons of his Parish in the Ten Commandments, the Articles of the
Belief, and in the Lords Prayer: and shall diligently hear, instruct, and teach
them the Catechism set forth in the Book of Common Prayer. And all Fathers,
Mothers, Masters and Mistresses, shall cause their Children, Servants and
Apprentises which have not learned the Catechism, to come to the Church at the
time appointed, obediently to hear, and to be ordered by the Minister, until
they have learned the same. And if any Minister neglect his duty herein, let
him be sharply reproved upon the first Complaint, and true notice thereof given
to the Bishop or Ordinary of the place. If after submitting himself, he shall
wilfully offend therein again, let him be suspended. If so the third time,
there being little hope that he will be therein reformed, then Excommunicated,
and so remain until he will be reformed. And likewise if any of the said
Fathers, Mothers, Masters or Mistresses, Children, Servants or Apprentises
shall neglect their duties, as the one sort, in not causing them to come, and
the other in refusing to learn, as aforesaid, let them be suspended by the
Ordinaries, (if they be not children) and if they so persist by the space of a
month, then let them be Excommunicated.

In K. James Direct. 616. and K. Charles 1. 1627.
And because the Papists have out-gone us in the godly and useful way of
Catechizing, let every Minister examine and instruct the ignorant persons and
youths of his Parish in the Church-Catechism, according as in the
Common Prayer Book is appointed.

In King Charles 2. his Direct. 1662.
That for the more edifying of the people in faith and godliness, (the
aforesaid abuses laid aside) all Ministers and Preachers in their several
respective Cures, shall not only diligently apply themselves to Catechize the
younger sort, according as in the Book of Common Prayer is appointed; but also
shall in their ordinary Sermons insist chiefly upon Catechistical Doctrines,
(wherein are contained all the necessary and undoubted Verities of Christian
Religion) declaring withal unto their Congregations what influences such
Doctrines ought to have into their lives and conversations; and stirring them
up effectually, as well by their examples as their Doctrines, to the practice
of such religious and moral Duties, as are the proper results of the said
Doctrines, as Self-denial, Contempt of the world, Humility, Patience, Meekness,
Temperance, Justice, Mercy, Obedience, and the like; and to a detestation and
shunning of sin, especially such sins as are so rife among us, and common to
the Age we live in; such are those usually styled the Seven deadly ones: in
short, all kind of Debauchery, Sensuality, Rebellion, Profaneness, Atheism, and
the like. And because these licentious times have corrupted Religion even in
the very roots and foundations, that where there is an afternoons exercise, it
be especially spent either in explaining some part of the Church-Catechism, or
in preaching upon some such text of Scripture as will properly and naturally
lead to the handling of something contained in it, or may conduce to the
Exposition of the Liturgy, and Prayers of the Church, (as occasion shall be
offered) the only cause they grew into contempt amongst the people being this,
that they were not understood.

The Order of Confirmation, or laying on of hands upon Children baptized, and
are able to render an account of their Faith, according to the Catechism
following.
TO the end that Confirmation may be ministered to the more edifying of such as
shall receive it, (according to St. Paul's Doctrine, who teaches that all
things should be done in the Church to the edification of the same) it is
thought good that none hereafter shall be confirmed, but such as can say in
their mother tongue the Articles of the Faith, the Lords Prayer, and the Ten
Commandments, and can also answer to such Questions of this short Catechism, as
the Bishop (or such as he shall appoint) shall by his discretion appose them
in. And this order is most convenient to be observed, for diverse considerations.

First, because that when children come to the years of discretion, and have
learned what their Godfathers and Godmothers promised for them in Baptism, they
may then themselves with their own mouth, and with their own consent, openly
before the Church, ratify and confirm the same, and also promise that by the
grace of God they will evermore endeavor themselves faithfully to observe and
keep such things as they by their own mouth and confession have assented unto.

Secondly, forasmuch as Confirmation is ministered to them that be baptized,
that by imposition of hands and prayer, they may receive strength and defense
against all temptations to sin, and the assaults of the world and the Devil, it
is most meet to be ministered when children come to that age, that partly by the
frailty of their own flesh, partly by the assaults of the world and the devil,
they begin to be in danger to fall into sundry kinds of sin.

Thirdly, for that it is agreeable with the usage of the Church in time past:
whereby it was ordained that Confirmation should be ministered to them that were
of perfect age, that they being instructed in Christ's Religion, should openly
profess their own faith, and promise to be obedient unto the will of God.

And that no man shall think that any detriment shall come to children by
deferring of their Confirmation, he shall know for truth, that it is certain by
Gods Word, that children being baptized, have all things necessary for their
salvation, and be undoubtedly saved.

A CATECHISM: That is to say, An Instruction to be learned of every person
before he be brought to be confirmed by the Bishop.
Question.

WHat is your Name?

Answer.

N. or M.

Q. Who gave you this Name?

A. My Godfathers and Godmothers in my Baptism, wherein I was made a member of
Christ, the child of God, and an inheritor of the kingdom of heaven.

Q. What did your Godfathers and Godmothers then for you?

A. They did promise and vow three things in my name: First, that I should
renounce the Devil and all his works, the pomps and vanities of this wicked
world, and all the sinful lusts of the flesh. Secondly, that I should believe
all the Articles of the Christian faith. And thirdly, that I should keep Gods
holy will and Commandments, and walk in the same all the days of my life.

Q. Do thou think that thou art bound to believe and to do as they have
promised for thee?

A. Yes verily; and by Gods help so I will. And I heartily thank our heavenly
Father, that he has called me to this state of salvation, through Jesus Christ
our Savior. And I pray unto God to give me his grace, that I may continue in
the same unto my lives end.

Q. Rehearse the Articles of thy belief.

A. I Believe in God the Father Almighty, Maker of heaven and earth. And in
Jesus Christ his only Son our Lord; which was conceived by the Holy Ghost,
born of the Virgin Mary, suffered under Pontius Pilate, was crucified, dead and
buried. He descended into Hell, the third day he rose again from the dead. He
ascended into Heaven, and sits on the right hand of God the Father Almighty;
from thence he shall come to judge the quick and the dead. I believe in the
holy Ghost, the holy Catholic Church, the communion of saints, the forgiveness
of sins, the resurrection of the body, and the life everlasting. Amen.

Q. What do thou chiefly learn in these Articles of thy Belief?

A. First, I learn to believe in God the Father, who has made me, and all the
world.

Secondly, in God the Son, who has redeemed me, and all mankind.

Thirdly, in God the holy Ghost, who sanctifies me, and all the elect people
of God.

Q. You said that your Godfathers and Godmothers did promise for you, that you
should keep Gods Commandments. Tell me how many there be?

A. Ten.

Q. Which be they?

A. The same which God spoke in the 20 chapter of Exodus, saying, I am the Lord
thy God, who brought thee out of the land of Egypt, out of the house of bondage.

i. Thou shall have none other gods but me.

ii. Thou shall not make to thy self any graven image, nor the likeness of any
thing that is in heaven above, or in the earth beneath, or in the water under
the earth. Thou shall not bow down to them, nor worship them: for I the Lord
thy God am a jealous God, and visit the sins of the fathers upon the children,
unto the third and fourth generation of them that hate me, and show mercy unto
thousands in them that love me, and keep my commandments.

iii. Thou shall not take the Name of the Lord thy God in vain: for the Lord
will not hold him guiltless that takes his Fame in vain.

iiii. Remember that thou keep holy the sabbath day. Six days shall thou labor
and do all that thou have to do, but the seventh day is the sabbath of the Lord
thy God. In it thou shall do no manner of work, thou and thy son, and thy
daughter, thy manservant and thy maidservant, thy cattle, and the stranger
that is within thy gates. For in six days the Lord made heaven and earth, the
sea, and all that in them is, and rested the seventh day: wherefore the Lord
blessed the seventh day, and hallowed it.

v. Honor thy father and thy mother, that thy days may be long in the land
which the Lord thy God gives thee.

vi. Thou shall do no murder.

vii. Thou shall not commit adultery.

viii. Thou shall not steal.

ix. Thou shall not bear false witness against thy neighbor.

x. Thou shall not covet thy neighbors house, thou shall not covet thy
neighbors wife, nor his servant, nor his maid, nor his ox, nor his ass, nor
any thing that is his.

Q. What do thou chiefly learn by these Commandments?

A. I learn two things: My duty toward God, and my duty toward my neighbor.

Q. What is thy duty toward God?

A. My duty toward God is, to believe in him, to fear him, and to love him
with all my heart, with all my mind, with all my soul, and with all my
strength. To worship him, to give him thanks, to put my whole trust in him, to
call upon him, to honor his holy Name, and his Word, and to serve him truly
all the days of my life.

Q. What is thy duty toward thy neighbor?

A. My duty toward my neighbor is, to love him as my self, and to do to all
men as I would they should do unto me. To love, honor and succor my father and
mother. To honor and obey the King, and all that are put in authority under
him. To submit my self to all my Governors, Teachers, spiritual Pastors and
Masters. To order my self lowly and reverently to all my betters. To hurt no
body by word or deed. To be true and just in all my dealing. To bear no malice
or hatred in my heart. To keep my hands from picking and stealing, and my
tongue from evil speaking, lying and slandering. To keep my body in temperance,
soberness, and chastity. Not to covet nor desire other men's goods, but to learn
and labor truly to get mine own living, and to do my duty in that state of
life, unto the which it shall please God to call me.

Q. My good child, know this, that thou art not able to do these things of thy
self, nor to walk in the commandments of God, and to serve him without his
special grace, which thou must learn at all times to call for by diligent
prayer. Let me hear therefore if thou can say the Lords Prayer.

A. Our Father which art in heaven, hallowed be thy Name. Thy kingdom come. Thy
will be done in earth as it is in heaven. Give us this day our daily bread. And
forgive us our trespasses, as we forgive them that trespass against us. And
lead us not into temptation: But deliver us from evil. Amen.

Q. What desire thou of God in this Prayer?

A. I desire my Lord God our heavenly Father, who is the giver of all goodness,
to send his grace unto me, and to all people, that we may worship him, serve
him, and obey him as we ought to do. And I pray unto God that he will send us
all things that be needful, both for our souls and bodies, and that he will be
merciful unto us, and forgive us our sins, and that it will please him to save
and defend us in all dangers ghostly and bodily, and that he will keep us from
all sin and wickedness, and from our ghostly enemy, and from everlasting death.
And this I trust he will do of his mercy and goodness, through our Lord Jesus
Christ. And therefore I say, Amen, So be it.

Q. HOw many Sacraments has Christ ordained in his Church?

A. Two only, as generally necessary to salvation, that is to say, Baptism,
and the Supper of the Lord.

Q. What meanest thou by this word Sacrament?

A. I mean an outward and visible sign, of an inward and spiritual grace,
given unto us, ordained by Christ himself, as a means whereby we receive the
same, and a pledge to assure us thereof.

Q. How many parts be there in a Sacrament?

A. Two: the outward visible sign, and the inward spiritual grace.

Q. What is the outward visible sign, or form in Baptism?

A. Water, wherein the person is baptized, In the Name of the Father, and of
the Son, and of the holy Ghost.

Q What is the inward and spiritual grace?

A. A death unto sin, and a new birth unto righteousness: for being by nature
born in sin, and the children of wrath, we are hereby made the children of
grace.

Q. What is required of persons to be baptized?

A. Repentance, whereby they forsake sin: and Faith, whereby they steadfastly
believe the promises of God made to them in that Sacrament.

Q. Why then are Infants baptized, when by reason of their tender age they
cannot perform them?

A. Because they promise them both by their sureties; which promise when they
come to age, themselves are bound to perform.

Q. Why was the Sacrament of the Lords Supper ordained?

A. For the continual remembrance of the sacrifice of the death of Christ, and
the benefits which we receive thereby.

Q. What is the outward part or sign of the Lords Supper?

A. Bread and Wine which the Lord has commanded to be received.

Q. What is the inward part or thing signified?

A. The body and blood of Christ, which are verily and indeed taken and
received of the faithful in the Lords Supper.

Q. What are the benefits whereof we are partakers thereby?

A. The strengthening and refreshing of our souls by the body and blood of
Christ, as our bodies are by the bread and wine.

Q. What is required of them who come to the Lords Supper?

A. To examine themselves whether they repent them truly of their former sins,
steadfastly purposing to lead a new life; have a lively says in Gods mercy
through Christ, with a thankful remembrance of his death; and be in charity
with all men.

So soon as the children can say in their mother tongue the Articles of the
Faith, the Lords prayer, the ten Commandments, and also can answer to such
questions of this short Catechism as the Bishop (or such as he shall appoint)
shall by his discretion appose them in; then shall they be brought to the
Bishop by one that shall be their Godfather or Godmother, that every child may
have a witness of his Confirmation. And the Bishop shall confirm them on this
wise.

Confirmation, or Laying on of hands.
Minister. Our help is in the Name of the Lord.


Answer. Which has made heaven and earth.


M. Blessed be the Name of the Lord.


A. Henceforth world without end.


M. Lord, hear our prayers.


A. And let our cry come unto thee.


Let us pray.

ALmighty and everliving God, who have vouchsafed to regenerate these thy
servants by water and the holy Ghost, and have given unto them forgiveness of
all their sins: strengthen them, we beseech thee, O Lord, with the holy Ghost
the Comforter, and daily increase in them the manifold gifts of grace, the
spirit of wisdom and understanding, the spirit of counsel and ghostly
strength, the spirit of knowledge and true godliness, and fulfill them (O Lord)
with the spirit of thy holy fear. Amen.


Then shall the Bishop lay his hand upon every child severally, saying,
DE^end, O Lord, this child with thy heavenly grace, that he may continue thine
for ever, and daily increase in thy holy Spirit more and more, until he come
unto thine everlasting Kingdom. Amen.


Then shall the Bishop say, Let us pray.

ALmighty and everliving God, which make us both to will and to do those
things that be good and acceptable unto thy Majesty, we make our humble
supplications unto thee for these children, upon whom (after the example of the
holy Apostles) we have laid our hands, to certify them (by this sign) of thy
favor and gracious goodness toward them. Let thy Fatherly hand (we beseech
thee) ever be over them: Let thy holy Spirit ever be with them, and so lead
them in the knowledge and obedience of thy word, that in the end they may
obtain the everlasting life, through our Lord Jesus Christ, who with thee and
the holy Ghost, lives and reigns one God, world without end. Amen.


Then the Bishop shall bless the children, saying thus: THe blessing of God
Almighty, the Father, the Son, and the holy Ghost, be upon you, and remain with
you for ever. Amen.


The Curate of every Parish, or some other at his appointment, shall diligently
upon Sundays and Holidays, half an hour before Even-song, openly in the Church,
instruct and examine so many children of his Parish sent unto him, as the time
will serve, and as he shall think convenient, in some part of this Catechism.

And all Fathers, Mothers, Masters and Dames, shall cause their children,
servants, and apprentices (which have not learned their Catechism) to come to
the Church at the time appointed, and obediently to hear, and be ordered by the
Curate, until such time that they have learned all that is here appointed for
them to learn. And whenever the Bishop shall give knowledge for children to
be brought before him to any convenient place for their confirmation, then
shall the Curate of every Parish either bring or send in writing the names of
all those children of his Parish, which can say the Articles of the Faith, the
Lords Prayer, and the ten Commandments, and also how many of them can answer to
the other questions contained in this Catechism.

And there shall none be admitted to the holy Communion until such time as he
can say the Catechism, and be confirmed.

A Course of Catechizing throughout the Year.
SUNDAY I. Of the nature and way of Catechizing.
Question.

TO what end are we all born into the world?

Answer.

I. 1. To know, 2. to serve, 3. to honor, 4. to enjoy God.

II. To do good to all men in our generation, while we behold man on the earth,
with the inhabitants of the world, Isai. 38.

III. To provide for the salvation of our poor souls, before our bodies return
to the dust, and our souls to him that gave them, Eccles. 12.7.

Quest. Which is the sure way that leads unto this end?

Answ. The will of God made known in the holy Scriptures inspired of God, which
are able to make us wise to salvation, perfect and thoroughly furnished unto all
good works, 2 Timothy 3.16, 17.

Quest. How may you (my good Child) learn to understand the Scriptures?

Answ. How can I except some man should guide me? Act. 8.31.

Quest. Who are appointed of God to instruct you in his Word?

Answ. 1. The holy Spirit of God, leading me into all truth, Act. 16.13. 1 Cor.
2.10, 11, 12. 1 John 1.27.

2. The Church, that pillar and ground of truth, 1 Timothy 3.15.

3. The Priests lips in the Church, that preserve knowledge, that the people
might seek it at their mouths.

Quest. How many ways do they instruct you?

Answ. 1. By Reading, 2. by Preaching, 3. by Catechizing.

Quest. What is Catechizing?

Answ. Catechizing is an Ordinance of God, wherein Youth and others are
instructed in the first principles of the Doctrine of Christ, and Oracles of
God, in a wholesome form of sound words, by way of Question and Answer.

Quest. How does it appear that Catechizing is an Ordinance of God?

Answ. 1. By his command enjoining it, Exodus 12.24, 26. chap. 13.8, 14. Deuteronomy.
4.9. chap. 6.7, 20. chap. 11.19.

2. By his favor encouraging it, Genesis 8.19. chap 14.14.

3. By his people practicing it, as Genesis 14.14. 2 King. 2.3, 5, 7. chap. 4.37.
chap. 6.1. 1 Samuel 19.20. 2 Timothy 3 15. Heb. 5 14. chap. 6.1, 2. Genesis 4.4. Romans
2.18. Gal. 6.6.

Quest. Who are to Catechize?

Answ. 1. Parents should bring up their children in the nurture and admonition
of the Lord, Ephesians. 6.4. training up a child in the way wherein he should go,
that when he is old he may not depart from it, Prove. 22.6. Josh. 24.15.

2. Masters, Genesis 14.14.

3. Schoolmasters.

4. Ministers; as good Ministers have done in all Ages.

Quest. What is the benefit you may receive by Catechizing?

Answ. 1. We are hereby seasoned betimes with the faith once delivered to the
Saints, the form of Doctrine according to the analogy of that faith, 2 Timothy
1.13. Jude 3. Romans 6.17. Romans 12.

2. And so grounded and settled, that we need not be tossed to and fro with
every wind of Doctrine by the sleight of men, Ephesians. 4.14.

3. And likewise secured for posterity; committing the things that we have
heard to faithful witnesses, who would teach others also, 2 Timothy 2.2.

Quest. What is it that is contained in the Catechism?

Answ. The true pattern of wholesome words, digested into brief heads,
(according to the pattern of Christ, who reduced the Law to two heads, Mat.
22.27. John 3.16. Eccles. 12.19. Act 20.21.) by the Church, which is to
preserve, to maintain, to propagate, and open true Religion, as our Church has
done in her Catechism; that is to say, An Instruction to be learned of every
Child before he be brought to be confirmed by the Bishop.

Quest. How many things do you learn from the Inscription before the Catechism?

Answ. Five things especially.

Quest. What is the first?

Answ. The Name of it, Catechism.

Quest. What do you learn from that?

Answ. That the Principles of Religion contained in it, are the true faith that
comes by hearing, Romans 10.17. ecchoed from the Apostles (whose sound went into
all the earth) to us by faithful men, who what they have received from the
Lord, the same have they declared unto us, 1 Cor. 11.28.

Quest. What is the second thing in the Title?

Answ. The thing understood by that Name Instruction.

Quest. What do you learn from that?

Answ. 1. Our misery, that without this Instruction, we are strangers from God
through the ignorance that is in us.

2. That the first part of our remedy is to be renewed in the spirit of our
mind, that the eyes of our understanding being enlightened, we may know what is
the hope of his calling, and the things freely given us of God, Ephesians. 4.23.
chap. 1.18. 1 Cor. 3.17. John 17.3.

Quest. What is the third thing in the Inscription of the Catechism?

Answ. They who are to learn it.

Quest. Who are they?

Answ. Children.

Quest. Only Children?

Answ. Any that are weak, and have need of milk, and not of strong meat, being
unskilful in the word of righteousness: but especially children, who with
Timothy are to be instructed in the Scripture from their youth.

Quest. Are children capable of these Instructions?

Answ. They are capable to remember their Creator in the days of their youth,
Eccles. 12.1. to hear the Law, by which a young man may cleanse his way, Psalm.
119.9. to be prepared for that judgment to which great and small shall come,
Rev. 2.12. to come to Christ, who reproved those that forbad little children to
come to him, Mat. 18.19. And Peter must not only seed sheep, but lambs.

Quest. What is the fourth thing you learn here?

Answ. The Duty of children that are to be catechized, Learn.

Quest. What is that?

Answ. It is manifold.

Quest. What is the first duty?

Answ. To come to Catechizing; Come ye children unto me, and I will teach you
the fear of the Lord, Psalm. 34.11. without excuse, Mat. 22. kept off neither by
pastime, sluggishness, nor idleness, Genesis 25.27. Isai. 19.10. Mat. 20.6.
prepared, 1 Chronicles. 29.18. Exodus 19. with a full purpose of heart to cleave to
God according to his word, wherein we are instructed, Act. 11.23.

Quest. What Is the second?

Answ. To pray to God for wisdom to understand, Jam. 1.5. memories to retain,
Heb. 2.1. hearts to embrace, Act 16.14. and lives to practice it, Jam. 1.21, 22.

Quest. What is the third?

Answ. That he that has an ear to hear, should hear, Luke 14.35. Luke 8.18.
attentively, Luke 4.20. cheerfully, reverently and soberly.

Quest. What is the fourth?

Answ. To understand what we hear, and repeat distinctly what we understand; so
learning betimes to give an account of the hope that is in us, Luke 1.46, 47.

Quest. What is the last thing you observe in the Title of the Catechism?

Answ. The time of Catechizing, and the end of it; Before they be confirmed by
the Bishop.

Quest. What is that? can you tell?

Answ. The particular time is half an hour before evening-prayer upon Sundays
and Holy Days; so men keeping the Sabbath with their sons, their daughters,
menservants and maidservants, and all that are within their gates.

Quest. What is the general time of this Duty?

Answ. Before we be brought to be confirmed by the Bishop.

Quest. The love and care of the Church! what do you understand by Confirmation?

Answ. That which we call Bishopping, or that Laying on of hands, Heb. 6.2. an
Ordinance continued throughout all Ages of the Church.

Quest. What is the use of Bishopping or Confirmation?

Answ. 1. That we may with the heart believe, and with the mouth confess to our
salvation, See Rubric before Catechism.
Romans 10.10. what others engaged for us.

2. That by the blessing and prayer we may be established, settled, and
strenghtned against those temptations to which our weakness and years are open.

3. That Catechizing may be in more use and esteem, the unity of the faith may
be maintained, Parents may be careful to instruct their children, children may
be more sound in faith, and civil in manners; that the ignorant and scandalous
may be discerned, and all differences about mixed communion may be quieted and
composed.

Quest. Whose care must it be to see children come to Catechizing?

Answ. 1. The childrens, as they love their souls, which may otherwise perish:
for, for want of knowledge the people perish.

2. Our Parents, as they love us; as they should help us to grace, who have
helped us to sin; as they care for us who are a part of themselves; as they
will answer the being not as careful for our souls, as for our bodies; as they
would account for the charge committed to them at that day, and would not then
come short of bruit creatures, who have tender care of their young; as they
would prevent the sorrow, and provide for the comfort of their old age; as they
tender the welfare of the Church and State, whereof their well-educated
children may be useful members.

Minister.

You say very well; and if you (my dear Friends) take care to bring your
children and servants to this godly and useful exercise, in obedience to God,
and our careful and tender mother the Church; (and you know, they that hear not
the Church, are as heathens and infidels) I say as St. Cyril says in the end
of his Preface: Meum est docere, It Is my work to teach; 2. Vestrum auscultare,
Yours to learn; 3. Dei perficere, and God's to give a blessing: For which
blessing let us pray to God.

Almighty and ever-living God, which make us to will and to do those things
that are acceptable in thy sight, We make our humble supplication unto thee for
these children, that thy fatherly hand may be ever over them, thy holy Spirit
be with them, even the Spirit of wisdom and understanding, the Spirit of
counsel and ghostly strength, the Spirit of knowledge and true godliness; and
fill them with the Spirit of thy holy fear, that they may hear thy word
attentively, understand it clearly, retain and remember it carefully, and live
according to it conscientiously: and prevent us all (O Lord) in all our doings
with thy most gracious favor, and further us with thy continual help; that in
all our works, begun, continued and ended in thee, we may glorify thy holy
Name, and finally by thy mercy obtain everlasting life, through Jesus Christ
our Lord. Amen.

Parents, Ministers and Schoolmasters, may see more of Catechizing and
instructing of Youth, in Bishop Andrews his Pattern of Catechistical Doctrine,
Woodward's Childs Patrimony, Pembles Mischief of Ignorance, Perkin's Preachers
Dignity and Duty, Perkin's right manner of ordering a Family according to
Scripture; and diverse others.

SUNDAY II. Of the benefits we receive by Baptism.
Minister,

NOw you are come (children) in the fear of God, in obedience to the Church,
and to the edification of your souls, to learn that form of Doctrine (which you
are to obey from the heart) in the excellent Church-Catechism.

Q. What are the things that you shall learn from this Catechism?

A. I learn, First, how I became a Christian by the blessed Ordinance of
Baptism, in the four first questions.

2 Being a Christian, I learn what I ought to believe for my salvation, out of
the Apostles Creed, that complete summary of our Faith.

3 Because Faith without works profits nothing, I learn what I ought to do
out of the ten Commandments, the perfect rule of life, Gal. 5.6. 2 Timothy 1.13.
Phil. 2.13.

4 Because without grace preventing, assisting, and blessing, we can neither
believe nor do as we ought; I learn to pray to God from the Lords Prayer, that
rule, sum, pattern, and perfection of devotion.

5 I learn the Doctrine of the Sacraments, which are conveyances of the Grace I
pray for.

Minist. So it seems you say there are five things in the Catechism. 1 A
Preface, in the four first questions. 2 The Apostles Creed. 3 The ten
Commandments. 4 The Lords Prayer. And 5 the doctrine of the two Sacraments,
Baptism, and the Lords Supper.

A. Yes.

Q. What is the excellency of this Catechism above others?

A. 1. That it is not of private, but public authority, and what seemed good
to the Pastors of the Church, being assembled together with one accord, Acts
15.25.

2 In that it is the ancientest way of instructing youth: and (thus says the
Lord) Ask for the old paths, and walk therein, and you shall find rest for
your souls, Jer. 6.16. Job 8.8.

3 Its the briefest way: and those times were happy, when there were but few
things necessary to salvation, and the weightiest things of the Law pressed
upon, and no greater burden laid upon us than these things necessary, Acts
15.28.

4 It Is the plainest and easiest way, a way that may make wise the simplest,
Psalm. 19. Isa. 35.8. Deuteronomy. 30.14. Romans 10.8.

5 This way leads soonest to the end of all Instruction, Godliness, containing
nothing but truths after godliness.

Q. What is the first question in the Catechism?

A. What is your Name?

Q. Why do you begin with that question?

A. That you and others may know my name, and with my name my Religion.

Q. How do men's names put them and others in mind of their Religion?

A. As our sirnames betoken the nature and relation we have in our first birth
-- as etc. so our Christian name betokens the nature and relation we have in
our second birth. As in Circumcision formerly, Genesis 17.15, 16. chap. 18.4. so
in Baptism now, we give our names to God, and to Christ Jesus, entering them as
it were in the book of Life.

Q What are you put in mind of by your name?

A. That we should walk worthy of that name by which we are called, Ephesians. 4.1.
We should not have a name to live by Baptism, and yet be dead, Rev. 3.1. Seeing
we have taken upon us the names of Christians, we should depart from iniquity,
2 Timothy 2.19. These names which we have received with religion, do put us in
mind first to learn the duties of that religion, and then to practice them.

Q. What names are most convenient to be imposed at Baptism?

A. Such names are may mind us of the virtues and excellencies of those persons
that bare them, whose followers we may be as they were of Christ: whose Faith
as we do in Baptism profess, so we may follow it, considering the end of
their conversation.

Q. Who gave you this name?

A. My Godfathers and Godmothers in my Baptism, wherein I was made a member of
Christ, the child of God, and an inheritor of the Kingdom of heaven.

Q. What ground is there for the use of Godfathers and Godmothers?

A. Isa. 8.2, 3. And I took unto me faithful witnesses to record, See Prideaux
de Baptismo: Ham. de confirmat. Hooker l. 5. Jun. in Isa. 8.2. Tertul. de.
Bapt. D^on. Hier. c. 2.
Vriah the Priest, and Zechariah the son of Jeberechiah. And I went unto the
Prophetess, and she conceived and bare a son: then said the Lord to me, Call
his name Mahar-shalalhashbaz. Luke 1 58, 59. And her neighbors and her cousins
called the name of the child Zacharias after the name of his father. Besides
that it has been an ancient custom even from the beginning, Matthew. 19.8. And
there is much in a custom of the Church of God, 1 Cor. 1 6.

Q. What use is there of Godfathers and Godmothers?

A. In case our Parents die, or be ignorant or negligent of our education; or
be seduced with the error of the wicked, these Godfathers are obliged by the
Church to see us brought up in the true faith, with the nurture and admonition
of the Lord.

Q. What is their duty?

A. To instruct us what a solemn vow, promise, and profession we have made by
them: to call upon us to hear Sermons, to learn the Belief, Commandments, and
the Lords Prayer, with all other things which a Christian man ought to know and
believe to his souls health* and that we may be virtuously brought up to lead a
godly and a Christian life; and this upon the solemn promise they have made to
God. When thou vowest a vow unto God, defer not to pay it; for he has no
pleasure in fools, Eccl. 5.4. Be not deceived, God is not mocked.

Q. How happy should we be, if the care of Sureties and Witnesses would be
according to primitive institution and ancient practice!

A. The care of our education would make the Kingdom happy in honest and
well-principled men, the Church in good Christians, and heaven in blessed
Saints.

Q. Then sure your Sureties may well be called Godfathers and Godmothers?

A. Yes; for thus they would offer us up unto God as his children: they
profess faith, repentance and obedience for us as his servants, and are bound
to God for their performance thereof.

Q. When received you this Christian name?

A. In Baptism, the first Sacrament of the New Testament, wherein we were
entered into the Church, engrafted into Christ, and washed from our sins, 1 Cor.
12.13. Gal. 3.27. Ephesians. 2.11, 12, 13. Romans 6.3, 4.

Q. What benefit, honor, and favor have you by being thus by baptism admitted
into the Church?

A. Thereby I am made, 1. a member of Christ. 2. a child of God. 3. an heir of
the kingdom of God.

Q. What do you observe in that you are taught to say you are made?

A. We observe that, alas! we were not born to this happiness; But that as
many as receive him, to them he gives power to become the sons of God, even to
them that believe in his name: Which were born, not of blood, nor of the will
of the flesh, nor of the will of man, but of God, John 1.12, 13. We were by
nature the children of wrath as well as others: But God who is rich in mercy,
etc. Ephesians. 2.4, 5, 6, 8, 9. In this state God made us, and not we our selves.

Q. Now you speak of this state; how manifold is the state of a Christian man?

A. 1. A state of innocence, 2. of sin, 3. of grace. 4. of glory.

Q. What is the state of Innocence?

A. It is a state wherein we all in Adam were made after Gods image, 1. in
Knowledge, 2. Righteousness, 3. Holiness, 4. Uprightness, Genesis 1.27. Col.
3.10. Ephesians. 4.24. Perfect in understanding, will, affections, etc. Eccles. 7.29.
Guided by a law in our hearts, Romans 2.15. Strengthened by Gods assistance in
our works, Acts 17.23. and encouraged with an interest in, and power over all
things here, which is part of Gods image, Genesis 1.29. Psalm. 4.5, 6, 7, 8, 9. and
a hope of reward hereafter. The Lord would have given grace and glory, and no
good thing would he have withheld from us if we had walked uprightly, Psalm. 84
11.

Q. What is the state of sin?

A. It is a state wherein we are all, by the wilful, ungrateful, presumptuous
disobedience of one man Adam, made sinners, 1. by imputation of his guilt (
Romans 5.14, etc. Hos. 2.2.) unto us, as we were in him legally. 2. By
propagation of his sin unto us, as we were in him naturally, Romans 11.16. Genesis
5.3. Job 14.4. Mat. 3.7. Isa. 1.4. Psalm. 51.7. Ephesians. 2.3. All have sinned and
come short of the glory of God, Romans 3 23. Psalm. 143.2. Job 15.14.

Q. What is man's condition in this state?

A. We have lost the favor and love of God; our own integrity and
uprightness; our peace, comfort, and hope: and we are, 1. Enemies to God by
wicked works, 2. Encompassed with a body of sin and death, Romans 7.21.23. Mise
able we are, for the deep and spreading pollution of sin, 1. Darkning our
understanding, making every imagination of the heart evil, 2 Cor. 3 5. Romans
1.21. Jer. 4.24. Ephesians. 4.28. Gal 5.7. Mat. 15.19. Eccl. 9.3. Romans 6.16 Genesis
8.21. Jer. 17.9. 2. Searing and defiling our consciences, Ephesians. 4.15. 1 Timothy
4.2. Tit. 1.15. 3. Making our wills loath the good, and desire the evil, John
8.24.9. 2 Pet. 2.19. polluting the whole man, Romans 3.13, 15, 16, 17. That lust
that conceives in us brings forth sin, Jam. 1.14, 15. 4. We are miserable
for the punishment that follows it, 1. A certain looking for, and fear of
wrath, Romans 2.5. Joh. 3.36. Job 27. and 47.1. and 15.20, 21. and 20 5, 11, 14.
Heb. 2.15.

2 A vanity and curse overspreading us, and all that belong to us, Deuteronomy. 28.

3 Death that is approaching, Genesis 2.17. 1 Cor. 15 22. Ezekiel. 18 4.

4 And the everlasting wrath that is ready to swallow us up, John 3.36. Deuteronomy.
32.22. Psalm. 9.17. Math. 3.10. Luke 3.17. Judge. 7.13. 2 These. 1.7, 8, 9. 2
These. 2.12. Romans 2. 5, 6, 7, 8, 10. Rev. 20, 10, 15. Mat. 7.10. and 13.40, 41.
Woe to us that we have sinned.

Q. O miserable men that we are, who shall deliver us from this body of sin and
death?

A. We thank God through Jesus Christ our Lord, Romans 7.24. who that his Father
might not loose the glory of his creation the honor of his mercy, and have
satisfaction to his justice, and attain the end of his law and government,
appeared to the world in the greatest demonstrations of his goodness, love,
and mercy, to redeem us to this third state of grace and favor, wherein he
has promised, 1. to write his law in our hearts, Heb. 8.10, 11. 2. To deliver
us from sin and Satan, Romans 3. Col. 1.13. 3. Pardon our sins, Isa. 43.15. 4. To
reconcile us to himself, Romans 5.1, 10. 5. To accept of our persons and
performances in his beloved Son Jesus Christ. 6. To give us grace to serve him
in righteousness and true holiness all our days, Luke 1.71. The first entrance
into which state is Baptism, whereby we are made members of Christ, children of
God, etc.

Q. What is the first benefit you have in this state?

A. 1. That we are members of Christ, Ephesians. 5.30. We are joined to him, 1 Cor.
6.15, 17. Live in him, Ephesians. 4.4. Romans 8.11. As branches of him the vine, John
15.5. Wives to him our husband, Ephesians. 5. Living stones upon him the
foundation, Ephesians. 2.20, 21, 22.

Or, the first benefit is, that I am made a member of Christ, from whom the
body fitly joined together, and compacted by that which every joint supplyeth,
according to the effectual working in the measure of every part, makes
increase of the body, unto the edifying of it self in love, Ephesians. 4.16.

Qu. What is it to be a true member of Christ?

A. It Is to be united to him by one spirit, to live in him by his grace, to be
guided by him and his power: For as the body is one, and has many members, and
all the members of that one body being many are one body, so is Christ. For by
one spirit we are all baptized into one body, 1 Cor. 12.12, 13.

Q. It Is true; If the spirit of him that raised up Jesus from the dead, dwell
in you, he that raised up Christ from the dead, shall also quicken your mortal
bodies by his Spirit that dwells in you, Romans 8.11. I am the vine (says
Christ) ye are the branches: he that abides in me, and I in him, the same
bears much fruit, John 15.5. To be the members of Christ, is to receive from
him as from our head, life, sense, and motion. What condition were you in
before you were a member of Christ? and what would have become of you if you
had not been thus made a member of Christ?

A. We should have been strangers from the life of God, the life of grace
derived to us from God in Christ, from whom we might have received grace for
grace, Ephesians. 4, 10.

Qu. Indeed as we had withdrawn our selves from the authority of God by our
disobedience, so we are withdrawn from the gracious influence of God by sin,
whereby all the faculties of our souls are corrupted, the imaginations of our
hearts are evil, the frame of our nature is depraved, and we are dead in sin,
until an heavenly life from God in Christ, in whom he is well pleased,
enliveneth us; and that heavenly spirit which he has received without measure
quicken us according to the measure of every part. But are all they true
members of Christ that are baptized?

A. 1. Some are only members of Christ outwardly: They went out from us, but
they were not of us; for if they had been of us, they would no doubt have
continued with us: but they went out that they might be made manifest that they
were not all of us, 1 John 2.19. Heb. 6.4, 5, 6.

2 Others are members of Christ inwardly, that have inwardly that grace from
Christ their head which they profess outwardly. Now ye are the body of Christ,
and members in particular, 1 Cor. 12 17.

Qu. What is the second benefit?

A. That we are children of God, John 1.12. See what manner of love is this the
Father has showed us, that we who are by nature children of wrath, should be
called the sons of God! 1 John 3.1. Ephesians 1.5. Gal. 4.4, 5, 6. Heb. 2.10, 11,
13. 1. We are called by his name, 1 John 3.1. 2 Timothy 2.19. 2. We are admitted
to his family, Gal. 6.10. He feeds, provides for, pitieth, protecteth,
corrects, instructs and rewards us.

Q. What would you have been, if you had neglected being baptized, if you had
not entered into the Christian profession?

A. Oh! I should then have wished I had never been born; or being born, to die:
then I had been a child of wrath even as others, Ephesians. 2.3. I had been one of
those whom the Apostle Peter calls cursed children, 2 Pet. 2.14. a son of
perdition.

Q. What is it to be a child of God?

A. To be a child of God, is, 1. To be framed after Gods image, in
righteousness, and true holiness. 2. It is by favor to be adopted for Gods
child. --

Minist. To be a child of God, is to be begotten anew by the immortal seed of
the Word, and bear Gods Image in holiness, endeavoring in all things to do
their Fathers will, Luke 6.26 -- To be removed from the family wherein we lived
by nature, to the family of heaven, Ephesians. 2.2, 3, 19. where God is our Father,
Christ is our elder Brother, the Saints are our coheirs, the Angels are our
fellow servants; to he free from all our former relations: If Christ has made
you free, then are you free indeed, -- and to be invested in all the rights and
privileges of the sons of God.

Q. Do you know what are the privileges of being sons of God?

A. 1. A child of God is free from the guilt of sin: There is now no
condemnation to them who are in Christ Jesus, who live not after the flesh, but
after the spirit, Romans 8.1. 2. He is under the care of God. 3. He is an heir of
the promise of God for this life, and that which is to come. 4. He has a new
name which no man knows but he that has it, Rev. 2.17. 5. He has the spirit
of God, whereby he cries Abba, Father.

Qu. What is your duty now you are the children of God?

A. We ought, 1. to admire Gods love. Behold what manner of love the Father
has bestowed upon us, that we should be called the children of God! 1 John 2.1.

2. We should imitate him, as obedient children; not fashioning your selves
according to your former lusts in your ignorance; but as he who has called you
is holy, so be ye holy in all manner of conversation.

3. We ought to rest in his good will concerning us, knowing that it is our
gracious Father, let him do what seems him good.

4. We ought to rely upon him, as a child does upon his father.

Q. What is the third benefit?

A. That we are hereby inheritors of the kingdom of heaven, not only that we
are sons, but heirs of God, and coheirs with Christ, Romans 8.17, 29. 1 Pet.
1.3, 4. Luke 12 32. Fear not, little children, it is your fathers good will to
give you a kingdom.

Q. If you had not thus been entered into a Christian profession, what had
become of you?

A. Being without Christ, aliens from the Commonwealth of Israel, we should
have been strangers from the covenant of promise, having no hope, and being
without God in the world.

Q. How do we inherit the kingdom of heaven?

A. 1. Not by birth, for so his only begotten Son, John 3.16. the brightness
of his image, and the express character of his person, has he appointed heir
of all things, Hebr. 1.3.

2. But by gift; The gift of God is eternal life through Jesus Christ.

Q. How are we assured of this gift?

A. We are assured of it, 1. In the promise which will never fail: Fear not
little flock, it is your fathers will to give you the kingdom, Luke 12.32.
John 17.24. Heb. 4.13. 2 These. 1.7. And faithful is he that has promised. 2.
In the price paid, viz. the precious blood of Christ, which is not shed in
vain: By the blood of Christ we have entrance into the holiest, Heb. 10.19. 3.
In the earnest: In whom also, after that ye believed, ye were sealed with the
holy spirit of promise, which is the earnest of our inheritance, until the
redemption of our purchased possession, Ephesians. 1.13, 14.

Q. What remains for us to do?

A. Having these promises, to cleanse our selves from all filthiness of flesh
and spirit, perfecting holiness in the fear of God, 2 Cor. 7.1. That we may be
meet to be partakers of the inheritance of the Saints in light: that
inheritance that is to be had among them that are sanctified.

Bishop Nicholson on Catechism; The Christians duty and privilege.

SUNDAY III. Of the Vow and Covenant in Baptism.
Q. WHat did your Godfathers and Godmothers promise in your name?

A. They did promise and vow three things in my name:

1 First, that I should forsake the Devil and all his works, the pomps and
vanities of the wicked world, and all the sinful lusts of the flesh.

2 That I should believe all the Articles of the Christian Faith.

3 That I should keep Gods holy will and commandments.

Q. They promised then in your names, 1. a solemn abrenunciation of that which
is evil, 2. a serious belief of all truth, and a conscientious practice of all
duty. What did you mean (children) when you told me that your Godfathers and
Godmothers promised that you should forsake the Devil and all his works?

A. That they promised to instruct us in the sin and danger of yielding to the
temptations, and doing the works of the great enemy of mankind, the Devil.

Q. What are his works?

A. 1. Lying, John 4.4. 2. Slander, Mat. 4.1. Job 1.7, 11. and 2.4, 5. 3
Hatred, Mat. 13.25, 3. 4 Murder, Rev. 17.11. 5 Pride, Isa. 14.11. 1 Timothy 3.6. 6
Drawing others to sin, Matthew. 4.3. 1 These. 3.5. 7 Final apostasy, and falling
away, when we are enlightened and have tasted of the heavenly gift, Heb. 6.4, 5,
6. Jude 6.

Q. What are his temptations?

A. All those advantages he takes from the creatures round about us, to ensnare
us to sin; and God knows we are not ignorant of his devices, 2 Cor. 2.11.

Qu. What do you mean by the pomps and vanities of the wicked world, which is
the second thing they promised you should forsake?

A. All that is in the world (the lust of the flesh, the lust of the eye, and
the pride of life) all that may be an occasion of sin must be forsaken as a
snare, and all that may do service to God as a sacrifice, 1 John 2.15, 16, 17.

Q What are the lusts of the flesh?

A. Adultery, fornication, uncleanness, lasciviousness, idolatry, witchcraft,
hatred, variance, adultery, wrath, strife, seditions, heresies, envyings,
murders, drunkenness, revilings, and such like; which they that do shall not
inherit the kingdom of heaven, Gal. 5.19, 20, 21.

Q. Now you are under a solemn promise by your Sureties, To put off concerning
the former conversation, the old man, which is corrupt, according to the
deceitful lusts; that you should deny ungodliness and worldly lusts, and have
no fellowship with the unfruitful works of darkness, Heb. 6. Ephesians. 4.22. Tit.
2.12. Isa. 1.16. Romans 13.14. Ephesians. 5.11. and so cease to do evil. Have not they
promised for you, that you should learn to do well?

A. Yes; To believe sincerely all the Articles of the Christian Faith.

Q. What do you understand by that?

A. 1. That we must know, assent to, embrace, as worthy of all acceptance,
without exception, all the fundamental Articles and points of our Christian
faith, by an obedience of faith that works by love, Romans 16.26. Gal. 5, 6.
Jam. 1.17, 18, 19, 20.

Q. What is it to believe?

A. It Is by the gift of God, Ephesians 2.8. To have our hearts wrought upon
inwardly by the holy spirit, See Bishop Nich. Cat: out of the Fathers.
Romans 12.3. and outwardly by the holy word, Romans 10.14. So that the
understanding is enlightened to know all saving truth revealed of God; the will
is inclined to assent to all saving truth known; the affections are ready to
embrace all saving truth assented to.

Q What is it we must believe?

A. The twelve Articles of the Christian Faith; Ruffin. in symb. Cypr. Ep. 70.
ad Dur. Baron. Tom. 1. Isidor de Eccl. 2.3. Ignat. ad Trall. and Magnes. Iren.
l. 1. c. 3.
the principles of the doctrine of Christ; the truth of God as it is in Jesus;
reduced either by the Apostles themselves, or by others out of their writings,
to an wholesome form of sound words, according to the analogy of faith, 2 Timothy
1.13. Romans 12 6.

Q. How much must we believe?

A. All the Articles of the Christian faith; Whosoever will be saved, before
all things it is necessary that he hold the Catholic Faith; which faith,
except a man keep whole and entire, without doubt he shall perish everlastingly.

Q. How may you know that you truly believe the articles of the Christian Faith?

A. When we are so rooted and established in the Christian truth, that it has
an influence over our hearts and lives, Romans 16.26. Jac. 2.17. Gal. 5.6.

Q. Have all Christians an equal belief of the Articles of the Faith?

A. 1. Some have a weak Faith: They say, We believe, Lord help our unbelief: O
Lord increase our faith, Luke 17.5. Matthew. 14.31. Mat. 12.10. Matthew. 5.6.

2. Some have a strong faith, who with Abraham stagger not at the word of God
through unbelief, but are strong in faith, Romans 4.10. They have a faith, which
is the comfortable subsistence of things hoped for, and the strong evidence of
things not seen, Heb. 11.1.

Minist. The second thing then which your Godfathers and Godmothers promise for
you, is this; that though you see not, nor of your selves know the things of
Christian Religion, Yet (being they are certainly contained in the holy
Scriptures, the writings of the blessed Apostles and Prophets inspired of God,
the God of wisdom, who cannot be deceived; and of truth, who will not deceive)
with a certain and full persuasion you will assent to the truth of them, and
with a fixed and undaunted resolution you will profess them; and with this
faith in your heart, and confession in your mouth, you will live and dye.

Q. You say, that at your Baptism your Godfathers and Godmothers have promised
three things in your name: The first whereof you told us, was, That you should
renounce all evil; the second was, That you should believe all truth: I pray
what is the third?

A. That I should keep Gods holy will and commandments, and walk in the same
all the days of my life.

Q. How many things are contained in that one promise?

A. Three things.

Q What is the first?

A. That I should have a Rule, even Gods holy will and commandments, Psalm.
119.105. Ephesians. 5.2.

Q. What is the second?

A. That I should walk by this Rule, neither standing still idly, nor turning
rashly to the right hand or to the left.

Q. What is the third?

A. That I should continue so doing all the days of my life, Luke 1.75.
knowing, that my labor shall not be in vain in the Lord: blessed is he that
endures to the end.

Q. Do you think that you are bound to believe and do as your godfathers and
godmothers promised for you?

A. Yes: I have by them vowed a Vow unto God, and I will not defer to pay it,
Eccles. 5.4.

Q. How do you say? will you do it?

A. By Gods help, so I will: of my self I am able to do nothing: I can do all
things through him that strengthens me.

Q. You say well: Have you any thing else to say in reference to your Baptism,
and the happy state you are in by it?

A. Yes, I have two things.

Q. What are they?

A. 1. I heartily thank my heavenly father, because he has called me to this
state of salvation, through Jesus Christ our Savior.

2. I pray to God to give me his grace, that I may continue in the same to my
lives end.

Q. What do you intend to do in order to the performance of your great Vow?

A. I intend, God willing, 1. to believe steadfastly; 2. to obey
conscientiously; 3. to pray devoutly; 4. to receive the Sacraments solemnly.

Q. Indeed these are the four parts of the pure Religion, and undefiled before
God. What Rules bave you in the performance of these things?

A. 1. The Rule of my Belief are the Articles of the Creed.

2. The Rule of my life and obedience are the Ten Commandments.

3. The Rule of my Prayer is the Lords Prayer.

4. The Rule for the receiving of the Sacrament, is the Doctrine hereafter
delivered.

Q. I pray rehearse the Articles of your Belief.

A. 1. I believe in God the Father Almighty, Maker of heaven and earth: and, 2.
in Jesus Christ his only Son our Lord; 3. which was conceaved by the Holy
Ghost, born of the Virgin Mary, 4. suffered under Pontius Pilate, was
crucified, dead and buried: 5. He descended into Hell, the third day he rose
again from the dead. 6. He ascended into Heaven, and sits on the right hand
of God the Father Almighty; from thence he shall come to judge the quick and
the dead. I believe in the Holy Ghost, the holy Catholic Church, the communion
of saints, the forgiveness of sins, the resurrection of the body, and the life
everlasting. Amen.

Q. What do you learn in these Articles of your Belief?

A. First, I learn to believe in God the Father, who has made me and all the
world.

Secondly, In God the Son, who has redeemed me and all mankind.

Thirdly, In God the Holy Ghost, who sanctifies me, and all the elect people
of God.

Minister. To keep the unity of the Spirit in the bond of peace, that there
might be one body and one Spirit; even as we were all called into one hope of
their calling, that there might be one Lord, one Faith, one Baptism, one God
and Father of all. Cent. Magd. 2 Col. 6.6.
The blessed Apostles (as some think) being of one accord in one place, Calvin.
Inst. 2.16.
composed this wholesome form of sound Doctrine; or else good men gathered it
out of the writings delivered by them to the Churches, as our Church thinks,
Confess. Art. 8. Which Foundation of Religion, has been explained in the Nicene
and Athanasian Creed, and in all the Confessions of other Churches, according
as times and occasions required: which our Church would have us understand
clearly, embrace heartily, profess constantly, and live up to religiously. This
Belief we shall open, 1. by explaining the words, and endeavoring a right
Notion and Conception of them, as they are to be understood in the Belief. 2.
We shall show what are those truths which are naturally contained in those
words so explained. 3. We shall confirm each truth so made out. 4. We shall
show the necessity of believing those truths so confirmed. 5. We shall show
what efficacy they may have upon the soul and life of a Believer.

Authors of the Vow in Baptism; Dr. Hammond's Practical Catechism; Bishop Reyn.
on Hos. 14. Bishop Hall's Satan's Fiery Dart; Bishop Nicholson's Catechism.

SUNDAY IV. The first Article of our Faith, or God Almighty, Maker of Heaven
and Earth.
WHat is the first Article of your Belief?

A. I believe in God the Father Almighty, Maker of Heaven and Earth.

Q. Why do you say, I believe?

A. To signify that every one must be saved by his own faith, and not by
another: Examine YOUR SELVES, whether you be in the faith, 2 Cor. 12. Know ye
not YOUR OWN SELVES, etc. Prove YOUR OWN SELVES, that you may have rejoicing in
your selves, and not in another.

Q. The Church first discovers to us the true faith, and afterward we put our
own seal to it, that it is true. As if Christ should ask every one of us in
particular, as he did the blind man restored to his sight, Do thou believe on
the Son of God? Joh. 9.35, 38. we are taught every one of us to answer as he
did, Lord I believe, As if the Son of God did promise to every one of them
which are gathered together in his name, what he promised to one of the
multitude, whose son had a dumb spirit, If thou can believe, all things are
possible to him that believes: each one for himself returns this answer,
Lord, I believe, help mine unbelief, Mat. 9.17, 23, 24. I live, ( says St.
Paul) yet not I, but Christ lives in me; and the life which I now live in the
flesh, I live by the faith of the Son of God, who loved me, and gave himself
for me. Without faith it is impossible to please God. But what do you mean when
you say, I do believe?

A. When I say, I do believe; 1. I say, I do understand this truth, that God
is, etc. 2. I say, I give my assent to it as revealed of God; by his Son
outwardly, and his Spirit inwardly. 3. I say, I confess this truth thus
embraced before the world.

Q. Therefore when you say you believe this and the other Articles of faith,
you mean that you assent to them as an infallible truth revealed by God, (who
by reason of his infinite knowledge cannot be deceaved, and by reason of his
infinite holiness cannot deceive) and delivered unto us in the writings of the
blessed Apostles and Prophets, immediately inspired and acted by the Holy
Ghost, out of whose writings this brief sum of necessary points of faith was
first collected. I say, you mean that your faith came by the ear hearing of
these words opened in the Church, and that the ear conveyed them to your mind
in all wisdom and spiritual understanding: the mind conveyeth the truth so
understood to the heart, which being opened, receaveth and embraces it; and
then out of the abundance of the heart the mouth speaks: and if now you
confess with your mouth the Lord Jesus, and believe in your heart that God has
raised him from the dead, you shall be saved. Do you think you must make
confession of your faith?

A. 1. In respect of Gods glory, who has commanded it. 2. In regard of our
selves, who shall be rewarded for it. 3. In regard of others, who shall be
confirmed and edified by it; we must make profession of our faith before men,
Mat. 10 32. Luke 9.26.

Q. Whosoever shall be ashamed of me and my words, of him shall the Son of man
be ashamed, when he shall come in his own glory, and in his Fathers, and the
holy Angels. Be ready always ( says St. Peter) to give an answer to every man
that asks you a reason of the hope that is in you, 1 Pet. 3.14. What do you
mean when you say you believe in God?

A. I mean, 1. that there is a God: for he that comes to God, must believe
that he is.

Q. Gods attestation, is the ground of divine faith; his being is the ground of
his attestation: What is the second thing you mean when you say, I believe in
God?

A. I mean, that I believe him the only true God, holy, omnipotent, all-wise,
all-sufficient, just, merciful, and good; who is of himself, and by whom all
things subsist.

Q How do you know that there is such a God infinitely holy? etc.

A. I know it, 1. by his works showing; for by the greatness and beauty of the
creatures, proportionably the beauty of them is seen, Wisd. 13.5. Romans 1.20. We
see some things here below have a beginning; therefore we believe a God above
who has no beginning: all things that are made, are made by another; for
nothing we see makes it self: therefore we believe a God, never made, but ever
of himself, by whom all things were made. Yea, when I see creatures working
without reason, according to reason, in order to their several ends in their
several places, I believe a God over all, who guides these creatures by that
eternal counsel of his will.

A. 2. The public consent and universal reason of the World, taught every man
to say, I believe in God.

A. 3. By clear discoveries which God made of himself, and of other things by
Revelations and Prophesies, Isai. 45.5, 6, 7, 18, 19, 21, 22, 24.

A. 4. I know there is a God by what works we have heard with our ears, and our
fathers have told us in their days, and in the old time before them. Blessed be
the Lord God, who only does wondrous works, Psalm. 44.1. and 72.18.

A. 5. I know there is a God by my own Conscience, which comforts me when I do
well, and torments me when I do ill with the thoughts of God, who is not far
from every one of us; in whom we live, and move, and have a being, Act. 17.
whom the heathen sought after, if by any means they might feel after him, and
find him: for they knew we are all his offspring.

Q. What is the third thing you understand when you say, I believe in God?

A. I believe in one God, that there is no other God but one, and there is none
besides him, Deuteronomy. 4.35. 1 Cor. 8.4. Thus says the Lord, the King of Israel, I
am the first, and I am the last, and besides me there is no God. I am the Lord,
and there is none else, there is no God besides me; that they may know from the
rising of the Sun, and the going down of the same, that ther^ is none beside
me. I am the Lord, and there is none else. Isai 48.12. and 44.6 and 45.5, 6
Deuteronomy. 4.32. and 35.39. Psalm. 18.31. Isai. 45 18, 21. and 44.8. Job 17 3. Deuteronomy.
6.45.

Q What is the fourth thing you say, when you say, I believe in God?

A. I say, I believe all that the only true God has said; and I know whom I
trust, and that he is faithful who has spoken, put my seal to his affirmation,
rely on his promises, fear his threatenings, and embrace his whole will.

Qu. What is the fifth thing you say, when you say, I believe in God?

A. I say, I will rely upon him as God all-sufficient; for he has said, I will
never leave thee, nor forsake thee: so that I may boldly say, The Lord is my
God, my helper, I will not fear what man can do unto me, Heb. 13 5.

Q. What is that God whom you say you believe in?

A. Our God is a Spirit, Job 4.24. infinite, Psalm. 139 81. invisible, 1 Timothy
1.17. eternal, Psalm. 90.2. all-wise; 1 Timothy 6.16. incomprehensible, immutable,
Jam. 1.17. all-sufficient, Gen 17.1. just, merciful, gracious, long-suffering,
Exodus 33. alone to be worshipped, saved, and adored, Mat. 4.10.

Q. Is there but one God?

A. No, there is no other God but one, 1 Cor. 8.5. Deuteronomy. 6 4. and 32.39. Psalm
86.10. Isai. 44.1. and 45.21. Ephesians. 4.5, 6. There are indeed three persons,
three that bear witness in heaven, the Father, the Word, and the Holy Ghost, 1 John 5.7. Mat. 28.19. Mat. 3.16, 17. but these three are one, 1 John 5.7.

Q. That is a mystery which it is rashness to search, piety to believe, and
life to know: in one God there are three persons, distinguished by their names,
inward properties, and outward operations. What do you mean when you say, I
believe in God the Father?

A. I mean, 1. I believe that the only true God whom I worship, is the Father
of our Lord Jesus Christ, who is hlessed for evermore, 2 Cor. 11.31. who gave
him to have life in himself, Joh. 5.26. as he has life in himself: that God is
the Father of Christ, giving him being in the womb, power in heaven and earth,
life from death, and a divine nature by an eternal generation.

A. 2. I mean, that the only true God is Father of all, Ephesians. 4.5. in heaven
and earth: the father of spirits, i. e. Angels; the Father of all things: so
that we may say in the words of the Prophet, Have we not all one Father? has
not one God created us? Mal. 2.10.

A. 3. But I mean especially that I believe that God is our Father,

1. Who created us by his power: for we are all his offspring.

2. Who preserves us by his providence: for in him we live, etc.

3. Who has redeemed us by his Son: Is not he thy father that has bought
thee? has he not made thee, and established thee? Deuteronomy. 32.6. Exodus 4.22. Isai.
44.24. Doubtless thou art our father, though Abraham be ignorant of us, and
Israel acknowledge us not: thou, O Lord, art our father, our redeemer; from
everlasting is thy name, Isai. 63.16.

4. Who of his own will has begotten us, with the word of truth, Jam. 1.18.
Joh. 5.1. Ephesians. 2.10.

5. Who has adopted us: What manner of love is this, that we should be called
the sons of God! And it does not yet appear what we shall be; but we know that
when he shall appear, we shall be like him, 1 John 3.2. Romans 8.17. Col. 3.24.
Heb. 9.15. Thus God has sent forth his Son, that we might receive the adoption
of sons, Gal. 4.4, 5, 6. Ephesians 3 15. and 1.5.

Q. Then you believe that God is the father of Christ by eternal generation; of
all creatures, by creation and preservation; and of all Christians, by adoption
and regeneration. What do you mean when you say, I believe in God the Father
Almighty?

A. I mean, 1. That God has Dominion over all things. Holy, holy, holy, Lord
God Almighty, which was, which is, and is to come. Alleluiah, for the Lord God
Omnipotent reigns Rev. 4 8. and 19.6. Luke 12.5. Act. 17. Jude 25. 1 Timothy
6.15. Thine, O Lord, is the greatness and the power, and the glory, and the
victory, and the majesty: for all that is in the heaven and the earth is thine.
Thine is the Kingdom, O Lord, and thou art exalted as head above all: both
riches and honor come of thee, and thou reignest over all.

Q What is the nature of Gods Authority?

A. 1. He has power to make all things as pleases him.

2. He has power to possess and use all things so made and framed by him.

3. He has power to dispose of all things he so possesses according to his
own pleasure.

Q. What manner of power has he over things?

A. 1. He has an universal power extending to all things.

2. He has an absolute power: Behold, as the clay is in the hand of the
potter, so are ye in my hands, says the Lord Almighty, Jer. 18.6. Romans 9.21.

3. He has an eternal power: 1 Timothy 1.15. Psalm. 145.13. Thy kingdom is an
everlasting kingdom, and thy dominion endures throughout all generations.

Q. Do you mean any more when you say, I believe in God the Father Almighty,
then that you believe that God has all Authority in heaven and earth?

A. Yes: I mean that he has not only an outward power to command others to
work, but an inward power to work all things himself; which I learn from
Christ, who says, With God all things are possible, Mat. 10 27. and from an
Angel, who says, That with God nothing shall be impossible.

Q How many ways is God thus Omnipotent?

A. Three ways.

Q. Which be they?

A. 1. I believe God is Omnipotent, because all power comes from him.

2. I believe he is Omnipotent, because none can resist his power. The Lord of
hosts has purposed, and who can disanul it? His hand is stretched out, and who
can turn it back? Isai. 14.27. Dan 4.35. 2 Chronicles. 20.6.

3. I believe that God is Almighty, because, as Job says, I know he can do
every thing, Job 42.1, 2. that becomes him to do.

Q. Thou, even thou art Lord alone; thou have made heaven, the heaven of
heavens, with all their host, the earth, and all things that are therein, and
thou preservest them all, Neh. 9.6. So if at any time by an evil heart of
unbelief, I should doubt and stagger in any condition, I may remember he is
able to help, Romans 4.21. and 9.21.

Preston and Larkin of the Attributes of God, Zanchy de tribus Elohim, and the
common places of God.

SUNDAY V. The first Article of our Faith, or God Almighty, Maker of Heaven and
Earth.
Q. WHat do you mean when you say, I believe in God the Father Almighty, Maker
of Heaven and Earth?

A. I mean that I believe in God the Father Almighty, Maker of all things
visible and invisible; who made heaven and earth, the sea, and all that in them
is, Exodus 22.11. I believe with St. Paul, that God made the worlds, and all
things therein, seeing that he is Lord of heaven and earth, and dwells not in
temples made with hands, Act. 17.24. See John 1.3, 10. Col. 1.16.

Q Are you sure that all things were made by God?

A. Whatsoever is not made, is God; whatsoever is made, is of God, of whom are
all things.

Q. When a man sees a fair building, and none near, he concludes that some
workmen have been there; for every house is builded by some man, Heb. 3.4. So
when we look upon the great house of the world, upon the earth that hangs
upon nothing, the foundation, the glorious heaven the roof, we acknowledge a
great Master Builder has been here; and he who built all things is God. How
were they made?

A. By creation out of nothing. I beseech thee, my Son, says the Jewish
Church, look upon the heaven and the earth, and all that is therein, and
consider that God made them of things that are not, 2 Mac. 7.18. He calls
things that are not, as though they were. Through faith we understand that the
worlds were framed by the word of God; so that things which are seen, were not
made of things that do appear, Heb. 11.3.

Q. What is the last thing you consider in this Article?

A. That I believe in God the Father Almighty, Maker of heaven and earth, and
all things therein, Genesis 1. Psalm. 33.6, 9. Psalm. 8.19. Psalm. 121.2. Psalm. 124
8. Job 38. And I believe that as he made all things, he preserves and upholds
them by his power, he cares for them by his providence, he orders, guides, and
disposes of them by his wisdom.

Q. What moved God to make the world?

A. His own infinite goodness (he was good, and he did good) and pleasure: Thou
have created all things, and for thy pleasure they are and were created, Rev.
14.11.

Q. To what end did he make the world?

A. To make manifest that glory which he had in himself before the world was
made.

Qu. To us therefore, beloved, there is but one God, of whom are all things,
and we in him; and one Lord Jesus Christ, by whom are all things, and we by
him, 1 Cor. 8.9. How do you know you believe in God aright?

A. I believe in God aright, 1 When I embrace his testimony with full assurance
of Faith. 2. When I can rely on his all sufficiency in an holy life, which
has the promise of this life, and of that which is to come. 3. When I fear and
worship him in spirit and in truth, and walk humbly with him: when I worship
the Lord my God, and him only do I serve.

Q. When does a man believe aright that God is a father?

A. 1. When he gives him that filial fear, honor and reverence that is due
unto him. A son honors his father, and a servant his master: if then I be a
father, where is mine honor, says the Lord of hosts? Mal. 8.6. Whosoever
(says our Savior) does the will of my father which is in heaven, the same is
my brother.

2. When he relies upon him as a father: Your Father knows how to give you
good things, Mat. 7.8, 9, 10.

3. He believes God a Father, when he can with patience bear all Gods dealings
with him. We have had fathers of our flesh, which corrected us, and we gave
them reverence; shall we not much rather be in subjection unto the Father of
spirits, and live? Especially considering, that they chastened us for their own
pleasure, but he for our profit, that we might be partakers of his holiness,
Heb. 12.9, 10. Deuteronomy. 8.5.

4. He looks upon God as his Father, who endeavors to imitate him, and be like
him in actions and affections; who obeys St. Paul's exhortation, Ephesians. 5.1. Be ye
followers of God as dear children. As he who has called you is holy, so be ye
holy in all manner of conversation, 1 Pet. 1.15. Lev. 19.2.

5. He believes God a Father, who draws near to him through Jesus Christ;
endeavoring through him to have access by one Spirit unto the Father.

Qu. How may I discern that I have true faith in God as Almighty?

A. A man may discern that he has true faith in God as Almighty, 1. By an
awful reverence of his Majesty, and Universal Obedience to his will. 2. By
patience and meekness under all his dealings: I was dumb, and opened not my
mouth, because thou did it, Psalm. 39.9. 3. By a tender sense of those
blessings which the Lord of his sovereign mercy has bestowed upon us.

Q. It Is true, this is a sign a man owns the Sovereignty of God over us: But
how shall a man know he truly believes the infinite power of God in himself?

A. 1. When he fears him: I will forewarn you whom you must fear; fear him
which after he has killed, has power to cast into hell: I say unto you, Fear
him, Jam. 4.12. Luke 12.5.

2. When he can trust him: Abraham believes this aright, when he staggered not
at the promise of God through unbelief, but was strong in faith, giving glory
to God, and being fully persuaded, that what he had promised, he was also able
to perform, Romans 4.20, 21.

3. When he can with hope draw near to him, to make his request known unto him,
who is able to do exceeding abundantly above what we can ask or think,
according to the power that works in us, Ephesians. 3.20.

Q. What should your faith in God the Father Almighty, Maker of Heaven and
Earth, work in you?

A. 1. A belief of God that cannot lie, Numb. 23.19. 2. A worship and kneeling
before the Lord our Maker, Psalm. 95.6. A fear, love, reverence, honor and
obedience to our Father, Mal. 1.6. A trust in the Almighty, Mark 10.27. Mat.
6.25, 26. and prayer and thanksgiving to him that created all things, for whose
pleasure they were and are created, Rev. 4.11.

Q Who is he that lives as one that believes God the Maker of Heaven and Earth?

A. 1. He lives so, that makes use of all things in heaven and earth to lead
him to the God that made them; and takes occasion from what he sees made, to
declare the glory of him that made them, Psalm. 148.2, 3, 4, 5. Romans 11.36. Neh.
9.5, 6. Psalm. 104.31. Rev. 4.10, 11. Psalm. 143.10, 11.

2. He, that considering the creation of God, the heaven and the earth which he
made, humbles himself, and says, O what is man!

3. He that can say, Thy hands have made me, and fashioned me: O therefore give
me understanding, that I may keep thy Law, Psalm. 119.73. Thou have made me, I
will serve thee.

4. He that can establish his heart in hope in the Lord his God, who made
heaven and earth, and all things therein, Psalm. 146.5, 6.

Minister. So you do truly profess, really believe, are fully persuaded that
there is one true God in Christ, the Father of us all, who has all power in
heaven and earth; and that heaven and earth, and all things therein, are not of
themselves, but were made in the beginning out of nothing, by God, out of his
goodness, for his glory: and thus you believe in God Almighty, Maker of Heaven
and Earth.

Zanchy de oper. 6 dierum; Gouge's Extent of Gods Providence; Dr. Pearson on
the Creed.

SUNDAY VI. The second Article of the Creed, or Faith in Jesus Christ our Lord.
Q. WHat is the second Article of your Belief?

A. And in Jesus Christ our Lord.

Q. If ye believe in the Father, believe also in me, says our Savior, John
14.1. But what do you mean when you say, You believe in Jesus?

A. I mean that I own, embrace, and rely upon the Savior of the world,
knowing that there is not salvation in any other: for there is no other name
whereby we may be saved, but the name Christ Jesus, Act. 4.12.

Q. How is Christ a Savior?

A. 1. He is a Savior, in that he has opened the way of salvation to the
world, Ephesians. 2.17. John 1.18. 2 Timothy 1.10.

2. He is a Savior, in that he procured salvation: God sen^ his Son into the
world, that the world through him might be saved, Joh. 3.17. Romans 5.10.

3. He is a Savior, seeing he ever lives to make intercession for us, to SAVE
to the uttermost all those that come unto him, Heb. 8.25.

Q. What need had we of a Savior?

A. Being fallen from our first state of innocence and happiness, to a state of
sin and misery, it pleased God to send his Son to restore us to our first
state; 1. by procuring pardon for our sins; 2. by procuring grace for our
natures; 3. by procuring us a state of reconciliation here; and, 4. by
procuring us a state of bliss hereafter.

Q. How does Christ save us?

A. He saves us from sins past, by his blood justifying of us, 1 Pet. 1 18, 19.
2. He saves us from sins to come, by grace sanctifying us. 3. He saves us from
all evil, by interceding for us.

Q Whereas you cannot with comfort believe in God the Father without the
Mediator between God and man, who of two might make one, and so make peace;
What is true faith in Christ?

A. It is a saving grace, whereby we accept of Christ for our Lord and Savior,
and rest in him alone for salvation, Ephesians. 1.12, 13. Romans 15.12. Tit. 1.1, 2.

Q. How does it appear that you believe in Jesus?

A. By my love to him, my hatred to sin, and resolution to amend my life
according to his holy will and word, seeing he redeemed me from all iniquity,
to purify me as peculiar to himself, one zealous of good works.

Q. What duties should our belief in Jesus stir us up to?

A. 1. It should stir us up to make our peace with God through our Lord Jesus
Christ, the only Mediator between God and man; God's well-beloved Son, in whom
he is well pleased. For by him God is willing to reconcile all things to
himself, whether they be things in heaven, or things in earth.

2. It should kindle our love to Christ, who loved us to the death. Greater
love has no man then this, that a man should lay down his life for his
friends: but while we were sinners, Christ died for us, Romans 5.8. John 15.13.
If any man love not the Lord Jesus Christ, let him be Anathema Maranatha.

And thirdly, as a token of love to him, we are to give up our selves to him,
to obey him, 1 John 5.3. John 14.15. Phil. 3 8.

Q. What do you mean when you say you believe in Christ?

A. I mean that I believe in our Savior, who was anointed and sealed King,
Priest, and Prophet: A King to govern the world, a Priest to offer himself a
sacrifice for the world, and a Prophet to teach the world the good, the
perfect, and acceptable will of God.

Q What did our Savior as a Prophet?

A. When no man had seen God at any time, the only begotten Son of God, who
was in the bosom of the Father, he has declared him, and the whole counsel of
his will.

Qu. How?

A. By himself first, opening the Law, and publishing the Gospel, leading us to
all truth; and then by his Spirit; and thirdly, to this day by Apostles,
Prophets, Pastors and Teachers, ordained by him, John 6.4. Heb. 1.3. Col. 2.3.
2 Cor. 3.3. Luke 4.18. Mat. 5.3. Ephesians. 4.11.

Q. How may we believe aright in Christ as a Prophet?

A. By hearing and embracing his Doctrine, and receiving his Word with the
obedience of faith. We must with Mary, sit at Jesus feet, and hear his Word,
and yield to the good motions of his Spirit.

Q. What did our Savior as a Priest?

A. 1. He has given himself an offering for us, and his soul an offering for
sin, and a sacrifice to God for a sweet smelling savor, Ephesians. 5.20. 2. He
removes our guilt, Heb. 9.7, 26. 3. He makes atonement for us, 1 John 2.2. 4.
He blesses us, Act. 3.26. And 5. prays for us, Joh. 17. So that poor sinners
may say, Who is he that condemns? it is Christ that died, or rather that is
risen again, and sits on the right hand of God, making intercession for us,
Romans 8.34.

Qu. How ought we to believe in Christ as Priest?

A. 1. Having an High Priest over the House of God, we ought to draw near with
a true heart, in full assurance of faith, Heb. 10.19, 20, 21, 22.

2. We ought to believe that Christ offered himself for us, so as to offer our
selves unto him, which is but our reasonable service, Romans 12 1. 1 Cor. 6.20.

Q. What does our Savior as a King?

A. The government of the world is upon his shoulders.

Q. How does he govern the world?

A. 1. By restraining, condemning, and destroying his enemies, especially
confounding Satan.

2. By protecting his people, and encouraging them here and hereafter.

3. By ruling his people.

Q. How does Christ rule his people?

A. By delivering them a Law by which they may walk, and by giving them grace
whereby they may walk in that Law. Or he as a King orders all things with
power to our salvation, Psalm. 2.6. Dan. 2.44. As, 1. He rules our hearts by his
grace, Heb. 8.10. Jer. 31.33. 2. He subdueth Satan and sin, Heb. 2.14. 3.
Guardeth us through all temptations to heaven, Ephesians. 1. 21, 22. 4. Having an
universal power in all Ages, over all creatures, in all things.

Q. How ought we to believe in Christ as King?

A. We are to believe in him, so as to rely upon him because of his great
power; and to obey him unto well-pleasing, because of his authority.

Q. How does it appear you believe all these Offices of Christ?

A. First, by my faith in his Word published by himself, preached by his
servants, and imprinted on my heart by his Spirit, it appears I believe in him
as Prophet.

Secondly, 1. by my obedience to his Commands; 2. my trust in his protection;
3. my opposing his enemies; 4. my reverence to his person; 5. trembling at his
threats and judgments, it appears I believe in him as King.

Thirdly, 1. By praying to him to intercede for pardon and grace; 2. by
receiving his grace with humble heart, as the greatest blessing in the world,
and using the grace bestowed on me in a life consecrated to him who offered
himself, it appears that I believe in him as Priest.

Minister. In a word, we are so to believe in Christ, as that every one of us
that names the Name Christ, may depart from iniquity, we having the Anointing
from the holy One, and the Anointing which we have received from him abides in
us, 1 John 2.20, 27. 2 Timothy 2.19.

Reynold's on Psalm. 110. Found's Trisagion, Dr. Pearson on the Creed.

SUNDAY VII. The second Article of our Creed, or Faith in Jesus Christ his
only Son our Lord.
Q. IN the second Article of your faith, you say, You believe in Jesus Christ
Gods only begotten Son, how is Christ the only begotten Son of God?

A. He is the only Son of God, 1. By Eternal Generation, Col. 1.15, 16, 17.
John 1.1, 2, 3. Heb. 1.5. coeternal, coequal with the Father. 2. by his
Incarnation in the Virgins Womb, when the power of the Highest overshadowed
her. 3. By his Resurrection, Thou art my Son, this day have I begotten thee,
Psalm. 2. Act. 13.33. Heb. 1.3, 4, 5. To which of the angels said he at any
time, Thou art my Son, this day have I begotten thee? Heb. 1.

Q. What benefit have we by believing Christ the only Son of God?

A. We are thereby sure to be accepted with God through his only begotten Son
Jesus Christ, who offered himself for us by the Eternal Spirit.

Q. What duty do we learn hereby?

A. Hereby we are taught to worship Christ as God, ascribing blessing, honor,
glory and power unto him that sits upon throne, and the Lamb for evermore.

Minister. Indeed when the Scripture brings the first begotten Son into the
world, it says, Let all the angels of God worship him, Heb. 1.6.

Q. But what other duty are we taught hereby?

A. We are taught hereby to live thankfully all the days of our lives, for the
infinite love of God in sending his only begotten Son into the world to die
for us.

Q. How does it appear that you believe this?

A. By the comfort I have, 1. That my Savior being God, is able to save me to
the uttermost. 2. And being the well-beloved Son, that I shall be accepted in
him, Heb. 2.10. Ephesians. 2.

Q. What do you mean when you call Jesus Christ our Lord?

A. I mean that I really believe that our Savior Christ has all things put in
subjection under him, Heb. 2.7, 8.

Q. How is he a Lord?

A. 1. He is Lord by creation: Without him nothing was made that was made; and
therefore there is nothing made but is under him.

2. By sustentation, Heb. 1.3. Col. 2.

3. He is Lord by appointment of the Father, Heb. 2.7, 8. Joh. 5.27. Joh. 13.3.
Mat. 28.18. Psalm. 110.7. Phil. 2.8, 9, 10, 11. Ephesians. 1.20, 21.

4. He is Lord by redemption; We are bought with a price, and we are not our
own, 1 Cor. 6.19, 26. And by covenant with us, 1 Cor. 15.25, 27.

5. By conquest, rescuing us from sin and Satan.

Q. Wherein does his power appear?

A. 1. In making Laws, and writing them in our hearts. 2. In appointing
Officers in his house. 3. In providing for his servants all things pertaining
to life and godliness. 4. In protecting, correcting and rewarding us.

Q. How do you know that you truly believe this?

A. 1. When we submit to him humbly, 1. In accepting the punishment of our
iniquities: 2. In being contented with our allowance: 3. In obeying his will
heartily, cheerfully, diligently, and constantly.

2. When we are sensible that we are not our own, and that we are bought with a
price, we resolve to glorify God with our bodies and souls, which are his.

3. When we can safely, using our honest endeavors, rely upon this Lord for
salvation, for protection and deliverance from all the enemies of our peace, as
upon one that is mighty to save.

4. When by believing him to be Lord of the world, we know that all things are
ours, and we are Christ's, and Christ is Gods.

Q What is it to believe this aright, viz. That Christ is our Lord?

A. 1. To believe it so, as to yield our selves to him as our Lord, as servants
to righteousness unto holiness, Romans 6 6, 13.

2. To believe it so, as to live not to our selves, to die not to our selves;
but whether we live or die, we may be our Lords, Romans 14.7, 8

3. To believe it so as to bring every thought to an obedience to Christ our
Lord, who is become the Author of eternal salvation to them that Obey. Heb.
5.8, 9. 2 Cor. 10.5.

4. To believe it so, as to comfort our selves in this, The Lord of all will
make all things work together for the best to them that love God.

Minister. You say then, that you assent to this as a great truth, That Jesus
Christ, the promised Messiah, is come into the world, and was anointed by the
Spirit of God, 1. A Prophet, to reveal Gods Will to us: 2. A Priest, to offer
himself a sacrifice, and to make atonement for us: 3. And that he is a King,
sitting at the right hand of God, far above all Principalities and Powers;
whereby when he has subdued all our enemies, he will confer perfect and
eternal happiness upon us. And you do really profess, that you are fully
assured of this, as a most certain, infallible, and necessary truth, viz. That
our Savior is the true, proper, and natural Son of God, God of God, Light of
Light, very God of very God. And you do assent to this as a certain and
infallible truth taught by God himself, That Jesus Christ, the only Son of
God, has Dominion over all things for the destruction of our enemies, and
completing of our redemption. And that he is especially Lord over US, 1. whom
he has purchased and rescued; 2. who are by faith consecrated to his service;
who have yielded our selves to him in Baptism, For whom he has taken care that
we should be the sons of God here, and that we should have heavenly Mansions
hereafter. And thus as you believed in God the Father Almighty, Maker of heaven
and earth; so you believe in his only Son Jesus Christ our Lord.

Dr. Pearson on the Creed, Heylin on the Creed, Bishop Nicholson ib. Zanchy de
Elohim, Christ's Sovereignty, Jeanes Scholastical Divinity, Bishop Reynolds on
Psalm. 110.

SUNDAY VIII. The third Article of our Faith.
Q. WHat is the third Article of your Belief?

A. Which was conceived by the holy Ghost, born of the Virgin Mary.

Q. What do you mean when you say, I believe in him who was conceived of the
holy Ghost? etc.

A. I am verily persuaded that he who was begotten of the Father before all
worlds, was now in the fullness of time conceived by the holy Ghost, and born of
the Virgin Mary: For as much as the children were partakers of flesh and blood,
he also himself took part of the same, Heb. 2.14.

Q. Why was he made flesh?

A. That we who are sinful flesh, might be saved by him, he becoming sin for
us, and we the righteousness of God in him; therefore it behoved him to be like
his brethren, Heb. 2.17. And the Mediator between God and man, must be the man
Christ Jesus, 1 Timothy 2.5. Since by man came death, by man also came the
resurrection of the dead, 1 Cor. 15.31.

Q Our Nature sinned, our Nature must suffer: but because our Nature which is
finite, could not satisfy the infinite justice of God, it was joined to the
Divine Nature; so that our Savior, who was of the fathers, according to the
flesh, was God over all, blessed for ever. How is Christ said to be conceaved
by the holy Ghost?

A. The Father willed his Incarnation, the Son consented to it, and the Spirit
works it. Christ being not capable of redeeming our Nature but in our Nature,
he had a body prepared for him by the holy Ghost, who separated the same body
from sin, and united it to his Divine Nature, Luke 1.34, 35. Joh. 1.14. Heb.
7.26. and 4.15.

Q What is the benefit you receive by this Article?

A. 1. I hope that the Father has made him sin for me who knew no sin, that I
who knew sin might become the righteousness of God in him, 2 Cor. 5.21.

2. I hope that as his Nature was holy, harmless, undefiled, and separated from
sinners; so our Nature will be presented by him to the Father without spot and
blameless.

3. Under my infirmities, I hope I have a faithful and a merciful high priest,
who being touched with the feeling of our infirmities, in that he himself has
suffered being tempted, he is able to succor us being tempted, Heb. 2.17, 18.
and 4.15, 16.

Q. What do you learn from this part of this Article?

A. 1. I learn first thankfulness, in that the kindness and love of God toward
man appeared, in not taking the Nature of the fallen Angels, but the seed of
Abraham, Heb. 2.16. Tit. 3 4. Luke 1.78.

2. I learn purity, that I in my Nature should be holy, as he in his Nature is
holy; that as he was not conceived by man, but by the holy Ghost, so we ought
to be born again not of blood, nor of the will of the flesh, nor of the will of
man, but of God; the same overshadowing power which formed his nature,
reforming ours: He which was born for us upon his Incarnation, ought to be born
in us by Regeneration.

Minister. So then you assent unto this as a most necessary and certain truth,
That the only begotten Son of God, very God of very God, was conceived and
born, and so made man, taking to himself the Humane Nature, consisting of a
soul and body, and joining it to the Divine Nature in the unity of his person.
And you are fully assured, That our Savior thus made flesh, was really and
truly conceived in the womb of a Virgin by the singular, powerful, invisible,
and immediate operation of the holy Ghost; whereby a Virgin was beyond the Law
of Nature enabled to conceive, and that which was conceived in her, was
originally and completely holy. And thus you profess to believe in Jesus
Christ, which was conceived of the holy Ghost.

Q What do you understand when you say in the last part of the third Article,
That as our Savior was conceived by the holy Ghost, so he was born of the
Virgin Mary?

A. I understand that my faith is confirmed, in that I see the Prophecies
fulfilled, viz. That that the Lord has created a new thing in the earth, a
woman shall compass a man, Jer. 31.32. Behold, a Virgin shall conceive, and
bear a son, and shall call his name Immanuel, Isai. 7.14.

Q. Do you think that Mary was an unspotted Virgin?

A. Yes; and I think of her as of the Gate of the Sanctuary, in Ezekiel. 44.2 This
gate shall be shut, it shall not be opened, and no man shall enter in by it:
because the Lord the God of Israel has entered in by it, therefore it shall be
shut.

Q. What is the benefit of Christ's conception and Nativity?

A. 1. That our Natures which are polluted with sin, might be cleared from
Original corruption, He was conceived by the holy Ghost, and filled with grace
and truth, Luke 1.35.

2 That our Natures might be redeemed by the seed of the woman, he took the
Virgins flesh, Genesis 3.17.

Q. How became the Virgin Mary a Mother?

A. 1. By conceiving, 2. by nourishing and increasing, and 3. by bringing forth
the Savior of the world.

Qu. What do you learn from this part of the Article?

A. 1. I learn humility from him who being equal with God, yet humbled himself
to be like us.

2. I learn a boldness of access unto the throne of grace, (through him who is
our brother) that I may obtain mercy and grace to help in time of need, Heb. 4.
ult.

3. I learn this comfort, That as God saw Adam, and all mankind that were in
him, sinful; so he sees Jesus Christ, and all that are in him, without sin,
and blameless.

4 I learn this truth, That Christ, according to the Prophecy that went before
of him, was of the house of David, because he was born of Mary, who was of that
house.

Minister. So then you assent to this as a certain truth, That there was a
certain woman known by the name of the Virgin Mary; a pure and unspotted
Virgin, who did by the immediate operation of the holy Ghost, conceive within
her womb the only begotten Son of God; and after the natural time of other
women, brought him forth as her firstborn: whereby the Savior of the world
was born of a woman under the Law, to redeem them that were under the Law,
without any Original corruption, that he might deliver us from the guilt and
stain of sin: Born of that Virgin which was of the house of David, that he
might sit upon his throne, and rule for evermore. And on this manner you
believe in Jesus Christ, born of the Virgin Mary.

Q. How will the knowledge of these things work in the heart of him whom God
will save?

A. It will bring him to a serious consideration of his own state, to grieve
for sin, and the fear of Gods displeasure, whereby the heart is first broken
and humbled, and secondly, rests upon Christ alone for salvation, according
to the free promise of God by faith inwardly wrought by the Spirit, and
outwardly by the Word and Sacrament, Jer. 8 67. Luke 15.17. Act. 3.37. and 9.6.
and 16.31. Romans 4.20. Heb. 11.11. Act. 16.14. Romans 10.14. Heb. 5.11, 12. and 6
1.

Q. What did our Savior between the times of his birth and death?

A. He led a most holy and good life for our imitation, that we might do as we
have him for an example, God having predestined us to be conformable to the
image of his Son, Romans 8 29. that as we have born the image of the earthy, so
we may bear the image of the heavenly, 1 Cor. 15.49. What he taught in his
precepts, he showed us in his life.

Minister. The Lord grant that since his image is imprinted in our Nature by
creation, so also we may show it in all the parts of an holy life, conforming
our will and affections to his holy precepts, submitting our understandings to
his Rules and Lessons of perfection: imitating his sweetness and excellency of
society, his patience and charity, his devotion and holiness, his conformity to
God, his zeal and meekness, his bounty and goodness; that our hearts, hands and
eyes, all the parts and faculties of soul and body, may grow up with the
increase of God, till we come to the full measure of the stature of Christ,
even to a perfect man in Christ Jesus; that at last in his light we may see
light, and reap the fruits of glory from the seeds of holiness, in the
imitation of his holy life.

Q. In what particulars ought we chiefly to imitate Christ?

A. 1. In self-denial, 2. in obedience, 3. in growth and proficiency: for he 1.
resigned himself unto God, 2. obeyed him unto the death, and 3. grew in wisdom
and favor with God and man.

Bishop Andrew's, Dr. Donne's, and Bishop Lake's Sermons, and Jeans his
Scholastical Divinity.

SUNDAY IX. The fourth Article of the Creed.
Q. WHat is the fourth Article of your Belief?

A. That our Savior Jesus Christ was not only born for us, and lived among us
a most holy life, by his Doctrine and Example leading us in the way to heaven;
but that he suffered under Pontius Pilate, was crucified, dead and buried:
which is the second step of his humiliation.

Q. What did our Savior suffer for us?

A. The whole wrath of God due to our sins, which we should have suffered: 1.
In his body, hunger, thirst, weariness, reproaches, griefs, sorrows, and
temptations: 2. In his soul, the displeasure of God; and who knows the power
of his anger? Isai. 53. 4, 10. Mat. 26 38, 39. Rev. 19.15. 1 Pet. 2.4. Jer.
1.12. Phil. 2.8.

Q. What moved him thus to suffer?

A. His own goodness, love, and our misery, Joh. 3.19. Ephesians. 1.5. Tit. 3.5.

Q. Wh^t are the benefits of his suffering?

A. That by his stripes we might be healed, Isai. 53.5. Heb. 9.14. and 26.28.
Col. 2.14. Heb. 10.2, 4. 1. That we might obtain remission of sin, Rev. 1.5.
Col. 2.13. 2. That we might escape punishment. 3. That we might be delivered
from the power of sin and Satan. 4. That we might be reconciled to God, Romans
5.10. 5. And redeemed from our vain conversation, 1 Pet. 1.18. and by his blood
have entrance to heaven, Heb 10.19, 20.

Q. Under whom did he suffer?

A. Under Pontius Pilate, Deputy under Tiberius, the Scepter being departed
from Judah, now Shiloh, i. e. Christ, was come, Genesis 29.10. Joh. 18.31. (the
Son of God submits to lawful power) who bore witness afterward of Christ's
innocence.

Q. What did he suffer under him?

A. Death, the dissolution of his soul from his body: death is the wages of
sin, which was threatened upon us: If thou eatest thereof, thou shall die, 2
Cor. 5.14.

Q. What kind of death did he die?

A. Because he was to remove the curse from us, therefore he was made a curse
for us, and so was Crucified, Gal. 3.13. Deuteronomy. 31.23. and to fulfill Prophecies
and Types, Psalm. 22.17, 18, 19. Exodus 12.46. Joh. 19. 36, 37. Lev. 7.4, 20. and
1.8.

Q. What became of him after death?

A. That he might sweeten the grave to us, and be both God of the dead and of
the living, Mat. 12.41. Romans 14.9. 1 Cor. 15 55. He was buried, and descended
into Hell; that is, he continued under the power of death three days, Psalm.
16.10. Act. 2.27, 31. Act. 13.34, 35. Jonah 1.17. Mat. 12.39. Genesis 39.20. 1 Samuel 24.4. Isai. 63.9.

Q. How do you know you believe aright this Article?

A. 1. I know I believe aright in his Death, when I die to sin for which he
died, Romans 6.6. Col. 2 7. When I suffer with him, and am ready to make his
patience, humility, innocence and charity in dying for me, my pattern in
suffering for him, Heb. 12.1, 2. Romans 8.18. When I love, admire, and thank him
for it; and upon the accusation of Satan or mine own conscience, am comforted
by his death for me, Romans 6.2. and not wallow in sin, to crucify again the
Lord of glory, Heb. 6.6.

2. I believe that he suffered under Pontius Pilate, when like him I am ready
to submit to every ordinance of man for the Lords sake, Mat. 26.53, 54.

3. And that He was dead and buried, and descended into Hell, when I am not
disheartened by death, or the grave, which are by him sanctified, the one for a
bed to rest from our labors, the other for an entrance to a better life, Rev.
1.18. Act. 2.36.

Q. How do you understand that Christ descended into Hell?

A. I understand he descended thither, 1. by his power, efficaciously; 2. by
his sacrifice, meritoriously; and 3. by his Soul descending to the invisible
Called (...), or Hell.
state of the dead.

Bishop Nicholson, Dr. Pearson on the Creed, Bishop Andrew's Passion-Sermons,
Bishop Bilson of Christ's Descent into Hell.

SUNDAY X. The fifth Article of our Creed.
Q. WHat is the fifth Article of your Belief?

A. That our Savior Jesus Christ rose again the third day; as Angels witness,
Apostles testify, Enemies confess, and Miracles convince, Mat. 28. Mark 16.
Heb. 2.4. It being impossible for him to be holden of death, Act. 2.24. Act.
1.3. Luke 24.3, 6. Joh. 20.27. Mat. 12.39.

Q. What need had he to rise again?

A. 1. For our justification, Romans 4 25. If he had layn under the power of
death, we had been under the power of sin, 1 Cor. 15.17. 1 Pet. 1.19. and we
had not been assured that our great debt had been discharged, and the Spirit
could never have convinced the world of righteousness.

2. For our sanctification, to apply effectually unto us the power of his
death, 1 Cor. 15.16, 54. Romans 4.25. Rev. 1.18.

Q. When did he rise?

A. Neither sooner nor later then the third day, to confirm his Disciples and
our Faith in the Type, Mat. 12.39. and Promise: So shall the Son of man be
three days and three nights in the heart of the earth, 1 Cor. 15.4. Hos. 6.2.

Q. What is the difference between the Resurrection of Christ, and the
Resurrection of those that rise before him?

A. He is the firstborn among many Brethren: He rose by his own power, Joh.
10.17, 18. they by him: they as private persons, he as the first fruits of them
that sleep, 1 Cor. 15.20.

Q. What are the benefits of his Resurrection?

A. 1. Thereby he was declared to be the Son of God with power, Romans 1.4.

2. He gives us hope of our Resurrection, Romans 6.4. and 8.11. Col. 1.1. Ephesians.
2.1, 6.

Q. How shall a man know that he believes Christ's Resurrection aright?

A. When he does so believe it, as to rise from sin to a new life, as he did
from the grave, Romans 6.4. Ephesians. 5.14. Col. 3.1. 2 Cor. 5.15. and that as he did,
1. speedily, Heb. 4.7. 2. perfectly, 3. with a resolution to die no more in
sin, as Christ being raised from the dead, dies no more, Romans 6.9, 11. Likewise
reckon ye also, etc.

See the aforesaid Authors, Jeans Scholastical Divinity, Reynolds on Psalm. 110.

SUNDAY XI. The sixth Article of our Creed.
Q. WHat is the sixth Article of your Belief?

A. That He ascended into heaven, and sits on the right hand of God the
Father Almighty.

Q. How many things be there in this Article?

A. 1. Christ's Ascension foretold, Psalm. 68 18. performed, Act 1.

2. His sitting at the right hand of God, foretold, Psalm. 110.1. revealed, Act.
7.5, 6.

Q. When did Christ ascend?

A. After he had conversed with his Disciples forty days to confirm them in the
truth of his Resurrection, and to instruct them in their future administration,
he ascended by his own power, visibly, in a cloud to heaven, Act. 1.11. Luke
24.51. Ephesians. 4.10.

Q. What are the benefits of his Ascension?

A. 1. The honor of his Name, Person and Power, Psalm. 110. Mat. 28.18. Phil.
2.9.

2. A power to save us to the uttermost, Heb. 7.25. 1. by interceding for us, 1 John 2.2. 2. by sending us the holy Ghost, Joh. 16.7. Ephesians. 4.12. 3. by
protecting us from heaven, Ephesians. 4.8.

3. Exaltation of our Nature, Heb 1.5.

4. A preparation of Mansions for us, John 14.34. Joh. 17.24.

5. An assurance to us, that he is accepted of God for us, Joh. 16.10. and
17.4, 5. God welcoming him to heaven with a Sit thou at my right hand, until I
make thine enemies thy footstool, Heb. 1.3, 9, 13.

6. The last benefit is, an assurance un^o us, that seeing Christ is entered
into heaven to take possession for us, therefore he will bring us thither in
his appointed time, Joh. 12.26. and 17.24. Heb. 6.20.

Q. How do you know that you believe Christ's Ascension aright?

A. When by that faith I ascend after him, having my conversation in heaven,
being heavenly minded, and setting my affections on things above, Col. 3.1.
Phil. 3.20. Ephesians. 2.19.

Qu. Where is our Savior now?

A. In heaven, at Gods right hand, in great glory and power, Act. 7.56.

Q. What do you mean by Gods right hand?

A. The honor and power which Christ received of his Father when he finished
the work of Redemption, Heb. 1.13. Ephesians. 1.20, 22. 1 Cor. 15.24, 25. The right
hand is given to those we honor, 1 King. 2.19. Ephesians. 1.20.

Q. What honor is it to be at Gods right hand?

A. 1. To be King of Saints, 2. Judge of Sinners, 3. Prince of our Salvation,
4. High Priest of our Profession, Heb. 8.1. Act. 5.11, 17, 31. Rev. 15.3.

Q. What does Christ do there?

A. 1. He makes intercession for us, i. e. he presents our prayers, and pleads
his merits for our acceptance, Heb. 7.25. and 9.24 Romans 8.34.

2. He sends grace from himself the head, to us his members, Ephesians. 1.20.

3. He gathers, preserves, governs, defends all his members until they come
where he is, Mat. 25.33. Rev. 1.21.

Q. When do you believe aright that Christ sits at the right hand of God?

A. When my faith in that Article makes me,

1. Submit to Christ's Power, Commands, Institutions, and to all that rule under
him, Joh. 5.23.

2. Offer up Petitions by him, and depend upon his Intercession.

3. To look to him in all temptations and pressures, expecting help from his
right hand.

4. To be afraid of opposing him, seeing we must submit either to his will, or
to his wrath. Kiss the Son lest he angry, and his wrath be kindled but a
little: blessed are all they that put their trust in him.

Bishop Reynolds on Psalm 110. Jeans Scholastical Divinity, and the foresaid
Authors on the Creed.

SUNDAY XII. The seventh Article of our Creed.
Q. SHall Christ sit always at Gods right hand? and shall this world never have
an end?

A. He shall sit there till the time of the restitution of all things, and then
he shall come and judge the world, 2 Pet. 3.10, 11. 2 Timothy 4.1. Mat. 26.64. For
the seventh Article of my Belief is this, From thence he shall come to judge
both quick and dead.

Q. By his Passion he redeemed us, by his Ascension he becomes our Advocate and
Patron, and in this he is appointed to be our Judge: Whom shall he judge?

A. The quick, i. e. all those righteous and wicked that shall be found alive
at the last day: And the dead, i. e. all that have departed this life from the
beginning of the world to this day, 1 Cor. 15.51. 1 These. 4.17. Rev. 20 12.
Joh. 5.28.

Q. Whereof shall we be judged?

A. Of all the things done in the body, according to what we have done, whether
it be good, or whether it be evil: for God will bring every work to judgment,
with every secret thing, whether it be good, or whether it be evil, 2 Cor.
5.10. Romans 2.5, 6, 12, 16. 1 Cor. 4.5. Eccles. 12.14.

Q. How shall he judge us?

A. Our own hearts shall accuse or excuse us, and he is greater then our
hearts, and knows all things. The whole world shall bear witness of us, his
Word shall try us, and he himself shall sentence us, Act. 17.31. Joh. 5.22, 27.
1 John 3.20, 21. Rev. 20.11, 12, 13, 14, 15.

Q. When shall he judge us?

A. 1. He judges every one immediately upon his death, when the soul departed
is set at Gods Tribunal to give account for all thoughts, words and actions,
Rev. 14.13. Eccles. 12.7. 2 Cor. 5.8. Phil. 1.23.

2. He judges all in general when the souls are joined to the bodies at the
last day, Mat. 25. 2 Timothy 4.1. Jude 14. Dan. 12.10.

Q. Where is the promise of his coming? for since the fathers fell asleep, all
things continue as they were from the beginning of the Creation.

A. Reason does convince, Conscience does testify, the Scripture does teach,
the Devils confess, and the great day will show there is a Judgment, when the
Lord shall descend from heaven with a shout, with the voice of the Archangel,
and the trump of God, 1 These. 4.16.

Q. What need is there of a general Judgment?

A. It is necessary,

1. For the honor of Christ, that the world may see Christ whom they have
pierced, abused and slighted, and mourn, Zach. 12.10.

2. It is necessary for the discovery of the justice and wisdom of God in
governing the world, Psalm. 58. ult.

3. It is necessary to discover many things which are now hid and secret, Jer.
17.9. 1 Cor. 3.14. Luke 8.17.

4. It is necessary, that the body may receive its reward as well as the soul:
for our Savior will raise these bodies, which being joined to their souls,
shall receive their Doom; and in the open view of God, men and Angels, they
that have done good shall go into everlasting bliss, and those that have done
evil to everlasting pain, Mat. 25.46. Dan. 12.2. 1 Cor. 5.

5. It is necessary, that they who by their good examples have done good, and
by their bad examples have done evil, after their death should receive their
reward.

Q. When shall this be?

A. It Is uncertain; therefore we should watch, that we may be always ready,
Mat. 24. from v. 36, to the last.

Q. What sentence shall pass upon those that love, fear, and obey God?

A. A pardon and absolution for Christ's sake, Ephesians. 5.23, 27.

Q. What on those that neither love, fear, nor obey him?

A. The Lord Jesus shall show himself from heaven with his mighty angels in
flaming fire, rendering vengeance to those that know not God, and obey not his
Gospel, 2 These. 1.7, 8, 9, 10. Rev. 6.16.

Q. What follows upon the belief of this Article?

A. It makes us careful so to order our conversation aright, that we may be
found of him in peace at that day, 2 Pet. 3.11, 14. 1 Pet. 1.17. 2 Cor. 5.9,
11, 12. Mat. 24.36.

Dr. Pearson, Dr. Nicholson, Dr. Heylin on the Creed, Jeans Scholastical
Divinity, Reynolds on Psalm. 110.

SUNDAY XIII. The eighth Article of our Creed.
Q. WHat use do you make of these Articles of your Belief concerning Christ,
which you have answered to?

A. I therefore put my trust in the mercy of God the Father Almighty, Maker of
heaven and earth, for whatever concerns the good either of my body or soul,
because of the merits of my Savior Jesus Christ. I repent truly of my sins,
which were the cause of his sufferings; and I obey his Doctrine, and follow his
example as the way to heaven; and I seek those things which are above, where
Christ sits on the right hand of God; and by perseverance in all good works,
I wait for the coming of my Lord to Judgment.

Q. By whose assistance do you intend to perform all this?

A. By the assistance of Gods holy Spirit, Act. 2.4. and 16.6, 7. 1 Cor. 12.11.
For the eighth Article of my Belief is this, I believe in God the holy Ghost.

Q. Having confessed your faith in God the Father, and God the Son, the
confession of your faith in God the holy Ghost follows very well, because no
man can call God Abba, Father, but by the holy Ghost; and no man can say that
Jesus is the Lord, but by the holy Ghost, Gal. 4 6. 1 Cor. 12.3.

Q. What do you mean when you say, I believe in God the holy Ghost?

A. I mean that I am fully persuaded that all those things which in the
Scripture are spoken either of the person, graces or gifts of the holy Ghost,
are certainly true, and necessary to salvation; and therefore I commit my self
to his tuition and direction.

Q. Is the holy Ghost a person in the Trinity, or a gift in us?

A. He is a person in the Trinity, equal, and of the same substance, 1 Cor.
1.13. 2 Cor. 13.13. Numb. 6.27. Heb. 9.12. 1 Cor. 2.10. Psalm. 139.7. 1 John
5.7. Joh. 15.26. and 16.15. and 14.26.

Qu. Seeing divine actions and titles are attributed to him, seeing we are
baptized and blessed in his Name, no doubt but he is a person in the Trinity:
but why do you call him holy?

A. Because he is holy,

1. In himself, and pure, 1 Pet. 1.15, 16. Luke 1.35.

2. As Author of holiness and purity in us, Tit. 3.5.

Q. What are the works of the Spirit?

A. His gifts are first common, of Nature and Art, Exodus 31.3.

Or secondly, special, Illumination of our mind, giving us a new life,
sanctifying, renewing, strengthening, teaching us what we know not, 1 Timothy 5.22.
putting us in mind of what we forgot, Joh. 14 26. stirring us up when we are
dull, 2 Cor. 3 6. helping us in prayer, Romans 8.26. relieving us in infirmities,
Joh. 14 16. comforting us in heaviness, Joh 16.7. sealing to the day of
redemption, Ephesians 4.30. and raising us again at the last day, Romans 8.11.

Q. These are the excellent graces whereby the holy Ghost shapes the heart
within, justifies and sanctifies a sinner, clears the conscience toward God,
and setleth a welcome peace: from whence he is called an Advocate, a Comforter,
and an Exhorter; helping us to pray, comforting and exhorting us to walk worthy
of our callings. By what means does he work these holy works?

A. By Ordinances which he blesses, by his Servants which he inspireth to
preach the Word, to administer the Sacraments, to exercise the power of the
Keys in Jurisdiction and Ordination.

Q. How may you know that you believe in the holy Ghost aright?

A. 1. By my expecting life, light, grace and holiness from him.

2. By preparing my heart by repentance and contrition to receive the holy
Ghost.

3. By my hearty prayer to God to bestow upon me his gifts and graces, Ps.
51.10.

4. When I expect his grace in that way wherein he is pleased to bestow it; in
hearing his Word diligently, in obeying his Pastors conscientiously, receiving
Sacraments devoutly, and submitting to Church Discipline patiently, Mat 16.19.
John 10.23.

See the foresaid Authors on the Creed, Bishop Andrews and others Sermons about
the Descent of the holy Ghost.

SUNDAY XIV. The ninth Article of our Creed.
Q. IN whom does the holy Ghost dwell and work?

A. In all the faithful and good people of God which are in the Catholic
Church; And the ninth Article of my Belief is this, I believe the holy
Catholic Church, the Communion of Saints.

Q. What do you mean when you say, I believe the holy Catholic Church?

A. Not that I believe in the Church, but that I believe that God has had, and
will have a Church, i. e. a society of Christians dispersed in the world, who
are redeemed by Christ, sanctified by his Spirit, admitted to the Church by
Baptism, strengthened there by the Word and Supper of the Lord, ruled and
continued under Bishops and Pastors lawfully called to succeed the Apostles,
and to have the power of the Keys for administration of Doctrine and Discipline.

Q. A Church is the company of Gods people called and separated from the rest
of mankind, and joined to Christ the head by faith, 1 Cor. 1.2. Gal. 1 15.
Ecclesia, ab (...).
A society of men called from sin, and the power of darkness, unto faith and
true repentance; from the love of the world, to the love of God; from
carelessness, to a conscience of pleasing God, Col 1.13. 1 These. 1.9. and 4.7.
1 Pet. 1.14, 15. Act. 26.18. How is the Church distinguished?

A. 1. Part of it has finished its course, and entered into its masters joy,
and is called the Church Triumphant, Heb. 12.23. 2 Timothy 4.7, 8.

2. Part of it is yet on earth, combating and striving with corruptions, fears
and temptations within, Satan and the world without, in expectation of their
crown and triumph, Rev. 7.13, 16, 17. and 14.13. And this part below is either
universal or particular.

Q. How may the true Church be known?

A. Where the Doctrine of Christ is pure, where his Worship is decent and
orderly, in spirit and truth, and where the lives of men are answerable in some
measure to their profession, there is a true Church, Jude 3. Act. 24.14. Hos
2.2, 4, 5.

Q. Is there salvation out of the Church?

A. No, Mat. 18.17, 18. therefore we should mark those that cause divisions
from the Church, and forsake the assembling of themselves together, as the
manner of some is.

Q. Why is the Church called Catholic?

A. Because it is in all places, persons and times, from the beginning to the
end of the world, Joh. 10.16. Ephesians. 2.14 Romans 10.12. Act. 10.35. Mat. 28.20.
Rev. 7.9. and Rev. 5 9.

Q. Why is it called holy?

A. She is holy,

1. By the holiness of Christ its head imputed to it, Isai. 28.16. Ephesians. 5.26.

2. By the graces of Christ wrought in it, Ephesians. 2.4.

3. By the holiness of the Religion professed by it, 1 These. 4.3. Psalm. 19.78.

4. By the holy lives of true professors living in it, who are for manners,
pure and holy; for Worship, sound and sincere; for Doctrine, Orthodox; in
Communion, united; walking worthy of the Gospel, 1 Cor. 6.11. 2 Pet. 1.4.

Q. The Church it seems, though it be not without having though not the guilt,
which is washed in Baptism, yet the stain of sin remaining, is holy, 1. By the
holiness of its head Christ imputed to it, 1 Cor. 1.30. 2. She is holy, because
she endeavors to be holy by the grace of the holy Spirit given to her, Rev.
22.11. 1 John 3.3. Who believes the holy Catholic Church aright?

A. 1. They that follow after holiness, labor and contend for increase of
grace, and all other duties of Christian purity, because God their Father, and
the Church their Mother are holy.

2. They that by their good conversation, holy charity, unity and obedience, do
preserve the honor, the peace and the authority of the Church they live in.

The aforesaid Author on the Creed; Hudson, Field and Gauden of the Church.

SUNDAY XV. The ninth Article of our Creed.
Q. HOw can Christians being scattered so far asunder, make up one Church?

A. By the Communion of Saints: that is, the fellowship that these good people
have with Christ their head, and one with another.

Qu. Wherein have the members of the Church Commmunion with Christ?

A. In all the privileges which God has bestowed on Christ: he is a son; we
are so by him, etc. Romans 8.17. Joh. 14.19. Ephesians. 5.30, 32. Joh. 17.24.

Q. These places show that we have a fellowship with Christ in his Sonship,
life, graces and Kingdom: but how is this wrought?

A. By the Spirit of God laying hold of us, and by our faith laying hold of
him, 1 Cor. 12.12, 13. and 6.17. Romans 8 9. Ephesians. 3.17. Heb. 3.14. Romans 11.20.

Q. How does it appear that we have this fellowship with Christ?

A. If we are conformed to him, making his will, his ways, his friends, his
foes, ours, Col. 2.19. ^ Joh. 4.13. and 1.6. Joh. 17.21. Romans 8.14. Phil 2.1, 5.

Q. How have the members of Christ communion one with another?

A. In one faith, hope, Spirit, Baptism; one Lord God and Father, and in one
way leading to one heaven, Ephesians. 4. Jude 4, 1 Cor. 1.26, 27. and in one desire
of doing good to one another, 1. in soul, 2 Timothy 4.2, 5. and 3.16, 17. 2. in
body, Act. 2.45. Romans 15.26. 1 Cor. 16.1, 2. 2 Cor. 8.12.

Q. When you say, I believe the communion of Saints, you mean that the people
of God have in common one Christ, one Spirit, one Lord, one hope, and that they
communicate in all duties of charity and piety. How are the members of Christ
that thus have communion one with another, called Saints, that is, holy?

A. Because they are holy with the holiness of Christ imputed to them, wrougnt
in them in part, Ephesians. 1.1. Heb. 12.14. They are called to be Saints on earth,
and they will be Saints in heaven.

Q. How may we know that we believe the communion of saints aright?

A. 1. If we break none of the bonds of unity, and Christian communion, causing
no divisions, giving no occasion of offense, Romans 14.13.

2. If we advise, exhort, reprove, and do every spiritual Office one to
another, to promote any man's salvation in our places and calling, Heb. 3.13.
Ephesians. 4.29.

3. If we pray one with and for another, Gal. 5.13. Act. 20.36. and 4.24. and
delight in one another good society, Psalm. 16.3. 2 Cor. 6 17.

4. If we bear one another burdens and infirmities, Gal. 6.12. Romans 12.15.

5. If we prepare our selves, and pray for the consummation of all things, when
the saints in heaven with the saints in earth shall be made perfect, Heb.
11.40. If we do thus, we live as men that really believe the communion of
saints.

Whitby's Communion of Saints, and the foresaid Authors of the Creed of
Remission of sins.

SUNDAY XVI. The tenth Article of the Creed.
Q. WHat are the privileges of those that are of the Catholic Church, and in
the Communion of Saints?

A. The first privilege is that which is the tenth Article of our Belief, The
forgiveness of sin.

Q. What do you mean when you say you believe the foriveness of sin?

A. I mean that I believe that there is for me and all other good Christians
pardon and forgiveness of all our sins to be obtained by the mercies of God,
through the merits of Christ our Savior; we sincerely performing the
conditions of a lively faith and true repentance thereunto required.

Qu. What is sin?

A. Any transgression of Gods law, 1 John 3.4.

Q. What is forgiveness of sin?

A. It Is a free and full discharge of a sinner believing in Christ, and
repenting of his sin, from the guilt and punishment of sin; so that in Gods
sight they are as if they had never been, Isai. 43.25. Micah 7.18, 19. Romans
8.33, 34.

Q What is the punishment due to sin here forgiven?

A. Eternal death, the curse of God for ever in hellfire, Romans 6.21, 23.

Q. Are you a sinner?

A. Yes, God knows, I was born in sin, and do daily in thought, word and deed
(either weakly out of infirmity, or unwillingly out of ignorance, or wilfully
out of perverseness, or presumptuously out of pride and malice) break Gods holy
laws, Psalm. 51.5. Romans 5.14.

Q. Shall you then be DAMNED in Hellfire?

A. I deserve damnation; but I believe that through Christ my sin shall be
forgiven me, Romans 8.1.

Q. Are sins forgiven in this life?

A. Yes, NOW or NEVER, 1 John 2.12. Col. 1.13. Mat. 9.2. Rev. 2.17. Romans 5.5.

Q. Who forgives sins?

A. 1. Principally God, who is offended and dishonored by them, Mark 2.7, 9.
Luke 23.34.

2. Ministerially, the Bishops and Ministers who preach the Word that declares
the pardon, who pray for pardon, Spare thy people, O Lord, Joel 2.17. who have
such a power committed to them, that whose sins soever they forgive, they are
forgiven unto them, Joh. 20.23.

Q. For whose sake are our sins forgiven?

A. For Jesus Christ's sake, who kept the Law of God, and suffered the wrath of
God due to sin for us, Romans 8.33.

Q. To what manner of persons is pardon of sin granted?

A. To them that believe, and repent, and amend their lives, and turn from the
evil of their doings, Luke 13.3. Mark 16.16. Ezekiel. 18.21. Isai. 1.18. Act.
16.31. Joh. 5.24.

Q. How shall we know that we believe forgiveness of sin aright?

A. We may be sure that we believe this forgiveness of sin aright, if we
endeavor to cleanse our selves from sin, as we desire God to forgive us our
sin, Mar. 5 24. Act. 3.26. Romans 6.11, 14. If we endeavor to perform the
condition upon which pardon is promised us: If we pray to God for pardon and
forgiveness: If we highly esteem all those ways and means in the Church,
whereby God has appointed to convey grace and pardon to us.

See Reynold's sinfulness of sin, and his life of Christ.

SUNDAY XVII. The eleventh Article of our Creed.
Q. WHat is the eleventh Article of your Belief?

A. I believe the resurrection of the dead: Which is another privilege that
belongs to the members of the Catholic Church, and to them that are in the
Communion of Saints.

Q. What do you mean by the resurrection of the body?

A. I do believe that this body of mine, and the bodies of all men, though they
be dissolved by death into dust and ashes, yet shall be again raised out of the
dust of death, and rejoyned to our immortal souls; that so we may receive
according to our deeds done in the flesh, whether they be good, or whether they
be evil.

Q. Shall they that be dead live again?

A. Reason shows, and the Scripture assures us that the dead shall rise
again, Act. 24.15. Jude 14. Job 19.24. Dan. 12.2. Isai. 26.19. Ezekiel. 37.1. Joh.
5.28. and 6.40. 1 Cor. 15. 1 These. 4. Rev. 20.

Q. Shall the SAME body live again, and be raised?

A. Yes, the same bodies made free from all defects and weaknesses unto which
we are now subjected, made spiritual, 1 Cor. 15.13. i. e. immortal, bright,
glorious, clear, nimble, and impassible, Mat. 13.43. Phil. 3.21.

Q. Who shall raise the dead?

A. God the Father shall raise all men by that power by which he is able to
subdue all things to himself, for Jesus Christ's sake, by the great power of the
holy Ghost, Joh. 6.39. Phil. 3.20, 21. Romans 8.11. Joh 5.21, 25, 28, 42.

Q. When shall this be?

A. At the last day, when the Lord shall descend from heaven with a shout, with
the voice of an archangel, and with the trump of God, and the dead in Christ
shall rise first.

Q. Where are men's souls from their death to the general resurrection?

A. 1. The souls of good men as soon as they are absent from the body, are
present with the Lord, 2 Cor. 5.1, 2, 3, 4, 6. Phil. 1.23. Rev. 14.13. Heb.
12.22. Act. 7. ult. Luke 23.4.

2. The souls of wicked men suffer the vengeance of eternal fire, and are
spirits in prison, Jude 7. 1 Pet. 3.18, 19.

Q. How may we know that we believe this Article aright?

A. 1. When we keep our bodies in that purity and sobriety that may prepare
them for that condition.

2. When we begin here to be spiritual, making our bodies submit to the
guidance, motions and directions of the blessed Spirit, as it shall be then.

3. When we live praying and looking for the consummation of all things; then
we do heartily believe the resurrection of the flesh.

Reynold's Life, the foresaid Author on the Creed, and others of Christ, and on
Psalm. 110. Bishop Andrews Resurrection-Sermons.

SUNDAY XVIII. The third part of the Catechism. Rules for understanding the
Commandments.
Q. NOw you have given an account of the two first parts of your Vow and
Promise, which are, First, that you should renounce the Devil and all his
works, the pomps and vanities of this wicked world, and all the sinful lusts of
the flesh. Secondly, that you should believe all the Articles of the Christian
faith. What is the third part of that Vow?

A. To keep Gods holy will and Commandments, and to walk in the same all the
days of our life, Luke 1 75.

Q. Our Catechism is an excellent sum of Religion, showing the Rule of Faith in
the Belief, the Rule of Devotion in the Lords Prayer and Sacraments, and the
Rule of Life in the Commandments of God; which you say your Godfathers and
Godmothers did promise for you in your Baptism, that you should keep. Tell me
how many Commandments there be?

A. Ten; which be called ten words, Deuteronomy. 4.3.

Q. Which be they?

A. The same which God spoke in the 20 chapter of Exodus, saying, I am the Lord
thy God, who brought thee out of the land of Egypt, out of the house of bondage.

i. Thou shall have none other gods but me.

ii. Thou shall not make to thy self any graven image, nor the likeness of any
thing that is in heaven above, or in the earth beneath, or in the water under
the earth. Thou shall not bow down to them, nor worship them: for I the Lord
thy God am a jealous God, and visit the sins of the fathers upon the children,
unto the third and fourth generation of them that hate me, and show mercy unto
thousands in them that love me, and keep my commandments.

iii. Thou shall not take the Name of the Lord thy God in vain: for the Lord
will not hold him guiltless that takes his Fame in vain.

iiii. Remember that thou keep holy the sabbath day. Six days shall thou labor
and do all that thou have to do, but the seventh day is the sabbath of the Lord
thy God. In it thou shall do no manner of work, thou and thy son, and thy
daughter, thy manservant and thy maidservant, thy cattle, and the stranger
that is within thy gates. For in six days the Lord made heaven and earth, the
sea, and all that in them is, and rested the seventh day: wherefore the Lord
blessed the seventh day, and hallowed it.

v. Honor thy father and thy mother, that thy days may be long in the land
which the Lord thy God gives thee.

vi. Thou shall do no murder.

vii. Thou shall not commit adultery.

viii. Thou shall not steal.

ix. Thou shall not bear false witness against thy neighbor.

x. Thou shall not covet thy neighbors house, thou shall not covet thy
neighbors wife, nor his servant, nor his maid, nor his ox, nor his ass, nor
any thing that is his.

Q. What do you chiefly learn by these Commandments?

A. I learn two things: 1. My duty toward God, to love and serve him with all
my heart, and with all my soul, Luke 10.27. in the four first Commandments. 2.
My duty toward my neighbor; that is, every one one that bears the face of a
man, to do to him, and love him, as I would be done to, and loved my self,
Deuteronomy. 30.16. Mat. 22.37. Luke 10.27. in the six last.

Q. What is your duty toward God, in the four first Commandments?

A. 1. My duty toward God is, to believe in him, to fear him, and to love him;
to put my trust in him, to call upon him by fervent prayer, to give thanks for
his mercies. Com. 1.

2. To worship him with inward Devotion of Soul, and outward Reverence of Body.
Com. 2.

3. To honor his holy Name and Word, and whatsoever belongs unto him in our
heart, and with our mouths. Com. 3.

4. To serve him truly all the days of my life, and also punctually to observe
those days that are consecrated to his public and solemn worship. Com 4.

With the manner how to perform these Duties with all the heart, cheerfully;
with all the soul, understandingly and knowingly; with all the strength,
diligently:

Q. What is your duty toward your neighbor, in the six last Commandments
enjoined?

A. 1. To love, honor and succor father and mother. To honor and obey the
King, and all that are put in authority under him. To submit my self to all my
Governors, spiritual Teachers, Pastors and Masters. To order my self lowly and
reverently to all my betters. Com. 5.

2. To hurt no body in word nor deed. To bear no malice nor hatred in my heart.
Com. 6.

3. To keep my body in temperance, soberness, and chastity. Com. 7.

4. To be true and just in all my dealings, and to keep my hands from picking
and stealing. Com. 8.

5. To avoid all evil speaking, lying and flandering. Com. 9.

6. Not to covet or desire other men's goods, but to learn and labor truly to
get our own living, and to do our duty in that state of life, whereunto it
shall please God to call us. And I learn the manner how to perform my duty to
my neighbor, in doing to him as I would be done to my self. Com. 10.

Q. What use do you make of these Commandments?

A. We use them,

1. To discover our sin when we have transgressed, Romans 7.13.

SUNDAY XVIII. The last Article of our Creed; or Life everlasting.
Q. WHat is the last clause of your Belief?

A. And the life everlasting.

Q. What do you mean when you say, And the life everlasting?

A. I mean that as I believe we must all rise again, so I believe that they who
have done evil shall rise to the resurrection of judgment or damnation; and
they that have done good, to the resurrection of life, Joh. 5.24, 25, 29.

Q. What is the everlasting state of the damned?

A. It is an everlasting separation from the presence of God, attended with an
utter deprivation of all the good we have, do or might enjoy, and a woeful
suffering of all the evil that can be understood, by the wrath of God, the fire
that is never quenched, or the worm that never dies.

Q. So then you believe that after this life the wicked are not consumed to
nothing, but kept in being to undergo the wrath of God then to be revealed
against the unrighteousness of men, and to be tormented with the devil and his
angels; losing God, with eternal regret that they have lost him, and an
everlasting despair of enjoying him; and undergoing his wrath, which shall
abide on them for ever, for being inclined to sin for ever against an
everlasting God; remaining under an eternal pain of loss, because there is no
hope of heaven; under an endless pain of sense, because there is no means to
appease the wrath of God for ever. Who believes this sad truth aright?

A. 1. They that are afraid to sin, considering nothing can bring them to hell
but sin; and careful to repent, considering no sin brings them thither but
that which is unrepented of.

2. They that fear God, the consuming fire, and tremble at his word, who after
he has killed, has power to cast into hell, Luke 12.5.

3. They who put a due value upon the blood of Christ, which only saves men
from the wrath of a never-to-be-appeased God.

Q. What is the everlasting life of those that are good?

A. It is a glorious state, wherein they that have approved themselves unto
God, do see and enjoy God immediately, 1 Cor. 13.12. and all good in him; with
infinite joy, security, rest, glory and satisfaction, without any allay of
evil, Rev. 21.4. and 22.3, 5. even what the eye never saw, the ear never heard,
neither has it entered into the heart of man to conceive, has God prepared for
them that love him.

Q How many degrees are there of this life?

A. 1. The earnest of it; He that hears my words, has everlasting life, and
is passed from death to life, Joh. 5.24.

2. The beginning of it in the soul, which as soon as it is dissolved from the
body, is with Christ, Phil. 1.23.

3. Or the completing of it in soul and body after the resurrection, when
heaven is prepared for us, and we for it.

Q. What shall become of the soul and body in this life?

A. 1. As for the body, that which was, 1. sown in corruption, shall be raised
in incorruption: 2. that which was sown in dishonor, shall be raised in
honor: 3. that which was sown in weakness, shall be raised in power: 4. that
which was sown a natural body, shall be raised a spiritual body: for he shall
change our vile bodies, that they may be like unto his glorious body, according
to the mighty working whereby he is able to subdue all things to himself.

2. As for the soul, 1. its understanding shall be perfectly enlightened, 1 Cor.
13.12. 2. The will shall be perfectly holy and conformable to Gods will, fixed
on the chief good. And, 3. the affections shall be perfectly regulated, and
perfectly satisfied.

Q To whom do you think is this life given and prepared?

A. For those that believe, repent, and finish their course in faith and
holiness, Joh. 1.16. Mat. 5.8. Heb. 12.14. Joh. 10.27, 28. Rev. 21.27. and
22.14. Joh. 17.4. 2 Timothy 4.8. Mat. 25 21. in a careful and constant performance
of Gods commands.

Q. Who knows that they shall enjoy this blessed life?

A. They in whom the life of grace is already begun, may be sure they shall end
in the life of glory, 1 John 3.3. Mat. 19.28, 29. Romans 6.22. Phil. 1.6. 1 Pet.
1.23.

Q. Who believes this Article aright?

A. 1. They that live in meditation upon, and expectation of the life of glory,
tasting the power of the world to come.

2. They that seriously ponder the two estates together, the one short and
troublesome of this world, the other eternal and happy in the world to come.

3. They that look upon this moment of their life, as a moment upon which their
eternal life depends, and now lay a foundation against the life to come.

4. They that die to this world, and live to another, having their affections
set on things above, where their life is hid with Christ in God.

Q. What use do you make of the five last Articles of your Belief?

A. 1. That believing in the holy Ghost, I do not grieve Gods holy Spirit by my
sins, Ephesians. 4.3. 1 These. 5.19. nor hinder the work of sanctification upon my
soul, by resisting his good motions and incitements to holiness of life.

2. That believing the holy Catholic Church, I continue a faithful and true
member thereof, by a true and lively faith in Christ, and an universal
unfeigned Charity toward all Christians.

3. That believing the forgiveness of sins, I relying upon the merits of Christ
for pardon, do truly repent of all my sins past, and amend my life according to
Gods holy word, denying all ungodliness and worldly lusts, and living soberly,
righteously and godly in this present world, as looking for the resurrection of
the dead, and the life everlasting in the world to come. Amen.

Q. Why do you conclude with Amen?

A. I do hereby acknowledge and ratify with my steadfast belief, the undoubted
truth and certainty of this Creed in general, and of every Article thereof in
particular, as undoubted and infallible truths; secretly willing, and earnestly
praying, that through the stedfastness of this faith, I may be preserved in the
true Worship of God the Father, through God the Son, by God the holy Ghost: To
whom be glory for ever.

Bolton's four last things, Longland's four last things. On the Creed, Dr.
Pearson, Dr. Jackson, Mr. Perkins, or Dr. Heylin, will competently furnish any
man.

The third part of the Catechism. SUNDAY XIX. Rules for understanding the
Commandments.
Q. NOw you have given an account of the two first parts of your Vow and
Promise, which are, First, that you should renounce the Devil and all his
works, the pomps and vanities of this wicked world, and all the sinful lusts of
the flesh. Secondly, that you should believe all the Articles of the Christian
faith. What is the third part of that Vow?

A. To keep Gods holy will and Commandments, and to walk in the same all the
days of our life, Luke 1.75.

Q. Our Catechism is an excellent sum of Religion, showing the Rule of Faith in
the Belief, the Rule of Devotion in the Lords Prayer and Sacraments, and the
Rule of Life in the Commandments of God; which you say your Godfathers and
Godmothers did promise for you in your Baptism, that you should keep. Tell me
how many Commandments there be?

A. Ten; which be called ten words, Deuteronomy. 4.3.

Q. Which be they?

A. The same which God spoke in the 20 chapter of Exodus, saying, I am the Lord
thy God, who brought thee out of the land of Egypt, out of the house of bondage.

i. Thou shall have none other gods but me.

ii. Thou shall not make to thy self any graven image, nor the likeness of any
thing that is in heaven above, or in the earth beneath, or in the water under
the earth. Thou shall not bow down to them, nor worship them: for I the Lord
thy God am a jealous God, and visit the sins of the fathers upon the children,
unto the third and fourth generation of them that hate me, and show mercy unto
thousands in them that love me, and keep my commandments.

iii. Thou shall not take the Name of the Lord thy God in vain: for the Lord
will not hold him guiltless that takes his Fame in vain.

iiii. Remember that thou keep holy the sabbath day. Six days shall thou labor
and do all that thou have to do, but the seventh day is the sabbath of the Lord
thy God. In it thou shall do no manner of work, thou and thy son, and thy
daughter, thy manservant and thy maidservant, thy cattle, and the stranger
that is within thy gates. For in six days the Lord made heaven and earth, the
sea, and all that in them is, and rested the seventh day: wherefore the Lord
blessed the seventh day, and hallowed it.

v. Honor thy father and thy mother, that thy days may be long in the land
which the Lord thy God gives thee.

vi. Thou shall do no murder.

vii. Thou shall not commit adultery.

viii. Thou shall not steal.

ix. Thou shall not bear false witness against thy neighbor.

x. Thou shall not covet thy neighbors house, thou shall not covet thy
neighbors wife, nor his servant, nor his maid, nor his ox, nor his ass, nor
any thing that is his.

Q. What do you chiefly learn by these Commandments?

A. I learn two things: 1. My duty toward God, to love and serve him with all
my heart, and with all my soul, Luke 10.27. in the four first Commandments. 2.
My duty toward my neighbor; that is, every one that bears the face of a
man, to do to him, and love him, as I would be done to, and loved my self,
Deuteronomy. 30.16. Mat. 22.37. Luke 10 27. in the six last.

Q. What is your duty toward God, in the four first Commandments?

A. 1. My duty toward God is, to believe in him, to fear him, and to love him;
to put my trust in him, to call upon him by fervent prayer, to give thanks for
his mercies. Com. 1.

2. To worship him with inward Devotion of Soul, and outward Reverence of Body.
Com. 2.

3. To honor his holy Name and Word, and whatsoever belongs unto him in our
heart, and with our mouths. Com. 3.

4. To serve him truly all the days of my life, and also punctually to observe
those days that are consecrated to his public and solemn worship. Com 4.

With the manner how to perform these Duties with all the heart, cheerfully;
with all the soul, understandingly and knowingly; with all the strength,
diligently:

Q. What is your duty toward your neighbor, in the six last Commandments
enjoined?

A. 1. To love, honor and succor father and mother. To honor and obey the
King, and all that are put in authority under him. To submit my self to all my
Governors, spiritual Teachers, Pastors and Masters. To order my self lowly and
reverently to all my betters. Com. 5.

2. To hurt no body in word nor deed. To bear no malice nor hatred in my heart.
Com. 6.

3. To keep my body in temperance, soberness, and chastity. Com. 7.

4. To be true and just in all my dealings, and to keep my hands from picking
and stealing. Com. 8.

5. To avoid all evil speaking, lying and flandering. Com. 9.

6. Not to covet or desire other men's goods, but to learn and labor truly to
get our own living, and to do our duty in that state of life, whereunto it
shall please God to call us. And I learn the manner how to perform my duty to
my neighbor, in doing to him as I would be done to my self. Com. 10.

Q. What use do you make of these Commandments?

A. We use them,

1. To discover our sin when we have transgress, Romans 7.13.

2. To awaken our consciences when they are secure, ibid.

3. And so it brings us to Christ, of whom we have need, Gal. 3.19, 24.

4. And directs us to walk with Christ, Romans 2.25. Jam. 2.10, 11.

Q Is it possible for us to keep these Commandments?

A. It is possible for us by the grace of God so heartily and sincerely to
endeavor an obedience to Gods Law in these Commandments, as that we may be
accepted before God through Jesus Christ, Mat. 11.30. 1 John 5.3.

Q What Motives have you to encourage and stir you to keep these Commandments?

A. I must keep them, because in keeping of them there is great reward, Psalm.
19.11. When the young man asked our Savior what he might do that he might
enter into life? our Savior answered that he must keep the commandments.

Q. What general Rules are to be observed to understand the full meaning of the
commandments?

A. The Rules are these:

1. That where any Duty is commanded, the contrary thereunto is forbidden; and
where any sin is forbidden, the contrary Duty is commanded.

2. The second Rule is, That in all Duties commanded, and sins forbidden, the
means conducing thereunto are forbidden also.

Bishop Nicholson's Catechism, Bishop Andrew's Pattern of Catechistical
Doctrine, Perkins, Dod.

SUNDAY XX. The Duties of the first Commandment.
Q. I Pray repeat the ten Commandments.

A. The same which God spoke in the 20 Chapter of, etc.

Qu. What does God intend by this first commandment?

A. He intends two things; the first is the motives we have to keep all the
Law; the second is the first duty of the Law.

Q. What Motives have we here to keep the Law?

A. We must keep this Law,

1. Because it is the Law of God, who is Sovereign over us, as being JEHOVAH,
the eternal, immutable, and Almighty God, having his being from himself, and
giving and graciously preserving our being, Exodus 20. Isai. 44.6. Exodus 3.14.
Act. 17.14.

2. Because it is the Law of our God, Psalm. 33.12. Romans 3.2, 3. because it is
the Law of the God that brought Israel out of the bondage of Egypt, and us out
of the bondage of sin, the power of darkness, and the tyranny of Satan, Luke
1.74, 75. 1 Pet. 1.15, 16, 17, 18.

Q. Which is the first commandment?

A I am the Lord thy God, and Thou shall have none other Gods before me.

Q. What is the general duty required in this commandment?

A. That in mind, will and affection we should take the true God alone in
Christ to be our God.

Q. What particular duties are commanded under this general?

A. They are ten.

Q What is the first duty?

A. To know God, his Nature, Will and Attributes, 1 Chronicles. 28.9. Joh. 17.3.
Romans 10.14. as he has revealed himself by his word and works.

Q. What is the second duty required in the first Commandmnet?

A. To acknowledge and confess him to be the only true God, and our God, 1
Cor. 12.9. Deuteronomy. 26.27. Psalm. 43.10. Jer. 14.22. and 24.7. Dan. 4 37.

Q. What is the third duty?

A. To worship and glorify him, Psalm. 95.6, 7. Mat. 4.10. by, 1. thinking,
Mal. 3.16. 2. meditating, Psalm. 63.16. 3. remembering, Eccles. 12.1. 4. highly
esteeming, Psalm. 71.19. 5. honoring and adoring him, Joh. 24.15, 22.

Q. What is the fourth duty here required?

A. To believe in him, 2 Chronicles. 20.20. Jer. 17.5, 7. Psalm. 31.6, 7. Exodus 14.31.

Q. What is the fifth?

A. We are bound to trust in him in all conditions, Dan. 3.16. and 6.23. Jonah
2.8. not being disheartened in our Duties, or stepping out to evil means.

Q What is the sixth duty?

A. We are bound to love him with all our hearts, as our chiefest good, above
all things, Mat. 10.37. and 19.22. Deuteronomy. 6.5. to delight in him, to desire to
please and enjoy him, to be zealous for him, Psalm. 42.1. Romans 12.11. Numb.
2.11. Psalm. 7.25. desiring his presence in heaven, Phil. 1.23.

Q. What is the seventh duty you are bound to in the first commandment?

A. We are bound to fear God, Isai. 8.13. to stand in awe of his Majesty, not
daring to offend him, 1 King. 8 3, 12. Isai. 51.12. and 8.2, 13. Jer. 2.19.

Q. What is the eighth duty?

A. To hope in God and his promises in Jesus Christ, 1 Pet. 1.13. Romans 5.5.

Q. What is the ninth duty you are obliged to in the first commandment?

A. We are bound to be so humble, as to obey God in doing and suffering his
will with the whole man, Jer. 7.23. Jam. 4.5. returning all that we have
received from him, to him, 1 Cor. 4.7. and 10.13.

Q. What is our tenth duty here?

A. To be patient, and with patience to submit to the will of God in all
things, Mat. 6.10. Jam. 57, 11. Heb. 10.36. Psalm. 39.10.

The whole Duty of man; Preston's Abridgement; Life of God.

SUNDAY XXI. Sins against the first Commandment.
Q. WHat are the sins, and who are the offenders against the first commandment?

A. There are ten sins especially, and ten sorts of Offenders against this
Commandment.

Q. What is the first sin?

A. The first sin is ignorance; which they are guilty of, who notwithstanding
his word and works, do either naturally, or carelessly, or willingly remain
ignorant of God, his Nature, Attributes, his works and will concerning us,
Ephesians. 4.17, 18. Job 21.14. Joh. 3.20. 2 Pet. 3.5. Jer. 4.12.

Q. What is the second sin against this commandment?

A. The second sin is Atheism; of which they are guilty, who either think,
Psalm. 14.1. Ephesians. 2.12. or wish there were no God, or live as if there were no
God all-seeing to behold them, just to punish, holy to abhor, and Omnipotent to
destroy a sinner, Tit. 1.16. Romans 1.18.

Q. What is the third sin?

A Unbelief: which they are guilty of, 1. Who assent not to his Law as holy,
just, and good. 2. Who believe not his threats, so as to be humbled thereby; or
his promises, so as to be invited by them to newness of life, 1 John 5.10. 3.
Who distrust, doubt, and are careless, 2 Pet. 2.7, 8. and 1.20. Tit. 1.14 Psalm.
58.6. Deuteronomy. 18.11. 4. Who fall away, Heb. 10.25. Heb. 4. by Heresy or Apostasy.

Q. What is the fourth sin?

A. Distrust of God: of which they are guilty, 1. Who despair, Heb. 10.38. Jer.
17.5. 2. Who trust in other things, Mat. 4.6, 7. Lev. 19.29. 1 Cor. 10.20, 21.
Jer. 17 5, 6. and 49.16. 3. Who make use of unlawful means.

Q. What is the fifth sin against this commandment?

A. Want of love: of which they are guilty, 1. Who love not every thing that
belongs to God. 2. Who love other things more then God, Jer. 2.13. Are not so
zealous for his Ordinances, Servants, Honor and Name, as they ought to be.

Qu. What is the sixth?

A. Profaneness: whereof they are guilty, 1. Who presume to sin, Psalm. 19.13.
2. Who are carnally secure, Zeph. 1.12. 3. Who harden their hearts, Romans 2.5.
4. Who are strangers to God, Ezekiel. 9 4. 5. Who slight and despise God and his
commands, Deuteronomy. 32.15. 6. Who resist his Spirit, Act. 7.21. Ephesians. 4.30. 7. Who
neglect his service and Worship.

Q. What is the seventh sin against this commandment?

A. Unthankfulness, Romans 1.21. whereof they are guilty, 1. Who ascribe the
praise of any good they have, or do, to Fortune, Idols, themselves, or any
other Creatures, 1 Samuel 6.7, 8, 9. Dan. 5.23 Deuteronomy. 8.17. Dan. 4.30. Heb. 1 6.
2. Who forget, slight, or live not answerable to his mercies. 3. Who do not
rejoice in the Lord.

Q. What is the eighth sin?

A. Idolatry: of which they are guilty, who worship, trust in, love, fear and
honor any thing more then God, Jer. 2.27, 28. 1 These. 1.9.

Q. What is the ninth sin against this commandment?

A. Security, Presumption, and Despair, growing from the forgetfulness,
misapprehension, false opinion, unworthy and vain thoughts of God, and pride
against him, Isai. 65.2. Psalm. 19. Jer. 5.3.

Q. What is the tenth sin?

A. Want of submission to his will, by obedience to his punishments by
patience, to his allotment by contentedness.

Q. You must have a God, that is Religion; you must have one true God as your
God in Jesus Christ, which is true Religion; you must behave your self toward
him as God, which is the practice of true Religion: What do you mean by these
words before me?

A. These words before me, teach us, that whatever we think, speak or do, for
or against him, is before his eyes, to whom all things are naked, Rev. 2.23.
Heb. 4.13.

Dod, Perkins, Binchius, Usher's Body of Divinity, Bishop Andrews as aforesaid.

SUNDAY XXII. The Duties of the second Commandment.
Q. WHat is the second Commandment?

A. Thou shall not make to thy self any graven Image, nor the likeness of any
thing that is in heaven above, or in the earth beneath, etc.

Q. What is herein commanded, and what forbidden?

A. 1. We are herein commanded to worship the only true God, after an holy and
true manner, inwardly with our minds, and outwardly with our bodies, as he has
prescribed in his Word, Exodus 34.11. Deuteronomy. 4.2, 12, 32. Mat. 28.20. Joh. 4.24.
Psalm. 95.6. and 132.7. Romans 12.1. 1 Cor. 6.20.

2. We are herein forbidden to worship the true God after a false manner, Lev.
19.4. and 26.1. 1 Cor. 10.14. Ezekiel 14 4, 6. by an Idol, an Image, or any
imagination of our own heart; preserving his Worship and Ordinances pure and
entire, Isai. 8.20. Psalm. 106.38, 39.

Q. What are the Duties required in this commandment?

A. They are five; whereof the first is,

1. That we should apprehend God as an infinite incomprehensible Essence,
without any visible form or shape; and therefore not capable of any
representation by image, resemblance, or picture, Romans 1.30. Deuteronomy. 4.15, 16.

Q. What is the second duty here commanded?

A. That we should worship this God as God, with fear, reverence and humility,
in our souls and in our bodies, which are his, Joh. 4.24. Psalm. 95 6.

Q. What is the third duty?

A. That we should observe religiously all the substantial parts of Gods
worship, as Prayer, Phil. 4.6. Ephesians. 5.20. hearing the Word, Deuteronomy. 17.18, 19.
the administration and receiving of the Sacraments, and the Discipline of the
Church, Mat. 28.19. 1 Chronicles. 11.23. Mat. 18.15, 16, 17.

Qu. What is the fourth duty?

A. In Gods worship to use such Ceremonies for which there are either Precepts
or Examples in Scripture, or such as are enjoined by the Church we live in, for
decency, 1 Cor. 14.4. order, 1 Cor. 14.20, 32. or edification, 1 Cor. 14.26.
Gal. 2.18.

Q. What is the fifth duty?

A. That we ought to approve, exercise and perform, purely, sincerely and
heartily, all the parts of Gods Worship, with all means and furtherances
thereof.

Bowls of the Worship of God; Bishop Andrews on the Commandments; the Authors
of Prayer, Preaching, Hearing, Sacraments, Discipline, Fasts and Feasts.

SUNDAY XXIII. The Sins against the second Commandment.
Q. REpeat the second Commandment.

A. Thou shall not make to thy self any graven image, nor the likeness of any
thing that is in heaven above, or in the earth beneath, or in the water under
the earth. Thou shall not bow down to them, nor worship them: for I the Lord
thy God am a jealous God, and visit the sins of the fathers upon the children,
unto the third and fourth generation of them that hate me, and show mercy unto
thousands in them that love me, and keep my commandments.

Q What are the sins, and who are the offenders against this Commandment?

A. There are chiefly seven sins, and seven sorts of sinners against this
Commandment.

Q. Which is the first sin against this commandment?

A. Vain Imaginations; which they are guilty of, who fancy to themselves any
likeness of the Deity, Romans 1.23. and express that fancy by any representation
of God in any kind of image or likeness of any creature whatsoever, Deuteronomy.
4.15. Act. 17 39.

Q. What is the second sin?

A. Idolatry; whereof they are guilty, who worship any of those images of God
they make, or worship God by them, Dan. 3.18 Gal. 4 8.

Q. What is the third sin?

A. All omission of any part of Gods true worship when it is required; and all
false Worship, either invented by others, or taken up of our own head.

Q. What is the fourth sin?

A. Not to prepare our selves for the service of God in any part of his
worship; not behaving our selves well in it; not endeavoring to receive the
benefit of it.

Q. What is the fifth sin?

A. To address our Prayers to God by Saints and Angels, and not by the only
Mediator between God and man, Jesus Christ.

Q. What is the sixth sin against this commandment?

A. Superstition: whereof they are guilty, that think those things which are
commanded of men for order, are commanded of God for Religion; and those who
think that those things which are indifferent for their nature, are
superstitious in their use; and so reject all Ceremonies for decency, order and
edification.

Q. What is the seventh sin against this commandment?

A. To magnify and set up our own inventions, under the color of Religion.

Q. What is the eighth sin?

A. Witchcraft.

Q Is God to be worshipped with any bodily worship?

A. We must glorify him with our bodies and our souls, which are his, 1 Cor.
6. ult. Romans 12.1.

Q. What motives have we to perform the duties enjoined, and avoid the sins
forbidden in this commandment?

A. 1. Because God is so jealous of his worship and glory, that he will punish
such as neglect or deprave it, to the third and fourth generation, accounting
them as enemies, Exodus 34.7. Deuteronomy. 5.10. Dan. 9.4.

2. Because he will mercifully reward them that obey and serve him according to
his will, as being his friends, and the promoters of his Interest.

Minister. As in the first Commandment we are bound to have one true God, so in
the second we are bound to worship him aright: where we have

1. A Precept, Not to make any graven image for Gods worship, nor to worship
any being made; that is, 1. All Idolatry; 2. Will Worship; 3. Superstition,
both Affirmative and Negative.

2. We have a severe Sanction: For I am a zealous God; wherefore, Let us
worship and bow down before the Lord our Maker.

Dr. Hammond of Superstition, Will Worship, Idolatry, Schism; Perkins of
Witchcraft.

SUNDAY XXIV. The Duties of the third Commandment.
Q. WHat is the third Commandment?

A. Thou shall not take the Name of the Lord thy God in vain: for the Lord will
not hold him guiltless that takes his Name in vain.

Q. Now we are bound by the first and second Commandments to own and worship
the true God, what are we bound to by this third Commandment?

A. We are commanded to propose to our selves the honor of Gods holy Name in
all our actions, and to have a separate and distinct respect for all such
things and persons as have the Name of God called upon them, and more
immediately relate to his service.

Q. What are the particular duties enjoined in this Commandment?

A. That we should use, 1. the Titles, 2. the Properties, 3. works, 4.
Ordinances, 5. the things that belong to God; 1. with knowledge, 2. faith, 3.
reverence, 4. joy, 5. sincerity and conscience, in thought, word and
conversation.

Q. What is the first duty in reference to Gods Name, Titles and Attributes?

A. We are to meditate with fear, to speak with reverence, honor and praise,
of the Names, Titles and Attributes of God, 1 Pet. 4.11. Lev. 10.3. Joh. 2.16.
Mal. 1.13. Ezekiel. 22.26. Psalm. 8.1. Deuteronomy. 28.58. 1 Pet. 3.15.

Q. What is the second duty we owe to Gods glorious Name?

A. To swear by his Name, 1. in truth, 2. in judgment, 3. equity, 4. being
lawfully called thereunto, Jer. 4.2. in the presence of God, who will 1. bring
it to light, 2. and punish whatsoever we falsify in his Name, 1 Cor. 4.5. Romans
12.19.

Q. May we swear?

A. Yes, we are commanded, Psalm. 63.11. we are encouraged by Gods example, Heb.
6.13. Angels, Rev. 10. Apostles, Romans 1.9. and 9 1.2 Cor. 1.23. And although
our Savior and St. James forbid us to swear, 1. by any thing but God; or, 2.
in any trivial idle business, wherein yea, yea, nay, nay, may serve, Mat. 5 34.
Jam. 5.12. yet in grave, necessary and charitable matters, either 1. to bind a
promise, 1 King. 1.17. Mat. 5.33. or, 2. to witness the truth, Heb. 6 16. we
may swear.

Q. What is the third duty we owe to Gods Name?

A. To call upon it in prayer, 1 John 5.14. Mat. 7.7. with humility, care and
faith; confessing our sins, p^aying for his grace, and thanking him for his
mercy.

Q. What is our duty in reference to his Word?

A. 1. To hear it with, 1. desire, 2. care, 3. diligence, Eccles. 4 17. Job
5.27. constancy, faith, Jam. 1.6. Joh. 5.24. improvement, joy and humility,
whether it be read or preached.

2. To propagate the Word of God to others, 1 Pet. 3.1, 2. Tit. 2.10. Mat. 5 16.

3. To live answerable to it our selves, and make such profession of it as may
adorn it before the world, Phil. 1.21. Ephesians. 4.3. 1 These. 4.12.

Q. What is our duty in reference to the Sacraments?

A To make conscience to use them, 1. with due preparation, 2. right affection,
and 3. answerable conversation.

Qu. What is our duty in reference to Gods works?

A. To observe, admire, and extol his great power, wisdom and goodness, so
evident in all his works, Psalm. 92.5, 6 Psalm. 104.24. 1 Pet 4.11. 1 Cor. 10.31.
and to give him thanks.

Q. What is our duty in reference to his Servants, and other things that belong
to him?

A. 1. To love, honor, relieve and imitate his Servants.

2. To reverence any thing upon which his Name is stamped.

3. To alienate nothing that belongs to him and his service, taking care not to
rob God.

Q. What is the fourth duty enjoined in this Commandment?

A. That we be careful what and how we vow; and when we have vowed any thing,
to perform it, Eccles. 5.4.

Sanderson of Oaths, Joseph Mede's Sanctification of Gods Name.

SUNDAY XXV. The Sins against the third Commandment.
Q WHat is forbidden in this Commandment?

A. We are forbidden in general all rash, unadvised, wilful profanation of
Gods ever-blessed Name, by Oaths, Curses of the Creatures, my Neighbor, and my
self: Not to use the Name of God slightly, idly, foolishly, and vainly; much
less to cover any, or what is unlawful and sinful, under his Name. Not
unadvisedly or irreverently to meddle with Gods holy Word, Sacraments, or any
parts of his holy Worship: Neither slight, undervalue or despise either things
or persons, wherein and whereby God is honored, and whereupon his holy Name is
called, Lev. 18.21. and 19.12 and 36.22. and 2.15, 32. Mat. 23.16. and 20.22.
Hos. 10 4. Lev. 24 14. Jam. 3.9. Prove. 30.9. 2. Tim. 2.19. Romans 2.24. Psalm.
5.7. Heb. 12.28. Prove. 13.3. Isai. 62.2. 1 Cor. 11.22.

Q. What are the particular sins and sinners against this Commandment?

A. The first sin is, Irreverence; whereof they are guilty, who do ignorantly,
Act. 17.13. vainly, Prove. 30.9. profanely, Mal. 1.6, 7. superstitiously think
or speak of, or use the great Name, Titles, and Attributes of God, by
blasphemy, 2 King. 19 12. Lev. 24.11. perjury, Zach. 5.4. and 8 7. and all
sinful discourse.

Q What is the second sin against this Commandment?

A. Carelessness, 1. to know, Psalm. 92.5, 6. 2. to observe, Zeph. 3.5. 3. to
meditate, 4. to praise or make use of the Titles, Properties, Ordinances, or
works of God, Mat. 13.19. upon great and solemn occasions.

Q. What is the third sin against this Commandment?

A. Curiosity: whereof they are guilty, who frame curious questions about the
nature, actions; and secret decrees of God; not contenting themselves with the
revealed things that belong to us and to our children, Luke 17.8. Rev. 1.21.
Phil. 2.10. Isai. 45.23.

Q. What is the fourth sin against this Commandment?

A. The abuse of God Ordinances: whereof they are guilty, who

1. Pray without understanding, 1 Cor. 14.15. without desire, or without care
to speed, Mat. 6.7. or without faith in Gods promises, Romans 10.14. or without
the awe of Gods presence.

2. Or hear without, 1. attention, 2. reverence, 3. or care to get good
thereby; or frequency, Ezekiel. 33 30. Act. 28.21, 22.

3. Or neglect the Sacraments of Baptism and the Lords Supper, or obey not the
Discipline of the Church.

Q. What is the fifth sin against this commandment?

A. A neglect to discover and acknowledge Gods power, wisdom and justice in
his providence and works: to be unthankful and murmur, Rom 9.20, 21. to abuse
Gods works to excess or superstition.

Q. What is the sixth sin?

A. Profaneness: whereby we dishonor his Religion with an unholy conversation
toward God or man, Mat. 5.16. Phil. 2.15. so hindering the propagation of the
Gospel, making a sport of sin.

Q. What is the seventh sin?

A. Vain, rash, malicious and false swearing; taking Oaths our selves, and
provoking others to take Oaths to do mischief against Law and Conscience, Mat.
5.34, 35. Jer. 12.16. breaking our Oaths and Vows in lawful, honest, and
possible things, Deuteronomy. 23.21. Psalm. 15.3. especially that Vow in Baptism, Psalm.
78.8. and keeping those Oaths and Vows which are unlawful, Mat. 14.10.

Q. What is the eighth sin against this Commandment?

A. Sacrilege: whereof they are guilty, 1. Who wrest the Scripture to their
own damnation, to maintain their own inventions, 1 Pet. 3.16 1 Timothy 1.3. Rev.
22.19. 2. Who profane any thing that is dedicated to his Name; as Churches,
Church-Utensils, Lands, Tithes, Persons, Customs, or any thing that is his,
Mat. 21.13. Romans 2.22. Numb. 10.3. and 16.38. Jer. 4.2. Act. 19.37. Psalm. 74 8.
Luke 7.5.

Qu. What is the doom of those that commit these sins against the third
commandment?

A. The Lord will not hold them guiltless, but will punish them either in this
life, or in the life to come, Lev. 24.10. Zech. 5.1, to 5. Though they escape
men, yet they shall not escape Gods wrath.

Minister. The propagation of Religion, the confession of the Faith, the
celebration of Gods Worship, and most transactions in humane societies being
performed by the tongue after that God had enjoined the heart to serve him in
truth in the former commandments; he directs our tongues chiefly, that they
shall not take his Name, i. e. any thing whereby he may be known, his Titles,
his Word, Psalm. 132.2. Deuteronomy. 18.19. his Attributes, Exodus 33.18, 19. and what
relates to his worship, in vain, i. e. rashly, foolishly, Psalm. 12.2. and 24.4.
irreverently, profanely and falsely: for the Lord will not, etc. The chief end
for which we were made being to exalt and celebrate Gods Name, therefore surely
the Lord will not hold them guiltless that take his Name in vain.

Downham against Swearing, Spelman of Sacrilege.

SUNDAY XXVI. The Duties of the fourth Commandment.
Q. WHat is the fourth Commandment?

A. Remember that thou k^ep holy the sabbath day. Six days shall thou labor
and do all that thou have to do, but the seventh day is the sabbath of the Lord
thy God. In it thou shall do no manner of work, thou and thy son, and thy
daughter, thy manservant and thy maidservant, thy cattle, and the stranger
that is within thy gates. For in six days the Lord made heaven and earth, the
sea, and all that in them is, and rested the seventh day: wherefore the Lord
blessed the seventh day, and hallowed it.

Q. What are we commanded in the fourth Commandment?

A. We are commanded, because there is a time for every thing, in general, to
dedicate every day of our life a spiritual Sabbath in rest from sin, and
vacancy to his service; and in particular, that we sanctify and keep holy to
God such set-times as he has appointed in his Word.

Q. What set-time has God enjoined to be observed under the Gospel?

A. 1. A seventh part of our time, as it is just in every first day of the
week, which we keep, because Christ the Lord of the sabbath, Luke 6.5. rose
upon that day.

2. Because it has been observed as a day of holy services by all Christians
since Christ's time, Joh. 20.19, 26. Act. 20.7. 1 Cor. 16.2. Rev. 1.10. and Let
no man judge us in meat or drink, or in respect of an holy day, or Sabbath
days, which are a shadow of things to come; but the body is Christ, Col. 2.16,
17. Heb. 2.4. and 8.10.

Q This is a Rule: What has been continued down to us by the uninterrupted
practice of the Churches in all Ages from the Apostles time, (as the Christian
sabbath was) and the example, practice, ground and reason whereof we have in
Scripture, that is of Divine authority: But are there no other days to be set
apart by Christians except the Lords day?

A. Yes:

1. Festivals set apart by the Church, for remembrance of the service of God to
us by his, 1. Son, 2. Servants, 3. and Providence, Esth. 9.22. Neh. 8.10. Psalm.
150. v. 1.

2. Fast-days, appointed for remembering our evil ways that were not good, and
loathing our selves for them, Ezekiel. 36.31. Isai. 58 6. Job 42.6. Neh. 9.31. and
for prayers to God to pardon and forgive us.

Q. How is the sabbath to be kept?

A. 1. By resting from all works, but works of necessity, holiness and mercy,
Luke 13.11. and 15.14. and 1 5. Mat. 12.5. Joh. 7.7.23. 1 Cor. 16.1. in heart,
tongue and life, Neh. 13.15, 16. Exodus 31.15, 16. Isai. 58.19. Jer. 17.24.

2. By devoting the whole day to prayer, meditation on Gods works and Word,
thanksgiving, examination of our hearts, Eccles. 4.17. Psalm. 93.5. 2 Timothy 2.19.
public worship, which we are to perform, 1. attentively, 2. reverently, Isai.
66.2. 3. sincerely, 4. thoroughly and constantly, Ezekiel. 46.1, 2, 10. Act. 10.33.
1 Cor. 14.16. and with our company, Heb. 10.25. Psalm. 42.4. and works of
necessity, mercy and charity, which we are to perform with heavenly minds, Mat.
12.1. Luke 13.15.

Q. Who are to take care chiefly to see this performed?

A. Superiors, who are not only bound to keep it themselves, but to see that
it be kept by all those under their charge, and to take care that they hinder
not others in employments of their own, Exodus 20.10. Josh. 15.15. thou and thy
servants, Neh. 23.11, 17.

Q. Why is the word Remember set in the beginning of the fourth Commandment?

A. The word Remember is set in the beginning of this Commandment, to stir us
up to prepare for the keeping of it; and in keeping of it, for the better
obeying of the rest of the Commandments, because we are apt to forget it in the
midst of our worldly businesses that go before or after it; and because Satan
endeavors to blot out the memory of it, to bring in all irreligion and
impiety, Lam. 1.7. Jer. 17.21, 22, 23. Neh. 13.15, to 23.

Bishop White, Cawdrey, Brerewood.

SUNDAY XXVII. The Sins against the fourth Commandment.
Q. WHat are the sins forbidden in this fourth Commandment?

A. The first sin is Negligence; which they are guilty of, that

1. Omit any duty in whole or in part, for matter or manner.

2. That sleep out part of the Sabbath.

3 That are not mindful of the Sabbath beforehand, to order their affairs so
that they may not hinder them in the Lords work on the Lords day.

4. They that come not at all, or late, and go away before the Blessing from
Gods service, and are careless in it, and unprofitable after it.

Q What is the second sin against this Commandment?

A. Profanation of the Sabbath: whereof they are guilty, who

1. Spend any moment of that precious time with worldly cares words or
businesses, as traveling, Exodus 16 29, 30. marketing, Neh. 13.15, 16, 17
labor, Exodus 34 21 going on trifling errands, vain recreations, and unlawful
pleasures, Isai. 58 12. 1 Cor. 10 7. eat, drink, or discourse it away.

2. They are guilty of profaning the Sabbath Day, that, 1. Put no difference
between this day and another: That refuse to come to the public Assemblies, to
hear and assist at Divine Offices, Heb. 10.25. Jude 19.

3. They that put others on needless works on this day, and suffer them to
absent from, and neglect holy duties, Neh. 13.15.

Q. What is the third sin?

A. Judaizing in opinion or practice, Col. 2.16. Gal. 4.10.

Q. What is the fourth sin?

A. Casting off the duty of reading the Scripture, Neh. 8.4. Jer. 36.6. of
common prayer, supplication, giving thanks, singing of Psalms and Hyms,
administration of Sacraments, exercise of Church Censures, collection for the
poor, 1 Cor. 16.1. Ordination; which were performed in the primitive Church
upon this day.

Q What is the fifth sin?

A. Not improving the Sabbath for the comfortable meditation of the rest that
remains for the people of God, Heb. 4.9.

Q. What is the sixth?

A Not improving the Sabbath in such acts of charity, as, 1. reconciling
Neighbors, Mat. 5.23 2. giving alms, Neh. 8.12. 3. provoking one another to
love and to good works: 4. visiting the sick, Jam. 1.27. 5. edifying one
another in love, 1 Cor. 14.3. 1 These. 5.1. Heb. 10.24, 25.

Q. What are the Reasons annexed to the fourth Commandment, to enforce it?

A. The first is taken from the equity of it; God allowing us six days of seven
for our own affairs, and reserving but one for himself: Six days thou shall
labor and do all thy work.

Q. What is the second?

A. The second reason of keeping the Sabbath Day holy, is, Gods special
property in that day: The seventh day is the sabbath of the Lord thy God.

Qu. What is the third?

A. Gods example: In six days God made heaven and earth, and rested the seventh
dsy.

Q What is the last motive to keep this Commandment?

A. The blessing God has put upon that day; not only in sanctifying it to be
a day for his service, but in ordaining it to be a means of blessing to us in
our sanctifying it: wherefore the Lord blessed the sabbath day, and hallowed it.

Goodwin's observation of the Sabbath.

SUNDAY XXVIII. The Duties of Superiors.
Q. NOw you have learned your duty toward your God in the four Commandments of
the first table; where do you learn your duty toward others and your self?

A. In the six Commandments of the second Table.

Q. Which are they?

A. v. Honor thy father and thy mother, that thy days may be long in the land
which the Lord thy God gives thee.

vi. Thou shall do no murder.

vii. Thou shall not commit adultery.

viii. Thou shall not steal.

ix. Thou shall not bear false witness against thy neighbor.

x. Thou shall not covet thy neighbors house, thou shall not covet thy
neighbors wife, nor his servant, nor his maid, nor his ox, nor his ass, nor
any thing that is his.

Q. What are the duties commanded in the fifth Commandment?

A. The duties of superiors toward inferiors, of inferiors toward
superiors.

Q. What is the duty of superiors toward inferiors?

A. The duty of Magistrates and Governors is, 1. to countenance, commend and
reward them that do well, 1 Pet. 3.7. Romans 13.3, 4. 2. To discountenance and
chastise those that do ill, Prove. 19.15. 3. To protect and provide for those
that are under them, things necessary for soul, body and estate. 4 To maintain
Religion, to honor God, Deuteronomy. 17.19. Isai. 49.23. 1 Timothy 2.2. Psalm. 101.6, 7.
and to establish justice and peace.

Q. What is the duty of parents toward children?

A. 1. To nourish, 2 Cor. 12.14. 1 Timothy 5.16. Genesis 21.7. 1 Samuel 1.22. 2. To
baptize them, Genesis 21.4. 3. To instruct and educate them, Prove 22.6. Ephesians 6.4
Deuteronomy. 6.6, 7. 4. To protect and provide for them, Genesis 30.30. Josh. 7.24. 5. To
keep them in subjection. 6. To bring them up in some honest labor and useful
calling, that they may not by idleness come to want, and the snare of the
Devil, Job 32 6 and 29.8. 7. Lovingly, seasonably and moderately to correct
them when they do ill, and to encourage them when they do well, Col. 3.21.
Prove. 13.24. 8. To watch over them. 9. To give them good examples, Psalm. 131.2.
10. To bless them by prayer and by piety, that their feed may be blessed.

Q What is the duty of masters to servants?

A. They are, 1. To choose good servants, Psalm. 101. 2. They are to be just to
them, allowing them that meat, wages, lodging, work, and time of refreshing
that is fitting, Prove. 22.27. 1 Cor. 9.9. Deuteronomy. 24.14, 15. and 31.15. Jam. 5.4.
Mal. 3.5. 3. They are to admonish, instruct and reprove them privately and
discreetly, and to take care that they come to be instructed publicly, Psalm.
101 7. Act. 10.2. Josh. 24 15. Prove. 31.15. 4. To be good examples to them. 5.
To enjoin them moderate and lawful commands, and to encourage them in
well-doing, considering they have a Master in heaven, Ephesians 6.9, 3. Col 4.1. 6.
They are to take care that they be provided for in sickness, Mat. 8.6. and that
their grievances be remedied, Job 31.13, 14, 15.

Q. What is my duty if I be a Minister?

A. 1. To feed the flock with wholesome doctrine, plainly, diligently, and
faithfully, 1 Timothy 4.12. Tit. 1.6. Lev. 21.4. 2 Timothy 3.16. Jer. 23.28. 2 Cor.
4.2. 2 Timothy 2.25. 2 Cor. 12.15. 2. Ministers are to go before the flock in a
blameless conversation, 1 Timothy 4. 12. and to assist them in all the parts of
the worship of God, Romans 15.16. 3. To take heed to themselves, and to the flock
over which the holy Ghost has made them overseers, Act. 20.28.

Q. What is the husbands duty to his wife?

A. 1. To choose religiously and discreetly. 2. To love her dearly. 3. To bear
with her patiently. 4. To protect her carefully. 5. To provide her necessaries
for her state and calling. 6. To allow her competent maintenance and liberty,
to rejoice and delight in her, and to admonish her with prudence and
tenderness, 2 Cor. 6.14. 1 Pet. 3.7. Ephesians. 5.33. Genesis 34.67. and 20.16. 1 Samuel
30.5, 8. Prove. 5.18.

Q. What is their duty who are above others in gifts?

A. 1. Not to despise others, 2. but employ their gifts to their advantage,
Romans 12.6. 1 Pet. 4.10, 11.

Q. What is the duty of Old men?

A. They should be, 1. Examples of patience, sobriety, holiness, gravity; 2.
sound in faith; 3. able to give good counsel and direction, Tit. 2.2, 3, 4.

Bishop Bilson of subjection; Perkins, Gouge, and Bishop Hall of Family Duties.

SUNDAY XXIX. The Duties of Inferiors.
Q. WHat is the duty of Inferiors?

A. To be subject, reverent, and thankful, bearing with their wants, and
covering them in love.

Q. What is the duty of subjects to their Sovereigns?

A. 1. Obedience to the Laws for conscience sake, Tit. 3.1. 1 Pet. 2.13. Romans
13.2.

2. Not resisting for fear of damnation.

3. To reverence, Prove. 24.21. 1 Pet. 2.17. and 2. to defend their persons with
our prayers, 1 Timothy 2.1, 2. 2. Goods, Romans 13.6, 7. body and life, 2 Samuel 18.3.
Fearing the Lord and the King, and meddling not with them that are given to
change, Prove. 24.24.

Q. What is the duty of children to parents?

A. 1. To revence, fear and obey them, Prove. 30.17. Ephesians. 6.1. Col. 3.20. 2.
To be disposed of by them, Ephesians. 6.1. Numb. 30.5. Ruth 3.5. Judges 14.2. 3. To
relieve them, 1 Timothy 5.4. Genesis 47.12. 4. To be advised by them, Prove. 24.22. 5.
To express our love to them, 1. by our behavior toward them: 2. by our
prayers for them, 1 Pet. 2.18.

Q. What is the duty of servants to their masters?

A. 1. Servants are wisely, faithfully, willingly and diligently to bestow
their time appointed in their Masters service, Tit. 2.9, 10. Ephesians. 6.5, 6.
Genesis 31.38. 1 Timothy 6.1.

2. They are to submit to their holy instructions and rebukes, without
grudging, stomach, sullen countenance, answering again, or resistance, Tit.
2.9. 1 Pet. 3.18. 2 Pet. 2.20.

Q. What is the duty of the people to their Ministers?

A. 1. They are to love them for their works sake, 1 These. 5.13. Luke 10.16.

2. They are to obey them, as having the rule over them, Heb. 13.17.

3. They are to pray for them, Ephesians. 6.7, 8. Col. 4.3.

4. They are to communicate to them of every good thing, Gal. 6.6. 1 Cor. 9.

Q. What is the wifes duty toward her husband?

A. 1. She is to obey, fear, and love him, Ephesians. 5 33, 22, 23. Col. 4.18 1
Pet. 3.1. 1 Samuel 25.3, 5. in word and behavior.

2. To be faithful to him in his bed, and his other affairs.

3. She is to be a help to him, Genesis 2.18. in things of this life, and of that
life that is to come.

Qu. What is our duty toward those that are above us in age or gifts?

A. We are, 1. to respect them; 2. to ask counsel of them; 3. to rise up before
them; 4. to give them leave to speak before us, Tit. 2.6. 1 Pet. 5 5. Lev.
19.32. Job 32.46. to make use of the gifts which God has given them, Joh.
4.19. Romans 16.1, 2, 3.

Q. How must all these duties be performed?

A. All these duties are, 1. cheerfully, 2. diligently, 3. faithfully to be
performed to superiors, though they be wicked and ungodly, in respect of the
commandment, will and authority of God, who has so appointed, Psalm. 119.4, 14,
32, 117.

Q. We have heard of the object of this Commandment, Superiors, who are called
Father and Mother, because they may be tender toward Inferiors, and
Inferiors may be the more obedient to them: we have heard of the duty, honor;
what is the motive to keep this Commandment?

A. We must be careful to keep this commandment, lest we be cut off, Deuteronomy.
21.18. Prove. 30.17. that as far as it may stand with Gods glory and our good,
our days may be long in the land which the Lord our God gives us.

Q. What is the duty of Equals?

A. Equals must regard the dignity and worth of each other, modestly carrying
themselves one toward another, and in giving honor to go one before another,
Ephesians. 5.21. Romans 12 10.

Mr. Reyner, Mr. Wheatley.

SUNDAY XXX. The Sins forbidden, and the Duties enjoined in the sixth
Commandment.
Q. WHat is the sixth Commandment?

A. Thou shall do no murder.

Q. Because life we would have above all things, and we can enjoy nothing
without it; hence the first thing that God secures of our Neighbors is his
life: What is forbidden in this Commandment?

A. We are forbidden first to be cruel and inhumane, Deuteronomy. 22.6. Prove. 12.10.
Numb. 22.19.

Q. What is the second thing you are forbidden to do in this Commandment?

A. We are forbidden to neglect our own preservation, 1. by excessive sorrow,
Prove. 17.22. 2. distracting care: 3. wicked thoughts and hands against our
selves, by solitary musing on the temptations of Satan, by neglect of meat,
drink, apparel, recreation, Physic, sleep, labor, or excess therein, to east
away our selves. Or, 1. by meddling with other men's matters, Amos 4. 1. Prove.
23.21. and 26.17. 2. By desperate adventures: 3. By dangerous company, or
business, Prove. 26.20, 21. to endanger our lives over which we are not Masters,
Luke 2.29.

Q. What is the third thing forbidden in this Commandment?

A. We are forbidden all the murders of the heart, Mat. 15.19. whereof,

1. The first is unmercifulness, Amos 2.6, 7.

2. Immoderate and causeless anger too lightly begun, too long continued,
Ephesians. 4.9.

3. Envy, grudging, repining, rancor, disdain, emulation, Gal. 5.20.

4. Hatred, malice, uncharitable suspicion, 1 Cor. 13.5, 7. Romans 1.29, 30, 31.

5. Desire of revenge, Act. 23.12. irreconciliation, frowardness, contention,
Romans 1.31.

6. A desire and consent to murder any man.

Q. What is the fourth thing forbidden in this Commandment?

A. We are forbidden all murders of the tongue, as,

1. Evil speaking, Ephesians. 4 31. Col. 3.12, 13, 19.

2. Disdainful words, Racha.

3. Bitter and angry words, Thou fool, Mat. 5.22.

4. Mocking, Lev. 19.14. Prove. 6.17.

5. Brawling, threatening, provoking, Tit. 3.2. Ephesians. 4.3.

6. Detraction, censoriousness, Act. 24.5. and 28.4.

Q. What is the fifth thing forbidden in this Commandment?

A. The murders of the hand, Genesis 4.11. and 9.5. As,

1. Chance-medley, Deuteronomy. 19.4, 5.

2. Manslaughter, Exodus 21.12, 13. Lev. 24.17.

3. Mutilation in fighting, Lev. 24.19, 20. Jam. 4.1.

4. All Duels, Genesis 10.9. Prove. 20.22.

5. All unlawful War, Treasons, 2 Timothy 3.4.

6. Abortions that are voluntary.

7. Delivering the Innocent to death, Luke 23.24. or Prove. 17.15.

8. 1. Oppression, Lev. 19.13. 2. withdrawing Corn from the poor, Prove. 11.26.

9. Detaining the hirelings wages, Jer. 22.13. not restoring the pledge.

Q. Is all revenge unlawful?

A. All private revenge is unlawful; but God has set the Magistrate in his
stead, to take vengeance upon a Malefactor, and to right our wrong for us,
Prove. 20.22. Romans 13.4. and 12.17. 1 Samuel 25.26, 35.

Q. May a Magistrate put any to death?

A. Yes, Romans 13.4. so it be, 1. for a just cause, 2. to a right intent, 3. and
by one in lawful power, 2 Chronicles. 24.22. Romans 14.4 after a fair trial, Act
23.25. Joh. 18.29. Act. 25.16.

Q. Is any War lawful?

A. Yes, if it be,

1. By just Authority, Judge. 1.1. 1 Samuel 17.37.

2. In a just cause, Judge. 20.23.

3. To a right end, not for spoil and prey, but for Religion and Justice, 1 Samuel 15.9. and 25.28. 2 Samuel 10.12.

Q. Is it lawful for subjects to raise up arms in any case against their
Sovereign?

A. No, in no case, 1 Pet. 2.13, 14, 16. especially if we have sworn Allegiance
to them, 1 Samuel 24.6. Romans 13.2. Joh. 19.11. Psalm. 82.6. Prove. 30.31, 32. Ezekiel.
17.15, 16. Judge. 9.19, 20, 24, 45, 56, 57.

Q. What is the last thing forbidden in this Commandment?

A. We are forbidden to kill our own souls with sorrow, Prove. 15.13. or with
sin and damnation; or other men's, by, 1. commanding, 2. advising, 3. enticing,
Prove. 1.10, 13. 4 assistance, 5. encouragement of 1. example, 2. approbation,
3. defense. No man can by any means redeem his brother: for the redemption of
the soul is precious, and for ever, Psalm. 49.7, 8. therefore let none destroy
him.

SUNDAY XXXI.
Q. WHat are we commanded to do in the sixth Commandment?

A. We are commanded by all means to preserve our own life, and the life of our
Neigbour.

Qu. What are the particular duties that we owe to our selves by virtue of this
Commandment?

A. We are to love and cherish our selves, and to take care to preserve the
vigor of the mind, and the strength of the body, that they may be serviceable
to the Lord, and fit for our brothers good, Ephesians. 5.29. 1 Timothy 5.23.

Q. By what means is the strength of body and mind preserved?

A. 1. By cheerfulness, Prove. 17.22. 2. by sobriety in 1. care, 2. meat, 3.
drink, 4. apparel, 5. recreation, 6. and use of Physic, Mat. 6.34. Prove.
25.26. and by moderation in labor and sleep, Eccles. 4.8.

Q. What are the Rules to be observed in eating, drinking, recreation and
apparel?

A. 1. We must eat, 1. Not before the time; 2. Not hastily and impatiently; 3.
Not delicately or nicely; 4. Nor immoderately or excessively.

2. We must drink sparingly and soberly, according as our constitution will
bear.

3. We must use, 1. Lawful recreations, 2. with moderation of time and
eagerness, 3. to the lawful end of a moderate refreshment.

4. We must use apparel, 1. to cover our nakedness, modestly: 2. to keep and
defend our bodies, healthfully: 3. to distinguish the quality and sex of our
persons, discreetly.

Q What means of refuge are we to use against violence and danger?

A. 1. We are to give soft words, courteous answers, Judge. 8.23. Prove. 15.1.

2. We are to use the benefit of Laws, Deuteronomy. 17.8. and of Weapons when force is
offered.

Q. What is our duty in reference to our Neighbors person?

A. 1. We are to love him, Romans 13.8. and rejoice at his good, 1 Cor. 12.25,
26. to seek peace and ensue it.

2. We are to use a courteous behavior toward him, Ephesians. 4.32. to be easy
to be entreated, Jam. 3.17. to give gentle answers, Prove. 15.1. to hear him in
his own defense, Job 31.13. to avoid occasion of strife, to part with our right
for peace sake, Genesis 13 8, 9.

3. We are to be harmless and innocent toward all men, Psalm. 15.3. to take
care that they take no harm by us or ours, Exodus 21.8. by word or action, Mat.
5.22. Lev. 24.19.

Q. What if our Neighbor be in distress, have done us wrong, or has
infirmities?

A. 1. In distress and want we are, 1. To have compassion of them, Ephesians. 4.31,
32. we are to relieve them, to cloth them, to lodge them, to visit them, to
plead for them, and if we are in power to defend them, that they may lead quiet
and peaceable lives; and this we are to do 1. cheerfully, 2 Cor. 9.6, 7. 2.
seasonably, 3. prudently, 4. liberally, 2 Cor. 8.9. and 9.6, 7.

2. In injuries, 1. We are to be patient, bearing wrongs, and forgiving
injuries, Col. 3.12. 1 Cor. 13.7. 2. We are to love them when enemies, and do
good to them, Mat. 5.44, 45. Ephesians. 4.32. 1 Pet. 3.9. Gal. 6.2.

3. Men's infirmities we are to pity, to cover, to pass by the weaknesses of
their words and actions, Eccles. 7.21. Prove. 17.9. to instruct, direct, and
assist them in what concerns their bodies, estates, and especially their
precious souls.

Minister. Lord have mercy upon us, and incline our hearts to keep this Law.

Downham of Anger; Doctor Hammond and Dyke of Scandal; Bishop Tailor of
Friendship, Mercy and Peaceableness; Perkins on the Beatitudes.

SUNDAY XXXII. The Sins forbidden in the seventh Commandment.
Q. WHat is the seventh Commandment?

A. Thou shall not commit Adultery.

Q. Having secured our Neighbors person in the former Commandment, God secures
his possession in the rest: in that, he has curbed our anger toward his
person; in this, he bridles our lust toward his wife. What is in general
forbidden in this commandment?

A. We are forbid all uncleanness of heart, speech, and gesture, together with
all the causes, occasions and signs thereof.

Q. What are the inward sins against this Commandment?

A. Filthy imaginations and lusts of the heart, Col. 3.5. 1 Cor. 7.9. Genesis 39.

Q. What abuse of the senses is condemned?

A. 1. Wanton and foolish jesting, Ephesians. 4.29. and 5.35. Col. 3.8. 2. Giving
ear to rotten communication, 1 Cor. 15.33. 3. Wantonness of the looks, Mat.
5.28. 2 Samuel 11.2.

Q. What are the occasions of uncleanness?

A. 1. Idleness, Ezekiel. 16.49. 2. Intemperance in sleep or diet, Jer. 5.18. 3.
Excess, Ephesians. 5.18. 4. Lascivious Books and pictures, 1 These. 5.22. and other
provisions we make for the flesh, to serve it in the lusts thereof. 5. Immodest
and unseemly apparel, Isai. 3.16. Deuteronomy. 22.5. etc.

Q. What sins are forbidden in our behavior?

A. 1. Impudency, 2. lightness, Prove. 7.13. 3. painting the face, 2 King.
19.30. 4. unlawful company and pastimes, Prove. 5.8. wanton gestures and
dalliances, immodest kisses.

Q. What are the actions forbidden in this commandment?

A. 1. Adultery, Deuteronomy. 22 32. 2. Incest, Lev. 18.6. 3. Having many wives, Mat.
19.5. 4. Concubinage. 5. Harlotry with a common whore. 6. Fornication with a
Maid not common. 7. Unlawful entrance unto marriage, Lev. 18.6. Deuteronomy. 22.23.
Romans 7.2. 8. An immoderate use of the marriage bed, Lev. 18.19. Heb. 13.4, 7.
and all unnatural lusts, Romans 1.24, 26, 27. 1. with man as Sodom, Genesis 19. 2.
with beasts, Lev. 18.23.

Q. Is not the judgment of God revealed in an especial manner against unclean
persons?

Q. Yes, in body and estate, Prove. 5.10, 11. in name, Prove. 6.33. Job 31.9, 10,
11. in posterity, Deuteronomy. 23.2. Hos. 4 13. God smites them, 1. with sottishness,
of judgment, Hos. 4.11. 2. with distress of conscience, Prove. 17.26, 27. and
5.34. Psalm 51.10, 11. 3. With secret dislike of honest and good men, Prove. 7.8.
4. With hardness of heart to hide their filthiness with lying, perjury, and
murder, etc. 2 Samuel 11.16. and 13.15. Lev. 20 10. Prove. 6 34. See 2 Samuel 13.
Numb. 25.8. 1 Cor. 3.17. Gal. 5.19. 1 Cor. 6.9.

Q. Is it not a fearful sin in the Church of Rome to tolerate Stews, and forbid
Marriage?

A. It is the Doctrine of Devils, befitting that place which is called
spiritually Sodom, 1 Timothy 4.1, 3. Deuteronomy. 23.17, 18. Rev. 11.8.

Minister. Let us say therefore with our Church, Lord have mercy upon us, and
incline our hearts to keep this Law.

Downham against Whoredom and Drunkenness.

SUNDAY XXXIII. The duties of the seventh Commandment.
Q. WHen we consider that Uncleanness is a sin, 1. full of shame, Prove. 6.23.
Job. 24.15. 2. full of care and sorrow, Hos. 2.6. 3. full of danger to two
souls at once: 4. that it is the only carnal sin the Devil delights in: 5.
that it is against our own body: 6. that it defiles the temples of the holy
Ghost, and the members of Christ, 1 Cor. 6.19. and 3.17. we must needs be
willing to hearken after the duties of this commandment: What are they?

A. That we should keep our selves pure in soul and body, both toward our
selves and others.

Q. What are the means that may help us so to do?

A. They be

1. The presence of God, who is in us, and in all things, solemnly thought upon
and considered, Psalm. 139.7, 8.

2. The avoiding of all temptations to, and occasions of evil, with the
beginning and first motion of sin.

3. Mortification of the flesh, Romans 6.6, 7.

4. Prayer to God, 2 Cor. 12.8.

5. Temperance in diet, recreation and sleep, Luke 21.34. 1 These. 5.6. and 4.2.

6. Labor in an honest calling, 2 These. 3.6, to 13. Ezekiel 16.49.

7. Watching, fasting, and keeping the body under, 1 Cor. 9.27. Romans 13.14.

8. Decency in words, behavior and apparel, Mat. 1.25 1 Timothy 2.9. 1 Pet. 3.2,
3.

9. To keep honest, modest, and good company, Prove. 23.33. Ezekiel. 16.49. Genesis
19.32.

10. To make a covenant with our eyes and ears, and other senses, Job 31.1.
Psalm. 119.37.

11. The bed undefiled, Heb. 13.4.

Q. What are the particular duties required of us in this commandment?

A. They are threefold: 1. purity of thoughts, 2. of words, and 3. of actions.

Q. What is that purity of thoughts?

A. A clean heart, 1 These. 4.3, 4. pure desires, and a chaste mind, neither
thinking of, nor allowing nor delighting in this sin.

Q. What is that purity of words?

A. Speeches savouring of sobriety, Col. 4.6. from a tongue chastened and
restrained with grace; a discourse seasoned with salt, that it may not corrupt
good manners, but tend to edification.

Q. What is our duty in respect of our actions?

A. To possess our vessels in sanctification and honor, 1 These. 4.5.

1. Virgins must intend purity of soul, be modest and retired.

2. Widows must restrain their former desires, thinking not upon their former
liberty: they must spend their time in fasting, praying, and almsgiving.

3. Married persons must take care that they be joined to those that are fit, 1
Cor. 7.9, 39. that being so wedded, they be faithful and loving to one another,
and moderate in the use of those pleasures that God and Nature allows them.

Minister. Whoremongers and Adulterers God will judge, Heb. 13.4. therefore let
us say with the Church, Lord have mercy upon us, and incline our hearts to keep
this Law.

Bishop Halls Remedy against Profaneness.

SUNDAY XXXIV. The Sins against the eighth Commandment.
Q. WHat is the eighth commandment?

A. Thou shall not steal.

Q. The sixth and seventh commandments take care of our persons, this of our
goods, and is the fence of propriety: it sets forth Gods providence over us, it
encourages man's industry, securing to every one the labor of his hands, and
any thing that he may call his own by just acquisition, by inheritance, by gift
or contract. What is forbidden in this commandment?

A. All neglect to further our own, or our Neighbors wealth: all impeachment
or hinderance thereof, and all increase thereof by unjust and indirect dealing,
public or private, by fraud or force acquiring or detaining what by the Rule
of Justice or Charity belongs unto others, 1 These. 4.6. Luke 6.30. Romans 13.8.

Q. What sins are forbidden in this Commandment in respect of our selves, and
our own estates?

A. 1. Idleness, 2. inordinate walking, Prove. 12.11. 2 These. 3.11. 3.
Covetousness, 1 Timothy 6.10. 4. pinching our selves, Eccles. 6.1. and 2.26. 5.
waste of our goods, 1. in meat, 2. drink, 3. apparel, 4. sports, Prove. 21.17.
Ephesians. 5 18. 5. by unadvised suretiship, Prove. 23.13. whereby we steal from our
selves.

Q. What sins are forbidden in this Commandment in respect to our Neighbor?

A. Downright robbery or stealing, 1 Pet. 4 14. f^audulent bargains;
oppression, and pretense of Law; lending or borrowing; unlawful callings;
Sacrilege, and the inward theft of the heart.

Q. Who are guilty before God of the inward theft of the heart?

A. 1. They who envy, grudge or contrive against the prosperity of others,
Psalm. 73.7. Deuteronomy. 22.1.

2. They who are discontented with their own estates, and covet others, Eccles
5.10. 1 Timothy 6.10. Prove. 15.27. Isai. 32.7, 8. Prove. 30.15. Hab. 2.5. Heb. 13.5.

Q. How does covetousness discover it self?

A. 1. If we spend our precious thoughts and delights upon abundance, place
much credit and comfort in it; or if we do mean or unlawful things to attain
it; or if we covet more then we dare to pray for, we are the persons whom God
accounts covetous, Ezekiel. 33.31. Eccles. 4.8. Prove. 28.20. Ephesians. 5.5.

Q. How do men sin in borrowing?

A. When they borrow, 1. to maintain idleness: 2. deceive men: 3. more then
they are able to pay, Ezekiel. 18.7. 4. and deny or abuse what they have borrowed,
or repay unwillingly, Psalm. 37.11. Lev. 19.13. Psalm. 15.4. Deuteronomy. 24.14, 15.
Jam. 5.4. Jer. 7 6.

Q. How do men sin in lending?

A. 1. By exacting an unreasonable increase for Loan, Exodus 22.25. Ezekiel. 18.8.

2. Cruel requiring all our debt, without mercy and compassion, Isai. 58.3.

Q. How do men sin in bargaining?

A. When in buying, selling, letting, hiring, partnership, they use, 1.
injustice, 2. craft, 3. fraud, 4. falsehood, 1 These. 4.6. a great scandal to
Christianity, Romans 2.24. and not the way to be rich, Prove. 22.16. Hab. 2 6.
Ezekiel 5.5.

Q. What are the sins usually incident unto trades?

A. 1. The Sellers denying or concealing the fault of his Commodity: 2. using
false weights, Lev. 19.35. Prove. 11.1. Amos 8.5. 3. and making advantage of
ignorant chapmen: 4. by over-rating things by reason of the Buyers indiscretion
and necessity.

2. The Buyers making an advantage of the Sellers necessity or indiscretion to
deceive them, Prove. 20.14.

Q. How do men sin in keeping other men's goods?

A. 1. By detaining, 1. things strayed, 2. found, Exodus 23.4. Deuteronomy. 33.1, 2, 3.
3. the means of our Neighbors livelihood laid to pledge, Exodus 22.26, 27. or
things committed to our trust and custody, Deuteronomy. 27.19.

2. By receiving stolen goods taken away by force or fraud, as Partners or
Buyers, Prove. 29.24. Psalm. 50.18, 1.

Q. How do men sin by oppression?

A. 1. By selling Justice, Job 5.34. 2. By removing ancient Landmarks, Deuteronomy.
19 14. Prove. 15.27. Ezekiel. 18.12, 18. Psalm. 12.5. Prove. 22.22. by prolonging
Lawsuits, by defending bad causes, by immoderate contention at Law, etc.
unjust enclosures, Isai. 5.8. Mich. 2.2.

Q. What is Sacrilege?

A. To buy or sell, or any other way to alienate Tithes, Land, etc. dedicated
to God in his Church, Prove. 20 25. Mal 3.8. Romans 2.22. Act. 5 3. Luke 20.25.

Q. What other sins are there against this Commandment?

A. Unlawful ways to get riches, 1. by distrustful and distracting cares in
getting, keeping and using them: 2. by unlawful callings, as false Coining,
unlawful games, Jer. 10.2. Job 30.1, 2, 3. 2 These. 3 10. Act. 19.19.

Lord have mercy upon us, and incline our hearts to keep this Law.

Sir H. Spelman of Sacrilege, Salmasius of Usury, Downham against Bribery,
Sanderson's Sermons.

SUNDAY XXXV. The Duties of the eighth Commandment.
Q. WHat are the duties required in the eighth Commandment?

A. That by all good means we further the outward estate of our selves, and of
our Neighbors, 1 Cor 6.11.

Q. How may we further our outward estate comfortably?

A. 1. By an honest calling, 1 Cor. 7.20. Genesis 4.2. 2. By faithful laboring,
Ephesians. 4.28. 3. True and honest dealing therein, Psalm. 15.2. 4. Frugality, as
1. honestly keeping what we have gotten; 2. wisely ordering our expenses; 3.
conveniently using what God has given, that we may be helpful to others, Prove.
21.20. A moderation of our judgments and affections concerning worldly goods,
1 Timothy 6.6, 7, 8, 9. Gal. 6.14. A provident care and study to get, keep, use
and dispose those things which are necessary and convenient for the
sustentation of our nature, and suitable to our condition, Prove. 17.23, to the
end. Eccles. 2.24. and 3.12, 13. 1 Timothy 6.17, 18. Isai. 18.2.

Q What is the duty of the borrower?

A. To borrow, 1. for need, 2. for good ends, 3. what we are able to repay, 4.
and to pay with, 1. thanks, 2. cheerfulness, Exodus 22.14, 15. 3. at the time
appointed, Psalm. 15.4. 4. with as much content as we can to the Creditor.

Q What is his duty that gives?

A. To give, 1. freely, Luke 6.30, 35. 2. justly, Isai. 58.7. 3. cheerfully, 2
Cor. 9.7. 4. according to our ability, and our Neighbors necessity, 2 Cor.
8.13. Heb. 13.16, 17. Exodus 22.7.

Q. What is the duty of the Lender?

A. To lend, 1. freely, 2. not requiring our own before the day appointed, 3.
not compounding for gain, 4. forbearing or forgiving, 1. the whole, 2. or part,
if it cannot be paid without the hazard of undoing the borrower, Luk 6.35.

Q. What is the duty in buying and selling? etc.

A. We must use, 1. truth, 2. faithfulness, 3. justice, 4. and indifferency in
buying and selling, etc. Mat. 7.12. 1 These. 4.6. Gal. 5.13.

Q. What are we to do with other men's things in our possession?

A. Seasonably and faithfully to restore, 1. things committed to our trust,
Exodus 22.7, 8. 2. things found, and 3. things unlawfully gotten, Lev. 6.2.

Q. What is the duty of men in suretiship?

A. 1. Good advice in undertaking suretiship: 2. that it be in matters not
above our ability: 3. and for such as are known and approved, Prove. 11.15. and
17.18.

Q. What if we be compelled to recover our own?

A. Moderation in recovering that which is our own must be used, Phil. 4.5.

Q. That we may preserve our Neighbors goods, and suffer every man to enjoy
his own quietly and fairly, what must we do?

A. We must chiefly learn in what state soever we are, therewithal to be
contented, by considering that what, 1. we have, is the portion that God allows
us; 2. that it is more then we deserve; 3. that what we have not, is but vanity
and vexation of spirit; 4. and that we have an eternal weight of glory reserved
for us in the heavens.

Qu. Seeing the Law of the Land is the fence of that propriety which this
Commandment provides for, what is the duty of Lawyers?

A. 1. Lawyers must take no cause into their hands which they see can have no
good end with equity, Isai. 5.20. Psalm. 15.2.

2. And they must follow those which they undertake to defend, with all honest
1. diligence, 2. faithfulness, 3. for love of equity, 4. and not of gain.

3. They must end Suits with all possible dispatch, and good expedition, Exodus
18.13. etc.

Minister. Lord have mercy upon us, and incline our hearts to keep this Law.

Robert Harris Old Religion, Perkins Christian Equity, The whole duty of man.

SUNDAY XXXVI. The Sins against the ninth Commandment.
Qu. WHat is the ninth Commandment?

A. Thou shall not bear false witness against thy Neighbor.

Q. Having provided for truth in our dealings in the former Commandment, God
provides here for truth in our discourse and speech: the former Commandments
took care of our lives and livelyhoods, this of our name, which is better then
life. What is the general sin in this commandment forbidden?

A. All failing to procure, defend, and further our own and our Neighbors
credit; all unjust defense, wrongful suspicion, or accusation of our selves or
others.

Q. Who break this commandment?

A. 1. All that equivocate and lie, Exodus 23.7. Col. 3.9. Zech. 8.16. Romans 3.7,
8. Job 13.7, 8. Ephesians. 4.16.

2. They that by an offensive and indiscreet conversation, and by bewraying
their weakness, and debasing themselves, do loose their good name, 2 Samuel
12.14. Romans 2.23, 24.

3. They that accuse their Neighbors unjustly, and raise false tales, and they
who report and scatter them, Tit. 2.3. Prove. 9.12. and stopping our ears
against a just defense, Act. 7.56, 57.

4. They who are suspicious, raise jealousies, and are busybodies in other
men's matter, 1 Pet. 4.15. Romans 1.29.

5. They that openly slander, detract, scoff, or rail at their brother, Psalm.
50 20. Jam. 4.11. Jer. 38.4. or uncharitably censure him, or backbite him, Luke
11.15. Act. 2.13. Mat. 7.1. Romans 2.1. 2 Pet. 2.18. 1 Samuel 25.3, 10. Psalm. 15.3.

6. They who conceal a truth, or tell a lie to the prejudice of another, being
required by justice and charity to give testimony to the truth, Exodus 23.1.
Romans 13.13. Psalm. 58.1, 2. Prove. 24.11. Lev. 5 1.

7. They who dissemble and flatter with a double tongue, Prove. 26.18. and 5.26.

8. Judges that give false sentences, Lawyers that plead in bad causes, and
Registers that make false Acts, Deuteronomy. 19.18 Mich. 7.3. 2 Timothy 4 16. Prove.
24.11, 12. Psalm. 119.69. Luke 19.8. Knaves that suborn false witness, Act.
6.13. and they that call good evil, and evil good; rewarding the wicked
according to the work of the righteous, and the righteous according to the work
of the wicked, Isai. 1.3.

9. They that speak the truth unseasonably, maliciously to a wrong end, or
perversely to a wrong meaning, or equivocally in a doubtful expression, to the
prejudice of truth and justice, Prove. 29.11. 1 Samuel 12.19, 20. Psalm. 52.1, 2,
3, 4. and 55.5. Joh. 2.19. Genesis 3.5. and 26.7, 9.

Q. How shall we root out those sins we are usually inclined to against this
Commandment?

A. 1. By watching against evil surmizes, and ungrounded suspicions, upon some
weak matter or evidence, Mat. 9.3, 4. Joh. 7.24. and 9.16. Romans 14.3. 1 Timothy
6.4. 2 Samuel 10.3. 1 Samuel 22.8.10. and 24.9. 2 Samuel 16.4.

2. By taking care that we rejoice not in the disgraces of another, and that we
grieve not at another good esteem, Isai. 15.3. Joh. 10.12. 1 Samuel 18.7, 8. and
so mortify the false witness of the heart.

Minist. Lord have mercy upon us, and incline our hearts to keep this Law.

Downham against Lying, Sanderson on Romans 14.3. Bolton's Directions for walking
with God; Reynolds, Preston, Dyke, Harris against Covetousness.

SUNDAY XXXVII. The Duties of the ninth Commandment.
Q. WHat are the duties which are enjoined in the ninth Commandment?

A. By all means we are to seek our own, and our Neighbors good name,
according to truth and a good conscience.

Q. How ought we to speak?

A. 1. We ought to speak truth, Ephesians. 4.25. Psalm. 15.2. without lying,
slandering, detraction, vanity, or tale-bearing.

2. We ought to speak freely, neither indiscreetly nor cowardly, Act. 23.7.
Joh. 18.36.

3. We ought to speak in the simplicity of our hearts, without guile, Romans
12.9. 1 Pet. 2.1. flattery, dissimulation or whispering, 2 Cor 12.20. Act.
12.22.

4. We ought to speak profitably, Ephesians. 4.29.

5. We ought to speak sparingly, Prove. 10.19. and 17.27.

6. We ought to speak courteously and affably, Gal 2.4. Ephesians. 5.4.

Q. What are we commanded in respect to our selves?

A. To know our selves, 2 Cor. 13.3. Gal. 5.26. to endeavor our own good name,
Prove. 22.1.

Q. How may we procure our own good name?

A. 1. By honoring God carefully, Heb. 11.2, 39.

2. By judging and speaking well of others charitably, Mat. 7.2.

3. By walking unblameably, Eccles. 10.18.

4. By defending our good name when need requires modestly, yet unwillingly.

Q. What are the duties enjoined us in this Commandment in respect of others?

A. 1. To desire and rejoice in their good name, Romans 1.8. Gal. 1.23.

2. To be sorry for, to cover, to hope the best, and judge charitably of their
infirmities, Ezekiel 9.6. 1 Pet. 4.8. 1 Cor. 13.5, 6.

3. Not bewraying men's infirmities, but endeavoring to redress them, Prove.
11.12, 13. and 25.9, 10.

Q How ought we to rebuke our Neighbors?

A. 1. We ought to rebuke them to their faces, Mat. 18.16. Gal. 2.11. 2. When
just occasion requires: 3. Lovingly: 4. Meekly, Gal. 6.3. Prove. 25.12. 5. With
remembrance of what is praiseworthy in them, Rev. 2.2, 3, 4. 1 Cor. 14.10.

Q. You have showed how we ought to behave our selves toward our Neighbors
infirmities; How ought we to behave our selves in reference to what is good in
our Neighbor?

A. 1. We ought to commend him when he does well, in his absence, rather then
in his presence, 1 These. 5.22.

2. We ought to defend his good name, whose unblameable carriage is known to us
by testimony, handwriting; yea, and by Oath, if need require, Phil. 10 11, etc.

3. We ought to check all idle reports against our Neighbor, Prove. 15.3. and
25.23. and 26.20.

Q. Who are they that keep this Commandment?

A. 1. They that endeavor to preserve their own good name, and their
Neighbors, Prove. 10.12.

Q. Who else?

A. They who speak well or charitably of all, 1 Cor. 13.5, 7.

Q. Who else keep this commandment?

A. They that use few, courteous, profitable and affable words, 1 Pet. 3.8.
Jam. 1.9.

Qu. Who else?

A. They that truly, freely and honestly give a testimony to truth; especially
when they are called to it by lawful Authority.

Minister. As God is a God of truth, so those who honor him, must labor to
preserve truth among men, and hate the contrary, which is all falsehood and
lying.

Lord have mercy upon us, and incline our hearts to keep this Law.

Reyners Government of the Tongue.

SUNDAY XXXVIII. The last Commandment.
Q. WHat is the tenth Commandment?

A. Thou shall not covet thy neighbors house, thou shall not covet thy
neighbors wife, nor his servant, nor his maid, nor his ox, nor his ass, nor
any thing that is his.

Q. What is the intent or sum of this Commandment?

A. To prevent and suppress all inward propensions, inclinations, motions and
desires, either of wrongful depriving any person of, or wrong him in any thing
belonging to him; being well satisfied and contented with our present
condition, though strait and mean, cheerfully depending on God for the
enlargement of it in due time, either by some more special providence, or by
his blessing on our lawful endeavors that way; knowing how to be abased, and
how to abound; how to be hungry, and how to be full; how to have nothing, yet
possess all things.

Or that we be truly contented with our outward condition, and heartily desire
the good of our Neighbor in all things belonging to him, great and small.

Q. What are the sins forbidden in this Commandment?

A. 1. In general: all thoughts of mind, wishes and desires of heart, and
delightful remembrance of evil against contentedness, Job 31.22.

2. In particular: 1. Original corruption, as it inclines us to wrong our
Neighbors: 2. The harboring and nourishing any actual, though secret, motion,
wish, desire, or imagination of enjoying what is not our own, Jer. 4.14.

Q. What is the duty enjoined in this Commandment?

A. That we dispose of all our thoughts and affections so as to be contented
with our Portions; wishing and delighting in our Neighbors welfare as well as
our own.

Q. How may we keep this Commandment?

A. 1. We must keep our hearts above all keeping, full of holy thoughts and
meditations concerning the things not seen, that are above.

2. We must pray to God to subdue our lusts, and to incline our hearts to his
testimonies, and not to covetousness.

3. We must avoid all the occasions of evil.

Q. You have given a good account of the Ten Commandments: By what Rules do you
come to know the true meaning of the Commandments?

A. We come to understand the inward meaning of the Commandments,

1. By considering the end of them.

2. By observing an Affirmative Precept in a Negative, and a Negative in an
Affirmative.

3. By including under every Virtue and Vice, the kinds of them; together with
the means, occasions, appearances, and alike practices; all dispositions, and
their fruits.

4. By joining the Accessory to the Principal, and understanding the
Commandments of our selves, and others also.

5. By making the Duties of Relations mutual, and including therein the Duties
of Equals.

6. By understanding the Duties we owe others, of our selves likewise, as far
as it is possible.

7. By choosing the greatest of two Duties when they stand in competition.

8. By understanding Affirmative Precepts binding according to occasion, and
Negative ones binding always.

9. By joining the inward disposition with the external Duty.

10. By observing the same Sins and Duties in diverse respects commanded or
forbidden in diverse Commandments.

11. Binding the Conscience to all the Commandments.

Q. Are we now under the Law?

A. Yes; we are under its direction as our Rule, though we are not under the
burden or curse of it as a Covenant.

Q. Is any man able to keep this Law?

A. None can keep it perfectly: for the best fail, Jam. 3.2. 1 John 2.14. but
Gods children keep it sincerely, 1 King. 15.5.

Q. How many ways do good men offend?

A. Often in the matter and manner of doing, and continually in the measure of
duty, Neh. 13.12.

Q. Should we not omit doing good, seeing we cannot do it in that measure God
requires?

A. No: but we should, 1. with diligence and singleness of heart, strive
against corruption; 2. look for the assistance of Gods Spirit; and, 3. labor
to grow in grace: the sin is to be avoided, the duty is to be done.

Qu. How may we grow better and better?

A. 1. By diligent, exquisite, and impartial searching of our hearts and ways.
2. By an impartial judging of our selves according to Gods holy Word. 3. A
narrow, careful, and continual watching of our hearts and ways. 4. Redeeming of
our time, and husbanding every moment thereof to our best advantage. 5. By
storing the heart with grace, and living by faith. 6. By taking to us the whole
armor of God; and with care, uprightness and constancy, using the means of
grace in every state.

Q. What is the benefit of an holy, uniform, and constant obedience?

A. It assures us of Gods favor to us, his fatherly care over us, his Spirit
to guide and comfort us, of growth in grace, and perseverance to the end.

Q. Who offend chiefly against this last Commandment?

A. 1. They who wantonly lust after their Neighbors Wives, covetously lust
after their Neighbors goods, and ambitiously lust after their Neighbors names.

2. They who are over-covetous and greedy, over-careful and disquieted about
worldly matters.

3. Thy who having sufficient, envy others, and desire more.

4. They who are idle, and labor not in an honest way to get their livelyhoods.

5. They who stifle not, but cherish the first motions of irregular lust.

Lord have mercy upon us, and write all these thy Laws in our hearts, we
beseech thee.
The last part of the Catechism. SUNDAY XXXIX. of Prayer, and the Preface to
the Lords Prayer.
Q. MY good child, know this, that thou art not able to do these things of thy
self, nor to walk in the commandments of God, and to serve him without his
special grace, which thou must learn at all times to call for by diligent
prayer. Let me hear therefore if thou can say the Lords Prayer.

A. Our Father which art in heaven, hallowed be thy Name. Thy kingdom come. Thy
will be done in earth as it is in heaven. Give us this day our daily bread. And
forgive us our trespasses, as we forgive them that trespass against us. And
lead us not into temptation: But deliver us from evil. For thine is the
kingdom, the power, and the glory, for ever. Amen.

Q. Can you keep Gods commandments by your own strength?

A. No, not without Gods special grace preventing, assisting and furthering us,
1 Cor. 15.10. Phil. 4.13.

Q. How may you obtain that grace?

A. By Prayer, Jam. 1 5, 6. Let Prayer ascend, that Grace may descend.

Q. To whom?

A. To God only, Psalm. 65.12. and 12.6. Joh. 6.23.

Q. How?

A. In faith, fervently, diligently, constantly and sincerely, in the Spirit.

Q. What is true Prayer?

A. It is to make our requests known, out of humble and sanctified hearts to
God, in the Name of Jesus Christ and his interest, with faith of being heard
and accepted through him in whatsoever we shall thus ask in Prayer, according
to the will of God, for our selves or others, 1 John 5.14.

Q. How many parts are there in Prayer?

A. Four: 1. Supplication against evil. 2. Prayer for good. 3. Intercession for
others. 4. Thanksgiving for mercies, 1 Timothy 2.1. With an humble sense of our
sins in public and private.


Q. What need we pray for?

A. For our life and livelihood, both which depend on God.

Q. What Prayer is heard and answered?

A. A Prayer joined, 1. with understanding, 1 Cor. 14.15. 2. with a sense of
our wants, Mat. 11.28. 3. with fervency: 4 with reverence: 5. with hope to
speed: 6. with love, Jam. 5.17. Eccl. 5.2. 1 Timothy 2.8. Mat. 6.14. Mark 11.25.

Q. May we use a form of Prayer? and how ought we to use it?

A. We may use it, Hos. 14.1, 2. Mat. 6. Luke 11. and when we use it, we must
be careful to raise inward motions and desires toward God, answerable to the
good words we read.

Q. Is there any Rule or form of Prayer prescribed?

A. Yes, the Lords Prayer; when you pray, say, Our Father which art in heaven,
etc. Luke 11.

Q. What desire thou of God in this Prayer?

A. 1. (In the Preface.) I desire my Lord God our heavenly Father, who is the
giver of all goodness, 2. (in the two first Petitions) to send his grace unto
me, and to all people, that we may worship him, serve him, and obey him as we
ought to do. 3. (in the fourth Petition) And I pray unto God that he will send
us all things that be needful, both for our souls and bodies. 4. (in the fifth)
That he will be merciful unto us, and forgive us our sins. 5. (in the sixth)
That it will please him to save and defend us in all dangers ghostly and
bodily; and that he will keep us from all sin and wickedness, and from our
ghostly enemy, and from everlasting death. 6. And this (in the conclusion) I
trust he will do of his mercy and goodness, through our Lord Jesus Christ. And
therefore I say Amen, So be it.

Q. Here is the sum of the Gospel: 1. Honor exhibited, when we call him
Father. 2. Faith, in the invocation of his Name. 3. A tender of our obedience
to his Will. 4. A Commemoration of our hope in his Kingdom. 5. A petition of
life, in Bread. 6. A confession of sin, in begging remission. 7. Our ear to
avoid temptations, in our request for defense and tutelage. Here is the sum of
the Law: 1. God is our Father; therefore no other gods. 2. God is in heaven;
therefore no graven images. 3. Hallowed be his Name; therefore take it not in
vain. 4. His will be done; therefore not our own, especially on his day, Isai.
57.13. 5. Give us our daily bread; therefore not take it, by killing or
stealing. 6. Lead us not into temptation; therefore not tempt our selves by
unclean or covetous thoughts. 7. Forgive us our trespasses; therefore we have
transgressed the Law, and our whole life ought to be a life of repentance. How
many parts are there in the Lords Prayer?

A. Three: 1. A Preface. 2. Six Petitions. 3. A Conclusion.


Q. What is the Preface?

A. Our Father which art in heaven.

Q What are we to consider from this, that we are taught to call God Father?

A. That we may be encouraged to draw near to him with the hearts of children,
whilst he has the bowels of a Father. We say God is our Father, not only by
Nature, but by Grace and Adoption, whom we may trust in, rely upon, and whom
we ought to love, honor and imitate.

Q. What do you consider when you say Our Father?

A. We consider our relation to him as children, to one another as brethren, 1
Pet. 2.17. 1 Timothy 2.2.

Q. What do you mean when you say, Which art in heaven?

A. We mean not that God is not every where, Psalm. 139.8. 1 King. 8.27. but
that we pray to him in heaven, where he manifests his glory, and whence he
bestows the gifts we pray for, Jam. 1.7.

Q. What do you learn from those words?

A. 1. Reverence, seeing he is in heaven, and we on earth, Eccles. 5.1.

2. Faith and trust not in any on earth, but in our Father which is in heaven.

3. An heavenly frame of heart lift up to the Lord, and set on things in heaven.

Minister. So then in these words you say thus much: Our Father, merciful and
gracious, thou gave us a being from nothing, according to thine own image;
and have tenderly preserved us, feeding, conducting, and strengthening us all
our days; and who have adopted us by a new birth to become partakers of the
inheritance of Jesus: Thou have given us the portion and food of children, O
make us to do the duty of children, that we may never loose our title to so
glorious an Inheritance. Let thy excellent Name and Title by which thou have
vouchsafed to relate to us, be our glory and confidence, our Ornament and
strength, our endearment to obedience, the principle of an holy fear to thee
our Father, and of love to thee and our brethren, partakers of the same hope
and inheritance for ever. Let thy Spirit witness to our spirits that we are thy
children, and enable us to cry Abba, Father. Which art in heaven: Heaven is thy
throne, the earth is thy footstool: from thy throne thou beholdest all the
dwellers upon earth, and nothing is hid from thy sight. Thy power is over all
things in heaven, where thou sit in thine own essential happiness and
tranquillity, immovable and eternal: that is our Country, and thither thy
servants are willing to go: there is our Father, there is our Inheritance,
there our hearts are, and there is our treasure laid up till the day of
recompense. And thus you say, Our Father which art in Heaven.

SUNDAY XL. Hallowed be thy Name.
Q. YOu have heard how we call God our Father which is in heaven; What do we
desire of him in this Prayer?

A. We desire three things that concern himself, viz. Honor, Power and
Obedience: three things that concern us, Sustenance, Pardon and Deliverance.

Q. What is the first thing that concerns God himself, which we sin against?

A. His Honor, in this that we say, Hallowed be thy Name.

Q. What do you desire in this Petition?

A. That Gods infinite Excellency may be magnified by us on earth, in heart,
word, and deed, Psalm. 40.16. and 115.1.

Q. How do you sanctify or hallow Gods Name in your hearts?

A. When in our very souls we honor and acknowledge him as God, by trusting in
him, by fearing and loving him, by our humble submission to him, by our hope in
him, by our desire of enjoying him, Isai. 8.1, 31. 1 Pet. 2.15. Romans 4 20.
Phil. 1.20, 21, 22.

Q. How do we hallow or sanctify Gods Name with our mouths?

A. When we speak good of his Name, Psalm. 34 3. Deuteronomy. 32.3. Psalm. 105.1. When
we call upon him, adore him, and praise him.

Q. How do we hallow or sanctify Gods Name in deed?

A. 1. By living as before him, Mat. 5.16. Joh. 15.8. 1 Pet. 2.32.

2. By patiently submitting our selves to his will, Josh. 7.17.

3. By professing his truth, Joh. 21.17.

And, 4. By living so as to glorify our Father which is in heaven.

Q. How many things are understood here by the Name of God?

A. God himself, Psalm. 115.1. 2. His Attributes, Exodus 34.56. 3. His Works,
Psalm. 119.1. 4. His Ordinances, 1 Timothy 6.1. 5. His Judgments, Isai. 30.27. 6.
His Mercies, Isai. 48.9, 10, 11. 7. Or any thing whereby he makes himself
known, Exodus 20.7.

Minister. 1. So then you desire that there may be a reverence and fear by his
grace wrought in us of his Majesty, his Attributes, his works of Grace, his
Word, his Name, his Day, and whatsoever else belongs to him.

2. That by our holy and devout lives we may magnify his Name throughout the
World, that he may not be sanctified by us only, but in us.

3. That Profaneness, Idolatry, Irreverence and Indevotion may be turned out
of the world, and true Piety may be set up, and flourish among men.

Q Let us hear your meaning in this Petition?

A. Hallowed be thy Name: Let thy Name, O Lord, be as glorious in the world, as
it is in its self. Thou art worthy to receieve honor, and glory, and praise,
for ever and ever. O let me glorify thee on earth, as I hope to be glorified
by thee in heaven.

Q. What is the second Petition mentioned in the Lords Prayer?

A. Thy Kingdom come.

Q. What do you desire of God in this Petition?

A. That God would rule in our hearts by Faith, rule in the world by his Power,
and bring us to his Kingdom of Glory when this world is at an end.

Q. How many Kingdoms has God?

A. 1. A Kingdom of Grace; 2. A Kingdom of Power; And, 3. A Kingdom of Glory.

Q. What do you desire in order to the Kingdom of Grace?

A. I desire that the Spirit of God may rule my heart, possessing my
understanding with true Faith, my will with love, my affections with
mortification, and my whole self with obedience.

Q. What means must you use that the Spirit may rule in your hearts?

A. 1. We are to hear his Word: 2. To attend his Ordinances: 3. To partake of
his Sacraments: 4. To submit to his Ministers, Pastors and Teachers: 5. To
obey his Law and Discipline; and to pray that the Gospel may run and be
glorified throughout the world, Romans 7.6. Gal. 5.16. Heb. 13.17. Col. 3.5.

Q. What are you to desire in respect of these means?

A. 1. That Gods Word may be continued, Gal. 2.5. 2. That the Ordinances of God
may be purely administered, 1 Cor. 11.23, 24. and 5.3, 4, 5. Heb. 3.2, 3. etc.
3. That Ministers and Magistrates may, 1. be preserved, Deuteronomy. 33.11. 2 These.
3.1, 2. 2. prospered, Psalm. 122 6, 7, 8. and, 3. increased, Isai. 49.23. and
that Schools of Piety may be erected and maintained, 2 Kin. 6.1, 2.

Q What is the Kingdom of power?

A. His Will and Providence, by which all things are guided, Psalm. 197.1.

Q What are you to pray for in order to this Kingdom?

A. 1. That all Creatures may submit to his will, Phil. 2.10, 11. and 1.8, 9.

2. That all enemies may be subdued under him, Ephesians. 1.21, 22.

Q. What enemies do you mean?

A. That Satan may be destroyed, Sin may be weakened, the Profane and the
Erroneous may be either converted or rooted out.

Q. How does Satan govern his Kingdom?

A. 1. By Ignorance, 2. by Error, 3. by Impiety, 4. by Disobedience, Ephesians.
4.18.

Q. What is the Kingdom of Glory?

A. A blessed state, wherein all that prepare their hearts to receive grace,
shall be received into the glory prepared for them, Isai. 60.3. Joh. 17.20.
Romans 8.18.

Q. What do you desire in order to the Kingdom of Glory?

A. I desire, 1. That Grace may be perfected in us, that we may be fit to be
received into Glory. 2. That the number of the Elect being accomplished, the
end of all things may come, and we may obtain full salvation and redemption,
and enjoy the glory prepared for us.

Minister. So you pray to God in these words, That all things, especially your
heart and life, may be be subject to him; and to that end, that his grace in
you may be daily increased, and your sin weakened, until grace may be swallowed
in glory. Let me hear your meaning in this Petition.

A. Thy Kingdom come: Thou rulest in all the earth, do thou rule in our hearts
also. Let thy Kingdom be set gloriously over us; Let thy Kingdom be set
graciously in us. Subdue our sin, that it may never reign in our mortal bodies.
Advance thy grace in us more and more: And when thy Kingdom of grace has been
raised to the utmost it was designed, grant that thy Kingdom of glory may
speedily succeed; and we thy servants may be admitted to the peace and purity,
the holiness and glory of that state where thou reignest alone, and art all in
all.

SUNDAY XLI. Thy will be done.
Qu. WHat is the third Petition?

A. Thy will be done in earth as it is in heaven.

Q. What do you desire in this Petition?

A. That whatsoever God wills in his word or works, may be obeyed, Exodus
19.8. Romans 12.2. Psalm. 27.8.

Qu. Why must we pray that Gods will be done?

A. Because by Nature we do our will, and not the will of God, Ephesians. 2.3. Joh.
8.44.

Q. What is the will of God?

A. The Word of God revealed in the Old and New Testaments, together with his
Works, is the will of God.

Q. What do you desire of God that you may do his will?

A. 1. That I may know his will, and prove what is the good and acceptable will
of God, Romans 12.2. Col. 1.9, 10.

2. That we deny our own wills, Romans 7.24. and 13 14.

3. That we have an eye upon Gods will in all we do, Ephesians 6.6.

Minister. This is the will of God, even your sanctification.

Q. What do you desire when you say, As it is in heaven?

A. We desire that we may do or suffer Gods will as the Angels and Saints in
Heaven.

Q. How is that?

A. 1. faithfully, 2. cheerfully, Psalm. 119.16, 32, 47. 3. readily, Luke 19.5.
4. sincerely, Deuteronomy. 5.28. 5. constantly, Isai. 6.2. Psalm. 119.126. 6.
universally, Luke 1.46. the whole will of God: 7. unanimously and peaceably,
Romans 12.18. Heb. 12.14. Act. 2.1.

Q. What inward disposition do you desire that you may do Gods will?

A. 1. An inward desire, 2. care, 3. delight, Psalm. 119.36, 143, 145. 4.
endeavor, 5. ability to obey it, Psalm. 119.112, 167, 168. Phil. 4.13.

Q. Are we able in this life perfectly to obey the will of God as the Angels do?

A. No: but we, 1. desire, 2. strive after, 3. hope for perfection, Luke 13.24.
Phil. 1.6. and now obey in sincerity, in truth, and as in the sight of God.

Q Are we only to DO the will of God?

A. We are to SUFFER his will, and say, It is the Lord, let him do whatever he
pleases.

Q. Let us hear your meaning in this Petition?

A. Thy will be done in earth as it is in heaven: Thy will (O God) is the
measure of holiness and duty; let us obey it. Thy Providence is the great
Disposer of all things, in order to thy glory, and the good of thy servants; O
that we may submit to it. Let us assure our selves, that whatsoever thou say
is true, and whatsoever thou do is good. O that we may be patient under the
evils that thou do inflict, that we may love the good which thou command,
that we may hate the evil that thou forbiddest, and that we may be pleased with
all the accidents thou sendest; that as the Angels in heaven, so we in earth
may obey thy will readily, cheerfully, zealously. Grant, O God, that as they
there, so all the world here, may serve thee with peace and concord, purity and
love unfeigned, with one heart and one voice glorifying thee our heavenly
Father. Grant that we may quit all our own affections, and suspect our
reasonings, and go out of our selves, and all our own confidence; that thou
being to us all things, disposing all events, and guiding all our actions, and
directing our intentions, and overruling all things in us and about us, we may
be servants of thy Divine Will for ever.

SUNDAY XLII. Give us this day our daily bread.
Qu. WHat do you desire for your self in the Lords Prayer?

A. We desire, first, Sustenance, in these words, Give us this day our daily
bread.

Q How graciously does our Savior condescend to our weak dispositions, and in
duties, that we ask first for the necessities of that part we love best, desire
necessary things for our bodies, viz. Bread to eat, etc. before that which more
nearly concerns us, viz. Remission of sin! etc. and he that is so willing that
we should ask for the least, will not deny that which is most necessary for us,
Act. 14.15, 16, 17. What do you desire of God in this Petition?

A. That he would bestow on us all things necessary for this life, maintenance,
sober and Christian delight, as health, wealth, food, raiment, Physic, sleep,
peace, and whatsoever we shall need all our days.

Q. What do you mean when you say, Give?

A. O Father, give, bestow, continue thy blessings, which are not my merits,
but thy gifts, given of God to our prayers and honest endeavors, Hos. 2.8, 9.
Psalm. 104.17. Genesis 28.20.

Q. Why do you say, Give Us?

A. Not to me alone, but to all thy servants: I ask not for my self; I will not
keep it to my self.

Q. Why do you pray for Bread only?

A. Give me neither poverty nor riches, but feed me with food convenient for
me, Prove. 30.8, 9.

Q. Why do you say, Our Bread?

A. I pray only for mine own, and not for another bread out of his mouth,
Prove. 10.17.

Q. What do you mean by Daily bread?

A. I mean by daily bread, 1. what may supply my present necessity, 2. or what
may be agreeable to my present condition, Prove. 15.16. Deuteronomy. 17.16.

Q. Why do you pray only for this day?

A. Because my care ought not to reach too far; and if I have wherewithal to
supply my present need, I should be therewithal contented, 1 Timothy 6.8. Mich.
6.31, 32. Psalm. 37.3, 25.

Q. Seeing we pray but for a day, may we not provide for the time to come?

A. Yes, in a lawful manner, and when God gives opportunity, Ephesians. 4.28. Genesis
41 34, 35. and 50.20. 2 Cor. 13.14. Act. 1.28. waiting upon Gods Providence, 1
Pet. 5.7. Psalm. 55.20. when we have means, Prove. 3.5, 6. and when we want them,
Isai. 28.16.

Q What cares for the things of this life are unlawful?

A. 1. All distrustful, 2. distracting, 3. unprofitable, 4. and needless cares,
Mat. 6.25. etc.

Q. What desire you under the name of our bread?

A. 1. Contentedness, Heb. 13.5. 1 Timothy 6.6.

2. Resting on Gods Providence, Prove. 16.3.

3. Honesty, Job 29.24.

4. Faithfulness and painfulness in our callings, 2 These. 3.12.

5. Joy and thankfulness under Gods mercy, Deuteronomy. 28.47. and 8.10.

6. Gods blessing sanctifying what we enjoy, 1 Timothy 4.4.

Q. What do you pray against in these words?

A. We pray against, 1. Covetousness, Psalm. 119.36. 2. Distracting cares, Mat.
6.34. 3. Distrust, Psalm. 78.22. 4. Discontent with our estate, 1 Timothy 6.10. 5.
Idleness and carelessness, fraud, oppression, and dishonesty, and whatsoever is
unlawful in our pursuit of outward prosperity.

Q. When is bread said to be ours?

A. Bread may be said to be ours, when it is gotten by just and lawful means,
Ephesians. 4.28. 2. In a good and honest calling, Genesis 3 19.

Minister. Then you pray in these words,

1. That God out of his fatherly care would distribute to us day by day that
which shall be sufficient for the necessities of Christian delights, of our
lives, Prove. 30.8, 9. Psalm. 37.5.

2. That God would give us grace to use Prayer and honest Labor to attain this
in the use of such means as he has appointted.

3. That he bless it to us when it is bestowed upon us: For man lives not by
bread, etc. Mat. 4.4.

Q I pray let us hear your devotion in this Petition.

A. Give us this day our daily bread: Thou, O God, which take care for our
souls, provide for our bodies that thou have made and sanctified, and designed
to be glorious. Give us neither poverty nor riches, but food convenient for us,
and provision suitable to that state whereunto thou have called us, as may
enable us with comfort to do our duty, having our needs relieved, and our
infirmities supported.

SUNDAY XLIII. Forgive us our trespasses, as we forgive them that trespass
against us.
Q. WHat is the second thing we desire for our selves?

A. A pardon and forgiveness of sin: (without which, sustenance would not be
granted; or if granted, would not be a blessing, Psalm. 78.30, 31.) Forgive us
our trespasses, as we forgive them that trespass against us.

Q. Indeed while we are in our sin, we may ask bread, and have it not, or have
it in anger, Jam. 4.2, 3. Hos. 13.11. But what do you ask of God in this
Petition?

A. We ask that our God in his free mercy in Jesus Christ, would fully pardon
all our sins, as we do pardon the wrongs and injuries we have received from
others, Isai. 43.25. Psalm. 51.2. Luke 11.4.

Q. What is it to forgive sin?

A. 1. To cover it, 2. to put it out of sight, 3. not to impute it, 4. or not
to call to a reckoning for it, Psalm. 32.1, 2.

Q. Why are sins called trespasses or debts?

A. Because as we by nature owe our God a debt of obedience, so as sinners we
owe him a debt of punishment, Gal. 5.3. Mat. 18 14.

Q What do you ask of God particularly in this Petition?

A. We ask five things.

Q. What is the first thing you ask?

A. Grace, feelingly to know, and freely to confess the great debt of our sins,
and our utter inability to satisfy for them, Psalm. 51.3. and 130.3. and 43 2.

Q. What is the second thing you ask in these words?

A. Faith to lay hold on the meritorious suffering and obedience of our Lord
Jesus Christ, for our pardon and forgiveness.

Q. What is the third thing?

A. We pray for the testimony of Gods Spirit, sealing to us the pardon of the
several sins and debts of every day and moment of our life.

Q. What is the fourth?

A. That the whole debt may be accepted at the hands of Christ our Surety, and
we fully discharged and acquitted, Phil. 3.8, 9. So that nothing may remain on
our account but the righteousness of Christ, whereby the favor and Kingdom of
God is purchased for us.

Q. What is the last thing you desire in these words?

A. We desire that we may not be destitute of an argument to plead for mercy
with God; and to assure our selves of success, we desire of God a portion of
that mercy which is so abundant in him, that we may be tenderly affected one
toward another, forgiving one another, even as God for Christ's sake forgiveth
us.

Q. Why do you say, As we forgive them that trespass against us?

A. Not that our forgiving others does merit that God should forgive us, Mat.
18. 32, 33 Col. 3.13. but it is a qualification necessary to have God forgive
us, Mat. 6.15. and 18.32. and our forgiving others, is a sign whereby we may
be assured that our God has forgiven us* Mat. 6 14, 15. and 5.22, 24. and 7.11.

Q. Are we ever to forgive the trespasses that are done against us?

A. The wrong that is done unto us, we ought to forgive; and the sin that is
done against God, we ought to pray to him to forgive; but the damage we are not
always to forgive, 2 Chronicles. 19.6. 1 Timothy 5.8. Ephesians. 2.9. Act. 16.37.

Q What must we acknowledge concerning God and our selves in this Petition?

A. We must acknowledge, 1. our selves miserable sinners, Psalm. 40.12. and
25.11. Ezekiel. 9.6. 2. That we have no power to satisfy for sin, Psalm. 49 7, 8.
Act. 2.37 38. Ezekiel. 16.4, 5. 3. That our God is patient, bearing with us so
long, Lam. 3.22. Psalm. 103.8. 4. And merciful, not giving leave only, Dan.
9.18, 19. 2 Chronicles. 7.14. but commanding us also to pray for pardon, Hos. 14.1,
2.

Q. Must we pray for pardon every day?

A. We sin every day, Eccles. 7.21. and therefore every day we ought to pray
for pardon, Psalm. 55.17. and our faith is weak, and we must pray daily for
greater assurance of salvation, Luke 17.52.

Q. Let me hear a Prayer of what you desire in this Petition?

A. Forgive us our trespasses, as we forgive them that trespass against us: O
look upon us in much mercy, for we have provoked thee in much sin. O pardon the
adherent Imperfections of our life, the weakness of our duty, the carelessness
of our spirit. O turn thine eyes from our iniquities, and look upon the purest
Innocence of Jesus Christ: in him have mercy upon us according to thy great
goodness, and according to the multitude of thy compassions be gracious unto
us: and be pleased to give us great charity, that we may forgive all that
trouble or injure us, that by this charity we may be discerned to be thy sons
and servants, and the Disciples of the holy Jesus.

SUNDAY XLIV. And lead us not into temptation, but deliver us from evil.
Q. WHat are the words of the sixth and last Petition?

A. And lead us not into temptation, but deliver us from evil.

Q Having prayed for pardon of sins past, we are to pray that we be not led to
any sin for the time to come: but what is temptation?

A. A temptation is any trial whereby the heart is incited to sin by Satan, the
world, the flesh, 1 These 3 5. Jam. 1.14 Mat 26.41.

Q. Who are said to tempt us in the Scripture?

A. God, Satan, the World, and the Flesh.

Q. How does God lead us to temptation?

A. 1. By withdrawing his grace from us, and leaving us to our selves, Hos.
5.15. 2 Chronicles. 32.31. Romans 1.26, 28.

2. By trying us with prosperity or adversity, Deuteronomy. 8.16.

3. Letting loose Satan to trouble or seduce us, 2 Cor. 1.7. 1 King. 12.22.

4. By suffering us to fall upon occasions of sin, and deferring to help us.

Q. Is not God the author of sin?

A. God forbid: we commit sin, he only in wrath and anger suffers it.

Q. How does Satan tempt?

A. 1. By inward suggestions, Joh. 13.2. 2. by outward objects, Mat. 4.3, 4, 8.

Q How does the world tempt?

A. The world tempts, 1. by bad examples, Jer. 44.17. or 2. by wicked
persuasions, allurings or enticements, Act. 21.12. Mat. 16.22.

Q. How does the flesh tempt?

A. 1. By ill motions, whereby we are drawn aside of our own lusts, Jam 1.14.
2. by inward delight, 3. by a willing consent, 4. by an allowed practice.

Q. How many sorts of temptations be there?

A. Two sorts:

1. One of trial, to prove us in faith, love, etc. as God does, Job 23.10. and
we count it all joy when we fall into such temptations, Jam. 1.2.

2. Another of seduction by Satan, to deceive, destroy, and undo us; and
against this we pray, Lead us not, etc.

Q. What is it to be led into temptation?

A. To be led into it, is to be overcome, so as that sin prevails, etc. Mat.
26.41. 1 Cor. 21.1.

Q. How is God said to lead into temptation?

A. God leads a man into temptation, 1. when in any trial he does forsake a
man. 2. When he does withdraw his grace from him. 3. When he does suffer him to
fall, 2 Chronicles. 32.31. 4. When he hardens his heart, Exodus 7.3. 5. and gives him
wholly up into Satan's power, and the full sway of his own corrupt heart, Romans
1.24, 25, 26. When we are so entangled with sin, that we cannot find our way
out.

Q What is it to be DELIVERED from evil?

A. To deliver, is, 1. to support us under, 2. or protect us from, 3. or to
rescue us from evil.

Q. What do you mean by the evil?

A. I mean,

1. The Evil One, Satan, the author of all evil, Ephesians. 6.16.

2. The evil of sin.

3. The evil after sin, Death.

4. The evil of my own heart, and of the world, that leads to sin and death,
Romans 7.19, 21, 23. Gal. 5.24. 1 John 2.16.

Q. What is it then that you desire of God in this Petition?

A. We desire that sin may not only be pardoned, but destroyed; and that we
may be freed from all trials and temptations to sin, so far as it stands with
Gods pleasure; and always from the evil thereof, that we faint not under them,
Mat. 26 39. Romans 8.28. 1 Cor. 10.13. and undergo the evil of sin and death.

Q. How many things do you desire in this Prayer?

A. We desire,

1. That seeing we cannot be tempted but by the will of God, and we cannot
resist but by his power, he would never leave us nor forsake us.

2. That he would tie up Satan, that he may not have his will over us, and
teach us to walk wisely and circumspectly, 2 Cor. 2.8, 11. that he would
preserve us from the evil that is in the world, Joh. 17.15. and about the power
of our corruption that is within us.

3. We desire that he would never take away his holy Spirit so, as that we be
left in the hand of our own counsels, and delivered to our own lusts, so as
that we cannot escape.

4. We desire that in temptations (if he see good to prove us) he would always
stand by us with his grace to keep us from falling, and to give us an holy use
of our trials.

5. We desire that if at any time our God should leave us to our weakness, he
would graciously raise us up again, with increase of spiritual strength and
courage, Psalm. 51.12.

6. We desire that he would mortify our lusts and corruptions, and support us
by his grace against them.

7. We desire that the Lord would stir us up to watch and pray, lest we enter
into temptation.

8. We desire that our God would put an end to all trials, and to these days of
trials; and that he would give us, 1. hope, 2. patience, 3. comfort, Col. 1.11.
2 These. 2.17. and a good issue out of all trials, that we may neither presume
nor despair, Prove. 30.9.

9. We desire that our God would increase and perfect the work of his grace in
us, enabling us to every good work; and in stead of temptations to evil, he
would be pleased to afford us all helps to well-doing.

Q. Let me hear you pray over this Petition in other words.

A. Lead us not into temptation: Pity thy poor servants in the midst of their
temptations, and give us spiritual strength, holy resolutions, a watchful
spirit, the whole armor of God, thy protection, the guard of Angels, and the
conduct of thy holy Spirit, to be our security in the day of danger. Give us
thy grace to flee from all occasions of sin, that we may never tempt our
selves, nor delight to be tempted; thy Providence so ordering the accidents of
our lives, that we may be delivered from the evil of sin and death.

SUNDAY XLV. For thine is the Kingdom, etc.
Q. WHat is the last part of the Lords Prayer?

A. The Conclusion and Doxology, in these words, For thine is the Kingdom, the
Power, and the Glory, for ever and ever. Amen.

Q. What do you mean when you say, For thine is the Kingdom? etc.

A. We mean that we call upon him in our necessities, and pray,

1. Because his is the Kingdom and Sovereignty over all things, and over us,
to whom he is a gracious Lord.

2. His is the Power to do above what we can ask or think.

3. Because his is the Glory that arises by our praying to him, and by his
answering our Prayers.

Q. What do you mean by Amen?

A. Be it so. The word Amen, being a witness of our faith, and desire of the
things prayed for, Jer. 11.5. of our desire that things should be so, and of
our confidence that it shall be so, 1 Cor. 14.16. Deuteronomy. 27.15. according to
Gods will.

Minister. So that our Savior teaches us to put an Amen to our Prayers, that
we may be admonished to desire and believe. Let us hear this part of the Lords
Prayer in other words.

A. These things which we have asked, good Lord, give and grant; so shall we
thy servants advance thy Kingdom, acknowledge thy Power, and the Glory of thy
mercy, from generation to generation, for ever. Amen.

Q. What comfort have you in this, that the Kingdom, the Power and the Glory is
Gods for ever and ever?

A. We have this comfort, that he who was able for his own glory to answer the
Prayers of the Saints in all Ages, is the same as yesterday, so to day, and for
ever, Heb. 4.16. and 13 8. Jam. 5.7.

Q. What ought we to do after we have prayed?

A. We ought to observe how we speed, and what answer we receive, Psalm. 3.4.
and 85.8.

Q. What Rules are we to observe touching the success of our Prayer?

A. 1. God may answer our Prayers, and we not know it, Isai. 64.24. 2 Samuel
17.13. Psalm. 51.1, 2.

2. For God does not always give the particular things we ask for, but what he
knows best for us, Romans 1.10. 2 Cor. 12.7, 8, 9. Heb. 5.7.

3. We must wait on Gods time, Isai. 28.16.

Qu. When do we speed well in prayer?

A. 1. We speed well when God gives us the same thing we crave, being good,
Lam. 3.17. Genesis 30.17. Psalm. 21.2, 4.

2. Or when God gives us something as fit, or more fit for us, Genesis 17.18, 19.
Heb. 5.7. or when God gives us more patience and strength to wait, 2 Cor.
12.7, 8, 9. Psalm. 40.1.

Q. How must we do if God answer us not?

A. 1. We must examine our selves how we pray.

2. We must continue fervent in prayer.

3. We must wait upon the Lord with patience until we speed, Jam. 4 3. Luke
18.1, 11. Hab. 1.3. Psalm. 5.3.

Q. How do we pray amiss?

A. We pray amiss,

1. When we pray ignorantly, rashly, coldly, distrustfully, and sloathfully.

2. When we pray for what is not good, or not good for us.

3. When we pray for things which we would consume upon our lusts.

Q. Why does God for a time deny us what we ask?

A. 1. That we may be humbled for our wants, Lam. 2.4.

2. That we may exercise our faith and patience in waiting, Mat. 15.23, 24.

3. To try our obedience for conscience sake, Psalm. 44.17, 18.

4. To make us depend upon him, and thankful to him; and that he may do us good
in the latter end, Judge 20 26.

Q. What shall we do to pray with success?

A. We must depart from all iniquity, and lift up pure hands unto God, Psalm.
66.18. and 78.34, 35, 36. 2 Timothy 2.19. Prove. 15.8. Joh. 9.31. Isai. 58.7, 8, 9.
Ezekiel. 17.17.

Q. What kinds of prayer are there?

A. 1. Public Prayer in the Church, decently and in order, 1 Cor. 14.40.

2. Private Prayer, fervently and sincerely.

Q. How often must we pray?

A. Continually, in the frame of our spirit, 1 These. 5.17. For the whole course
of a Christian is a perpetual communion and intercourse with God; either suing
for mercy, or waiting for an answer to be received, or rendering thanks for an
answer already received, Psalm. 5.3. Luke 2.47. but especially when we enter
into any business, or receive any blessing.

Q. What ought to be our outward carriage in prayer?

A. Such as may best express and increase the reverence, humility, fervency and
affiance, that ought to be in our hearts; as the bowing of our knees, lifting
up our hands and eyes to heaven, etc.

Q. May we use a form of prayer?

A. Our Lord, who has given us this form, saying, When ye pray, say, has
admitted of all languages, words and forms agreeable to this pattern, whether
read, rehearsed by heart, or presently conceived, so be it we pray both with
spirit and affection, and with understanding also.

Minister. Thus we have done with the third part of the Catechism; wherein we
were taught what to pray for, according to that absolute form of Prayer which
the Lord has taught us: of which the Ancients said, It was a familiar,
grateful and friendly Prayer, to entreat God by that petition he framed, the
prayer that Christ taught ascending to his ears. Let the Father acknowledge the
words of his own Son, when we pray: Let him who dwells in the heart, be in
the voice; and since we have him an Advocate with the Father for our sins, when
we poor sinners ask pardon for our offenses, let us produce and send up the
words of our Advocate, etc.

Almighty, etc.
SUNDAY XLVI. Of the Sacraments.
Q. WE believe that our Savior did redeem the world, in the Creed; we see how
he does apply, seal, and present that redemption to us by his Sacraments. In
the one we hear, in the other we feel, taste, and see how gracious the Lord is.

How many Sacraments has Christ ordained in his Church?

A. Two only, as generally necessary to salvation.

Q. Which are those two?

A. Baptism and the Lords Supper, answerable to the Circumcision and the
Passover under the Law. 1. By Baptism we are admitted into the Church. 2. By
the Lords Supper we are nourished, preserved, and grown up in Christ after we
are born again.

Q What do you mean when you say, that these two Sacraments are generally
necessary to salvation?

A. We mean that all ought to receive these Sacraments that will attain
Salvation.

Minister. This is not so to be understood, as if God could not save without
them: but that they are the means instrumental, and ordinary seals by which God
has promised to assure and convey Christ's merits unto us, and commands us
this way to receive them: so that wilfully to neglect them, or to want them
when they may be had, is to neglect Gods Ordinance, and to disobey Gods command.

Q. What are the uses of Sacraments?

A. They are useful,

1. To separate Gods household from strangers, Genesis 17.10.

2. They are Bonds of Obedience, Obligations of mutual Charity, Provocations to
Piety, Preservatives against sin, and Memorials of the benefit of Christ, Gal.
3.1. Luke 22.19.

3. They are visible marks by which God gives notice of his approach; and
purposes to impart the saving grace of Christ to all that are capable thereof.

4. They are conditional means, which God requires to be observed of them unto
whom he imparts grace: which grace a worthy Receiver partakes of, by his
assistance going along with the Sacrament.

Q. What do you mean by this word Sacrament?

A. We mean an outward visible sign, of an inward and spiritual grace,
ordained by Christ himself, as a means whereby we receive the same, and a
pledge to assure us thereof.

Q. What is contained in a Sacrament?

A. There are two things contained in a Sacrament, The outward sign, which is
presented to our eye or sense; and, The inward grace sealed unto the soul.

Q. What is the grace offered in the Sacrament?

A. The whole obedience, merit, death and passion of our Lord Jesus Christ; and
the benefits that flow thence are,

1. Justification, whereby we are made righteous.

2. Wisdom, whereby we are made wise to salvation.

3. Sanctification; for by the power of his Spirit we die to sin, and live unto
righteousness.

4. Redemption, by which we are redeemed from sin, death and hell, and shall be
estated in glory when the day of full redemption shall come.

Q. How come these outward and visible signs which we see, to signify the
inward and invisible grace which we believe?

A. Because Christ has ordained it: he said, and it was done, 1 Cor. 11.28.

Q. Who has power to ordain Sacraments?

A. God only, who can confer grace on worthy receivers, and can punish the
unworthy receivers.

Q. For what end were the Sacraments ordained?

A. 1. To be a means to receive grace.

2. To be pledges to assure us of grace received.

Q. What do you mean by that?

A. We mean three things.

1. That the Sacraments represent to us, and set before our eyes what Christ
has done for us.

2. They convey that so laid before us into our souls, in so much grace and
favor as is needful for us; as, Pardon of sin, Reconciliation, acceptance,
and strength to do what he requires.

3. That the Sacraments are a pawn left us by God in the hands of the Minister,
to give acquiescence and ground of confidence, that the graces promised shall
be surely performed, Romans 4.11. Genesis 17.11.

Minister. Our God not content with the general offer of the promises, out of
his mere mercy has thought fit to seal them to every particular believer,
having a regard thereby to their infirmity; that by faith they may apply those
things they see, to such things as are not seen: he has given us seals to the
word of the covenant of grace, to instruct, assure and possess us of our part
in Christ and his benefits, and to bind us all in thankful obedience to him,
and in love to his saints. Do you know how the Sacraments are especial means to
confirm faith?

A. The Sacraments are special means to confirm our Faith, because in them
Christ is in special manner represented and offered to all, and received by
those that communicate worthily.

Q. Who are lawfully called to administer the Sacraments?

A. Those who being furnished with knowledge and grace, are set apart for that
Office by the Church, Deuteronomy. 33.10. Mal. 2.7. Mat. 5.14, etc. 1 Timothy 3.2, 4, 5.
Tit. 1.7, 8. Romans 1.1. Tit. 1.5.

Q. What do the Sacraments belong to?

A. To the Covenant of Grace, viz. I will be thy God, and thou shall be my
people, Jer. 31.33. whereof they are seals.

Q How many Sacraments be there under the Gospel?

A. Two: the Sacraments of Baptism, and the Lords Supper, which are to continue
for ever, Heb. 1.13.

Almighty, etc.
SUNDAY XLVII. Of Baptism.
Q. WHat is Baptism?

A. Baptism is a Sacrament of our engrafting into Christ, Communion with him,
and entrance into the Church, Act. 8.31. Mat. 28.19. by the washing of Water,
representing the powerful washing of the blood and Spirit of Christ, and so
sealing our new birth, and entrance into the Covenant of grace, 1 Pet. 3.21.

Q. How was this Sacrament brought into the Church?

A. At the Commandment of God by the Ministry first of John, therefore called
the Baptist; afterward it was sanctified and confirmed by our Savior Christ
himself, being baptized by John, and giving Commission to his Apostles and
Ministers to continue the same in his Church unto the end, Joh. 1.33. Mat. 3.1.
and 28.19.

Q. How many parts be there in this Sacrament?

Q Two: the outward visible sign, sanctified or appointed by God to represent
and seal another thing to the mind and heart; and the inward invisible grace
conveyed to the heart, Genesis 9.11, 12.

Q. What is the outward visible sign, or form in Baptism?

A. Water, 1. wherein the person is baptized, 2. In the Name of the Father, and
of the Son, and of the holy Ghost, Act. 10.47. Mat. 3.6, 11, 13, 16. Act. 16.15.

Minister. Here are two things: 1. The outward matter of Baptism, Water. 2. The
form, In the Name, etc.


Q. What is the end of Baptism?

A. To enter us in the beginning of Christianity, by washing off our guilt with
the blood, and our stains by the Spirit of Christ, Mat. 20.28. 1 Timothy 2.6. Tit.
3.5. Eccles. 1.12, 13. Heb. 9 22. and 12.14. Jer. 2.22. Romans 6.23. Ezekiel. 16.

Q. What is the outward action or ceremony to be used in Baptism?

A. It Is indifferent,

1. Whether diving or dipping, which represents our burial with Christ, and our
rising up with him again, Romans 6.3. 1 Pet. 1.2. Heb. 12.22. Col. 2 12, 13.

Or, 2. Sprinkling, which is used in colder Countries, upon the authority of
that place, Heb. 12.24. Ezekiel. 36.25. Numb. 19.18, 19. 1 Pet. 1.2. Act. 10.47.

Minister. Sprinkling is ancient, as appears by Tert. 6 chap. of Bapt. Gregor.
Mo. 26.76. Epist. Cypr. What is the form to be used in Baptism, which never may
be omitted?

A. In the Name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the holy Ghost.

Qu. What do you learn from this form of words?

A. 1. I learn that what the Minister does in Baptism, he does not of himself,
but by authority of the Father, Son, and holy Ghost.

2. I learn for my comfort that the Father, etc. do ratify and confirm what is
promised and sealed in Baptism, viz. Remission of sin, and acceptance with God.

3. I learn for my duty, 1. To acknowledge these three persons in one God. 2.
To obey, worship, and live by the rules and directions of the Father, etc.

Minister. Upon this condition being admitted by Baptism into the Church, God
has assured us in the use of means what grace he has promised in the
Covenant. But what is the inward spiritual grace and favor that belongs to the
soul of man in Baptism?

A. A death unto sin, and a new birth unto righteousness: for being by nature
born in sin, we are hereby made the children of grace.

Minister. In our first birth we are dead in sin; in our second birth of water
and the holy Ghost, Joh. 3.5. we are dead to sin: In our first, we are alive to
our lusts; in the second, we are alive to Gods grace. So that here is
Mortification, or the weakening and pulling off of sin; and Vivification, and a
quickening by the Spirit to serve God in holiness.

Q. Whence do you gather these two parts of the inward grace in Baptism?

A. 1. From Col. 2.12. Romans 6.3. 1 Pet. 2.24. Romans 6.5. Ephesians. 2 5, 6. where we
have a death to sin, a new life to grace; new in the principle of the Spirit,
new in the effects, faith, hope.

Minister. The inward effect of Baptism, is forgiveness of sin, and
sanctification, Mat. 1.4. Tit. 3.5. Act. 2.38. by Christ's blood and Spirit,
Joh. 1.26. Mat. 3.11.

Q. What need is there of Baptism?

A. Because we are by nature born in sin, i. e. conceived in sin, and brought
forth in iniquity; polluted no less in sin from the womb, then an Infant in his
mothers blood, Psalm. 51.5. Ezekiel. 16.1. it is necessary we should be washed.

Minister. Indeed God permitting, Satan tempting, and Man yiedling, being left
to himself, fell by Adam, the head of mankind, into a state of sin and death:
of Sin, 1. born in Original corruption; 2. and living in actual transgression,
the image of God being defaced in our soul, and the life of God lost in our
conversations.

Q. In what part of us does Original sin abide?

A. 1. It lies in our understandings, misleading us.

2. In our wills, hardening us.

3. In our affections, disordering us.

4. In our consciences, abusing us.

5. In the whole man, soul and body, defiling us.

Q. How is actual sin committed?

A. 1. by omission of what we ought to have done.

2. By commission of what we ought not to have done; and that, 1. inwardly in
heart and mind; 2. outwardly in word and deed.

Q. By what degrees do we proceed in actual sin?

A. By a temptation offered, by lust embracing it, by the delight in it; by
lust bringing forth sin, by custom continuing in it, and by hardness of heart
dying in it, 2 Samuel 11.2. Psalm. 7.14. Jam. 1.14, 15.

Q. What are the several kinds of actual sins?

A. 1. Partaking with others sins, Isai. 6.5.

2. Sins of ignorance, Psalm. 19.12.

3. Sins of knowledge through infirmity, 1 Cor. 8.7.

4 Sins of Presumption and Obstinacy, Romans 7.19.

5. The unpardonable sin against the holy Ghost, or an obstinate continuing in
sin against the means and method of grace, Heb. 6.45. and 10 29. Mark 3.29, 30.

Q. How does God recover us from this state of sin wherein we were born?

A. By the Covenant of grace in Christ, which is sealed by Baptism, whereby
upon faith in Christ, we are restored to Gods grace and favor: for we are
hereby made the children of grace, and enabled to resolve to forsake sin, and
live a godly life; yea, and actually to forsake it, and lead a new life, by
grace from above, to die unto sin, and live unto righteousness.

Q. What is required of persons to be baptized?

A. 1. Repentance, whereby they forsake sin, Act. 21.18. Mat. 10 4.

2. And Faith, whereby they steadfastly believe the promises of God made to them
in that Sacrament.

Q. What is it truly to repent and forsake sin?

A. It is not only to be touched with the sense of sin, to be grieved for it,
to be ashamed of it, or to resolve against it; but really, sincerely, and
actually, to leave and forsake it: so that though weakly we fall into it, yet
wilfully we commit it not, nor obstinately continue in it.

Q. What use do you make of your Baptism?

A. 1. In all our fears and doubts we look back to our Baptism, and the
promises of God sealed therein, which we believe steadfastly to our comfort.

2. In all our failings we look upon the Covenant of grace in Baptism, whereby
we may recover.

3. We renew our Faith, and all our graces by those blessed promises of grace,
and so expect all good from Gods free mercy in those promises.

Q. Why are children baptized who cannot repent, and believe, and perform other
things required in Baptism?

A. Yes, they do perform them by their Sureties, who promise and vow them both
in their names; which when they come to age, themselves are bound to perform.

Q. How can they promise and vow for the Children?

A. They may promise and vow for Children, that they shall use the means
whereby the Children may perform these things, and that they will pray to God
for a blessing upon these means.

Q. Did you ever read in the Scripture that Children entered into any Covenant?

A. Yes: once in Genesis 17.9. and thrice in Deuteronomy. 29.11, etc. and 12.18. and once
more in 2 Chronicles. 26. and 13.7. Jonah 3.5. and 4.10, 11.

Q. Did you ever read that Children should enter into Covenant with God by
Baptism?

A. Yes, I read that children entered into covenant with God by Circumcision;
the like figure whereunto is Baptism, Col. 2.18.

Q. Are we commanded to bring little children to Christ?

A. Yes, Mark 13.14.

Q. Show me out of the Scripture who are to be admitted to Baptism.

A. 1. Those of riper years, who are converted to the Christian Faith, Act.
8.37.

2. Children born of Christian Parents, Act. 2.39. 1 Cor. 7.14.

Q. How are you sure that the infants of Christian Parents ought to be baptized?

A. 1. Because they are within the Covenant and Promise, Act. 2.39. Mark 10.

2. Because Circumcision among the Jews (which answers to our Baptism) was
administered to Infants, Genesis 17.12. and 21.14. Luke 1.59. and 2.21.

3. Because whole households were baptized, among whom were some infants, Act.
14.15.

Minister. Indeed Church Members in all Ages have offered up their children to
God by Baptism; and (as St. Augustine says) Let no man whisper to us any other
Doctrines: This the Church has always had, always retained: This it keeps
perseveringly unto the end. That which the universal Church maintains, and was
not instituted by Councils, but always continued, is most rightly believed to
be delivered by the Apostles authority. But how can any promise that the child
will perform the Vow when it comes to age?

A. None can promise absolutely that the Child shall do it; for that is beyond
their power to undertake: but conditionally, that he shall perform it, or have
no benefit in the Engagement.

Minister. Therefore when the child is come to age or years of discretion, he
is to be put in mind what a solemn Vow, Promise and Profession his Sureties
have made to God for him; and then he is put to his choice whether he will
stand to them or no. If he stands not to them, how shall he escape who neglects
so great salvation? If he allows of what we have done, he must perform the
conditions, i. e. repent, with a full resolution of amendment of life, and
believe with a faith unfeigned.

SUNDAY XLVIII. Of the Lords Supper.
Q. WHat is the other Sacrament?

A. The Sacrament of the Lords Supper.

Q. Why was the Sacrament of the Lords Supper ordained?

A. For the continual remembrance of the sacrifice of the death of Christ, and
the benefits we receive thereby.

Qu. What do you learn from hence?

A. I learn, first, that Christ died for me, Isai. 53. 2 Pet. 2.24. Phil. 2.8.

2. That his death is a Sacrifice; he made his soul a sacrifice for sin, Heb.
9.16. 1 John 2.2. Ephesians. 5.2.

3. That this Sacrament was ordained to be a continual remembrance of that
Sacrifice, Luke 22.19. Genesis 11.14. Do this in remembrance of me. So often as we
eat this bread, and drink this cup, we show forth the Lords death, Luke 22.19.
1 Cor. 11.14.

Minister. Yes, here we have Christ crucified before our eyes, represented
lively before us as upon the cross: hereby we remember Christ's death, and the
benefits we receive thereby.

Q. What are the benefits we receive thereby?

A. The first, is to remove guilt: the blood of Jesus Christ purges us, 1 John
1.7.

The second, is to remove the sting of it: there is now no condemnation, Romans
8.1.

The third, is to weaken the power of it: the blood of Jesus Christ purges our
consciences from dead works, Heb. 9.14.

The fourth, is reconciliation: for we are by his blood reconciled unto God.

The fifth, is eternal redemption, Ephesians. 17.14.

The sixth, is liberty to enter into heaven, Heb. 10.19, 20.

Qu. What is the outward part of the Lords Supper?

A. Bread and Wine, which the Lord has commanded to be received, Mat. 26.17.
Mark 14. by all people.

Q. What is the inward part or thing signified?

A. The body and blood of Christ, which are verily and indeed taken and
received by the faithful in the Lords Supper, Luke 22.17. Mat. 26.28.

Q. How do we verily and indeed receive Christ's body and blood?

A. By faith: The Cup which we bless, is it not the Communion of the blood of
Christ, who is present there?

Q. Believe, says St. Augustine, and thou have eaten. How many manner of ways
may Christ be said to be present?

A. 1. He is present as God in all places, Psalm. 139.7. Jer. 23.24.

2. He is present as Man on the right hand of God, making intercession for us.

3. He is present by his grace in the hearts of believers, Ephesians. 3.17.

4. He is present by a special blessing, wherever two or three are gathered
together in his Name.

5. He is present effectually in the Sacraments, 1 Cor. 10.16, 17.

Q. So then you believe that Christ is present in the Sacrament by his special
presence, as God; that he is present in the hearts of true Communicants,
spiritually; and that he is in the Elements, representatively. Who are to
communicate?

A. All true Christians: Drink ye all of this, Mark 14.

Q. What are the benefits whereof we are partakers by the Sacrament?

A. The strengthening and refreshing of our souls by the body and blood of
Christ, as our bodies are by the bread and wine.

Q. As the body is strengthened by bread, so the heart is established, and the
soul is strengthened by grace in the Sacrament of Christ's body: as wine cheers
the heart, so the blood of Christ in the Sacrament rejoices the conscience
with an holy comfort. Come, O ye that are weak, to this Sacrament, and it shall
strengthen you: Come, ye that are weary and heavy laden, and it shall refresh
and ease you. But what is required of them that come to the Lords Supper?

A. To examine themselves, 1 Cor. 11.28.

Q. What are they to examine themselves in?

A. They are to examine themselves whether they truly repent.

Q. What is it truly to repent?

A. 1. To have a true sense of a real sorrow for our former sins.

2. To have a steadfast purpose to lead a new life, Tit. 2.12.

Q. What is the second thing we ought to examine our selves in?

A. A true and lively faith in Gods mercy through our Savior Christ.

Q 1. You must have faith, 2. a lively faith, 3. and that in Gods mercy, 4.
which is ours through Christ. What is saving faith?

A. Faith is such a persuasion in heart, or belief of the truth of the Gospel,
or that Jesus Christ is the Son of God, which disposes a person to manifest or
make it known by fruits of love to God and men: or, justifying faith is a grace
or habit infused into the soul by the holy Ghost, whereby we are enabled to
believe not only that the Messiah is offered to us, but also take and receive
him as our Lord and Savior.

Q. What is the third thing you ought to examine your selves in?

A. It is to examine whether we have added to our faith a thankful remembrance
of Christ's death in the Sacrament.

Q. What does this thankful remembrance imply?

A. It implies, first, an humble sense of Gods mercy: secondly, an hearty and
real expression of that sense in word and deed, by our words and by our lives,
Act. 2.46, 47.

Q. What is the fourth thing you are to examine your selves in before a
Communion?

A. Whether we be in charity with all men.

Q. When you have set your hearts right toward God, you must try how they
stand toward man, Mat 5.23. For as this Sacrament seals the Communi^n of the
members with the head, so it seals up the Communion of the members one with
another. How must you show or exercise your charity?

A. First, in giving cheerfully to them that want, 1 Cor. 16.2.

Secondly, in forgiving heartily them that have trespassed against us; without
which our sins are retained, our pardon not sealed, our prayers not accepted,
Mat. 6.14, 15.

SUNDAY XLIX. The Discipline and Worship of the Church of England opened.
Q YOu have now learned the Doctrine of the Church; it remains you should learn
the practice of it. What think you is a man's duty in the place he lives in?

A. To be quiet, and follow his own business, obeying them that are over him in
the Lord.

Q. Why?

A. For conscience sake.

Q. Conscience, of what?

A. That there is no power but what is ordained of God.

Q. What if we should, as many have done, resist the powers?

A. We do it to our own damnation.

Q But what if our Governors are wicked?

A. We are to obey not only the gentle, but the froward: and they cannot be
more wicked then they were in Moses, Daniel, our Savior, the Apostles, and the
first Christians time; yet they obeyed the worst, submitted to the cruellest,
gave their due to the most unjust, (to Caesar the things that are Caesar's) and
ordained Prayers and Supplications for, and obedience unto all.

Q. What, to those that command what God forbids, or forbid what God commands?

A. Yes, even to those by way of cheerful obedience in things lawful, or of
patient submission in things unlawful; either doing willingly what they enjoin,
or suffering patiently what they inflict.

Q. What if your superiors force your conscience?

A. They cannot force my conscience; for I may think what I please: but they
may restrain my practice; for I must not do what I please. I am to be in all
cases very fearful of my own opinion, when it crosses the resolutions of a
whole Kingdom: however, if I have faith, I will have it to my self; in those
things I have already attained, I will conform; in other things I will stay
peaceably and quietly until the Lord reveal it to me.

Q. Yes, but it is hard to be undone for conscience sake.

A. Government undoeth no man; the Law is innocent, and declares only the
Kings Conscience, who must have that liberty to govern according to his
Conscience, that we would have to obey. If our Opinions be conscience, we are
not good Christians if we do not cheerfully and quietly suffer for them; if
not, we are not honest men if we do not leave them.

Q. What think you of those that repine and complain?

A. I think they charge God foolishly, who takes special notice of Murmurers
and complainers; of those that curse their Rulers in their thoughts, and speak
evil of Dignities.

Q. What if there were an opportunity to alter the Government, and redress
grievances?

A. I will always think upon that of Solomon: If the spirit of the Ruler be
stirred against thee, move not out of thy place. And that, My son, fear thou
the Lord and the King, and meddle not with them who are given to change: for
who knows the ruin of them both? I will possess my soul in patience, and
pray for those that are over me, that under them I may lead a peaceable and
quiet life, in all godliness and honesty.

Q. But are not we of this Nation bound by our Covenant to oppose the present
Government?

A. 1. No: we are by that Covenant bound to endeavor nothing out of our
places; and it does not belong to our places to meddle with the Government.

2. The Covenant did not bind us against our Engagement formerly; therefore not
now against our Allegiance.

3. Sinful it is to rebel, more sinful to swear we will do it.

4. As that Covenant could not be taken, so it cannot be kept but against the
Law.

5. We are bound to nothing by any Act of our late Disorders, but to Repentance.

Q. What is to be thought of those that are turbulent and seditious?

A. We are to mark those that cause Divisions, and to avoid them.

Q Why?

A. Because they dishonor the Gospel, and make Christianity seem odious in the
world, and bring inexpressible miseries upon the places they live in; being
enemies of the public good, in opposing Government that secures it.

Q. What is necessary for this peaceable temper that becomes all subjects?

A. 1. A meek, sober, moderate and contented Spirit.

2. A well-informed Judgment concerning the things that are enjoined, with a
firm persuasion that our Superiors may enjoin any outward circumstances of
Gods Worship that may be, 1. decent and in order, 2. to the glory of God, and
3. to edification.

Vid. Deus and Rex; Sanderson's Sermons; Dr. Fernes Discourses; Bishop Usher of
Obedience; Mr. Digges against Rebellion; Dr. Wards exact Sermon, and Bishop
Mortons learned one upon Romans 13.12.

SUNDAY L. Of outward Reverence, and the Customs of our Church.
Q. WHy is it that you use any bodily service in Gods house, when he calls
only for the spirit?

A. I must offer to him my body and my soul, which are his, which is my
reasonable service.

Q. How must you behave your self in the Church?

A. I must think God is there in an especial manner by his presence and
assistance, though but two or three meet together in his Name; and I must take
heed to my self when I go into the house of God, Eccles 5 1, 2.

Q What gesture must you use there?

A. 1. When I pray, I must fall down and kneel before the Lord my Maker, as my
Savior and all good men have done in all Ages.

2. When I confess my faith in the Belief or Gospel, I must stand up, as not
ashamed to believe with the heart, and make confession with the mouth to Gods
glory, the edification and confirmation of others, and the salvation of my own
soul, as I do when I exalt the Name of God in Psalms, Hymns, and spiritual
Songs.

3. At the Name of JESUS, I bow to his Person; to whom I let all men, even
those that deny his Godhead, thereby see that (as the Apostle says) Every knee
should bow, of things in heaven, and things in earth.

4. When I hear, I do it reverently, not as to the word of man, but as to the
Word of God.

5. When I receive the Sacrament, I do it with all humility, which I show the
world for their instruction, by receiving that infinite mercy from the hands of
my God upon my knees.

Q. Dare you put on your Hat there?

A. No, because of the Angels, 1 Cor. 10.1.

Q Why do you reverence the Church more then any other place, and one part of
the Church more then another?

A. Knowing God is present every where, I express my reverence to him in that
place where I am in an especial manner drawing near to him.

Q. How ought you to behave your self toward the Ministers of the Church?

A. I should attend to their Doctrine, live their Sermons, follow their
examples, pray for their infirmities, honor their persons and callings for
their works sake, and pay them the tenths, and other duties appointed by God
and Man for their maintenance.

Q. What if you do not?

A. If I neglect them, I neglect God; if I rob them, I rob God also.

Q. But what if they are weak?

A. I must eye the strength of God in their weakness; and look neither on Paul
planting, nor Apollo watering, but on God that gives the increase.

Q. But what if your Minister be wicked?

A. I am to pity his infirmities, which are his own; to honor his Calling, and
receive his Doctrine, which are of God; always remembering that we have the
Gospel-treasure in earthen vessels.

Q. What think you of his habit, as his Gown, Surplice and Tippit? can you hear
him in them?

A. It Is no more to me what Habit he prays or preaches in, then it is to him
what Habit I hear him in: all our Clothes should be decent and comely: but the
Word of God does not depend upon the Clothes of men; his Garments can no more
hinder his Preaching, then mine do my Hearing.

Q. But do you think it necessary to pray so much, and so often as you do now?

A. We whose dependence upon God is so great, whose sins are so many, whose
wants are so hourly, whose mercies are renewed so every moment, cannot too
often make our requests known unto God by prayer and supplication with
thanksgiving. Prayer is the life of our Religion: we hear that we may believe,
we believe that we may have communion with God in prayer, and we pray that we
may be saved, Romans 10.

Q. May we join in a form of Prayer prescribed in the Church?

A. We may as well join in words prescribed by the Church, as in those invented
by a private Minister; for we are equally tied to the one as well as the other:
besides that all good men, both before and since Christ's time, worshipping one
God in one Faith, have used one form of words constantly, Deuteronomy 6. ult. Hos. 14
1, 2, 3, etc. Mat. 6.6. 2 Cor. 13.13. Mat. 27. etc.

Qu. You pray not by the Spirit when you join in a dead form?

Q. No form of good words is dead to me, if my heart be not dead: The work of
the Spirit in prayer is not to invent a variety of expression, but to keep up
the heart to good expressions: then I pray by the Spirit, not when I speak many
words, which I can do by nature; but when I raise my heart to go along wi^h
good words, which I can do only by grace.

Q. Why were you marked with the Cross in Baptism?

A. To show that I, as well as the Primitive Christians, am not ashamed to own
Christ and his Cross, which Heathens, Turks and Jews deride; that mark
signifying no Popish Superstition, but my Christian Resolution.

Q. Are there not many things in our Church that are in the Church of Rome?

A. Yes; and we have thrown away the Superstitions of Rome, lest we should be a
corrupted Church; not the good usages thereof, lest we should be no Church: if
we cast off every thing that Rome has, we must throw away our Bibles: what was
Primitive in the Church of Rome, we retain; what is merely Popish, we reject.

Q. Sure there are many things that are Antichristian here.

A There is nothing owned here, but what was practiced by all the Christians in
the world in every Age of it. If these things are Antichristian, there has
been no such thing as Christianity in the world: for thus Christians lived in
all Ages, and thus they died.

Qu. Why do you say the same things over so often?

A. To quicken our hearts: we have the same wants and sins, and we use the same
words, as our Savior did those words, Father, if it be possible, etc. thrice
in one hour.

Q Is not our Common Prayer Book in the Mass Book?

A. Yes, some of it is, as there is some of the Bible in it, and both taken out
of the old Lyturgies of the Primitive Church.

Q Do you not hear the Apocrypha?

A. We Vid. Hier. Praefat. Solom. Epiph. c. Ebion.
hear no more then was read of old in the Prim tive Church, and is now read in
the Confess. Bell. Act. 6.
Reformed Churches: no more then is grounded upon the holy Scripture, and is
useful for edification.

Q. Here are many Ceremonies of Humane Institution.

A. None but are agreeable to the Word of God, and such are in Vid. Helvet.
Confess. c. 27. Boh c. 15. Gal. Art. 32. Belg. Art. 32. Aug. Art. 15. Saxon.
Art. 20. Suev. chapter 14.
every Church, and among all people, who must determine the outward and
indifferent circumstances of their actions.

Q. Is there not superstition in the use of these things?

A. There may be Superstition in enjoining or using things in themselves
indifferent, as of themselves necessary: Ye observe days, etc. Gal. 4 10. And
as much superstition in forbidding things in themselves indifferent, as
unlawful: Touch not, wear not a Surplice, etc. Col. 2.21.

Qu. But are not some things offensive?

A. So they be lawful, no matter if they be offensive; especially if men will
take offense where there is none given.

SUNDAY LI. Of the Lyturgie and Ceremonies of the Church of England.
Q. WHy do we begin our Morning and Evening Prayer as we do?

A. We begin with an holy sentence, to stir us up; we proceed to Confession, to
humble us; and then to Absolution, to comfort us.

Q. Why do you repeat after the Minister?

A. To keep our wandering hearts close to our Devotion.

Q. Why do you say, Glory be to the Father, so often?

A. Both to express our Faith in, and our Reverence to the blessed Vid. J.
Martyr, Exposit. fid. Clem. Alex. paed. l. 3. p. 14. Theod. l. 2. c. 24.
Trinity, which many question, and not a few deny.

Q Why is the Invitatory Psalm said always, viz Come let us? etc.

A. It was sung anciently while the people were coming to Church; upon the
first hearing whereof, they hastened to the Morning-Service.

Q. Why so many Hymns mingled with the Lessons?

A. To support the Hearers, according to the Council Laod. Can. 17. in Balsam.
Primitive Constitution; and that the whole Word of God might be read over in
some space of time.

Q. Some of the Hymns were used upon special occasions.

A. Though used upon special, they may be applied, as David's, to general
purposes by a devout spirit.

Q. Why so many Creeds?

A. That we may have before us the plain and sincere Faith of the Catholic
Church.

Q Why are the last words left out of the Lords Prayer in some places?

A. We use it in some places, because St. Matthew has it; and we omit it in
others, because St. Luke has it not.

It is thought that it was inserted by the Greek Church, Vid. Luc. Brugens,
Var. Lect.
Q. Why do we read Epistles and Gospels upon peculiar days?

A. That we may learn all our Religion once a year, and every part of time we
may meditate on some part of Christianity.

Q. What do you mean when you say, That immediately after morning-service the
Communicants shall give in their names?

A. Formerly in England, and now in Scotland, a Bell rings between Prayer and
Sermon.

Q. Who is the notorious Offender that is excluded the Sacrament?

A. Notoriety being either, 1. of Presumption, or 2. of Fact, or 3. of Law; he
is notorious there, that is by Law condemned and excommunicated.

Q Why does the Priest stand on the Northside of the Table?

A. To avoid the Popish Superstition of standing toward the East.

Q. Why is the Lords Prayer so often used? and why do the people pray after
every Commandment?

A. The Lords Prayer is used as the sum of our other Prayers; and we pray after
the Commandments, to teach people that they should look up for Gods Grace when
they hear his Commands.

Q. Why do we stand up at the Gospel, and say, Glory be to thee, O Lord, after
it?

A. The first, to signify our awful Reverence in hearing the blessed Gospel;
the second, to signify our Thanks to God for declaring it unto us.

Q. What do the Ministers mean when they say, Let us pray for this and that
before Sermon?

A. They mean to instruct the people what they are to pray for (according to
the old usage of the Vid. Constable. Ap. c. 1^. (...), etc.
Church) by way of Doctrine, as well as to show them how they are to pray by
way of form.

Q Why do you say the Prayer for Christ's Catholic Church last of all?

A. Vid. Tert. Apology Clem. Constable. l. 2. c. 51. Eusebius. vil. Constable. l. 4. c.
45. Cyril. Hier. Cat. Rud. 10.
Because we might conclude our Service with the greatest act of charity in the
world; so great, that it obliges Mankind to our Religion.

Q. Why does the Minister say, Draw near, when the Communicants are already
sat?

A. Because of old no Layman durst come near the Chancel until the Priest
called him.

Q. Why do you kneel at the Communion? do you worship the Breaden God?

A. No: but we, as all the Ancient and Modern Churches, draw near to the true
God with all veneration possible, as bowing, Vid. Cyril. Cat. 5. Soz. Hist. l.
8. c. 5. Vid. Harm. Confess. p. 21.
kneeling.

Q. What do you mean by sanctifying of Water in Tert. de Bapt.
the form of Baptism?

A. We mean being separated from common to a sacred use, and blessed with
Christ's presence in his Ordinance.

Q. What do Godfathers and Godmothers mean when they promise that the child
shall forsake the Devil?

A. They promise that they will use all the means in their power that they may
do so.

Q. This is a great charge?

A. 1. It is necessary that children may be brought up acco ding to their
Baptism

2 It is necessary that some undertake it.

3. They that undertake, should consider what they do, and perform it.

4 If they do not, the fault is not in the Church that imposes, but in them
that neglect what they undertake.

Q. How do you say that the child is regenerate and born anew?

A. We say that a child receives in Baptism the Spirit of God, which in riper
years upon use of means actually sanctifies and regenerateth him.

Q. What do you mean by Confirmation?

A. We mean a solemn admittance upon examination and prayer, to a capacity of
receiving the holy Sacrament of the Lords Supper, of good use in the Primitive
Church Vid. Tert. de Bapt. Conc. Auris. Can. 1. Conc. Carth. Can. 6. Clemens
Alex. paed.
, Heb 6.2.

Q. Why do you pray for all men?

A. Because the Apostle enjoyneth that Prayers and Supplications be made for
all men, as especially for those that are in authority.

Q. Why do you pray against sudden death?

A. Because we would be prepared to meet the Lord at his coming.

Q. Why is the Ring given in marriage.

A. To signify,

1. The perfection and continuation of love.

2. The trust reposed in the Wife, who has the Ring that seals up all
treasures.

Q. What do you mean by those words in Matrimony, With my body I thee Worship?

A. We mean, that after our Marriage our bodies are not our own, but our Wives;
Worship being but an old English word for Honor.

Q. What does the Priest mean when he says, I absolve thee, in the Visitation
of the sick?

A. He means,

1. That he prays to God to absolve him in these words, Almighty God have
mercy on you.

2. That he declares Gods pardon.

3. That he declares it by virtue of his Office and Commission, Whose sins you
remit, they are remitted unto them.

Q. How do we say in the Office for burial, That we commit the dead body to the
ground, in sure and certain hope of the resurrection to eternal life?

A. We say so, not so much in reference to the persons state that is buried, as
to our own Fa th; not in sure hope of his resurrection, but in certain hope of
the resurrection.

Q. How often, and where is the Commination to be read?

A. It is to be read four times a year, viz. 1. Ashwednesday, 2. One of the
three Sundays before Easter, 3. One of the two Sundays next before Pentecost,
and one of the two Sundays next before Christmas; and that in the Pulpit,
because there was no Reading-Pew known until anno 1603.

Q. What is meant in the Common prayer by the word Curate, when the whole
Clergy is divided into these two parts, Bishops and Curates?

A. By Curate, is meant only they that have cure of souls.

Q. What is the use of Music in a Church?

A. Agreeably to the Jewish and Christian customs, which were neither typical
nor sinful, we use Music, to stir up our hearts to worship and praise God with
the same holy fervor the Primitive Christians did; it being lawful for us to
make use of any creature to advance the worship and honor of God.

See Bishop Nicholson's Defense of the Church-Liturgie; Hooker's Eccles. Pol.
l. 5. Sparrows Rationale; Dr. Hammond, Dr. Tailor, Dr. Heylin, Archbishop
Whitgift, Dr. Burges, Bishop Morton.

SUNDAY LII. A brief account of all the Fasts and Festivals observed by the
Church of England throughout the year.
Q. YOu have given a fair account of some things in the Common Prayer; can you
tell me one thing more, why we keep Fasts and Festivals?

A. Our two great duties being to pray to, and praise God, we fit our selves by
Fasts and Humiliations for the one, and by Festival Solemnities for the other.

Q. But why do we observe days not enjoined in Gods Word?

A. If constant service of God, and watchfulness over our selves is enjoined,
the particular time is left to our liberty: sometimes we must observe Fasts, as
mindful of our sins; sometimes we must keep Festivals, as mindful of Gods
mercies: and if at any time, at what time better then on that appointed by
Public Authority? Besides, we find Gods people observing, Esth. 9.21. our
Savior keeping days not enjoined in Gods Word; and See Chrysostom. Hom. 66. ad
Pop. Antioch. Eusebius. Eccles. l. 3. c. 15. Council. Carthag. 3. c. 47. Aug. Ep.
118. ad. Jan.
all Christians, yea, Aug. Confess. Art. 14. Helvet. c. 24. Bohem. c. 15.
all Protestants following them.

Q. Why do you observe forty days Fast before Easter?

A. To prepare us by Humiliation, we fast; in imitation of the Primitive Unum
quadragesima. Hier. Epist. ad Lect. 54. ad Lucen. Orig. l. 5. c. 26. Tert. de
resur. c. 6. Council. Laod. Can. 49, 50, 51, 52. Basil orat. de jejun. and
Tertul. ibid. See Ignat. ad Philip. Orig. Levit. Hom. 5.
times, we fast forty days; to preserve the stock of the Nation, we fast from
flesh.

Q. Why is the first day of Lent called Ashwednesday?

A. From the Penitents humbling themselves in Sackcloth and Ashes wherewith
they were sprinkled.

Q. Can you give an account of every solemn day observed in our Church?

A. Yes: we can say they are the Ornaments of Religion, the Witnesses of
ancient truth, Motives to serious Devotion, Lasting Records on earth, and
shadows of everlasting felicity in heaven. Commemorations of Mercies, are
Duties we are obliged to at all times: but what we are to do always, we do
never; therefore have we peculiar times allotted by our Church.

Q. What is the first Festival? and why kept?

A. It Is the Advent Sundays; wherewith the Church begins her year, and prepares
for Christ's fourfold coming: 1. In the flesh, by Incarnation. 2. In his
Ministry, by Instruction. 3. In his Spirit, by Inspiration. 4. In Judgment,
for determination.


The four Duties we learn by the Collects, Epistles and Gospels, is Christ's
coming to the world.

Q. What is the next?

A. Christmas, or Christ born on the 25 of December, according to most
Computations, we keep as the day of Christ's Nativity, in the 42 of Augustus
Caesar's Reign; whereon we meditate on his Incarnation, and the benefits
thereby accruing.

Q. Which is the third?

A. St. Stephens day; wherein we worship not the man, but imitate his Patience,
Faith and Charity, in suffering the first Martyrdom the next day after his
Savior was born to suffer for him, Act. 7.58, 59, 60, 72.

Qu. Which is the fourth?

A. St. John Evangelist, that beloved Disciples day, the brother of James the
great; whose happiness in enjoying Christ's love as a Disciple, and faithfulness
in preaching love as an Apostle, we commemorate on this day, and honor him in
his Epistles as an Apostle, in his Gospel as an Evangelist, in the Revelations
as a Prophet: in Vid. Eusebius. Ann. Chr. 101.
his faith and suffering at Pathmos, where he was banished by Trajan, a
Confessor: in his care in constituting the Asian Bishops, a Metropolitan: in
his high style against Cerinthus, the Eagle; and in his abhorrency of the
Heretics company, an Angel: following his Doctrine, and imitating his love,
industry, resolution, faithfulness and piety, according to the Collect, the
Epistle, 1 John 1.1. to the end, and Gospel, Joh. 21 12. to the end.

Q. Which is the fifth?

A. Innocents day: St. Stephens day we honored a Martyr in will and deed; on
St. John's day a Martyr in will, but not in deed; now on Innocents day Martyrs
in deed but not in will; not those children in Bethlem that confessed Christ by
speaking, but by dying; whose innocence, humility, obedience and dependence we
are Epist. Rev. ^4.1, to the end. Gospel, Mat. 2.13, to 19.
taught to meditate by him who says, He that humbles himself as a little
child, the same shall be greatest in the kingdom of heaven.

Q. Which is the sixth?

A. The Circumcision, on Jan. 1. (called from the civil account of the year,
New-years-day) whereon we meditate on Christ's observing and fulfilling the Law
for us, especially that of Circumcision; The Collect, the Epist. Romans 4.
Gospel, Luke 2.
teaching us to circumcise the foreskin of our hearts, to make us new hearts,
and renew right spirits within us, whereby we may offer our selves unto God a
New-years-gift, which is our reasonable service.

Q Which is the seventh?

A. Epiphany; or, 1. The appearance of the Star to the Wisemen. 2. The
appearance of the Trinity at his Baptism. 3. His appearance in Cana, celebrated
by the Greek Church in commemoration of the Star that came from According to
Balaams Prophecy.
Jacob, and led the Magi, the first fruits of the Gentiles, from the East to
the East; whence we pray toward the East; for which we Gentiles commemorate
it, and learn to come to Christ by the light of his Word, and offer to him the
three gifts of Prayer, Fasting, and Alms; returning a new way, that is, by
newness of life, to our heavenly Country.

Q. The eighth?

A. Ashwednesday, which is called the head of Lent, and with the four days
following, was added to supply the three Sundays of Lent, whereon we must not
fast; whereon we are taught mortification of body and soul, which is one half
of our Christianity, by Fasting and Prayer, Sacrifices wherewith God is
well-pleased.

Q. The ninth?

A. Palm Sunday, the beginning of the great and holy week; the day Christ's way
to Jerusalem was strewed with Palms: it is called Passion-Sunday too, whereon we
meditate on his patience and humility.

Q. The next?

A. 1. Maunday-Thursday, called so from Christ's washing the Disciples feet, as
our Kings do their poor men's.

2. Good-Fryday, or Christ's Passion, whereon we go with him to the Garden and
Cross, and meditate on his Sufferings, until we have learned his love, his
humility, his patience, his obedience.

Q. The eleventh?

A. Easter Day, from Oist in Saxon, signifying that though the time was a
controversy for 200 years between the East and West, yet the Festival was as
ancient as Christianity: the Christians meeting one another would say, (...),
He is risen.

Qu. The fourth Saints Festival?

A. Candlemas, either because on Candlemas-day we lay Candles away which we
used all the winter, or because of the lights used in procession in imitation
of the Virgins Lamps, (instituted by Justinian) or in allusion to the light
that enlightneth every man that comes into the world. Here are four Festivals
in one: 1. The Purification of Mary. 2. The Presentation of Christ. 3.
Candlemas. 4. St. Simeon. It is observed according to the Law, Lev. 12. within
40 days after the Nativity; and we meditate thereon how Christ observed all
righteousness; how he being presented the first fruits, we should present our
selves before God with Nic. Chron. Buchol. Chron. in Isaacson.
pure and clean minds. Mary died Anno Chr. 45.

Q. The next?

A. St. Matthias his day, who was chosen by Lot to be one of the twelve
Apostles in Judas his room, and to take his Bishopric. And as his name
signifies a Son of Labor, so he traveled the sandy Deserts of Africa, to
refresh them with the heavenly dew of saving truth, where he is stoned, and
then beheaded, anno 51. On this day we learn the calling of Bishops and
Ministers, and pray against all false Teachers, that the Church may be ordered
and guided by faithful and true Pastors.

Q. Why do you keep Lady Day?

A. In memory of the Annunciation to the blessed Virgin by the Angel Gabriel,
Luk 1.26. not observed formerly in Lent, wherein it was lawful to observe no
Festival; whereon we meditate the Angels service to us, the Virgins humility,
Gods love, and the glad tidings of great joy brought to all that are as the
Virgin, pure in heart.

Q. The next?

A. St. Mark, as Matthew, in allusion to Ezekials four beasts, has the face of
a man, describing Christ's humane Nature; St. Luke of a Calf, describing his
Priesthood; St. John of an Eagle, describing his Divinity: so St. Mark of a
Lion, writing his Kingdom. We learn, 1. Humility, by his mistake of our
Saviors Discourse of the bread from heaven, Joh. 6.67. 2. Caution, from his
weakness in leaving St. Paul. 3. Industry, from his service in being St. Peter's
Amanuensis. 4. Prudence, from his Episcopal Government at Alexandria. 5.
Constancy, from his death there, anno 63. and perseverance in the true Faith,
from his sound Doctrine.

Q. Go on.

A. May Day, (from Maia the Goddess of Flowers) was observed in honor of All
Saints, and is now in honor of Philip the Apostle in the Gospel, and the
Deacon in the Lesson, and James the brother of our Lord: from whose conjunction
we learn amity; from Philip the Apostles question, Joh. 14. we learn to search
till we know the Lord: from his pains in Scythia, Asia the less, Aethiopia,
patience and diligence: from his prayers in destroying the Phrygian Serpent,
how to overcome Satan: from his imprisonment, stoning and Crucifixion, anno 5
3/^. constancy and immoveablenss. From Philip the Deacon, the Patron of Spain,
going to the South, and his conversion, we are taught the blessing of
obedience: his opening and applying the Scripture, the Ministers and Peoples
duty; and from his crucifixion in Hierapolis, the strength of his faith. From
St. James his humility, though a brother of the Lord, moderation in our
Enjoyments: from his Epistle, good works: from his carriage when first Bishop
of Jerusalem, and called James the Just, uprightness: from his praying till his
knees were as hard as a Camels, and his forehead by prostration as a stone,
Devotion constant and fervent: from his death from the pinnacle of the temple,
where he was desired to preach, not to trust the multitude, who advance a man
one day, and ruin him the next.

Q. The next Festival?

A. It is St. Barnabas, not one of the Apostles or first Bishops, yet one of
the 70 Disciples or Ministers, on whose day we meditate on the gifts of God
given him and us, and pray for grace to use them: from whose solemn call, Act.
13.27. we learn the sacredness of the Ministry: from whose Name, the son of
Prophecy, we gather the gifts necessary for it: from whose mildness in Marks
case, moderation: from his pains, diligence; and from his Martyrdom,
perseverance. This is the longest day in the year.

Q. The next?

A. St. John Baptist, the Morning Star to the Son of Righteousness, the
forerunner of our Savior, in whom are those graces united that are scattered
in others: in his life a miracle, in his death a Martyr; from whose preaching
we learn repentance, as from his proofs faithfulness: from his Diet and
Apparel, plainness and temperance; from his life and death, constancy,
resolution and patience.

Q. Go on.

A. St. Peter's day we observe, and from his weakness learn humility; from his
recovery, repentance; from his preaching, faith and saving knowledge: from his
opposition to Simon Magus at Rome, magnanimity: from his Sermons in Asia, the
Doctrine according to godliness: from his dream and sheet, obedience and
charity: from his seven years Episcopal carriage at Antioch, prudence; and from
his crucifixion with his head downwards, anno 67. under Nero, faith and grace:
from the command of Christ to him, the Ministers duty, and the peoples care.
This day was anciently dedicated to Paul and Peter, Fellow Laborers in Christ's
Vineyard.

Q. Proceed to the next Festival?

A. The next is St. James the great, son of Zebedee; great, 1. in age, 2. in
familiarity with Christ at his transfiguration, 3. in courage, in reproving
Herod's sin: the first Martyr of the twelve Apostles; whose self-denial we
learn, in that he was one of the first that left all, and followed Christ;
whose resolution, when beheaded by Herod Agrippa we learn.

Q. Why do we observe St. Bartholomews tide?

A. In honor of St. Bartholomew the Apostle, a Noble Person, ( Bartolmy the
son of Ptolomy) but humble, whose travels in Lycaonia, India, Armenia, where he
was first crucified, and then preaching on the Cross, beheaded and flaid, Anno
51. in memory of which double Martyrdom, two days are celebrated, viz. the 24
and 25 of August, which teach us the true Doctrine and life of a Christian.

Q The next?

A. St. Matthew the Publican, or Excise-man, who left all and followed Christ;
teaching the worst sinners not to despair of mercy, if they delay not their
repentance. He preached to the Aethiopians, and was beheaded by them anno 71.
leaving us an example of self-denial. The On this day, the Nativity, the
Clergy were bound to be at home.
next day says Augustine after the first Full Moon following the Vernal
Aequinox, and the day of first fruits among the Jews; the day which the Lord
has made; whereon we meditate the foundation of our faith, the resurrection of
our Savior, till we feel the power of his resurrection; and dying to sin, live
again unto holiness, and comfort our selves with the holy Doctrine of this day.

Q. The next solemnity?

A. 1. (...), Aug. C. D. l. 228.
The Easter Monday and Tuesday, which were added to celebrate the great
Sacraments at this time; and indeed all the time between Easter and Whitsontide
was formerly sacred.

2. Low-Sunday, called so in respect of Easter the high day; and Whit-Sunday,
from the baptizeds white garments.

Q. The thirteenth?

A. The fifth Sunday after Easter, called Rogation Cent. Magd. cent. 5. fol.
693. and 741.
Sunday, from the three Rogation-days before Ascention-day, observed at first
(by Mammercus Bishop of Vienna's Order) upon the occasion of an Earthquake, and
continued by Q. Eliz. upon the account of the fruits of the earth at that time
subject to casualties, in Prayer, Fasts, Litanies, Supplications.

Q. Go on.

A. Holy-Thursday, or Ascention-day, the fourth Dominical day that Aug.
Epistol. c. 18. Tertul.
as St. Augustine says, was observed all over the world, (though not distinct,
in the solemnity of the seven holy weeks between Easter and Whitsontide)
whereon we meditate on our Saviors and our own exaltation, that we may set our
affections on things above.

Qu. Proceed.

A. Whit-Sunday, or the descent of the Holy Ghost, the third Person in the
Trinity, by whom all things are sanctified, called

1. Whit-sunday, from the glorious light that then Or from them who were then
baptized in white, and called Illuminates.
enlightened; or Huict Sunday, that is, the eighth from Easter.

2. Pentecost, i. e. the fiftieth day after Easter, and the day whereon the Law
was delivered to the Jews, as the Spirit was given to the Christians; whose
saving graces, works and comforts, we this day meditate, and pray, O God make
clean our hearts within us, and take not thy holy Spirit from us.

Q. Why do you observe the Monday and Tuesday after Whitsontide?

A. We observe them not as Festivals, but as Ember-fasts, in order to the
ordination on Trinity-sudnay. (They fasted and prayed, and then laid hands on
them.) Athan. Apol. de fuga sua.

Q. The sixteenth solemnity?

A. Trinity-Sunday; whereon we meditate the mystery of three Persons, Father,
Son, and holy Ghost, in one God, and learn to give Glory to the Father, and to
the Son, and to the holy Ghost: As it was in the beginning, is now, and ever
shall be, world without end. Amen.

Q. I pray when, why, and how are the Ember-weeks observed?

A. 1. They are observed four times a year, 1. Wednesday, Friday and Saturday
before Dec. 13. or St. Lukes day: 2. The same days after the first Sunday in
Lent: 3. The same days before Pentecost: 4. The same days following September
14.

2. They are called Ember, from the Ashes then poured upon the head, and Cake
eaten in the evening baked under the Embers, (and jejunium 4 temporum) or from
Embert, Noble Brother.

3. They are kept, 1. As the first fruits of each quarter: 2. As times of
Prayer, 1. for a blessing upon the fruits of the earth, then either sown,
sprung up, ripening, or gathering; 2. or against the distempers incident to
that season: 3. As times of solemn Devotion, for a blessing upon the Churches
sacred Ordination, which were ever solemnized the next Lords day following each
of these; and which ought, as by Christ and his Apostles, so ever by their
Successors and Disciples to be performed with fasting and prayer.

Q. How come we to observe the first day of the week in stead of the seventh?
the Sunday in stead of the sabbath?

A. The Son of man, who is Lord of the Sabbath, with his Disciples observed the
first day of the week, in commemoration of his redemption of the World, as his
Father did the seventh, in memory of his creation of it; and the Church keeps
it after his example: he met his Disciples, they met one another; and the
Christian Church always assembled on that day.

Q. The Saints Festival?

A. The first is St. Andrews, the Patron of Scotland, who came first to Christ;
whose day is observed either immediately before or after Advent-Sunday, because
he brought the first news of our Saviors coming, Joh. 1.38, 40. whom he
preached in Scythia and Aethiopia, and along the Euxine Sea, until he was
crucified in Achaia under Vespasian: whose faith in immediate closing with
Christ, love in teaching his brethren, and perseverance intimated by his Name
Andrew, i. e. Strong, in continuing to the end, we this day meditate and
imitate.

Q Proceed.

A. The next is St. Thomas, whose doubt intimates our frailty, as his
confession strengthens our faith: on whose day we meditate on his confession,
My Lord and my God; we imitate his faithfulness, in preaching the Gospel to the
East Indies, where he died anno Christ. 25. and learn his faith and patience.

Q. Go on.

A. After this we celebrate St. Paul's strange Conversion, the Apostle of us
Gentiles: learning the sinfulness of Nature in him when Saul, and the strength
of Grace when Paul; observing a Christian and a Ministers faithfulness, in
being in labor more abundant then they all; and blessing God for his excellent
Epistles, and his pains in preaching the Gospel in Asia and Greece.

Q. Why do we observe the Feast of St. Michael the Archangel?

A. As a Memorial of our comfort in the Angels care of us, and our duty in
imitating them: whereon we contemplate their natures, meditate on the good they
do us, and all mankind, in soul and body: we consider their tuition of us, we
observe their obedience and service.

Q. Why All Saints day?

A. To celebrate the Communion of Saints in heaven and on earth, joined to
Christ by faith, and to one another by love; and communicating in each others
joy and sorrow, and following each others good example in all virtuous and
godly living, until we all come to the measure of the fullness of Christ.

Q. Have you any more?

A. Yes: 1. St. Lukes-day, the beloved Physician of soul and body, who cured
our infidelity by publishing the Gospel as Christ's Amanuensis; and strengthened
our Faith by writing the Acts as St. Paul's Register, wherein he died in
Bithynia, now called Anatolia, anno 74. on whose day we pray God to heal our
souls with his wholesome Doctrine.

2. St. Simon and Iudes day, two brethren in Nature and Grace, called by Christ
to promote Unanimity, and commemorated by us to promote Love. St. Jude's
Catholic Epistle we read to amend our lives: his sincere and plain dealing we
observe, to direct our steps: his diligence to promote the common salvation by
writing and traveling, we consider, to follow him: his refusal of King Abyarus
his gifts, because he had left his own goods for Christ, and would take
another for himself, we lay to heart, to teach us moderation in the use of
this world: his death by the Priests of that Country, we lament, but learn by
it patience and faith. St. Simon the Canaanites Zeal, we admire and imitate:
his travels to Egypt, Libya, Persia, Cyrene, and some say to Britain, we thank
God for: his Crucifixion when second Bishop of Jerusalem, anno 120, we
Register; Learning with him, not to look on those things which are seen, which
are temporal; but on those things which are not seen, which are eternal.

Q. Why do we honor these Saints, and not Christ?

A. As Aristotle says, If Timotheus had not been, we had not had so much sweet
Music; but if Phryny, which was his Master, had not been, we had not had
Timotheus: so if these Saints had not been, we had wanted good examples; but if
our Savior had not been, we had not had these Saints. We honor him in them,
and them in him.

Q. Why do we fast the Eves of the Holy Days?

A. To prepare our selves for the Solemnities of them.

Qu. Why do you not fast on all Holy-day-Eves?

A. Not on the Circumcision, because it is an Octave, and the Octaves never had
their Vigils: not on the Epiphany, because it was a Fast Day it self: not on
St. Mark, St. Philip and Jacobs Eves, because there are no Fasts between Easter
and Whitsontide: not St. Michaels, because the Angels entered not to their Joys
through sufferings: not on St. Lukes, because there was a solemn Festival
observed in our Church at the Eve of it.

FOr further Enlargement on the Church-Catechism, see Bishop Nicholsons
Catechism and Creed, full, clear, and solid: Bishop Andrews Catechistical
Doctrine, copious and learned: Crooks Guide, succinct and plain: Dr. Hammonds
Catechism, useful and practical: Perkins, honest and satisfactory: Rogers,
sound and grave; and all common places, whereof Gerard is the learned and
complete sum.

On the Creed. DOctor Pearson is solid, learned and practical: Dr. Heylin is
learned and copious: Dr. Jackson is acute and solid: Dr. Gill is rational:
Boys is quick and Canonical: Bishop Babington is devout and honest: Adams is
ingenious: Perkins and Zanchy, Nicholson and Cartwright, are all.

On the Lords Prayer. BIshop Andrews and Doctor Gouge are complete: Dr. King
and Sir Richard Baker are acute and devout: Perkins, Boys and Babington, as
upon the Creed.

On the Decalogue. BIshop Andrews and Perkins complete: Dod, Elton, Babington,
plain and pious, and Weems learned.

On the Sacraments. BLake on the Sacraments, subtle; Rogers, Orthodox; Gerard,
complete; Bishop Morton of the Lords Supper, learnedly and fully; Bishop
Reynolds and Dr. Gouge, satisfactorily; Mr. Cudworth and Mr. Vines, learnedly;
Bishop Tailor and Mr. Dike, practically.

On the Church-Customes. SEe Dr. Hammonds Resolution of six Queries, his
Dissertation and Quarto Discourses; Dr. Tailors Polemicals; Mr. Hookers Eccles.
Pol. Bishop Gaudens (...), and Hieraspistes; Mr. L'estrange's Alliance of
Liturgies; Archbishop Whitgift against Cartwright; Bishop Morton, Dr. Burges,
Mr. Sparrow, Bishop Downham, etc.

A Pattern of Daily Devotion, drawn by the Life of the most Reverend and Pious
Son and Father of this Church.
INstead of Prayers, which use to be at the end of Books of this nature, we
have thought fit to set before you the Pattern of daily Devotion, out of the
Life of the most reverend and eminent person that ever this Church bred:
whereby all men may see how they may have and keep communion with God in the
use of the wholesome Prayers and Directions of the Church of England; and withal,
how they may keep up their souls in a suitable holy frame at those Prayers,
which may honor God, comfort them, adorn our Religion, convince gainsayers,
and keep a happy correspondence between us and heaven.

1. As soon as you awake, be sure you have some choice Psalms and Portions of
Scripture to pitch your first thoughts upon, together with some meditation of
sleep, of the night, Gods preservation toward you: to which end you should
have the seven penitential Psalms; and indeed all the Psalms, as they had them
in the Primitive Church, by heart: and you should enlarge your meditations on
the Lords most comprehensive Prayer, observing each word, with the duties and
comforts contained in them.

2. Suffer no worldly business to possess your thoughts, till you have
considered the temper of your soul within; your opportunities of doing good,
and your temptations to evil from without: your carriage for the time past, and
your resolution for the time to come; and wrapped up those thoughts in some
Scripture-sentences, Ejaculations and Meditations: and then drawing some holy
Considerations from every thing you do, and keeping your soul in a constant
course of contemplation, till in an humble sense of your sin against, and
dependence upon God, you kneel and say, O holy, blessed, and glorious Trinity,
three persons and one God, have mercy upon me a miserable sinner. Lord, I know
not what to pray for as I ought: O let thy Spirit help my infirmity, and enable
me to offer up a spiritual sacrifice to thee by Jesus Christ. And then by the
help of that Spirit, raise up your soul to go along with the Confession at the
beginning of the Common Prayer, and that at the Communion; which you may read,
and enlarge your heart upon, according to your own condition, running over
particulars in your thoughts, while you read generals.

3. Having opened your heart to God, if you can, go to Church, or any other
place where you may receive the Absolution from the Minister, who has power to
declare the will of God concerning poor penitent sinners; so as whose sins he
declares pardoned upon their repentance and faith, they are pardoned; and whose
sins he declares not pardoned upon their impenitence and unbelief, they are not
pardoned. Hear, if you can, the Commissioned Ambassador of God, opening his
good will concerning a penitent sinner. If that cannot be, look upon the three
gracious Absolutions, 1. in the beginning of the Common Prayer, the 2. at the
Communion, the 3. at the Visitation of the sick, and apply them to your broken
heart, and believing soul, and then go on in the Morning-prayer, the Psalms and
Lessons of the day, warming your heart by the one, and instructing it by the
other; being sure always to apply every period as near as you can to your own
occasions, and enlarge upon every Petition of the Prayers, and upon every Verse
of the Psalms in your mind, and reducing your thoughts upon them by writing to
a method, which you may make use of to quicken you at any time. After the
Morning-prayer, you may use some Collects, either for those special graces you
want, or against the special sins you are sensible of, or for the special
mercies you have received, or for others, superiors, your friends, or enemies;
and to that end he reduces the Collects to a method, that you may choose them
out for your own occasion, concluding always with that, Prevent us, O Lord, in
all our doings, etc.

4. When he is ready, he has a peculiar meditation for every accident that
occurs to him; and there can be no opportunity of hearing, praying, or
discoursing, that he waves or neglects. At the beginning and end of every
affair that is likely to take up his thoughts, he armeth his soul by a suitable
reflection and Ejaculation, ordinary or extraordinary, as the nature of the
occurrence is.

5. Before Dinner, wherever he is, he retires for half an hour to reading,
meditation and prayer.

6. At Dinner he has a Chapter read, and discoursed of before him by as able
men as any are in the Land, such as use his Table.

7. He has his Diary for every remarkable particular that falls in word or
action from himself or others.

8. After the hour he allots to discourse, and the four hours he allows
business, wherein he keeps up his private and pious considerations, agreeable
to events, he retires to the evening Office, which he performs as he did the
morning, adding an examination of his Diary of that days remarque.

9 As he examineth the account of every day at the close of it, so of every
week, every month, and every year at the end of them.

10. The benefit he found by this course of devotion, was, That there happened
nothing within or without him for which he was not prepared by an heavenly
remedy.

11. Repentance being the great business of his life, upon all Fast-days,
either public, directed by the Church, or private, set apart by himself, 1. He
surveyed his life, and heart, noting down the particulars of each, with all
circumstances. 2. He wrought himself to a due sense of his vile and dangerous
condition, until he was affected with a true and hearty sorrow for, and
established with a strong resolution against his sinful life or actions. 3.
Applying himself to God by faith in Christ, by supplication and prayer. 4.
Offering up himself entirely unto God, with a promise of new life by Gods
gracious assistance and Spirit. 5 Setting on those duties wherein he has been
most defective, and mortifying those sins to which most inclined. 6. Always
making and keeping his peace with his own heart, and with all men.

12. He chose out several Collects in ordinary, reserving to himself a liberty
in extraordinaries upon the seven hours of Prayer; as 1. at 3 a clock in the
morning; 2. at 6; 3. at 9; 4. at 2; 5. at 3 in the afternoon; 6. at 6; 7 at 9,
or bedtime.

13. He has a large Volume of experimental Observations upon the Lyturgie, the
Bible, the Sacraments; together with the public Occurrences: whch teaches an
observing and steady Soul to reduce every thing it reads, sees or hears,
to its own purpose and occasions.

14. The last things, the Theological graces, the Cardinal Virtues, the Sins
that are nearest that against the holy Ghost, the seven deadly sins, the
sixteen fruits of the Spirit, the twenty Policies of Satan, the ten
Commandments, the twelve Articles of our Faith, have taken up so much of his
time, that he has six Volumes of his own observations upon them. Go thou and
do likewise, that thou may attain his honor and respect, his virtues and
exactness, his peace with God and his own conscience and his Name, which shall
be had in everlasting remembrance.

FINIS.

