ENGLANDS present Case stated, IN A further Remonstrance of many thousands of
the Citizens, Householders, Freemen and Apprentizes of the City of LONDON,
agreeing with the sense of the major part of the People of this NATION:

^artly occasioned by the late Proclamation for the convening of a Parliament
(by the arbitrary Will and power of Charles Lord Fleetwood, Bulstrod Lord
Whitlock Desborough, and some others, of the Military Officers at Wallingford
House and elsewhere, tending to the utter subversion of the Rights, Liberties
and Privileges of Parliaments, Governments, Laws, Freedoms and Proprieties of
the Free people of the Nation) Against which they do protest.

Wherein the arbitrary unparalled proceedings of the Army and their
adherents, since 1641. to this time, their dissolving of all Parliament Powers
and Governments, to perpetuate themselves, are discussed and discovered.

With several serious Proposals and Expedients for the speedy composure of all
Interests and Differences, settling the Nation in Peace and Unity upon a
righteous Foundation, to prevent the spilling of more English Blood.

As also a Declaration to live and die with the Generals by authority of
Parliament and the City of London, in Defense of the Parliament, Laws, City and
Nations, and the Rights, Privileges, Liberties, Freedoms and Proprieties of
the free People against all persons whatsoever that shall Declare or Act
against the same, or exercise an arbitrary illegal Power in imprisoning or
levying of Taxes, Excise, Custom, Free Quarter, or otherwise without authority
of Parliament.

Printed Anno Domini, 1659.

ENGLANDS Present Case Stated.
CHARLES late King of England in the Year 1640. did summon a Parliament
consistting of two Houses, of Lords and Commons to do and consent to those
things which should happen to be ordained by Common consent of the King, Lords,
and Commons, by Common Council of the Realm, concerning certain arduous and
urgent affairs touching the Defense, State, Crowns, of the King and his
Kingdom, and of the Church of England, To bear faith and true Allegiance to
the King, his Heirs, and Successors, and him and them to defend with all rights
and jurisdictions annexed and belonging to the Imperial Crown of England,
against all attempts and conspiracies whatsoever. Withal, which the Writs
themselves, Returns, Oaths, Protestation, League, Covenant, Declarations,
Votes and Remonstrances of both Houses of Parliament, submitted unto sworn, and
engaged to maintain by all the people of England, besides the Oaths of
Supremacy and Allegiance, do agree and solemnly bind them to the performance
thereof.

Who can absolve and nullifiie these Oaths by the Laws of God and man and how
well the same have even observed by the Army, the Authors of all our troubles,
(though many of them have been and continue great professors of, and pretenders
to Religion) is submitted to the consideration of the Nations; and whether the
Army who were the Authors and Promoters, and forcible Compellers of the
breaches thereof, have not committed heinous perjuries, and involved ye people
in a National sin not to be pardoned by the Laws of God and Man without cordial
contrition and actual satisfaction and reparation, with amendment of their
lives and conversations for the time to come.

King Charles That commoned the said Parliament died a violent death by the
hands of his own subjects and servants the Army, as an Offender: some of them
declaring against his office, some against his misgovernment, and promising
Reformation in Church and State, wherein we judge the Army the Active, and the
Parliament the Passive power who were forced to yield unto and comply with them
therein.

Whether those that ruled since under the Army were not guilty of far more
heinous sins and trangressions then these for which they impeached their KING.

Whether they have not since set up a single Person, who with his adherents
were guilty of more arbitrarines and tyranny, then the virulency of their Pens
and malice of their Tongues could impeach their lawful Sovereign.

What Reformation have been since wrought in Church and State as was promised
to the Nations.

Or rather are not the Nations Impoverished by the Ambition, pride and
Covetousness, of those that si^ce Usurped the Supreme power having consumed
many Millions of Money besides the spilling the Blood of so many thousands
Christian English Freemen, the Arbitrary and wrongful imprisonment of their
persons, Imbezelling and Robbing them of their Goods, the Destruction of the
Trade, Honor, and Interest of the Nations, both at home and abroad, and all
these evils wrought by an Apostatized, Ambitious, Deceitful, overruling part
of the Army.

5. Whether by the Death of the late King Charles the said Parliament (which
were called by his writ to consult and advise with him, being the head and one
of the three Estates which make a Parliament) were ipso facto dissolved. And
whether after his death they had any power to sit or make Laws which require
the royal consent of the King, for if the head be cut off, how can the Body
live or act, and with whom could they treat, consult, or advise?

6. If so, What power Oliver Cromwell or Richard his Son and their awherents
(being common Subjects of the Nation) had to call Parliaments or make Laws,
since neither of them did pretend Title to the Crown; and therefore may not
bear the favorable style of Usurpers or Kings de factor. But rather ought to
bear the names of unparallelled-unpardonable Traitors meriting exemplary
condign punishment de jure, and therefore of what validity are their Acts and
Ordinances.

7. What legal power has Charles Fleetwood, John Lambert, or Bulstrode
Whitlock, Desborough, or any others of their confederacy to call a Parliament.

8, If they call a Parliament as soldiers, who will obey them, or how may they
be submitted unto without giving up the rights, liberties, and privileges, and
birthrights of the people of the three Nations to a few inconsiderable persons
in Arms; against whom General Monck, Admiral Lawson, the City of London and
as well the two Houses of parliament sitting in 1640. as the remainder of the
parliament that last sat do protest against and declare them Rebels and
Traitors by the Laws of the Nation, and every one of the said great Bodies,
remaining Authorities and powers, appear more considerable and have greater
right therein, in the judgment and opinion of the Major part of the people of
the three Nations, and greater estates and fortunes to answer for their actions
then these few persons that assume to themselves this Regal Magisterial and
Legislative power.

9. Consider the ill consequence of the Nations condiscention and submission to
such a Call, since it proceeds from a party or faction in an Army who have been
the instruments to put their Lawful King to Death; Subverted, Dissolved, and
interrupted all that boar the name of Parliaments ever since they left their
own Call, and whereunto they have submitted and received their Commissions from
them, and in the face of the Nations promised to yieldobedience unto them; and
all this evil carried on to perpetuate themselves and posterity in an Arbitrary
Military tyrannical power over our lives, persons, and estates, under the many
specious false pretenses of Reformation, Religion, Freedom, Liberty of
conscience, securing our civil and spiritual rights, which they every day
destroy and deprive us of, who are now necessitated to call a Parliament for
the safety of themselves, or rather nine field Officers, against their own
wills and dispositions to amuse and silence the Nation, and hold the hands of
the people from executing Gods wrath and vengeance on them until they arm and
strengthen themselves with the basest and most sordid sort of the people, in
hops of the plunder of the City and Nation; persons destructive to all
Governments, Civil societies, Rights and proprieties, and when they have
fortified themselves with these miscreants and hirelings they will according to
their wonted practice either dissolve this parliament now intended to be
convened, (if they cannot by their factious partial Sheriffs Swordmen and
loose adherents form them according to their own unlymitted, unsettled wills and
pleasures*) or otherwise seclude all those that are not for their profit and
interest, by color of their pocket, dormant, exceptions, fundamentals,
restrictions, and qualifications already prepared and to be provided for ye
purpose notwithstanding their sugered pretense of a Free Parliament, never by
them i^te^ded, being a constitution (really astablished) far more destructive
to them then the last parliament, whose readmission they fear, well knowing
their guilt, and that the Parliament know also how well they keep their Oaths,
Faith, and promises according to that old verse Nulla fides pietasque vi^is qui
castra sequntur. And those that shall have leave to sit shall serve only for
these purposes, viz.

1 To pase an act of Indemnity for all their former evil doings, and breaches
of faith and trust, and for what ever more Villainies shall be committed by
them, or their Party for the time to come, and to have a standing perpetual
Committee, for that purpose.

2 To Vote this Part of the Army that call them, the everlasting Army, to hold
and continue, these several Mllitary commands now assumed by themselves, and
given to one another during their lives, and to intail the same with a
Continuando to posterity, being one of their Ungratious, Trayteerous, Shameless
Fundamentals.

3 To lay heavy unsupportable Taxes and Impositions on the poor afflicted,
oppressed thread bare Nation, now lying under that unsufferable burden of free
quarter, against all Law and Conscience, being one of the great Crimes
wherewith they charged the late King, and the Earl of Strafford and others,
and took away their Lives on pretense of being guilty thereof; and for which
these Arminians, Anabaptistarians, and wicked Traitors ought to die the common
death of Traitors, Thieves and Murderers by the Laws of the Nation.

4. To take away Tyths, Ministers and Ministry, with the Universities, and to
bring the Tyths, Church-Revenues, Colledge-pensions, and all Charitable Gifts
into a public Treasury for the maintenance of these Legislators, whilst the
Learned Ministers of the Nation go begging; and in their stead to appoint a few
Mechanic ignorant Emissaries to preach up the Army Doctrines and Interests
after the rate of 20 l. per annum, as they have already practiced in Wales, and
other remote parts of the Nation.

5. To take away the Law, Professors and profession thereof, and sequester all
the rich Offices and places belonging to Courts of Justice, ( being the
officers Freeholds) into their own hands, under pretense of regulation of the
Laws ( which they neither understand nor intend to obey) that the Nations may
be governed by their own arbitrary wills and pleasures, and nothing left to
secure Propriety, Interest, Privilege, Freedom or Liberty of the people. But
the Lord have mercy upon us.

6. To grant Liberty of Conscience to themselves and all of their own party and
no others; to violate all Laws, Oaths, Covenants, Vows, Promises,
Protestations, Declarations, and all that is called sacred; and to walk after
their own pride, lust and avarice: and to grant liberty to all others to labor
and work for them as their slaves and vassals, and to endure all manner of
ignominious reproaches, punishments, imprisonments, poverty and death it self;
for which the people shall be bound to prvy as the only remedy to rid them
from their unsufferable slavery and bondage.

10. It it map not be yet seasonable to ask Honcurable Person the L. Whitlock
by what Authority he does so highly adventure to call a Parliament, whether by
Authority of the Army Officers at Wallingford House, or by virtue of the Act,
of King, Lords, and Commons, of 16 Car. as Lord keepper of the great Seal of
England, and to consider the consequence thereof and the punishments
appertaining to any that shall counterfeit the great Seal and assume to
themselves so great an Authority, being as high a Treason as may be.

11. If by power of the Military Officers, then he is desired to consider who
gave them Commissions, and whether they that gave them their Commissions and
those from whom they derive their Authority, have not been twice interrupted,
kept out, and secluded by their dutiful servants, and how perilous it is for
his Lordship ( being an Eminent member of the Law) to endanger his own Person
and Estate, and the Liberties, Laws, and Privileges of the whole Nation, to
satisfy the Lusts, and boundless siekle wills of those Military Changlings, he
now seems to serve merely for self perservation and the Custody of the Seal.

12. If as Lord Keeper, he issues forth writs, then who Commissionated him,
sure the King did never empower him, and if he did his Commission determined
with his death, whereto he contributed; and we are sure be bare not own a
Commission from his Son.

13. If from the Parliament in 1648, 1653, and 1659. Then certainly either they
are a Parliament still or he is no Lord Keeper and why he should bury his
Masters and Fellow Members alive a reason is humble demanded: when as
Commissionated by the last Parliament, he had two equally trusted with him by
the names of Lords, Commissioners, and not Lord Keepers, viz. the Lord
Widdrington, and Lord Keeble who are both alike, And it is not amiss to put
his Lordship in remembrance, that Oliver Cromwell did since change these
Commissioners, and appointed the Lord Fines and the Lord Lisle, (President of
the High Court of Justice) and his Lordship was at last added to them Lord
keepers: And the last Parliament appointed the Lord Bradshaw, Lord Terrill, and
Lord Fountain, Lords, Keepers; and how the Lord Whitlock came by the Seal and
the single Office of Lord Keeper, is worthy the Inquiry. But how he comes to
issue forth Writs for a Parliament to be chosen and held the 24 of January next
deserves a greater Examination.

14. If by color of the Act of 16 Car. Then whether the three years time be
not lorg since elapsed since the first Dissolution of the last Parliament in
1648, or 1653, by the Death of the King: secluding, and interrupting the
remaining Members, and some persons deserve to be punished for not Issuing
forth Writs according to the said Act in so many years Elapsed.

15. Whether we are not far Short of the three years if the Act shall be
construed to commence from the dissolution of Oliver or Richards last
Parliaments, who at the passing of the said Act, had little hopes, or
probability to usurp the Regal Legislative Power, at least wise were not
intended by King Charles or his Parliament to be their Successors in the
Execution of the Legislative Power.

16. If a Parliament be called according to the Act of 16 Car. then no
exceptions or Provisions must be made nor any secluded or excluded from
discharging their Trusts in Parliament for being new Christened by the names of
Cavaliers, Delinquents, Boothonians, Episcoparians, Presbiterians Independents,
Anabapti^ts, Fift-monarchy-men, Quakers, etc. But it must be a Free Parliament
indeed and no person to be exempted, or expelled but for good and legal cause
by Judgment of his Fellow Sumoners, and not by a Council of Officers who can
hardly hope for pardon from such a Parliament.

17. We must not only by the said Act have a House of Commons, but also a House
of Lords, And the King in whose name the Writ must Run, and by his Authority
the Parliament called ought to come in to make it a Free and complete
Parliament, and how shall such a parliament be called without a King, and you
will say how shall the King (as the case now stands) be called without a
parliament, And so by consequence no Parliament no King, no King no free
Parliament, no Free parliament no Money, no Money no Army, and at last the
Legislative power by Extraordinary providence, may revert, and devolve it self
into the hands of the people the first Donors and legal owners thereof, to whom
of right it justly belongs, and from whom all the Legislative power
originally was and still ought to be derived.

1. For that the Lord Keepers and Commissioners of the Great Seal, who were by
the said Act of the 16. Car. to call triennial Parliaments did not issue forth
Writs for that purpose.

2. The Peers and Nobles did not call a Parliament according to that Act
whereby they highly violated the trust therein reposed.

3. The Sheriffs violated their trusts, who on Default of the persons
aforesaid, were to Summon the Freeholders and Burgesses to choose their
Representatives.

4. The people themselves by the said Act (on fail made by all the said
persons so entrusted) were to meet at a certain time therein prefixed to choose
their Representatives, which they have neglected; whereby the tenor and effect
of the said Act has not been observed and put in force; so that there have
been great neglects and failings in all parties and persons concerned and
entrusted by the said Act.

Therefore for the reconciling of all Parties, composing of all Differences,
Reformation of all Abuses, and what is amiss in Church and State, and
establishing a firm, lasting, and righteous Setlement, Peace, Unity and Amity
in the three Nations. It is humbly proposed as the best expedient to the
present exigencies of the Nation.
That the Parliament lately interrupted 13 October last, be invited, encouraged
and protected to Sit again, being de facto the last remaining authority of the
Nation, twice entrusted therewith, and the three Nations submitting thereunto
as the supreme authority, from whom all Commissions, Millitary and Civil, are
now derived, and all Writs issue by their act in the Name of the Keepers, etc.
and that they do call in their Fellow Members (secluded by the army) who have
not forfeited their places and freedoms (which we submit to the judgment of
Parliament) and issue forth Writs for the Election of Knights and Burgesses to
fill up all vacant places, whereby the Nations may be governed by their own
Representatives in a full and free Parliament whereunto all persons as well as
our selves will most readily submit and acquiesce in their Councels and
Determinations, which we desire may be effectually employed more particularly
for these further ends.

1. To establish a righteous Government and an equal Representative and future
Succession of parliaments, and a prefixed time appointed for the Dissolution of
this Parliament.

2. To setle, countenance, and protect a Godly, Learned and Orthodox Ministry
in the Nations, with provision for Liberty of Conscience to others of different
opinions and persuasions, and such restrictions as may also prevent the
disturbance of the Government in Church and State by abusing the liberty so
granted unto them.

3. To regulate the Laws of the Nation, whereby the same may be less chargeable
and dilatory to the people then heretofore they were exercised.

4. To secure our Lives, Liberties, Properties, Privileges, and immunities by
a confirmation of Magna Charta, and the petition of right and other Laws and
such other additional Laws to be made as shall be thought necessary to preserve
the Nations from Arbitrarious tyranny and oppression.

5. To revive our decayed trade and Navigation, and regain our lost credit,
Peace, Traffic, and interest with foreign Princes and States.

6. To indempnisie, and pardon all the Soldiers, and such and so many of their
Officers and others, for their many breaches of trusts, and high infringments
of the privileges of Parliament, and known Laws of the Nation, as may be
consistent with the future peace of the Nation, and the honor and security of
the Parliament against the like attempts for the future.

7. To take all possible speedy and effectual course for satisfying the Arrears
of the Army, other then such as shall be exempted from pardon, wherein we
submit our selves to their Wisdom, Justice, and Clemency, and that the
Nations hereafter may be Governed by the Civil power, by their own
Representatives, eased of their great burdens, and taxations, and freed from
the former oppression and slavery, the Nation groaned under, the Military and
Arbitrary unlimitted powers, lately exercised over them.

8. That the people of the Nation may be entrusted with their own Arms for the
public defense of the Nation, and the Army reduced to such a convenient number
as may be useful only for security of the peace of the Nation. And that the
Parliament would entrust in places of command, such persons only as are
obedient to authority and behave themselves conformable to the commands of the
Parliament, and that as much as in them lies, persons of unstable Fanatic
Spirits, Enemies to civil Governments and of itching dispositions, and
principles to change and overturn Governments may not be entrusted with the
Arms, Garrisons, Forts, and power of the Nations.

If these things be not speedily granted, and the Lord Whitlock, and such of
the Army (who countenance and employ him to call a Parliament by pretense of
the order of the Committee of Safety, (whose authority we utterly renounce)
shall persevere therein after the space of 48 Hours, from the publication
hereof,

1. We do hereby protest against their proceedings therein as arbitrarily,
unwarrantable, and traitorously, done without any color of Law, and legal
Authority, to Delude, Ensnare, and Inslave the free people of this Nation, with
false pretenses of a Free Parliament, with an absolute intention in the interim
to List and Arm the most Vile, Wicked, wretched, poor sordid Sectaries and
Vermines of prey in the Nation. 1. To Disarm us. 2. To Murder us. 3. To
possess themselves of our Estates, and Fortunes.

2. We Declare, in case the said Charles Fleetwood, Lord Whitlock and
Army Officers, or any other persons do continue in their evil purposes
aforesaid, That we shall not like Dogs bark at, or bite the stone, viz. (the
Redcoat) But look on the grand Officers Instruments and carriers on of these
Traiterous Designs against the Parliament and Nation; and post and publish
their names with their crimes and punishments to be inflicted on them, and
shall offer and pay 1000 l. sterling for the HEAD of every such grand Traitor
so to be proclaimed and published to any noble Hero that shall venture his life
to redeem his Country from slavery and bring in the same, with an assurance of
other Marks of Honor and Reward to all that shall contribute their assistance
therein, being a legal and warrantable practice when Traitors and Malefactors
are become so strong and hardy as to protect themselves by Force against the
Power of the ^^ws of the Nation wherein they live.

3. We declare against all persons whatsoever that shall presume to Tax, Levy,
Colle^^ (...), or cause to be Levied or gathered any T^xes, ^^^^^sitions
Customs, Excise, Sum or Sums of Money whatsoever by any pretense or to any use
whatsoever other then by Act and authority of Parliament, and likewise declare
against all persons that shall labor to impose free Quarter, on the free
people of the Nation without their own consents or the consent* of the
Representatives of the respective Ciries, Tow s, and Counties, of England, in
Parliament Assembled, And if any shall transgress herein, we shall deem them
Traitors by the Known Laws of the Nation, and by force resist them, and
apprehend their persons; whereby they may be proceeded against as Traitors, and
Rebels, According to the known Laws of the Nation. And we do invite and
encourage all the good people of the Nation, to join with us herein and not to
pay them any public or other moneys remaining in their hands, or give
obedience to any person or persons that shall require or Demand the same unles
by Authority of Parliament. And we shall with our lives, and fortunes join in
the protection and defense of each other against the offenders aforesaid, in
endeavoring the effecting of the matters and things herein before declared for.

4. We do further Declare, that we shall with our Lives and Fortunes join with
and assist the Generals by Authority of Parliament, particularly the Lord
Monck, Admiral Lawson, Sir Arthur Haslrick, Colonel Morley, Gol, Waulton,
Lieut. General Ludlow, Major General Overton, with the City of London and
Nation, in defense of the Parliament, City, and the Laws and Privileges
thereof, and the Rights, Privileges, Liberties, Freedoms and Proprieties of
the Free people of this Nation, against all persons whatsoever that shall
Declare or Act against the same.

FINIS.

