THE SECOND PART OF THE SVRVEY OF THE ARTICLES OF THE LATE REJECTED PEACE
WHEREIN THE INVALIDITIE AND NVLLITIE OF THE SAID PEACE IS PROVED, 1. By the
revocation of the Marquis of Ormonds Commission before any Peace was legally
concluded etc. 2. By the defect of sufficient Commission or authority on the
part of our Committee of the Treaty. 3. By the revocation thereof by the
Protestation of the principal part of the Body Politic of the Kingdom and
other Inhibitions. 4. By exceeding their Commission. 5. By deviating from the
rules established by assembly, by which they ought to regulat themselves,
namely, from the Oath of Association, Model of government, Acts of Assembly,
Grievances, Declarations, and Propositions made by the Kingdom to His
Majesty, etc. 6. By rejecting the Kings favors and graces. 7. By their
surreptitious and clancular concluding of a Peace contrary to their promise
made unto the Lord Nuncius. 8. By the Kingdoms non acceptance thereof; 9. By
their violation of the public faith of the kingdom past by Solemme Contract
unto the L. Nuncio 19 February 1645.

Whence the Justice of the Clergies Decree of Perjurie, and excommunication
against the Adherents to so impious and invalid a Peace, is evidently deduced.

By Walt. Enos Dublinian, Priest, D. of Divinity and treasurer of Ferns.

Viri faederis tui illuserunt tibi, inualuerunt aduersum te viri pacis tuae.

Abdiac. 1. Printed at Kilkenny, by permission of Superiors, and approbation of
Schoolmen in the year, 1646.

MANDATVM ILLVSTRISSIMI NVNCII ET CONGREGATIONIS ECCLESIASTICI VTRIVS QVE CLERI
REGNI HIBERNIAE.
NOs Ioannes Baptista Rinuccini, archiepiscopus and Princeps Firmanus apud
Hibernos Confoederatos Nuncius apostolicus extraordinarius, necnon uenerabilis
Congregatio utrius que Cleri Regni Hiberniae, uobis RR. PP, quorum nomina
inferius Scripta sunt, and cuilibet uestrum, facultatem facimus, and per
praesentes pariter mandamus, ut post diligentem perlectionem secundae partis
libelli, cui titulus est (a sur vey of the articles of the late rejected peace)
ab eximio Domino and Magistro Gualtero Enos S. T. Doctore de mandato nostro
compositi, censuram uestram and calculum pro qualitate and vtilitate operis
eidem apponatis, adeoque confirmetis and corroboretis, ut qui ante Autoris
argumenta de iniquitate reiectae pacis in prima part proposita comprobastis,
modo eiusdem argumenta in hac secunda part de inualiditate dictae pacis
proposita uicissim comprobetis, ut uel inde iustitia nostrorum decretorum
contra Authors eiusdem pacis orbi terrarum innotesceat. Datum Kill Kenniae 18.
January 1646.

Ioannes Baptista Archiepiscopus

THe touchstone of disouering an act to be invalid is the law: the Author
sincerly conferrs the treaty of peace with the Maxims of law, and finds the
same lawless, consequently inualid and not obliging. This survey ingenuouslie
traced over the iniquity of the peace, and plainly proves the inualiditie. his
work is learned, meritorious, and intended for our good, according lie I
approve it

FR. PATRICKE PLVNKET.

THis Second part of Doctor Enos his survey etc. diserues no less credit and
acceptance then was attributed to the first part by the not praeiudicating
opinion of

Tho. Roth. Deane and Vicar General of Ossory

I Am of the same opinion.

NICOLAVS TAILOR,

Having perused this second part of the Survey of the late rejected peace, I
think it to be noe less worthy of public view, then the first, it being a
plain discovery of the inualiditie thereof. It needs therefore noe other
show, to purchase a public welcome, then the name of its learned author walter
Enos Doctor of divinity. Ita censeo

IOANNES SHE THEOL.

IN obedience to the forsaid mandat we have with diligence read and perused
this second part of the forsaid Survey, wherein we find nothing dissonat to
faith or good manners, but very many things conduceing to the honor and saftie
of faith and Religion. wherefore, as in the first part we approved the Authors
arguments proueing the iniquity of the late rejected peace so we approve his
arguments produced in his second part to prove the inualiditie of the same
peace: and accordingly we censure it no less worthy, than necessary to be
exposed to public view. Dated at Kilkenny the 27. th of January. 1646.

Fr. Hugh Duigin Suprior of the Frs Preachers of Kilkeny

EX Commissione Supradicta accurate Legimus hanc secundam part^m in qua nihil
orthodoxa fidei dissonum reperitur, quin potius pro ea acertime certat. Hoc
opere, suo solito more, author animo calamoque pote^s, delirescentem alto puteo
veritatem extrahit: eaque in sua basi exposita opposita Commenta vsurpato
limine deturbat. Sic censemus in hoc Coonobio Sancti Francisci Kilkeniae
Kalendis February. 1646

Fr. Antonius MacGeogheganus. Fr. Paulus King S. T. Lector

WE do find that the learned and zealous author according to his grounds
and principles does well show and prove the inualiditie of the peace he treates
of.

William Saint Ledger

To the right honorable the Lords, Knights Citizens and Burgesses of the
Confederat Catholics of the Kingdom of Ireland assembled together at Kilkenny.
REnowned Catholics
A peace contained in. 30. Articles made ad published at Dublin. 29, Iulij
1646, being put under the consideration of the Venerable Congregation of the
Clergy at Waterford in August last, was found unsafe for Religion, contrie,
and the lives and liberties of the Confederat Catholics, the fortes and
government of this Kingdom being (by that peace) to come under an other power
and that of an adverse Religion. Some cried up this peace as a blessing from
God, and the period of fire, war, and desolation, and though it was reputed a
blessing, yet was an army a preparing to enforce it upon us: others, (who
looked nearer unto it) said it would prove fatal to Ireland and Religion, and
vnexpectedlie a great army (as it were of me^ risen out of the Earth) came from
the North to oppose it. While the Soldier had sword in hand to proscribe this
rotten peace, my Superiors put a pen in my hand, by way of survey to lay open
to the world the iniquity and inualiditie thereof. The first part of this
Survey [containing the iniquitie] I dedicated to the right Reverend Prelates and
Congregation: the second part (speaking the inualiditie of it) I address with
all humility and candor to the power and great wisdom of this assembly. I
will say with S. Paul; ueninon in 1. Cor. 2.
sublimitate sermonis aut Sapientiae: my language is low, my conceptions
plain, my thoughts the best to Religion and Contry. I doubt not, many
judgments will pass upon me: some will term me precipitant, others hott, and
others bitter; I can give to all the answer of S. Paul. si hominibus placerem,
Christi seruus non essem. Nor Gal. 1.
are my lines to feed men's humor, but with reasons to overcome their
understanding. I may be precipitant out of weakness of reason, and hot out of
frailty of nature. but bitter I am not out of malice. If the purgation prove
bitter, the Patient may not blame the nature of his Phisician, but the
malignant nature of his own disease. Renowned Catholics, Religion and Ireland
are under your hands, you have it in your power next God, to kill or save both.
I know, you all intend to make a peace; let it be a good one; I have removed a
block out of your way, I mean that unjust, inualid colored peace: vnio^ is
the only way to make a good peace, or a good war; union will save you, and
division will destroy you. My prayers shall ever be, ut pacis and non
dissentionis Deus may be ever with you.

I am your most humble servant Walter Enos.

Aduertisments to the Reader.
Firstnote, that the work is complete; though the pages 36. and 41. meet not
together, because the work was printed in several places. 2. the number of
ministers Coats mentioned page 12. n. 11, are but. 4. surplisses. 7. and so
many Robes for Doctors; they resolved to walk in station to possess our
Churches. 3. the Lawyer mentioned page 117. n. 76. is not learned Mr. Darcy,
but Mr. T. T. 4. If lay men should take upon them to Censure this work, which
has been approved by the Clergy, they are excommunicated in bulla caenae.
see Tolet. excom. 9. Trid. sess. 23. c. 23. de Reformat. totam did. 96. and.
11. q. 1. authent. vt Cleri proprios iudices conueniant. collat. 6. yet is it
left free to any man to refute (if he can) the arguments produced by the Author.

THE SECOND PART OF THE SVRVEY OF THE Articles of the late rejected Peace:
wherein the invaliditie and nullitie of the said Peace is evidently proved out
of many heads or causes.
1. IN the first part of this Survey we proved the injustice and iniquity of
the said Peace by notable observations on cach, or most of the Articles
included in the same peace. In this second part we further proceed to prove
also the invaliditie, and nullitie thereof out of those heads or causes, which
are expressed in the laws, and accepted as general Maxims among Divines and
Lawyers; to the end the Catholic Confederates may be rightly informed how
far they are exempted from any obligation to embrace such a Peace, in the
contriving whereof injustice accompanied with nullitie, had full and perfect
concurrence. As in other Contracts, so in Contracts past by mandate or
Commission, the nullitie and invaliditie thereof is derived from many sources or
heads. Six are A zor. Instit. moral. par. 3. l. 9. c. 7. ^illiuc. to. 2. tr.
39. cap. 2.
principally enumerated by Schoolmen in contractu mandati; and among those
six, that nullitie or invaliditie, which proceeds from the revocation of their
Commission, that have power to treat and conclude the contract, before they
have concluded any such Contract, has a prime place. That the like revocation
of the Commissions or mandates given to the Marquis of Ormond, and to our
Committee of the Treaty has happened in the concluding of this Peace, before
the same was concluded, is the point (among other) which we are to prove in the
following paragraphes. In the.

. 1. The invaliditie of the foresaid Peace is proved by the revocation of the
Marquis of Ormonds Commission given him to conclude a Peace, before the same
was concluded.
2 THis invalide and unjust Peace was indeed signed and sealed by five of our
Committee on the 28. of March 1646. but never DELIVERED interchangeably by both
parties until the 29. of July following: during the interjacent time it lay,
as an Escroule or Scroule on the hands of the Marquis of Clanrickard without
any power or force to oblige in law either parties. Though this be a truth
confessed in private by the Committee of Treaty, and well known to the then
Supreme Council and Committee of Instructions, yet because the knowledge
thereof is suppressed from the rest of the Confederate Catholics, and that
the Peace has been published, as if the same were absolutely concluded on the
28. of March, I here think fit to discover the mystery of iniquity out of
that, which I sinde written by Mr. Darcyes own hand, (one of the five that
signed and delivered the said Peace) on the outside of the manuscript draught
of the articles of Peace delivered by Mr. Plunket and himself in Waterford to
the Congregation of both Clergies; Signed and Sealed ONLY (note the exclusive
partticle ONLY) 28. March 1646. anno 22. Regis Caroli, in the presence of the
Lord Digby, Sir Maurice Eustace; Doctor Fennel, and George Lane, and DEPOSITED
on the Marquis of Clanrickards hands till 1. May, and until the ten thousand
be sent into England. Thus far one note. In another note there written, I
read thus: This (meaning the Articles of Peace) was DELIVERED 29. July 1646.
in my Lords STVDY, by my Lord Lieutenant on the one part: Lord of Muskery, Sir
Robert Talbot, John Dillon, Patricke Darcy, and Geofrey Brown of the other
part, witnessed by the Marquis of Clanrickard, Lord Taaffe, Lord Digby,
Monsieur du Moulin the French Agent, and Daniel O Nealc. Present besides, the
Earl of Roscoman, Lord Dillon, Colonel Trafford, and George Lane, etc. on the
same 29. day of July, and not before, the defeasance, which past between the
Marquis of Ormond and our Committee, obliging the kingdom to send over 10000.
men, were cancelled, and an Instrument avoiding the defeazance then perfected
and witnessed, ut supra, says a third note written also by Mr. Darcyes own
hand on the foresaid manuscript Copy.

3. By all which it appears that the Peace was never concluded until the 29.
of July, and that both parties did suppose the same for a certainty, as well
because they never cancelled the foresaid defeazance until the foresaid 29.
day of July, as also because the Marquis of Ormond, having before that day
received His Majesty's letter revoking his Commission, supposing himself not
to be obliged by any act, that passed on the 28. of March, rejected our
Committee of Treaty, and would by no means proceed to the conclusion of the
foresaid peace, affirming that his Commission was recalled and that he had no
authority to treat further with them; as you shall hear as yet more
hereafter. This is further confirmed by the letters of the late Supreme
Council and Committee of Instructions dated at Lymericke the first of June
1646. delivered unto the Lord Nuncius, where they confess the Peace was not
then concluded, but that shortly they expected the same to be both concludedand
published.

4. We press the matter as yet more eagerly: they concluded the Peace, either
on the 28. of March, or on the 29. of July: If the later, we have our
intention; namely, that they concluded the Peace after the Marquis his
Commission was recalled, which was the eleventh of June before: if the former;
See numb. 5.
then were our Council and Committees violators of their promise made to His
Holiness His Nuncius Apostolic, and perfidious to the whole kingdom, which
in public assembly promised and agreed, that nothing should be concluded
(...) agreed upon until May following. Such as are meanly versant, either by
study or practice in the laws of this kingdom, know that an obligation past
by a Debtor unto his Creditor, though Signed and Sealed this month, yet
binds not then, nor ever after, unless he also DELIVER the same obligation,
and then only, and not before, it begins to oblige, when the obligation, or
bond is delivered: how much more in our case, is it evidently convinced, that
the rejected Peace began not to oblige until the time of the deliverie
thereof, which was on the 29. of July, and not before; seeing that in our case,
besides the defect of deliverie, the very signing and sealing it self was not
absolute, but conditionally, that 10000. men should be sent over by the
Catholic Confederats, and the Articles were not laid on the hands of either
of both parties, but deposited on the hands of a third person? But in a truth
so evident, and testified by so many witnesses, yea, confessed by the Committee
of treaty themselves, we need not wast much time.

5. Wherefore we are to prove that the Marquis of Ormonds Commission was
recalled and revoked before the foresaid 29. day of July; for effecting whereof
we need no other evidence, than the Kings own letter which we exhibit unto
the Reader word by word, as it was written by His Majesty himself.

His Majesty's Letter to the Marquis of Ormond.
CHARLES R.

RIght trusty, etc. Having long with much grief looked upon the sad condition,
Our Kingdom of Ireland has been in these diverse years through the wicked and
desperate Rebellion there, and the bloody effects have ensued thereupon, for
the settling whereof we would have wholly applied our selves, if the
difference betwixt us and our Subjects here had not diverted and withdrawn us,
and not having been able by force (for that respect) to reduce them, we were
necessitated for the present safety of our Protestant subjects there, to give
you power and authority to treat with them, upon such pious, honorable, and
safe grounds as the good of that Our kingdom did then require, But for many
reasons too long for a letter, We think fit to require you to proceed no
further in Treaty with the Rebels, nor to engage us upon any conditions with
them after sight hereof, And having formerly found such Real proofs of your
ready obedience to our commands, we doubt not of your care in this; wherein
our service and the good of our Protestant subjects in Ireland, is so much
concerned. From Newcastle the 11. of June 1646.


6. Out of which letter, the Catholic Confederates may behold not only the
revocation of the Marquis his Commission, but also the dangerous Condition,
wherein they are, while His Majesty is so awed by the Rebellious Scot as he
must say, write and do against His faithful Subjects, what ever they please
to suggest unto him. Here His Majesty is pleased to call us Rebels, and our
war desperate Rebellion; elsewhere (being freed from those Harpies) he
calls us His faithful Subjects,. 5. 6. Glamorgans C^mmission and Articles
and letter 27. February.
upon whose succors (to rescue him from his present calamity) he wholly
depends. Wherefore I exhort the Confederate Catholics to stand well upon
their guard, and to preserve securely in their own possession and Command such
Forts, Cities, Arms and Armies, as God has prodigiously given unto them since
these wars, least His Majesty (being forced by the Scots, or Parliamentaries)
should subscribe to such Commands unto Ormond, as he subscribed unto Mountrosse
in Scotland, commanding him to lay down Arms, and to yield unto the Scots
such Cities and Forts as by his Arms he recovered for His Majesty from them.
That the Parliament has and will endeavor to obtain such Commands from the
King, we are premonished by the Vote made in the house of Commons of England
3. July 1646. where they order that a letter should be drawn up to be sent to
His Majesty from both houses of Parliament, to desire His Majesty to write to
the Marquis of Ormond in Ireland to SVRRENDER up several holds and places of
strength in that kingdom possessed by his forces, to such hands, as both
houses of Parliament shall nominate and appoint: and a Committee was named
presently to draw up the said letter. Now in case the King be forced to send
such a Command unto the Marquis; what assurance have the Confederate
Catholics that he will not forthwith yield obedience to such forced Commands
(as he yielded to the above letter) and deliver up unto the Parliament not
only what Cities, Towns, and Forts, he has in his own Quarters, but also
such Cities, Towns, Forts, Garrisons Armies, and Magazins, as should be
transferred to his government, Command and trust by the Confederate
Catholics? Its known, that the Marquis is of the same profession with the
Parliament; that since these wars he has continual Commerce and mutual
correspondence with them; private letters, messages, and Agents past between
him, the Parliament and the Scots; that he never used any act of hostility
against either; nay since the Clergy and their Adherents (the Confederate
Catholics) have opposed this Peace, he has sent several Agents as well unto
the Scots, as unto Insequin and the Parliament, praying them to send him
succors, and actually entertained some of the Parliament Commanders in Dublin,
and entrusted them with places of Command within that City; yea, had actually
delivered not only that City, but all other Cities and Forts etc. in his
Quarters to the Parliament, if the Parliament vouchsafed to entrust him with
the government of the kingdom; and to grant unto him such Conditions, as he
expected: for procuring whereof (it is thought) Sir Francis Willoughby (whom
the Marquis sent over before to the Parliament) is now gone over again with
the Parliament Commissioners to elaborate the business. I appeal then to all
disinteressed Divines, whether the Catholic Confederats may in such a case
transfer from themselves (who have sworn allegiance and fidelity to their
Sovereign, and particularly to keep secure such Forts and Cities, etc. for
His Majesty's use) unto one so suspected, the government or Command of the same
Cities, Forts, Armies, etc. seeing in so doing they do probably hazard
Religion, King, and Country. If neither Parliament nor Scot will entrust his
Excellency with the chief government of the kingdom, though he be of their
profession, nor entertain him, as their servant, shall the Catholics, (unto
whose Religion he is a sworn Adversary) inttust him not only with such a
government, but also entertain him, as their Lord and Master? This I speak
not (God be my Judge) for disrespect to so noble a personage, who (if he
followed the steps of his noble Catholic progenitors, and were disingaged
from wicked Council) might well deserve such honor; but to discharge my
conscience in a matter of such importance, as concerns the security of
Religion, King and Country.

7. As this letter was dated, so was it delivered and communicated to the Lord
Marquis long before the 29. of July, when (and not before) the Peace was
concluded; wherein I The revocation communicated to the Marquis before the 29
of July.
call as witnesses the conscience of those very noble persons, who concluded,
and joined in concluding this peace. Nay, the same has been confessed unto me
even by some of them, that subscribed unto the peace. But the account, which
Mr. Brown gave unto the late Supreme Council at Limericke after his return
from Dublin in the month of June and his public narration or declaration of
the answer received from the Lord Marquis in Dublin, puts the question out of
all doubt, wherein he declared that the Lord Marquis his Commission was
confessed by himself to have been recalled, and that therefore he could
conclude no peace with us. His return then without effecting any thing, and
the very original letter above mentioned shown to Mr. Brown and others by
the Lord Marquis, does confirm it.

8. It may be answered that the Lord Digby brought over some new Commission
from France authorizing the Lord An objection preoccupated.
Marquis to proceed in the peace. But this is as easily denied, as it is
affirmed without appearance of truth; it being most certain (and so signified
by letters from Paris, to the Council and Congregation) that the Lord Digby
never saw the king, nor received letters from the king, from the time he left
Ireland until he returned back; how then could the Lord Marquis his
Commission be renewed? some letters are said to have been brought over by the
Lord Digby in Ciphers, the interpretation whereof must be received from the
Lord Digby only. But this may carry as much truth as the former; and though it
were true, yet have the Confederate Catholics no reason to give credit (in a
matter of such high concernment) to such Interpreters; but supposing all were
true, it would never be able to render the peace concluded the 29. of July
valid; forasmuch as the same peace is grounded on the Commission given unto the
Lord Marquis 24. Iunij 1644. and the 20. year of His Majesty's Reign, which
(as you have heard) was recalled before the foresaid 29. of July, and not on
the new imaginary Commission brought over by the Lord Digby; wherefore if they
would render the peace ought worth or of any validity in law, they ought to
ground the same on this new Commission, and not on the old: or if this new
Commission were a Continuation, or a reintegration of the old, both should be
inserted in the Articles of peace, if they intended to conclude any valid or
solid peace. Shall I speak the truth in simplicitate cordis mei? as that peace
alone was concluded, which pleased the Marquis of Ormond, and all other peaces,
that pleased God and man, king and Country were rejected: so then was the
peace concluded, when it pleased Ormond, namely when her and his pretended
Protestants could no longer subsist, their brethren (the Scots and other
Parliamentarie Rebels) being reduced to nothing in Vlster and Connaught. while
these monsters could craule, the conclusion of any peace was protracted; while
Bunratty was in despair, Roscoman and other places in Connaught in defiance
against the Confederate Catholics; then the Marquis his Commission was
recalled; but when the Catholic Confederates recovered all these places, and
gained two glorious victories against the Enemy, then this demortued
Commission was suddenly revived, and a peace was concluded upon, maugre all the
resistance of the Lord Nuncius and Clergy, or the soundest part of the
Council and Committee, of several acts and protestations made by the whole
kingdom in the assemblies held in August, and February 1645. But, qui habitat
in coelis, irridebit eos. Eijce ancillam.

Heresy has already too long tyrannized in Ireland more in Psalm. 2. 4. Gal.
4. 30.
the following paragraph, and paragraph 3. numb. 13. where the king by his
Declaration (or at least by that Declaration, which was set forth under his
name) is content to leave the managing of the business of Ireland wholly to
the two houses of England, which if the Reader please to compare with the vote
of the Commons above mentioned numb. 6. He will find that the Catholic
Confederats are like to loose to their king and themselves all Ireland, if they
part with the government of such Cities, Forts or Garrisons, as are in their
Quarters or with the Command of their armies etc. to any, that is not a swor^^
Confederate Catholic.

. 2. That neither obligation of law or honor, utilitie to His Majesty, or
necessity of the kingdom, did induce our Council to conclude this Peace.
9. THat no obligation of law did enforce our Committee to conclude this peace
is evident by what even now we expressed in the foregoing paragraph: for if the
articles, though signed and sealed on the 28. day of March, yet remained still
as a scrole until the 29. of July following, at which time, and not before,
they were delivered and begun to oblige; then is it certain that during that
intervall our Committee were free, and at their own liberty to perfect, or
not perfect, conclude or not conclude the said Articles, yea they could not
with integrity of conscience and discharge of the trust imposed on them,
proceed to the deliverie or conclusion of the said Articles, being informed
that His Majesty had now recalled the Marquis his Commission, authorizing him
to conclude a peace; it being a Maxim generally received as well in the laws
of England as in the Cesarean or Common law, extingui mandatum per revocationem
mandantis; that a Commission given to any is extinguished by the revocation
thereof, and out of the extinction of the Commission follows the extinction
also of all obligation to pursue the contract, nay we shall show hereafter,
that the Commission given to our Committee to conclude this rejected peace was
not only invalid but also sufficiently recalled before any such peace was
concluded. Wherefore we may without difficulty conclude that no obligation of
law did enforce our Party to conclude this peace. As then the Lord Lieutenant
did recoyle from those articles, which he himself signed and sealed, esteeming
himself not to be obliged by any such signing and sealing to deliver the same,
so hereafter (in case we were brought to that fools Paradise to accept the
peace, and he once possess our Armies and garrisons) he will likewise
recoyle, and tell us, when we look for performance of the Articles; Sirs, my
Commission was recalled when I concluded this peace with you, what I have done
therein was grounded upon no authority, and therefore invalid, wherefore I am
not obliged, neither will I stand to the articles therein concluded.

10. The obligation of law being thus extinguished, undoubtedly the obligation
of honor, which is grounded thereupon was also extinguished. This I add,
because I have heard some of our Committee of Instructions ingeniously
confess, that they had never consented to proceed unto the conclusion of that
peace, if they had thought, they were not obliged thereunto by Law and honor,
of which ignorance I marvailo they were not freed by those among them, who were
skillful in the laws: they themselves might observe in the Marquis of Ormonds
recoyling from the Contract, that he held himself not bound either in Law or
honor to conclude the same; why then should they think themselves more bound
than he? if there was any obligation, it was also mutual; so as the Marquis
could not be free, unless ou^r party were also free; If our Council and
Committees would needs insist so much upon honor, they should rather in honor
desist from the conclusion of any peace with his Excellency, seeing they were
so fooled by him, as having received their moneys, to the value of three
thousand pounds (as is said) to supply his present necessity, he without any
respect to such favor done him, or to the precedent obligation of signing and
sealing the peace, rejected them and denied to conclude any peace with them.
Wherefore in very deed the conclusion of that peace did redound rather to their
dishonor than honor; and the giving of so much money to the Marquis was to
disgrace and prey the Country. Questionless no good Catholic would ever
contribute any money to purchase such a peace. I wish this dishonor were
confined within the bounds of Ireland only.

11. That utilitie to our Sovereign could be no motive to our Committee of the
treaty to conclude such a peace is also evident, in as much as the Carholiques
at home observing the iniquity thereof tending directly to the maintenance of
their sworn Enemies and their own destruction, had been thereby wholly
disheartened, and deterred from giving any aid to His Majesty either in their
persons or means; and the Catholic Princes and Prelates abroad had likewise
wholly subtracted their succors, deeming it against Conscience to concur to
the preservation of heresy. And what can more dishearten the Catholics of
Ireland, than to see their service, their Contributions, their prowess and
fidelity so vilipended, as they may not be permitted to enjoy those
privileges only and immunities, either in spiritual or temporal, which are
due unto them by their birthright and which by the ancient fundamental laws
of the kingdom they ought quietly and peaceably to enjoy? much more might be
here said, particularly touching the danger, whereunto our Sovereign had been
exposed, if the possession of his Forts and Command of his Armies had been
given to any, but to such as are Catholics. Whereof else where. That See
part. 1. sup. art. 25. 28.
the necessity of the kingdom should induce the Committee of the Treaty to
make this peace, it may not be, seeing the kingdom was never in a better
posture to defend it self, or in greater hopes to chase away, and destroy the
Enemy, than it was, when our Committee concluded this fatal peace, as you
have, and shall hereafter hear more amply. Certainly if the hinderance of the
prosecution of our victories against the Enemy be a disprofit and detriment to
His Majesty (as sure it is) the concluding of this peace (where such
hinderance followed) must be necessarily a disprofit and detriment to His
Majesty. Wherefore we may rightly conclude, that neither necessity on our
part nor utilitie on the Kings part, nor obligation of law or honor did induce
our Committee to the conclusion of this peace. Had our Council and Committees
showed the same resolution, and used the same endeavors to procure the
acceptance of the Earl of Glamorgans honorable and just peace in the Enemies
Quarters by force and arms, as they used to procure the acceptance of the
Marquis his dishonorable and unjust peace in the Consederate Catholics
Quarters, then had the purity of their intentions been revealed, and their
endeavors applauded. St autem ^culus tuns fuerit nequam, totum corpus tuum
tenebrosum erit. The Marquis of Math. 6. 23.
Ormond his Protestant party had more zeal (licet sine scientia) to secure
their new sect, than our Council or Committee had to seenre the Catholic
Religion. The Protestants would rather loose their eyes (and life to) than
join with them in settling Glamorgans peace within their quarters, because they
held it destructive to their sect; yet they must join, with the Proterestants
to settle within the Catholic Confederates Quarters Ormonds peace, though
they could not be ignorant, how it was destructive to the Catholic faith.
Eighteen black Coats belonging to Ministers were found among the rest of the
luggage, which were left in the Castle of Kilkenny after the Marquis his
retraite to Dublin. Factum est hoc ad insidias, sanctificationi, and in
diabolum malum in Israel. 1. Machab. 1. 38.

. 3. The Marquis of Ormonds his Commission tacitly recalled in January 1645.
The objection made that the revocation of the Marquis his Commission was
enforced, is resolved.
12. IN the declaration made by His Majesty the 29. of January 1645. recalling
the Earl of Glamorgans peace, His Majesty promises to make nd peace with the
Irish without the consont of the Parliament; this declaration coming to the
knowledge of the Marquis of Ormond, and of our Council and Committees before
the 28. of March, was (at least) a tacit revocation of the Marquis his
Commission, even before the very signing and sealing of this Peace: wherefore
neither of both ^^ties ought (after notice thereof) proceed to the signing and
sealing of the same peace. Our Committee was inhibited by the assembly, to
conclude any thing in the business until May; the Marquis receives the Kings
declaration, that he will proceed no further in any peace with the Irish,
without consent of the Parliament; notwithstanding all this, both parties
proceed in the peace. Yet as soon as ever the same revocation appeared, our
Council and Committee forthwith desisted in the prosecution of Glamorgans
Peace, though it was known to have been not only invalid, as coming after
the mandate was executed; but also to have been surreptitious and framed by
Glamorgans Adversaries, and the Adversaries of the Catholic Confederates:
nothing (though ever so valid) was powerful enough to stop or stay our
Council and Committees from concluding Ormonds unjust peace: any thing (though
ever so invalid) was powerful enough to stop them from prosecuting Glamorgans
just and honorable peace. If our people did prefer the advancement of the
Catholic faith before their own private interest and inordinate affection to
private persons; they should set upon them that opposed Glamorgans peace with
as much vigor, as ever they set upon the Scot or other Parliamentaries,
especially when such persons were informed by special letters from his
Majesty that such a Commission to conclude a Peace was given to Glamorgan. Yet
from hence we deduce this argument a minori ad maius: If Glamorgans peace was
cenfured invalid, because it was revoked by His Majesty, though the revocation
was not made until after he executed his Commission* how much more invalid is
the Marquis his peace, seeing his Commission was revoked and recalled by His
Majesty expressly before the Marquis put his Commission in execution, and
implicitly before it was inchoatively attempted to be put in execution? That is
worthy the observation, when our Council and Committees doubted not of the
conclusion and acceptance of Ormonds peace, they slighted and contemned
Glamorgan and his peace; but when they saw the Clergy and kingdom would by no
means accept of Ormonds peace, then did they begin to look on Glamorgan and
his Peace, and to color their own proceedings they would make us believe,
that in Ormonds peace there was a relation unto Glamorgans. Whereupon Glamorgan
(to fit them in their own policy) told them, the Conditions were not
observed, and that therefore he was not obliged, therefore would not stand to
the Articles past between him and them; which he said to no other end, than
to affront them, that would affront him, and let them know comprehenduntur in
consilijs quibus cogitant.

13. It will peradventure be answered that His Majesty was not then sui iuris,
at his own liberty and freedom of will or power, when he recalled the
Marquis his Commission, being indeed then in the hands of the Scots. Whereunto
we reply, that his Excellency the Marquis accepted His Majesty's revocation
proceeding from him as being in pleno iure, in his own full and free liberty,
and yielded obedience thereunto, notwithstanding a precedent double tie, which
obliged him to go forward, to wit, the signing and sealing of the Articles of
peace on the 28. of March before, and the receiving of three thousand pounds
(or thereabouts) from the Council, not long before, on hopes to conclude such
a forlorn peace. Its against the rule of justice (which requires equallitie on
both sides) that the Confederate Catholics should be tied to stand to the
peace made with the Marquis, notwithstanding any revocation, and that the
Marquis should be fast and loose, and at his own liberty, when he please by
accepting the revocation to annull the Peace, and by rejecting the revocation,
to render the same valid and of full force. Montrosse in Scotland received
Commands from His Majesty (being in the same condition with the Scots, that
he was, when he wrote this revocation of Ormonds Commission) to lay down
arms etc. whereunto he yielded obedience, supposing His Majesty to be, even
then, sui iuris: of which president, we doubt not, the Marquis of Ormond will
make use, when he is disposed (upon any advantage) to invalid or make void the
Articles of the rejected peace. That the Marquis has already resolved to yield
perfect obedience to that revocation is (at least indirectly) insinuated unto
us by the six Agents sent from Kilkenny to Waterford Psalm. 2. 4. Gal. 4. 30.
in the reasons given by them to the Congregation, why they concluded the
peace, where they say, that the Lord Lieutenant conceiving that what comes
NOW from His Majesty is not his free act, is resolved to give no obedience
thereunto: So as this disobedience is in ordine ad futura mandata, looks upon
all Commands that shall come after that time, namely, after the month of
August last, and not on the Commands, that came before, among which was that
revocation of his Commission to make a peace. These words expressed in the
foresaid declaration, recalling Glamorgans Commission makes this matter more
dangerous: that a messenger (says His Majesty writing to the Parliament) be
immediately sent for Ireland to prevent any accident that may happen to hinder
His Majesty's resolution of leaving the managing of the business of Ireland
wholly to the two houses, and to MAKE NO PEACE there, but with their CONSENT,
which in case it shall please God to bless his endeavors in the treaty with
success, His Majesty does hereby engage himself to do. Who knows, but the
forementioned messenger has been accordingly sent to the Marquis commading
him, even then, to make no peace? Incidit in foveam, quam fecit. this
declaration is thought to have been made by Digby and others in Dublin to
destroy Glamorgans Peace, yet being well examined, will prove as destructive to
the Marquis his own peace.

. 4. The invaliditie of the peace proved out of the Marquis his Exceeding his
Commission, and not observance thereof.
14. IF he, that has a Commission or command to do any thing, shall exceed
his Commission, he does nothing that is valid or firm, Azor. Instit. moral.
par. 3. l. 9. q. 6. quaesito 4. Fillinc. trac. 39. Cap. 2.
says the law, whereof in the paragraph more amply, herein we conceive the
Marquis tra^sgressed this co^missio^ namely in gra^ting by the 15 article of
the rejected peace an act of oblivion unto al his Majesty's ^ubiects, therein
co^prehending the Rebellious Scotts and Parliame^taries, whereas his Commission
extends only (as we collect out of the preface of the articles, where mention
is made of his Commission) to the confederat Catholics, nay his Majesty by
his letters dated the 16. th. of February 1644. gave express order to the
Marquis of Ormond to seek to rene we the Cessation with the Irish for a year:
for which (says his Majesty) you shall promise the Irish (if you can have it
noe cheaper) to join with them against the Scots and Inchequin: for I hope by
that time, my condition may be such, as the Irish may be glad to accept less,
or I able to grant more. mark (I beseech you) the Irish (in obedience to his
Majesty's desire) continued the Cessation for a year and a half after, yet all that while did not the Marquis join with them against the Scots or Inchequin.
To gain only a years Cessation his Majesty was pleased that the Marquis
should join with us against the Scots and Inchequin: Our Council and
Committees have not only consented to a cessation, but have also made a peace,
and yett have not obliged the Marquis to join with them against the Scots or
Inchequin. Indeed the Marquis and our Committee have played the part of good
Chapmen for his Majesty, but their negotiation cost his Majesty the loss of
England, if he, by whom kings reign, repair not the loss.

15. In the Diurnals of the Assembly held in August, 1645. I read that the
Marquis of Ormond by his letters sent from Dublin to the assembly then held at
Kilkenny, and there read 18. augusti 1645. declared unto the Confederat
Catholics, that the Rebellions Scots of the North were advanceing forward with
their Army, and therefore prayed the said Confederats to send their arms and
forces to gether with six weeks means to be joined with his forces: he prayed
also he might be Commander in chief of both forces, and that the Catholic
armies might be subordinat to his Commands. The Confederat Catholics, not
esteeming any Machiuilian policy, (which herein they might forsee) but being
carried away with the firm allegiance they ought their King, and fervent
desire they had to advance his service, by universal and unanimous vote
condescended to the Marquis his request, and gave him with all, in money to
assist his majesty in that expedition 3000-pounds. The monyes were received by
the marquis (as then was bruited) the Catholic confederats provided on their
parts; but neither then nor after would the marquis of Ormond ever go into the
field either with his own forces aparr, or joined with ours, against the Scots.
nay if we may give credit to the probable conjectures and strong presumptions
of many, his Excellency had some influence and concurrance in the invasion
made by the Scots into Conaught, and other parts of Ireland, and it was
observed, that upon such invasions and other defections of the Enemy, his
Excellency endeavored to draw our people to this unjust peace, obiecting unto
us; how could we resist so many Enemies? wherein he had enough of mercenaries
in our own bosom, who played the advocates for him see more. 5.

16. It is also observable, that our Council and Committees had notice of the
forsaid letter dated 16. February 1644. the next July following, yet did they
neither publish it, nor make use thereof in the treaty of peace by causing the
marquis to join with them against the Scots or Inchequin according to his
Majesty's direction, either aftet the peace was concluded or before, during the
continuance of the Cessation: see above in the first part, and in the Marquis
his answer to our 7. and 8. proposition, where every impartial judgment may
discover how far the Marquis was from giueing obedience to his Majesty's
directions in this particular; and what merueile is it, he favor, affect and
cherish those, who Were then used as instruments to persecute the Catholics,
and now lately called upon by the Marquis himself to assist the heretics of
Dublin? The king (as you may see by this letter) was glad to give us a
remuneration for condescending to a Cessation, being then necessitated; but our
Committees would take noe notice thereof; they evermore cast the necessite on
our selves, and in lieu of accepting graces from his Majesty, they wasted the
monyes of the kingdom on the subject.

17. Our distressed sovereign by his missive of the 16. of April 1646.
advertised the Marquis of Ormond, that he received very good security, that
he, and all that did, or should adhere unto him, should be safe in their
persons honor, and Consciences in the Scottish Army, an that they would reallie
and effectually join with his Majesty for his preservation, and employ
their armies and forces to assist him, with whose assistance, and with the
conjunction of the forces under the Marquis of Montrosse in Scotland he would
endeavor to procure an honorable and speedy peace in England, which
resolution he prayed the Marquis of Ormond to communicate to his Council and
his loyal subjects with him. Among these loyal subjects it pleased the
Marquis of Ormond to register Major General Monro, unto whom by his letters
dated 21 may 1646. he communicated the kings forsaid resolution in this
dialect, Sir having this morning rereiued a dispach from his Majesty, and
command to impart it not only to his Council, but to all his loyal subjects,
I am confident, you have so good a title to aknowledge thereof, as I have held
it my part instantly to dispache it unto you by an express, and so sir,
wishing you all happiness, I rest, your assured humble servant. Ormond. here I
observe first that Monro, and such other Cou^nantiers (who have sworn the oath
of Covenant against the king, and his Monarchy, and made war these four
years past against him, are in Ormonds Calender Loyal subjects, though (in
his Majesty's Calender) they be notable Rebels, and therefore he admonishes
Ormond Kings letter 27. febr,
to join in arms with the Irish against them; from whence this sequel may be
rightly deduced, to give the government of the Cities, forts. etc. within our
quarters, or the Command of our armies unto Ormond, is in effect to give them
unto Monro, and his fellow Couenantiers. 2. I observe that the Marquis joined
with the Scots against us, whereas the king commanded him to join with us
against them. 3. I observe, that the Scots in England have been so far from
joining their forces, with our party (the Marquis of Montrosse in Scotland)
as they have made him lay down his arms, and render unto them what forts,
Cities. etc. he had in his possession; noe better security or effects may the
Confederat Catholics expect by any conjunction with Ormond if therein he shall
have the chief Command or government. Other observations I omit, having
heard before the impression hereof some good news of Leslyes conjunction with
Antrim, and of a happy victory by them obtained against the Parliamentaries.
God grant it be true. To concur with the English Parliament to dethrone
their own natural sovereign, who has been the greatest ho^our that ever
Scotland had (considering the amplitude of his dominions) is a thing so
Unnatural, as heaven and earth may be astonished at it. Twere better be
subjects to him, than slaves to his Rebellious subsects, the Parliament,
dixeruntque omnia ligna ad rhamnum, veni, and impera super nos. for the Scots
forwarning ^udic. 9. 14.
herein, and the incitation of all faithful subjects to take arms against
that rebellious merciles Parliament of England, I will presume on the Readers
favor to license me to.

A difgression, wherein the Parliament of England has manifested their
impudency against the Scots, and their horrid treason against their and our
natural liegelord.
QVEREES, TO FIND OVT WHO IT IS THAT HOLDS OVT IN ARMS AGAINST THE STATE OF
ENGLAND,
Seeing the King is our prisoner, as in the Scottish Army, who by contract are
our servants and our Army, and therefore not to do what they list, but what we
command them, seeing they receive pay from us as mere mercinaries, and serve
not freely as brethren; therefore if our State representative, the chosen
Commons of England assembled in Parliament, shall give Order to the State of
Scotland for tht King presently to disband all his Forces in England, Ireland,
or elsewhere, and to deliver up all Towns and Garrisons unto our States hand;
- Quere, I say if it be not done thereupon, if we may not conclude, that it is
the Scots hold up Arms against our State, for the King being our Prisoner, and
in their power (our servants) has no power, but must do as they will, and they
will do as they list for him.

For if they of themselves can prostrate their own opposite arms of
Montrosse, and.- and put his name thereto for a color, as if done by him, or
enforce him to do it, to color their doing why not the same form upon order
from our State aforesaid, - why, oh English States is not this assayd, to
discover who it is that holds up arms against you? - for what power has one
man that is in the power of others? And if our State will not give order for
the same what may we not conclude there of? must the lives and estates of men
be sacrificed to the wilfulness of any? But our State performing their parts,
we shall apparently see where it rests, for how can the King hinder what they
please to do?

Do not these that are celled the French and Spanish States, what them please,
- and put. - or their King must put their names thereto, to culour it, that the
State may not be seen in it, but it may pass as if their Kings act, not
theirs. - Can any be so simple to think their Kings may or can rule a State. -
which is as much as the wisest State can do. - In short it is the States do
all, and so do the Scot, and so ought our State and not let the weal, safety,
happiness, prosperity and being of a Kingdom or kingdoms, and millions of
lives therein, lie at the will, or the VVilfulnesse, folly, or madness of one
man, whom they call their king, though the Parliament of England in their late
letter to him when he was at Oxford, doetell him plainly, that he is guilty of
all the innocent blood which has been now shedin all the three kingdoms.

Oh therefore, let not the world ieerus, that our prisoner can use his keepers
as his prisoners, etc. Who has stood it out in open Hostility as long as
possible he could, against his Earthly Sovereign, Lord, king, and Creator, the
state Universal; Whose legal and formal representative, the Parliament, (he
has unnaturally, wickedly, uniustly, and irrationally) proclaimed Traitors and
Rebels for doing their duty in endeavoring the preservation of those that
trusted them, from the ruin and destruction endeavored and intended to them
by him, their rebellious servant.

How can it be properly said, that the Engish Creator, the State of England,
can commit Treason agasnst it is own mere creature, the king? If it be treason
to assist the king with men moneys, arms and horses in this his unnatural
War and Rebellion against the Parliament and people of England, as the
Parliament has often declared, then is it not the height of Treason for any of
the Parliaments Armies privately to treat with him, and to receive him, into
their Army, and there protect him (from those who requite him and have right to
him) and to disposc of him, yea, and afford him elbow room and liberty to send
Messages and Embassages to Denmark, Holland, France, Spain and Ireland, or
whether he pleases, that so he may lay new designs for the utter subversion
and destruction of the State and kingdom: Oh the height of. etc. no longer to
be put up, borne, or suffered by trustees that desire to approve themselves
faithful to their trusters.

London August. 16 46.
19. Read all histories, ^acted and profane, reuolve all Chronicles
domesticke and foreign, and tell us, if you have, or can find any treason so
abominable, any rebellion so odious to God and man, any Apostacy so
detestable to heaven and earth, as is this damnable treason, rebellion, and
apostacy of the titular Parliament of England? It is not enough to be
perfidious to their king, bur they must be also blasphemons against God, by
making themselves Creators. Here monarchy is ablegated, anarchie introduced
the Lords anointed made slaves to their subjects, and their subjects raised
to noe less dignity, than to earthly sovereigns, Lords, Kings, Creators, the
stato universal. Their fellow subjects (the Scots) are their merce naries
and servants, not their Brethren, and the Irish are unto them opprobrium
hominum, et abiectio Plebis. But pride and confusion, disobedience to Princes,
and treason against them and their monarchy is a property inseparable from
modern heretics wherefore we must not admire that D. Garrier sometime a
Protestant and Chaplain to k. James burst forth into these words. I can not be
persuaded, that they ever will, or can join together to advance your Majesty,
or your children, further then they may make a present gain by you. They are
not agreed of their own Religion, nor of the principles of universal and
Eternal truth; and how can they be constant in tho Rules of particular, and
transitory honor? Where there is nullum Principium Ordinis, there can be nullum
principium Honoris: such is their Case. There is a voice of confusion among
them as well in matters of State as of religion. Their power is great, but not
to edification, but to destruction: They join to geather only a gaynst good
Order, which they call the Common Enemy? and if they can destroy that, they
will in all likelihood turn their fury against themselves, andlike Devils
torment, like Serpents devour one another. In the mean time if they can make
their Burgers, Princes, and turn old Kingdoms into new States, it is like
enough they will do it: but that they will ever agree together, to make any
one Prince, King or Emperor over them all and yield due obedience unto him
further, then either their gain shall allure them, or his sword shall compel
them, that I can not persude my self to believe. And therefore I can not hope
that your Majesty, or your Posterity can expect the like honor or security
from them, which you might do from Catholic Princes, if you were joined
firmly to them in the unity of Religion.

5. The Marquis of Ormonds Commission enlarged by his Majesty, but his Command
not executed.
20. When the Marquis of Ormond dispachd Agents unto the Parliament demanding
succors from them against the con, federat Catholics of Ireland, It is said,
S argeant Eustace (to cloak that treason) publickelie declared in the
dismembered Parliament of Dublin, that as it was lawful for every man even by
the law of nature to defend himself against the violence of unjust Assailants,
so was it lawful for the kings Lieutenant, and the kings privy Council in
Dublin (for their own defense) to look for succor from the kings Enemies,
(the Parliament) against the kings subjects the Irish, who were in a violent
and hostile manner to assault them. letting this pass for an hyperbole, the
Catholic Confederats do briefly affirm, that they were noe assailants, but
defendents of their lives, religion, liberties, and estates against their
fellow subjects, and particularly against the chief Ministers of justice, who
following the steps of their Predecessors tirannically governing, made use of
all the projects, that michieuous policy could invent to deprive them of
their lives, religion, liberties, and estates, wherein they have been so
exorbitant, as neither the authority of the ancient fundamental laws of the
kingdom, nor the kings own Commands could prevail with them. Here we must
descend unto particulars, and especially to the kings Commands sent unto the
Marquis of Ormond enlarging his power for the speedy conclusion of a happy
peace.

21. The impossibility (says his Majesty writing to the Marquis of Olmond)
of preserving my Protestant Subjects in Ireland, by a continuation of the war,
haueing moved me to give you these powers and directions, which I have formerly
done "for the concluding of a Peace there, and the same growing daily much more
evident, that alone were reason enough for me to enlarge your powers, and to
make my Commands inthe point more positive. But besides these considerations,
it being now manifest, that the English Rebels have (as farras in them lies)
given the command of Ireland to the Scots; that their aim is at a total
subversion of Religion and Regal power, and that nothing less will content
them, or purchase Peace: here I think my self bound in Conscience not to let
slip the means of settling that Kingdom (if it may be) fully under my
obedience; nor to lose that assistance which I may have from my Irish Subjects
for such scruples as in a less pressing condition might reasonably be stuck at
by me: For their satisfaction I do therefore command you to conclude a Peace
with the Irish, whatever it cost, so that my Protestant Subjects there may be
secured, and my Regal Authority preserved; But for all this you are to make me
the best bargain you can, and not discover your enlargement of power till -
you needs must. And though I leave the managing of this great and necessary
work entirely to you, yet I cannot but tell you, that if the suspension of
Poynings Act for such Bills as shall be agreed upon between you there, and the
present taking away of the Penal Laws against Papists, by a Law will do it; I
shall not think it a hard Bargain: so that freely and vigorously they engage
themselves in my assistance, against my Rebels of England and Scotland, for
which no conditions can be too hard, not being against Conscience or Honor.

22. Many things are here to be carefully oberued by the Confederat
Catholics. first that this letter or enlargment of the Marquis his power was
never communicated unto our Council or Committees (though then, and after in
atctuall treaty with him for a peace, by virtue of a former Commission given
him by his Majesty the 24. th of June before) until the same was put into the
press by the Parliament, who found the same in his Majesty's Cabinet in the
battle of Nasby; from the print of London it was sent into France, and there
sent by accident into Ireland. yet the reuocation of the Marquis his Commission
by the letter of the 11. of June above mentioned was forthwith and without
delay communicated unto us by the Marquis, and so punctuallie observed as noe
precedent obligation past between him and the Confederat Catholics could
induce him to go forward. By which the Confederat Catholics may with
resentment take notice, how little behoulding they have been unto the Marquis
of Ormond for any graces or favors showed them by him, though his fauorits have
extolld his imaginary favors don the Contry beyond measure. 2. Whether the
Kingdom have more cause to conceive jealousy (in this respect) against the
Marquis, who (as you may behold in the letter) had some Commands not to
discover the enlargment of his power till he needs must, than against the then
supreme Council, who receiving this letter in July or August 1645. did never
to this day reveal or publish the same unto the kingdom. whether this was don
by them, because they were then actuallie concluding a peace (in huggar muggar)
with the Marquis and therein resolved to reject these royal graces of the
repeal of the penal laws, and suspension of Poynings act, and therefore would
not discover these graces, least their own remisnes in the cause of God
should be likewise discovered: or for what other cause they did it, 'twere fit
to bring into question. 3. we are to observe with what confidence the Marquis
proceeded with our Committee, with whom he doubted not to conclude a peace on
more abject Conditions than the king himself did grant unto them. 4. That as
Sir William Parsons and the rest of the Rownd-headed privy Council of Dublin
did suppress from the Contry the graces sent over into the Chtholike
Confederats of Ireland the August before the first of these Commotions; so our
own entrusted Catholics suppressed these other graces granted unto us by his
Majesty since these Commotions. inimici hominis domestici eius. 5. out of all
which you may further observe the hypocrisy of some great ones in Dublin; who
(to cloak their disloyal recourse for succors to the Parliamentarie Rebels)
gave out that they were forced thereunto for their necessary defense against
the Confederat Catholics: whereas it is is most certain if the Marquis had
granted unto us what the king commanded him by this letter, and not given (for
his own private ends, to the kings irrecouerable detriment) impediment to the
Earl of Glamorgans articles of peace; the Catholic Consederats had joined with
arms and hearts in so happy a peace, and (by Gods blessing) they had (with
the hazard of their lives, estates, and fortunes, together with the aids of
foreign Catholic Princes and Prelates) prevented and preserved his Majesty from
the deplorable condition wherein now he is; and chased out the of three
kingdoms his sworn enemies. In a word the Marquis, and those of Dublin sent
unto the kings Ennemies for succors, not to defend themselves as they
pretended; but to defend their obstinat disobedience to the kings Commands;
and their inordinat desires to preserve these pernicions heretics who are
known toside with and swear for the Parliament; wherefore the Confederat
Catholics did discharge their duty to God, and their allegiance to their
king in setting upon such disloyal Refractories wherein they proceeded (Like
faithful subjects) in a defensive way, endeavoring to maintain the present
grants and graces, which their gracious Sovereign conferred upon them, and
the ancient fundamental laws of the kingdom, chiefly that of Magna Charta,
wherein their, religion, liberties, lives, and estates have been secured unto
them; for defense Whereof millions of noble Catholic subjects in England in
former ages have sacrificed their lives and fortunes, and taken up arms, even
against their own sovereigns: how much more justly might the Confederat
Catholics, (for defense of the same laws) take up arms against their fellow
subjects, who, as they have rebelled against God by repealing those ancient
fundamental laws and establishing new destructive to the Catholic faith; so
have they, and still do rebel against the lords anointed their liege lord
and sovereign, by disobeying his lawful Commands; and attempting the ruin of
him and his royal issue. But these observations on that letter are
extrinsecall; in the fol. lowing paragraph we will present the Reader with
other observations that are intrinsecall.

. 6. His Majesty's Confidence in the sidelitie and assistance of the Confederat
Catholics. Parliamentaries justly branded by his Majestle for Rebels, and
their actions Rebellions.
23. Before the forsaid letter of the 27. th of february was written and sent
by his Majesty to the Marquis of Ormond, his Majesty wrote and sent three
other letters unto him, whereof the first was dated December 15. 1644. and
continues what follows.

As for Poynings Act, I refer you to my other Letter: and for matter of
Religion, though I have not found it fit to take public notice of the paper
which Brown gave you, yet I must command you to give him, my L. Muskery and
Plunket particular thanks for it, asluring them that without it, there could
have been no peace; and that sticking to it, their Nation in general, and they
in particular shall have comfort in what they have done: and to show that this
is more then words, I do herby promise them, (and command you to see it done)
that the Penal Statutes against Roman Catholics shall not be put in
execution, the Peace being made, and there remaining in them due obedience; and
further, that when the Irish gives me that assistance which they have promised,
for the suppression of this Rebellion, and I shall be restored to my Rights,
then I will consent to the Repeal of them by a Law; but all those against
Appeals to Rome, and Praemunire must stand, all this in Cipher you must impart
to none, but those three already named, and that with injunction of strictest
secrecy: so again recommending to your care the speedy dispatch of the peace
of Ireland, and my necessary supply from thence, as I wrote to you in my last
private letter, I rest.

24. The second letter is dated from Oxford 7. January 1644. and contains
what follows. The Rebels here agreed to Treat; and most assuredly, one of the
first and chief Articles they will insist on, will be, to continue the Irish
war, which is a point not popular for me to break on; of which you are to make
a double use: First to hasten (with allpossible diligence) the Peace there, the
timely conclusion of which will take off that inconvenience which otherwise I
may be subject to by the refusal of that Article upon any other reason.
Secondly, by dextrous conveying to the Irish the danger there may be of their
total and perpetual exclusion from those favors I intend them, in case the
Rebels here clap up a Peace whith me upon reasonable terms, and only exclude
them; which possibly were not councelable for me to refuse, if the Irish Peace
should be the only difference betwixt us, before it were perfected there. These
I hope are sufficient grounds for you to persuade the Irish diligently to
dispatch a Peace upon reasonable terms; assuring them, that you having once
fully engaged to them my word (in the conclusion of a Peace) all the Earth
shall not make me break it.

But not doubting of a Peace, I must again remember you to press the Irish for
their speedy assistance to me here, and their friends iu Scoland; Myintention
being to draw from thence into wales (the Peace once concluded) as many as I
can of my Protestant armedsubjests, and desire that the Irish would send as
great a Bodyas they can to land about Cumberland, which will put those Northern
Counties in a brave condition; wherefore you must take speedy order to provide
all the Shipping you may, as well Dunkirk as Irish Bottomes; and remember, that
after March it will be most difficult to transport men from Ireland to England,
the Rebels being masters of the Seas. So expecting a diligent and particular
account in answer to this Letter, Irest.

15. The third letter is dated at Oxford also, february 16. 1644. in the
postscript whereof (for the letter it self, we have not seen) it is thus
written: In case upon particular men's fancies the Irishpeace should not be
procured upon powers I have already given you, I have thought good to give you
this further order (which I hope will prove needles) to renew the cessation for
a year: for which you may promise the Irish (if you can have it noe better
cheap) to join with them against the Scots and Inchequin, as above you have
heard. where we are to note that his Majesty forseing that the power already
given the Marquis was not sufficient to induce the. 4.
Irish to a peace, enlarges by his letter dated the self same month, to wit,
the 27. of february, above (number. 21.) mentioned, the former power given to the
Marquis, and expresses in particular the points Wherein this power is
enlarged: namely to the suspension of Poynings act and present taking away of
the penal laws against Papists, which by his letter of the 15. th December
his Majesty promised to repeal, when he should be restored to his rights, and
for the present commanded the same penal laws should not be executed. But
whatsoever the king commanded the Marquis to perform by these letters, the
Marquis has contemned; whatsoever he has promised, our Committee has l.
diligenter mandati; and glos. in c. sicui
neglected; and whatsoever he has actuallie granted, they have rejected. Among
many obligations by which Mandatorius (or a Commissioner or Committee) is
obliged mandatori, to him, that gives the Commission, that is a principal one,
that the Commissioner is dilig entlie to observe the commands given him; and as
he is not to exceed his Commission, so is he not to deuiat from the same;
wherein how far the kings Commissioner on his part, and our Committee on
their part have transgressed, we leave to the censure of those that have eyes
to see, and judgment to discern. To gain credit in court, and to be courted
with letters from great ones, was more esteemed, than the advancement of
Religion king, or Conrry. vae filii desertores and non per spiritum meum etc.
habentes fiduciam in vmbra Aegipti. some Is. 30.
of our own Committee in lieu of soliciting the cause of God, of religion,
king, and Contry, wherewith the kingdom entrusted them, became active
instruments for the adverse party, and busy Postilions from one Commander,
and from one Gentleman to an other, to solicit them to a defection, and some
of these are known to have received priuar letters from great ones, with whom
to ingratiat themselves what would they not attempt? though when matters are
well discussed, it shall appear to the world, that they proved such bad
Proctors, as marr-d all the business, and hindered irrecouerablie (unless God
streatch forth his helping hand) both king and Contry. were they so diligent
in promoueing the cause of God entrusted to them by the kingdom, they would
(at least) show themselves so provident and careful, as they Would cause
these missiues Royal (or the substance of them, for so much as concerned the
repeal of the penal laws and suspension of Poyning act) to be inserted in
the articles of peace, that the Contry might have some consolation, and
religion some Security. But if you mark it well; they have followed the
instructions of the adverse party against whomthey were employed, and not of
the kingdom, for which they were employed. refer all things to the king
(says the adverse party) and that is don, though they knew in their own
souls, the king will never be able (whilst he remain in his present woeful
Condition) to grant us, what already he has commanded to grant us: let
nothing be referred to uncertainties, but obtain an actual execution of these
Commands and graces, which the king has already granted us, and which is due
unto us by our birth right (says the kingdom) and that is not don. how
seuerly the ancient Iurists, or Canonists have censured such kind of
Commissioners, who (vel ex culpa leuissima) do thus neglect or slight the
execution of the Commands given, and what punishment are to be inflicted on
them are expressed in the Canons A zor instit. moral. par. 3. l. 9. Cap. 6
and schoolmen, whereunto we refer the learned Readers.

26. Observe (I beseech you) the motives that induced his Majesty to command
the repeal of the penal laws, and suspension of Poynings act: the preserving
of his protestant subjects, and the kingdom of Ireland from the Scots: to
encourage his Irish subjects to assist him against the English and Scottish
Rebels: to repress the rebellion in England, and to advance the kings service
in Scotland by our friends there: The kings Commissioner and ours have gone the
clear contrary way to work, and as by Preposterous accelarating this peace
they have given a maine impediment to the prosecution of our victories in
Vlster and Connaught, so have they by their compliance with one an other
hindered the succors, which the kingdom commanded to be sent for his Majesty
by Antrim into Scotland, and by Glamorgan into England. Note, I pray you the
words of the letter of the 27. of february: for their (the Irish)
satisfaction, I do therefore command you to conclude a peace with the Irish
what ever it cost. A general command, you see, this is, which has noe other
modification or restriction, than; so as my protestant subjects there may be
seoured, and my regal authority preserved: the later part the Irish have
sworn to do in their oath of association, oath of fidelity: and in their
several protestations and declarations: whereunto the doctrine of the Catholic
religion, (which, in opposition to all sects, maintains monarchy and regal
authority) adds a further obligation. The former to wit, the security of
his Majesty's Protestant subjects the Catholic Consederats have assured in
their several declarations, and are ready to give such further assurance, as
the law of God and charity can oblige them to give in that case: adding
further that they shall be more secure and safe among the Consederat Catholics,
than among the Parliamentarie Rownd-heads, who have spilt most unnaturally and
barbarously more Protestants blood in England (and that causleslie) than over
the Catholics (since these wars) have in their own defense spilt in
Ireland. The Protestants themselves may read carefully the Treaty or
conference lately past in Dublin between his Excellency, the Marquis of
Ormond and the five Commissioners of the Parliament, and glass their own
misery. By Protestants we understand such as profess the protestant doctrine
established in England an. 1562. and comprised in the 39. articles, and not any
new Parliamentarie Protestants, who, as they have demolished the
ecclesiastical hierarchy maintained in the said articles, so have they (as
much as in them lay) monarchical government; such a brood of vipers, which
deuoureth both Church and state, king and Prelat, may not be licenced to
cohabit with the Confederat Catholics. Qui enim dicit illis ave, Communicate
operibus eorum malignis. ^ud. v.


27. Observe further that (according the forsaid letter) the authority to
conclude a peace is entirely in the Marquis, yet has hi^ Excellency evermore
assumed to his assistance, and joined (in a manner) in the same authority with
him, those of the privy Council in Dublin, who (for the most part of them)
are known to have either adheared to the Parliament, or to have been
impeached of high treason by the kingdom; they (fearing their heads) would
never suffer or advise the Marquis to condescend unto a good peace. And if my
author (who lived in Dublin and was an eye-witnes of what he related unto me)
may be believed, those very porsons, who were known to adhere to the
Parliament, even those four, who for that cause were once commi^ted to the
Castle by the Marquis, have had in the Ins there private Conuenticles, together
with the lord Chancellor, lord lowther, and Maurice Eustace, who (I mean the
three last) after their private consultation there would repair to the privy
Council in the Castle, where their advise (as learned in the laws) was
followed in promoueing this Peace, and their advise was instilled according
the infusions received in the Parliamentarie private Conuenticles: so this
inference may seem more than probable: whatsoever was don in promouing and
concluding this peace, was not done according the direction and Commands of his
Majesty, but according the advice and and Council of Parliamentarie Rebels.
The effects prove the verity of this inference.

28. To conclude, the king holds it not a hard bargain to grant us the repeal
of the penal laws, and the suspension of Poynings act, so we freely and
vigorouslie engage our selves to his assistance. noe other condition of
secureing his protestant subjects; or preserving his regal authority does
herequire of us for conferring on us those two graces, which I wish those
Gentlemen did take notice of, who, when they were questioned by the
Congregation, wherefore they labored not to obtain the benefitt of the graces
by this letter conferred on us, and (to cause the fame to be inserted in the
articles of peace) excused the Marquis of Ormond (or rather themselves) saying
that there were other conditions added in the letter, which you see is not
consonant to truth, for so much as concerns these parricular graces, other
more ample graces might be also granted by the Marquis unto us, if we secured
the Protestants, and preserved regal authority: for (on those more ample
conditions) the king commanded him to make a peace with the Irish whateuer it
cost, and aggrauateth the matter more earnestly in the conclusion of his
letter, affirming that to gain our assistance against the Rebels of England
and Stolland no conditions can be hard, not being against conscience and
honor. wherein evermore he supposes the repeal of the penal laws and
suspension of Poynings act to be neither against conscience or honor, or
against the security of his Protestant subjects, nay we shall else where
demonstrat it, that our kings of England are tied by the ligatures of promise
royal past by thire royal progenitors, and solemn oath taken at their
Coronation (at least indirectlie) to repeal the said penal laws, in as much
as they have been surreptitiously enacted in these later days of defection
against that Catholic faith, which our king by the said promise and oath have
been obliged to defend and maintain I must not here pass by, that the king
comma^ds the repeal or present taking away of the penal laws without any
lymitation or exception: the Marquis of Ormond in his brief of Concessions
(from which he shrunk in this peace) limitteth this general Commission unto
the penal laws only that concerns the exercise of our religion, who is
herein imitated by the Marquis of Clanrichard (or rather by the politic
Contriuers of his engagment) where a promise is made of a reuocation of any
penalty etc imposed on us for the free exercise of our riligion. unto what
woeful days are we come, when subjects do presume not only to limitat their
kings commands as they please but also utterly to reject them and by that
disobedience to be the occasion of his present disasters, and hazard of the
loss of his kingdoms?

29. By which letter and by these other two above mentioned the judicious
Reader may observe what great confidencie his majesty reposeth in the aid and
assistance of the Confederat Catholics, as well at home, as abroad, in England
and scotland, by sea and by land, and how earnestly he presses a speedy
dispatch of the peace to that end. Be it on them and their posterity, that
have hindered the same. Glamorgans articles do as yet further confirm as well
the kings confidence in our assistance, as our alacrity, willingness and
earnest desire to comply therein with his Majesty; but the same authors, who
contemned the commands of his Majesty have also laid obstacles to the
assistance promised to his Majesty upon the conclusion of Glamorgans peace. It
shall be ever verified what John Dauies sometimes the kings Attutnie left written
to posteritic. that the Irish gladly continue obedient subjects, without
defection or page vlt. of his discourse of Ireland
adhering to any other lord or king, etc, and that there is noe nation or
people under the sun, that does love equal and indifferent justice better,
then the Irish, and will better rest satisfied of the execution thereof etc:
far different (I wisse) was the Censure of this well experienced lawyer, and
of many others (whose testimony for the present I omit) concerning the
loyalty of the Irish from the Censure of the present lord Chancellor of
Ireland, who having received in his Chamber in the Ins of Dublin from the
Councell-table by the hands of a purseuant a printed book setting forth the
kings resolution to come for this kingdom; said, God forbid his majesty
should come unto this kingdom, for the Irish would massacre him, as soon as
any other. whereunto his son sir Edward Bolton, now chief Baron answered;
nay, father, I am confident, if his Majesty came hither, that the Irish would
lay down their arms at his feet and kiss the ground he went on. The father
admiring at the sons confidence in the fidelity of the Irish, the son
confirmed his confidence by affirming, he would lay his head at the stake, if
they would not do it. This dialoque past between the father and the son in
the presence of the Lady Bolton, Bently the Purseuant, and R. S. a Citizen of
Dublin, who is my author. The son here proves the loyalty of the Irish, the
father shows his ingratitude toward the Irish, that Nation, that charitablie
entertained him in his flight from England to shun the Censure of the Castle
Chamber there, who being raised from the lowest ebb of fortune, (by Ireland)
now floateth in the highest spring of posterity. Qui reddit mala pro bonis,
non recedet malum a domo eius. Such as repined at his Majesty's coming into
Ireland repined at his happiness* and adhered in opinion and affection to the
Parliament. Histories recount, and the present damnable Rebellion of England
does confirm more bloody wars to have been raised in England by the
English against their natural sovereigns and more horrid violence to have
been offered to their persons, than ever has been raised in Ireland against
them, or offered by the Irish unto them wherefore what the Chancellor affirmed
of the Irish is more applicable to him and to his ill affected Contrymen,
wherein, all Europe may be produced as witnesses, who behold the present
calamities; whereunto the Rebellions Parliament have reduced him. what here
might be more particularized concerning the ill-affected of that nation, might
be also particularized in the ill affected Scots, Who are said to have imbrued
their hands in the blood of many their own natural Princes-from both I
abstain for the honor I bear unto England the sister of Ireland, and unto
Scotland the daughter of Ireland, wishing with all the faculties of my soul,
the occasion of such recrimination among indeered fellow subjects were never
given, or being given, might be totallie taken away. Deus aeternetu scis
quoniam falsum testimonium tulerunt contra, Hibernos.

. 7. The Marquis of Ormonds Commission recalled) as to so much) hy the Earl of
Glamorgans Commission.
30. Our Divines and Canonists do teach us, that the second mandat, or
Commission does not indeed derogat unto the first unless Azor supra Cap. 6. q.
5. et Filline supra.
it make mention thereof, yet that sometime the second prevails and not the
first, namely because the second is of a more strict obligation, as tending to
the public utility and Commodity, whereas the first conduced to the private
only. Ormonds Commission granted by his Majesty is (in our case) the first,
being given 24. Iunij. 1644. Glamorgans is the second, being given the 12. of
March 1644. which was full eight months after. In this later Commission mention
is made of the first thus; we give you power to treat and conclude with the
Confederat Roman Catholics in our kingdom of Ireland, if upon necessity any
thing be to be condescended unto, wherein our lord lieutenant can not be so
well seen, as not fit for us at the present publickelie to own etc. lo,
mention made expresselie of the first Commissioner and implicitlie of his
Commission, and by consequence a reuocation (as to so much at least) of the
Marquis his Commission. yea his Majesty did by his express letters signify
unto the Marquis of Ormond that he gave unto the Earl of Glamorgan this second
Commission, therein expressing the ends and causes, wherefore he gave the same,
and wherefore he would have the matters and points committed to Glamorgans trust
exempted from all other matters comprehended in the Marquis of Ormonds
Commission, and these matters concerned the spirituality, for example, the free
and public exercise of our religion, the security of our Churches, the
exemption of the Catholics from the jurisdiction of the Protestant Clergy,
the repeal^ of all penal laws made against Catholics etc. This Commission
being granted by his Majesty upon the neglect of the Marquis his obedience to
his Majesty's Command, requiring him to grant unto us the present taking away
of the penal laws, and the suspension of Poynings act, -I admire how his
Excellency attempted to conclude a peace for these matters, so exempted out
of his Commission, and to refer those matters, which were agreed and
concluded by his Majesty's special Commissioner (namely the repeal of the
penal laws, the free and public exercise of our religion, etc.) unto any
new or future Concessions to be granted by his Majesty, as if he would be
moderator, or superintendent over king and subject. It Was not enough to
disobey the kings Commands given to himself to repeal those laws, etc. but
he must also positiuely oppose those other Commands given by his Majesty to
others, and the Conclusion thereupon made. wherefore It is conceaved whateuer the
Marquis of Ormond has treated or concluded with our Committees in this peace,
that was comprehended in Glamorgans Commission, and by him concluded with the
Catholic Confederats, were treated and concluded by the Marquis without any
power, or Commission, not only because his Commission was recalled, as, you
have heard above in the first. but also because these very. articles concerning
the spiritualitie (especially that first article) where the Marquis would
needs refer us unto the king, for the repealing of the penal laws etc,
which the king already granted us, were exempted out of his Commission, by the
Commission granted unto Glamorgan; so as that maxim (mandatum secundum
derogat primo, si in secundo fiat mentio de primo) must pass current. Cap.
grave de officio Iud ordinarij.

31. To the same effect (but with more energie is that other maxim Cap
pastoralis de rescrip.
or interpretation admitted by schoolmen and Canonists (mandatum speciale
derogat generali, etiam si eius ni hill meminerit. a special Commission (such
as Glamorgans was) does derogat to the general, though therein there were noe
mention made of, the general. If we look for other arguments to avoid this
assumed pouuer of the Marquis of Ormond, the Canons will afford us many; this
alone may suffice for the present: mandatum finitur, sirem demandatam quis
alius idonee gesserit; a Commission is ended if any L si procurat, mandati ff.
mandati.
other has conveniently accomplished the thing given in Commission to be don;
v. g. if a man give a procuratorie or letter of Atturny to any to purchase a
piece of ground* if any other or he himself, who gave the procuratorie, shall
purchase the same piece of ground before the Atturny; cessat mandati actio.
says the law: so (in our case) if the king, or Glamorgan (for the king) has
conveniently and agreeable to the kings Commands, accomplished that very
command, which before was committed to Ormond, but by him slighted, then hoc
ipso is Ormonds Commission expired: neither ought or could our Council or
Committee have recourse To Ormond to treat or conclude those things which were
allreddie concluded by the kings special Commissioner, unless it were to
confirm (in the kings behalf) what already was concluded by the same
Commisioners and to cause those articles granted by Glamorgan to be confirmed
by act of parliament, as well as any other articles or concessions granted (for
the temporalitie) that were agreed upon with the Marquis of Ormond.

32. It was agreed upon by the Earl of Glamorgan for and in the behalf of his
Majesty, his heirs and successors that the Marquis of artic. Glamorgan numb.
5.
Ormond or any other authorized or to be authorized by his Majesty should
notdisturbe the Catholics in their present possession or continuance. of the
possession of their Churches, jurisdiction etc for assurance whereof the Earl
engaged his Majesty's royal word and public faith, and his Majesty himself
(in Glamorga^s patent) in the word of a king and a Christian promised to
ratify and perform whatsoever the Earl granted unto the Confederat
Catholics. and least his promise royal should be frustrated, his Majesty
communicated by special letters the Commission given Glamorgan, and his
resolution in this particular, to the Marquis. But alas all was in vain; so
far were these seeming Royalests and real Parliamentaries of Dublin engaged
with, or at least, aw^d by the Parliament of England; as they never yet yielded
to any thing, or complied with the kings Comma^ds in any thing, that they
thought would be offensive to the Parliament* in so much as that chief
Governor, who (of all others) should advance this opportune service in the
kings spressing necessity, was the only man that hindered the same. Now after
the word of a king, and a Christian so solemnly and graciously engaged unto
the Co^federat Catholics (but blasted by the Marquis of Ormond) a noble
Catholic Peer of this realm the Marquis Cla^richard, is brought in by the
Marquis of Ormonds proctors to imbarke him self in a business, Wherein he was
never authorized by his majesty, nor invited by the Catholic Confederats, and
he undertakes to give us nothing but to procure us some thing, and that less
than the king himself by public contract has actuallie granted unto us.
Truly I am persuaded the Catholic Co^federats will not be so amused as to
reject the word of their sovereign, and to accept of the word of their
fellow subject, who is less able to procure a performance of what he promises,
than the Catholic Confederats themselves are. To plant that heresy in
England in the days of Elizabeth, who now has bathed these three Islands in
their own blood, such art was used: heretics assumed Catholics, as
instruments to compass their designs; where indeed they prevailed, but the
fatal end of such Catholics, and the utter extinction of their noble
posterity does manifest to present and future ages, how odjous their
enterprise was to God and his Angels. Caput aspidum sugent, and occidet eos
lingua viperae. If the Marquis of Ormo^d Job. 20. 16.
fo und out a way (as he thinks) to cross us of the kings own graces and
Concessions: who may doubt. he will find out a way to cross Clanrichards
engagment? we do not mean to look for those graces and privileges by
petition or solicitation of others which are allredie granted us by public
Contract. maugre all emulous subjects the Catholic Confederats shall have the
full benefitt of Glamorgans articles, together with the fruit of their
possessions and victories since then acquired; neither will they be deluded by
any vnualid, unjust, and dishonorable peace, which any Puritan statists would
by factio^s enforce upon them.

. 8. The invaliditie of the rejected peace proved out of the insufficiency of
the Commission given the Committee of Treaty.
33. HItherto we have showed the invaliditie of the rejected peace on the part
of the Marquis of Ormond and his Commission: now we are to show the
invaliditie of the same peace on the part of our Committee and their
commission; wherein (being matter of fact) many acts of assembly, orders of the
Council, protestations of the Clergy, etc. must be alleged and produced. What
I could light on, I will with integrity cite what I could not light on, and
may make for these noble Persons that concluded, or concurred to the conclusion
of that peace, I must leave to their citation, when they please to impugn this
Survey or any part thereof. Among the acts of the first Supreme Council I
find a commission made by that council 5. April. 1645. unto thirteen
persons, namely, Mountgaret, Muskerie, Dubliniensis, Antrym, Alexander mac
Donell, Nicholas Plunket, Sir Robert Talbot, Sir Richard Everard, Dermot O
Brien, Patricke Darcy, Geofrey Brown, John Dillon, and Richard Martins
Esquires, authorizing them or any five of them to treat, agree and conclude
with the Ma^ques of Ormond a firm lasting and settled peace in such manner as
they in their judgments should think fit, and most available for the said
Catholics and general good of this realm.

34. For the Counsels warrant to grant this commission they allege in the
same act, an act past in the general assembly held at Kilkenny the 20. of July
1644. Where (say they, in the act of their Council) the said assembly
authorized the foresaid 13. persons to treat, agree, and conclude with the
Marquis for settling and concluding of a sirme and perfect peace, otherwise to
conclude of a further Cessation. Where the Reader is carefully to observe that
the assembly (according to the Councels own relation) appoints indeed those 13.
persons as a Committee of the Treaty, but does not limit the same unto any
five of them, as the act of the Council has done. I have made search among
the Acts of that assembly, but could not find any act dated the twentieth of
July 1644. I have indeed found an act of assembly made 10* Augusti 1644. where
it is ordered that the undernamed shall be super added to the Commissioners
lately authorized by Commission to go to His Majesty, now to go to the Lord
Lieutenant to treat with his Honor, for settling a firm peace within this
Kingdom, or a further Cessation of Arms. The persons undenamed are the Lord
Archbishop of Dublin, Earl of Antrim, Lord Viscount Mountgaret, Sir Richard
Everard, Patricke Darcy and John Dillon Esquires. The Commissioners to go to
His Majesty were the Lord of Muskerie, Nicholas Pluaket, Alexander Mac
Donnell, Sir Robert Talbot, Colonel Dermot O Brien, Geoffrey Brown, and
Richard Martin. The like Commission was made by the second and last Supreme
Council unto the same Committee of Treaty, de verbo ad verbum, as appears
in the abridged registers of the Acts of the same Council.

35. To show the insufficiency, defects, and nullitie of the said commission
we need not entertain sharpe-sighted Lawyers, the errors, and defects
thereof are so gross and palpable, as men meanly versant in that profession
may without difficulty discover them. We say then in the first place, The
first argument proving the insufficiency of our committees commission.
that it appears not by any act of assembly (that I could light on) that
either of both Counsels were ever authorized or enabled by the Kingdom, to
give any Commission to the foresaid Committee of Treatee, either to treat of,
or conclude a peace with his Excellency. Not in any act of assembly past the
twentieth of May 1644. as the foresaid Commission given by the first Council
does mention; for no such act can I find in the Records of the assembly,
notwithstanding I have (together with the Clarke of the assembly) made diligent
soarch for the same. As for the Act of assembly 10. Augusti 1644. even now
mentioned number 34. you see the kingdom selected indeed the foresaid
Committee of Treaty, but never (by that act) authorized the Supreme Council,
to give them a Commission to that effect. Yet that such an authority is
necessary, is supposed by the Council it self, which groundeth it self on
the like authority, as you have heard numb. 34. for as the assembly only in
the name of the whole kingdom, and not the Supreme Council, had power to send
Commissioners to His Majesty so the Assembly only and not the Council, had
power to send Commissioners to His Lieutenaut, to treat and conclude a peace.
Yet supposing such a Commission or power were given by the Assembly unto the
first Supreme Council, we say in the second place, the same or the like
commission and power 2. Argument.
ought to have been renewed by act of Assembly, and given unto the new Supreme
Council authorizing them to give Commission, to the foresaid committee of
Treaty to conclude a peace, and to guide and direct them therein: because, if
any such Commission was given by any assembly unto the L. inter causas ff.
maudati and l. and quiae ff. de Iurisd. omniud. and l. ult. ff de solut. l. si
quis alicu^. morte ff. mandati and Instiede mandato. recte.
first Supreme council, both that commission, and any other commission given
by the Council in virtue thereof to the Committee of the Treaty, is
extinguished, and dies with the same Supreme Council, because, as morte
mandantis, so morte mandatarij extinguitur mandatum, says the law; as by the
death of him, that gives a Commission or mandat, so by the death of him that
receives it, the Commission or mandat is extin guished. If he, for example,
that gives or receives a letter of Attorney to prosecute a cause, or to do any
other service, dies, the letter of Attorney dies with him. The same we may say
of Agents or Ambasladors sent from or to any P^inces or Prelates. Accordingly
we say, that the first Supreme Council, being removed from that office, are
civilly dead, and therefore any authority given them (in this particular) or by
them (in virtue thereof) given to the Committee of Treaty (for in these two
respects the Council may be called Mandatarij and Mandantes) is extinguished
and dies with the late removed Council.

36. It is true that the common power and authority given to the Supreme
Council by the Model of Government may peradventure descend upon the
succeeding Supreme Counsels, because by the Model of Govurnment that common
power is expressly declared to be conferred by the Kingdom on the Supreme
Council for the time being; but the case is other wise in this weighty matter,
whereon depends the security and safety of Religion, King and Subject; and
therefore being transcendent and extraordinary it must be acted by and
concluded by transcendent and extraordinary power: and as the Commissioners
appointed to go to his Majesty must have been established and appointed by
the whole Kingdom, because, indeed their employment concerned the whole
Kingdom; so (for the same reason) the Commissioners appointed to treat with
His Majesty's Lieutenant (in this particular) must be authorized (either
mediatly or immediately) by the whole Kingdom; for as much as their employment
concerns the whole Kingdom. If His Majesty did confer any power or
authority upon any Corporation, which he would have to continue in the
succeeding Magistrates thereof, he is careful in his patents or Charters to
use these words: to the Mayor, or to the Mayor and Citizens for the time being,
to show, that his intention is not to make this power personal only: but in
that commission, which the first Supreme Council pretend to have had from the
assembly, there are no such words used, authorizing the Supreme Council for
the time being. Much more may be here said, which I leave to our learned
Lawyers discussion, whereof some (unto whom I have propounded this difficulty,
have assured me, that (for this respect) the Commission given our Committee of
Treaty by the Council. wassufficienr and inv^alid. And when I admired, that
the Supreme Council dared attempt such an enterprise without a full and solid
authority from the Kingdom, my admiration was augmented by the answer I
received from one affected to them, to wit, that the Council made no doubt to
conclude all things (as they pleased) by force.

37. The last Supreme Council was established the second of March 1645. Their
Commission to the Committee of Treaty was given the sixth of March following.
After diligent search, I found among the assembly acts of that second day of
March, this act; It is ordered that the Supreme Council, and the Committee of
Instructions, as by former order in that behalf appointed, shall sit this
afternoon, and PREPARE all affairs conceaning the Treaty of peace, and with
all possible speed dispatch the Commissioners to Dublin: But neither this
order, nor any other former order I could light on, does give power or
authority to this new Supreme Council to give any commission to the committee
of Treaty, either to treat or conclude a peace at all, much less to conclude
such a peace, as the committee of Treaty in their Judgment should think fit,
which is the commission the first Supreme Council gave the committee of
Treaty; for which, I am persuaded, they never yet had authority from the
Assembly: It is one thing to sit and PREPARE all affairs concerning the treaty
which alone this order imparts: another thing to be authorized by the Assembly
to give (...)
commission in the name of the Kingdom to the committee of Trea^y, to conclude
what peace they listed, which is the point here questioned. But here occurres
unto the what I have been often told, even by members of some assemblyes past,
that such (I will not say, Factionists) as precipi^a^ed into this abortive
peace, had their private cabinet Councels, where they molded what Orders they
thought convenient^ for their purpose, which they ordinarlly presented about
the perclose of the Assemblyes, and when they saw such as they thought would
oppose them absent; and prepared such as they knew would adhere to them and set
forth the matter with a specious gloss, to be present, and so caused such
orders to pass surreptitiously, without any deliberation or mature
consideration by the house of such orders or of the ends the Moulders of them
intended. I suspect this order (though it make little to the present purpose)
to be one of those surreptitious orders; the cause of my suspicion is; that in
the self same Assembly 19. February, the whole Kingdom unanimously agreed and
promised unto the Lord Nuncius, that they would conclude nothing with the
Marquis of Ormond touching the peace until the first of May following; what
appearance is there then, that the same Kingdom in the same assembly should
order, that with all possible speed the Commissioners should be dispatched to
Dublin, and thereupon to sign and seal a peace the same month, never
expecting the first day of May, as they promised; and by that means so to
entangle the business, as whether the Popes peace came or no, by the first day
of May, the Kingdom was obliged to embrace Ormonds peace, though ever so
unjust; and indeed so some of the very Committee of Instructions were
persuaded; but the unfolding of this mystery we leave unto the assembly,
which, I pray the God of truth to illuminate, and preserve from faction and
division.

. 9. Other defects proving the insufficiency and invalidity of the said
Commission.
38. IN the Commission given by the first and last Supreme 3. Argument.
Council they authorize the committee of Treaty nor only to treat and agree,
but also to conclude a peace with the Marquis of Or^n^nd; their authotitie
herein they father on the act of Assembly past 20. July 1644. which kind of
act I could never find among all the acts of Assembly; nay the contrary is
evident, as well by both the Acts of assembly above specified, numb. 34. 37. as
by other acts, which hereafter I shall express, that they had power only to
treat of the peace, and to prepare matters conceruing the same, but not to
conclude i^. I have indeed heard, that our committee of Treaty labored in
several Assemblyes to have absolute power given them, not only to treat of,
but also to conclude a peace, but as yet I have not seen any such power
granted, neither ought any such power at any hand be granted to any particular
men, who by faction, corruption or affection, might be able to destroy
Religion, King and Country. These men, (...) desired this absolute power, are
known to be either of allians with the Marquis of Ormond, or to depend of him,
or to have been deluded by him with vain hopes of promotion; wherefore it is
not secure for the Kingdom to give absolute power to such persons, how
honorable and faithful soever they may be esteemed to be; neither ought they,
if they would avoid the just suspicion of the people, demand it. We must not
put the cause of God to compromise to Achitophel. If then it appears clearly
our committee of Treaty had no power to conclude, but to treat of a peace
only, who may doubt, but their proceeding to a conclusion without commission
is altogether in valid? peradventure they may produce some act of assembly (for
an act of the Council or committee of Instructions will not serve their turn)
to p^ove they had not only power to treat, but also to conclude such a peace,
as they thought fit: but hitherto I have not seen any such, and if any such,
shall be produced, It rust the Kingdom will be so careful of its own honor
and welfare, as to disqusse the validity thereof, and the ways and means,
which were used in getting forth such an act. It can hardly be exemplified,
that four or five persons in a Kingdom had ever such absolute power given
them, as to conclude a peace within the same Kingdom for and concerning the
most important affairs, that ever could be agitated in a Kingdom, even then,
when they might call upon an assembly of the whole Kingdom to try and examine
the justice or injustice, validity or invaliditie of the said peace; and that
the power should be so unlimitted, as their Commission had no express relation
to any Instructions, by which they ought to be regulated. That five secular men
should be made Supreme Judges in a Catholic Kingdom of Prelate and Priest,
of Regular and secular, of Religion, Church, and Church Livings, of
Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction, administration of Sacraments, celebration of
divine service and office, etc. a seculo non est auditum, no not in Henry the
eights own days. Numquid omnes Crumvelli? numquid omnes vicarij in
spiritualibus and temporalibus? numquid omnes Braini? And this is the third
argument, whereby we prove the invaliditie of the said peace.

39. The fourth argument may be deduced out of the number selected by the
kingdom to be of the Committee 4. Argument.
of Treaty, which was thirteen, as you may observe out of the act of Assembly
numb. 34. by which act there was no power given the Council to reduce them to
the number of five, or to a less number than 13. This selected number of 13.
did belong unto the substance, and (as it were) essence of the commission or
authority given by the Kingdom, and therefore could not be altered without
rendering the commission invalid. When I read in the commission given by the
first Supreme Council to the committee of Treaty, that the number of thirteen
was appointed, and no power mentioned therein authorizing them to diminish that
number* I was indeed astonished, and therefore labored so much the more
earnest to find out if any act of Assembly there were giving them any such
authority; at length I lighted on an act past 23. August 1644. Wherein it is
ordered by Assembly, that the Supreme Council shall grant Commissions under
Seal from time to time unto such, and so many of the Commissioners nominated
and authorized by the house to TREAT with the Lord Marquis of Ormond for
establishing of a firm peace within this Kingdom, or a further Cessation of
arms, as the said Supreme Council, and the additionall Committee of
Instructions shall think fit. This act of Assembly may seem to quell the
strength of my fourth argument: Yet I cannot but resume, and urge for my
argument against this order 1. that it does not so much warrant the Supreme
Council to diminish the number of the Committee of Treaty, as it does limit
the power of the said committee; for here (as in the first act of Assembly) no
greater power is given them, than to TREAT of a peace, etc. and no power at
all to conclude a peace. 2. This act seems to me very suspicious, in as much
as the same assembly (not above thirteen days before) supposing those seven
Agents, who were authori^ed to go to His Majesty* to be too little to treat
with the Marquis, added positively six more, as above you have seen,
insinuating thereby, that they intended to have that full number always in the
Treaty, and no less. 3. Here my second argument may seem to have force; If
this act of Assembly, and that other of the tenth of August 1644. were (...)
not renewed upon the removal of the old Council, and institution of the new,
the power and authority given by those acts seems to dye, and be extinguished
with that old council, because ind^^e mandantis extinguit unmandarum. 4. The
Commission given the committee of the Treaty is not grounded on this act, but
on an act of the twentieth of July 1644. above number 34. 5. It must be also
grounded on an act of assembly authorizing them to reduce the number of 13 to
5. which act we find not. 6. ^ow ambiguously soever this act has been
couched, yet it may seem to prove that the number should be full 13. for it
orders that the Council should grant commission to such and so many etc. as
were authorized, The words (as they shall think fit) have relation either unto
a treaty of peace or a Cessation of arms, as they think fit; and not unto any
reduction of the number of 13. to the number of 5.

40. But here I must not omit to advertise the Reader of the cause of my
suspicion. as soon as ever the foresaid number of 13. was chosen to be of the
Committee of Treaty, forthwith (before they could be sent unto Dublin) notice
was sent Mr. Andrew Moore for this is my Author who s^w the letter.
in Post, even by some of the Supreme Council, to Dublin, that such persons
were elected, among whom there was one catholic Bishop. The notice was sent
by a letter to Sir Maurice Eustace, enclosed in a letter to this Supreme
Counselors Nephew, then resident in Dublin; upon which letter was written,
haste, haste, post haste. Whereupon letters were returned by the Marquis of
Ormond to the Council (or assembly) that he would not treat of any peace with
us, if any Catholic Bishop were of the committee. That ever the Marquis
obtained his desire herein by consent of the assembly I never heard, nay I have
heard the clear contrary, that the assembly resolved never to change or
diminish the number of that committee, Howsoever I do not know but this act of
the 23. of August was hedged in upon this motion, the circumstances whereof I
could wish were diligently examined. How his Excellency could deny to treat
with any commissioners we sent, without disobedience to the Kings command and
commission given, I do not know. The sum is, as he would have a peace of his
own moulding, so would he have a committee pliable to his own resolutions;
and it is remarkable, that when any that was of that same small number of five,
which the Council cul'd cut, were suspected to stand constantly for the cause
of God and the Country, and not to yield to the Marquis his abject conditions,
such art was used, that such kind of persons were then kept from the Treaty,
when all things were upon conclusion. Among these was worthy Mr. Nicholas
Plunket (whom for honor sake I nominate) though he also past not altogether
free from blemish, in subscribing to the command for the publication and
acceptance of the peace, wherein so well deserving a man might be excused,
having thought all remedy, for redress to be impossible. Had our people
Machabean spirits inflamed with Gods love and the advance of his holy Religion,
they would select no other out of that 13. but such Ormond rejected, and
chiefly the Arch bishop of Dublin; and omit no other, but such as Ormond would
have admitted.

41. Other argumen^ against the sufficiency of the Committee of Treatyes
Commission may be thus briefly framed: the commission given by the Supreme
Council was grounded 5. Argument.
on an act of Assembly made 20. July 1644. no such act appears. Ergo; their
commission given the Committee of Treaty may not subsist, quia non posita causa
necessaria non ponitur effectus, non posito fundamento non ponitur tectum.
Again, in 6. Argument.
no act of assembly can I read, that the Council was authorized to give this
power to the Committee: to treat, agree, conclude; etc. a firm and settled
peace etc. in such manner as they in their judgments should think fit and
most availeable for the said Catholics and general good of this realm. Yet
this is the power the Council has given them; which how faithfully they have
executed, you have already and shall hereafter hear. Moreover 7. Argument.
their Commission was to conclude a peace or a further Cessation: they have
done neither; for in their reasons presented to the Congregation. in Waterford,
they confess they have made no peace, but a pacification, which they call a
present union with expectancy of an absolute peace to follow. For concluding
such pacification, you see their Commission authorizeth them 8. Argument.
not. Furthermore, by Commission, the number of five at least were authorized
to treat and conclude the peace: the articles of peace in the Preface reduces
this number of five to four; telling us of a Commission authorizing them or
any four or more of them to treat and conclude a peace: such a Commission is
not, nor never was extant in rerum natura. Ergo, the peace grounded thereupon
is void. In the same preface 9. Argument.
it is said, articles of peace concluded, etc. between the Marquis on the one
part; and these. 7. Mountgaret, Muskery, Sir Robert Talbot, Dermot O Brien,
Patricke Darcy, Geffrey, Brown, and John Dillon on the other part; yet five
only of these. 7. concluded the peace: Mountgaret and Dermot O Brien never
signed, sealed or delivered the peace. Yea, Mr. Dermot O Brien made public
protestation against it, and manifested unto the world as well his aversion
against the proceedings of the rest of the Committee in that treaty, as against
the iniquity of the said peace, for which he deserves from his Country
immortal praise. How then is it true that those 7. concluded the peace, when
as 5. only concluded it? These, I trow, are errors, and defects sufficient
enough, to prove the insufficiency and invaliditie of the committee of the
treatyes Commission, and consequently the nullitie of the peace thereupon
concluded, which we pray all our learned and disinterelled Lawyers to discuss
together with those other arguments, we produce in the rest of the paragraphes,
and to strengthen the same by their approbation and apposition of the
authority of our Laws of England, which I could not well peruse for want of
leisure and commodity.

10. The invaliditie of the said peace proved by the revocation of our
Committees Commission, namely by the protestation of the principal part of the
Body politic of the kingdom and other Inhibitions.
1. BEsides the nullitie of the foresaid peace by the insufficiency of our
committees commission, we prove the same by the revocation of the same
commission (if it were ought worth) before the peace was concluded. Hear then
the Lord Nuncius his protestation.

THE LORD NVNCIVS HIS PROTESTATION.
MOst Illustrious and Reverend Lords,
Where as before the imprisonment of the Earl of Glamorgan, Glamorgans peace
not secure or honorable.
I abundantly represented unto your honors that the peace, which then was in
agibation* was (...) on any. Fitles neither honest nor, secure but scand alous
in the opinion of his Holyneisse and the rest of the Catholic ^rine^sland
that, for that cause, ^^ would in no sort ^^ndescend thereunto and whereas the
same (peace after the release of the said Earl) is as yet, lessei secure, by
reason of many accidents that befell and seeing his Holiness, has sent (...)
me the heads of the peace agreed upon at Rome between his Holiness and her
Majesty the Queens Agent with promise of the Kings information thereof, which
heads are both honest by reason of the persons and more ample, then all the
points hitherto treated of, and do promise all the security which may be had
in these circumstances, I urge with your Honors, that you The Nu^cius urges
the Council to expect the Popes peace.
expect the Originals of the said heads. and that in the interim no other peace
be concluded, but that the Treaty of peace be deferred, least you wrong his
Holiness his benignity toward this kingdom, and your Honors incur his
indignation together with the aversion of all Princes, chiefly seeing that the
Instrument signed by your selves remaynes in my custody which before my coming
over your Honors delivered, as an answer to Master Spinola of happy memory
wherein you promised to The Cou^ cell promise to complie with the Nuncius.
do in this affair, whatsoever I upon consideration of the state of the
kingdom* should think fit to be done. If otherwise you proceed, I do
(besides the breach of your promise) protest; that I do not, neither will I
consent unto any peace or change of things or government in this kingdom,
until upon view and consideration of the foresaid heads (of the Popes peace)
it shall be maturely established what shall be more profitable to this kingdom.
And if things be otherwise carried, I protest (though with sadness of heart)
that all damages, which by this acceleration of peace shall befall the Kings
Majesty, and this miserable kingdom proceeded not from the faults of any
other, but of those who having pos^posed the reverence and gratitude due to his
Holiness, do abuse their own private affections and interest, to the
destruction of the Commonwealth. From the Palace of our residence the sixth day
of February 1645. stylo veteri.

Your Honors most addicted Servant


2. According to this protestation the Lord Nuncius, the very next day
following, to wit, the seventh of February, and again, the ninth of February,
came personally to the assembly, and having decla^ed the affection, and care
the Sea Apostolic had of this Nation (sometime for learning and sanctity,
called the Island of Saints) declared that his Holiness (to succor the
Catholic Confederates) neglected and postposed the wars by the Turks
against the Christians, by the Swelande^ against the Emperor, and other wars
nearer home, that he labored (and at length prevailed) with His Majesty, that
the Roman Catholics should not only have and quietly possess their Church
and Church Livings; but also that the Catholic Natives should be made capable
of all places of command, honor, p^ofit, or trust in the civil marshall or
Ecclesiastique government, together with many other extraordinary graces and
concessions; that he daily expected the articles of this peace; and therefore
prayed seriously that the conclusion of any peace with Ormond (which was the
worst of all other peaces) might be protracted, at least, till May, assuring us
(if we pers^vered constantly in the cause of God) that the Popes Holiness and
other Catholic Princes would never be wanting to supply the Confederate
Catholics with sufficient means and money to maintain the war, and that
he himself in the interim would defend Leinster against Ormond, in case he
condescended not to a cessation for so long a time. This motion was seconded by
noble Glamorgan by two several speeches delivered by him in the Assembly 12.
and 19, February, which was accepted and entertained by the whole house with
such joy and alacrity, as you might descry in their outward gesture their
inward consolation.

3. Our council and committees (contrary to the resolution of the whole
house) would not expect so long: they were not four days chosen, when they
gave a new commission to the committee of Treaty to conclude a peace with his
Excellency, which was signed and sealed 28. March, as you have heard. It was a
business long before concluded, as you may gather by Justice VValsh (one of
the purchasers above mentioned) his speech delivered in the house 10. February;
wherein he affirmed that he himself brought all things, points; and matters to
a full period according our wishes with the Lord Marquis; but (said he) the
imprisonment of Glam^rgan hindered the sig^ing thereof. Yet I read in the
diurnall of that day, that the chaire-man (Mr. Thomas Tyrell) informed the
house, that our Agents were in Dublin eleven weeks, and yet were not able to
conclude any thing* And Mr. Geofrey Brown declared in public assembly 15.
February, that the Marquis was resolved not to conclude a peace, until we
complied in sending over 10000. men. wherein the Marquis might have spared his
labor, the contract for sending over 10000. men being made by us with
Glamorgan, and not with him; whose peace was not (in it self) worthy the
acceptance only, much less worthy the reward of sending over 10000. men for
getting it. To be brief, thus stands the question; how dared the Committee of
Treaty to sign and seal a peace before the first of May, contrary to the
Assemblyes resolution; and how dared the new supreme Council (without consent
of the assembly) to grant them a commission to that effects. By the relation of
Mr. Brown and Mr. VValsh, you see, our committees were not engaged by all the
Treaties past, to conclude a peace with the Marquis: they might without
difficulty comply with the Popes Holiness and the Kings special commissioners
request; And this request was made by them, even then when Glamorgans articles
were in full power, because they held it not altogether so secure and
profitable, when they afterward understood, that his Majesty protested against
Glamorgans articles, do you think, that either they or the assembly would
ever yield, to accept of Ormonds fordid articles apart; either the May
following or for ever: he had more need to beg a peace of us than we of him.
Had not the country been betrayed by licencing him to receive his rents, he
had been glad to come off with better conditions, according his Majesty's
commands, and provided better for His Majesty and himself.

The Clergies subscription to the Nuncius his Protestation.
4. We also the underwritten (Prelates and Clergy of Ireland) do adhere unto
the opinion of the most illustrious Lord Nuncius, confirming what are above
expressed. And we do resolve unanimously to insist upon the same protestation.
Dated at Kilkenney the foresaid sixth day of February 1645. stylo veteri.

Hugo Ardmachanus. Fr. Thomas Dubliniensis. Thomas Casseliensis. David
Ossoriensis. Gulielmus Cor^agiens. and Duan. Io. Clonfertens. Emerus
Clogherens. Io. Laonens. Fr. Patrie. Waterford. and Lismor. Fr. Edmund.
Laghliniens. Nicholaus Fernensis. Richardus Ardsertensis and Accadensis.
Edmund. Calamens. Episcopus and Coaedjutor Linericens.
Fr. Albertus O Brien. Provincial. Ordin. Praedicatorum. Robertus Nugentius
Societatis Jesus Superior. VValterus Linchaeus Vicar General. Tuamens. Iacobus
Fallonus Vicar. Apostolic. Accadens. Fr. Oliverus de Burgo Vicar. Duaceus.
Donaldus O Gripha Vicar. Apostolic. Finiburensis. Iacobus Dempsy Vicar.
General. Kildar. Cornelius Gafnus Ardaghader Vicar. Oliver. Deise vicarius and
Procurator Reverendissimi Medensis Episcopi. Carolus Coghla^ Vicar. General.
Cluanensis.

. 11. An abridgement in English of the Lord Nuncius his Latin letter dated the
5. of May 1646. sent unto the Supreme Council and committee in the prosecution
of the said Protestation.
5. In this letter the Lord Nuncius does elegantly distinguish in the Marquis
of Ormond a double quality, the one of a Lieutenant for his Majesty, the
other of a chief Peer of the realm. In the quality of Lieutenant, he
proves no firm and solid peace can be made with him; forasmuch as his
authority No firm peace could be made with Ormond.
depends of the King, and by how much the more or the less the security and
power of his Majesty increases or decreaseth, it necessariiy follows that
the authority also of the Lieutenant increases and decreaseth, and that the
safety and authority of the King being uncertain, the authority also of
Lieutenant becomes void and uncertain etc. and if this be true in those
articles, which belong to the politic state of the Kingdom, how much more in
the Ecclesiastical state, and things belonging to the Catholic Faith;
against which (he being a Protestant) has an aversion of mind, besides the
want of authority. Wherefore the Confederate Catholics ought not by any
means choose any other way, than by laying aside in the interim any treaty of
peace. etc. until the Kings most excellent Majesty be restored Inhibition
until the King confirm the peace of Rome.
to that state and condition, as he may confirm by Parliament the Articles,
which His Holiness agreed upon with Digby in Rome: which thing seems not only
profitable and necessary for the affairs of Ireland in the present state, but
also honorable to the King himself, seeing all things are reserved to his
authority until that time, when he shall be in the full liberty of dominion,
and the loyalty of the Irish shall be able to merit somewhat with his Majesty
etc. which shall be Pidelitie of the Irish.
augmented by the Catholics public protestation, that whatsoever they
possess or acquire shall be with all loyalty and fidelity preserved for his
Majesty; who otherwise may be washed out of all, if Parliamentarie Harpies
once fix their Tallons in them.

6. He proceeds further showing how glorious it shall be unto the
Confederate Catholics, that the advance of the Catholic cause, the
splendor, liberty, laws, rites, and public exercise of Religion, proceeded
rather from themselves, and from the innate love they bear to true Religion,
than from any treaty with the Marquis, whose authority lies a bleeding, etc.
All Christian Princes (and chiefly the Pope) would be offended, that any peace
(and that of abject conditions) should be here treated of, while the peace
(containing honorable and good conditions) concluded upon in Rome does expect
only our Kings approbation; as if particular men (and those Procestants to)
could better provide for Ireland, and the Catholic Church; than His Holiness
can do.

7. If the Marquis be considered as a Peer of the Realm; in that respect he
may have all things common to the rest of the Irish, The Church's care that
loyalty he observed to Princes 11. 5. 7.
and therefore I hold he may be a defender of his country against the common
enemies. And if he will, as an Irish man, and a Servant to his Majesty gather
all his forces against the Scots and Parliamentaries, he ought to be received,
yea, and to be assisted by money and other subsidies, so as the Catholic
Religion by such kind of conjunction receive no detriment: for effecting
whereof he lays down (among other) these conditions; if it shall ever happen
that the forces of the Marquis be joined with the Catholic forces, that then
he may by no means establish any other Religion, than the Catholic Religion
in all places, which shall happen to be gained by the same armies joint
together, otherwise the Popes aides, as well present as future may by no means
be employed for the advance of Protestanisme, which were impious That the
Consederates so treat with the Marquis, at our hopes of having or obtaining a
Catholic Viceroy after the expiration of his time, be not frustrated, which
the security of Religion does chiefly require, and His Holiness does
vehemently desire. Therefore to this end we must be wary, least in the
interim, while the affairs of England do waver, we do any thing, which may
compel the Nuncius Apostolicus, in the behalf of His Holiness, to protest
against it, as by his private letters he has protested a few days past. He
adds further, that Dublin be delivered to the possession of the Confederates
to be preserved for the Kings most excellent Majesty; that all hopes may be
cut off from the Pu^itans, who perpetually thirst after the possession thereof,
etc. I trow, this should be a forewarning prevalent enough with our Council
and Committees not to conclude a peace with the Marquis upon such base
conditions, as they have done.

. 12. The Council and Committee of Instructions Latin answer 1. Iunij 1646.
to the foresaid letter and protestation abriged into English.
8. IN the first place they acknowledge the receipt of the letter and
protestation, and do observe the resolution of the Lord Nuncius and Clergy to
be such, as he will have no peace at any hand concluded with the Kings
Commissarie, unless first the splendour of the Catholic Roligion be
established, and with the articles published. In the second place they admire,
that the protestation came not sooner unto their hand, and at length they
answer, that the weakness and necessity of the Confederate Catholics
enforces them to a peace; that by public declaration printed 1642. and by
their Agents they sent to the Pope and other Christian Princes to demand aid,
and that for the space of five years war, they received not so much succor
as would defray the charge of war for two months time; that they looked
only for as much means as would maintain 15000 foot and 2000. horse for six
months times, and they would undergo all hazards, and endure all
discommodities to increase the splendor of the Catholic Religion through all
parts of this Kingdom; which they obtained not. The consideration of these
things (say they) and the obedience due to his Majesty enforces them to make
ANY PEACE to prevent the fatal miseries of War, and the sudden ruin of
Religion and Nation.

9. Yet they tell the Lord Nuncius, that they resolve to ratify (mark the
phrase, I pray you, ratas habere) Glamorgans concessions granted by the Kings
authority, and to endeavor by the authority of the Sea Apostolic, and the
mediation of other Catholic Princes to obtain more plentiful graces for the
establishing of the Catholic Religion; that in the Treaty of peace there was
place left for further privileges of the Catholic Religion. They further
affirm, that in the last treaty at Dublin nothing was done without consulting
the Nuncius, and that according his desire, the Conclusion (mark that hitherto
the peace was not concluded, and therefore they were as yet at liberty to
conclude the peace or not conclude See against this 5. 19.
it) and publication of the peace was deferred until the Calends of May, least
any impediment should be given to the conditions, which were expected by that
time to come, (but are not yet come.) They pray his Grace to take notice, if it
shall happen the peace shortly to be concluded and published without the
promulgation of Glamorgans concessions, that same is pro re, and to the greater
good of the Religion.

10. They proceed further aggravating the present state of the kingdom in the
temporality: Mounster exhausted with war cherishes many enemies in her
bosom, who daily increase by the patronage of the Parliament of England and
revolt of Thomond. In Connaght all is wasted (besides Galway and Mayo,)
Roscoman Boil, and other Forts revolting, etc. General O Neyle has so wasted
Leynster, before he went to Vlster, that three or four counties thereof are
unprofitable for the plow, and in themselves miserable, etc. They add the
fear of the Lieutenants conjunction with the Scots, etc. insomuch, as force,
fear, and danger beget in all men a desire to embrace any peace: Besides fear
of the Scots conjunction with the Parliament, the King being now in their power
a peace timely made may alone hinder this, which being concluded, the
catholics may serve God and their King, and free themselves from all those
evils.

This Letter was signed thus. Illustrissimae ac Reverendissimae Dominationis
vestrae addictissimi,

Muskry.
De mandato Concisij

Thomas Tyrell.






11. Why the Viscount Muskry alone subscribed hereunto and none else, I do not
know, unless it be, because the ill affected of the Council (for so they
call, in the Manuscript outside of the Articles, the soundest part of the
Council and those that were not of the faction) did not condescend thereunto.

13. The Lord Nuncius his Letter 10. Iunij 1646. sent to the same Council and
Committee.

12. Least I might (says he) in this most weighty circumstance of things,
seem to have sent unto your honors two several protestations without any
ground of reason; I pray you would Two Protestation sent by the Lord Nuncius.
read the same reasons, which moved me so to diswade the peacc in these times,
which is now propounded esteeming me to have been compelled to write these
things out of ze^le only toward Religion, and the honor of the Catholics of
this kingdom etc. And having repeated the substance of his foresaid Letter
touching the double quality of the Marquess of Ormond, he says, that though
there could be a peace made, yet it ought not to be made for the following
reasons. For seeing nothing is therein established concerning the Catholic
religion, etc. by what means I beseech you, may the Catholic Confederats
defend themselves, if (among others) even the Nuncius Apostolic is to become
witness among all Christian Princes; that the Catholics might have The good
peace rejected; the worse accepted
better conditions from her Majesty the Queen in France the last year; and as
yet better from the Lord of Glamorgan in these later Months, and as yet the
most plentiful of all concluded by his Holiness in Rome, and yet that the
Confederate Catholics, all these peaces being contemned, after so many
months cessations, in the very point of new difficulties in England, and after
that a full halte year of the time to make war is past over; yea, when the
enemies are all almost beaten back, should accept of a worse peace, than the
other three; Let every conscience bear witness, whether by such a resolution
the Oath of Association taken with such glory and constancy be not violated.

13. It is therefore manifest, unless first the Catholics be assured, that
the Kings Majesty would ratify the Earls authority, and that the Queens
Majesty has clearly understood whether the Popes conditions shall have place,
or no, whatsoever shall be done, shall tend to the evident destruction of this
kingdom, and to the extirpation of Religion (which is the head of all) and to
the notable injury of the Princes, who hitherto have labored for the safety
and security of the Catholic Confederats; which is so much the more true,
seeing no reasonable motive can be assigned by the adverse party for concluding
this peace. Then answering to No reasonable motive to conclude this peace.
the objection of the danger of the Scots, he says there is no danger of more
Scots to come over this season being busily employed elsewhere, and as for
those, that are in Vlster and Connaght, they are sufliciently provided against,
by two Armies mayntained by the Popes moneys. There remaynes therefore only
the Lord Marquess his forces: and those forces, how great are they, that they
may not be repulsed? And seeing we need not fear the enemies this year, why
should not we hope that even the soldiers that are in Mounster may, after
this present expedition, be turned to the defense of Leinster, and by what
other ways soever to preserve Leynster. Wherefore (right honorable) it must
be concluded, that that peace must in no sort be made; neither must it be
treated of, before the things mentioned be notifyed unto you, least by an
imaginary New warning not to conclude a peace.
utility of repose, you leese your estimation with Christian Princes. Be these
spoken over and above, what in my Protestations, and in my letters to the
Supreme Council I have sufliciently declared, praying that your Honors would
ponder them with the same spirit I wrote them, namely for the sole increase of
the Catholic Church, and the true and solid felicity of Ireland, which
felicity God alone and the Catholic faith is able to give, all things else
concluded, whatsoever the world, and the followers thereof can say. Thus far
elegantly and religiously the Lord Nuucius in Latin.

. 14. An abridgement in English of a third Letter in Latin dated 25. Iumj 1646.
and sent to the same Council and Committee by the Nuncius in answer to their
Letter.
14 HAving acknowledged the receipt of the Council and Committees letter above
mentioned, he first shows wherefore he did not sooner communicate the
protestations Why the protestation was made and for a while concealed.
to them., Know therefore (says he) that therefore the said protestation has
been made by me, when in the months past, it was vehemently doubted, (and not
without cause) that the Supreme Council and Committees would then by all
means conclude a peace with the Lord Lieutenant, and not expect the articles
transacted between his Holiness and her Majesty the Queen of England, and by
consequence that they would prefer any other peace before the Popes peace,
which contained most honorable and most plentiful conditions for this
kingdom. And when I presented this my grief unto the Prelates and Clergy, they
(without reluctance of any) subscribed to my opinion, according to the
reverence they ought and do bear to his Holiness. But wherefore the
protestation was suppressed, I alone am the cause thereof, being not willing to
show it, until I were compelled through great necessity, and desiring (for the
love and observance I bear your honors) that it could be perpetually
suppressed, but wherefore I have in this present state of things manifested it:
this was the cause; that your honors might seriously consider that both
Clergies are yet much more ready to subscribe unto it again, if any peace be
The treaty of peace not discovered to the Nuncius.
concluded, that may be any way scandalous or less honorable for Religion,
when as for the expectation of the articles of Rome they so readily subscribed
thereunto.

15. He denies that they communicated unto him the manner of their proceeding
in the treaty, saying, though they still informed him of many missions of the
Committee, to Dublin, yet it is also certain, that they never spoke unto him
until the month of March of the peace with the Marquess now subscribed, nay
it was expressly denied, although I oftentimes showed that I understood from
many places of such a thing, and when after the notable declination of the
Kings Majesty, and the wonderful change of the state of things, I wrote two
letrers to your honors, the one the 27. of April the other* the 5. of May sent
from Kilkenny, wherein I endeavored to show that no peace could be made with
the Marquess, etc. I vehemently grieved I could get no answer to them, neither
were the letters publicly read in the Committee, nor the reasons pondered,
etc. whereof there can be no other cause, than that hidden conclusion of peace,
which could be no way dissembled, if answer were given. Whence I might easily
suspect that, which for many months has been bruited, namely, the
magnificent proclayming of the communication of all matters with me, and my
consent thereunto that by such reports the people might* be drawn with more
alacrity to consent unto this intended peace. Which thing (most illustrious
Lords) imposed a great necessity on me (if an honorable peace were not
concluded) to admonish the kingdom and the chief Cities thereof, that I never
The Nu^cius never assented to Ormonds peace.
gave assent thereunto, least I should seem by my silence and presence to
blemish the most holy intention of his Holiness, who urges nothing more, than
this free and public exercise of the Catholic Religion, etc.

16. Unto the necessities alleged by the Supreme Council and Committee, he
answers, no necessities could be so pressing as to force the Confederats to
make any peace, or to accelerate Answers to the necessity.
political conclusions without an honorable addition of things
Ecclesiastical also, etc. and that the cause, why such plentiful succors, as
they expected from Rome, came short of their expectation, was, that at Rome, it
was held that the Supreme Council and Committees by their Cessations with the
Lord Lieutenant did corrupt the good success of the affairs, and the
progress of their victories, whereby they injured themselves and his
Holiness, which opinion grew so strong in Court, as the same was insinuated by
the sacred Congregation unto the Nuneius himself, when he was there, and among
those of the wisest sort grew so violent, as it can hardly be now blotted out.
He adds further, though the succor, by himself brought being considered
abstractively, were indeed very little, in respect of what his Holiness, and
other Princes of Italy together with the cardinals, resolved to send; yet ought
they to be esteemed much considering the poverty of the Sea Apostolic; which
by the last wars was in a manner exhhausted, and the charge of sending hither
an Archbishop, a Nuncius Apostolic, etc. which was an undoubted pledge of
further succors from time to time, neither ought they to be esteemed small
succors, without which the Armies could not be timely sent into the field this
year, and by which in Vlster two great victories have been obtained, and a
whole province freed, and such a slaughter made of the enemy, as was not heard
of these four hundred years, which with the hopes of Prestons victories in
Connaght are strong arguments, that the monyes given by the Sea Apostolic for
the advance of the Catholic Religion do bring forth immense fruit, even to
miracle, if with due confidence and estimation they be received and employed.

17. He urges the affairs of Vlster to proceed so well, as that Province was
never in better condition, and that the proceeding of Connaght was not of less
hope, and that if Bunratty were besieged, as it ought, the Army that was in
that Province might be sent to Mounster and so three Provinces recovered in the
residue of this Summer. Wherefore (says the zealous and incomparable Prelat)
seeing the Marquess No cause of fear.
of Ormond alone remaynes, who may oppose himself to the Confederats, I pray
you, what reason have you, why you should fear him, if he may neither join
with the Scots now overthrown, and that he is in such want of moneys, as he
has been forced to beg three thousand pounds from your Honors these later
months to make up soldiers, for from England there is no danger that any
succors shall come unto him this Summer. Give me leave (right Hhonourable) to
speak freely to you, this favor and miracle of heaven requires from you some
compensation or thankesgiving; this can never better be paid by you, than by
laying aside all fear, and by increasing your confidence in the divine aid.

18. He goes on egregiously showing, there was no necessity on our part, nor
any power or authority on the Marquesle his part, to make a peace; that more
prejudice would More prejudice by this peace, than by a war.
arise by such a peace, than by war, as first the dishonor, which thereby
might redowne to the Nuncius. Secondly, the dishonor unto the whole Nation
among Christian Princes abroad. Thirdly, the distaste of the Sea Apostolic,
that the worst of all peaces should be preferred before his, which was the best
of all. Fourthly, that it was as good to make no peace at all for the Church,
as to trust Glamorgans peace being now recalled by his Majesty, by Glamorgan
himself abandoned, and the condition no way performed. Fiftyl, the ruin of the
Catholic Faith by raising unto the chief government a Protestant Lieutenant.
Sixthly, the danger of resuming Armies, when the enemy is put in the height of
authority and power. Seventhly, the assurance of no reconciliation with the
Pope, if the peace were concluded. Eighthly, the exile of the Nuncius. Ninthly,
the just fear of loosing whatsoever the Confederate Catholics have gained.

19. He fore warnes them of their dishonor among Catholic Princes, to whom
he must publickely notify his dissent from that peace, and advises them by no
means to go forward in the peace if there were any difficulty, that a
General assembly should be called upon to determine the same the least
mischief should fall on their own heads alone, and least they might be
thought to have examined lightly and contemptibly the Popes reasons. Thus far
the Apostolic Legate, where you are to observe that after this answer was made
by the Lord Nuncius, and before the peace was legally concluded Bunratty and
Roscoman were gained by the Catholic Confederats, and Prestons Trophyes
erected by purging all Connaght (Sligo only excepted) of the Scots, whereof
more numb. 32.

. 15. The Authors observations on the Council and Committees Letter above
mentioned. 12. and their reasons to conclude this peace resuted.
20. THe Author observes in the first place that the Council and Committee
acknowledge the receipt of the Nuncius and Clergies protestation against any
peace to be made with the Marquess of Ormond, together with the Lord Nuncius
his letter to the same effect. In which the Nuncius declares the cause of his
opposition to such a peace, namely, until first the splendour of the Catholic
Religion be ^stablished, and with the articles published. For this cause
chiefly the Catholic Confederats took up arms, as appears by their
several Declarations, Remonstrances to his Majesty, solemn Oath of
Associa^ion, Model of government, and several acts established and published
in both the Assemblies held in Midsummer 1645. and February 1645. The same is
confessed by the Council and Committee in this very answer sent by them to the
Nuncius: Templa, aedes sacrae, altaria, aur haereticorum polluta ins^rviebant
vesaniae. aut solo aequae^a jacuerunt penes Protestants, etc. pro aris and
focis and Regis sui indubitato jure bell lum iner^es moverunt. See as yet more
amply in their own Declaration, and other evidences hereafter to be produced.
upon these grounds, and upon the promise made by the same Council under their
own hands, and delivered to Master Spinola that they would never make any
peace, but what the Lord Nuncius would consent unto (whereof mention is made in
the Lord Nuncio his protestation above, and hereafter shall be made more
susely) the Lord Nuncius (and with him the clergy) confidently avouched he
would never consent unto any peace, until first the splendour of the Catholic
Religion were established and with the articles published. With the Lord
Nuncius and Clergy agree the soundest and all the disinteressed part of
Council and Committees, whom those others, who concluded this pacification, or
peace in expectancy, term the ill affected of the Council, etc. and with
these also conspire the whole kingdom in then several protestations and acts
published in the Assembly held in Midsommer 1645. namely, 2. 4. 9. 11. 13.
Iunij 1645. and 14. 18. 21. 28. of August, and in the assembly held in February
1645. namely, 5. 7. 9. 10. 12. 19. etc. The two powerful Armies (such as never
yet were seen in Ireland) raised and gathered together on a sudden (even then
when the late Council had exhausted Pope Clergy and kingdom) to defend the
public cause, does confirm the general dissent of the Confederat
Catholics from that illegal unsafe and unsecure peace, which defense had
proved the most fortunat to Religion, King and Country, that ever Ireland saw,
had not faction and sedition, preverted the happy success thereof. But Expecta
Dominum viriliter age and confertetur cor tuum. By all which it appears how
far they erred, who in their foresaid answer to the Nuncius affirmed that the
chief Cities, Counties, and Commanders were glad to embrace ANY PEACE, etc.
Experience has taught the^ ere now, the contrary, notwithstanding the
multitude of conspiracies wrought to seduce such Cities and Commanders.

21. To prove the revocation of the Committees commission by the said
protestation, we say, that as the body politic of this Kingdom is composed
of two parts, the spiritual and the temporal, so ought not the temporal part
alone aslume such authority to it self, as to conclude a peace for the whole
body, even then when the spiritual part positively resisted. That the
temporal part should dispose of the lives, livelihood, liberties and estates
of the spiritual part, at their own pleasure without their consent, was a
sacrilege practiced in the apostaticall days of Henry the eight, yet did he
still preserve the Catholic faith, and established several acts of
Parliament for securing thereof, only he erred in the point of Supremacy. In
our days the one and the other is taken from us; a few secular men not only
dispose of the lives, livelihood, liberties, and estates of the Church; but
also distroy Faith and Religion, by giving the same over unto the Tutelship of
the sworn Enemies of Faith and Religion, and (as if they were emulous of the
prosperity of holy Church) have renounced those great graces, which our
Sovereign conferred on us, for the conservation and free exercise of our
Religion, and accepted of his subject (whom they know to have, at least,
indirectly, vowed the ruin of Religion) abject Scire vos oportet quod nunquam
ab aliquibus nostr^os homines sinimus ^pprimi: sed si necessitas ulla
occurrerit, praesentaliter vindicamus, quiae nostri gregis in omnibus ultores
esse debemus and praeciput adiutores. Leo. 4. habetur* c. 23. q. 8. cap. 8.
omni timore ac terrore deposito contrae inimicos sanstae fidei and adversarios
omninm Religionum agere viriliter sludete: no vit enim Omnipotens, si quilibet
vestrum mor^itur, quod pro veritate fidei, and salvatione patriae, ac
defensione mortuus est, ideo ab eo praemium caleste consequetur. idem ibid.
cap* 9.
pernicious conditions destructive to Religion. Nothing now is wanting, but
that they imitate the monstrous Parliament in England, who after taking away
Church and Church Livings, Faith and Religion, have at length discarded the
Prelates, and chief Pastors of Faith and Religion, but as that body is
monstrous without a head; so is it imperfect without the chief members
thereof: nam and corpus non est unum membrum, sed multa etc quod si essent
omnia unum membrum ubi corpus? The eye cannot say to the hand, I nee de not thy
help: nor the head to the feet, ye are not necessary for me; The error had
been more gross, if the temporal or material part of either natural or
politic body did say to the spiritual part, I have no need of thee, you are
not necesary for me: If the body did say unto the soul, or the Lay man to his
spiritual Pastor, I have no need of thee. We have had only one Church man
(the right Reverend the Archbishop of Dublin) among those 13. persons, who were
selected for the committee of Treaty; but they made use of this Prelate in the
Treaty, as accomptants do ciphers in numbers. If the Clergy attempted to
conclude a peace for temporal matters without consent of the seculars; what
think you; would not the seculars be justly ossended with the Clergy, and
reject such a peace? How much more reason has the Clergy to be offended with
those few seculars that attempted (and that without commission) to conclude a
peace in matters of Faith and religion, of Church and Church Livings, of
sacrifices and Sacraments without their consent? The principal end of our
war being to repair and propagate the Catholic faith and to vindicate the
injuries done unto the Professors of the same, who ought rather to approve,
authorize, or prosecute the same, than the prime Prelates of faith and
religion? ye ought to know (says Pope Leo the fourth Supreme Pastor of holy
Church) that we never permit our people to be oppressed by any, but if any
necessity occur we d^fend them without delay, because we ought in all things
to be defender, of our fl^cke, and ^hiefe assistants: for Bishops ought not
only to be keepers of Papers, but also defenders of Churches. Wherefore the
same Pope wri^ing to the French army exhorts them, having laid aside all fear,
to endeavor manfully to set upon the Enemies of holy faith, and the
adversaries of all Religions: for the Omnipotent knows, if every one of you
should happen to dye, that ye dye, for the (...) of faith, and saving of your
Country and defense of Christians* and therefore ye shall receive from him a
^elestiall reward.

22. Much more might be alleged as well out of the said Pope, as out of others,
whose steps have been traced by the late Pope Viban the eight, and the now Pope
Innocent the tenth, in their several Apostolical Missives addressed unto the
confederate Catholics authorizing their holy war and exho^ting them to the
prosecution thereof, which because the same is elsewhere treated of, I omit in
the present Survey; I will only here summatily lay down what in other Canons
(touching the Ecclesiastical power to make war) are more amply to be found.
In the power granted to Se^ Mercur Apologetic. position. 1. ^x can. extrau,
commu. lib. 1. tit. 8. de major. and obed c. 1.
Saint Peter, and his successors, there are two swords, a spiritual and a
temporal etc. he that denies the temporal sword to be in the power of Peter
understands not rightly the word of our Lord, saying, put up thy sword into thy
sheath Matthew. 26. Both then, to wit, the spiritual and material sword, are in
the power of the Church, but this indeed to be employed for the Church, that by
the Church; That by the hand of the Priest, this by the hands of Kings and
Soldiers, but at the command of the Priest. But one sword must be under the
other, and the temporal authority must be subject to the spiritual power. By
the Popes Edict war is made not only against heretics, the enemies of
faith and other Rebels, but also when his known subjects (the Catholics) V^i
supex lac. de Graffijs decision. 28. and canonib.
are oppressed. He may lawfully proclaim war, not only against Infidells,
but grant tithe also for so pious an act, seeing that such a war tends to
the defense and ampliation of faith; and to the recoverie of the lands whereof
they have been robbed and wherein Christ was worshipped, as also because by
this war the common profit as well of the Clergy, as of the laytie and
Churches is procured.

23. This much I have expressed for the information of out seculars, to the end
they may take notice, that as a war for the reparation and propagation of the
Catholic faith is authorized by holy Church; so a peace concerning the same
faith ought to be established and concluded by the same Church; and not by any
private Lay men, whereof some peradventure have possessed themselves of our
Churchlivings by the oppression of Henry the eight, who therefore cannot but be
partial Judges in their own cause, howbeit traepidaverunt timore ubi non erat
timor; the Clergy of Ireland preferring the public good before their own
private interest, are ^eady to renounce their interest to such Church Livings,
according the dispensation and relaxation made or to be made by the Sea
Apostolic, and according the unanimous resolution of the kingdom assembled
together. The punishment inflicted by God on Vzias, Jeroboam, and other
seculars for intermedling with spiritual affairs, invitis Sacerdotibus, may
be a sufficient caveat for others to decline such negotiation. Neither ought
they think it strange that Churchmen should interpose themselves in martial
affairs, especially when the same concerns Faith and Religion; herein they
have as paterns to imitate the Prince and High Priest Mathathias, and his
posterity, the noble Machabeans, Judas Machabeus, Ionathas, Simon, John,
Onias, etc. who in defense of holy Church, and 1. Macha^ 2. 66. c. 3. 11. 23.
c. 4. 20. 34. c. 10. etc.
their Country liberties defeated Apollonius, Seron, Lysias, Pto^omeus,
Nicanor, and Gorgias, chief commanders for King Antiochus and his son. More
for the present I omit; for indeed this matter deserves a special treati^e.
Our conclusion upon this first observation is, that the committee of Treaties
commission (if it were ought worth) was sufficiently recalled before the
conclusion of any peace) by the chief members of the body politic of this
Kingdom, to wit, the clergy, who are the spiritual members thereof, and with
all by the authority of the Sea Apostolic, to whom it belongs to make peace
or war in like case; Especially when the secular Prince is not able to redress
the subjects grievance. See n. 46. etc.

24. In the second place I observe, our late Council and Committees have
violated the public faith and promise made by them to the Nuncius
Apostolic, assuring him they would never conclude any peace, but that
whereunto he would condescend, upon which conditions he came into Ireland, and
they accordingly accepted of him. Hereof the Nuncius challenged them in the
above protestation; but their silence in not answering thereunto argues their
tacit confession of breach of promise. I do not know what conscience men may
frame unto themselves, to send into Rome by letters and Agents, praying the Sea
Apostolic, to help and honor this Nation with a Nuncius Apostolic, and
after so great a Prince and Prelat (having exposed himself to many dangers by
Sea and by Land) arrived in this Kingdom with full and ample power to aid and
assist the confederate Catholics, not only by his council and advise, but
also by the contribution of moneys and ammunition; to make use of him to serve
their own turns, but never to follow his ways or direction, never perform
what they promised, but lurkingly to proceed in the conclusion of this
miserable peace. Whereof the Nuncius being privately advertised, and observing
the sudden sending of the committee of Treaty to Dublin, challenged them of
their promise; unto whom by their lelter dated at Kilkenny mense Marcij 1645.
they answered that the committee concluded no articles of peace, neither could
there be any articles of peace perfected or have any power before the Calends
of May, and that nothing was done contrary to the sense of the paper signed
and delivered to his most Illustrious domination, and therefore prayed him to
give credit unto them, professing these things. Its not without mystery, that
the day of the month of March is omitted in this letter: least they should be
found guilty of notable falsehood; for at this very time were the committee in
Dublin actually laboring in drawing up the articles of peace, and in signing
and sealing the same; for (if you be remembered) their commission was given them
the 6. day of the same month of March, the draught of the Articles was given
Mr Darcy by the Viscount Muskerie on the 14. of the same month, and signed and
sealed on the 28. wherefore the council did purposely abstain from putting to
the letter the precise day of the date thereof, to conceal their own sinister
and clancular proceeding in concluding that peace, contrary to their promise
past unto the Nuncio, which in this last letter of the first of June they
tacitly confess. But by their good leave, they went beyond their commission;
for neither had they, nor our Committees of Treaty any further power. but to
prepare all affairs concerning the treaty of peace, not to conclude the peace,
as appears by the act of Assembly, dated the second day of the same month of
March.

Twelve answers refuting the objection affirming that the Lord Nuncius desired
to protrast the peace with Ormond no longer than until May.
25. IN this Letter of the first of June the Council and Committee of
Instructions affirm that, according to the desire of the Lord Nuncius the
conclusion and publication of the peace was deferred until the Calends of May,
least any impediment should be given to the conditions (of peace) which by that
time were expected from Rome. Whereunto answer is made first, that as they 1
Answer
broke their first promise freely made unto the Nuncius by that Instrument,
which they delivered to Spinola, whereby they obliged themselves never to
conclude any peace, but what should be to his liking; so here also have they
foully broken their promise by signing and sealing a peace on the 28. day of
March, which was upwards of a moves before the Calends of May, which they
themselves (in their confirmation of the peace) do call a concluding or
agreeing upon, etc. Secondly, 2. Answer
I answer that in the diurnals of the assembly held in February 1645. I read
of an agreement past between the Lord Nuncius, Glamorgan; and the committee of
Instructions, See hereafter. 19.
which was published in the assembly by Glamorgan 19. of February 1645. but
this agreement, or happy conclusion of peace (for so my note terms it) could
not receive full satisfaction until May. How the self same committee could
without breach of faith conclude, or give order to the committee of Treaty, to
sign and seal a peace the 28. of March following, contrary to this agreement,
I conceive not. Thirdly I answer that the full satisfastion, which by May was
expected was the coming 3. Anfwer
of a more secure, more honorable and more advantageous peace from Rome; which
was imagitation between his Holyness^ and our Queen, then Glamorgans own
peace, which the Nuncius publickely declared in the assembly 9. of February
1645. But as the heretics of England did hinder this more secure and more
honorable peace from the Pope, so did our council and committees (I mean
still, the corrupt part of both) hinder not only that peace, but Glamorgans
peace also: for their preposterous acceleration of the sealing and signing of
Ormonds disadvantagious and unwarrantable peace, could produce no better
effect, than to give occasion to his Majesty to recall Glamorgans peace, and to
give command to desist in the prosecution of the Treaty with his Holiness, his
Majesty having once notice that the Marquess of Ormond had concluded with us
upon far in feriour conditions; for we are to know that this unjust peace was
a moulding half a year before, and that the Marquess had time enough to
inform his Majesty thereof, thereby to invite his Majesty to the revocation of
Glamorgans Commission.

25. Hence proceeds a fourth answer? that the Lord Nuncius seeing the delay of
the Popes peace, and the revocation The 4. answer.
(though invalid) of Glamorgans peace before May, very providently and
carefully sent unto the council and committee of Instructions before the
Kalends of May the foresaid protestation made by himself and the clergy
against any peace to be made with the Marquess of Ormond; and least that
should not prevayle with them, he sent unto them (before May also) his special
letters dated the 27. of April inhibiting them from proceeding on Ormonds
peace, which he confirmed by those three other letters of the fifth of May, 10.
and 27. of June above mentioned, which (I trow) was a sufficient revocation of
any allowance they could pretend to have had from the Nuncius to conclude a
peace with Ormond after May; a thing neither he nor any good catholic would
ever consent unto, having seen the revocation of Glamorgans peace, and the
damnable practices of his and our adversaries, and for this very cause the
Nuncius fl^tly denied at Limmericke (as is said) to give his benediction to any
of our committee of Treaty going to Dublin, Plunket only expected, whose
re-Iuctancy and aversion against that unhappy peace is welknowne.

26. Here I must prevent such nimble wits, as thus ar^ue: The 5. answer.
the Nuncius desired the conclusion of the peace with Cr^on^ should be
protracted until May. Ergo he consented, it should be concluded after May;
this consequence I deny, as they themselves would deny this sequel, if one
bidding them adieu, would say, God be with you until I see you again. Ergo he
minds that God shall not be with them after he see the^ again. Unto Micol
the daughter of Saul (says the holy Text) was there no child borne until the
day of her death. Will our committees 2 Reg. ^^ 26.
or any other thence infer, by reason of the word (until) that she had a
child after her death. Until heaven and earth pass, one Matthew. 5. 19.
jot or one tittle, shall not pass of the law. It follows not that after
heaven and earth pass, that then the law shall pass. He had been an
Helvidian heretic, who against our blessed Ladies perpetual and unspotted
virginity, would infer out of this passage of the Scripture: Joseph did not
know our Lady Matthew. ^. 25. Math. 28. 20. Psalm. 109. 1. Chrysostom. in c. 1.
Matthew. Hie^. ^bid. and contra Hcluid.
until she brought forth her first hegotten child. Ergo he knew her after.
More you may read in the Scriptures, Fa^hers, and Schoolmen. It is known
what sinister practices the corrupt part of that council and committees, used
in this matter, when they pleased to say a peace was concluded with Ormond (to
hinder any other peace) it was and must have been so; when they pleased to say
there was no peace concluded with Ormond (for their own advantage) it was so:
and their faction grew so strong, and their Art so indust^ious, as in our later
assemblies, they seemed to rule and govern faith and religion; kingdom and
people, as they pleased. That would I once see well discussed, how and by what
commission the committee of Treaty signed and sealed the rejected peace before
the Kalends of May, contrary to their own See hereafter.. 18. 19.
promise and the promise made by the whole kingdom to the Nuncius? By what
commission or authority did the late council and committees immediately after
the signing and sealing of that rejected peace betray the country in sending
over D^gby into Frunce, there to make a faction, and by the power of the Arms
of France to force that unsafe peace upon the confederate catholics of
Ireland, and upon sending him over, to rack this kingdom by taking up by
force 1200. or 1500. pounds in money from the catholics to furnish a known
adversa^y to Religion and country in that voyage, and to disappoint the
kingdom of the best Shipping they had by trusting the same unto him?

27. It has been observed, that the late Supreme council and committee of
Instructions have exhausted this distressed Nation in succouring and relieving,
maintayning and supplying with monyes the two greatest adversaries to Religion
and countre^, that ever Ireland saw; and have evermore subtracted all means
and sustenance from the two great Noble Catholic subjects Antrim and
Glamorgan, who have been chiefly entrusted by King and countroy to bring these
unhappy disorders to a happy attonment. By public Assembly Antrim was allowed
to carry, into Scotland a certain number of men for the Kings service, and to
defray that charge a considerable sum was granted unto him by the catholic
confederats. Our late council by influences (as is said) from Dublin, crossed
all that design, and had stopped the Marquess of Antrim himself, had he not
timely slipped anchor, and got him away. Can there nothing be done for Religion,
King or country but by the adversaries of Religion, King and country? Ah, let
never any inordinat affection toward any private subject diminish in any their
zeal to Religion, loyalty to sovereign, and love to their own native
country? Mr. Brent the Lawyer standing near the cross of Kilkenny seeing
proper Irish gentlemen walk in the streets, was heard to pronounce these
words, or words to that effect, were it not pity that these proper gentlemen
were forced to employ their arms against, and kill one another, which
undoubtedly they will do, if they accept not of what peace the Marquess of
Ormond will prescribe unto them. The very like words he was heard to iterate in
Dublin. Doctor Meara wrote from England to Dublin to a friend in Dublin words
to this effect: Here (with the King) all things concerning Ireland are squared
according the rule prescribed by your great one there, his will is that the
dismembered Parliament there (in Dublin) continue, and prayed the King to turn
the Irish over unto him, and be would draw them to what conditions he pleased.
Others say, the same great one protested, That he would spill the least drop of
blood that run in his veins before he would suffer the least luster of the
Protestant Church to be diminished. Whether he meant the Church, which the
Kings Majesty calls protestant Church, or that Synagogue, which the parliament
in these later days has baptized protestant Church, I leave to the
interpretation of his own ghostly father in Dublin. See the Marquess his
Treaty with the Parliament Commissioners. page 21. 6. Answer


28. When the Council and committee promised under their hand unto the
Nuncius, that they would conclude no peace, but what would be to his liking,
they limited no time, until May or Mid-somer; neither did the Nuncius or
Congregation in their several protestations made against any peace to be so
concluded with the Marquis of Ormond limit any such time. It is therefore
certain, that neither Nuncius nor Clergy did ever consent, that such a peace
should be concluded 7. Answer
after May. Yet if we did suppose a falsehood, that they consented a peace
should be concluded after May, with the Marquis, it follows not, that they
consented, such a peace should be concluded, which is known not to be the same
with that, which then (in the month of February and August) was in agitation,
and publickely read in the assembly, as we have observed in the first part,
chiefly on the first article. Nay, if we may give credit unto some of
integrity, who were of the Committee of Instructions, those very articles,
which were read among themselves privately, were notably changed unawares of
the said committee. Matters were carried with such secrecy, as they were not
communicated unto any disinteressed person of Council or Committee: for, qui
male agit, edit lucem. Again, though we did suppose, 8. Answer
that not only the Nuncius and Clergy, but also the whole kingdom should once
consent, yea, authorize the committee of Treaty to go forward in the peace
with the Marquis, which once was read in Assembly, being then assured of the
full benefit of Glamorgans peace, and in expectation of the Popes peace, does
it therefore follow, that when this assurance of Glamorgans peace was taken
away and our expectation of the Popes pe^ce frustrated, the same consent of
Nuncius, Clergy and Kingdom, together with the mandat given to the Committee
of Treaty, must still remain, especially when that very peace, they concluded
with Ormond put an obstacle not only to the benefit of Glamorgans peace, but
also to all other peaces, the law tells us that in this case the mandat or
commission given is extinguished: extinguitur euim L. Sicum and and l. cum quis
(...) desolut.
mandatum mutatione status in deterius. consensus autem conditionatus sublata
condition tollitur.

29. Out of all which the Reader may resolve that objection, which the Council
and Committees commonly object against the Clergy, as if the Clergy
themselves did agree and consent in all points unto this peace, for (say they)
the Archbishop of Tuam in open assembly, admonished us not to trouble our
selves about the affairs of Religion and Church; for (says the Archbishop)
the Clergy are fully satisfied, and do rest content with what already is
agreed upon concerning that particular. Words to the same effect I read in my
diurnalls of the assembly 19. 20. 23. February 1645. wherein the Nuncius
himself confirmed the above mentioned speech of Glamorgan; and Glamorgan
himself signified again in public assembly that our peace then was to our
own hearts desire. But all this being after changed (as you heard) and the
King himself being The 9. Answer.
reduced to that deplorable condition, as neither his Majesty nor his Lord
Lieutenant were able to make good any conditions to be agreed upon in the
behalf of the confederate Catholics; the committee of the Treaties
commission (if any they had) was extinguished; and they (to discharge their
own conscience, and the trust imposed in them, and withal to avoid the
suspicion, which the Kingdom conceived of them) should endeavor by the
mediation of the Supreme Council and committee of Instructions, to have an
assembly forthwith called, as the Lord Nuncius earnestly desired in the behalf
of the Clergy and Kingdom. And seeing The 10. Answer.
by the words of the Archbishop of Tuam the point of Religion, and Church was
otherwise concluded and agreed upon between the Clergy and the Kings special
commissioner, they had no commission to treat or conclude any thing to the
prejudice thereof with any other. Now, if they will obstinately insist upon it,
that the Clergy or spiritual member of the body politic of this Kingdom
could not recall the power or commission granted unto them by the whole body;
surely they will not be so perversely obstinate, as to deny, they may recall the
commission, for so much of the matter to be treated of, as belonged to
themselves, namely the affairs of Religion, Church and Church Livings,
Jurisdiction, etc. Yet, I am of opinion, if one of three Merchants, who are
partners (contractu Societatis or otherwise) recall a procuration, or letter of
Attorney made by the three to one Factor, to negotiate their affairs, the
revocation is valid and good. More examples and authorities I leave to our
Lawyers to be The 11. Answer.
alleged. Lastly (to come to a period in this particular) you see by the
diurnall of the acts of Assembly 19. February above mentioned, the words go
not so, that our council or committees should expect until May the conclusion
of any peace, and that the Nuncius desired no further time (as they insinuate
in their answer) but that the conclusion of the peace between the Lord
Nuncius, Glamorgan and Committee, could not receive full satisfaction until
May. By which words alone (if all other reasons were wanting) their objection
is blasted. Yet, let us again suppose a falsehood, that the Clergy did once The
12. Answer.
consent, that the Committee of Treaty should after May conclude a peace with
the Ma^ques of Ormond; who may doubt, but they might afterward absolutely
recall any such consent, and that the committee (being certified of such
revocation) could not validly proceed? See the decretalls lib. 1. de
Rescriptis Tit. 3. cap. 33. and the gloss thereupon, where a Rescript obtained
by a Proctor or Attorney after revocation of his procuratorie is declared
invalid by Pope Gregory the ninth, which may very fitly be applied as well to
the Revocation of the Marquis of Ormonds commission, as to the revocation of
our committies commission.

A fourth observation refuting the allegation of the Council and Committee,
affirming that the necessity and calamity of the Kingdom, enforced them to
conclude this peace.
30. To the objection made concerning the necessity of our country and want of
means to prosecute the war a A threefold answer.
threefold answer is returned. First, that by conjunction with the Marquess of
Ormond upon such sordid conditions such necessity is rather augmented, than any
way decreased, as appears by what we have observed above and in the first
part of this survey in our observations on the 25. Article: for by that peace
(were it accepted) we were tied to maintain not only the Catholic
Confederats army and the Garrisons in their Quarters, but also all the armies
and Garrisons belonging to the pretended Protestants in the four Provinces of
Ireland; we should be at the charge to maintain the Marquess of Ormond his
followers, the Lord Digby, and other pretended Protestants, that throng hither,
which would be more burdensome to the kingdom, than the maintenance of an Army
in the field; to speak nothing of the danger, whereunto the Catholic
Religion would be driven by entertayning such guests, whose imaginations and
endeavors are wholly employed in sowing sedition, and division among the
Confederate catholics, to the end they might ruin this poor Nation,
suppress religion, and raise up heresy, unto whom when the catholics have
done the most charitable offices they may, they must expect no other reward
than that which the Quibus cum benefeceris pejores ^fiunt.
ten Leopards gave unto the martyr saint Ignatius. We may foresee our future
calamity by such conjunction in the present calamity wherein the distressed
Catholics in their Quarters are. The pretended Protestant party have neither
meat, money, ammunition, or other provision for war: How then do they expect
to be relieved, but by the Confederate Catholics? There were but three
hundred pounds in our Treasury at Kilkenny, when the Marquess of Ormond came
thither, which were commanded by the late council to be forthwith given to
that handful of soldiers, that waited on his Excellency to Kilkenny from
Dublin. There are, at least, fourteen thousand pounds due on the Marquess of
Ormond for the maintenance of the protestant Army, and Garrisons in his
Quarters, as appears by the Treaty past between his Excellency and the
commissioners sent unto him by the parliament. Who doubts but that great sum
would be racked from the confederate Catholics, if once they joined with him
upon the rejected peace? I p^sse by the 1200. or 1500. pounds given to the Lord
Digby, etc. add hereunto upon conjunction (upon a peace so disadvantagious to
the catholic faith) the succors expected from catholic Princes and Prelates
abroad would be wholly subtracted from us, without whose succors we shall
never be able to subsist; on the other side the p^otestant party expect nor a
groat from any their allies at home or abroad.

31. Our second answer is, that the loud cry of the people (and that confirmed
by the Lord Nuncius his letters above) is, that our late Supreme council
themselves are the chief cause of such weakness and necessity, as well
because they continued for the space of three years a tedious, chargeable, and
needless cessation with the Marquess of Ormond: by which means the
Parliamentary rebels in the North, Conaght and Mounster (who at first accepted
the cessation) had leisure enough to strengthen themselves, who having
sufficiently furnished themselves from England and other places, rejected the
cessation, and put in practice their hidden treason: as also because they
consumed vast sums of money on the Marquis of Ormond and other known enemies
of Religion without any necessity, which being observed by Catholic Princes,
and Prelates abroad, gave occasion unto them to subtract the aid and succors,
they resolved to give unto the Confederate Catholics for the advance of
Religion, and conservation of Monarchy. Our frequent missions to Dublin were
known to have corrupted men of integrity, increased division, multiplied
faction: Conversi sunt in arcum pravum. Besides the extraordinary sums
bestowed on the Lord Marquis of Ormond, our late Council licenced him (yea
were active Instruments for him) to receive all his rents and revenues out of
the Confederate Catholics Quarters; and whereas the confederate Catholics
themselves contributed to the public the fourth part of their rents, the
Marquis of Ormond had so great favor with our Council, as not only himself,
but many of his friends also contributed no more, but the eight part of such
rents, as they had within the confederate Catholics Quarters. This was not
all: they licenced him also to take up in mortage, lone, and otherwise upwards
of twenty thousand pounds worth: great yearly rents were given by them unto
those very persons, who were known to have been husband men for his
Excellency in sowing division among the confederate Catholics: those that
affected that party were preferred to places of honor, command and profit;
others that affected the public, rejected: p^mphelets made by the enemies
against the justice of our war, entertained and admitted; books made (even by
advise and command of Council and convocation) suppressed, so powerful were
Factionists among our council and committees. Were the rents due to the
Marquis of Ormond employed with fidelity for the Catholic cause, well nigh a
thousand men might be maintained thereby every day in the year; or if the same
were charitably dispensed among those Catholic noble men and Gentlemen, whom
the Marquis burned, wasted, and banished; then had they been provided for with
competencie to relieve themselves, and not necessitated to fawn on the Marquis
for any desperate peace, who otherwise would be glad to fawn on them, and the
rest of the confederate Catholics, being reduced to their necessity, if his
means were subtracted from him. Our own subsidies subministred unto the
Marquis, have been the chief occasion, why his Excellency hitherto disobeyed
his Majesty's commands, in not yielding to such a peace, as he commanded? The
sending of suspected Generals (whose Treachery is now discovered) unto Vlster
and Mounster, where they did little service, and wasted upwards of threescore
thousand pounds, did concur to this necessity and weakness; which was
augmented by decrying the p^ice of Bullion, procured by private men for their
particular interest, contrary to the act of the first general assembly,
whereby Merchants and others do now make it a trade to export Bullion out of
the Kingdom, who before made it a trade to import Bullion into the kingdom. I
pass by the lamentable division, which if daily fomented among our selves, and
causes many to be more tenacious of their moneys, and less free in their
contributions to the advance of the catholic cause; less service irdone, and
yet our necessity increased; what we gained by Gods powerful hand, we are
like to loose by our own facall division. In a word, not out enemies forces,
but our selves have brought upon us all the necessity and weakness, the late
Council and Committees have thus complained of. Sed tantum confidenter state,
and videbitis auxilium Domini super vos 2. Paral. 20. 17.


33. Our third answer is, that our necessity or weakness is not so great (for
all that) as they seem to aggravate. First, because we received from
catholic Princes and Prelates abroad in money and money-worth well nigh an
hundred thousand pounds. Secondly, we had the assistance of the Excise.
Thirdly, of Customs. Fourthly of the Kings Rents. Fifthly, of the tenths of
prizes gotten at sea. Sixthly, the estats of the fugitive Parliamentary Rebels*
Seventhly, two thirds of the Church livings. Eighthly the fourth part of our
own catholic Confederats rents. Ninthly, several grand applotments, which
amounted to large sums of money. Tenthly, other great sums borrowed by way
of Ione, etc. Certes these subsidies are far greater, than those, which our
enemies in all the Provinces of Ireland have had, and (being well managed) had
maintained yearly in the field a greater army, than ever has been maintained
by the late council and committee; but when great pensions are given to many,
who do but little service to the cause, or who may well serve for nothing
being other wise rich enough, what mervayle is it that the means appointed to
relieve the soldiers are thus eaten up? Yet are many of those men, who thus
heavily complain of necessity so far from being really necessit^ted, as
(among them) they have made purchases of twenty thousand pounds worth; and many
of them who had not where withal to subsist, are now furnished with many
thousand. Trepidaverunt timore, ubi non erat timor. When we contributed large
sums of money to the enemy, we never complained of necessity; but when we
are to contribute to the maintenance of the catholic cause, then are our
complaynts multiplied. To maintain heresy against God, and treason against
our Sovereign, the London heretics contributed in one morning welnigh a
Million of money, and since that time have contributed many Millions more, and
yet never complained of necessity: shall Catholics to maintain Religion
toward God, and loyalty toward their Sovereign, be inferior to such
miscreants? Were our necessityes relieved, or our war diminished, and the
Catholic faith in some sort secured, by the late rejected peace, some
colorable excuse these men might have for their complaint of necessity. But
when by such a peace our necessities are rather augmented, and our war
increased, and (which is worse of all) our religion extinguished, what just
cause of complaint may they pretend? You will say, having peace with Ormond we
have less enemies to oppose, and the war is (by so much) diminished. I
answer, the catholic Confederats gain not so much tranquillity by that peace,
as they gain woe and misery, infamy among Christian Princes on earth and the
indignation of God and his Angels in heaven. Seeing they are tied to maintain
all the heretics of the kingdom, and all the armies and garrisons belonging
to their enemies, whereas before they had only the Catholics and the armies
and garrisons in their own quarters to be maintained, and besides that, by that
peace, they loose all the subsidies above mentioned, which hitherto they had to
maintain such armies and garrisons, so as they are like to be reduced to the
most miserable condition, that ever any Nation has been reduced unto. Add
hereunto, that in very deed, when we suppose by this peace, that we have
peace, yet we have no true peace, but the Marquesle is at his own liberty to
break off, when he finds his best opportunity, seeing the peace is invalid and
grounded on no Commission, Et curabant contri^i^nem f^liae p^puli mei cum
ignominia dicentes, pax; pax, and non erat. pax. Ierem. 6. 14. See 1. part.
art. 15. etc. And p. 2.. 2. See hereafter numb. 35.

The danger of the kingdom aggravated by the foresaid Councels Letter unto the
Nuncius, taken away before they concluded any peace.
33. IN that Letter you have heard the Council and Committee aggravat
vehemently the dangerous state and condition, wherein then (1. Iunij 1646.) the
kingdom was; and to avoyde this danger they would needs make any peace upon
what conditions soever. This was the chief pretense they had to make this
unhappy peace. Now, mark the just judgment of God discovering the corruption
of this pretense; before ever they concluded this peace this dangerous state
and condition, wherein the kingdom then stood, was quite taken away by the
wonderful hand of God, insomuch as Ireland was never in a better posture or
condition than it was, when they concluded this peace. Mark it well, I pray
you: the peace was never concluded until the 29, of July 1646. neither were
they by virtue of any anteriour contract bound then to conclude that contract,
as above I Infra. s. 2.
have proved, but they remained still in their full liberty till the foresaid
29. day of July to conclude or not conclude a peace. Before that 29. day of
July, namely, the sift day of June the glorious victory against the Scots in
Vister was obtained by the Confederate Catholics, under the conduct of the
renowned Commander Eugenius O Neyle; and by that means the dangerous state and
condition of that part of the kingdom quite taken away. On the 7. of July
(which was 22. days before the peace with Ormond was concluded) the noble and
vigilant Commander Preston (after deleating all the power and strength of the
Scots-horse, which was upwards of 600.) reduced to the obedience of the
Confederate catholics (for his Majesty's ufe) Roscoman, Abbey of Boil, etc.
and immediately freed all that Province of Connaght (Slygo only excepted) from
the infesture of the rebellious Scot, and had clearly chased them out of Slygo
also, had not this wret. ched peace given interruption to his fortunat
endeavors. S^ See hereafter numb. 35
as the dangerbus condition, wherein that Province was likewise taken away
before the foresaid 29. of July. On the 13. of July, (which was 16. day^s
before the foresaid peace was concluded) Bunratty was taken in, and the enemies
chased out of that part of the Province of M^unster; so as the greatest danger,
which might be there feared, was also taken away. Et persecuti sunt filios
superbiae and prosperatum est opus in mamb^^ eoru^. This expedition was done by
the army commanded 1. Machab. 2. 47.
by the Lord Viscount Muskry, seconded by the auspicious access of the most
Illustrious John Baptist Archbishop and Prince of Firmo Nuncius Apostolic; by
whose largesses the foresaid armies of Vlster and Connaght were maintained.

34. Compare these with the Lord Nuncius his answer, (judicious Reader) and
judge whether our entrusted council and committees have proceeded bona side,
in concluding this unwarrantable peace, whether they have with that integrity,
which is suitable to the quality of such noble Catholics discharged the trust
imposed in them by the whole Kingdom in the weightiest affairs, that ever
concerned a Nation? After that the God of Hosts had prodigiously rescued
Ireland from those dangers and calamities, which were imminent; after that
those great clouds, which were feared to burst into a terrible storm, had
been in a moment dissipated; after the revocation of the Marquis of Ormonds
commission, and of the commission given unto our committee of treaty, after so
many advertisments given unto them by the Nuncius and Clergy not to conclude
any peace; after so many exclamations of the Catholic confederates at home
and of Christian Princes and Prelates abroad against the oblique proceedings of
our entrusted party; and after the opposition made by the soundest part of the
council and committee, It pleased the rest of them (notwithstanding all this)
to conclude (without power or commission) this fatal peace, whereby they have
stopped our happy progress in further victories, and given occasion of the
greatest division, that ever yet has: been in Ireland. Whereas if they were
pleased to abstain from concluding this fantastical peace with our Enemy in
one part of the Kingdom, we had, ere now, had a true peace with all our enemy
in all parts of the kingdom: for indeed (by Gods blessi^g) we had either
chased them out of the kingdom, or we had forced them to such conditions, as
would secure Religion, King and Country. So as in very deed, the making of
this peace has made a war and no peace, increased our da^g^rs necessities,
weakness and calamities, but took no^e away. Deceperunt populum meum
dicentes, pax and non est pax Ezech 13 10.

34. Its remarkable how in then foresaid answer they aggravate only the present
state and condition of the kingdom, in the temporallitie; Ezech. 13. 10.
as if they weighe^^ not the stay and condition of the kingdom in the
spirituallitie, which was the point the Nuncius urged, and the whole kingdom
in their several decla^a^ions resolved to rectify. They ^ffi^me; that
obedience due to his Majestre enforced them to any peace. with what Divines did
they consult, to inform them, how far the subjects obedience to his Prince
did extend? Is it not known, the divines that sa^e in the same council with
them, were against them? can not we render due obedience to our King without
dis^b^ying our God? they ought to rem^mber that lesson of the Aposties Oportet
obedire Deo magis quam hominibus* How shall we give to God what is due to God,
if we give all to Cefar, and leave Act. 4. and 5.
nothing for God* But this was a work of supererogation of theirs; the Kings
Majesty looked for no such blind obedience from them. He gave them the repea^e
of the penal laws; they rejected them; he gave them by public contract
their Churches, Church Livings jurisdiction, and free exercise of Religion;
they contemned them. Yet, if they would needs appear such obedient subjects;
why did they disobey the Kings let^er of the eleventh of June, commanding no
peace should be made with them. I wish it appear not, their obedience was to
the subject, and disobedience to the Prince. The Lord Nuncius in his Letters
exhorts them to fidelity to their Prince, and yet diswadeth them to m^ke any
peace with the Marquis, protesting that all the damage, that should befall the
King and this kingdom by concluding that unjust peace should be imputed to
them, as to men, who abuse their private affection, and lucre to the
destruction of the Commonwealth. So as in the Lord Nuncius his opinion (by
whom our council and committee should be directed (if they stood Infra?. 19.
to the principles of Catholic doctrine, and their own covenant with him)
its disobedience to the King to obey Ormond, and to disobey him is obedience to
the King.

35. But the council and committee in their foresaid letter to the Nuncius say
they will ratify Glamorgans peace, and yet they blash not to tell the Nuncius,
that they will not publish it. Vae duplici cord: they contracted with Ormond
to publish his peace without Glamorgans: and contracted the contrary with the
Lord Nuncius. A man of quality writes thus concerning renowned Prestons
expedition in Connaught: after R^scoman was yeeded, we were constrained to
loiter for fifteen days without moneys to pursue our victories, the enemy at
Sligo being frighted, sent away all their goods, and happy was he, that could
get into the North Several letters were in the mean time written to our
camp, that the Council detained our moneys by devises fearing our victories
should increase, and thereby their peace with Ormond should vanish. But we
getting one weeks means marched to Boil, and in our March cleared that wentie
miles together with Drumrush, and Camboe, and within three days took in Boil
and Castle-Conor in the County of Sligo and notwithstanding all our Messengers
to the Council not one penny did they send us which if they had in time,
besides clearing of Connaught, we had advanced to the North to the Lagan
(whose strongest and best men were defeated formerly at Roscoman) where with
great terror we were expected with little or no resistance. They on the report
of our coming to the County of Slig^ broake down the^r fortifications at
Bellabofeagh on the soord of F^n. So as the want of means made us stay at the
Boil from the 25. of July until the 24. of August, etc. whereas (were we
supplied) we had lodged this winter in the North in despit of them or any their
Adherents.

Here, because I shall never be able to aggravate this matter with such
Energie, as it requires, I leave the same to the judicious Readers censure and
aggravation, as also what other observations might be made upon the foresaid
letter written by the Council to the Lord Nuncius.

. 16. The invaliditie of the foresaid rejected peace, proved out of our
Committee of treatyes exceeding their Commission.
36. IF be that has a commission or command (says the Law) to do any thing,
shall exceed his commission, he does nothing, that is valid or firm. If he
pass beyond the bounds of his Commission, he seems to do another thing, and
not the thing, for which he had a commission. And this has place not only
when he does contrary to the prescript form of his commission, but also V.
Etia^^ Panormitanum c. ult. de restitut. spoliat, and Azor. 3. p. mor. Inst.
when he does besides, or beyond his commission, says the gloss in c. si cui
de electionibus in 6. etc p^udentiam de offic. Iud. deleg* To prove that our
Committee of the Treaty in concluding this peace, did proceed not only
besides and beyond, but also contrary to their commission may seem a hard
task, seeing they pretend to have from the Kingdom an absolute and an
unlimitted commission. As the Marquis of Ormond would treat with no other
commissioners, but with those whom he himself did seem to cull out of the
foresaid thirteen persons, so would he not daine to treat with any, unless
they had absolute power given them by the kingdom, not only to treat of, but
also to conclude a peace, and nor only to conclude a peace; but to conclude a
peace, as they thought fit. This Commission (to conclude a peace, as they
thought fit) is not from the Assembly, but from the Council; and therefore are
not capable to oblige the kingdom: for if the Council did exceed their
commission, in giving that power, which they had nor, unto the committee of
treaty; the kingdom is not liable to any thing they have done beyond the
commission or authority they gave them. Yet have the Council themselves
limited this power (to conclude a peace, as they should think fit) given to
the Commit to these bounds (and most available for the said Catholics, and
general good of this Realm.)

37. Wherefore (that we may now come ad radicem (we ask (and in this our
interrogation we assume as Judges all indifferent Catholics breathing)
whether it was most available for the Catholics and general good of this
Realm, that the Catholics should still remain under the yoke of the penal
laws* and all the calamities that thereupon follow, (where of in our first
part page 6.) as by this peace our Committee of Treaty (without any necessity)
has left us; or whether they should be freed from that yoke? whether it
conduced more to the general good of this Realm, to have a present suspension
of Poynings acts, whereof we have disputed so amply in our foresaid first part,
or to let the same remain in full force against us? Whether to have our
Churches and Church livings free exercise of our Religion, exemption from the
Jurisdiction of Protestants Clergy, as his Majesty by his special Commissioner
has granted us; or to want our Churches and church livings, free exercise,
etc. as our Committee has concluded. Much more you may read in our first
part. 14. numb 26. 27. where I have laid down as well their wilful omissions
in procuring those things, which was given them in commission to procure, as
also their disdainefull reiection of those things, which his Majesty granted,
us, and which were most available for the Catholics and general good of this
Realm. Whether it was more available for the Catholics, etc. to preserve in
the hands of the Confederate Catholics, Excises, Customs, and other
subsidies to m^intayne alone the armies and garrisons under the Confederate
Catholics command, or to give away from the Confederate Catholics all the
said subsidies and yet to charge them with the maintenance not only of their
own armies and garrisons, but also with the maintenance of the enemies armies
and garrisons as our Committee of Treaty have done? Whether it was more
available for the Catholics, etc. to preserve their armies under their own
command, and their garrisons under their own government, at least until all
things were secured unto them; or to deliver the same over unto the enemy
before any security was had for our Religion, lives, liberties, and estates, as
the Committee have done, were that peace accepted? More to the same purpose may
be collected by the judicious reader out of our observations in the first part.

38. And though their commission were general and not limited, as you have
heard, yet could they never by any power given them make any contract or peace
to the prejudice of faith or commonwealth, which could be valid in law;
because, as all contracts made by a Tutor or Curator to the prejudice of the
pupil, are (by the law) altogether invalid, and void; So all contracts or any
peace made by any Committee to the prejudice of faith and commonwealth are
altogether invalid and void. See the Canons established as well for the defense
of Ecclesiastical immunities, as also against the alienation of things
Ecclesi^sticall. And if this be true, even then when they are appointed
Committees or Agents for the Church; how much more is it true, in case the same
Church did positively recall all Commissions given to such Committees or
Agents, as the Clergy of Ireland has done in this present peace? How general
soever a Commission may be, yet this exception is always involved therein,
that nothing, that is unlawful may be done by virtue thereof: mandatum si
generale sit, solum prohibet quae licita non sunt; which the law exemplyfieth
by this case, if a Commission be given to elect any one, in general terms,
to any dignity, office, or benefice; it is to be understood, that a fit one be
chosen: Vnde mandatum Cap. super quibusd de verb. signif.
de aliquo eligendo intelligitur de eligendo id^neo. What could be done more
unlawful in the execution of any Commission, than what has been done by our
Committee of Treaty in the execu^ion of their commission; they rejected the
graces our Sovereign granted unto us for gayning whereof they had a
Commission; and engaged the kingdom in matters Cap. caufam quaerelati.
of high concernment, for which they had no commission. Can that peace be a
good peace, wherein thereis no security for our Religion, lives, liberties, or
estates?

The limitation of our Committee of treaties Commission proved out of the
Model of government, by which Magna Charta is to be maintained and the Church
livings granted to the Catholic Clergy. 39. In the very first Article of the
Model of Government I read thus. Inprimis, That the Roman Catholic Church
in Ireland shall have and enjoy its privileges and immunities according t^ the
GREAT CHARTER enacted and declared within the Realm of England, in the ninth
year of the reign of King Henry the second, sometimes King of England and
Lord of Ireland, and ofterward enacted and confirmed in Ireland; and that the
common law of England, and all the statutes in force in this kingdom, which
are against the catholic Roman Religion, and liberties of the Natives (Mark
the resolution to procure the repeal of the penal, laws, etc) and other
subjects of this kingdow, shall be observed, etc. That every branch of MAGNA
CHARTA, and all other statutes confirming, expounding, or declaring the same,
shall be punctually observed. Know ye (says the King in that Charter) That we
in the Honor of Almighty GOD, and the SALVATION of the SOVLES of our
Progenitors and Successors Kings of England* to the ADVANCEMENT of HOLY-CHVRCH,
and the amendment of our Realm, of our mere and free will, have given and
granted unto the Archbishps, Abbots, Pryors, etc. That the Churches of England
shall be free, and shall have all her whole rights, and liberties inviolable,
Reserving to all Archbishops, Abbots, Pryors, Templers, Hospitlers, Earls,
Barons, and all persons, as well Spiritual as Temporal* all their free
liberties and free customs, which they had-in times past, and all these
customs and liberties aforesaid which we have granted to be holden within this
our Realm, as much as pertayneth to us, and our heirs, we shall observe. And
all men of this our Realm, as well Spiritual, as Temporal (as much as in them
is) shall observe the same against all persons in likewise. This great Charter
(which contains the immunities of the Church and liberties of the Subject)
has been confirmed by thirty Parliaments in the succession of 18. Kings.
Edward the third in the 14. year of his reign augmented the same by the
addition of five special privileges granted the Church and Clergy; and in the
25. year of his reign added a surplus of nine privileges more. And this is
it, which the Earl of Glamorgan has in part granted unto us, and which our
Kings of England have sworn to maintain unto us. Henry the 8. indeed deprived
us of the benefit thereof. I wish our own bosom friends at home had not too
nearly imitated him. In all the articles of peace there is not so much as once
mention made of this GREAT CHARTER, though it be the first and prime article
the kingdom resolved to insist upon.

40. In the six and twentieth Article of the same Model of Government. It is
ordered, and established, that the possessions of the Protestant Archbishops or
Bishops; Deanes, Dignitaries, and Pastors in the right of their respective
Churches, or their Tenants, in the beginning of these troubles, shall be deemed
taken, and construed as the possessions of the Catholic Archbishops, Deanes,
Dignitaries, Pastors, and their Tenants respectively, to all intents and
purposes; and that those possessions are intended within the precedent order
for setlement of possessions. And this public order of the kingdom (you see)
is conformable to MAGNA CHARTA (for so much) and agreeable to the public
Declarations of the kingdom and other acts of Assembly.

The like limitation of the same Commission is expressed in both our
declarations made anno 1642. 41. In our Declaration printed in France, 1642. we
declared it to be a means to reduce Ireland to peace and quietness, (among
other things) that by act of Parliament it be declared that the Parliament of
Ireland has no subordination to the Parliament of England; that Poynings act
and the penal laws be repealed. That all Marks of national distrinction
between English and Irish be taken away by act of Parliament. That the
Bishoprics, Deaneries, and all other spiritual promotions of this Kingdom,
and all Frieries and Nunneries may be restored to the Catholic owners, and
that Impropriations of ti^hes may be likewise restored and that the scity,
ambits and precincis of the Religious houses of the Mo^ks may be restored to
the^* but as to the residue of their temporal poss^ssions it is not desired to
be taken from the present proprietareis but to be left to them, until that God
shall otherwise incline their own hearts. That all Plantations made since a.
1610 may be avoided by Parliament, if the Parliament should hold this act ^ust,
and their possessions restored to those or their heirs, from whom the same was
taken, they nevertheless answering to the Crown the rents and services
proportionably reserved upon the undertakers.

42. In our Remonstrance delivered to His Majesty's Commissioners at the town
of Trim 17. March. 1642. (among many other grievances) we desired redress
against the penal laws of 2. Eliz. imposing incapacities on the Catholics
in places of trust, honor, or profit both in Church and Commonwealth; against
false inquisitions taken upon feined titles of the Catholics estates against
many hundred years possession; against the two impeached Judges, who illegally
avoided 150. letters patents in one morning; for securing the subjects lives,
liberties and estates; for exempting the Parliament of Ireland; from any
dependency on the Parliam^nt of England; and for the power and authority of
the same Parliament of Ireland; against the dismembered Parliament of Dublin;
against the Continuance of poynings ast, the laws and incapacitie to sit in
the next Parliament. While our Commissioners (the Lord Viscount Gormanston, Sir
Luke Dillon, Sir Robert Talbot, and John VValsh Esquire) presented this
Remonstrance to his Majesty's commissioners at Trim 17. March 1642. with hopes
of redress for our grievances, and a happy accommodation, the Marquis of
Ormond (taking advantage of the time and occasion) marched out of Dublin with
his forces, took in Timolin, and attempted Rosse, where he lost his shipping,
was frustrated of his expedition, and his army so infeebled, as he was not able
to make any considerable Excursions in half a year after, wherein God showed
his indignation against perfidie, and remunerated the innocence and integrity
of the confederate Catholics by giving into their possession thirty or forty
of the enemies garrisons; within few months after, in so much as the Marquis
of Ormond was glad to make a speedy cessation with them, otherwise they had
gone to the very gates of Dublin, there being no considerable resistance
against them.

43. The limitation of their commission according to the 17. propositions
propounded unto his Majesty in April 1644. and the 14. additionall
propositions thereunto annexed, whereunto the 30. Articles of the late rejected
peace are answerable, is sufficiently explicated in the first part,
particularlarly. 14. Numb* 26. whereunto we refer the Reader.

The limitation of the foresaid Commission by several Acts of Assembly. 44.
Quarto Iunij 1645. It is ordered (says the kingdom then in public Assembly)
upon the question (nemine contradicente) that the Committee of Instructions
shall draw an act, that as to the Catholics of Ireland whether Clergy or
La^y, all penalties, pressures, incapacities prejudice and inconvenience laid
on the professors of the Roman Catholic Religion by the statute of 2.
Elizabeth, or any other Act or Law in force in this Kingdom should be taken
away and repealed. This act was concluded and agreed upon after mature
deliberation and serious debate had of this matter by the committees of
Instructions, whose opinion the Chaire-man reported unto the house at two
several sessions, to wit, the second and fourth of June 1645. It was likewise
unanimously ordered by the said Assembly 9. Iunij 1645. That as to the demand
made by the Lord Marquis of Ormond Lord Lieutenant of Ireland to the
commissioners of the Treaty of peace for the restoring of the Churchesto the
Protestant clergy, the commissioners shall give an absolute denial, and the
committee of Instructions are to prepare an Instruction to that effect. 11.
Iunij 1645. the article concerning Ecclesiastical and spiritual Jurisdiction
(says my diurnall) received in public Assembly a long and learned debate
concerning the several statuts of praemunire and provision, and concerning
excommunications fulminated by Protestant Prelates against Catholics, whereby
they were perpetually forced to repair to the Protestants Tribunal, to
obtain absolutions from them, or else to be imprisoned by a writ de
Excommunicate capiendo; also concerning the maine difference between our
Religion and protestancie, in dispensing with marriage within degrees etc. much
more appertaining to the Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction was then debated, and at
length generally referred that day unto the comissioners with instructions from
the committee of Instructions. The Marquis of Ormond in his abridgement of
concessions read in assembly 14* Augusti propounded three manner of remedies
for that g^ievance: none pleased the assemby; because the cure was worse than
the discease; tandem 28. Augusti 1645. it was unanimously agreed upon by the
Lords Spiritual and Temporal in full Assembly (nullo discrepante) that the
Catholic confederates of Ireland should never submit or be subordinate to the
Protestant Clergy, or to any their jurisdiction. See also for this the
counsels letter, numb. 51.

45. What dispensation our committee of the Treaty had to conclude a peace
without procuring a repeal of the penal laws, assurances for our Churches,
and exemption from the Protestant Clergies Jurisdiction, we have not read or
heard of. So great were the pressures suffered by the Catholics in Ireland by
the Exorbitant power of the Protestant Prelates, as many of our Cathliques
breathed their last in miserable captivity, others were forced to keep their
own dwelling houses, as if they were in restraint, to shun the greedy Parators
and hapshares; whereof some (namely Alderman Doud and Alderman Goodwing, Mr.
Thomas Long, Mr. James VValsh, Mr. Robert Hacket, and others) continued in such
restraint for the space of seven years or thereabouts. Alderman Francis
Tailor was prisoner in the Castle of Dublin 18. whole years, if my memory
fail me not; and Alderman N. one of the two so dyed.
Patricke B^owne after so many years also imprisonment in the Castle dyed in
the prison. But hereof much more might be said, which I am forced to omit.
Shall we; shall we, wilfully fall again into the same servitude, and incur
the malediction of Chanaan, to be servi servorum fratribus nostris. Genes. 9.


The learned debate in the assembly and convocation house touching this
question, whether the confederate Catholics be bound in conscience by virtue
of the oath of Association, or other tie, to make an express article with the
Protestant party for keeping in our hands such Chuches, Abbeyes, etc. now in
our possession? 46 For the negative part it was suggested that if any such
article be made his Majesty will break off and consent to no peace between us
and the above specified party, to the great danger of the estates, lives and
liberties of all our party. And it was further urged that in not demanding such
an article as above, his Majesty will grant us toleration of Religion. For the
affirmative part it was likewise suggested, that without an express article
Gods patrimony was not secured; that however men might be prodigal in the
dispensation of their own goods, yet without danger of Gods indignation, they
ought not to be prodigal in the dispensation of Gods goods; that this his
Majesty's Kingdom of Ireland had been more securely preserved for him and his
Royal issue by preserving the Churches in the Catholics hands, than in
suffering the seeming Protestants to pos^esse the same, who indeed have as
great an antipathy against the Protestant doctrine established in England, as
they have against the Catholic doctrine; and therefore might be justly feared
to so journe in such places, where the Churches and Church Livings are, as
Intelligentiers for the Parliament.

47. For these reasons and many more, the house of Convocation wholly inclined
to the affirmative part. The integrity of the whole Kingdom (in this
particular) appears by their act of assembly of the 9. of June one thousand
six hundred forty and five above mentioned. They debated indeed learnedly for
a long time, how they might observe that Divine lecture of CHRIST JESUS: Give
unto Caesar what is due unto Caesar, and unto God what is due unto God. Some
feared, if the Catholic Confederats had demanded an express article for
their Churches, they had not Given to Caesar what was due unto Caesar, and
therefore thought a negative act, that is to say, an act of our own assembly
denying to give unto the Lord Lieutenant our Churches, might serve the turn;
others thought, they had not given unto God what was due unto God; If the
kingdom had concluded a peace without an express article for conservation of
their Churches. God, the Supreme moderator, decided the pious controversy, and
gave sentence (as it may seem) for the resolution of the Clergy, when by the
articles of the peace concluded upon between the Earl of Glamorgan and the
Confederate Catholics, his Majesty was pleased to grant unto the Clergy, what
they demanded herein.

48. How our late Council and Committees may be excused, at least, of
negligence in not providing for the conservation of our Churches when they saw
Glamorgans peace revoked, I do well know. By the fourth article of the
rejected peace they provided carefully for securing secular men's lands by the
vacating of all Indictments, Attayndors, Outlawries, etc. and all Processes and
other proceedings thereupon; and of all Latters patents Graents, Leases
Custodiums Inquisitions etc. that were taken on secular men's Lands; o^^ing
secured for the spiritual^y; The Arc is exposed to the depredation of the
Philistines, Gods house to the profanation of heretics; Christ's patrimony to
the inv^sion of vultures. Nay, in lieu of procuring any act to secure us our
Chu^ches or church l^vings, by the second branch of the first article and by
the second article of the rejected peace they rej^cted all former graces
granted unto us, that might any way secure us of our Churches etc. as you may
read in the first part and first article. Whether it was a greater sacrilege
in Henry the 8. to take away by force our Churches and church livings, or in us
to give them back freely without compulsion to be polluted by heretics, we
leave to the censure of the judicious reader: This much we add to aggravate
the offense, that we seem to concur with the sacrilege hitherto committed
by such as injustly possessed Christ pa^rimony, and do approve their
usurpation by making restitution; the Title, which hitherto in them was
invalid, we render valid. Chrysostom, Ambrose Stanislaus, Liberius. Hosius.
Athanasius, Hilarious, and other Orthod ox^ Champions of holy Church, denied to
yield, even unto Cesars, so much as the possession of one only consecrated
church to be profaned by heretics; and shall posterity record that the
renowned Confederate Catholics of Ireland, without cause o^ necessity.
yielded unto any heretic subject what their Caesar granted them. To secure the
Protestants against the Parliamentaries Ormond was careful to article with
their Commissioners; because he was sure the Parliamentaries would turn the
protestants out of their possessions, as soon as ever they concluded upon the
treaty; but with the Commissioners for the Confederate catholics in
concluding the rejected peace, he scorned to article any thing for the
Protestants security, or possessions, because he was sure of them, seeing there
was no act or article of the peace either to debar them from entering into
possession, or to preserve us in our possessions.

. 17. The Committee of Treaty exceeded their Commission by obliging the
Kingdom upon the Marquis his peace to send into England 10000. men.
49. Upon what conditions the Consederate Catholics offered at first to His
Majesty ten thousand men to succor him in England, in appears out of our
Remonstrance presented to his Majesty in April 1642. whereof numb. 42. how
afterward we actually resolved to send them over, and upon what conditions, it
appears by Glamorgans articles. But that ever the Kingdom agreed to send
over 10000. men upon the bare conditions of Ormonds peace, as I never heard or
read it; so do not I mean ever to believe it. It is written on the backside
of the rough dranght of the Articles of peace delivere^ by Mr. Plunket and Mr
Darcy to the congregation, that the ill affected of the Council would never
consent to the articles but that they saw the impossibility of performance by
the day of our part, by the time limi^ted 28. March, 1646. Mark, I beseech
you, how first without any Commission they engage the confederate Catholics
in a thing impossible, v g. to send over 10000. men by the 28. day of March
(which was the very day they entered into the engagement) or by the last day of
March (for so I understood from one of the Committee, wherein I refer my
self to the defeasance pe^fected to that pu^pose.) To perform such an
obligation by either of those days is known to be impossible; after, to
cancel this obligation or engagement, they force their fellows of the
Council and Committees to consent, unto those unfortunate articles of peace:
So as to escape the unjust obligation to send over ten thousand men, we
contracted a more unjust obligation to assent to an unjust peace.

50 But what if Glamorgan would set upon us, and demand of us to send over the
ten thousand men, according the contract past with him, and present us as good
assurance for the performance of his contract with us, as Ormond can do for
his, what will Ormonds dispensation given us not to send them over a veil us?
Sure I am the catholic confederates were ready enough on their part, and (as
I have been informed) the Marquess his own Commissioners from Dublin took
aview of the muster of six thousand of them (for so many were to be first sent
over.) but the Marques^e had not provided any shipping to carry them away. We
were tied to bring them no further than to the Seaports; and every man knows
the Marquess provided not the least vessel to bring them away: neither had he
so much as a chief commander to conduct them over; So as, whereas our
committee would needs purchase a dispensation at so dear a rate, as the
condescending to so unjust a peace, they ought rather to stand upon their
justification, and to show, the confederate Catholics performed their part,
but that his Excellency performed not his part, in providing shipping. But,
alas, it is known, these projects have been invented to cast of Noble
Glamorgan, as heretofore they cast of Noble Antrim, both whose powers, if we
made use of, as we ought, we might have spared many frivolous and chargeable
journeyes to Dublin.

. 18. An abstract of the letter sent by the Supreme Council in October 1645.
upon Mr Spinola's arivall unto the Lord Nuncius, then being in France. wherein
the state of the Kingdom is set forth, and a promise made to conclude what
peace the Nuncius should think fit.
51. MOst illustrious and most Reverend Lord, in the last general Assembly of
the confederate Catholics, as well the Ecclesiastics as the Seculars by
unanimous consent did determinatly agree upon certain postulations,
conditions, and upon the means to obtain them, which if they may be obtained,
the honor, utilitie, and splendor of the Catholic Religion, and of the
Professors thereof in Ireland shall be excellent well provided for etc. and
unless these postulations and conditions be obtained, and the promises
thereupon made, fulfilled, and by a free act of Parliament confirmed etc.
necessarily the war must be continued.

52. The treatte of peace upon the foresaid postalations and condi^ions long
since instituted is continued, they dispute for the least thing; in no part
thereof is it yet con^luded, neither is i^ known when any conclusion shall be
Certes if peace were concluded, nothing else thence follows, than rep^se, and
as it were a certain cessation, until it receive sull perfection and
accomplishment by parliament: and when Note the uncertainty when the Parliament
shall be.
this Parliament shall be, yea, whether it shall ever be, seeing it de pendson
very many accidents, its altogether uncertain, and when the Parliament shall be
assembled we have recourse to arms, if any d^ssention arise: mean while the
government of their own Quarters, as hitherto, and of their Churches, of their
Emoluments, and of the passessions of all their things does remain in the
hands of the confederate Catholics.

53. Out of which, and out of many more reasons, which in the same Epistle the
council does allege; they prove the necessirie of the Nuncius his p^esence in
Ireland, and to that end do not only invite, but also u^ge and press him, as
well by this and other letters, as also by special messengers sent into
France, to come into Ireland as^^ing him further, that the Ecclesiastical
^urisdiction in the conditions of peace deman Ecclesiastical jurisdiction the
hands of the Catholic Clergy.
ded, and derived from His Holiness, is and shall be in the hands of the
Catholics independent of the Protestants; to the promotion, pro pagation and
secure preservation whereof the presence of the Nuncius Apostolic is
necessarily required, etc. having promised unto him a place of Residence, where
the supreme government of the kingdom should be, together with a guard to wait
on his person, they show the constancy of the Catholics of Ireland in their
Religion, and their Christian fortitude in attempting this holy war, even
without arms, ammunition, or other provision, against he enemies of Religion,
King and Country, and unto the difficulties propaunded by the most noble
Spinola, concerning the oath of ^upremacie the admission of Catholic Of the
Supremacy, etc.
Bishops to the next Parliament, and the government whither the same should
remain in the hands of the Protestant Vice Roy; they answer, that the Irish
Nation by no means, dangers, or hazard of life and fortunes for these hundred
years past, could ever be induced to acknowledge the temporal Prince to be
S^p^eme head of the Church, or to submit themselves to such an Oath, much less
do they mean hereafter to submit themselves thereunto, and that in the last
assembly by universal voice and vo^e^t was concluded, that they would
perpetually this is not taken a way
insist upon the taking away of the same oath; that they believed the pseudo*
Bishops would not dare appear in the next Parliament and that they had great
hopes and grounds to exclude them from thence, and though they were present,
yet may ^ot they prejudice our affairs, s^eing it is extant in our conditions
that they are to have no ^urisdiction in causes appertaining to the Catholic
Religion and the professors thereof. etc.

54. Unto the third difficulty, concerning the government of the Kingdom by a
Prot^stant Vice - Roy, they answer, that neither the whole govermn^nt, nor the
government of all the sorts or cities shall be in the hands of the Viceroy:
there shall be catholics in the council of state and they shall be
governors of many cities: the Ecclesiastical hierarch^e shall be the
catholic clergy; out of all these there shall be a body politic composed
of catholics, etc. the chief member of which body shall be the Nunoius of
the Sea Apostolic, who shall make choice of the most secure city wherein he
may keep his residence, and that body politic of catholics shall defend
his dignity and security with the hazard of life and fortunes; so we in the
name of all the conf^derate catholics (ex nunc and ^unc) do promise; and
therein oblige the public faith of Note the obligation*
the whole Kingdom. And this mean, and this remedy is sufficient, etc. to
secure the Apostolic Nuncius (being in this Kingdom) from any disgrace or
danger* Add hereunto, presently upon the arivall of the most illustrious and
most Reverend Nuncius, having considered the conveniences and inconveniences of
our-state and affair. WE VVILD DO WHATSOEVER HE SHALL THINK expedient.

Observations on the foresaid Letter or obligation.
55. The Reader is first prudently to observe that the postulations mentioned
number 51. are the seaventeene propositions and the 14. additionall
propositions, whereof we have made frequent mention in the first part, those
acts of assembly and other orders above mentioned. Which Unless they were
obtained and by Parliament confirmed, the war was still to be continued. Our
committee have concluded the rejected peace, and the same council, that made
this promise in the name of the Kingdom (two only excepted) has confirmed
the same; and yet the conditions or postulations above mentioned, nor the tenth
part of them have been by our committee of treaty obtained* as the Reader may
clearly behold in our observations on the articles of peace part 1. 2. The
council numb 52. do acknowledge, they know not when the Parliament will be
and do inform the Nunc^us, that until the Pa^liament be, the government and
jurildiction, Church^s possessions, etc. must still remain in their own
hands; and yet by the articles of the peace they are taken from us before, and
not the least appearance of security for our Churches or church livings, much
less of exemption from the Jurisdiction of the Protestans clergy. It is true,
that when this obligation was made, Glamorgans peace was in force, by which our
Churches and Church Livings, Jurisdiction and exemption from the power of the
Protestant clergy was in some sort secured unto us; but that peace being
recalled by his Majesty before Ormonds peace was concluded; and the condition
on our part (upon which tha^ peace was grounded) being not performed, it was a
notab^e breach of public faith, in our council inexcusable, ever to approve
or condescend to ^he Marquis of Ormonds peace: and the matter is so much the
more to be aggravated, that the council themselves did seem to wave the
b^nefit of Glamorgans peace upon the Protestation made against it by the
Marquis of Ormond 3. By our observations on the first article in our first part
it appears that neither Ecclesiastical ^or Secular is exempted from the Oath
of Suprem^cie; so as in this particular also whereof numb. 53) public faith
is broken with the Nuncius. Touching the Protestant Bishops sitting in
Parliament, and the continuation of a Protestant Viceroy see our observations
on the 10. 12. and 14. article part 1. 4. Nothing that is promised numb 54. is
performed, or true; and if the rejected peace were accepted, the body politic
of the confederate Catholics had been dissolved, the Nuncius forced with
disgrace to fly the country, and no confederate catholic secured of his
Religion, life, liberty or estate. 5. By the last particle our council
obliged the Kingdom upon the arrival of the Lord Nuncius not to rely upon the
Earl of Glamorgans own peace, if the Lord Nuncius thought any other peace
more expedient, which is the matter, which he so earnestly urges in his
letters above mentioned. And herein we charge the council and committees with
notable breach, who contrary to their promise and vow, and contrary to the
several protestations and inhibitions of the said Lord Nuncius concluded a
peace, which he thought not expedient and whereunto he would never yield
consent. See our observations on the 14. article numb. 26. 27.

. 19. A public Contract made by the kingdom with the Lord Nuncius not to
conclude any peace until he and Glamorgan concluded on a peace for the
Spirituality, etc.
56. Articles agreed upon betwixt the most Illustrious and most Reverend Lord
John B^^^ist, Lord ^rchbishop and Prince of ^^rmo, extraordinary ^postolicke
Nunc^o to the Confederate Catholics of Ireland; and the Nobility, employed by
the said Consederate Catholics together with the Earl of Glamorgan to the
said Illustrious Nuncius at Kilkenny the 19 of February 1645.

Inprimis a Cessation shall be continued till the first of May by which time or
sooner if the most ^llustrious Lord Nuncius do not bring the Original
agreements under hand and Seal betwixt his Helynesse and the Queen of great
Britain the said most illustrious Lord Nuncius shall ratify whatsoever shall
seem meet to him on the behalf of his Holiness, and the Earl of Glamorgan
in the behalf of the King of England, that an honorable and wished peace be
not any longer deferred.

57. Secondly, In the mean time if the Confederate Catholics do send from
hence to treat with the Viceroy about political affairs and differences, it
is declared that no prejudice shall be inferred by that treaty to this Treaty,
that is to be betwixt the most illustrious and most Reverend Lord Nuncius and
the Earl of Glamorgan, that until there be a conclusion and publication of
it, the other also may not be concluded or published. And that there be no
change in the in^erim of the Political or Civil government, so that both may
be at once and together concluded and published by the approbation of the
general assembly if it shall be seen necessary to the said Lord Nuncio, and
Earl of Glamorgan to call it.

Thomas Tyrell Emerus Clogherensis Nich. Plunket Gerald Fenell Richard Bellings
Patricke Darcy Thomas Cashell Castle-haven Audly Net ^ervile Muskry Thomas
Preston Daniell O Brien Lucas Dillon Terlagh O Neyle George Comin
58. Here we are to note. First, the circumstance of time, to wit, the 19. of
February, which was when the assembly of the kingdom was fully gathered
together. Within 12. days after, namely the second of March, an order was
conceived by the same assembly to Treat with the Marquess of Ormond, and to
prepare things for a peace with his Excellency, but not one word authorizing
the Committee to conclude a peace; for that had been a manifest violation of
this contract made with the Nuncius: nay, by this very act of assembly and
solemn contract (whereunto the whole kingdom condescended) i^ before then
either Conncell or Committees had any power communicated unto them by any
former act of assembly (which I could never yet read) it was now sufficiently
recalled. Secondly, we are to note the persons, that subscribed to the contract
in the behalf of the Confederate Catholics, are the persons chiefly
entrusted by the kingdom, M Tyrell chayreman of the committee of Instructions,
the Lord Viscount Muskry and M. Darcy are two of the five that subscribed to
the peace contrary to their own contract here agreed upon, the rest were then
of the Supreme Council or Committee, whereof most of them being of the
following Supreme Council or Committee of Instructions, approved also the
peace contrary to this their own contract wherein they engaged themselves and
the kingdom never to conclude or publish any peace until the peace to be
agreed upon between the Nuncius and Clamorgan were concluded and published
together with it. Th^^d^y, this contract clearly discovers how frivolous that
part of the Council and Committees answer to the Nuncius. 1. of June, was,
wherein they say, they expected until the first of May according the Nuncius
his pleasure before they concluded any peace; for they were indeed to expect
UNTIL a conclusion or publication were made of the peace to be agreed upon
between him and Glamorgan in the behalf of his Holiness and his Majesty, and
if the Orig^nals came not from Rome by May, they were to expect until the
Nuncius did ratify whatsoever should seem meet unto him etc. which was
agreeable to the public Faith of the kingdom past by them unto him before his
coming unto the kingdom by the above mentioned Letter sent unto Number. 54.
him in October 1645. wherein they promised to do nothing but what should
seem expedient unto him. So as if I had ^^^ely seen this contract, I might
well have spared the twelve answers I made above to this objection: wherefore
the Nuncius and the Clergy did justly protest against all their Number. 26
proceedings in the late rejected peace, as being without ground or Commission,
and in violation of the public Faith given. Fourthly, no withstanding this
contract they changed the government by concluding that peace, and contrary to
the same contract they would not dayne to call together a general assembly (as
the Nuncius desired and as by this contract they were bound) before they
concluded the peace. How herein they may be excusable, I understand not.

. 20. The Oath of Association, which being compared to what we have delivered
in this Survay proves the justice of the Clergies Decree of perjury etc.
59. I A. B do promise, swear, and protest before God and his Saints and his
Angels, that I will during my life, bear true faith and allegiance to my
Sovereign Lord CHARLES by the grace of God King of great Britain, France,
and Ireland, and to his Heirs and lawful Successors, and that I will to my
power during my life defend, uphold, and maintain all his and their just
prerogatives, estate and rights, the power and privilege, of the Parliament of
this Realm, the fundamental Laws of Ireland the free exercise of the Roman
catholic faith and Religion throughout this Land, and the lives just
liberties, possessions, estates, and rights of all those that have taken, or
shall take this Oath, and perform the contents thereof, and that I will obey,
and ratifye all the orders and decrees made and to be made by the Supreme
Council of the Confederate Catholics of this kingdom concernig the said
public cause, and that I will not seek directly or indirectly, any pardon or
protection for any act don or to be don touching this General cause without
the consent of the Major part of the said Council, and that I will not
directly or indirectly do any act or acts that shall prejudice the said cause,
but will to the hazard of my life, and estate, assist, prosecute, and
maintain the same, So help me God and his holy Gospel.

60. This Oath was established for preservation of union among the Confederate
Catholics by act of assembly 26. of July 1644. Where it was declared full and
bin^^ng without addition, and they declared perjured, who affirm the said O^th
admits any equivocation or mental reservation. By observing each branch o^
this Oath every indifferent man may discover, wherein the contrivers of the
late rejected peace have violated the same. I may not here insist upon all
branches, take (Reader) these few notes only upon some. First, they have not
maintained the power and privileges of the Parliament of Ireland as well
because they wilfully rejected the suspension of Poynings act, and resolved
nothing for the repeal thereof, as also because they have not established any
thing efficatiously to exempt it from any dependency on the Parliament of
England. Secondly, they have not maintained the fundamental laws of the
kingdom, chiefly MAGNA CHARTA, and those other laws which are ampliations and
explications thereof and sseighted the prosecution of those, who have been,
impeached by the whole kingdom for overthrowing the said fundamental laws.
Thirdly, they have not defended, upheld or maintained the free exercise of the
Roman Catholic says and Religion throughout this land, forasmuch as they
have concluded a peace without procuring a repeal of the penal laws
surrep^itiously established since the days of heresy against the free
exercise of the same Religion* Which repeal was graciously condescended unto
by his M^j^sty in his letters to his Lord Lieute^a^^ of the 27. of February
1644.

61. This branch of the Oath was corroborated by act of assembly, by our 17.
propositions, and by our frequent Declarations, wherein we resolved never to
make a peace without the repeal of these penal laws. Whether Gla^^^ga^s
peace were to be deemed valid or invalid, it was their part to press the Kings
Lieutenant to comply with his Majesty's command for repealing the penal laws.
The free exercise of religion intended by those that took that Oath was
understood to be somewhat more, than that which we had before these distempers:
Ergo by the free exercise of Religion. they understood the free exercise
thereof in Churches, for before these distempers they had the free exercise in
private houses, etc. This interpretation is confirmed by the act of assembly,
wherein it was unanimously ordered never to restore any the Churches in our
possession. By this peace nothing is See above number. 53.
established to secure us of the free exercise of our Religion either in
Churches or private houses, and the government of our Cities and Garrisons
together with the command of our Armies is given to the enemies, so as
whatsoever the Assembly has enacted for keeping the churches would be
infallibly fi^strated, there being nothing to debar the protestant Ministers
to reinvest themselves in the same Churches. Wherefore the Clergy proceeded
prudently, when they resolved, that they ought to make a positive act for
preservation of their Churches.

62. Fourthly, they have not (according to their oath) defended the possessions
estates and rights of all those that took the oath of association,
particularly that of their fellow members the Clergy as above you have heard.
As for the provision they have made for the seculars lands and possessions in
the fourth article, its certain the same is in no sort valid, until it be
confirmed by Parliament, which when it shall be, they do not know. See our
observations on the fourth and fifteenth Article; Fifthly, that the said
Council and Committees have at least indirectly, done several acts to the
prejudice of the cause of God, is evident by what proofs we have hitherto
produced. So as all things being well pondered, its no less evident, that the
several decrees given by the clergy against such as contrived, perfected and
approved the said peace, is most just and valid: qui autem superbierit nolens
obedire Deuteronomy. 17. 18.
Sacerdotis imperio, qui eo tempore ministrat Domino Deo tuo and decreto
Iudicis, morietur homo ille, and auferes malum de Israel. See above, number 46.
What may be pressed against the contrivers of this peace out of the first
branch of this oath concerning the allegiance and loyalty due to our
Sovereign and this commonwealth, we willingly omit, hoping that God of his
mercy will (in his own time) produce a happy at^onement, for the relief of
this distressed Nation.

. 21. That the Excommunications fulminated by the Lord Nuncius and
Ecclesiastical congregation against such as adhere to the late rejected peace
is both just and valide.
63. We are here to suppose that which faith teaches us, to wit, that in Gods
Church there is power to excommunicate, and that the same power has been
practiced by the Matthew. 18. 17. 18. 1. Cor. 5. 2 Thessalonians 3. etc TT. in sup. ad q.
21. a. 3.
Apostles themselves, and their successors, men constituted in Apostolical
jurisdiction. The cause of Excommunication (according the received opinion of
Schoolmen, grounded on the Canons) is deadly sin, yea, venial sin is a
sufficient cause Excommunicationis Minoris. In consequence to the foresaid
Decree of perjurie other decrees were made by the said congregation, and
particularly one dated the 17. Augusti 1646. imposing upon such cities and
towns, cessation from Mass and divine office, that would admit the
publication of the peace. On the first day of September following a
comminatorie excommunication was set forth against those that would adhere or
by any means favor the said peace; but the evil as yet increasing, divisions
and factions perpetually multiplying, after several admonitions, another
Excommunication was published the month following, wherein I read thus: In
pursuance of which decrees being forced to unsheath the spiritual sword, we
(to whom God has given power to bind and loose on earth) etc. do, cum
virtute Domini nostri Jesus, deliver over such persons to Satan; that is to say
we excommunicate, execrat and anathematize all such as after publication of
this our decree, and notice either privately or publickely given them hereof,
shall defend, adhere to, or approve the justice of the said peace, and chiesely
those, who shall bear arms, or make or join in war with, for or in the
behalf of the Puritans or other heretics of Dublin, Cork, Yoghell, or of
other places within this Kingdom, or shall (either by themselves or by their
appointment) bring, send or give any aid, succor or relief of victuals,
ammunition or other provision unto them, or by adv^se or otherwise advance the
said peace, or the war made against us. These and every of them by this
present decree we do declare and pronounce Excommunicated ipso facto, etc.

65. The cause of this Excommunication (besides the sin of perjurie above
mentioned) is contumacie against the decrees of holy Church; concurrance to the
advancement of heresy and suppression of Religion, together with many other
causes, which may be collected out of what hitherto we alleged. Sequestrari
oportet graviter lapsum (says S. Ambrose) ne modicum fermentum totam massam
corrumpat. Cum excommunicat Ecclesia L. de poe^^t. c. 14. Tract. 50. in Joan.
and q. 39. in Deuteronomy.
(says S. Augustine) in coelo ligatur Excommunicatus. Hoc nunc agit in Ecclesia
Excommunicatio, quod agebat tunc (in lege veteri) interfectio. Which, I wish,
those that glory in their malice, by maintaining still and adhering to the
said peace, did reflect on.

66. Examples of such like Excommunications histories do record. Fulke
Archbishop of Rhemes, when he had manifested unto the world the turpitude of
the peace made by Charles the French King with the Normans, and the greatness of
the crime, resolutly threatened him with Excommunication, saying, if you do
that thing (namely make a peace with Flodoar. l. 4. hist. Rem. c. 5
the Normans) and give way to such Counsels, you shall never find me
faithful I will draw back from your fidelity all that I may, and with all my
follow. Bishops excommunicating you and all yours, I will condemn you with an
eternal Anathema. Yet was not this peace, which the French King intended to
make with the Normans by many degrees so pe^nicious to Religion, as the late
rejected peace was. The like excommunication was actually fu^minated by Pope
John the eight, against the Princes 10. 8. ep. 41.
of Italy; because they made a peace with the Saracens, which peace was
indirectly only prejudicial to the catholic faith: in scelere impio
manentibus mis^rendum non est, says the Pope. The like Excommunication was
fulminated by the same Pope for the same cause against the people of
Amalphitan, unto whom he thus speaks, we together with the consent id. ep 22.
of all the Apostolic See, do deprive you of all sacred Communion, and
separate you from the Society of Gods Church, that you remain in the same
excommunication until repenting you separat your selves from the wicked p^ey
of the Pagans. Geoss^y Prince of Salernitan upon the like Excommunication being
terrified b^oke off the peace he had with the Saracens, and afterward had the
slaughter of many of them; witness Leo Ostiensis. Our Chronicles of England have
registered many examples of the like excommunications. See Conc. Lateran. sub.
Innocent. 3. Decreto de haereticis vide etiam cap. ex^om.. credentes de
haereticis. cap noverit de sententia Excommunic. Bullam coenae plurib. locis
Out of all which, those eight Catholic Churchmen in Dublin may find grounds
enough to rectify their opinion, holding, that the bare adhering to the late
rejected peace was not a sufficient cause of Excommunication.

The resolution of an objection.
67. Nothing was done (says the Authors of the late peace) by us in the peace
now published, but what was exactly agreeable to the unanimous sense and vote of
the late general assembly held at Kilkenny in March last, whereof the
catholic Bishops were members and in whose hearing the substance of the
peace, as it stands now concluded, was publickely read and transacted.
Whereunto we answer, First that information is made that some of those
articles were changed in substance, particularly the first article, for
manifesting whereof we cannot but refer our selve^ to those, that were then
present in that assembly. Certain I am the Bishops consented not thereunto,
and it is as certain that the soundest part of the Council and Committee
could never be induced to give their free assent thereunto, as above we have
noted. Secondly, let us give it for granted that the assembly did assent
thereunto, was not Glamorgans peace then in full force, whereon the kingdom
chiefly insisted; Now this peace being revoked and by the Kings Leutenant
rejected, who may doubt, but the whole kingdom would renounce the peace agreed
upon with the Marquess of Ormond and never trust to that alone. This is
evident, seeing they renounced a better peace by his Excellency in August
before offered unto them in his brief of concessions? Wherefore the Council
and Committee upon this alteration (to discharge themselves) should procure a
new assembly to be called upon as the Lord Nuncius desired. Thirdly, by that
assembly the committee of treaty had no power given them to conclude, but to
treat of a peace. Fourthly, that very general assembly by public contract
between them, the Lord Nuncius and Glamorgan decreed the contrary, never to
conclude or publish any peace with the Lord Lieutenant, until the peace
agitated between the Nuncius and Glamorgan were concluded and together with the
other published, which is an evident sign, the kingdom never intended to
accept of the one peace without the other. Fifthly, the principal part of the
body politic of the kingdom recalled your commission, if any you had and
protested against your proceedings. See above. 10. n. r. Contrary to all this,
you concluded a peace Iurkingly, and when you knew the kingdom would not
accept thereof, you endeavored to force the same upon them, and to this day do
continue in the same resolution, by making of factions and divisions. You ought
to know that the non acceptance thereof did render the same invalid, Leges
nulla ex alia causa nos tenere, quam quod indicio populi Leg. 32. ff. d^
legibus.
receptae sunt.

A brief appendix concerning the Earl of Glamorgans peace, and his Excellency
the Marquis of Clanrickards Engagement.
68. In both three things are chiefly to be considered, first the concessions
or graces granted unto the confederate Catholics. 2. The grounds whereon they
are granted, and the security for performance. 3. The parties between whom
the contract passed. As concerning the first, by the Earl of Glamorgans peace
there is granted unto the consederate Catholics for evermore hereafter free
and public exercise of their Religion; all the Churches, other than such as
are now actually enjoyed by his Majesty's Protestant Subjects, exemption from
the Jurisdiction of the Pro^estant Clergy; a repeal of all the ponall laws;
the taking away of all incapacities; that the Catholic Clergy shall have
their Church livings, etc. By the Marquis of Clanrickards engagement we are
not granted, but a promise is made by his Excellency to procure a revocation
of the laws in force in this Kingdom, not absolutely, as the King himself by
his letter of the 27. of Februasy 1644. and his Commissioner, the Earl of
Glamorgan, granted, but restrictively, inasmuch as shall concern any penalty,
inhibition or restraint upon Catholics for the free exercise of their
Religion. The inconveniences, which may befall the Catholics by this
Restriction is amply discovered by the late council and Congregation, and in
some sort by me in the first part of this Survey, whereunto I remit Observat.
on the first art. page
the Reader. And this is that kind of repeal, which the Marquis of Ormond
himself once granted unto the confederate Catholics in his brief of
Concessions, but afterward fell back from his word; and by this engagement of
Clanrickard he obliges himself to nothing.

69. Here, before I go further, I must appeal to the confederate Catholics
conscience, whether he had rather have the subjects promise to procure
(forsooth) a kind of repeal of the penal laws; or the Kings own word
actually commanding a repeal of the said penal laws absolutely, as he has
done not only by himself immediately, but also by his special commissioner
the Earl of Glamorgan? Then the confederate Catholic is to make this
ratiocination, if the Kings own commands could take no effect with his
Protestant Ministers of j^stice in Dublin (such an aversion have they against
the distressed Catholics) much less will any subjects promise be able to
procure any thing for us, or (having procured it) be able to bring it to any
effect. What need we run to France or elsewhere to procure that which his
Majesty has already granted us? There are the Kings own commands to repeal
the penal laws: can any one procure us more? What is the let? the subjects
disobedience, who will not put in execution the Kings commands. And how may the
Ma^ques of Clanrickard procure any thing in France, when as the French Agent
here pleads strongly for the accepta^ion of Ormonds unjust and invalide
peace, and never vouchsafes to solicit for Glamorgans just and valide peace?

70. The second thing promised by the Marquis of Clanrickard is, that the
Catholics shall not be disturbed in the enjoyment of their Churches or any
other Ecclesiastical possessions until that matters with others referred
already, receive a settlement in a free parliament, etc. Though this be but a
promise, yet were it actually procured, must not we be cast out of our
Churches and possessions, whenever this settlement shall be in a free
Parliament? for until then: and no longer are we to hold possession: by
Glamorgans peace these are actually granted us for ever. By Clanrickards
engagement we are only promised that we shall enjoy the Churches and
possessions that were in our hands at the publication of the late peace. By
Glamorgans peace these are not promised but actually granted unto us, and with
all other Churches, lands, tenements, tithes and hereditaments, other then such
as are now (when that peace was concluded) actually enjoyed by his Majesty's
Protestant clergy or subjects. So as, in case, God should bless the
consederate Catholics with such victories against Iusequin and the rest of
the Rebels in Mounster, and Vlster, as he blessed us in Connaght, by
Glamorgans peace all the Churches, and Ecclesiastical lands, etc. must fall
unto the Catholic Clergy; by Clanrickards engagement they must fall unto the
Protestant clergy; so as all our war for the future should be to raise that
Sect, and by raising them, to suppress our selves: which being once known to
foreign Princes and Prelates, they would subtract all their helps from us; and
the Catholic subjects at home would (with good reason) withdraw both arm,
heart and means from such a war.

71. By the same engagement there shall be forth with a Catholic Lieutenant
general, etc. If he be sworn to the Catholic confederacy, and approved by
the kingdom, its well. Such an one was granted unto us long since by his
Majesty; how he was put off, let them judge, who know best the state of that
affairs. All incapacities are taken away from the Catholics by Glamorgans
peace, etc. what then should hinder us to have a catholic Viceroy, which is
said to have been also granted unto us by his Majesty. Item our Generals shall be
invested with principal commands worthy of them etc. These principal commands
being not specified, may be interpreted a Colonels place, which indeed
(respectively) is a principal place* That they be invested in some important
Garrisons NOW under his Majesty's obedience suffers the like interpretation,
and gives warning to Noble Preston, that he must out of Duncanon; for they will
affirm that that garrison is not under his Majesty's obedience, but under the
Confederate catholics obedience. Further by the engagement is is said, that a
Considerable number of the Catholic Confederats forces shall immediately be
drawn into all the chief garrisons under his Majesty's obedience. This
concession is good, if it were performed; but because herein the Marquess of
Ormond failed, therefore Noble Preston retired, and freed himself from the
engagement. If it were granted that a proportionable number should be drawn
unto, etc. 't were more secure, for otherwise our catholic forces being far
less in number, than the protestant forces, would be subject to massacre. But
the clauses inserted in the Protestation made or to be made by the generals and
commanders upon acceptance of this engagements marres all the market, and would
frustrate our forces of all their pretensions, and the catholic confederats,
of Glamorgans peace. These clauses I commit not to the Print, because I have no
order so to do.

72. Now to come to the second thing, which is to be considered. Glamorgans
peace is grounded on the Kings Commission dated the 12. of March, where his
Majesty authorizeth him as firmly as under the great Seal to all intents and
purposes, and obliges himself in the word of a King, and a Christian to
ratify and perform what he should grant to the Confederate Catholics. His
Excellency the Marquess of Clanrikards engagement is grounded on no such
Commission, he only voluntarily engages himself without any invitation of
the confederate catholics, and is assumed, as an instrument by those, who
would cross his Majesty's foregoing grants made unto the catholics, who may
reasonably thus discourse with themselves: if those men have frustrated his
Majesty's own grants and the peace by his commission concluded, how much more
will they frustrate the engagements of any private subject, which are grounded
on nothing but on his own undertakings, and in case of non performance the
catholic confederats have no redress. Neither does the Kings Lieutenant
himself oblige himself to the performance of any thing, nay rather this
engagement supposes his opposition to some things. To conclude (omitting much
more) the parties, who concluded Glamorgans peace, have been authorized by
King and country; the parties concluding Clanrikards engagement have been
authorized by neither; and therefore invalid and to no effect. Out of which,
and what already has been answered by the council and congregation 24.
November. 1646. it is evident how far those nine catholic churchmen of
Dublin erred in their judgment, when unto a question propounded unto them
touching this matter, they answered, that the Roman Confederate catholics of
this kingdom may without scruple submit to the late rejected peace and accept
thereof as strengthened with the said addititionall engagements. Neither can it
avayle them to add (the circumstances of times and present state of this
distressed kingdom considered) seeing we had better conditions from his
Majesty himself, when we were in a worse posture, and we were never in a
better posture, then we were when this engagement was offered, if mischievous
faction had not put a division among us. Veruntamen, vae illi per quem
scandalum venit. If the rejected peace with these additionall engagements could
be accepted without sc^uple, I believe the Council and Congregation could
judge better thereof, than any private men, who were not in a f^ee condition to
deliver the sense of their souls. Ecce praedico vobis li^ertatem, Ierm. 34 ^^.
ait Dominus, ad gladium, ad pestem, ad famem.

The Epilogue.
THus by the Divine assistance (Judicious Reader) I have finished both parts of
this Survey; to God be honor and glory, who is the Author of all good things.
In matters of fact, that are transacted with much secrecy, its very hard to
produce demonstrative arguments to convince the actors, and when such matters
trench upon the honesty and integrity of men, things doubtful are, regularly
to be interpreted to the best sense; but if such transactions be justly
suspected to tend ^o the ruin of Religion, destruction of Common wealth, and
hazard of Gods people, it is not only expedient, but oftentimes necessary that
things though doubtful and not evident, per modum cautelae and remedij, be
interpreted in the worse sense, say the Cajetan. Salon, Aragon. Ban. apud Tan.
to. 3. disput. 4. q. 3. dub 3. nu. 57. 58. ex S. Tho. 22. q. 60. a. 4.
Schoolmen. In both parts of this Survey, I am persuaded, I have produced
solid demonstrations to prove the principal conclusions by me handled; if in
some accessories, which follow the principals, I have only produced probable
arguments, or reasons grounded on violent presumption, or just conjectures, I
am not therefore to be reprehended, because in matters, which may prejudice our
Religion, and hazard our lives, fortunes, and estates, we may make use even of
arguments, of the truth whereof there may be some doubts or suspicion; with how
much more reason may we make use of arguments, which carry with them some
probability; because they are alleged per modum Cautelae etc. to prevent the
suspected. If one were impeached of high Treason, to convict him, it were
enough to prove one article of the 24. What I have written in this second part
concerning the Ma^ques^e of Antrims conjunction with General L^sty, as it was
received from the forge of f^bles in Dublin, so it appears fabulous; such like
discourses, which are accessories to the principal, as they occur, repute
the as Apoch^ypha. In the prosecu^ion of this work I have not preoccupated all the objections my adversaries could make, some I have reserved for a reply if
any encounter me. Those that ought to stand at the bar to be judged by this
work, must not sit on the bench to give judgment against it; I have other
Judges of more indifferency unto whose cognizance such censures do properly
belong: yet if it shall please God to reunite the hearts of the Confederate
Catholics together in the bond of charity, I shall be willing by a sweet
supplement to wipe away all distasts and jealousies. Of two evils the least is
to be chosen, if the clergy for bear the discovery of those truths, which may
touch the reputation of a few particulars, then must the reputation of all the
confederate catholics of Ireland necessarily suffer detriment among all foreign
Nations abroad, because without any necessity they consented to so unjust a
peace. If the clergy had been silent, then (to save the credit of a few
private persons) they had hazarded their own credit, and sunk in the heroicke
enterprise by them attempted for defense of Religion, King and country:
neither had the confederate catholics been so truly informed of the nature
and condition of the said rejected Peace, had consequently they had been
ignorant of their own misery. Those good Gentlemen, who have herein
manifested their affection to the Marquis of Ormond, have not been so well
recompensed by his Excellency, as they deserve; for in his treaty with the
Parliament, he was careful to provide for the security of all the Protestants
in Ireland, but neglected to provide for the security, either of those
Gentlemen, or of other his dearest catholic friends and nearest alliance.
Maledictus homo, qui confidit in homine.

74. The ill-affected do ordinarily calumniate the clergy, Iorem. 17. 5.
charging them with an inordinate desire to obtain the possession of their
church livings. To omit many answers to this calumny; these seculars, that vent
it, ought rather to thank the clergy; because their own children (if they
become churchmen) will questionless reap the fruit of the clergies labor.
And in my judgment, it had been a great joy unto them to see their own
children raised to the height of church-dignity, and thereby enabsed to help
themselves and help their friends, whereas otherwise (while heretics
possessed all) they might be forced to beg their bread. Dew patientiae and
solatij det vobis id ipsum sapere in alterutrum secundum Romans 15. 5.
IESVM CHRISTVM, ut unanimes uno ore honorificetis Deum and Patrem Domini
nostri IFSV CHRISTI.

75. A Quere was made, how it stood with the Oath of Association, that the late
Council should give orders unto General Preston, asworne Confederat
catholic, to obey the commands of his Excellency the Marquess of Clanrikard,
and to deliver unto his command and possession (being not of our u^ion, or
(worn to the catholic Confederacy) such Castles, Forts, and Garrisons, as he
took in in Connaght, by which means (if God shall not unite his Excellency to
our Confederacy) we are like to be at as much trouble to recover them out of his
hands, as we were to recover them from the enemy. Whereunto I can make no
answer, but do humbly refer the discussion thereof unto this Catholic and
general assembly. I have often admired, to see so many by-ways taken, so many
factions raised, and so many sollicitors employed, even by Catholics (but
Catholics poisoned by the contagious infusions of our adversaries) to procure
the acceptance of Ormonds peace, though destructive to the Catholic Fath;
and none of them speaks for the maintayning of Glamorgans peace, though it
tend principally to reparation and conservation of the catholic Faith.
Mysterium absconditum.

76. I hear, I am traduced (but by an interessed Lawyer) to have alleged some
statute or other in the first part of this Survey, as if the same was not
repealed which indeed was repealed. What this statute might be, I do not well
know, only I conjecture, that it is the statute of 28. Hen. 8. which I cited in
the first part page 3. and 4. touching which I have had conference with some
learned Lawyers, who could never show me upon any authen^icke record the
repeal of that statute or other in the first part of this Survey, as if the
same were not repealod which indeed was repealed. What this statute might be I
do not well know, only I conjecture, that it is the statut of 28. Henry the
8. which I cited in the first part page 3, and 4. touching which I had
conference with some learned Lawyers, who could never show me upon any
authenticke Record the repeal of that statut, for which cause, and for other
reasons which here I must omit, I was encouraged to cite that statut. The
collector of the Irish statutes has not followed the method of the Collector
of the English statutes, who carefully at the conclusion of each statute
repealed or revived, informed his Reader, when and where such a statute was
repealed or revived, yet he tells us in his Epistle Dedicatory, that he has
printed only such statutes as were formerly printed and not expressly repealed,
and among some statutes repealed, whereof mention is made in the Collection
Fol. 67. 427. 429.
of the Irish statutes I find not this mentioned. It is true, that 3. and 4.
Philip and Mary, this statute and all other statutes enacted by Henry the 8.
against the Sea Apostolic, and the Supreme power thereof, were repealed,
though the statutes of such repeales were not recorded among the rest of the
Irish statutes, which some attribut to the corruption of the collector, yet
were the same statutes all revived, confirmed and amplyfyed in the second year
of Queen Elizabeth's reign, Irish statuts page 260.
where express mention is made of the statutes of the foresaid 28* year of
Henry the 8. and not only the grievances by me alleged out of the same
statute, but also the Oath of Supremacy there established, iterated and
confirmed by the statute of 2. Eliz. so far is it from truth, that the
foresaid statute was and remains repealed. Which our learned Lawyers that
penned our declarations and remonstrances foreseing, were therefore careful to
demand that not only the the act of 2. Eliz. in Ireland, but also all other
acts made against Catholic Religion Declar. printed in France p. 8. n. 6.
since the 20. year of Henry the 8. should be repealed* wherein they suppose
the said statuts of Hen. 8. to be in force: accordingly the first of our 17.
propositions, wherein we demanded a repeal of al p^nal laws, was propounded
in general terms abstracting from the statut of 2. Elizab. and all other
statuts. Our Committee of the treaty should have followed their Instructions
in this particular, and not limit the revocation of the Oath of Supremacy to
that Oath of 2. Eliz. knowing right-well, that the other Oath of 28. Hen. 8. is
extant in the printed Irish statute, but the repeal thereof no where (that I
could find) extant. It were more honorable for this good Lawyer, to take pen
in hand (if his joints be not too stiff) and refute this Survey, than to rail
against the Author at other men's Table* remove a te ospravum, and detrahentia
labia sint procul a te. Prove. 4. 24.


I conclude with the Apostles advise, I beseech you brethren, mark them
diligently, which cause division, and offenses. Romans 16. 16. 17. 18.
contrary to the doctrine which you have here learned, and avoyde them. For
they that are such, serve not the Lord JESUS CHRIST, qut their own bellyes,
and with fair speeches and flattering deceive the hearts of the simple.

Laus Deo Deiparaeque.

Omnia S. R. Ecclesiae and Congregationis utriusque Cleri Hibernici judicio
subjectasunto.

FINIS.
Erratasecundae partis.
Page 11. lin. 23. for where, read whence. page 13. lin. he, is omited, p. 17.
lin-21. for can read and, p. 25. lin. 31. read ontayneth, p. 26. lin. penult*
for in read in, p. 36. lin. 24. who, eade which, page 44. lin. 24. read
insufficient, page 56. lin. 26. read Protestants, p. 66. lin. 64. read
Religion, p. 79. l. 2. for 14000. l'. read 13000. l'. p. 86. lin. 14. read
yielded ibid. lin. 31. read Churches, yielded, page 94. lin. 1. read disease,
page lin. 3. 97. read us.


