Propugnaculum Pietatis: THE SAINTS EBENEZER, AND Pillar of HOPE in GOD, when
they have none left in the Creature. OR, THE Godly Man's Crutch or Staff in
Times Of Sadning Disappointments, Sinking Discouragements, Shaking Desolations.
Wherein is largely showed, The Transcendent Excellency of GOD, His Peoples,
HELP and HOPE: WITH The Unparalled Happiness of the SAINTS in their
Confidence in Him, overballancing the Worldlings Carnal Dependence both as to
Sweetness and Safety. Portrayed in a Discourse on Psalm. 146.5. By F. English

The Righteous shall never be removed, Prove. 10.30. But David encouraged
himself in the Lord his God, 1 Samuel 30.6. Quis ei metus est, cui Deus Tutor
est? Non labefactat mentem human^a molestatio, quam corroborat divina
protectio. Cypr. LONDON, Printed, 1667.

THE EPISTLE TO THE READER.
Reader,
THE vanity and emptiness of the Creature, and the excellency and sufficiency
of God, the great and eternal Creator, are like two Crystal Glasses, which
set one against the other, give mutual light and illustration. And our
knowledge of God being more by negation, than comprehension in this life, the
worlds blackness cannot but become a foil to set off his beauty with the more
shining splendor, and orient luster. These two first Principles of the
Doctrine of Christ, God ordinarily instills in our first conversion, and
convinces us of with such light and evidence, as they carry a remarkable
accent with them, and should leave upon us a more powerful and permanent
tincture and impression: Yet notwithstanding such is our dullness and stupidity
in conning these our primary and principal lessons, as we almost forget them as
soon as we have learnt them. For though at our first acquaintance and communion
with God, before our heads and hands come to be engaged in the world, we are
carried out with a vigorous prosecution of the one, and led into an holy
contempt and undervaluing of the base spoils of the other; yet when once we and
it come to grow familiars, the interest of Heaven and Religion must vail and
bow the knee to this our beloved darling and favorite. How many set out
forward and zealous Professors in the ways of godliness, as if they had fully
meant to have taken the Kingdom of Heaven by violence, whose zeal and
blessedness is now not to be found; but of ringleaders, are proved ren^gado's,
and of first, become last? They began to run well, until stooping to take up
the golden Apples in their way, they stopped in their Christian race, and acted
their parts on the stage of prosession, like Princes, till the Nuts of worldly
pleasure and gain being thrown by hand-fulls before them, they discovered
themselves no better than Apes. By venturing to nibble at Satan's pleasurable
bait, we are often catched with his deadly and destroying hook, and by overmuch
incumbring our selves with the world, we become (the best of us) like Anselms
bird, which had a stone tied to her leg, and pulled her down to earth, as fast
as she attempted an ascent to Heaven. This heavy weight so besets us, as we
cannot run with patience the race set before us. So that besides our
initiation, and first indoctrinating in the things that are excellent, God is
forced ever and anon to become our Monitor, and catechize us anew at the school
of the Cross; in his wilderness speaking to our heart, and by his word and
works, rubbing up our memories afresh with the meditations of what we first
imbibed, though now have lost the scent and savor of. And it is no other than
free grace, and infinite mercy in our heavenly Father to recall his extravagant
Prodigals, who will change their Fathers bread for the worlds husks, and thus
go out of Gods blessing into the warm Sun. Would we indeed make use of the
spectacles of the word, we might plainly read the inscription of vanity; yea,
vanity of vanities, written on the forehead of all creatures; and though never
so short-sighted, see an end of all created perfection. But alas, commonly we
look at the wrong end of the prospective, or look on the world in a
multiplying-glass, which represents it to our fancy, (...), some great matter,
and on the great God in an extenuating, which makes him appear little in our
vain imaginations; and so we entertain debasing thoughts of that eternal
verity, while we have high conceptions of these low and sublunary vanities. And
seeing these ear-remembrances suffice not for our conviction, it is but
necessary and requisite God should find out some other way of instruction for
us, wherein both our ear and eye should receive an impression: And that they
who would not learn by the teachings of the Word, should have the voice of the
Rod cry to them, which (though less articulate) may yet become more
significative. And has not God been a long time teaching us by his Providence,
as Abimelech did once the men of Succoth, by briars and thorns, and reading us
a large lecture of the uncertainty of all created beings and comforts? Has he
not with fire and sword been pleading with all flesh? by the sore and dreadful
calamity of the pestilence, been ushering us into discipline? Has he not in
his greatest severity overthrown some of us, as he did Sodom and Gom^rrah, by a
most deplorable and lamentable fire, in whose ashes is buried all our glory and
hope, and the blisters whereof will rise in our faces, when it is flames are
both extinguished and forgotten? The very mention whereof can be no other than a
fire in our bones; and whoever has the spirit of a Christian, cannot but by
sympathy suffer, and be offended at such a burning. What English man's heart so
stony as not to bleed within him, or can his eyes contain from tears, either to
have heard or seen the metropolis of our Nation, the royal and magnificent City
of the Kingdom, once the wonder of the world, and even mirror of all
Christendom; so beautiful for situation, numerous in people, famous for
riches, strength, beauty and honor, levelled with the dust, so as one stone's
not left on another, and become a burning pile, an heap of rubbish, a place of
desolation, even in a moment? Quis talia fando temperet a lachrymis? What ear
was ever auditor of so awk and direful a knell, as then alarmed its
Inhabitants? What eye ever spectator of so dreadful and doleful a tragedy as
was then acted on that noble theater? Who ever saw so devouring a fire, or
heard of such a dismal flame, so sudden, violent, universal, irresistible, and
(to be feared) irrepairable? Surely, what terror and affrightment, what amuse
and amazement, what horror, and even consternation of spirit, this rueful
spectacle seized the spirits of its beholders withal, is impossible to divine
and imagine. Poor souls, (methinks) I saw at a distance your pale faces,
trembling joints, weakened hands, dedolent hearts, who were in this so fatal a
blow most nearly concerned; methinks I hear you crying out to your friends and
neighbors, to your Rulers and Governors, as the woman did once to that King,
1 King. 6.27. Help, O King, who were all forced to return you that sorry
answer, If the Lord helps not, whence should we help? Ah what thousand pities
(had Heaven pleased to have prevented) to see so many famous structures,
ancient and venerable Monuments, learned Libraries, rich goods and treasures,
beautiful Halls and Exchanges, useful Churches and Chapels within so small a
compass, turned into a Chaos of confusion, and heap of utter destruction! Ah
how lamentable a sight to see so many able Citizens impoverisht, so many mean
ones quite beggared! how hideous an outcry to hear men complaining, We who had
thousands in the morning, had not a penny left to help us by the evening! we
who had full tables, could afford plentiful entertainments, rich purses, and
large banks, enough for back and belly, for necessity and delight, for us and
ours, are now reduced many of us to a morsel of bread, and glad to live on the
alms of the charitable; we went out full, but came in empty. Ah how sad to
behold so many families ruined and undone, so many dwellings and places, that
must never more know their owners and inmates, but have for ever cast them out,
leaving them to the wide world, and exposing them, as so many Tenants at will,
and that without any warning, to the mercy of the great and sovereign Landlord
of Heaven and Earth! What true Son of Sion, upon view or tidings of so sad a
catastrophe, must not bear a part in the Churches Funeral Elegy over Jerusalem,
Lam. 1.1. How does the City sit solitary, that was full of people? How is she
become as a Widow? she that was great among the Nations, and Princess among the
Provinces? And so cap. 4.11. The Lord has accomplished his fury, he has poured
out his fierce anger, and has kindled a fire in Zion, and it has devoured the
foundations thereof. Oh that by the brightness of these flames we could see our
sin, that has long appeared as at noon day, but we would never yet behold by
the Sun-light of the word! And that this most formidable fire may become to us
a flaming beacon, to signify our approaching danger and ruin, unless Gods
anger be timely quenched by the blood of Christ, and tears of repentance. And
that amidst the cold formalities, and freezing devotions in the winter quarter
of these last and perilous times, our cooler souls might be heated, and our
dying affections (by an holy kind of Anteperistasis) advanced into a diviner
flame of holy zeal, in seeking the Lord, lest he makes us as Admah, and sets us
as Zeboim, and kindles a fire in the Palaces of Joseph, so as none shall quench
it. Oh that we could all learn, from the highest to the lowest, those lessons,
Gods intention is to teach us by so severe dispensations, either for
humiliation for what is past, or reformation for time to come. And if I mistake
not, the physiognomy of this providence (whether it be looked on in the glass
of a more immediate or more mediate agency) Gods hand appeared most remarkably
in it, and concurring circumstances give us plain intimations of its
commission, and direction by a special superintendency from Heaven. And though
(like a picture well drawn) it looks wishly on every one in the room, yet it
seems to prefer a particular charge against those wickednesses of pride,
luxury, wantonness, security, earthliness, and uncharitableness, which have so
long burnt as fire among us. Ah what haughtiness, idleness, and fullness of
bread was to be found in our streets? with what pleasure did we live upon
earth? what port and state did we begin to carry? what wantons were we grown,
forgetting the God that made us, not attributing to him our power to get
wealth, having our hearts lifted up, or like foolish children, with Jesurun,
standing on our heads, and kicking against Heaven, and neglecting the God of
our salvation, sacrificing Gods corn, wine, oil, wool and flax, to our lusts
and lovers, instead of our Creator! Were we not grown like Sodom and the Old
World, a God-despising, and a self-pleasing people? that gave up our selves to
eating and drinking, buying and selling, planting and building, every man
looking to his own way and gain; and as for the ship of the Church, the
interest of God and Religion; having caught the fish, we laid aside the net;
and so we could but save our own petty Cabbins, let Gods and Christ's cause sink
or swim, we were become Gallio's, not minding these things! Oh how did we that
pretended to God, mind little or nothing but the world? How went we, one to his
farm, another to his merchandise; our shop was become our closet, and the
Exchange our Church. The Courtier, the Merchant, the Tradesman, all busy as so
many Ants on an Hill to scrape together so much refined dust, and lade
themselves with this thick clay: Every one setting up his Heaven on Earth, and
singing a requiem to his soul in his stately houses, full warehouses, vast
incomes, if not unjust gains and oppressions, looking so much to earth, as
those that had neither time or mind to look up to Heaven; but if with the Lark,
soaring to Heaven in pretenses of zeal and affection on the Sabbath; with the
Worm, grovelling on the worlds dunghill all the week after. Like him in the
Poet, (that cried out, O Coelum, with his tongue, when his hand touched the
earth) committing even a sollicism with our hands, and bidding an express
practical contradiction to our professions. Ah is it not just God, should deny
us the world as a creature, which we could not have, but must adore as our God?
Is it not righteous, that should be taken out of our hands, which instead of
being trodden under our feet, had got up so near our hearts? Oh how much better
Christians, (for to you alone I now speak) (as for the wicked who grow worse
and worse, and do more wickedly, Hell fire shall shortly do that in consuming
them, which this could not do for refining) had it been for you to have cast
your bread on the waters, than to have had it wasted by such a fire? Ah, had
you but worn the world as a loose garment, that you might have put off and on
at pleasure, it would not now have come from you (as your skin from your flesh)
with pain and torture, but ease and delight; or as the blood out of your veins,
with reluctance and opposition, but as water from a fountain, with freedom and
liberty. These pictures, if hung up loosly, would have been taken down with
less rending, tearing, and noise, than they are like to be, if your hearts be
fastened or glewed to them. Oh Sirs, had you minded God and Christ, as you did
this Mammon of the world, and attended your heavenly trade, as you did your
East India, Turkey, French, Spanish, or the rest, and conversed with God in your
closets, as you did with your customers in your shops, and your friends and
neighbors sometimes at the Tavern, you had had something in such an hour to
bear up and comfort your spirits withal, which I am afraid, many of you now
want. Oh that you would in this your day, yet know the things of your peace!
And before God rises up to Judgment a second time, and the fire of his wrath
now smothered, breaks out with a seven times more, even into a most violent and
unquenchable flame; Hear the voice of the Rod, and him that has appointed it:
And by all that God has done, or is doing with you this day, learn those
fundamental lessons, of the vanity and contingency of the creature, and the
fullness and alsufficiency of the Creator; so as to make an utter renunciation
of all carnal confidence, and engage your souls in a firm and resolute
dependence on God alone. O that this might indeed be a purgatory fire, to
refine our souls from all that rust of carnality, and worldly affection that is
so grown upon us! Let us not make gain our godliness, but count godliness our
greatest and only gain. Why should we set our hearts on vanity, on a non
entity? who would love or value that which he cannot long keep, but if a fire
or plunder comes, is upon the wing, and takes its flight; or give that the
chair of state, or upper room of pre-eminence in his heart, which very shortly
he must part with out of his hands? Can you (Christians) carry your houses and
lands, your baggs and treasures with you to eternity? will they not all shake
hands with you at the grave? O then make friends (by employing for God and his
honor) to your selves of this Mammon of unrighteousness, and use the world as
if ye used it not, remembering the fashion thereof passes away: And lay up your
treasures not on earth, but Heaven; store up a good foundation against the time
to come, the top of whose building may reach eternity. Mind not so much things
seen and temporal, as those believed and eternal. Make sure of God as your
portion, and choose him as your inheritance. Now learn to trust to, and lean by
faith on the arm of an Alsufficient God, while ye experience the broken staff
of all created beings and comforts. When the stream is dried up, and all your
vessels emptied, have recourse to that inexhaustible fountain. Learn the Art of
living by faith upon an unchangeable and eternal Jehovah under all worldly
changes and revolutions: To rejoice in the Lord, and be glad in the God of your
salvation, not only when ye sit under the shadow of your own Vines and
Fig Trees, but even when they neither blossom, nor bring forth fruit. Though
your goods be gone, yet ye have not lost your God; he is not gone, whose
alsufficiency is able to make up all your losses by plague or fire, and
recompense you an hundredfold, in whom alone (possessing all things) you may
possess them, while you have nothing. Though your trade be at present broken,
ye have now a seasonable gale for Heavens more enduring substance. Though ye
may be dispersed and scattered as Vagabonds here and there, having no certain
dewlling place, God will be a little sanctuary to you; and though your City
has forsaken ye, your God is a Tower yet left, which your souls may get upon,
and a City of Refuge for you to fly to, and repose in with greatest security.
Though ye have nothing but tents to dwell in, and (with holy Jacob) a stone for
a pillow to lay your head on, God is in this place, and he that never slumbers
nor sleeps, watches for your safety, while his Angels also are your lifeguard
and protection: He is your arm every morning, and your salvation in time of
trouble. Though all die and leave you, relations, possessions, yet your God
lives, who is ten thousand times better, and able to make it better to you than
all the goods and estates in the world. Trust in the Lord then for ever, in the
Lord Jehovah, in whom is everlasting strength. And then, should you fall into
the hand of men's violence out of that of Gods vengeance, while the enemies of
Jacob are your hunters, you are sure of the God of Jacob for your help. This
consideration was that holy David bore up his reeling soul withal under all
the reflections of the wickeds prosperity and enmity; Whom have I in Heaven but
thee? my flesh and heart fails, but God is the strength of my heart, and my
portion for ever. And in all the weights of his own adversity, he encouraged
himself in the Lord his God. And this was the infallible pillar and foundation
with which the Church under all her ruins, supported her drooping faith, even
the eternity of God, Lam. 5.19. Thou, O Lord, remainest for ever, thy Throne
from generation to generation. And Reader, it is the hearty option of my soul,
that thou, and all that read these lines, yea all concerned in these fatal
strokes from the King on the throne, to the beggar on the dunghill, had the
same comfort under Londons burning, that holy David had once on Ziglags; even a
God to encourage themselves in, who is, what, and where he was, the same God to
his for ever and ever, when all persons, places and creatures, shall not be
what they once were, or be no more. This encouragement of all them who fear the
Lord, is the sole design of this ensuing discourse. The Author intending it no
other than an anchor to buoy up our finking spirits, or crutch, the better to
enable to step our limping faith. A word in season, is as apples of gold in
pictures of silver. And he hopes (if you have not already forgotten the hand of
God upon you) he might find some advantage in this present address, our hearts
under afflictions being always more pliable, and apt to receive divine
signatures and impressions. In this your helpless, and almost hopeless state
the providence of God seemed to call to him, as once the men of Macedonia to
Paul in another case, come over and help us. And though a stranger to most of
your faces, yet being a fellow-sufferer with you through the common spirit of
Christianity, his bowels could not but be enlarged with pity, and his heart
inflamed with zeal and piety toward you: And (seeing no other stepped before
him) looked on himself as obliged to open to you some door of hope in this
valley of discomfort, and afford you what after-help his poor talent could, to
bear your present condition; become to you a plank after shipwreck, to bring
your souls to a comfortable shore. And if his mite may contribute ought to so
blessed and happy an end, to any of you, or the people of God, he has his
purpose, who is,

Your Supplicant at the Throne of Grace, and Servant in the work of the Gospel,
F. E.
November. 5. 1666.
The TABLE, or Contents of this Treatise.
THe general nature of Happiness, Page 1 With, the common desire of Mankind
toward it, 2 And the Worlds apprehensions concerning it, ib. The Saints sense
of it, and its true measure and Standard, consisting in the enjoyment of God;
in a good, much more in an evil day, 3
The scope and contents of the Psalm, showing the Creatures vanity, and
mutability, 4 Gods alsufficiency, and eternity, 6
The parts of the Text. An indefinite Proposition, and a more particular
confirmation, 7 In the first, implied, A significant description of God, ibid.
As to the reality of his Being, and existence, ib. His special relation to his
people, 8 An assertion of his peculiar Providence, ibid. I. In its sufficiency,
and way of efficiency, 11 God, His peoples help, proved, 12 Opened, First, in
what respects, 13 1. In respect of supply and provision, ib. In regard of
Spirituals, 14 And Temporals, 15, 16, 17.
2. In respect of defense and protection, 18 And so, He is the help of Jacob,
his Church in general, 19 Whom he helps, sometimes immediately, ibid. Sometimes
mediately, 21 Either by Angelical ministration, ibid. Humane assistance, 22
Sometimes, by direct and proper means, ibid. By improper, wicked, contrary,
destructive, ib.
Or his people in particular, 25 1. Against their homebred Enemies, their
lusts and corruptions, ibid. 2. Satan's assaults and onsets, 26 3. The Worlds
enmity and opposition, 28 And that, By preparing them private recesses, 31 By
abating the natural force and fury of Creatures, 32 By disappointing wicked
designs, and frustrating them, 34 By diverting violent executions, 37 By
reconciling enemies to his People, 38 By turning intended mischiefs to good and
advantage, 41 By ruining and destroying their adversaries, 44

4. The stroke of common Judgments and Calamities, 47 Either, By removing them
out of their reach, 48 On Earth, ibid. To Heaven, 49
By distinguishing them in the evil day, 50 By bringing them up out of the
affliction, 54


3. In respect of succor and redress under burdens, 56 Of Sin and guilt, 57
Duty and Service, 59 Trialls and Sufferings, 60 And that more visibly and
openly, ibid. Either by Alienation of them, ibid. Redemption from them, 61
Or more secretly, and indiscernably, 62 By supplying them with necessary
influences of grace, ibid. Assisting them with seasonable supports of spiritual
strength, 63 Filling them with inward manifestations of joy and comfort, 64

4. In respect of relief under Failures and Disappointments, 65 By giving them
satisfaction under the distresses, 66 In the failing of Mercies, 67, 68, etc.
Feeling of Evils, 72
Compassing their deliverance by unhop^d ways and means, 73

Secondly, After what manner he helps them, 74 Suddenly and unexpectedly, 75
Gradually, 76 Opportunely and seasonably, 77 Under their Enemies rage and
infolency, 79 Their own dejection and despondency, ibid. Powerfully, and
irresistibly, 81 Proportionably, 84
To their Wants, and Necessities, ibid. Desires, and Prayers, 85 Hopes, and
Expectances, 86 Right improvements, 88

Thirdly, Reasons, why God helps his People, 90 1. The relation he has to
them, and propriety in them, 90 2. His manifold Promises and engagements made
to them, 94 3. The conditions of obtaining help found in them, 95 Of humility
and spiritual poverty, ibid. Prayer and Invocation, 96 Faith and dependence, 98
Waiting and attendance, 100
4. The encouragement in his Service, and against their enemies he would give
them, 102 5. The worthy return he shall receive from them, 103

II. In it is efficiency, or way of conveyance and communication to his People,
105 Expressed. The Happiness in having God our help, ibid. Laid down, in Theft,
positively, and absolutely, by way of Antithesis and comparison, 107
Positively, wherein two things considerable, ibid. A Benedictory Conclusion,
ibid. A peculiar appropriation, ibid.
From the Benediction affirmed: Two Observations, ibid. First, The Saints
Happiness lies only in the enjoyment of God, ibid. Three things requisite to
make up Happiness, all found in God, and only in him, 108 Sufficiency and
perfection, Proportion and suitableness, Perpetuity and duration, ibid.

Secondly, The supreme, and sole ground of comfort, and confidence in an evil
day, is title to, and influence from God, 109 Evidenced from the consideration
of Gods Nature, ibid. Wherein considered, The infiniteness of his Being, The
absoluteness and independency of his operations, ibid. The immutability of his
purpose, and promises, 111 The tenderness of his Bowels, ibid. The eternity of
his existence, 112

From the properties of his Help, ibid. He helps ably, ibid. willingly 113.
readily ibid. faithfully 114. constantly, 115

From the Appropriation or limitation, 116 Observe, First, A Saint is
priviledg'd with special propriety in God, ibid. Secondly, Fiducial repose in
God in an evil time is only to be founded on our interest in him, ib. Thirdly,
Propriety in God is the only ground of true felicity and comfort, 117 Fourthly,
They alone, are just Expectants of divine help in straits and afflictions,
which are firm recumbents and constant dependants on God, 119
Comparatively, Whence observe, First Gods excellency, and the Creatures vanity
illustrate each other, 121 Secondly, There is an excellency in the fruitiou of
God, far beyond that in the enjoyment of all Creatures, 122 God the most Real
Good, 123 God the most Pure and refined Good, 124 God the most Satisfying Good,
125 God the most Durable Good, 126
Thirdly, Gods help exceeds all humane help and succor whatsoever, proved by
way of comparison, 126



In the second, The Illustration of the Proposition, 128 Wherein the connection,
and order are observable, the matter wherein, ibid. First, The Saints
disposition, and affection, of hope in the Lord their God, 129 Secondly, Their
reward and remuneration, Happy are they, ibid. In the first, The Persons
qualification, 130 Their hopes foundation, ibid.
From first, Observat. Gods people are an hoping and expecting people, ibid.
Wherein, The Proposition proved; and the nature of hope, in the Philosophical,
and Theological notion opened, 131
In second, The appellation. The Lord God. Whence, Observat. first, Hope in
God's mercy stands with reverence of his Majesty, ibid. Second. Gods power, and
greatness, as well as his mercy, and goodness, is a great encouragement of his
peoples hope, ibid. Third. God, and God alone, is the object of his servants
hope in the day of affliction, 133
Five things in God, the ground of the Saints hope, The glory of his
Attributes, ibid. The merits of his Son, 134 The relations of his Covenant, 137
The truth of his Promises, 138 The experiments of his Providence, 140
The Application. The Lord our God. Hope the Saints peculiar, 142
In the second. The reward, or Compensation of their hoping. Whence
observation. Dependants on God, and Expectants from him, are happy and blessed,
proved, 144 Opened in three things, 1. As this hope is a Preserver of the Soul
from sin, 145 Particularly against Despair and succumbency, Discontent and
impatience, under affliction, 146 Unlawful and indirect means to get out of
it, ibid.
2. A reliever of the Soul under trouble, 148 In order whereunto, it has a
fourfold Energy, Quieting 148. Sustaining, 149. Comforting 150 Establishing,
ibid.

3. An assurer of mercy and deliverance, 152
Application. Inference. Wherein, The different character of the Godly from the
Worldling and Hypocrite, 155 His different privilege, 160 Wherein, His
advantage above them, As to Peace and serenity, ibid. Certainty and security,
161 Supply, and sufficiency, ibid.
The infelicity, or cursed, (because desperate) estate of the wicked, 162 Both
in the day of 1. Prosperity, ibid. 2. Affliction, 163 As to self and also
creature-confidence, 164
3. Death, 165

The transcendent excellency of God above all created perfections, in making
the soul happy, 169 The folly, and danger of all oppositions against Gods
People, 171. and compliance with their enemies, and oppressors, 172
Examination. Wherein, Signs more general of our interest in God, 174 Union
with him in and through Christ, 175 Covenant-obligation to him, ibid.
Acquaintance and communion, 176 Sympathy, and fellow-feeling, 177 Suitable
affections to him, 178 Of high esteem, ibid. Ardent Love, 179 Earnest desire,
180 Sweet delight, 181 Firm resolution, 182
Vehement endeavor, and pursuit after him, 183
Signs more special, 184 1. Of making him our help: ibid. Two. Rejection of all
creature-confidence, ib. Exercise of sole and constant dependence, ibid.

2. Of having him our Hope: Wherein, the Godly man's hope, 185
Contradistinguisht from the Hypocrites, as being 1. Grounded, 186 2. Effectual,
187 Wherein a sixfold discriminating virtue, ibid. Purifying from sin, ibid.
Quickening to duty, 188 Staying under temptations, 189 Pacifying under delays,
190 Raising above worldly expectations, 191 Fortifying and confirming against
all opposition, 192

3. Steadfast and permanent, 193


Reproof, to Gods people, who (as if there were not a God in Israel) go to
Baalzebub, the God of Ekron, 194 Wherein, showed, The greatness of the sin. 195
Danger of the punishment. ibid. ^isappointment of our hopes. 196 ^mpair of our
mercies. 197 ^o feiture of divine protection. 198

Comfort. The godly man the only blessed man. 200 Blessed, In all his relations
wherein concerned. ibid. In all conditions whereinto cast. 201
Of spiritual trouble under Desertions. 202 Temptations. ib. Corruptions. ib.
Outward, under Wants and Exigencies. 203 Fears and dangers. 205 Losses,
crosses and disappointments. ibid. Unkindnesses or oppositions. ibid.
Afflictions, death it self. 206

Excitation 1. To Christians, to walk worthy divine help and influx. 207 In the
duties of 1. Thankfulness. 208 2. Access to him. 210
Wherein 1. The special seasons of address, in A calm. 216 A storm. 217
Particularly under, Pursuits of divine wrath. ibid. Oppressions of Satan's, or
humane violence. ibid. Creature-disappointments. 218 Unusual and extraordinary
services. ibid. Falls into sore distress. ibid. Dying apprehensions. 219

2. The manner, how to make our addresses, 220 By Soul-abasement and
humiliation. ibid. Renunciation of humane help. 221 Prayer and supplication.
ibid. Faith and believing. 223 Resolutions of return. ibid. 3. Satisfaction and
acquiescence in him. 224 4. Return toward him. 226 By improving help received,
In endeavors to advance Gods glory. ibid. In communications to our Brethren.
227 In their Soul necessities. ibid. Bodily necessities. 229



5. Confidence under trials. 230 Wherein 1. Objections answered, arising, 1.
From our own unworthiness of divine help and influence. 232 2. From our long
disappointment. ibid. God helps not always, Perfectly. 233 Visibly. 234
Presently. 235

3. From the sadness of our state. 238
2. Two Questions answered. 241 On what terms divine help may be expected under
the immediate visitations of Gods own hand. ibid. On five conditions, 1. A
religious severity, consisting, In an immunity from the sins of the times.
ibid. An accurate walking before God. ibid.
2. A fiducial and firm recumbency. 243 3. A praying importunity. 244 4. An
exact integrity. ibid. 5. A resolved singularity. 245

At what special times may help be looked for under the violences and
persecutions of humane wrath. 247 When Gods Cause, and the whole interest of
Religion hes at stake. ibid. When a cloud of reproach is cast upon his peoples
innocence. 248 When all humane help disappears and fails. ibid. When the
enemies blaspheme Gods Name and insult over his people. 249 When their spirits
begin to sink and fail. 250 Especially when truly humbled by their afflictions,
they seek him by faith and prayer. ibid.


6. Adherence, and cleaving to God, always, with full purpose of heart. 251 2.
To sinners.


Direction, Where to look for help out of their lapsed state. 253 Exhortation,
To get an interest in God. ibid. Motives, Means. An humble sense of their
hopeless and helpless condition by nature. 255 Flying to Gods mercy in Christ.
ibid. Engaging into, and keeping covenant with him for ever. 256





ERRATA.
PAge 1. line 11. for greedy read ravished, page 44. line 25. read ruining, page
132. line 25. for no read not.

In the Title over the head of the Pages, for Godly read Godlies.

THE GODLY PILLAR OF HELP.
PSALM 146.5. Happy is he that has the God of Jacob for his help, whose hope
is in the Lord his God --
HAppiness is a blessed word, bigg-bellied with comfort, and full fraught with
satisfaction; as full of sweetness, as the Breast of Milk, the Cane of Sugar,
or Comb of Honey; as grateful and refreshing to the reasonable soul of man, and
much more the awakened and enlightened conscience of a Christian as the
fountain is with its water to the thirsty Traveller, or the Sun with its light
to the greedy beholder. Felicity is the grand attractive of every appetite, and
the common loadstone of all the desires of the Sons of men. Its generale votum,
universalis supplicatio, the unanimous vote, and universal request of all
mankind. Who will show us any good, is language naturally spoken, and almost
worn threadbare by the mouths of all men, Psalm. 4.6. Whatsoever other
difference runs in the current of humane opinions, their affections herein are
all tuned unisons, and their music is in consort. As conformity to God in
holiness, is the most perfect intendment, so in happiness, is the most
desirable attainment of men and Angels? Who is it that would not be happy? or
though they affect no good in them, desire not good to them? Though few but
disdain holiness in the way, all design happiness in the end. Even the Heathens
themselves affected, as well as conceived, a Fools Paradise, a Phanatick
Elysium of bliss and happiness, as well as Christians a real. They entertained
multiplied opinions about happiness, some placing it in gifts of nature, others
of fortune (by them so called) a third sort, of mind: Some in pleasure, some in
profits and honors, others in learning, and natural, or acquired endowments;
all in some external good, and outward satisfaction. They brake the shell, and
we gat the kernel; they ran away with the notion and bare speculation, we are
blessed with its actual fruition. For having otherwise learned Christ, we know
and believe, This to be eternal life only, to know God in Jesus Christ, and
that true happiness is bound up in God alone, the first cause, and last and
utmost end, the highest and chiefest good; so tunes that heavenly Chorister,
Psalm. 73.25. after a descant on all creature-enjoyments, even a differing note
^^om the worlds votaries, Whom have I in Heaven but thee? and there is none on
Earth that I ^^sire in comparison of thee. And the Church se^^nds him in this
pleasant ditty, Lam. 3.24. ^he Lord is my portion, says my soul, therefore
will (...) hope in him. Nunquam been sine te, nunquam male ^^m te, says
Bernard sweetly. The gracious soul ^^ndes it self never ill in his presence,
never well (...) his absence. The Sun of Righteousness makes ^ay in the souls
of the Saints, though all the ^tars of creature-consolation withdraw their
light and influence; when notwithstanding the brightst and most glorious shine
of these earthly glo^^orms, (under its fatal eclipse) a perpetual night ^f
darkness invelops the soul, and covers its whole ^eavens. Worldly evils may
render a carnal ^^an miserable, but worldly goods can never ^nake an holy man
happy. And as a Saints choicest ^appiness lies in God in a good day, much more
^ave they sens'd their felicity to be concerned in ^im in an evil day; when all
other happinesses ^ail, and felicities vanish and fade, as a gourd of ^he
night, or the morning dew before the ^corchings of the rising Sun. When God
comes ^o blow upon our comforts, and by the ireful ^ooks of his severer
providence, to frown on ^ur spirits, neither the friends, nor things of ^he
world, can add one cubit to the stature, or ^ontribute one mite to the measure
of our blessed^ess; but in the saddest hour that befalls a Christian, of loss,
cross, trial and temptation, when ^he barrel of meal is exhausted, and the
cruse of ^yl spent, all secondary causes are at an end, all creature comforts
at a pose and loss, all worldly relations and fruitions prove dry brooks, and
barren wildernesses, disappointing the expecting Traveller, or like so many
Lotteries, to which a men goes with an head full of hopes, but returns away
with an heart full of blanks, utterly void of his expectation, then, and then
alone true and sure consolation is to be fetched from the experience of God,
and acquaintance with him, who is the over and ever-flowing fountain of living
waters. And therefore the Prophet here in this Psalm, setting before us the
vanity and emptiness of all created helps and sufficiencies in competition
with, and comparison of the divine fullness and alsufficiency, condemns all
confidence in the creature to the very Hell, and advances with the highest
Encomiums, and most heavenly Elogies adherence to God, and dependence upon him
alone. He dehorts on the one hand from confidence in man, or any arm of flesh,
by Arguments drawn from their infirmity and vanity, the mutability of their
tempers, and also the fragility, yea mortality of their state. All created
things have in them an utter incompetency to administer help to a soul under
any strait or affliction, being finite and fading. For that must be eternal and
immutable, that must afford succor and relief under all vicissitudes of
providence, all mutations and interchanges of life. To pass creatures moving in
a lower orb, and take Princes elevated to the highest sphere of dignity and
excellency here below, the best and highest of men, yea so many representative
Gods, the Viceroys and Vicegerents of that infinite and eternal Majesty of
Heaven and Earth, exalted to the ^itch of deputed by God, and reputed Deities
by ^en, yet even they are under the same predi^ament of changeable affections
and dispositions, and eke of a mortal condition with other men: Though gods
while living, they die as men, and (...) as Diogenes once told Alexander the
great of ^hilip his Father) their ashes are not distinguish^ble from the ashes
of the common sort; so that ^arivs's memento te esse hominem, wherewith he
^ommanded his Chamberlain thrice a day to ^ound him, will fit them as well as the
common sort. Men, though never so able and potent, often^^mes have neither
power, nor yet will to help their expectants, their minds are uncertain, and
their opinions unstable as water; so as, with Reu^en, they cannot excel.
Inconstant they are to their principles, professions, resolutions, and start
^side upon the least diversion from their promises, ^urposes and intendments
like a deceitful Bow. And should they hold even and fixed, either their ^^fe or
state may admit a change; the wheel now ^^p (as Bajazet told him) may soon go
down. They may fall so far from the pinnacle of power, and turret of honor, as
they may not be able to ^ave themselves, much less their adherents and
de^endants; such is their inconstancy and uncer^ainty. How soon can God clip
the wings of their ^omp and bravery, and stain the beauty and pride ^f their
glory, so as their excellency which ^eacht up to the Heavens, and touched the
clouds, ^nay become as their own dung? Job 20.6. Their ^reath may soon be upon
the wing, and take its ^ight to eternity, and when they die, all their
thoughts, endeavors, counsels, all their dignity and fame, power and majesty
dies with them, and there is an end of all their perfection. And therefore he
concludes this with the Prophets counsel, to cease from man whose breath is in
his nostrils. And all this he expresses to the life, verse. 3, and 4. Put not
your trust in Princes, nor in the Son of man in whom there is no help. Hi^
breath goes forth, he returns to his earth: in that very day hi^ thoughts
perish.

But on the other side, he highly commends confidence in God, showing their
blessedness that depend on him; they shall be sure never to mee^ with a
disappointment. Though men die, God ever lives; though they change, he changes
not, with him is no varial leness, nor shadow of turning. The eternity of
Israel cannot lie, or repent: He is the great Almighty Jehovah, in whom is
everlasting strength, the immutable Rock of Ages, and sure dewlling place of
his people throughout all generations: A God who abides ever the same, to day,
yesterday, and for evermore the true and ever-living God; righteous in his
judgments, faithful in his promises, beneficent in his providence, and
providential dispensations; which is daily exhibited toward all sorts of
persons calamitous and oppressed, sustaining, defending, governing and helping
them in a most eminent and divine manner; and that not in this particular, o^
that other age of the world, but for ever, throughout all ages, in former,
present, and succeeding generations. And therefore its both far safer and
sweeter to trust to the Creator, than to repose in any creature; all which the
Prophet evidenceth in the sequel of the Psalm, from verse. 6, ^o the end. And so
(to come to a close of his ^nain Proposition) he positively affirms to all
^he world, That though there be nothing but misery and unhappiness to be found
in the creature, ^ll fullness and blessedness dwells in the ever-living and
ever-loving God. In consideration whereof ^he Psalmist breaks out by way of
Antithesis in^o this most pathetical acclamation, and peremp^orily sets down
this infallible maxim, draws up this most comfortable conclusion for faith to
^ive and feed upon, here in the words; Happy is ^he that has the God of Jacob
for his help, etc.

In which words are observable two general parts:

First, A general and indefinite Proposition, of comfort, Happy is he that has
Jacob's God for his help; whoever he be, he is really blessed.

Secondly, A more particular Exposition and Illustration; or (if you will) a
tacit imposition of duty, whose hope is in the Lord his God. In the former,
the comfortable Proposition, we have something employed, and something
expressed. Two things are supposed, and (being coucht in the bowels of the
words) deducible thence by way of Illation or Inference. First, A famous and
significant description of God, the God of Jacob. Secondly, A tacit assertion
of the sufficiency of his power and providence over, or his mercy and goodness
toward his people. Their Help.

First, A description of God, and that first in respect of his nature, or the
verity and reality of his being and existence, He is styled here by way of
elegancy or emphasis, the God of Jacob. Says Mollerus, to discern and
distinguish the true God of Israel from all Heathenish Deities, and to explode
all fictitious gods and worships thereunto. As the true God is the God of
Jacob, so the God of Jacob is the only true God. He is God alone, and there is
no other besides him. The gods of the Heathen are all vanity, they have eyes,
and see not, ears, and hear not, etc. Psalm. 115.5, 6. But our God is in the
Heavens, and does whatsoever he pleases. He alone is he, whom all mercy and
good must be expected from, and so all prayer and supplication directed to. To
whom should a people seek, but unto their God? his prerogative it is to hear
prayers, and to him shall all flesh come.

Secondly, This Title or Appellation serves also to describe him in his special
relation to his people. We find him called by our Psalmist, Psalm. 132.5. The
Mighty God of Jacob. He is indeed the God of the whole Earth, but in a peculiar
manner the God of Israel, Matthew. 15.31. In Judah is he known, his Law goes
forth from Zion, and his Word proceeds from Jerusalem. The Heathen have not
known his Law; and although by those vestigia creatoris, those darker
impressions made in creation and providence, they can feel after him, and so
trace his Divine Essence, yet they understand little of his Law or love. And as
in a special way he has made himself known to his people; so he bears a
singular respect to them, and takes a particular care of them. It Is observable
in Scripture, that he styles not himself so frequently (in his revelations of
himself to them) the God of Heaven and Earth (though that also be title full of
encouragement) but the God of Abra^^m, Isaac, and Jacob; as if he had born such
^oice good will, and had such a peculiar care ^r those three men, as to
overlook all the world ^esides them. So near and intimate relation have ^ods
people to him, as their interests are mutual^^ involved, and twisted in a
reciprocal and co^enant-bond. They are his, he is their portion; their Beloved
is theirs, and they be his: They ^re called by his Name, the Saints are styled
his Holy Ones, and the Church is termed expressly, Christ. Yea, he condescends
to be called by their ^ame; he assumes the name of Jacob, Psalm. 24.6. This is
the generation of them that seek him, that ^eek thy face, O Jacob. And of
Israel too, Ezra 10.2. set now there is hope in Israel concerning this thing.
The very name Jacob acquired upon his conquest, Genesis 32.28. And that the whole
Church is denominated by, Psalm. 31.3. Let Israel hope in the Lord -- Although
he be the God of all by Creation, all creatures being the works of his hands:
Psa. 100.3. Act. 17.26, 27.
yet he is the God and Father of his people in Christ; his Father, and their
Father, Joh. 20.17. And by way of choice and covenant, Deuteronomy. 7.6. For thou art
a holy people unto the Lord thy God, the Lord thy God has chosen thee to be a
special people to himself above all people upon the face of the earth. They are
(...), a people raised and elevated above the ordinary make, and common stamp
of the residue of mankind. There is a mutual stipulation between God and them,
Deuteronomy. 26.17, 18. Psa. 50.5.
Thou have avoucht the Lord this day to be thy God; and the Lord has avoucht
thee this day to be his peculiar people* The mutual Indentures of the Covenant
of Grace run thus; Ye shall be my people, and I will be you^ God, Ezekiel. 36.18.
Sancti quasi sanciti. As God has obliged himself to them in bonds of mercy and
loving kindness, so have they reingaged themselves to him in bonds of duty and
allegiance. Who is this that engaged his heart to approach unto me? may be
understood of Christ or of true Christians, Jer. 30.21. One shall say I am the
Lords; and another shall call himself by the name of Jacob; and another shall
subscrib^ with his hand unto the Lord, and surname himself by the name of
Israel, a metaphor from volunteers, who enter their names into the common
muster-rolls, and engage into a (Sacramentum militare) a military Oath, to
cleave to their Captain, and faithfully to follow their colors. So indeared an
union and communion is between Go^ and his people, as himself describes it
under the most near and affectionate relation of Father and child, as appears
in that gracious promise he make to David concerning his Son Solomon, 1 Chronicles
17.13. I will be his Father, and he shall be my Son; by which interpellation he
also treatet^ David himself, Christ, and all the faithful Psalm. 89.26, 27. He
shall cry to me, Thou a^ my Father; Also I will make him my first-born^ Yea,
because a man must forsake Father and Mother, to cleave to the wife of his
bosom; he court his people (though in their widowhood, and (...) under some
seeming disadvantages for respect an^ affection) with conjugal embraces; and
that no^ by way of complement, as to what he intends to ^e, but good assurance
of what he actually was, and is, and will be for ever, Isa. 54.8. For thy Maker
is thine husband. And as he said of that ^aternal, Nemo tam Pater quam
Coelestis, None ^ach a Father as our Heavenly Father, Nemo tam ^ater, nemo tam
pius. So says our Law of those ^uptial Obligations, Vxor splendet radiis
Mariti. Gods Church and People shine with the beams ^f him, their endeared and
ever-loving Husband. And so much for the first, the description of God, both in
this his absolute and relative consi^eration.

Secondly, follows the implicit affirmation of ^he sufficiency, or rather
agency and efficiency of his Providence, together with the manner of its
^onveyance to his people. He is their Help, and and so as the God of Jacob.
First then observe, Gods influence and communication to his, he is their Help,
or their Salvation, as the word imports. He is indeed a common help, an help to
all, he bears up the Pillars of the Earth, and upholds the reeling World and
its Inhabitants from ^inking and perishing, Psalm. 75.3. The eyes of all things
wait upon him who is the great Almoner, the grand and bountiful Benefactor of
Heaven and Earth; all live upon the universal Ordinary of his infinite bounty,
and are fed at his Providential Table, and none go tristes ab illo, sad from
his presence, that come to him, and call upon him. He helps the wicked
sometimes against the wicked, yea the wicked against the godly, when they
rebel against him, or run away from him: But yet in a peculiar manner he is
their help; a Saint has him by way of propriety his help. He is their help,
and their shield. Psalm. 115.9, 10, 11. O Israel, trust thou in the Lord, he is
their help, and their shield. O house of Aaron trust in the Lord. Ye that fear
the Lord, trust in the Lord, he is their help, and their shield. Whether the
Church of God in general considered, or its particular members, they stand
obliged to trus^ in him, whether they be placed in higher spears of
excellency, or in a lower Orb of activity; for different degrees as to worldly
conditions make no alteration in his paternal Indulgences, and Fatherly
dispensations. He is styled the Rock of Israel, 2 Samuel 23.1. and the strength
of Israel, 1 Samuel 15.29. David speaks singularly, and by way of appropriation,
Psalm. 54.4. Behold, God is my helper, he becomes a suitor and supplicant to him
upon the account of his choice of his ways, Psalm. 119.173. Let thine hand help
me. God is to his People a shade for delight and solace, while they fit under
the shadow of his wings, and his Banner over them is Love; and a Shield to them
for defense, to ward off all blows of affliction, and strokes of Calamity,
while under his Feathers their Souls do trust.

Which point being a necessary Preface, and preliminary Introduction to that
which follows, as laying a just foundation for the Happiness asserted in the
Text, I shall not pass without consideration of, but open what is material
therein in a fivefold Postulatum. Three of which Queries will satisfy the
Explication thereof, and the two latter fall in its practical improvement and
Application.

First, In what respects may God be styled an help his people.

Secondly, After what way and manner does he ^lp them?

Thirdly, Upon what account, or for what rea^s does he help them?

Fourthly, At what special times and seasons does most afford his help?

Fifthly, Upon what terms and conditions may vine help be expected?

First, How, or in what regard may God be acpunted an Help?

There are four things implied in the notion (...) an Help, all which agree to
Gods influence (...) his People, wherein he appears so, and where(...) it will
be demonstrated that he is properly ^eir help. Supply of wants and indigencies:
^ccour and relief under burdens and extremi^es: Aid and assistance against
enemies and ad^ersaries: Redress of failures and disappoint^ents.

First, God is their Help in respect of supply and ^ovision. Thus the Rich
helps the Poor by sup^ying his wants out of his fullness; and a man ^elps his
Friend, by taking care to provide for ^s necessities. The Lord thus helps his
people. ^e is not a barren Wilderness nor a land of ^rought or darkness to
them; but he deals gra^ously with them, and they have enough. The lord is the
portion of their Inheritance, he main^ineth their lot. The lines are fallen to
them in plea^nt places, and they have a goodly heritage. Upon ^his account he
is said to be their Sun, where ^e is said to be their Shield, Psalm, 84.10. a
Sun for consolation, as well as a Shield for protection. We find the Apostle
drawing up this Conclusion of Faith from the Promise; Heb. 13.6. So that we may
boldly say, The Lord is my Helper. He supplies all their spiritual wants by
influence of the Promises, and all their temporal by the influences of his
Providence. Godliness has the Promise, both of this and the next life.
According as his divine power has given unto us all things that pertain unto
life and godliness, the Apostle has it, 2 Pet. 1.3. He gives both Grace and
Glory; gives pardon of sin, peace of Conscience, sense of his love, and
assurance of his favor; the Spirit of adoption, a new heart, and a right
spirit; holiness both habitual and actual, in the root and blossom. Grace,
peace, comfort, quickening, strength, establishment, perfection are all his
Legacies, freely bestowed, and gifts abundantly multiplied on the heads and
hearts of his people through Jesus Christ. To the ignorant Soul he communicates
saving knowledge, to the unbelieving, faith; to the graceless, true piety and
godliness. He sends light to them which are in darkness, life to them which
labor under deadness, liberty to them which are captive and inslaved by sin
and Satan. He clothes the naked soul with the honorable robe of justification,
and enriches the poor Conscience with the fine Gold of Sanctification. The
treasures of Wisdom and Knowledge are his free grant as well as the garments of
Salvation. Every good and perfect gift is a ray and emanation from him, the
Father of lights, and fountain of life and happiness. He draws the beautiful
features of Grace on Souls which naturally are no other than Monsters of
deformity and imperfection; and pours ^n the wine of spiritual consolations
into the hearts of solitary and distressed Pilgrims in this ^alley of tears, so
as passing through the valley of Baca they dig up fountains still. When the
poor and needy seek water, and there is none, and their ^ongue fails for
thirst, he opens Rivers in high pla^es, and Fountains in the midst of the
Valleys, Isa. 41.17, 18. And he feeds the hungry and perishing with that
heavenly and delicious Manna, which is able to nourish up their Souls to a
blessed Eternity. David most elegantly under the notion of a Pastor expresses
the sufficiency of divine re^ief; Psalm. 23.2. He makes me lie down in green
Pastures, he leads me besides the still waters. As a Shepherd, feeds, guides,
comforts, and defends his Flock, so does God his People, allowing them a
sufficient Viaticum, until thy come to the Supper of the Lamb, Yea, such is
the exuberancy of his goodness, as he supplys all their wants, according to the
riches of his glory in Christ, Phil. 4.19. Neither does he give them only the
upper, but as Caleb did his Daughter, also the nether Springs. As he gives them
a double portion, a Benjamins Mess in spiritual blessings, so he is no Niggard
to them in temporal conveniences and accommodations; but while he gives them
himself for their portion, he gives them these for their passage. He has
entayled by way of Covenant on them, the Corn, Wine, and Oil; anoynts their
steps with Butter and Honey, feeds them with the finest of the Wheat, and lets
them drink the purest blood of the Grape, yea satisfies them as with Honey out
of the rock. He spreads their Tables out of his fullness, and overflows their
Cups with his goodness, and allows them not only for necessity, but also for
delight and satisfaction. Thus Moses of old with purest strains of eloquence
describes his depasture of Israel, Deuteronomy. 32.13, 14. His have from him all
things plentifully to enjoy, and always ad sanitatem, though not ad
voluntatem; a competency to sustain their natures, though not a superfluity to
maintain their lusts, and pamper their more sensual affections. The Lions of
the World may suffer hunger, but Gods Lambs shall want no good thing; insomuch
that David dare give it forth for an experience and undoubted Observation,
Psalm. 37.25. I never saw the righteous forsaken, nor their seed begging bread.
The mercies of the Throne are theirs, and no less those of the Footstool, the
benedictions of Gods heart, and eke of his hand, their portion. And if God
condescends so low as to feed the Ravens and cloth the Lillies of the Field,
how much more will this great Paterfamilias of Heaven and Earth take care of
his own Family? If he be the Savior of all men, much more of them that
believe. And having right in the promise of superadding all things to them
while seekers of the Kingdom of Heaven, how shall they be denied possession?
yea having given them Christ and himself, how shall he forbear to give them all
things? For all is theirs, seeing they are his; and they may cry out with holy
Athanasius, Deus meus and omnia; our God, and our all. Though having nothing,
they possess all things, seeing they possess him who possesses all things.
Such is Gods singular care and providence over them, that he blesses their
modicum, while he curses the worldlings abundance; and, while extravagant man
diminishes, and makes a little of much, the omniprovident God multiplies, and
makes much of his peoples little; as appears in Jacobs ingenuous
acknowledgement, Genes. 33.11. of Gods raising him even from a staff and a
Scrip, a men, low, and beggarly conditi^n, and enlarging him into two bands.
Yea, if further supplies be cut off, and recr^its fail, he husbands for them
the old sto^k, so as it serves their journey through the Wilderness of this
World, as he did Isreal's in the Desert, whose Clothes waxed not old on their
backs, nor their Shoes on their feet. Nay, when reduced to greatest straits,
so as there seems no way of escape from perishing rather than want relief, he
will work a miracle; of which kind of operation we have many remarkable
instances upon Record, both in sacred and civil story; but these two may
content us to evidence its certainty; even the multiplication of the Widows Oil
to so strange a measure, as to serve not only for the maint^nance of her
Family, but also the payment of her debts, and satisfaction of all her
Creditors, 2 King. 4.7. and the incredible and miraculous increase of an
handful of Meal, and a little Oil in a Cruse, beyond their natural virtue, so
as to become a sufficient store under several years famine, 1 King. 17.14. In
famine, God redeems his people from death, and when all other Provisions fail,
he can rain down upon their Tents Bread from Heaven, as he did on Israel, no
less than forty years together. That Is the first, God helps his people by
supplying their wants and necessities.

Secondly, An help imports defense and protection against enemies and
assailants. Thus a man who becomes a second to another, foiled and worsted by
reason of his impotency and infirmity, one that stands by another against his
adversary, to defend his right and cause, an Advocate that maintains the suit
of his Client; a Prince that relieves his oppressed subjects; auxiliary forces
that recruit afresh a besieged City, or beaten Army, may be styled helpers to
them. And such is God to his chosen. He that is the great Atlas, who bears up
the Pillars of the Earth, upholds them under all the crushings of humane
violence, he keeps the feet of his Saints that they are not moved, 1 Samuel
2.9. This Moses most lively expresses in that rapsodical benediction of
Israel, Deuteronomy. 33.29. Happy art thou, O Israel: who is like unto thee, O people
saved by the Lord, the shield of thy help, and who is the sword of thy
excellency! a sword for assault, a shield and buckler for defense. Solomon
takes it as an answer of his solemn prayer, even while he is preferring it,
That God will maintain the cause of his people at all times, as the matter
shall require, 1 King. 8.59. Upon this account we find David in this Book of
Psalms often soliciting God for help, urging him to preserve, save, defend, and
deliver him, Psalm 22.11. Psalm. 70.1, 5. Psalm. 109.26, etc. And as praying, so
praising him for his help, Psalm. 118.13. Thou have thrust sore at me that I
might fall; but the Lord helped me. Saul and his Courtiers bore against him,
but God was a sure stud and pillar to his soul, that shored him up, and
underpropt him against all their rage and malice. Upon this account it is that
we find help and refuge in a conjunction, Psalm. 46.1. God is our refuge and
strength, a present help in trouble. And in this sense God is his peoples help
upon a more public, and also a more private account.

First, He is the help of his Church in the general, and that two manner of
ways. He helps them first immediately, without the intervention of second
causes, Deuteronomy. 33.26. There is none like unto the God of Jesurun, who rides
upon the Heaven in thy help; and in his excellency on the sky. The eternal God
is thy Refuge, and underneath are the everlasting Arms; and he shall thrust out
the enemy from before thee, and shall say, Destroy them. God sometimes goes on
foot in the use of instruments, and way of means, for the salvation of his
people; but here he comes riding (as it were) on horseback in a more sudden
and immediate manner, leaping over the Hills, and skipping over the Mountains.
Sometimes he works deliverance, but sometimes only commands it. Thou art our
King, O God, says the Psalmist, command thou deliverances for Jacob, Psalm.
44.4. He unbares his own Arm, he puts on righteousness as a breastplate, and
clothes himself with zeal as a cloak, and when he sees that there is no man,
and wonders that there is no intercessor, his Arm brings salvation, and his
righteousness sustains him; Isa. 63.5.
and the appearances and outgoings of his providence are so signal and
conspicuous, as digitus Dei, the finger of Heaven appears, and every spectator
must say, This is the Lords doing, Hos. 1.7. I will have mercy on the house of
Judah, and save them by the Lord their God, and will not save them by bow, nor
by sword, nor by battle, by horses, nor by horsemen. Gods people many times
see the salvation of men (more of man than of God is visible in it) but often
they behold the salvation of God. Stand still, says Moses to Israel, and see
the salvation of the Lord, which he shall show you to day, The Lord shall fight
for you, Exodus 14.13, 14. God now was in the van and head of their Army; The
Lord thy God shall go before thee: Sometimes went in the heart or body of it;
The holy One of Israel in the midst of thee: And sometimes in the rear; The
glory of the Lord shall be thy rereward, Isa. 58.8. How elegantly does the
Prophet express Gods immediate conduct of them through the red Sea and
Wilderness, Isa. 63.12. Where is he that brought them up out of the Sea with
the Shepherd of his flock, that led them by the right hand of Moses, with his
glorious Arm, dividing the water before them, to make himself an everlasting
Name? God can rend the Heavens and come down, and make the Hills tremble, and
Mountains flow at his presence. The Sea saw it, and fled. Jordan was driven
back, the Mountains skipped like Rams, and the little Hills like Lambs; the
Earth trembled at the presence of the Lord, at the presence of the God of
Jacob; whose voice breaks the Oak of Bashan, and shakes the Cedars of Lebanon.
God can blow on his enemies, and with one ireful frown of his providence, can
look them into destruction; as with one smile of his countenance look his
people into salvation. This is the Argument of Asa's prayer to God, when that
invincible Host of a thousand thousand came out against him, 2 Chronicles. 14.11.
Lord, it is nothing with thee to help, whether with many, or with them that
have no power. He can save by many, by few; nay, without any at all; with
means, without means; yea, against means can he bring about his peoples help
and salvation.

Secondly, Mediately, and so he helps either by Angelical ministration, or by
humane assistances, first, By the M^nistry of Angels. They are all ministering
spirits unto those who are heirs of salvation. Not one single, but all the
Angels are the Churches, and every particular members I feguard, both their
servitors and saviors. They shall bear them up in all their ways. Their
mi^stration, though secret and invisible, is most certain, and powerful to the
Church. They serve for her enemies offense, and her own defense. When the four
Angels were destroying, we find another protecting, Rev. 7.2. An Angel helps
Hezekiah, by destroying Senacheriks Army, ^sa. 37.36. When Herod smote the
Christians, an Angel of the Lord takes their part, and smites him to the earth,
Act. 13. The Angel of the Lord in^ampeth round about them that fear him, and
d^^ivereth them, Psalm. 34.7. So that there is no room ^^ft for destruction to
enter. An Angel preserved Daniel in the Lions den, Dan. 6.22. The Angel of the
Lord stood in the bottom amongst the myrtle-trees, Zach. 1.8. They grow by the
rivers side, Sea shore, or in the valley, and are plants of a low stature. When
Gods people are at the ^owest; then are they under the most High, his special
safeguard and protection. Gods Angels gave Jacob a comfortable meeting, when he
was expectant of so sad a greeting from his Brother Esau, Genesis 32. When Flijah
was in his solitude, an Angel of the Lord comes to him with an encouraging
repast and refreshment, 1 King. 19.5. Satan and his evil Angels may combine the
Saints destruction, but God and his good Angels take care of their welfare and
preservation. We are often on a sudden delivered out of great dangers, not
knowing how we came out of them, nor which way deliverance came, which is from
no other but their ministry over us.

Secondly, By the assistance of men: And so God helps, first, by direct and
proper means, appointed by him to that end. Thus God raised up Israel Saviors,
Nehem. 9.27. He gave them Moses for a deliverer, Act. 7.35. So Jepthah,
Sampson, Joshuah, David, and others. God raises up instruments to execute his
temporal will and providence. When Tolias and Sanballat with others
disaffected, conspired against it, God raised up Ezra, and Nehemiah, who
carried on the work of the Temple against all opposition. Rather than fail of
instruments, Cyrus is Gods Shepherd, who shall perform all his pleasure, Isa.
44.28.

Secondly, By improbable means, and very improper. God puts such a spirit of
valor into David's breast, as he destroies monstrous Goliath, and routs the Army
of the Philistines. He curtails, and new-models Gideons Army to three hundred
men, and by them overthrows a puissant Host. He marshals the stars, and makes
them in their courses to fight against Sisera. The walls of Jericho fall down
at the sound of Ramms horns. The Philistines run at the noise on the top of
Mulberry-trees, 2 Samuel 5.24. Earthen pitchers are the trumpets which alarm the
Midianites. The stretching out of Moses's Rod becomes effectual to divide the
waters, Exodus 14.16. A very unlikely means to humane apprehension. The Hornet
drives out the Nations, and the Plague, which one would have thought should
have ruined the Israelites, is made Gods weapon to expel the Canaanites, Hab.
3.5. One poor fireship breaks, and scatters in pieces an invincible Armado. As
the Fly and the Be may be Isreal's correctors, so the Gnat Adrians destroyer.

Thirdly, By wicked means (or rather wicked men) God makes use of bad men to do
his people good. Judas's Treason is a poison, out of which he makes a sovereign
Treacle for the salvation of the world. Ehud a left handed man becomes a
Savior to Israel, Judge. 3. Gibeonites become serviceable unto his Sanctuary.
Troublous times forward the building of his Temple, Dan. 9. When no other
helper could be found for Israel, God saves them by the hand of Jeroboam the
Son of Joash, 1 King. 14.27. A traitorous Letter proves the Treasons discoverer
and bewrayer. That wicked men intend evilly, God brings about for good to his
Church. What the envious Brethren of Joseph meant for his ruin, God ordered for
his rise and advancement, Genesis 50.20. He makes the wrath of men praise him, and
the remainder of their violence does he restrain, Psalm. 76.10. The wise
horseman makes use of so much of the horses metal as serves to keep him in his
pace, and carry him on his journey, and the remainder he bridleth. The wise God
uses man's violence to his own praise.

Fourthly, By contrary and destructive means. Clay and Spittle, which (if any
thing does) one would think should daub up a man's eyes, and make him that sees,
blind, our Savior makes use of to cause the blind man to see by. The red Sea,
which any one would have imagined should have been the Israelits grave, became
their way and thorow-fare, and by passing through (which a man would have
thought had been the ready way to be drowned) was accomplished the way of their
escape and deliverance. The Earth proves the woman's midwife, and gives her a
safe delivery, which in all probability might have smothered and stifled her
conception; and swallows up the flood of persecution, which the Dragon spits
out of his mouth, which in all likelihood might have swallowed her up in a
moment, Ret. 12.16. The three children shone by the light of that flame, by
which (as to all humane expectation) they must have been burnt and consumed,
Dan. 3. They were indeed saved by fire. When Gods people seem to run into the
mouth of danger, often times they fall into the lap of deliverance; and while
others sink as a stone to the bottom in the waters of affliction, they are born
up by the bladders of faith and hope; and as the Prophet Isaiah glosses
elegantly on Isreal's passage through the vast Ocean as a Causey, Isa. 63.14.
They are led through the deep as an horse through the wilderness, that they
should not stumble. As a beast goes down in the valley, the Spirit of the Lord
causes him to rest. That Is the first, he is an help to his Church on a more
pub^ick account.

Secondly, To his people in a more particular relation, and private capacity.
And that especially in a threefold regard.

First, Against their own homebred enemies, the lusts and corruptions of their
own perfidious hearts. There is a mystery of iniquity acting in the
treacherous heart of man. The best of us carry about us an heart deceitful
above all things, even desperately wicked. Our foes are our own household, velis
nolis intra fines tuos inhabitabit Je^usaeus: we fight against spiritual
wickednesses in ^ugh places. Many desperate lusts, as unbelief, hypocrisy,
pride, etc. usurp Christ's Throne and Government: But our good God by the help
of grace, and his good hand upon us, inables and assists us against their
batteries; so that though they combat, they shall not conquer; and though
turbulent, they shall not be prevalent. Conflictus licet miserabilis, quia non
habet pacem, ^amen non damnabilis, quod perficit iniquitatem. Aug. This
conflict may disturb our tranquillity, but hinders the perfecting of iniquity.
God assists us by a prosperous gale of grace, while we ^re rowing against the
stream of corrupt nature. His wind drives against that tide. Grace casts sin
down, though it cannot cast it wholly out. These Monarchs have their dominion
taken away, though they live for a season. Grace helps against the power, at
well as the guilt of sin; and though it does not hinder ne sit, yet ne obsit,
and while it acts the part of a slave, or a Tyrant, yet it cannot of a King.
Iniquities prevail against us, but thou shall do them away, says the Psalmist,
Psalm. 65.3. And the Prophet seconds him, Micah 7.19. He will subdue our
iniquities, and thou will cast all their sins into the depths of the Sea.

Secondly, As against the strength of corruption, so against the onsets and
assaults of Satan. Thus God assisted Paul with a sufficiency of grace, 2 Cor.
12.8, 9. And Christ helped Peter, when Satan shot a whole broadside of
temptations against him, he was his bulwark to defend him: when Satan pressed
hard upon him, and beat sore against him, he was his buttress to support and
uphold him.

Non ignara mali, miseris succurrere disco. Is englished by the Apostle, Heb.
2.28. Being tempted himself, he is able to succor those that are tempted. Thus
the Lord Jesus Christ himself, when the evil Angels were mustering their forces
against him, the good Angels came and ministered to him; while they were
endeavoring to destroy him, these took care to preserve and comfort him. In an
acceptable time God heard him, and in a day of salvation he succored him. So
when his Disciples are pursued by Satan that mighty Nimrod, and beaten sore
upon by temptations to blasphemy, despair, presumption, or the like, Christ
becomes their Sanctuary from the rage and persecution of that infernal
blood-hound, and great destroyer of souls. When Satan stood at the right hand
of Joshua the High Priest, to interrupt him in his Office, the Lord Christ
comes and rebukes him, and tells him, This is a brand plucked out of the fire,
too hot for the Devil to touch and tamper withal, Zech. 3.2. It Is reported of
some holy men, as Grynaeus, and others, that the Devil on their deathbeds made
his appearance to them, and challenged them to a cornbate, which they readily
entertained, only with premise of that promise to the disputation: The seed of
the woman shall break the Serpents head. There is not so much venom in the
temptation, as there is balsome in the promise. If the soul be once arked in
Christ's merits, they are to it as so many Cities of Refuge; vulnera Christi
sunt civitates refugii. Bernard. This Lion may then roar, but he cannot devour;
this Serpent may hiss, but he cannot sting; this Dragon spit, but he cannot
bite nor destroy. Upon this score does the Apostle not only give us a
commendation of Christ's ability, pity and fidelity, but also a solemn
invitation to come with boldness to the Throne of Grace and Mercy, and by our
holy and humble Oratory beg help in the time of need. And though it may seem
strange and improbable, yet Gods people find it an experimental truth, that
they always get ground and advantage, both by corruptions and temptations.
Those weeds shall not spoil the good corn, nor those worms destroy the
beautiful flowers of grace, though they may be in the field and garden of their
souls; but the sight of both shall serve to humble and quicken them to higher
seize of holiness. And though Satan snarls at, and wrangles with them, he
shall never trapan them out of their right; but being foiled in the dispute,
their cause will be the clearer, and worsted in the trial, their evidence the
firmer and stronger. In all his winnowings, they lose no one grain of grace,
only the chaff of corruption.

Thirdly, Against, or under all the enmity and opposition of the world, secret
or open; of pretended friends, or professed enemies; their power, policy, envy,
insolency, treachery, turbulency, rage and fury. Thus God helped Moses, so that
in memory thereof, he baptizeth his child into that very name, Exodus 18.4. The
name of the other was Eliezer (that is, my God is an help) for the God of my
Father, said he, was my help, and delivered me from the sword of Phara^h. Thus
God succored Joseph, Genesis 49.23, 24, 25 The Archers (his Brethren, Potiphar
and the Egyptian Courtiers) have sorely grieved him, and shot at him, and hated
him. But his bow abode in strength, and the arms of his hands were made strong,
by the hands of the mighty God of Jacob -- Thus he promises to help his Jacob,
Isa. 41.10. He prohibits him all slavish fear, For (says he) I will strengthen
thee, I will help thee, yea I will uphold thee by the right hand of my
righteousness. Three various expressions, to give him manifold assurance of
divine maintenance under all humane malevolence. First, he promises him inward
heartning, but if his spirits should fail, then he will second him in the
conflict; and should he not come off conqueror, yet he shall never be
overthrown; for at least he will uphold him. Nay, he will not only secure him
from succumbency, but confer upon him victory; he shall not only escape
breaking and crushing by the mountains, but shall himself thresh them, and of a
crawling worm, come off a victorious Prince, verse. 14, 15. God will not only
help his people against the impostures of their own hearts, and Satan's
malignancy, but also the worlds violence. His promise runs, That his arm shall
strengthen him; and his hand be established with him. The enemy shall not exact
upon him, nor the son of wickedness affl (...) him, Psalm. 89.21, 22. This David
in his own person found blessed and frequent experience of, while he
professes, ( Psalm. 18.17, 18, 19.) God to be his stay, his deliverer, and
lif^er up of his head under great dangers, and many enemies. And hope hereof
was the ground of Christ's triumph, even assurance of his Fathers assistance,
Isa. 50.7, 9. For the Lord God will help me, therefore shall I not be
confounded. Behold the Lord God will help me, who is he that shall condemn me?
No matter what were his enemies, while God was his friend; or who his accusers,
while he was his Advocate. God is a sure hiding place, an home, an harbor, a
refuge, a shield, a protection, a sanctuary, an high Tower to his, yea a strong
hold in the time of trouble; and when their City shall be taken, they may
betake themselves and fly to him as their impregnable Casile. They are called
expressly, his hidden ones, Psalm. 83.3. not only in point of worth and
excellency, but also for ^secresie and security. He is to them a shadow from
the heat, and a refuge from the storm, Isa. 25.4. And what was said of Christ,
is made good to them, Isa. 49.2. In the shadow of his hand has he hid me. In
the sha^e of his hand are they preserved against all the scorchings of the
hottest burning Sun of divine wrath, or humane malice; and their souls skreened
by their Saviors Righteousness against the one, and his fatherly providence
from the other. Yea, under the shadow of his divine, or those Cherubims wings
of special protection may they (as the chickens do under the wings of the damm
on the Kites approach) hide themselves securely, till the dint of every
calamity be over-past. As the sweet singer of Israel tunes melodiously, Psalm.
57.1. God is to his people both a pillar of cloud, and of fire, one to
refocillate and refresh them, and the other to preserve and defend them in
their journey to Heaven, through the wilderness of this world, (as Travelers
are by it against wild beasts) Yea, a wall of fire round about them; a wall, to
keep in their persons, and of fire, to keep out their enemies: And in case they
be yet so desperate as to venture on them, he yet bears them up on Eagles
wings, far above out of their reach, or sight, Exodus 19.2. His providence is to
them an incompassing hedge, so that if there be not that Intus that must
destroy them (as the voice told Phocas, when close barred up in his Masters
Palace) they cannot but be safe. The eyes of the Lord run to and fro the whole
Earth, to show himself strong in the behalf of them, whose heart is perfect
toward him; and what need they fear shipwreck (as that Philosopher once said,
when under fears of drowning, he looked up to Heaven in a bright starry night,
and beheld those twinkling luminaries bespangling and imbroidering that
heavenly Canopy over his head) while they have so many eyes of Providence about
them. The Keeper of Israel is always waking, though Enemies be great and
mighty, many and numerous, yea near at hand, they may sleep sweetly and
comfortably, as Alexander once did when in great danger of an approaching
adversary, because Parmenio, his chief and vigilant Captain watched: or rather
as David did when compassed about with an Army of ten thousands at least in
imagination, being then also hemmed in and enclosed by divine protection. God
is a defense to his Peoples glory against all that rise up against them, Psalm.
32.7. What sweetness and safety does holy David engage to his own heart in
confidence of divine safeguard, Psalm. 31.20. Thou shall hide me in the secret
of thy presence from the pride of Man; Thou shall keep them secretly in a
Pavilion from the strife of tongues. God is his Peoples Asylum from the heat
both of hand and tongue-persecution by their adversaries.

Now God helps his People against their outward Enemies diverse ways: Either

First, By preparing for them places of recess, where the Enemy cannot find
them. Thus God secured Elijah from Ahabs fury, when he sent an Inquisition
after him, throughout the whole Land of Israel, 1 King. 18.10. He returns with
a Non inventus, and like one that seeks a Needle in a bottle of Hay, bestowed
his labor in vain. Thus the Lord in a persecuting time hid an hundred of his
Prophets by the hand of Obadiah. Thus under Saul's violent rage against innocent
David (which made him pursue him as a Partridge on the Mountains) God provided
places of retirement for him, sometimes in a Cave, sometimes in a Rock or
strong hold, now in the Wilderness, now at Naioth, and anon in the Land of the
Philistines; erewhile in this, cre-while in that place, so as he was kept out
of the reach of his rage, and escaped the violence of his intended fury and
malice against him. He was as a man upon the top of an high Mountain, out of
the reach of gunshot, or any danger but what might come from Heaven; or as one
upon the top of an high Rock in the midst of the Sea, able to sing, to triumph,
to out-brave, and bid defiance to all the raging surges, and temp^stuous
billows, that beat against him; to which himself also alludes, Psalm. 61.2.
When my heart is overwhelmed, lead me to the rock which is higher than I. Thus
God protected Jeremiah the Prophet, and Baruch the Scribe, Jerem. 36.26. so as
the Kings Sergeants dare not arrest him. When Herod sought Christ's life, and
would have become Murderer of him who came to be his Savior, an Angel of the
Lord comes and gives his Parents private intelligence about the Tyrants bloody
intentions, and advertiseth them to go into Egypt, which was made his Harbor
and Receptacle till he was dead and gone, and so he kept out of his Clutches,
and escaped his barbarous and bloody hands. Math. 2.13. Thus the Woman (a type
of the Church) had a priviledg'd place assigned her and prepared of God for her
in the Wilderness, whether she was to flee, and be fed there a thousand two
hundred and threescore days, Revelat. 12.6. Thus in the Ten Persecutions, and
the late Marian days, many Professors and Confessors of the Truth lay ^ormant
in Wood-stacks, Hay-stacks, and the ^ike, till the fury of the persecution was
over and gone; much like those Primitive Worthies, who were constrained to
depart the society of men, and live like beasts in Wildernesses, wandering about
in sheepskins, and goat skins, being desti^ute, afflicted, tormented, in
Deserts, Mountains, Dens and Caves of the Earth, of whom the World was not
worthy. Under the greatest rage and sorest oppressions of the Church by
Anti^hrist and his followers, God always had a few Names reserved, who bowed
not the knee to his ^dolatrous Worships and Inventions.

Secondly, By abating the natural force, and ^nnate violence of destructive
evils. As God sometimes alters the course of nature in order to his Enemies
ruin, makes waters ascend, and lick up ^he old World, fire descend on Sodom,
the Earth open her mouth, and swallow up Korah, Dathan and Abiram, the Earth
disclose her blood, and ^omit it up, no more covering her slain; so otherwhile
in order to his peoples preservation. When Pharaoh and his Egyptian Host had
entangled Israel as in a net, so as to avoid them they were forced to take the
Red Sea, which as to all humane expectation must have sunk and drowned them,
God makes it but a Ferry for them to swim over, or shallow Foord to wade
through, and so pass on their Journey to Canaan. When Jonah was swallowed up of
the Whale, whose ^owels in all probability would have been his Tomb to interr
him, God gives him a Vomit, and makes him disgorge his bait, and instead of a
Grave to bury him, he becomes only his Womb to keep him alive, and deliver him
safe on shore. The three Children who were by Nebuchadnezzars decree and order
cast into the fiery Furnace, in which none could imagine but they must be burnt
to ashes, God makes it a Sun only to refresh and comfort them instead of a
flame to consume them. Not one hair of their heads was sindged, nor their
Garments changed, neither did the smell of the Fire rest upon them. Dan. 3.25.
The very hairs of their head were indeed numbered. When Daniel by Darius's
Commandment was thrown into the bottom of the Den of Lions, whose ravenous and
devouring nature one would have thought with their greedy and whetted stomachs,
should have opened their gaping mouths wide to receive so welcome a morsel, an
Angel muzzles them, that he became not a prey to those masterless Creatures, to
which his accusers became their Sacrifice, and crushed between their cruel
grinders before they could once open their own mouths for Mercy. These noble
Worthies had those Promises fulfilled in the Letter; When thou walk through
the Fire, thou shall not be burnt, neither shall the flame kindle upon thee,
Isa. 43.2. Thou shall tread upon the Lion and Adder; the young Lion and Dragon
shall thou trample under thy feet. The Apostles Text has here its full and
clear Comment, Heir. 11.33. By Faith they stopped the Mouths of Lions, and
quenched the violence of Fire. When Evils and Enemies (like so many Leviathans)
rush upon Gods people, he sometimes puts a bridle in their jaws, and an hook in
their nostrils, and they become to them but so much painted Fire, or as dead
Lions that cannot hurt them. God can bridle the natural force of Fire, Seas,
Beasts, or ought that intends ^urt to his People.

Thirdly, By preventing and disappointing the flesigns of wickedness against
them. The God of ^y Mercy shall prevent me, says David, Psalm. 59.10. by the
early Influences of his own Mercy, and timely discovery of his Enemies
mischief. God let us not the weapons formed against his prosper, but causes the
wickedness of the wicked to come on their own head, and their violent dealing
upon their own pate. And when they themselves do not, Gods People do escape ^he
intended destruction. God gives warnings and Items to his, before the World can
shoot off their murdering pieces against them. He either fastens strong
instincts and impressions of imminent danger, or gives them timely notices and
significations, which are as so many hands in the way to direct them their
passage, or way of escape. As sometimes he hides a Moses from Pharaohs ^ruelty
by the hand of the Midwives, and secures the Spies in peace by the hand of a
Rahab (Hebr. 11.31, 33.) so sometimes advertiseth a David by Jonathans Arrows
(which though inarticulately, yet speak significantly his concernment) to make
haste from Saul's rage: And Elijah by a Messenger to flee from Jezabels fury,
and run for his life, 1 Samuel 20. 1 King. 19. Whem Achitophel had contrived
David's ruin, Hushai gives him Intelligence, 2 Samuel 17.16. When Haman had
conspired Mordecai's and the Jews total extirpation, and fatal destruction, God
in his wise Providence so ordered the Decree about it, as there was upon a
Twelve-months space between it and the Execution, so as respite was given for
flight and evasion, and also for application to the Persian King for its
Reversion; In which space such effectual means was used, as the ruin intended
against the Jews light on the head of the Enemy, and Haman changed with
Mordecai his advancement in Court for that on a Gibbet, which he had prepared
for him. Esth. 7. ult. and cap. 8.15. When Paul was apprehended by the Jews,
and the sacrificing knife of death putting to his throat, the chief Captains
Advent in the Interim occasions his rescue and reprieve from their purposed
Execution. Act. 21.32. And so again, when more than forty Bloodhounds waited
for his precious life, longing like so many Leeches to suck out his
heart-blood, having bound themselves in a desperate and devellish Oath, or
banned themselves into an Obligation to make him their Sacrifice, his Sisters
son certifies the Centurion, who carries him away by force out of their hands
upon the young man's information; so that, though in very great danger of his
life, he escaped safe. Act. 23.20. It Is storied of Austin, when at a certain
time the Donatists had conspired to butcher him in his journey home, Gods
Providence directs him a contrary way, and he (who once in a Sermon by the loss
of his matter won a Soul, now) in his travail, by going out of his way saved
his life. The People of God many times when under fears of surprizal, or
treading upon the very brink, and precipice of danger, in the way of their
duty, have been snatched out of the mouth of the Lion, and when even turning to
destruction, have been remanded back with a Return ye children of men.

Fourthly, By diverting evil men in their furious executions. As no plot of
darkness so deep, but God gives his people some light of it even when the train
be laid, and there wants nothing but Give Fire: So no resolution so firm or
fixed, but he can put a stop to it. God can cut off even the Spirit of Lions,
and make the heart of an Egyptian tremble at the shaking of a leaf; dispirit
and discourage wicked men in their ungodly enterprises, and if not, yet divert,
so as if their courage and heart holds good and fails not, yet he finds their
hands other picking-work. When Pharaoh is marching in his full carier, and
driving furiously against Gods Israel, with a Sic volo in his mouth, I will
pursue, I will over-take and divide the Spoil, God can take off his
Chariot-wheels, and so smite him in the hinder parts, as he shall drive
heavily, and be glad to retreat and go back (if he might) as fast as he came.
When Saul grows outrageous against David, and was mad of taking him, being so
earnest and eager in his pursuit, that he solemnly avoucheth, that if he were
in the land, he would search for him through all the thousands of Judah, and by
search had found him, and compassed him round about, got him in a nook, a pound
(as it were) and he thought he was cock-sure of him, comes sudden news of an
Invasion by the Philistines, which dispatch makes him desist his pursuit after
a single person, and take care about his Land. When proud insulting Sennacherib
comes out against Judah, full mouth, God stops him by the overthrow of an
Angel, so that he came not into the City, nor shot an arrow there, nor came
before it with Shields, nor cast a bank against it, but by the way that he
came, by the same he returned, Isa. 37.33, 34. God has all his Peoples
enemies, Satan and his Instruments, not only in the Chain of a finite Nature,
but also a powerful Providence, and can hinder them not only from doing all
they would, but all that otherwise they could against them.

Fifthly, By convincing the Adversary of his Peoples Integrity, and reconciling
them to his People. They that fear the Lord, he has said, He will make his
Enemies to be at peace with them, so as they shall say as the King of Judah to
the King of Israel, I am as thou art, and my Horses as thy Horses; or as
Abraham to Lot, Let there be no Controversy between us, because we are
brethren. He can not only divert their hands, but convert their hearts. The
hearts of all men are in his hand, and he can turn them as the Rivers of
waters. He can enamour those that dwell in Sodom with the excellency of the
Citizens of Sion. He can make a Balaam who comes out with an intent to abase
and curse his People, break out into highest strains of admiration and
blessing. How goodly are thy Tents O Jacob, and thy Tabernacles O Israel! Who
can count the dust of Jacob, and the number of the fourth part of Israel? It Is
God's promise to his Church, Isa. 45.14. Thus says the Lord, The labor of
Egypt, and Merchandise of Ethiopia, and the Sabeans shall come over to thee,
and they shall be thine, and they shall come after thee, in chains they shall
come over: And they shall fall down to thee, they shall make supplication to
thee, saying, Surely God is in thee, and there is none else, there is no God. A
strange and prodigious respect shown to the Church by exterous Nations, and to
her Members born there. God can so captivate sinners with the Beauty of the
Saints graces, as they, who were their Opposers, should now think it their duty
to become her Supplicants, and their Persecutors esteem it their honor to be
not her Pensioners only, but her Prisoners and Captives. The Miracle done on
the three Children, extorted an acknowledgement from the Heathen King, of the
truth of their God and Worship and changed his mind, Dan. 3.28. and Daniels
deliverance, of his Majesty and Kingdom: And the Apostles Ministry and Miracles
drew forth the Peoples Confession, These are the Servants of the living God.
Ye^, whole Armies when coming forth in the heat of their rage, have thrown down
their weapons at the apprehensions of the goings forth of the God of the
Christians; and as Israel to Benjamin, wept over the necks of those whom they
purposed to tread upon. So effectual is the sense of Religion, as where it does
not convert, it does at least restrain, and bridles the passions, where it
reconciles not the affections. It is easy, and has been ordinary with God, to
incline the hearts of Enemies, and turn them toward his People. Thus God dealt
with Jacob, when Laban pursued him, he did intenerate his heart, Genes. 31.29,
42. with Joseph, when his Master on the false Informations of his Mistress,
imprisoned him, he found favor in the eyes of the Keeper of the Prison. Psalm.
105.21.
Genes. 39.21. And so when he was forgotten by Pharaohs Butler, and envied by
his Brethren, he found great respect and honor in the Egyptian Court. Genesis
41.40. So Esther, Mordecai, and the people of the Jews, though sentenced by a
wicked and unrighteous Decree to utter destruction, found not only (upon her
applications, and the Kings Inquisition into the Rolls produced, containing the
record of his former service) a relaxtion of the sentence, and the one great
Preferment, while the other sure establishment; but an Order and Express under
the hand of that Persian Monarch for the Temples re-edification. So Daniel,
when the Princes and Courtiers (who maligned, and spleen'd his advancement)
turned informers of his Non-addresses to the King, and his addresses to his
God, God works a Miracle for him, rather than they shall work him out of
favor; And as his Interpretation of dreams gat him his honor, cap. 2.46. so
these signal appearances on his behalf kept and retained him it, cap. 6. When
Israel had their Exit from Egypt, God ingratiated them to the Egyptians, so as
they lent them Money, Raiment and Jewels to bear their charges through the
Wilderness, Exodus 12.35, 36. When they were in their travails, God fenced off
all injuries from them; he suffered no man to do them wrong, Psalm. 105.14. And
in their bondage and thraldom, he made them to be pitied of all that carried
them Captives, Psalm. 106.46. God promises wellentreatment to his People by the
Enemy in the tiem of affliction, Jerem. 15.11. The Lord said, Verily, it shall
be well with thy remnant, verily I will cause the enemy to entreat thee well in
the time ^f evil, and in the time of affliction. And so far ^oth God make good
this his promise in all ages, ^s the Apostle draws it up into an adage, 1 Pet.
3.13. And who is he that will harm you, if ye be followers ^f that which is
good? God can on a sudden pour ^orth a spirit of unity and harmony, abate all
seuds, jealousies and animosities, and make men of the same mind in an house;
of stones he can ^aise up children to Abraham; of a rugged Jaylour ^^e can make
a kind Host, the greatest opposer, the ^hiefest Confessor. He can either deny
power or opportunity, means, or hearts to do his people mischief. He can either
turn their enemies hearts, or weaken their hands.

Sixthly, By turning all the evil intended against his people, to their good
and advantage. It Is the standing promise, All shall work together for good to
them who love God, Romans 8.28. And Gods performances are answerable to his
promises. Out of the eater God brings meat, and out of the strong sweetness.
The wise Physician of Heaven makes the purest Treacle out of the most dangerous
poison. The sharpest ^edged sword of an enemy he anoints with balm, so that
even while it cuts, it heals, and while he thinks to let out the precious life,
he only takes away the corrupt and superfluous blood, and in stead of killing
the person, only cures the impostume, dum pungit, ungit, as Bernard speaks. The
hottest fires of humane wrath, do but refine the Saint into a more spiritual
temper; they burn up indeed the dross and rust of corruption, but perish never
a golden grace, but rather make it shine with a more radiant luster, and though
the Sun of persecution looks upon them, yea the furnace be seven times hotter
than usually, yet the trial of their faith comes off with advantage, and is
found for praise, honor and glory. The deepest and highest swelling waters of
men's mo^ boisterous rage, do but scour them into the greater w^iteness of
purity and holiness. The flail of humane violence serves only to beat them the
cleaner out of their husk. God is a wis^ Chemist, that extracts gold out of the
courses^ metal, and grace a divine limbeck, that make^ sweet waters of the
sowrest herbs. The oppressions of the world conduce to Gods peoples spiritual
advantage. They do their souls good. Their Chains are more beneficial than
their Crowns, and their Crosses more wholesome (though it is like not so
toothsome) than their Comforts. As the collision of stones, occasions the
sparklings forth of light; so the knocks they meet with abroad in the world,
the shine of their graces, and (as he said) schola crucis, lucis; they never
meet with more light than in the darkest dungeons o^ worldly disconsolation.
They always taste (when^ the bitterness of man's wrath) also the sweetness of
Gods love: And also to their outward good in the end. As wicked men's violence
always determines in their own ruin: In the net they prepare for others, is
their own foot taken, and in the very same pit they dig for the righteous, do
they fall themselves: So the sufferings of the Saints always end in their rise
and advantageous recovery: evil slaies them not, as it does the wicked; but if
God in his wise providence indulgeth them not a total immunity and exemption,
he grants them at least a sanctified use, and a fair come-off, yea, a glorious
issue, a clear instance whereof we have in Joseph, out of his own mouth, Genesis
50.20. Where speaking in reference to his Brethrens sale of him, he thus
bespeaks them. As for you, ye thought evil against me, but God meant it unto
good, to bring to pass, as it is this day, to save much people alive. Their
purposes of destroying his single person, were issued with the salvation of the
whole family, if not the whole Land. And likewise in Job, with whom the Devil
made a sad and black beginning, but God made a fair, a comfortable and blessed
end. As the Apostle speaks, James 5.11. Ye have heard of the patience of Job,
and seen the end of the Lord: That he is very pitiful, and of tender mercy. So
effectually does God work all for the good of his people, as he reconciles all
the seeming contradictions of his providence to his promise. Though Isaac was
once nigh being no child, yet God makes him the Father of many Nations. Jacob's
hard usage by his Uncle Laban, ends in great respect and kindness, as appears
by his profession, and affectionate desire of his stay and company, Genesis 30.27.
If a man meets his enemy, will he not slay him? and yet God so overcomes the
heart of Esau, inclines him toward his Brother Jacob, as instead of killing,
he kisseth and embraces him, Genesis 33.4. Such is the power and efficacy of
divine operation, as turns foes into friends, opposers into familiars, envy
into admiration, curses into blessings, malice into benevolence, execrations
into applause and acclamations, wrathful resolutions into kin^ salutes, and
bland compellations, imprecation into apprecations, the utmost indignations
conceived into the fullest satisfactions, and highe^ benedictions: So that if
enemies will not commend, they shall have no power or will to condemn; if they
will do them no good, they shall have no heart to do them any hurt. We man
think all things are against us, as Jacob once tol^ his Sons ( Genesis 42.36.)
upon the parting with his Son Benjamin, but the letting go his Son wa^ the only
way of saving himself. When Davi^ seemed nearest the grave, then was he nighest
the Crown. The Israelites wilderness (though somewhat about) was a direct road
and line to Canaan, whither they were journeying. We bring oft-times the
greatest evil out of the greatest good ^ such is our corruption; but God brings
the greatest good out of the greatest evil; such is his goodness. Let the
Apostle conclude this in his general conclusion of comfort, both as to sin, and
affliction, Romans 8.31, If God be for us, who^ can be against us? none
assuredly, so as to hurt o^ prejudice us.

Seventhly, By running, and overturning their adversaries, making the arrows
they shoot at his people, rebound back on themselves, and their darts to stick
in their own breasts, Psalm. 81.14, 15. I should soon (says God) have subdued
their enemies, and turned my hand against their adversaries; The haters of the
Lord should have submited themselves to him. The Psalmist breathes out their
destruction by the spirit of Prophecy throughout the 83. Psalm, in most elegant
metaphors of a wheel turning, a fire burning, a storm ^asting, all which note
the suddenness and irre^stibleness of their destruction. Thus God ruined ^e
Egyptians, when they pursued Israel, Exodus 14.7, 28. He destroyed Pharaoh,
Sisera and his Host, ^udg. 5.21. Swept them away by the River ^ishon, as a
besome sweeps away the filth of an ^ouse, or as a stream carries away the dirt
of a ^ity; and Haman, who conspired the Jews fatal ^estruction, Esth. 7. And
Senacherib, 2 Chronicles. 32.21. ^n Angel overturns his Host, and as that was
de^royed by these Sons of God, his person was ^estroyed by the Sons of his own
loins. Thus God destroyed Herod. For trampling on the worms of Jacob, and so on
their God, he turns ^gain, and causes worms to eat him up. Thus ^e destroyed
Judas who betrayed Christ, and Ju^an who blasphemed him, dying with a vicisti
Galilee in his mouth. God does sooner or later wound the head of the Dragon,
the hoary scalp of his enemies, pours out his wrath on the Heathen that devour
Jacob, and lay waste his dwelling place. Though they gather themselves against
his people, yet they shall not escape by their iniquity, but he will cut them
off in their wickedness; when once their sin be at the full, and ^aving filled
up their measure, they become ripe for destruction. Though their bones be
scattered as at the graves mouth, yet will he overthrow their Judges in stony
places, Psalm. 141.6. If they drink of the Cup, which (comparatively) are not
worthy, they shall not escape unpunisht, but shall certainly drink the dreggs
thereof, Jer. 49.12. When he has performed his whole work on Mount Sion, he
will then punish the fruit of the stout heart of the King of Assyria, Isa.
10.12. Judgment begins indeed at his house and Sanctuary, but Jerusalem does
but hand the Cup to the Nations; and when God has used the wicked as Rods to
lash his people, having done with them, he throws them into the fire. Babylon
is dealt with as she dealt with Israel, Jer. 51.6, 49. -- And so Amalek, Deuteronomy.
25. ult. God will be an enemy to the enemies of his people, and set himself
against them who are so mad in running upon their own ruin, as to set
themselves against his chosen. None ever fought against Gods interest and
prospered, but was in the event worsted, and forced to confess he kicked against
the pricks. The house of David in fine overcomes that of Saul, and though their
horns be lifted up never so high, he, who is the horn of his peoples salvation,
will cut off the horn of the wicked, or by his Carpenters fray them away, Zech.
1.21. And when once they come under the hammer of his Justice, they must expect
judgment without mercy, who would show no mercy. The Psalmist does most
elegantly express both the sudden alteration of providence to Gods people, and
to their enemies, Psalm. 138.7. Though I walk in the midst of trouble, thou will
revive me (as the Son of man did the children in the furnace) thou shall
stretch forth thine hand against the wrath of mine enemies, and thy right hand
shall save me. An allusion to Moses stretching his hand over the Sea, whereby
the waters came upon the Egyptians, and drowned their Chariots and horsemen.
God has an outstretched Arm, able to reach those who are ^ut of the reach of
his people, and they that ^ome not within the compass of humane-Justice, ^et
cannot escape divine Vengeance. And so ^uch for the third particular.

Fourthly, Here is an help against the stroke of ^ommon judgments, and public
calamities, so ^ to fence then. ^ from their heads, or at least ^^e evil of
them. ^hus God helped Noah to an ^rk, to house him in time of the universal
de^ge: Lot to a Zoar, to secure him in time of public conflagration. In time
of war, he keeps ^s servant David from the hurtful sword, di^ne protection was
as a coat of Male to him, ^ Armor of proof to him, to keep him shot^ee and
untoucht, Psalm. 144.10. In the time of ^^some Pestilence, when his infections
Arrows ^e shot forth like lightning, they abide under ^s shadow, and are
covered with his feathers, ^s truth is their shield and buckler, himself their
^ck and habitation: so that though thousands ^ll on the right hand and on the
lest, yet he ^ands upright, no evil befalls him, nor no Plague ^nters his
dwellings, Psalm 91. Which promise, ^ough it gives not absolute assurance of the
event and issue as to temporal preservation, yet it offers ^ur encouragement,
and propounds sure and sole ^rection how to escape the lash of the destroyer:
one standing on so sure a soot, and a fair ground ^f protection in such a day
of general calamity, ^s Gods people. In time of famine he redeems them from
death, (when he is riding on that ^ale horse, he enters not their tents) as in
^var, from the power of the sword, Job 5.20. ^n horrible burnings, when others,
(both persons and places, Cities and Countries, are made firebrands of his
wrath, they are plucked as brands out of the fire, Amos 4.11. In times of great
concussion, when the world seems quite off his Axletree, and removed from its
basis and foundation, the earth moved from its center, and the hills carried
into the midst of the Sea, the waters roar and are troubled, and the mountains
shake with the swelling thereof; men's hearts sail them for fear, and the powers
of Heaven are shaken, and great desolations are made in the earth, they remain
intacti and illaesi, unshaken and immoved, Psalm. 46. Luke 21. Etiamsi fractus
illabatur orbis, impavidum ferient ruinae.

Now God (under the deluge of judgments) is an help to his people three manner
of ways.

First, By removing them out of the reach of them; securing them from their
dint and stroke. Sometimes he removes their souls to Heaven, and lodges their
bodies in the chambers of the grave. He takes his out of a sinful and miserable
world before the Judgment commenceth, Isa. 57.1. Thus he took Josiah up into
the chambers of heavenly glory, before the storm came on Isreal's head. He baild
off the arrest his life time, but no sooner is he dead and gone, but issues out
her writ of remove out of his sight. Thus God took away Austin a little before
Hippo was sacked, and Pareus a little before Heidelburgh was destroyed; and
Luther (according to his own prayer, that he might not live to see the Plagues
of God coming on an ungodly world) before the German troubles brake forth. God
removes his people by an habeas corpus out of this lower world, and then comes
down its execution. And the greatest storm of outward Judgments, has no
further effect on the godly, than to drive them to their Fathers house, or most
boisterous wind of calamity, than to blow them home to their desired Haven.
When God had informed Daniel of such a time of trouble coming on the world as
never was since there was a Nation, even under the persecution by Antiochus, he
dismisseth him with his quietus est, Cap. 12, 13. Go thou thy way till the end
be; for thou shall rest, and stand in the lot in the end of the days. When
Gods peoples race be run, their work done and finished, he gives them a
dispensation for tarrying any longer in the world, or managing their office and
duty here below; plucks them off the stage, and sends them to Heaven to rest
from their labors, and receive their reward, prepared for them, and promised
to them. Sometimes God removes them out of the verge of trouble on earth, Isa.
26.20. Come my people, enter into thy Chambers, and shut thy doors round about
thee, and hide thy self as it were for a little moment, till the indignation be
overpast. God has chambers of distinguishing providence, and of gracious
presence, whither he lovingly invites his people as one friend does another
distant from his own home, and overtaken with a storm, to come in and shelter
himself till it be blown over. God has hiding-places, places of retirement and
repose for his people under public outgoings of his Majesty, and his wrath
and justice against the inhabitants of the earth. When the world lies open and
naked to the storm of divine vengeance, as a man in rain without a covering, or
in a battle without a defense, and feel the smart of it, the godly are
priviledg'd and protected: when the avenger of blood comes, they have their
Sanctuary. They are Gods marked, Ezekiel. 9. His sealed ones, Rev. 7. They are hid
in the day of his anger, Zeph. 2.3. Who dare meddle with what God has marked,
or break what he has sealed? or who can touch what he has hid? when the
destroyer smote all the firstborn of Egypt, he passed by the doors that were
sprinkled, Exodus 12. When God comes to sweep the Kitchen of the world with the
besome of desolation, he has a Parlour of special providence, or other rooms
of retirement to turn his people into, so as the overflowing scourge shall not
come nigh them. Though not all, or perhaps many, yet have not some of Gods
Servants providentially been removed out of the reach of the present Plague,
and perhaps the late Fire also? Josephus reports, that a little before the
final destruction of Jerusalem, the godly Jews in the City, in time of the
siege, heard a voice in the Air, crying, Ite Pellam, Ite Pellam, a little
Village thereby, whither many of them fled, and so were preserved. When the
Town be taken, God receives his into Castle, which leads to the second way of
divine help in common evils.

Secondly, By distinguishing them in the day of calamity: Sparing their persons
and families in the day of his wrath. If God hides them not from the Judgment,
yet he does in it. We have a promise of a specialty to be granted, Mal. 3.16,
17, 18. A Book of remembrance was written before him for them which feared the
Lord, and that thought upon his Name. While others were sentenced to death,
their names were registered (in albo beatorum) in the book of the living. And
they shall be mine, says the Lord of Hosts, in that day when I make up my
Jewels. Whatsoever becomes of the lumber and common household stuff, though that
be consumed by the fire of his wrath, God will look to his choicer Treasure,
and keep that safe and secure. And I will spare them, as a man spares his own
Son that serves him. Though their sins deserve they should be turned out of
doors, as well as others, and exposed to the wind and weather of common
afflictions, yet God has a covering both for their sins and souls. This is a
full Copy of the act of Gods discriminating grace in a sad hour. For then
(says he) shall ye return, and discern between the righteous and the wicked,
between him that serves God, and him that serves him not. Distinguishing
^^uty is crowned with distinguishing mercy. In ^aies of prosperity, the
difference between Gods people, and the men of the world is not so dissernable
as to their carriage toward him: they ^re wanton, secure, formal, careless and
carnal -- but affliction edges them in duty with a greater ^eal and
earnestness, and is a foil to set of their graces with the more orient
brightness. Neither ^s Gods singular respect then so observable to them: He
seems to turn them loose to the wide world, to shift for themselves; but when
danger ^omes, then Noah and his family goes into the Ark, then, come my people,
enter your chambers -- is Gods usage with them, his language to them. That ye
may know (says that Text) how the Lord puts a difference between the Egyptians
and Israel. Exodus 11.7. God made a famous and notorious difference between them
under all the Plagues inflicted, especially under that of smiting the
firstborn; and so in that of darkness; thick darkness invelopt them, and spread
the face of their horrizon, but all the children of Israel had light in their
dwellings, Exodus 10.23. To the upright did arise (...) light in darkness. So
God promises his people when the hail came down on the field, and the forest
in thickest showers, it should yet be fai^ in the City; and while sinners were
battered down with its force, and shattered with its terror, his people should
yet dwell in peaceable habitations, sure dwellings, and quiet resting places
Isa. 32.18, 19. God exercises a special providence over his people. As the
Prophet excellently illustrates it by the similitude of the five an^ the fann,
Amos 9.8, 9, 10. And also fitly applies it: Behold (says he) the eyes of the
Lo^^ God are upon the sinful Kingdom, and I will destr^ it from off the face of
the Earth; saving that (...) will not utterly destroy the house of Jacob, says
the the Lord. He will destroy the rebellious multitude, but yet reserve a
select remnant. For (...) I will command, and I will sift the house of Isra^
among all Nations, like as Corn is sifted in a su^ yet shall not the least
grain fall on the Earth -- Affliction is called Gods sive, and fann in
Scripture of which there is a different use. The sive le^ out the flower, and
retains nothing but the brann; contrariwise, the fann throws out (...) the
chaff, and keeps nothing but the wheat. Though God lets the chaff be blown
away, and scattered, when by the whirlwind of his wrath he comes to winnow a
people, yet he will gather the wheat into his granary; that shall be put unto
his garner, while the chaff is burnt up with unquenchable fire. Nay, should the
godly and wicked be put into the same sive of affliction) (and the metaphor
conceived only singly) providence will so cooperate with it, as even to invert
the nature, and change the end of afflictions, so as what is to one a curse,
shall prove to the other a blessing; by what one is much a looser, the other
shall become a very great gainer; while the sinner becomes as chaff, and as dry
stubble, even as a leaf which the wind scatters to and fro, the sound and solid
Christian shall be as wheat, not one grain of substantial and sincere grace, no
upright sound-hearted Christian shall perish in the day of Gods wrath. Take a
Saint and a Sinner, and cast them into the fiery furnace of tribulation, and
there will appear (though no such difference in their going in) yet a marvelous
wide disparity in their coming out; even as much as between the three children
cast by the King into the fiery furnace, and their accusers, and executioners;
the one it touched not, the other it slew, Dan. 3.22. Either they come not out
at all, or else as a stone out of the fire, sparkling with un^elief,
impatience, and discontents against providence, whereas a Saint comes out
melted into ^n holy, humble, spiritual, pliable frame, even as ^ure gold, Job
23.10. There is a singular exercise of grace discoverable by the Saints under
afflictions, and also a singular action of providence about them; and when God
makes the greatest sweep, yet there are some reserves, as the Prophet Amos
lively expresses it in the third chapter of his Prophecy, verse. 12. As the
Shepherd takes out of the mouth of the Lion two legs, or a piece of an ear;
so shall the children of Israel be taken out that dwell in Samaria, in the
corner of a bed, and in Damascus in a Couch. When the ravenous Wolf or Lion of
Judgments has worried a people, and almost torn them asunder, yet their
hunger shall be so satiated, and rage stopped, as still there shall be some
remnant undevoured.

Thirdly, By bringing them up out of the affliction, that though they suffer by
it, they shall not be utterly cast down when they are judged, nor wholly
destroyed. God brings back the captivity of his people, Psalm. 14. and Psalm.
126.1. He may frown, but causes his face to shine again. The Sun of mercy may
go down in the evening in a cloud, but rises in the morning in a very glonous
shine. It will turn again, and have compassion on us -- Micah 7.19. God may for
a while turn his back, but will turn his face in due time toward his people;
and though for a moment he forsakes, with everlasting kindness he will
remember. He will not contend for ever, or be always wroth. Heaviness may
endure for a night, but joy comes in the morning, ad momentum irascitu^ ut in
aeternum delectetur. While he punishes the community, he reserves a remnant,
whom h^ resolves to pardon, Jer. 50.20. He promises to return the captivity of
Judah, Jer. 31.42. -- and cap. 33.26. And like as he brought great evil upon
them, so to bring all the good he had promised. Though brought low, he will
raise them up again, call back his plagues, if they return from their sins. As
the Prophet emphatically expresses it, Hos. 6.1, 2. For he has torn, and he
will heal us; he has smitten, and he will bind us up. After two days will he
revive us, in the third day he will raise us up, and we shall live in his
sight. An allusion to our redemption by Christ, which is a sure pledge of all
temporal deliverances; as of that they were a type. According to that of the
Evangelical Prophet, Isa. 26.19. Where, having expressed by significant
metaphors, the Churches travel with its pangs and dolor, and her misconception
(as it were) and miscarry as to any hopeful productions, he yet closes with a
comfortable promise; Thy dead men shall live, together with my dead body shall
they arise: awake, and sing ye that dwell in dust: for thy dew is as the dew of
herbs, and the earth shall cast out the dead. Though the Church may suffer
from, and in the world, yet her sickness shall not be to death, though God
breaks his people with breach on breach, yet this wise Physician will in due
time give an healing plaster; he will set them into joint again, and then the
bone that was broken shall be stronger than ever: Nay, though they be brought
to deaths-door, to the graves mouth, he will command a resurrection, and
breathe on those dry bones, that they shall live, Ezekiel. 37.11, 12. -- His
providence shall be a midwife to usher in to them a full and glorious
deliverance. They shall have rest from the days of adversity, Psalm. 94.13.
They may go into the Fire with others, but when they perish there, these shall
come out, and be refined Gold, while the major part is consumed as dross, Zech.
13.8, 9. Two parts shall be cut off and die, but the third shall be left
therein. -- They may be proved and tried as Silver, in a very hot Furnace,
brought into the Net, affliction laid on their Loins, ridden on, pass through
Fire and Water, but God will make a way of escape, he will bring them out into
a wealthy place. They may he among the Pots, Scullion-like, in a sooted,
smeared, forlorn condition, yet shall they be as the wings of a Dove, covered
with Silver, and her Feathers with yellow Gold, Psalm. 66.10, 11, 12. Psalm.
68.13. And so much for the second particular implied in this notion of help,
assistance and aid against all Enemies and Evils.

Thirdly, It imports succor and redress under burdens, or deliverance out of
dangers feared, straits and miseries, injuries, oppressions and afflictions
felt, Psalm. 20.1, 2. The Lord hear thee in the day of trouble, the Name of the
God of Jacob defend thee. Send thee help from the Sanctuary, and strengthen
thee out of Sion. So Psalm. 9.9. The Lord also will be a refuge for the
oppressed, a refuge in time of trouble. God is an help, a refuge, a defense and
Sanctuary to his people. Thus the Porter helps his partner by lending him a
shoulder to heave under his Load; one man helps another up, when he be fallen
down; Eccles. 4.10. We are commanded to help out our Neighbors Ox or Ass out
of the Ditch, Deuteronomy. 22.4. Thus one is said to help another in battle, Josh.
10.4. 2 Samuel 10.11. And God is on this account said to help Vzziah against the
Philistines, 2 Chronicles. 26.7. Thus a Friend helps another in distress, by
commiserating his Case, visiting him, and administering in Food, Physic, or
other necessaries to his afflicted condition. And thus is God a Helper to his
people, and that upon a threefold account.

First, Under the (otherwise unsupportable) burden of sin and guilt. This is an
heavy burden to a gracious Soul; his Iniquities go over his head, and are a
burden too heavy for him to bear. One sin weighs more than Hell, set home upon
the Conscience by the Impressions of Gods Spirit; it oppresses it very sore.
The sense hereof made David pray with that vigor and earnestness, Psalm. 40.12,
13. Be pleased O Lord to deliver me, O Lord make haste to help me. What is the
matter? Mine iniquities have taken hold upon me, so that I am not able to look
up; they are more than the hairs of my head, therefore my heart fails me.
Like one arrested upon many actions at once, here one Sergeant, and there
another claps hold on him, so that the man is put into such a distraction, and
confounding amaze, that he knows not what to do, nor which way to turn him.
This made Paul breathe out with so much dolor his (...), Romans 7.24. O wretched
Man, who shall deliver me from this body of death? Just like the Malefactor
condemned to drowning in Tiber, that had a dead body tied to his own living,
and so was dragged along the streets, and haled into the River: Than which
there is no worse punishment. And indeed the weight of sin is Onus Angelorum
bumeris formidandum, such as Christ himself (though but imputed) could never
have undergone, had not his Humanity been supported by the power of his Deity,
but must have sunk under the Oppression of it. It was not only Agnus Dei, but
Deus qui tollit -- the Lamb of God, but the Lamb who also was God, that could
bear the sins of the World. And verily, for a poor disconsolate sinner to look
upward, and see God frowning; downward, and see Hell gaping; inward, and see
Conscience accusing; outward, and see all Creatures withdrawing; it would sink
his Soul presently into an Hell of despair, if not elevated by the infinite arm
of Omnipotency; but Christ's left hand being under him, and his right hand
embracing him, his Motto may be with the Palm-tree's, Depressa resurgo. The
experience of divine help makes David triumphantly out-brave all the sad
apprehensions of guilt, Psalm. 49.5. Wherefore should I fear in the days of
evil, when the iniquity of my heels shall compass me about? Though hemmed in
by his sins never so close, he is able by Faith to hang out to them a Flag of
defiance. The Papists tell us of their St. Anthony, That lying on his
deathbed, Satan came to him, and charged upon him all the sins that ever he
had committed, but presently appears an Angel at his bedside, and tells the
Devil, he reckoned without his Host, for omnia haec deleta sunt sanguine
Christi; that all these were blotted out by the blood of Christ, and so he
vanished immediately. Though this might be a Fiction taken out of their golden
Legend, to deceive their Proselytes, I am sure, it is true as to the Saints and
People of God, Fuso sanguine sine culpa, omnium culparum chirographa sunt
de^eta. Aust. Christ's blood has washed them from the guilt of all their sins,
and therefore they may without spot appear before the throne of God with
boldness: Which makes holy Paul cant out his Doxology, Romans 7.25. I thank God
through Jesus Christ our Lord, and (...). No one condemnation to them in
Christ. Yea, to sing forth a divine Ennikion, or Carmen Victoriale, and bid a
challenge to all the enemies of his salvation. Romans 8.33. -- 1 Cor. 15.56. --

Secondly, He helps under weights of Duty and Service. It was Gods Promise to
Joshua, when he called him out to difficult service, Josh. 1.5. I will be with
thee, and never fail nor forsake thee: And to Moses, when he set him upon the
dangerous employment of an Embassy to Pharaoh, that he would certainly be with
him, and be a mouth to him, Exodus 3.12. cap. 4.12. God gives forth strange
assistances for extraordinary performances. Gods people know not their
strength, till they have tried it, cannot tell what they can do till they come
to do it. For Callings and Employments which they never thought themselves able
to manage, he gives another manner of spirit, a double portion of his Spirit,
when he sets men over a Congregation, he pours out the gifts and graces of his
Spirit on them, so as that holy Oil runs down from their heads to the skirts of
their Garments. He makes helpers in Government, and gives gifts to men, that
though they have no sufficiency of themselves, yet through grace they become
able Ministers and Stewards of his mysteries. Such is divine goodness, as he
never calls any man to service, but he furnishes him with gifts and Enablements
necessary thereunto. Yea in ordinary services he comes in as their Assistant.
In Prayer, the Spirit (...), Romans 8.26. helps our infirmities, as to the
matter, manner and ends of it: The word is very emphatical, and denotes a
lifting at the other end of a burden, so that what one cannot raise, two easily
lift together. What the Soul cannot do, when never so much raised by the power
of Nature, it can easily do, being alleviated and elevated too by the
assistances of Grace. Though without union with Christ, it could do nothing,
yet, receiving virtue and influence from him, it can do all things, Hodie
Bernardum Heri Christum; I am able (says the Apostle) to do all things, (...).
Philip. 4.12. This made Paul ready pressed to service, that he beggs to become
Gods Journey-man, Act. 9.4. Lord what will thou have me to do? God gives not
only the posse, but the velle too; works in us both to will and to do of his
own good pleasure. Gratias ago tibi (Clementissime Domine) quod nihil a me
requisivisti, quod mihi non prius donasti, says Cyprian. What his will
commands, his grace bestows.

Thirdly, Under the pressure of sufferings, whether spiritual or temporal for
God, or from God, personal, domestical or public; God helps his under the
burden of all, And that either visibly, or secretly and invisibly.

First, More openly and visibly, and that two ways.

First, Alleviando, by mitigating and moderating of them. He gives them at
least a little help, as he promises the sufferers under Antiochus's
persecution, Dan. 11.34. grants them some deliverance, as he assures Judah
against Shishak: 2 Chronicles. 12.6. He gives them a Nail in his Tabernacle, and a
little reviving, some short breathing times, Lucida intervalla, Ezra 9.8.
Silence for half an hour, Revel. 8.1. He corrects them but in measure, though
he leaves them not altogether unpunisht, Jerem. 44. ult. He smites them not, as
he does his enemies, them that smote him, Isa. 27.7. He lays on his little
finger, but not his loins, he chastens with rods, (whips not with Scorpions)
and those too the rods of men, of an old man (in the original) who cannot
strike any considerable stroke. He remembers his Peoples frame, and considers
that they are but dust, and will not contend for ever, lest the Spirit should
fail before him, which he has made. He stays his rough wind in the day of
his East wind: He regards not what we deserve, but what we can endure, and
never so beholds us Sinners, as to forget us Creatures, or deals with us
according to the greatness of his Power, or exactness and severity of his
Justice, but with abundant mixtures of Mercy and Love. In the midst of Wrath he
remembers Mercy, and never lets out all the Vials of his indignation, and
though he forsakes for a moment, with great kindness will he gather. Isa. 54.8.

Secondly, Liberando, by Redeeming his Israel out of all their troubles. Many
are the troubles of his Righteous, but the Lord delivers out of them all. He is
with them in six troubles, and in seven no evil touches them, Job 5.17. and
though their troubles be full and perfect, so shall be their deliverances. If
he preserves them not from trouble, he will save them in it, and deliver them
by it, yea, out of it. He that has delivered, does deliver, and will deliver,
says the Apostle. Satan or the World are not so ready to afflict, as he is to
redeem or comfort. He delivers Joseph out of the Prison, Jeremiah out of the
Dungeon, Daniel out of the Lions Den, the Three Children out of the Fire, Peter
out of the Goal. He delivers his from reproach, clearing up their innocence as
the Sun at Noonday; from want and beggary, by raising them up Families like a
Flock; He raises up the poor out of the dust, and lifts up the Beggar from
the dunghill, to set them among Princes, 1 Samuel 2.8. He delivers them from
sickness by recovery of them from the bed of their languishing; delivers them
from oppression, by subduing at their foot the Sons of Violence, and giving
them (to tread on) the necks of their adversaries. No temptation befalls them,
but he gives a way of escape. --

Or secondly, more insensibly and indiscernably. He helps them under their
sufferings,

1. By supplying them with necessary influences of Grace; He causes all Grace
to abound in them, Faith, and Patience, Self-denial, Humility,
Heavenly-mindedness, to have its perfect work; gives them all Graces in their
power and efficacy, vigor and activity; makes the spirit of Glory to rest upon
them. As they have doing so suffering Grace from Heaven. Philip. 1.29. To you
is given not only to believe, but suffer -- They have the honor and assistance
too to bleed for Christ as well as believe in him, to lay down their necks and
^ives for him, to offer him their blood, as well as ^pply his; to give up
themselves dying sacrifices ^or him as well as living to him.

2. By assisting them with seasonable supports ^f spiritual strength, in their
Souls. He settleth them, stablisheth them, strengthens them. He helps and
upholds them too, Isa. 41. that they Ho not succumbere, fall into any spiritual
deliquium. He is a stay to them, a Crutch under them, to keep them from
falling. They are always supported and succored, when they are not delivered.
His grace is sufficient for them, 2 Cor. 12.9. And if any spiritual qualms, or
fainting fits come upon them, so as they despair of Life, he raises and
restores them. Gods people need never, nor would not be so afraid of sufferings
as they are, ^f they knew but their strength. God gives his a back to every
burden, fits a constitution to every bitter potion; bears them up, so as they
^aint not under his chastening, but endure (where^n they are happier than by
escaping). Its all one, ^ay far better to be supported under trials, than want
the honor of being exercised with them. God always stands at his peoples back
to encourage them, and says to them, as to Abraham, Jacob, and Paul, Fear not:
As to the Church, Fear none of the things thou shall suffer. And this divine
support is that which has created even in Women, noble, generous, and
masculine spirits; as appears in that heroic Matron the Apostle pomts at in
his short Martyrology, Heb. 11.34, 35. Out of weakness they were made strong,
God gives a shoulder proportionable to every burden, and fits no Coat of
affliction to his Peoples backs, but first he takes a measure or scantling of
their spiritual strength.

3. By filling their hearts with abundance of holy joy and comfort. They have
strong consolation, and good hope through grace. Thou have helped me, and
comforted me, Psalm. 86. ult. As their afflictions abound, their consolations
superabound: measure heaped, pressed down, and running over. God fills out the
generous Wine of Consolation into the hand of suffering Saints: They have
heavenly and ravishing Music, sweet Airs upon the top of the Waters; with the
noise of thunder and tumult of waters, there is also the voice of Harpers,
Songs in their Pilgrimage. Rev. 14.2. The Oil of spiritual Consolation swims
upon the top of the waters of all Earthly discomfort; the lively sense and
feeling whereof makes them with the Swan, sing when dying, and with the
Nightingale, in the darkest night, when the sharpest Thorn of affliction is at
their breast. This we find evidenced in that sweet singer of Israel, 2 Samuel
23.5. The consideration of his interest in God and his Covenant made his dying
heart to revive, and when expiring his last breath, to leap into the World
again, and dismiss it with this comfortable Farewell. The Apostles had
experience of this, which made them not only content, patient, thankful,
(blessing a taking as well as a giving God) but cheerful and joyful, yea,
exulting and triumphant in their sufferings. Act. 5.41. They rejoiced that they
(...), were honored in being dishonored to suffer for Christ's sake. That
which to others would have been matter of grief, to them became matter of joy;
and not only did they joy, ^ut glory in tribulation, (...), Romans 5.2. And so
the Primitive Christians took joyfully the spoiling of their goods, Heb. 10.34.
A strange contra^^ction to the carriage of the world, whose joy is not in a
plunder, but rather in the dividing of the spoil. And this made the Martyrs
request the people not to mourn for them, but rejoice with them. The joy of the
Lord was indeed their irength. In the feeling of present miseries, they
rejoiced in the sight of the approaching reward of glory. This made Ignatius,
when his body was grinding between the teeth of wild beasts, to try out, Now am
I preparing fit manchet for my Lord and Savior. This made holy Philpot, when
^hrust into the Bishop's Cole-house, to say, Now shall I be scoured, and made
fit to set on my Fathers ^igh shelf in Heaven. This made Mr. Glover call ^ut,
when at the stake, He is come, he is come -- Yea such are the streaming
comforts of Gods people, in times of suffering, as they esteem them ^ot only
their honor and profit, but even their ^ery pleasure also and delight (and so
there is no ^ead of Arguments wanting to make them com^rtable) 2 Cor. 12.10.
Therefore (says the Apostle) I take pleasure in infirmities, in re^roaches, in
necessities, in persecutions, in distresses. A very Hell of sorrow with the
enjoyment of God, ^s better than an Heaven of happiness without ^im. That Is the
third notion. An help for re^ress under sufferings and afflictions.

Fourthly and lastly, An help for, and accurrence ^o, and relief and recovery
from under disasters and disappointments. Thus Abraham helped his Brother Lot,
when he recovered his person and goods both taken captive. Thus David helped the
people when he pursued the Amalekites (who had burnt up their City, and taken
their wives and goods) and recovered all, 1 Samuel 30.19. Thus a man help; his
neighbor, when he furnishes him at an unexpected disappointment, or pressing
necessity, as he in the Parable did his friend with the loaves at his need.
Thus the Seaman helps the shipwrackt, when (the ship being split all to
pieces, and he floating on the top of the waters, and swiming to save his life)
he receives him into his boat, or vessel, and carries him safely to shore. And
in this sense is God an help unto his people; secunda tabula post naufragium, a
plank after shipwreck, when all hope of being saved being gone, he comes in
with unexpected relief. And this I conceive the proper notion of the Psalmist
here, whose design is to proclaim the sufficiency of Gods help in the
deficiency or treachery of all creatures in never so high an orb, of never so
powerful an influence here below in this world. And so God is an help to his,
both under the failure of expected mercies and comforts, and also under the
feeling of unexpected evils.

First, Under the failure of our expectations. When we look for peace, and no
good comes; and for healing, and behold nothing but trouble: When our eyes
fail, with beholding vanity, and our hearts fail with creature-reliances, then
says David, Whom have I in Heaven but thee? my flesh and my heart fails, but
God is the strength of my heart, and my portion for ever, Psalm. 73.26. So again
he professes, Psalm. 142.4, 5. I looked on my right hand, and beheld, but there
was no man that would know me, refuge failed me, no man cared for my soul. I
cried unto thee, O Lord, I said, Thou art my refuge and my portion in the Land
of the living. Though all means failed, he knew God would never forsake him.
When the streams were dried up, he goes to the fountain. Do persons fail, God
is an help under their disappointment, Psalm. 27.20. When my Father and my
Mother forsake me, God will take me up. Though he were cast out (as an
exp^sititious child) to the wide world, God will (as he did for Moses) take
care of, and make provision for him. God says to his people (as Peter once to
Christ) and pertorms it infinitely better. Though all forsake thee, yet will
not I, I will die with thee rather than deny thee. Paul says of himself, 2 Timothy 4.16. At my first answer no man stood with me, but all men forsock me.
(All greedy of privileges, backward to sufferings for the Gospel) men are
eager to be ringleaders, when profession is in its flourish, but ^^inch back,
and draw the neck out of the collar, when it comes to persecution: Like
ill-made cloth that shrinks with the wetting. Notwithstanding the Lord stood
with me, and strengthened me -- God came near, when man stood aloof off, and at
the greatest distance. When men, friends and relations, turn the back, and run
away from us, then God stands at our back, and draws closer to us. That Is the
disserence between God and creatures: They in the halcyon days of prosperity
will complement us into an opinion of their respect and kindness, even as the
shadow follows the Sun, so do they wait on those to whom they are pretenders --
Donec eris foelix -- but few are born for a day of adversity, and will girt
themselves (like the Travelers coat) closer, and unite firmer to our interest
in a day of misery and infelicity. But God on the other side seems to neglect
his people under their fullness of worldly fruitions and satisfactions, (they
never enjoy less o^ God in the heart, than when they have most of the world in
their hand) but when afflictions come then he indulgeth his most kind and
frequent visits to them, and bestows his choicest presents upon them. The world
deals with her favorites as Orpah with Nacmi, follows her till hardship and
difficulty presents it self, and then with a flattering salute, takes her leave
of them, but God with his followers, as Ruth with her Mother, cleaves and
clings to them under all crosses and changes; follows them not only usque ad
aras, but through the water, the fire, through reproaches, plunders,
imprisonments, exiles, death it self. Though (...) walk through the valley of
the shadow of death, tho^ art with me, says David, Psalm. 23.4. Jobs friends
and kinsfolks stand aloof off his sore, his breath was strange to his wife, he
was the butt of his friends persecution; but still his Redeemer stays with
him. Though all the company be gone, the Physician and Nurse abide still with
the Patient. David becomes a reproach to his neighbors, and a sear to his
acquaintance; his very look was so ghastly as frighted them; no sooner they saw
him, but they fled from him; they forgot him as a dead man, out of mind he was,
as well as sight. He looked for some to take pity, but there was none; and for
comforters, but there was none; he was like a Pelican in the wilderness, an
Owl in the desert, and a Sparrow on the house top; brought to a solitary,
forsaken, forlorn condition; yet when all other friends and lovers absented,
his God was still with him, his face shined upon him; he heard his poor, and
despised not his prisoner; he looked down on him from the height of his
Sanctuary, had respect to his groaning, and regard to the prayer of the
destitute. Whom the world turns off, God commonly receives; whom they cast out
of their company, he entertains in his ever-blessed communions, Isa. 66.5. When
sin says, Ego inficiam, I Will defile you, Satan, ego interficiam, I Will destroy
you, the world, ego deficiam, I Will fail you, he says, ego reficiam, I Will
refresh you. When they know not whither to go, he has for his the words of
eternal life, Job. 6.68. When creatures prove all like so many broken Reeds,
not only deceiving, but afflicting him that leans on them; He is the staff of
Jacob, and the hope of Israel, upon whom whosoever leaned, was never ashamed.

Do the things of the world fail? he helps under their disappointment. All
outward things are of a defectible nature, they perish with the using;
uncertainty is stamped upon the best of them, and their fashion (...), deceives
and passes away, 1 John 2.17. But the Word of God indures for ever. He that
seeks sufficiency or satisfaction in the world, seeks the living amongst the
dead; God never made it for enjoyment, but only for use. Such expectations
raise it beyond its natural virtue, and innate efficacy. And when we look for
more, God may justly let us find less than it may otherwise afford us. And
sometimes God on purpose breaks the staff of creature comforts, to learn us
sole d^pendance on himself. As is reported of William the Conqueror, when he
first came over into this our Island, he burnt all his ships, thereby to render
to his soldiers the thoughts of a return desperate. God will have his have no
other strings to the bow of their trust, but his majesty and mercy. And as we
always find in the world less than we expected, so in God more, than we could
reasonably hope. He makes good to the enjoyer what he promised to the
expectant, and is better to his people, not only than their fears, but their
desires and hopes. He never leaves his people desolate, though for a time he
may make them disconsolate. In all straights he has a reserve, and exigencies
a supply and succor. Under spiritual disappointments, the want of Ordinances,
and necessary means of Grace; he can prepare a table in the wilderness. He fed
Israel with Manna there forty years together. He has promised to be a little
Sanctuary to his people, Ezekiel. 11.16. for retirement, and also for refreshment.
He affords the gracious soul sweet repasts by the manifestations of his
presence; as he did David when banished from his inheritance by the Sons of
violence. Under outward disappointments, and want of creature-accommodations,
he can make a sufficient provision. When Elijah is ready to famish, he can make
a Raven to undertake his Catership, and when he sits solitary under a
Juniper-tree, hand him a collation by an Angel as his Servitor. And a modicum
with his blessing, is better than the greatest multiplication without it. For
man lives not by bread alone, but by every word that proceeds out of the mouth
of God, Matthew. 4. He fills his peoples hearts with food and gladness. He can
carse much; while the meat is in sinners mouths, he can send leanness into
their souls, and they may eat, but not have enough, drink, but not be filled,
be clothed, but not be warm: So he can bless a little; Daniel's pulse he can
render more nourishing than the Kings dainties. Though the staff of bread be
broken in pieces, yet he can renew it, or at least deal graciously with the
soul, so as it shall say, I have enough. Nimis avarus animus, cui non sufficit
Deus. Bernard. The experience of this was that gave the Church such a large
festival of joy in a fasting-day, Hab. 3.17. Although the Fig Tree shall not
blossom, neither shall fruit be in the Vines; the labor of the Olive shall
fail, and the fields shall yield no meat, the flock shall be cut off in the
fold, and there shall be no herd in the stalls: yet I will rejoice in the Lord,
I will joy in the God of my salvation. And as in the want of necessary
competencies for outward and bodily sustenance; so in the loss of worldly
conveniences, God is his peoples helper. He recompenseth them an hundredfold;
what they lose in temporals, they gain in spirituals; and when bereaved of all
this world can afford, can yet cry out, we have enough, all in our God. Though
they be as having nothing, yet they possess all things, and retain their
heirship, while they appear to the world to have lost their Sonship -- Yea in
the utmost misgivings of their souls, when not only their enjoyments, but even
their expectancies are thrown overboard, and set all on float, their hope
perished from the Lord, yet his compassions bear them up, Lam. 3.21. And when
with Jonah, they apprehend themselves cast out of his sight, yet can they look
toward his holy Temple, Jonah 2.4.

Yea secondly, As under the frustration of expected comforts, so under the
feeling of unexpected crosses and afflictions is God their help. God is never
far from his people, when trouble is near: When men draw back, he draws most
near, and misery advances forward; he never goes away and leaves them naked
combatants with it. If outward mercies fail, he will give contentation under
the want of them, or better mercies instead of them; exchanges the gold of
Heaven for this earthly dross: (Though others have the portions, they have with
Isaac the Inheritance, and the men of the world gifts, with Jehoram, they have
the Kingdom, and change of worldly comforts, for the hopes of future glory, and
a double portion of the gifts and graces of his Spirit, is no robbery or
injury.) Yea he often bestows better in kind, as well as value; as he gives
them himself, who is better than many wives, children, estates, (for when all
these die, he yet lives) so he raises up other comforts to sweeten their
crosses: when he takes away one mercy, sends another in the stead. If David
loses his child, which surviving had been a standing monument of his shame, he
shall have a Solomon, that shall be to him a Crown of Glory in his stead: So,
if outward afflictions approach, he will find out a way of deliverance, 1 Pet.
2.9. The Lord knows how to deliver the godly out of all temptations. Troubles
rush in upon us suddenly oftentimes, and we know not which way we come into
them, but God makes our way out of them. He opens for us a backdoor of escape,
when there appears of it no humane probability. Many a time did he deliver
them; says the Psalmist of Israel, Psalm. 106.42. They cried unto the Lord, and
he delivered them out of their distresses. Under soul-conflicts, when they have
even concluded their case desperate, God has come in with his salvation. When
Hezekiah says, He is cut off, and shall never more see the Lord in the Land of
the Living, so that his soul was in great bitterness, in love to his soul, his
God delivers him from the pit of corruption, Isa. 38.17. When the soul is
reduced to such extremities, as it knows not what to do, how any longer to
hope, but draws up desperate conclusions against mercy, and says, The Lord
will be gracious no more; he has in anger shut up his tender mercies, I shall
surely fall by the strength of this corruption, that temptation: (As Mris.
Honywood said) As sure as this Glass breaks, I shall be damned.) The soul looked
for comfort from Ordinances, and Promises; expected help from faithful
Ministers, and Fellow Christians, but finds none to save, none to comfort;
even then he finds out some Messenger, an Interpreter, one among a thousand to
show to man his uprightness; then he is gracious, and delivers him from going
down to the pit; he delights in the Almighty, and lifts up his face to God. Job
cap. 22. and cap. 33. And so under outward calamities, which come so suddenly
and violently, as there seems no way of rescue or resistance, but a man cries
out with David, He shall, must one day fall by the hand of Saul, by the power
of this or the other affliction, yet God delivers out of the mouths of these
ravening Lions; as he did him, Psalm. 31.22. I said in mine haste, I am cut off
from before thine eyes; nevertheless thou heardst the voice of my supplications
when I cried unto thee. Though he were even at deaths door, at the graves
mouth, God brought up his soul from the grave, and kept him alive, that he went
not down into the pit. The sorrows of death compassed him, and the pains of
Hell got hold upon him, and he said in his haste, all were liars, the Prophet
Samuel, and all; yet at length God gave him such experience of his salvation,
as he could not contain, but cries out, Thou have delivered my soul from death,
mine eyes from tears, and my feet from falling. It Is Gods usual method to work
by contraries, and as he disappoints sinners in the height of their hopes and
confidences; so he relieves his Saints in the lowest ebbs of their diffidencies
and despondencies; he casts them down when advanced on the highest pinnacle of
undeserved, and abused mercy, and lifts his own up, when plunged into the most
deep and intricate labyrinths of affliction and misery. And that is the last
particular in this first branch of the Proposition. In what respects God is an
help to his people.

The second follows: How, or after what sort and manner he gives them help.
Take it briefly in these following particulars, which will enhance the
excellency of divine help.

First, He helps suddenly and unexpectedly, when his people little dream of it,
least of all look for it, and expect it, Psalm. 126.1. When the Lord turned
again the captivity of Sion, we were like them that dream. The deliverance was
so great as it seems incredible, too good news to be true. Wicked men build
Castles in the Air, and dream of more mercy than they find true; dream they
eat, and when they awake, are an hungry. The godly carry a low sail, and
commonly dream of less. The world is commonly worse than its promises, God
ordinarily better than his word. Sinners meet with less, Saints more than they
expected. God, with a breath blows the wicked into destruction, and with a
breath commands his peoples deliverance. Their ruin is sudden; how does
desolation come upon them in a moment, and they are consumed with Gods
terrors? When Babylon is so pleased with her self, that she courts her self
like a Lady, God can make her a Widow. As gliding waters, melting snales,
untimely births, so is their prosperity, and as a sudden flame, or unlookt for
H^rricane, comes their misery, Psalm. 58.9. And no less expected are Sions
reparations. It Is compared to a Creation, Isa. 65.18. which is suddenly
effected, a generation, which is in instanti: Nay, before she traveled, she
brought forth, Isa. 66.7, 8. She is delivered before her time, and without
pain, and yet does not miscarry. Yea, and as her deliverance comes unexpectedly
as to time, so to means likewise, Micah 4.10. Be in pain, and labor to bring
forth, O Daughter of Sion, like a woman in travel; Thou shall go even to
Babylon, there shall thou be delivered. An enemy shall become her Midwife, who
sought to be her murderer. It Is but the shine of Gods face, and his people are
saved, Psalm 80. ult. But the turn of his hand, and his people are delivered,
Zech. 13. He says, return, his word can do it as well as his work, Psa. 90.3.
Judgments come on foot, but mercy on horseback, on the wing, skipping over the
hills, and leaping over the mountains. No sooner do Gods people cry to him in
prayer, but he eccho's to them in mercy, Isa. 58.9. Then shall thou call, and
the Lord shall answer: Thou shall cry, and he shall say, here am I. As Gods
people answer to his voice commanding, Speak Lord, thy Servants hear; so he
answers to their voice petitioning, Call upon me, and I will answer thee, Jer.
33.3. He cuts short his work in righteousness, Romans 9.28.

Secondly, Gradually; though salvation comes suddenly, yet not simul and semel,
all at once is it completed and perfected. It Is compared to light, which
creeps upon the Air pedetentim, by little and little. The dawning of the day
goes before the high noon. God works for his people, (...), after diverse ways
and manners: by piece-meals and inches, as it were. Sion is not built in a day.
God could destroy his peoples lusts, and their enemies together, but he slaies
them not, lest they should forget. He could at once perfect the building of
grace in the soul, and work of reformation in his Church, but he chooses to let
it have its stages; first lays the foundation, then lays on the
superstructures, and so at last perfects the fabric, that so he may have the
greater tribute and revenue of praises and acclamations coming into his Grace.
God is a God that waits to be gracious to his people; but he is also a God of
Judgment. They shall get ground, but yet must be fighting; they shall have
supply, yet must be waiting. The prudent Father will not give his child his
whole portion into his hand at once; nor the discreet friend trust all the
stock he intends to his friend together, but help them by degrees according to
their necessities and occasions; thereby to engage their continual dependence
upon them. Lesser motions are ordinarily quick, but great motions slower. God
gives the wicked Prodigal all in hand, whom he has no further thoughts of good
will, and purposes of grace and love unto; but in respect of his people, he
does all for eternity; and therefore with the skillful Artists, draws not up
his work in haste, but takes time to make it the more beautiful and admirable.
God is the Savior of his people, and yet sometimes like the curious Limner,
hides his work till the whole draught be completed, Isa. 45.15. Verily thou
art a God that hidest thy self, O God of Israel, the Savior. He carries on the
work in a very hidden and mysterious way, by so many aenigma's and riddles of
providence, as his footsteps cannot easily be traced, nor his handiwork
searched out to perfection. There are many hitherto's in his mercies and
salvations, many Ebenezers, 1 Samuel 7.12. He called the name of it Ebenezer,
saying, Hitherto has the Lord helped us.

Thirdly, He helps opportunely and seasonably, in the very present emergency,
and strait, in the hour, the nick of trouble. Opportunity is the Salt that
seasons any mercy. Now God times all his helps and succors to his people. As
he dealt with Christ, so with them; In an acceptable time he hears them, and in
the day of salvation he helps them. He is (...), a God at a pinch; In the Mount
will he be seen -- when his own arm shall be the more conspicuous; or when his
people are in eminent and imminent dangers. When the murdering-knife is putting
to Isaac's throat, he plucks back Abraham's hand. When the Canon is discharging
against the Jews, then he muzzles the mouth of it, Deuteronomy. 32.36. For the Lord
shall judge his people, and repent himself for his Servants; when he sees that
their power is gone, and there is none shut up or left. When the siege can hold
no longer (and there is none left in the fenced Cities, more than in the open
Plains) then forthwith comes relief. This is the day of Jacob's trouble; alas,
for that day is great, and there is none like it, but he shall be saved out of
it, Jer. 30.7. Days of great trouble, are days of glorious salvation. When
Israel was in a very great distress, like to be swallowed up by the Ammonites,
and upon their applications to God he turns them off, with a protestation that
he would deliver them no more; yet pleading the instancy of their oppression,
and begging relief in the present exigency (Deliver us only we pray thee this
day) His soul was grieved for their misery, and his pity became solicitor to
his power in order to their succor and redress, Judge. 10.16. When the soul
like Jonah, in the Whales belly, is even swallowed up of sorrow, and out of the
depths, the belly of Hell, cries to the Lord, He will hear him. God ^ath said,
He will bring his people back from the ^epths both of Earth and Sea, Psalm.
68.22. Psalm. ^1.20. Prayer put up to Heaven by a soul ready ^o sink in the
mire, as being able to find no standing, is always in an acceptable time:
That ^s moll^ssimum fandi tempus, Psalm. 69.13. Gods help is limited to no time,
but there are usually two special seasons when the fruit of mercy is full ripe,
and God plucks it off the tree of providence, and throws it into the laps of
his people; either when their enemies condition is high, and they triumphant,
or his peoples low, and they despondent and desperate.

First, The influx of divine help is then seasonable under the enemies rage,
height and insolency, when they blaspheme the God of Heaven, and say, Where is
their God become? There is no help for him in his God; Ah so would we have it;
God has forsaken him, persecute him, and take him; there is none to deliver
him; we offend not, they have sinned against the Lord, the habitation of
Justice, the hope of their Fathers. God then will make no delay, but make haste
for their help: When the malignant Church vaunted it against the true (as the
debaucht Harlot against the chaste Mistress) she returns her this answer, Micah
7.8, 10. Rejoice not against me, O mine enemy, Though I fall, I shall rise: She
that is mine enemy shall see it, and shame shall cover her, which said to me,
Where is the Lord thy God?

Secondly, Under the Saints succumbency, when they seem to be swallowed up
quick of the rage of their adversary; to fall by the power of corruption, to be
in such an estate as they cannot extricate and wind themselves out by all
their policy and industry; yea, are ready to conclude, The Lord has forsaken
them, and there is no hope; their hope is perished, their way hid, and their
Judgment passed over from their God; it is in vain, and they will wait on the
Lord no longer, are ready to leave off, and quite give over praying, waiting,
hoping and believing; their spirits fail them, and they are ready to put forth
their hand to iniquity; their extremity is his opportunity. This is that David
urges, Psalm. 70. ult. I am poor and needy, O God, thou art my help and
deliverer. And so the Church, Psalm. 44. ult. Our soul is bowed down to the
dust, and our belly cleaves to the Earth; Arise for our help -- When Gods
servants know not what to do, in ipsa hora dabitur; and when they are exposed
to great injuries and oppressions, it repents the Lord because of their
groanings, by reason of them who oppress and vex them, Judge. 2.18. I have seen
the affliction of my people which are in Egypt, and heard their cry by reason
of their Taskmasters, and I know their sorrows: And when their sighing and
crying came up before God by reason of their bondage, he thought them meet for
deliverance, Exodus 2.24. cap. 3.7, 9. The Rabbis have a proverb, Cum
duplicantur lateres venit Moses, when the tale of Bricks was doubled, then
comes Moses a deliverer out of Egypt. Nothing fetches down Judgment from
Heaven sooner than the cry of Sodoms sins, nor mercy, than of Sions sorrows.
God regards the prayers of the destitute, hears the groaning of his Turtles,
appointed for death, of his prisoners, destined for destruction. Their mourning
weeds, furrowed faces, and sighing, sobbing hearts are silent but potent
Orators at the Throne of Heaven for relief and succor. God gives his Enemies a
loose rein for a while, but when they grow extravagant the limit; he has set
them, he pulls at the Curb; and he lays the rod on his people to lash them for
their sins, but if once it fetches tears from their eyes, and brings them to
weeping Cross, he spares further correction, and throws it into the fire.

Fourthly, God helps his People invincibly and irrestistibly. Not by might, nor
by power, but by my Spirit, says the Lord, Zach. 4.6. What is this Mountain
before Zerubbabel? As he works by an insuperable grace in the heart, so by an
omnipotent power in the world. Thy right hand, O Lord, is become glorious in
power, says Moses in his excellent Canticle, Exodus 15.6. The right hand of the
Lord does valiantly, says the Psalmist, Psalm. 118.15. The right hand is
commonly the Instrument of action, and the seat of power. God saves by his
right hand, Psalm. 17.8. by it he can work, and none shall let him, nothing is
too hard for him. For if the very weakness of God (to speak as to our capacity)
be infinitely too much for the strength of man, what is the strength of God to
the weakness of men? He is wonderful in counsel, and mighty in working, Jer.
32.17, 19. He has power to help, and power to cast down, as the Man of God
tells Amaziah, 2 Chronicles. 25.8. The arm of Creatures is but an Arm of flesh, as
Hezekiah tells the People to encourage them against Rabshaketh's revilings, 2 Chronicles. 32.8. With him is an arm of flesh, but with us is the Lord our God to
help us, and to fight our battles. So able is God to help, that he can do the
work alone, though there be none else to help. He is the Lord alone, and
besides him is there no Savior, and he can save alone, without any use of
Instruments and second Causes. As Jehesophat tells the People, 2 Chronicles. 20.17.
Ye need not fight in this bastel, the Lord your God fights for you. And so he
did, by making their Enemies their own destroyers, while his People went out
with Songs instead of Weapons, and struck not a stroke, only sang a Psalm of
Thanksgiving, they became each others Butchers, and Executioners, Verse. 22, 23.
And so it was in Midian's destruction, Gideon and his Soldiers, go out with
Lamps and Pitchers, instead of Military Engines, and not a Sword drawn, or Drum
beaten, only a shout given, and the Lord sets every man's Sword against his
fellow throughout the whole Host. Judge. 7.22. Here was the Finger of God
evidently manifested for his People against their Enemies, in making them spend
their Arrows one on another. So dealt God also with the Egyptians, that they
confessed the Lord fought against them for Israel, Exodus 14.25. Here was the
immediate hand of Heaven. Gods Providence can easily discover, divert, or
discomfit his Enemies, making their own fears their snare, as he did the
Syrians, 2 King. 7.6. Yea, such is Gods Omnipotency, that though there be never
so many letts and hindrances, resistances and oppositions, he can leap over
all. If he has none to help, there shall be none shall hinder. If he cannot
find his way, (with Hannibal) he will make it; he can make every hill a Plain.
Notwithstanding all impediments he can work his intentions, and accomplish his
Purposes both in the World, and in the Heart. Though violent temptations
assail, and strong corruptions oppose, so as the Sons of Zerviah seem to be too
hard for the Soul, grace can triumph over all difficulties and discouragements,
and level all towering thoughts, and soaring imaginations, and bring it into the
obedience of the just. There is no difficulty to omnipotency. He can cause the
work of his Temple to go on in troublous times, and give the great things of
Righteousness and Reformation which have met with nothing but a miscarrying
Womb, and dry Breasts, strength to conceive, and also to bring forth. And the
designs of Enemies he can make all abortive. The wisest Counselor against his
Church he can make his own Executioner, and cause him to exchange his badge of
honor for an ignominious Halter, 2 Sa^t. 17.23. Though Gebal, Ammon, and
Amalek conspire, he can blow on their Confederacies by the breath of his
nostrils. Antichrist who lets, he can remove out of the way, and make the
little Horn push the Nations, and the interest of the Lamb break in pieces the
Kingdom of the Beast, though his followers be even innumerable. Hence it is
worthy our observation, that he chooses to appear for his People in a very low
condition, ( Psalm. 136.23.) that so aliquid divini might appear in all his
Manifestations. He overlooks his People, when erect as the Palm; or spreading
forth themselves as the green Bay Tree, and looks upon them, when like the
Myrtle they dwell in a low place. Such is the power of his Providence in his
operations for his Servants, as in Scripture Phrase it obtains the name of a
Resurrection, to the performance whereof is requisite no loss than an infinite
and omnipotent Arm, Ezekiel. 37. when they are as dry bones, and scattered, he can
command a re-entrance of the spirit, a return of life: To which metaphor David
alludes in his Prayer and Invocation for help, Psalm. 141.7, 8. Our bones are
scattered at the graves mouth, as when one cutteth and cleaves Wood upon the
earth. But mine eyes are to thee, O God, the Lord: in thee is my trust, leave
not my soul destitute.

Fifthly: He help; them proportionably. Divine wisdom dispenses Mercy by an
even balance unto its receivers, by a just proportion, and that fourfold: To
His Peoples wants, desires, hopes and expectations, and their good improvements.

First, To their Wants and Necessities. Gods supply ever respects man's
indigency. The worlds rule is, Habenti dabitur. The Rich have many Friends: The
more men have, the more they would, and shall have. But this poor man cried,
and the Lord heard him. He is an helper of the Fatherless, Psalm. 10.14. and so
its said of Christ, Psalm. 72.12, 13. He shall deliver the needy when he cries,
the poor also, and him that has no helper, -- Poor Orphans, who are too
commonly the Objects of the Worlds oppression, are the Objects of Gods and
Christ's compassion and commiseration. It was Job's testimony of his integrity,
that he delivered the poor that cried, the fatherless, and him that had none to
help him, Job 29.12. cap. 31.21. and its a Rule of Equity observed in Heaven:
Gods relief loves to lift up those whom the sense of their own wants has cast
down. Necessity has a loud voice, and prevailing with the Almighty. Man's
inisery, it is ansa divinae misericordiae. God pours the Oil and Wine of
Consosolation into broken hearts, wounded spirits. Drooping and dejected hearts
may most confidently expect health from the light of this Heavenly Physicians
countenance. The World leaves us, when we most want it, and Creatures forsake
us, when we have most need, but then God stands by us. When the hour of
sickness comes, he always gives his people the sweetest Visits of Love. Men
commonly take the strongest, but God, the weakest side. What is said of Earthly
Monarchs, is much more true of him the King of Kings, and Lord of Lords, the
only Potentate, Parcit subjectis, debellat superbos. He pulls down the mighty
from their seat, and exalts them of low degree, He fills the hungry, but sends
the rich empty away.

Secondly, To their Prayers and Requests. Asking is the readyest way of having.
This depends on the former, (for Oration sine malis quasi Avis sine alis. He
that wants not, beggs not, or at least ought not so to do.) But now true
seekers are always good speeders. The most sturdy Beggars go away with Heavens
Alms, and the eagerly soliciting Favorites come away with grants from the
Throne of Mercy. The Apostle plainly insinuates, that an holy (...) at the
Throne of Grace, a bold suit there is the surest way of obtaining grace to help
in time of need, Heb. 4. ult. Qui timide rogat docet negare: A cold suit does
but make way for the stronger denial; but an holy ((...)) importunity God
cannot, will not relist, Luke 18. Psalm. 107.13. They cried unto the Lord in
their trouble, and he saved them out of all their distresses. He that besieges
and beleaguers Heaven with his Prayers, shall have what it can afford him. The
Kingdom of Heaven delights to suffer this holy Violence. Let Moses hold down
his hands and Amalek prevails, let him lift them up, and Israel prevails. When
Jehosophat and all the people of Judah were in a great strait, they sent up
their united voices in one general shout to heaven, to ask help of the Lord, 2 Chronicles. 20.4. And he urges God with his Promise in prayer, which was, when evil
came upon them, as the Sword, Judgment, Pestilence, or Famine, if they cried
to him in their affliction, he would hear, and help. God commonly gives help as
an answer, and return of Prayer. Prayer enlarges and expatiateth the Soul,
desire stretches it out for the receiving larger measures of Mercy; and it
provokes God also to bestow them. Observe, what God promises Jeremiah as to
deliverance from the Babylonish Captivity, Jer. 29.12, 13. Then shall ye call
upon me, and ye shall go and pray unto me, and I will hearken to you. And ye
shall seek me, and find me, when ye shall search for me with all your heart.
By Prayer, that Legio Fulminatrix, that band of Christian Soldiers, obrained a
refreshing shower, when their enemies were broken with a dreadful storm.

Thirdly, To their Hopes and expectancies. God loves to give his People an
expected end. According to thy Faith be it to thee, was our Saviors usual
welcome to all comers to him. Mercy commonly comes on the wing of Faith. Oleum
masericordiae (says Bernard) non infunditur nisi in tasa fiduciae. The Vessel
of Faith is that receives the precious Liquor of Mercy. Faith is the Bucket
that draws the waters of life out of the well of Salvation. Faith was that gave
Abijah victory over Jeroboam, 2 Chronicles. 13.18. Thus the children of Israel were
brought under at that time, and the Children of Judah prevailed, because they
relied upon the Lord God of their Fathers. The stay and strength of all states
as well as Persons, and assurance of all Victories, depends on their trust and
confidence in the Lord. Faith is a wonder-working grace: What was the
Instrument of all those heroic actions done by the Patriarchs, and primitive
Worthies, but Faith? Through Faith they subdued Kingdoms, wrought
righteousness; obtained Promises, Heb. 11.23. Faith overcomes lust within, and
the World without. It Is a Shield against, and a Sword to all our adversaries;
it lays hold on divine help, engage^h Almightiness, extorts mercy from Heaven.
Coelum tundimus, preces fundimus, misericordiam extorquemus, quoth Tertullian.
Faith removes mountains, of pride within, and power without. It Is an invincible
grace, and no wonder, because the only receiving grace, and makes use of
whatsoever is in God for the supply of a poor Creature: and Quanto vas fidei
capacius afferimus (says the Father) tanto majus gratiae inundantis
exhaurimus. The larger the Bucket, the fuller the Vessel, the larger the Net,
the greater the Draught. But now Infidelity cuts short, and withers the arm^ of
Mercy, as Faith unbares it. They that believe in the Lord shall prosper, 2 Chronicles. 20.20. But if ye will not believe, ye shall not be established. Isa.
7.9. Unbelief prevailing, no help against lusts at home. O faithless
generation, says Christ to his Disciples, when they could not cast out the
evil Spirit, there lay the reason of their impotency, unbelief hinders Christ's
own miracles, he could not do many things there, because of their unbelief. O
Augustine, In te stas and non stas, was language to Austin, when he could not
overcome his beloved corruption: Nor yet against Enemies abroad. Alas,
Infidelity opens a backdo^re for Syria's escape, 2 Chronicles. 16.7. Because thou
have relied on the King of Syria, and not relied on the Lord thy God, therefore
is the Host of the King of Syria escaped out of thine hand, Want of due and
noble exercises of Faith on God in the day of Prosperity, provokes God often to
leave his own People in the day of Adversity. God loves to be trusted by his
People, their Faith honors him. He that comes to him for mercy, must believe
his being, and his plentiful remuncrations, and an Unbeliever must expect to
receive nothing at the hand of the Lord.

Fourthly, To their right use and improvement, or worthy carriage and
deportment. They who do best shall have best with God, and that most endeavor
to help forward his glory, he will most influence them with comfort. Vtenti
dabitur. Dii munera laboribus -- Truly God is good to Israel. Walk before me,
says God to Abraham, and be perfect, and I will be thy Shield and Buckler, and
thy exceeding great reward. Let God have much of the fruit of our obedience,
and we may expect much of the light of his Countenance. Ordinarily, the more
Ships we send out laden with duty, the larger returns we find of Mercy. The
more Service we do to our great and Sovereign Lord, the more we have of
Privilege. The end of all deliverance is service in holiness and
righteousness, and the end of righteousness is peace and assurance for ever;
the fruit thereof is sown in peace, and such as the seed-time is, such is the
harvest. Sin clips the wings of Mercy. God will never bestow his Corn and Wine
on them who bestow it on themselves and their lusts, nor trust his mercies in
their hands, who make them weapons to fight against him. His salvation is nigh
them that fear him, and his blessing upon his people; but he will not take the
ungodly by the hand, or help the evil doers, Job 8 20. Sin separates God, and a
Soul, divorceth him and a People; an unthankful or unfruitful return of his
Influences wholly shuts them up. No long shinings of his favor, where no
reflections of our gratitude; no allegiance no protection, but a casting out of
the lines of the communication of his grace. While we do well and be obedient,
we shall eat the good of the Land, but if rebellious, we shall be devoured with
the Sword. If faithful Servants, he will become our gracious and affectionate
Savior, but if undutifull Sons, he will be our Judge and Corrector. Isa. 63.9,
10. In all their affliction he was afflicted, and the Angel of his presence
saved them: In his love, and in his pity he redeemed them, and he bare them, and
carried them all the days of old. But they rebelled, and vexed his holy
Spirit; therefore he was turned to be their enemy, and he fought against them.
His promises of assistance to presence with his People are conditional, and so
are his performances, Dum se been gesserint. As the Seer told King Asa, 2 Chronicles. 15.2. The Lord is with you, while ye be with him; and if ye seek him, he
will be found of you, but if ye forsake him, he will forsake you. And so much
for the second particular, how God helps his People.

Thirdly, What are the Causes of Divine Help, or the reasons why God will help
his People?

First, In respect of that relation he bears toward them, or that right and
propriety he has in them. Relations, though of small entity, are of great
efficacy. Now there is a near and intimate; yea, an united and manifold
Relation between God and his People. They are related to him in Christ, that
mighty one, on whom he has laid help; though by nature afar off, yet by grace
made nigh, and have a new and living way opened through his blood, whereby they
draw nigh to God, and beg help and succor from him, Heb. 4. ult. He is the
saving strength of his Anointed, Psalm. 28.7. Or by his Anointed, as some read,
the strength of their salvation by Christ. They are related to him in covenant.
He is their God, and they are his people. And being their God, therefore he
must needs become their salvation. As Moses sings, Exodus 15.2. Salvation is of
the Lord, and his blessing is upon his People, Psalm. 3. ult. He is their
Shepherd, and they are his Sheep; their Maker, and they his Image; the work of
his hands, and what is a man more tender of than his picture, or a King more
nice than of his coin? The Father protects and pro^ides for his Children;
though Prodigals, he takes some care of them. The Husband helps and defends the
Wife. Our Law says, Vxori lis non intenditur, no suit can be commenced against
a Wife, because she is under Covert-barn. The friend is helpful and beneficial
to the friend; whom should a man expect relief from in his strait, but from his
friends? A Friend is born for Adversity, and is better than a Brother. God is a
Father and friend to his People. As a Father pities his children, so does the
Lord pity them that fear him. Doubtless, thou art our Father -- But now, O
Lord, thou art our Father. Isa. 64.8. And (...) we being evil, know how to give
good gifts to our children, and should be worse than Infidels, if we did not
provide for them, how much more shall our heavenly Father take care of his
children? Yea, he is the Husband of his People, Isa. 54.5. For thy Maker is
thine Husband; from him they may expect, and to him they may seek for
protection. Abraham was called, the friend of God, Jam. 2.23. He is their
Master, and they are his Servants; their King, and they his Subjects. Now, no
Master but will maintain his Servant in the work he does for him, and by his
order and appointment, he will always maintain the cause of his Servants.
Princes will defend their Subjects in the way of their duty and allegiance.
This is the Churches Argument in her prayer for mercy, Psalm. 44.4. Thou art my
King, O God, command deliverances for Jacob. Yea, this is a firm conclusion of
her faith, Isa. 33.22. The Lord is o^ Judge, our Lawgiver, our King, he will
save (...) They are styled his portion and heritage, Isa. 54.1^ Deuteronomy. 32.9. As
he is their, so they his portion and he will not suffer that to be wasted and
e^bezelled. His Jewels, in comparison of whom a^ the world besides are but as
so much lumbe^ Mal. 3.17. He will not admit their spoil o^ plunder. His Turtle,
Psalm. 74.19. which has a^waies a sympathy with its mates affliction. Hi^
beloved favorites, for whom he has a choic^ respect, and endeared affection,
in whom h^ takes singular delight and complacency, Psa^ 18.19. and 60.5. Their
heart is set on God, and his heart on them; and because he loves them, he
compasses them with favor as with a shield* Psalm. 5.12. The apple of his eye,
Zach. 2.8. Now as the eye is the tenderest part of the body, so is the apple of
the eye. They are his hidden ones, for privacy and value, worth and excellency;
more excellent than their neighbors, the least, meanest of them more worth
than all the world; a people of whom the world is not worthy, Heb. 11.38. His
precious ones, Isa. 43.4. In comparison of whom, all other are but vile in his
account. His holy ones, Psalm. 86.2. which he will not suffer the world to
profane. His chosen ones, or the people of his choice: The Lord has chosen
Jacob unto himself, and Israel for his peculiar Treasure, Psalm. 135.4. His
redeemed ones, or the people of his purchase, Isa. 43.3. which he will in no
wise lose, either by fraud or violence; his Garden or Paradise, wherein he
delights, Isa. 58.18. His Vineyard, which he both ^^ters, and watches every
moment, Isa. 27.3. (...) a word, his Jacob and Israel, against whom ^^ere is no
enchantment or divination, Numb. 13. and the work of his hands, which he will
in ^o case forsake, Psalm. 138. ult. And concerning which he will not only be
entreated, but also com^anded, Isa. 45.11. There is a mutual interest ^^d
propriety between God and his People. God ^^th made over himself to them in the
Covenant (...) Grace, and they have reobliged themselves to (...). They are
said to have surrendered or given ^o themselves to the Lord, 2 Cor. 8.5. He
shall ^^^se our inheritance for us, says the Psalmist, ^sal. 47.4. They have a
stock of prayers going ^^th God, and he has a stock of mercy and ^ory going
with them: Their interests are so ^^ited, and twisted together, as they cannot
be ^^vered. His cause is concerned in his People, ^^d his own honor highly
engaged upon their ^ccount; yea, the vindication of all his Attri^utes, his
Power, Wisdom, Holiness, Mercy and Goodness, Truth and Faithfulness is obliged
in their sublevation, which else would be wholly ^^^t, and utterly impaired in
the world. They ^re so linked in an holy league, and sacred con^^deracy with
him; That it is observable in their addresses to him in prayer against their
^nemies, they level them as against Gods interest, and not their own; and all
they need request is, only that God may be glorified. So Da^id, Psalm. 83.2. Lo,
thine enemies make a tumult; and they that hate thee have lift up the head. He
doubts not to call his, Gods enemies. And so Asa in his solemn supplications
put up to God o^ the approach of that innumerable host against him 2 Chronicles.
14.11. O Lord (says he) thou art (...) God, let not man prevail against thee.
Not us, bu^ thee. As Gods glory is bound up in the sam^ bundle with his Peoples
eternal, so is it also wit^ their temporal salvation.

Secondly, In respect of the manifold Promise and Engagements he has made to
them. Go^ has engaged for their security, and boun^^ himself for their
protection, as well as the provision, so far as is necessary. They are styled
The People of his Covenant, Psalm. 111.12. And the stipulation is mutual. They
are in covenan^ with God, obliged to his service, and devoted t^ his fear. O
Lord, truly I am thy Servant, I a^ thy Servant (says David) Psalm. 116.16. They
are engaged to walk in his ways, and to be foun^ faithful. And God is a God in
covenant wit^ them; and as they never leave him, so will he never leave them in
their enemies hand, Psalm. 37.33* As they defend his glory, so will he their
intere^^ and cause. If God be a God keeping Covenant even with them, while in
lesser things they some times break with him, ( Psalm. 89 34.) Much more will he
keep Covenant with them while a^ they fear him. Though salvation be far from
the wicked, his salvation is with them that fear him* And as they are included
in a general Covenant so have they entailed upon them many graciou^ promises of
special protection. He has said He will never leave nor forsake them, Heb.
13.5* The same promise he made to all Israel, Deuteronomy. 31.8. and made good to
Joshua in person, he also accomplisheth to all Believers; He will not for^^ke
his People, or cast off his Inheritance. He will have compassion on his
dewlling place; he will comfort Sion, and choose Jerusalem. They have Gods
promise for help and deliverance in the day of trouble, Psalm. 50.15. which is
good security. They are under a reserved promise, under the Judgments of
Sword, Famine or Pestilence, Amos 9.8. Isa. 33. Psalm. 91.10. Which kind of
promises, though not absolute engagements, yet are seasonable directions, and
comfortable encouragements (...) times of calamity and affliction. They are
always prisoners of hope; for by the blood of the Covenant God will send them
out of the pit wherein there is no water, Zach. 9.11. Covenants of old were
confirmed by Sacrifices, Psalm. 50.5. Jer. 34. Et caesa jungebant faedera porca.
-- Virgil -- The Lord Jesus Christ by the blood of his Covenant has bought
outward and common, as well as saving and eternal mercies for his People.

Thirdly, In regard of those conditions of obtaining Divine Help, which are
ever found in them. They are under a fitness and aptitude of disposition to
receive it. There are four conditions or qualifications especially, which make
them meet for this divine influence, which are to be found in them.

The first is of Humility, or spiritual Poverty, Psalm. 34.8. The Lord is nigh
to them that are of a broken heart, and saves them that be of a contrite
spirit. He beholds the proud afar off, as scorning his tuition; but he
graciously beholds the humble, Isa. 66.2. In him the fatherless find mercy. A
Father of the fatherless, and Judge of the Widow is he out of his holy
habitation, Psalm. 68.5, 6. The Lord helps those that are cast down. The Lion
puts (as it were) into his bosom those that bow before him, or he down at his
feet, but tears in pieces them that run away from him, or bid resistance to
him; so generous and noble is his nature and disposition, satis est prostrasse
-- And so do^s the Lion of the Tribe of Judah, he is a Lion to lofty and sturdy
sinners, but a Lamb to depressed and dejected souls. Such as advance themselves
to the Throne, God brings down to the footstool, but to those that patiently
bear the Cross, he reaches forth the Crown. He revives the spirits of the
humble, and the hearts of the contrite ones.

Secondly, Prayer and Invocation. Gods People are a praying people, a
generation of seekers, and such commonly are speeders. God sends none away that
so come to him with a non inventus: He never said to the seed of Jacob, seek ye
my face in vain. They seek his face, righteousness and strength, and he is
found of them. When Jehosaphat was compassed about with the Syrian Host, and
had no way to fly but up to Heaven; he cries to the Lord, and he helped him, 2 Chronicles. 18.31. The Saints alone betake themselves to God and his help, run to
him as their Sanctuary; others fly from Gods presence, run to the Rocks, and
the tops of the ragged Rocks, call to the hills and the mountains; but a child
of God goes only and tells his Father, and before him lays open his cause. As
good Hezekiah did, when Rabshaketh came out against him, O Lord, I am
oppressed, undertake for me, or the Church, Isa. 33.2. Be thou our Arm every
morning, and our salvation in the time of trouble. They only sensibly need, and
so alone crave and implore divine succor. And God will not suffer his People
to lose the precious treasure of their prayers, Psalm. 145.18, 19. The Lord is
nigh unto all them that call upon him; to all that call upon him in truth. He
will fulfill the desire of them that fear him; he will also hear their cry, and
save them. So Psalm. 91.14, 15. Because he has set his love upon me, therefore
will I deliver him: I will set him on high, because he has known my Name, he
shall call upon me, and I will answer him -- That God who prepares his Peoples
heart to pray, prepares also his own ear to hear; and he that promises to hear
before we call, will never deny to hearken, when we cry unto him. Ideo
premuntur justi, ut pressi clament, clamantes exaudiantur, says Calvin.
Oppressions and afflictions make man cry, and cries and supplications make God
hear, Psalm. 141.1, 2. -- Spreading forth our hands in believing and servent
prayer, is the only way of grasping mercy. God has given full assurance by
promise, of grants on such applications even under the inffliction of the
greatest judgments and calamities, 1 King. 8 37. 2 Chronicles. 6.28. -- If public
mercy does not, yet particular at least always follows as an answer of prayer,
Psalm. 32.6. For this shall every one that is godly pray unto thee in a time
when thou may be found: There Is the voice of prayer: What is the Echo of
mercy appears in the very next words, Surely in the floods of great waters they
shall not come nigh to him.

Thirdly, Faith and dependence on God, and expectation from him. He that comes
unto God (and goes not away as he comes sad from his presence) must believe
that he is, and that he is a rewarder of them that diligently seek him. It Is
the periphrasis that David describes him by, The Savior of them that trust in
him, Psalm. 17.7. In this hope and confidence the Prophet places man's
blessedness, Jer. 17.7. Blessed is the man that trusts in the Lord, whose
hope the Lord is. The Lord is a buckler to them that trust in him, Psalm. 18.30.
God is to his People whatsoever by faith they make him: Faith makes all that is
in God a man's own; it engages all Gods Attributes, and sets them at work for
his People; it obliges him in point of honor to come in for their relief: Who
will be found so unworthy as to fail them that trust to him? If a friend trust
to us for supply, counsel, assistance, we will by no means disappoint him. Nay,
if an enemy delivers himself up into our hands, and confides in us for
secrecy, we will not be so disingenuous as to betray him; much less will God
ever prove unfaithful to us, while we are faithful to him. Faith calls in help
from Heaven; it says to God as the men of Macedonia to Paul, Come over and
help us. God is known in her Palaces to be a refuge. Our Fathers trusted in
thee, and were not confounded, Psalm. 22.5. Unbelief hinders establishment, but
Faith ushers in prosperity. It Is a riddle to Philosophy to fetch strength from
another to undergo a burden; but Faith has a secret virtue to fetch strength
from God, either as to doing good, or bearing evil. The Lord takes pleasure in
them that fear him, that hope in his mercy, Psalm. 147.11. He is a Sun and
Shield to them that trust in him, Psalm. 84.12. Hope in him never makes the soul
ashamed. God never forsakes such as are dependants (by faith) upon him: They
that trust in him, shall never become desolate. David urges this frequently in
this book of Psalms for help and protection, Psalm. 57.1. Be merciful to me, O
God, for my soul trusts in thee, Psalm. 86.2. Psalm. 7.1.
O thou my God, save thy Servant that trusts in thee. So Psalm. 71.1. In thee,
O Lord, do I put my trust, let me never be put to confusion. It Is observable,
that Gods being a rock and a refuge are joined in Scripture, Psalm. 46.1. God is
his Peoples refuge which they fly to, their habitation they continually resort
to, and therefore he becomes their help. Though creatures are broken reeds, and
cracked cisterns, yet God was never a broken staff, a dry and barren wilderness
to his People. Now Gods children are not only an humble and a praying, but a
believing and depending people. As the child hangs on its Mothers breasts; so
do his children on their Fathers bowels. We find holy David usually professing
his confidence in his God, Psalm. 62.1. Truly my soul waits upon God; from him
comes my salvation. And so verse 5. My soul, wait thou only upon God; for my
expectation is from him. The Lord is my strength, and therefore is become my
salvation, Psalm. 118.14. The People of God know his Name, and therefore will
trust in him, Psalm. 9.10. They are a people who will not lie, by falseness to
their profession and principles, or vain confidence in second causes, or
creature comforts; a poor afflicted people, that trust in the Name of the Lord,
that will not lie, nor do iniquity, Zeph. 3.12, 13. The hypocrite leans on his
house, as Job speaks, his parts, privileges, profession, common grace. The
wicked man trusts in chariots and horses, armies and navies, his riches and
revenues, power and carnal policies, shifts and devices, friends, wit, or
wealth, Psalm. 49. But what says the pious and devout soul? he breaths forth
himself in David's dialect, Psalm. 20.7. Some trast in chariots and in horses,
but we will remember the Name of the Lord. A Saint leans only on the staff of
Jacob, the holy one of Israel; he has no other string to the bow of his trust,
but God alone; he expects help no where, but from Heaven: Thou art my hope,
(says Jeremiah) in the day of evil, Jer. 17.17. God is by right the confidence
of the ends of the earth, but by act, the sole dependence of his People. They
trust in him at all times, and pour forth their hearts before him. Even under
the most dismaying providence, which strike amazement into others hearts, and
dejection into their countenances; yea, set the world into an uproar and
combustion; under his skirt do their souls trust.

Fourthly, Waiting and attendance upon him. Gods People are attendants at the
Court of Heaven, always waiting at the elbow of the Almighty. As they are a
praying, so a waiting people; when they have sent out the Dove of prayer, they
wait for her return with an Olive Branch in her mouth: when they have sent
forth the ship of supplication, they stand like Merchants on the shore,
expecting her return, full fraught with heavenly treasure. They wait upon the
God of Jacob, and look toward him: They hearken and hear what God speaks,
having spoken, attend the Echo, and dispatched their letters, look for an
answer. Now eye has not seen, no ear heard, nor can the heart of man conceive,
what God has prepared for them that wait for him, Isa. 64. God waits to be
gracious to them that wait for hun, Isa. 30.18. Such as wait on him, with
submission and resignation to his will and pleasure, due respect to his glory,
and patient resolution till he shows mercy, shall never lose their labor. When
David's eyes attend his God, as the eyes of a Servant look to the hand of his
Master, and a Maiden to the hand of her Mistress, he is sure of receiving some
gift of mercy from hun, Psalm. 123.2. When his soul waits for the Lord, more
than they that watch for the morning, the San of divine goodness will certainly
rise, break forth, and shine upon him, Psalm. 130.6. God inclines to the soul
that waits patiently for him; none ever waited on him in vain. Saints always
get something by praying, but by waiting they gain double. The still child
shall have two breads. When the Church resolves once to wait, God soon
resolves, she shall wait no longer, but of an expectant, makes her an enjoyer,
Micah 7.7, 9. The Prince soon gives ear to the Favorite, who continues to give
him attendance, and the Advocate delays not to plead the Clients Cause, who
will not away from his Chamber door, but determines to ply him with his
over-eager solicitations; yea, the longer it be, before the ship of faith and
prayer returns, when it once comes home, it is the more richly laden, and
brings him a double venture: The Church found it so, when she came home top and
top-gallant with her sails of triumph, Isa. 25.9. Lo, this is our God, we have
waited for him, and he will save us: This is the Lord, we have waited for him,
we will be glad and rejoice in his salvation. The needy shall not always be
forgotten, nor the expectation of the poor perish for ever.

Fourthly, In respect of that encouragement in his service, which he would have
his receive from him, even against the wicked, who do not serve him. The Lord
takes part with his People, and helps them against the world, that hate both
him and them, Psalm. 118.11. When most the object of men's envy and malignity,
they have most of Gods love and affection: when outcasts to their Brethren,
they are received into their Fathers arms. God would have the wicked
discouraged in their way of rebellion, and his People encouraged in the way of
duty. And by this they know he favors them, because their enemies do not
triumph over them, Psalm. 41.11. Did not God take in with his People, and stand
by them, the uncircumcised would triumph, and the Saints be disspirited and
despondent: he assigns this therefore as the reason, why he would not contend
for ever with them, lest their adversaries should carry it strangely, Deuteronomy.
32.27. and their spirits fall into a desperate succumbency, Isa. 57.16. Now
when he pours contempt on their haughtiness, and advances the poor on high from
affliction, the righteous rejoice, and all iniquity stops her mouth, Psalm.
107.42. On which very account David solicits help, Psalm. 109.26, 27, 29. that
his adversaries might be clothed with shame, and cover themselves with their
own confusion as with a Mantle; while the righteous are glad in the Lord, and
trust in him, and all the upright in heart do glory. The Master sometimes
siniles on the dilig^nt and faithful Servant, as to encourage him in his duty,
so to discourage the negligent in his laziness; and the Prince shines on his
Subject, as to countenance him in his loyalty and allegiance, so to dishearten
the Traitor in his Treason and Rebellion.

Fifthly, In regard of that just return and due improvement of his help, which
he receives from them. They are those alone who will praise and magnify,
extol and lift up the Name of the God of Jacob. Being their strength, he
becomes their Song, and their Praise. Hear holy Jeremiah proclaiming him upon
this Experience. Jer. 17.14. O Lord, my strength, and my fortress, and my
refuge in the day of affliction. And so our David before him. Psalm. 18.1. O
Lord, my rock, my strength, my fortress, and my deliverer, my God, my Buckler,
the horn of my salvation, and my high Tower. And Moses before them both. Exodus
15.2. When the Egyptians were drowned, and Israel preserved, he cants forth a
most heavenly Doxology. The Lord is my strength and song, and he is become my
salvation: he is my God, and I will prepare him an babitation, my Fathers God,
and I will exalt him. What the Saints win by prayer, they always wear by
Thankfulness; what they receive in Mercy, they return in Duty. Where there is
gratiarum decursus, there is also gratiarum recursus. Let favor be showed to
the wicked, and he will deal injustly: The shines of Mercy which draw out the
fragrancy of the Saints graces, raise but a greater stench from the dunghill of
his corruptions. They sacrifice to their own Nets, and say, their own arm has
saved them. But the Church gives other language, Psalm. 44.3. Thy right hand,
and thine arm, and the light of thy countenance; because thou had a favor to
them. Let God grant the Jews deliverance from the yoke of cruel and bloody
Masters, and give them free entertainment in his Service, they will wear the
Livery of Joy and Gladness, and with their best Ornament of a grateful
Affection celebrate to future Posterity the Anniversary Solemnity of this good
day of their deliverance. As Gods People go to him alone, and offer a
sin-offering in the day of their misery and calamity, so they return to him
only with a Peace Offering in the day of their mercy and comfort. They give
unto the Lord the glory due to his Name, and what they want in outward
expression is abundantly supplied in inward affection and admiration. He
becomes their praise, because he is their Salvation; yea, their boast and
triumph all the day long: They make mention of his Name, and his Righteousness,
and that only. Neither do they with the profane Israelites sing his Praises,
and forget his works, but as they talk honorably, so they, and they alone walk
worthy of his help, (and so in a comparative sense may be said to deserve it.)
They abuse not the goodness of God (as wicked men do, who sound all their
Mercies upon their lusts, and sacrifice them to their own sensuality;) but
duly improve it, by ordering their Conversations aright; returning all the
shines of mercy by reflections of obedience, doing justly, and walking humbly
with their God; offering up themselves back to him as a living, holy and
acceptable sacrifice, as their (...), their reasonable service: Thereby
bringing themselves within the compass of his gracious promises, of seeing his
great salvation, and having the effect of righteousness to them quietness, and
peace and assurance for ever. Thus holy David professes and resolves, Psalm.
116.8, 9. Thou have delivered my soul from death, mine eyes from tears, and my
feet from falling. I will walk before the Lord in the Land of the living. And
so much for the first particular, The Communication of Gods help to his people.

The Second follows, viz. The manner of its conveyance to his people. Not as
the God of Nature, or of the World, but as the God of Jacob. And indeed, God in
a way of Covenant, or as Jacob's God, is the cause and fountain of all good and
mercy to his people: All their blessing comes not by way of common Providence,
but special Covenant. Their Corn, Wine and Oil are Appendices thereunto. They
have the comforts of this, and hopes of the next life, the blessings of the
Throne and Footstool, of Gods hand and heart too, by way of promise. Although
my House be not so with God, (says the sweet singer of Israel in his dying
Notes, 2 Samuel 23.5.) yet he has made with me an everlasting Covenant, ordered
in all things and sure: For this is all my salvation, and all my desire. -- All
the sweet streams of mercy to a Believer come swimming through the Channel o^
their Saviors blood, and his comforts are al^ sifted and strained through the
Covenant of grace^ so as they lose their bran and dreggs, and are infinitely
more sweet and refreshing. This very consideration both sweetens and sanctifies
all Others Gardens are watered by the foot, as the Land of Egypt was by the
River Nilus, but they are watered from Heaven. Deuteronomy. 11.11. The sweet hony-dews
of mercy drop into their mouths from Heaven, and while they open them wide, God
fills them. This gives a sweeter taste, a better tenure (a title in Capite)
creates a sanctified use, and confirms to them their assurance of a supply:
others may possibly, they certainly shall have help and comfort. So that the
application of this special relation is a great advantage and fortisication to
Gods peoples Faith. And indeed so intended here. The Psalmist here gives him
this title, to persuade us to a more firm dependence upon him, and lay us in
with a surer ground of confidence, than is to be had, or found in all things
besides either in Heaven, or Earth. And upon this very score does God usually
reveal himself by that Name, and his People ordinarily behold him under that
notion, in Scripture. Not to multiply places, take one which may be instar
omnium, Psalm. 20.1. where the Church thus accents her Benediction. The Lord
hear thee in the day of trouble, the Name of the God of Jacob defend thee.
Where she makes it a kind of an Holy Spell to chase away all her Enemies, and
expel her Adversaries. But so much for the first general branch of the words.
The Thing implied.

The Second follows, something expressed, which is The Happiness in having God
for our Help. This is delivered positively, and also comparatively.

First, Positively and absolutely, in it self. And so therein are two things
considerable. 1. A Benedictory Conclusion or Affirmation, a sentence of
blessing pronounced. Happy is he -- 2. Its limitation affixed or annexed, in
the peculiar appropriation, expressed in the possessive His. His help -- Here
is the Saints great privilege with their singular propriety. Their privilege
in having God as an Help: Their peculiarity in having him as their help. -- To
begin with the first. The Benediction affirmed. Happy is he -- and that hints
to us two Observations, one more general, the other more particular.

First, That the Saints happiness lies only in God, in interest in him, in
union and communion with him. God only is the certain ground, and infallible
foundation of the Saints happiness. Their blessedness lies not in having such
relations to men, or influence from the World, but in their acquaintance with,
and experience of God. The Psalmist has laid down an irrefragable Conclusion
as to this, Psalm. 144. ult. when he had given in an account of the Worlds value
and Estimate as to Happiness, or taken a survey of the perfections of all
Creatures, and their most promising looks of felicity, so as he cries out,
Happy are the People which are in such a Case, having hopeful and beautiful
Children, full Provisions, secure Dwellings, by an holy Epanorthosis he
corrects himself, yea happy is that people (says he) whose God is the Lord.
This is eternal life, happiness in the beginning, and perfection too, to know
God in Jesus Christ. Happiness is not bound up in the Creature, or the bundle
of Creature-enjoyments, riches may serve for the owners hurt, and not for their
good, and as they may render a man occasionally sinful, so they may leave him
finally miserable. David beggs deliverance from such a mercy (as a man in an
agony, or at the brink of the pit of destruction) Deliver me from men whose
portion is in this life, Psalm. 17.14. from their persecutions, and also from
their fruitions and enjoyments, as appears by the sequel of his supplication.
There Is no blessedness in having the World for our God, but in having the Lord
for our God. A man may (with the Be) wander from Flower to Flower, from one
Creature-enjoyment to another, and yet find no sweetness or satisfaction. It Is
only safe blessing our selves in the God of Truth. Isa. 65.16. Such as rejoice
in the World, rejoice in a thing of naught. Amos 6.13. It Is he alone that made
us, who can make us happy, and that gave satisfaction for us, who can give
satisfaction to us: And though we had never so large handfulls of the World, if
we have not our hearts full of God and Christ, we are far from true happiness.
Three things are requisite for the completing of true Felicity, the
conjunction whereof is that which renders the Soul happy, and in the want
whereof it must be found completely miserable: Sufficiency and perfection,
proportion, and perpetuity or duration; and these are only found to center in
God himself, who is God self and all-sufficient, the portion of his peoples
Souls, and God from everlasting to everlasting, the Alpha and Omega, who has
neither beginning of days, nor end of life, but is the same yesterday, to day,
to mornow, and for ever. But this is only implied. --

Secondly, and more particularly with reference to the chief scope and
intendment of the Text, (as the notion of help speaks a relation to the
circumstances of an evil time) a time of disappointment and affliction,)
observe,

That the supreme, yea sole ground of comfort and confidence in an evil day (a
day wherein a soul needs ^elp) is interest in God. O thrice happy is that Soul
that in any day, especially in a day of trouble and affliction, has God for
his Help. This was all the Music of David's Joy, when on the top of the waters
of distress, and outward disconsolation. This was his sole encouragement, that
spoke well to his Soul, when all things seemed to look asquint on him, and be
against him. 1 Samuel 30.6. This was the only surviving hope of the Prophet
Jeremiah in the day of evil. This was the alone remaining prop of the Churches
Consolation in times of greatest persecution, Mic. 7. and depopulation, Hub. 3.
This was the ground of her acclamations under all worldly disturbances and
commotions. The Lord of Hosts is with us, the God of Jacob is our resuge, Psalm.
46.7. Now the verity of this point will appear, and be made good from a double
consideration: Both from the Nature of God, and also the manner, or the
peculiar properties of that Help he affords his people.

First, From the Nature of God, who is his Peoples Helper. Now (amongst many
other) there are four or five things especially considerable in God, which
bespeak the Saints happiness interested in him, in an evil day.

First, The Infiniteness of his Being, Isa. 40.12, 13, 14, -- 28, 29. -- All
his Attributes are equal, because they are all infinite. Who has limited the
holy one of Israel, or can confine him that is Eternity? Can thou by
searching find out God? Job 11.7. Though we may know him to salvation, who can
know him to perfection? Creatures are all finite, though never so excelsent,
but his understanding is infinite: His Power, Wisdom, Justice, Holiness, Truth
and Mercy, all carry an infinity with them. He is not measurable by the line of
humane reason, or fathomable by the plummet of any created understanding; but
still we must cry out, (...), O the depth of the riches, both of the wisdom and
knowledge of God! how unsearchable are his judgments, and his ways past
finding out? Romans 11.33. He can do every thing, and no thought can be
withheld from him, Job 42.2. Men can do something, but God can do all
things; he is omniscient, omnipotent, and omnidisponent. Now all the wants and
straits of the creature are but finite, and inter finitum, and infinitum nulla
est proportio; there is no proportion between finite afflictions, and infinite
compassions.

Secondly, The Absoluteness and Independency of his actings. He does whatsoever
he pleases in Heaven, or Earth, or all deep places, Psalm. 135.6. He sits on
the circle of the Heavens, and all the Inhabitants of the earth are but as so
many Grasshoppers before him. All the Inhabitants of the earth are reputed as
nothing; and he does according to his will in the Army of Heaven, and among the
Inhabitants of the earth; and none can stay his hand, or say unto him, what
do thou? There is none (...), absolute and independent, but God only: so
miraculous is his providence, as he does great things past finding out; yea,
and wonders without number, Job 9.10. All second causes depend on him for their
being, motion and operations, and in every strait and exigency that befalls,
must say as the King to the woman, Except the Lord helps, we cannot help. But
though Heaven acts on haec inferiora, the first cause on the second, it never
goes to the second, while that ever goes to the first. The spring depends not
on the stream, though that depends on the fountain: All created beings depend
upon God, though he depends on no created perfections; but for, through, and to
him are all things. His own arm (when that of the creaturesis quite withered)
can work salvation to him, and his righteousness sustain him.

Thirdly, The Immutability of his purpose and promises. He works all things
according to the counsel of (...) ^wn will. And his decrees issue forth as
between mountains of brass, Zach. 6.1. His counsel shall stand, and he will do
all his pleasure, Isa. 46.10. If he decrees, who can disannul? he cannot lie or
repent, but will perform all he has spoken, his whole word to his Servants.

Fourthly, The Tenderness of his bowels. He has not only, a fullness, and
riches of grace, but exercises a freeness in his operations; and while
creatures act according to desert, he does all from free grace, and has
abundance of compassions^ which are never failing to his People. He i^ (...),
the Father of pities and compassions, and they are all the genuine offspring
o^ uncreated goodness. He has the wisdom of a Father, and the bowels of a
Mother, Isa. 41.15. Mercy is his darling, which pleases him, Mica^ 7.18. The
Benjamin of his delight; he will not always chide, nor be angry for ever. As a
tende^ Shepherd carries his Lambs, so does he his People in his bosom: his
bounty may be seen in his bowels, as in an Anatomy, Hos. 11.8. How shall I give
thee up, O Ephraim! -- mine heart is turned within me, my repentings are
kindled together.

Fifthly, The Eternity of his existence. He is the eternity of Israel, the rock
of ages, and God of all Generations. Creatures are but of yesterday, and must
shortly say to corruption, Thou art our Father, and to the worms, ye are our
Brethren and Sisters: but his years have no end, and endure throughout all
generations. He that builds on him, shall never be ashamed, but have an
everlasting foundation. In the Lord Jehovah, (Isa. 26.4.) is everlasting
strength. So that put all these together, and they must needs speak his People
happy in the worst of times, whose help is laid on such an infinite, immutable,
independent, compassionate, and eternal God, as their only refuge.

Secondly, It Is demonstrable from the manner of his supply and help. And so
their happiness in this their interest appears,

First, A facultate, from his ability to help: he is the Mighty God, yea, the
Almighty, Genesis 17, 1. An able and self-sufficient, yea an Alsufficient God to
his people; he has pleonasms of grace, and can do abundantly, yea,
superabundantly for his, above all they can ask or think, Ephesians. 3.20. He has
not plenitudinem vasis, but fontis; a fullness of redundancy, as well as of
abundance. Does the soul want pardon, he can abundantly pardon; grace, he gives
gifts even to the rebellious; comfort, he is the Father of mercies, and God of
all consolations. He knows our wants, yea and our thoughts long before; and
when we know not what to ask, yet he knows what to give. He is able to help
against sin, its guilt, its strength; against temptations, though Satan be
mighty, he is Almighty, against afflictions from himself, or oppositions from
the world. The shields of the earth are his, and he can weild them as he
pleases, Psalm. 47.9. His very intueri is operari, and one smile of his
beatifical face, is able to create more sollace, than all the frowns of the
world can sadness or discomfort. This was the pillar of Abraham's faith, Romans
4.21. Knowing, what he had promised, he was able to perform --

Secondly, A voluntate. Men oft-times are willing to help, but not able, and
many times able, but not willing; but God is as willing as able. He is always
ready to succor and relieve his People: he is a God that waits to be gracious;
yea, he is already engaged, Call upon me, and I will answer thee.

Thirdly, Ab instantia auxilii, from the presentness and instancy of his help.
He is a present help in time of trouble. Men oppressed often miscarry through
help at a distance, but the Lord is always near at hand to his people: he is
their arm every morning, and in the evening the God of their life. God is in
the midst of her, and she shall not be moved, God shall help her, and that
right early, Psalm. 46.5. I am God, and not man, the holy one of Israel, in the
midst of thee, Hos. 11.9. He comes in the nick, seasonably and opportunely, and
brings salvation (if need be) on the wing, Isa. 31.5. As birds flying, so will
the Lord of Hosts defend Jerusalem; defending also, he will deliver it; and
passing over, he will preserve it. Veni, vidi, vici, is his motto; he is slow
to punishment, but quick to deliverance. Then thou shall call, and the Lord
shall answer, thou shall cry, and he shall say, here I am, Isa. 58.9. He is often
nearest, when he seems furthest off. As he cuts short his work in
righteousness, in respect of the wicked; so he brings near his righteousness to
his People, Isa. 46.13. It shall not be far off, and his salvation shall not
tarry --

Fourthly, A fidelitate, from his faithfulness in helping. The reason of men's
failure, is either want of ability, or want of fidelity; but God is faithful
who has promised. By promising he has made himself a debtor, and he will not
stand always engaged, much less break his promise. His faithfulness cannot
fail. The husband may be unfaithful to the wife, the father to the son, the
Prince to the subject; but God will never be unfaithful to his People. Men may
intend help, but be unexpectedly disappointed, or pretend it, and yet really
hinder; there is often a conjunction of forces, where no union of hearts and
affections. God made the woman to be a meet help to the man; and faithfulness
is one of the principal du^^es that flows from conjugal relations, but yet
^^t-times they prove unfaithful, yea, perfidious, ^s Dalilah did to Sampson;
but God will never ^ail them that trust in him. He keeps truth for ^er, verse.
6.

Fifthly, A constantia, from the perpetuity and ^nchangeableness of his help.
This the Psalmist ^ere adds by way of confirmation of his assertion ^f
blessedness, verse. 10. The Lord shall reign for ^^er -- God always lives and
reigns. Men die, ^one generation comes, another goes, and none ^ayes, (but God
ever lives as the Patron and Pro^ector of his People. The King of Heaven never
^ies; under all the changes and vicissitudes in this ^wer Region of the world,
he still abides a God, who changes not. He is a standing help, to which ^he
soul may go, and resort on all occasions, Psalm. ^1.2. He will not forsake the
work of his hands; ^he is a never fading and failing refuge. Nevertheless
(says the Psalmist) I am continually with thee; ^hou have holden me by my
right hand. Thou shall ^uide me with thy counsel, and afterward receive ^e to
glory, Psalm. 73.23, 24. We may let go our ^old of God, but he will never let go
his hold of ^s; by his grace we are kept from falling, and ^y his mighty power
((...)) are guarded to salvation. Let the Psalmists inference conclude this
point, Psalm. 48. ult. For this God is our God for ever and ever; he will be our
guide even unto death.

And so much for the privilege, or the blessing pronounced.

Secondly, Follows the propriety, or benedidiction applied, in this pronoun his
-- his help -- whence observe,

First, A Saint, and he alone has a special interest and propriety in God.
Others may have a common, but they only a saving interest. God may give the men
of the world something from himself, but he has made himself only over to his
People. They may call all their own but God, but these can call God theirs,
when they have nothing else. Abraham gave the Sons of Keturah portions, but
reserved Isaac the Inheritance, Jehosaphat gave his other Sons gifts, but
Jehoram the Kingdom. The earth God has given to the children of men, but the
Lord is the portion of his Peoples Inheritance, Psalm. 16.5. Influence flows
from interest, and interest flows only from union. O God (says David) my God:
Thou art my God, and I will praise thee. He, who is the God and Father of our
Lord Jesus Christ, is in him their God and Father. This new name none knows,
but he that receives it.

Secondly, Observe, Saints only can be just expectants of divine help and
influence. His help and salvation is to them that fear him. Fiducial recumbency
on God flows only from the consideration of our interest in him, and is founded
on this bottom, that he is a God in covenant with us. He is first the God of
Jacob, and then an help; that is the order here. My God, and then my salvation,
Job 13.16. He is a peculiar help to his People. The title he has assumed to
himself, is the God of their salvation. Indeed he is an help to others in a
larger sense, but by way of peculiarity, or singular specialty, the only help
of his elect. They alone are, others are not under any distinguishing promise,
but rather a threatening, Isa. 65..13. Behold (says God) my Servants shall eat,
but ye shall be hungry, my Servants shall drink, but ye shall be thirsty, they
shall rejoice, but ye shall be ashamed. And they only coming within compass of
the promise, and so having a right to the mercy of it, can only j^stly hope,
and confidently expect it. The wicked has no hope. They alone can come with
boldness to the Throne of Grace, and beg it in the time of their need. Wicked
men have no God to go to, and how can they ever hope to come to God in an evil,
who in a good day have run away from him? They alone will walk answerably to
it, and therefore they only shall be the seats and subjects of it. The
worldling indeed may have as large a sail of confidence as a child of God has,
but he has no good ballast of evidence: he may have a general hope in God as
his God and Father, and so call him in prayer and by profession; but dolus in
generalibus: how can he be their Father, when they have not known him: David's
confidence is particular, and conjoined with good evidence, of faith in him,
and love to him, Psalm. 18.1. Cui nomini natura negatur, nomine deluditur. He
that usurps a title to God, without a conformity to his Image, is but
overborn, and imposed upon by a damnable presumption, instead of a grounded
persuasion. The Lord knows who are his, and he that names his name must depart
from iniquity.

The third Proposition is, That propriety in God is the only ground of true
felicity. Happy is he that has him for his help -- That has the Lord for his
God -- Propriety only causes delight Lo, this is our God -- says the Church.
My Lord and my God, cries Thomas. Israel shall cry to me my God, we know thee,
Hos. 8.2. Thou shall call me my Father, says God by way of promise to hi^
Church, Jer. 3.19. When the Spouse would express her complacency and
satisfaction in Christ she says, My Beloved is mine, and I am his. When Christ
would comfort Mary, he tells her, I ascend to your God, and my God. When Paul
would confirm and strengthen his faith, he adds, wh^ loved me, and gave himself
for me. The knowledge of God in himself is terrible. It Is dangerous (says
Luther) to go to an absolute God. It Is only the relative knowledge of him which
affords comfort, ut mea non prosint sine me, sic tua non prosint sine te, says
Bernard. Our Civilians say, Mine is a better tenure than ours. If a man walks
over pleasant Meadows, or in delightful Orchards and Gardens, and cannot say,
they are his, he has no content or comfort in them. If a soul should run over
all the Attributes of God, and the Promises of the Gospel, and the sufferings
of his Savior, and cannot write mine, they are a burden, rather than a
blessing. Propriety and interest is the only certain ground of influence and
mercy. The Promises (indeed) of the Gospel are generally propounded, excluding
none who shut not out themselves by their unbelief; but withal particular
application is pressed, that none might rest in the naked notion, without
peculiar appropriation: hanging on the outside of the Promise will do us no
more good, than did them their hanging on the outside of the Ark. The most
sovereign Plaster heals not, if not applied; nor does the most delicious meat
nourish, unless eaten and concocted. If ye eat my flesh, and drink my blood,
then ye have eternal life dwelling in you. Snatching at the Promise, without
union with the Person, is altogether as unavailable to comfort the soul, as
that phrenetick persons challenge of all the ships that came to shore was to
enrich him, when he had interest in none of them. Or as a Cheaters catch of an
heiresses writings is to entitle him to her estate, without marriage to her
person. It Is a good observation Bernard has on that passage of the Church,
Isa. 26.9. With our soul in the night have we desired thee -- She says not
tua, but te. The gracious soul surrenders it self up to God in a way of duty,
saying, Lord, I am thine: and applies God to himself in a way of mercy, crying
out,, Lord, thou art mine. If Solomon's Servants were counted by the Queen of
Sheba happy in enjoying not so much his Court, as his company and presence,
then are the Saints much more to be esteemed blessed, not so much in the
fruition of the bare Promises, as in the vision of their Fathers face in and
through them. Blessed are they that dwell in his house, whose strength is in
him. Blessed are the people that hear the joyful sound, that walk in the light
of his countenance. The union between the King of Heaven and his Subjects, and
holy confederation, is the rise of all their privilege and protection.

Fourthly, Observe, They alone can expect help from God, that exercise in times
of strait and afflictions, a fiducial recumbency upon him. That is gathered
from the phrase or form of the words. Qui ponit in auxilium. There Is a tacit
condition annexed, placing our help in God; plainly implying, That it is not the
bare habit, but the act and exercise of faith, that entitles the soul to divine
help, and so makes a man blessed and happy in evil times, times of
disappointment or dereliction, any trouble or affliction whatsoever. The
Promise runs to the act of faith. As ye may find it expressed to the life,
Psalm. 91.10. Because thou have made the Lord (who is my refuge) even the most
high thy habitation -- And indeed faith alone is that which makes use of Gods
Attributes in time of distress. The habit of faith indeed interests in them,
and makes them our own, but the exercise thereof draws them forth into act;
that engages God only in point of honor to come in for relief, even our firm
dependence on him. What will all the treasures of Gods Power, Wisdom, Mercy and
Goodness serve to enrich the the soul, if locked up by unbelief? no more than a
man's baggs, who never trades or imploys them. It Is not interest, but use of God
does the soul good. Indeed that delivers from eternal trouble, but this only
supports under temporal. What good does a rest or leaner do a man under his
burden, if he never stays himself on it? or a sword or shield in a battle, if
he never draws the one, or holds forth the other? or a sanctuary and shelter in
a storm, if a man never runs to it, and houses himself in it? what benefit of a
friend, if a man never makes use of him in his strait? little or no sweetness
or consolation is to be found in any thing in God, his Attributes, Promises, or
Providence, if we let them be dead and rust by us, and draw not out the virtue
of them by faith. It Is grace exercised only, which pleases God, and also
profits us. If we do not recumbere, we must succumbere. The Name of the Lord is
a strong Tower, but only they which run to it are safe. And therefore the
Prophet advises this dependence on God as the only antidote against dedolency
and desperacy in dark conditions, and under sad apprehensions, Isa. 50.10. Let
him that sits in darkness, and sees no light, trust in the Name of the Lord,
and stay himself upon his God.

And so much for the absolute consideration.

Secondly, Take a comparative view of it. For the Psalmist having been eying of
creature-helps and succors, turns away his eyes from beholding vanity; by a
sudden Apostrophy looks wholly off the creature to God, and while engaged in
that aspect, he resolutely and confidently opposes his manutenence to all
humane helps within view considered. And if we take notice of it in that
opposition, or contradiction to those objects wherein wicked men usually place
their happiness, it will suggest to us these two Observations.

First, The excellency of God is much illustrated by the consideration of the
vanity of the creature. These are Chrystal-glasses, which set one against
another, reflect a mutual light one to the other. The Word of God is a true
prospective, at the one end whereof, if we look, we shall see the world as a
little molehill, at the other, God as a vast and great mountain: Indeed the
glass of created perfections represents God, (as the Moon do^^ the Sun) when
they stand in conjunction with and subordination to him; (his invisible glory
and excellency is legible in the book of the Creatures,) but they do but darken
his beauty when standing in opposition against him: And so do'^ he theirs. The
greater light extinguishes the less, Lord how soon did those joys vanish, when
thou did i^ once enter into my Soul, who art clearer than the Sun, and purer
than the Light it self; says Austin. The black-spots of Creature-deficiency
set off the white colors of divine p^rfection with a most orient and
beautiful luster. As the sight of our sin appears most full in the glass of
his purity and Holiness; so that of our Vanity in the glass of his Fullness, and
of our misery in that of his glory and happiness. Gods fullness and our
emptiness mutually illustrate one another.

Secondly, If we observe the words as brought in by way of opposition or
comparison; so they speak an excellency in the enjoyment of God above all
Creatures, and a felicity in his Help above all humane help:

First, Here is implied a comparison between God himself and the Creature, even
the best of them, and so the Psalmist speaks him a God which has a prelation
and pre-eminence to all Creatures in their highest attainment and most glorious
advances. The Souls happiness in the enjoyment of God is superexcellent and
transcendent to what is to be found, and had in the Creature. The Saints
enjoying God are more happy, blessed far above wicked men, who only enjoy the
World: The one bears no proportion to the other. We find David making out the
comparison between the Portions of his hand, and the Vision of his Face, Psalm.
4.7. and Psalm. 17.14, 15. and how does that cast the balance without all
contradiction? Lord, lift up the light of thy Countenance -- Thou have put more
gladness into my heart -- As for me, I will behold thy face in righteousness --
The Kings favor is to be preferred beyond his gifts. Chrysantas's Kiss exceeds
Artabarus's golden Wedge. Let him kiss me with the kisses of his mouth (says
the Spouse) his love is better than Wine, Cant. 1.2. Cursed is he (says that
noble Convert) who preferrs not an hours communion with God before all the
treasures of the World. When as once Charles the fifth by his Herald defied
the King of France, under his multiplied titles, Emperor of Germany, King of
Castile, Leon, Arragon, and Naples, Archduke of Austria, etc. Francis the
First returns his challenge only with the repetition of France as often as might
answer his petty Principalities; intimating that one France was more valuable
than them all. And does not David oppose his Interest in God to all the World,
when he had taken a full survey of all its glittering glory and bravery, even
to envy, Whom have I in Heaven but thee? -- God was beyond, and infinitely
better than Relations, Estates, Friends, Pleasures, Honors, Life, Earth, yea
Heaven it self, than all in his refined and raised apprehensions: Mallem in
Gehenna esse cum te, quam in Coelo sine te; Luther says. And indeed God alone
is a real, solid and substantial good, in respect of whom all other are but
false, counterfeit and deceitful. Imaginaria in saeculo and nihil very, says
Tertullian. The World it self is like some persons in it, empty,
shallow-brain'd men, of a flashy, vapouring temper, the less ye know of them,
the more ye value and esteem them; acquaintance with them breeds slight and
contempt of them: But the more we search into God in whom there is a real and
infinite worth, the more excellency our Souls find in him, who is that Puteus
inexhaustus, never to be drawn dry by his Creatures; and in the Conclusion we
must say, not the one half has been found by us. It Is with the World as with a
Picture, the greater distance we stand from it, the better it looks, but the
nigher we draw to God, (as to a beautiful face, and native Complexion,) the
more delectable and desirable aspect. There Is always upon trial, less in the
World, but more in God than we could expect and look for. God is a pure and
refined good, from all the dross and dreggs of imperfection and corruption
which adheres to, or inheres in all Creatures. He is a full and satisfying
good, the ultimate perfection to which all Creatures tend, and wherein all
desires center and find content and satisfaction. Show us the Father, and it
suffices. Nimis avarus animus, cui unicus non sufficit Deus. Bernard. The Sun
refreshes without the Stars illumination. Had a man all the World in hand, his
heart would not be at rest, but (like the Needle touched with the Lodestone,
which is always moving toward the north point) would be inclining to God the
first good, and utmost end. The enjoyment of God fills up all the chinks of a
reasonable Soul, and satisfies him alone in all wants, straits, exigencies and
extremities, though he has nothing of the Creature; but notwithstanding the
greatest confluence or influence of worldly comforts, and Creature
accommodations (which God never made or intended for the Souls satisfaction) in
the midst of its sufficiency, it is in straits, and tantalizeth under its
greatest fullness: All its fruition is but a golden dream of a Feast by one
rockt asleep on the bed of security and self-deceit, which to him once awakened
to right apprehensions, soon vanishes, and determines in a real hunger. Many
have been surfeited by the world, but none sufficed, had too much to do their
Souls good, but who almost ever said, I have enough. To conclude this, (and
dwell no longer on this first branch of the Text) God is (in a word) a durable
and lasting, yea an everlasting good, an enduring substance, a portion to his
for ever. Creature Comforts are colors merely waterish, which a little shower
alters, but divine consolations, as colors laid in Oil, which the greatest
storm will not wear off, or fetch out. Creatures are all standing Ponds, or
cracked Cisterns, soon dried up; but God an ever-running and flowing Fountain;
in whom there is (as the Father speaks) serenitas sine nube, satietas sine
labe, felicitas sine fine, Clearness without cloud, fullness without want,
felicity without end. Yea, as his People are best at last to him, so is he to
them: The World indeed is best at first, but God, at last sweetest to the Soul.
The first tastes of God are exceeding delightful, witness Solomon's Canticles,
when young, and in the prime of his affections. The largest and longest
draughts of the World leave with them a tang of bitterness in the end, witness
his Vanity of Vanities, in the strength of his Experience. The fashion of this
World and all things here below passes away, and no wonder, for all created
beings carry about them principles of self-destruction, but God and his Word
endure for ever.

And as a Saints happiness consists in the enjoyment of God above all things
besides; so is it aggravated by having interest in his help above all humane
help and succor whatsoever. And if we should draw out the comparison at length
(which I shall not for fear of interfering, and too much enlarging) we should
find there were indeed no comparison; And that there were none holy as the
Lord, none such a rock as our God. There is a vast difference, and so
transcendency of divine Help to humane, in respect of its absoluteness and
immediateness: All the help of Creatures is but mediate through the use of
other Causes or Instruments, and but conditional on supposal of divine
concurrence; If he withdraws not his anger, the proud Helpers do stoop under
him, Job 9.13. All Creatures borrow their light from that Sun, derive their
strength from that Arm. Second causes cannot help without the concourse and
influence of the first; Men may pity, but the Lord only can help: But though
they cannot help without him, he can work without them as well as by them. God
and all the Creatures, is no more than God without any of them. All
Creature-help is but secondary, but his is the prime and original. The help of
Creatures is but particular and partial. Some men will assist some persons and
some others; some will help their Friends, and others their Neighbors, or
Dependants, or take in with those that stand, and are on the surer ground, and
stronger side. But God helps all that call upon him, even those which are
fallen down, as well as those that stand upright. Some things will help in some
cases, one thing in wants, another in sickness, a third under dangers: but no
one good thing is to be found in the World, that has in it an universal virtue
and efficacy: but God is a (...), and his grace a catholic remedy under all
trials and troubles, and can succor under less afflictions, and also under
greater; when the troubles of our heart are enlarged, he can enlarge the hand
of his grace, and brings us out of all our distresses. Humane help oft-times is
unconstant and uncertain in the event. Men oft-times will not, oft-times cannot
help, not the Warrier to Victory, or Magistrate to Right and Justice, because
overpowered by the number of enemies or offenders. and commonly fail, when we
stand in greatest necessity thereof: Vain is the help of Man, says the
Psalmist; weak is their help. All the Nations of the Earth, are but as the drop
of a Bucket, and the small dust of the balance, Isa. 40.15. God threatens the
Helpers of Egypt, that they should all be destroyed, Ezekiel. 30.8. and lie down
in the grave with the uncircumcised, cap. 32.21. Ethiopia and Egypt were No 's
strength, and it was infinite, Put and Lubim her helpers, yet she was carried
away into captivity, Nahum 3.9. The Egyptians themselves were Men, and not God,
and their Horses flesh and not spirit; when the Lord stretches out his hand,
both he that helps shall fall, and he that is helped shall fall down, and
they all shall fail together, Isa. 31.3. But God is a sure and impregnable Rock
to his People. In fine, all humane help, as it is but arbitrary, (depending on
the will of God, the highest cause of all things) so it is but temporary. Men
and friends may stand by us, and help us till death, but they are mortal as
well as we, and when either die, we are out of the reach of their help: A gulf
is then fixed between us. None can redeem his Brother, no more than deliver his
own soul from the hand of the grave, Psalm. 49.7. But God is our God even to
death, yea in, and after death, even to all eternity, will never fail or
forsake us, but guide us by his counsel, till he receives us to his glory.

And so I have finished the first general part of the Text, the comfortable
proposition or conclusion. Happy is he that has the God of Jacob for his help.

A word or two of the second general part, and so I shall close all with some
branches of practical application; which is the further explication or
confirmation of the assertion. In these words, Whose hope is in the Lord his
God. Wherein (to pass the connection, which might give us this observation,
That he who would have God, or can justly challenge him for his help, must make
him his hope.

And also the order of the words, describing a godly man, first by his faith in
making God his help, and then by his hope, which notes to us the conjunction
of, with, or the priority or precedence of the grace of faith unto that of
hope, and of believing to expecting. Faith is the Mother, and Hope the
Daughter; the soul first believes, and then hopes in the God of its salvation.
In regard of the habit, as all other graces; so these are infused simul and
semel, being but one and the same cast of that seed of God, which abides in us:
And also in respect of their working and operation, they go hand in hand, they
are as so many links of the same chain, knots in the same garden, all
concatenated and indissolubly twisted together; yea faith and hope, above all
other, are of nearest alliance, and closest companions. Hope is to Faith Fidus
Achates, its faithful and constant friend: yet notwithstanding there is a
priority of order, both as to their being and acting, though none of time,
faith being the primitive grace, challenging the primogeniture in the soul,
having both excellency of dignity, and of strength: This transition of the
Psalmist only hints us the one to be pedissequam to the other; where one goes
before, the other follows, and faith is in the center, hope in the
circumference.

But passing this, I shall take notice only of the matter, and therein consider
these two particulars.

First, The Saints character or description: They are such as hope in the Lord
their God.

Secondly, The Saints charter of happiness on that account, or their reward or
remuneration; Happy are they -- The first is the attribution of hope, as the
distinguishing property, or peculiar specification of Gods People in times of
distress and affliction. And therein we have first, spei exercitium, the act or
exercise of their hope. Secondly, spei fundamentum, the object, whereon their
hope is founded, and whereby it is sustained and supported. The Lord their God.

First, The exercise of hope: That Is the qualification of the persons. And so
we may observe, Gods People are an hoping and expecting people, especially in
evil times is their hope fixed and engaged on God. Thou art my hope, is their
usual language. Hope is the discriminating character of a Christian. This the
Saints have always made profession of, and encouraged themselves unto in the
worst of times, Psalm. 71.5. Says David, Thou art my hope, O Lord God. So Psalm.
141.8. Mine eyes are to thee, O God the Lord, in thee is my trust. So the
Church, Lam. 3.26. It is good that a man should both hope, and quietly wait for
the salvation of the Lord. It Is the commendation of Abraham, the Father of the
faithful, that in hope he believed against hope, Romans 4.18. Their souls depend
wholly upon God, and their expectation is only from him. It Is their
differencing character from the wicked, who are men without hope, Ephesians. 2.12.
Now hope upon a moral account is nothing else, but a passion of the irascible
appetite, about a future good, hard and difficult to be obtained, and yet
possible, because either promised, or proper to us. It Is called future, to
distinguish it from fruition, and also joy; For what a man sees, why does he
yet hope for? Romans 8.24. Its object is also said to be difficult, to
distinguish it from desire and anhelation, yet possible to oppose it to
desperation. Divine hope is no other than an assured looking for, and undoubted
expectation of all promised good things to come, spiritual, temporal and
eternal, on the account of Gods mercy, and Christ's merits, and the outgoing of
the soul toward those apprehended goods. Fear is conversant about evil, but
hope about good. And as it bears a special respect to eternal blessedness, life
and salvation, so a subordinate and inferior to all outward deliverances,
mercies and comforts whatsoever. Faith considers things as true, hope as hard,
though possible, cha^ity as good. Faith looks at the word promising, hope at
the thing promised. Faith and Patience properly respect afflictions, the one
the strength, the other the length of them; hope more strictly the delation of
mercies and blessings. The Saints often have little in hand, but they have much
in hope. It Is the Periphrasis of the Saints, such as hope in the Lord. They
trust in him at all times, an a good day, a day of mercy, when their steps are
anointed with butter and honey, while they ^eat the finest of the Wheat, and
drink the purest blood of the Grape; and in the evil day, either of public or
private calamity, when God hedgeth up their ways with thorns, and writes
bitter things against them; what time they are afraid, they trust in him. They
have spem in imis, and (though tossed to and fro with the waves of sorrow and
discomfort) they can (with the wise Mariner) fasten the anchor of hope, both
in the dark, and the deep, in the God of their salvation. They are always
cleaving to, and depending on God, addressing to him, waiting on, and expecting
from him, looking and longing toward him; and though they want comfort and
assurance, yet they always nourish a secret hope, and (though in a passion
they may cry out, Their hope is perished from the Lord) yet as soon as the fit
is over, they recollect themselves, and say, Why are ye cast down, our souls
hope in God, for we shall yet praise him.

Secondly, The foundation of that hope is here expressed, The Lord their God.
Where we must consider the appellation, The Lord God, and the relation, The
Lord their God.

First, The appellation, The Lord God, Deus est nomen essentiae, Dominus
potest^tis; the one is a name denoting substance, the other power and authority.

Hence observe first, Though a Saint be never s^ happy in the influence of
mercy, yet he still keeps an^ eye to, and maintains a reverential aw of divine
Majesty, Heb. 12. ult. Having received a Kingdom, let us serve him acceptably,
with reverence and godly fear. So 1 Pet. 1.17. If we call him (not Judge) but
Father, let us pass the time of our sojourning in fear. God has so tempered
the discoveries of his greatness, with those of his goodness, as there is
matter for filial fear in the highest exercises of our faith and confidence.

Secondly, Gods power and greatness is a great encouragement of his Peoples
hope in him. Not only his grace and mercy, but his power and ability, is a
stable prop of their says and confidence. Outward greatness proves a
disadvantage to the improvement of worldly interests, and makes men stand at a
distance, but does no way hinder or impeach, but rather help forward divine
interests and accesses. Without an interest in God, indeed the most comfortable
Attributes are terrible, but through that, the most terrible Attributes become
comfortable.

But to pass these; thirdly, Observe, God, and God alone is the object of his
Peoples hope in a day of ^ffliction. He is the confidence of the ends of the
^arth, Psalm. 65.5. The Proph^t st^les him expressly, and by way of emphasis, The
hope of Israel, Jer. ^4.8. He is called, The God of hope, Romans 15.13. ^jctive
as well as effective. He is so in himself, and is People make him so. He is
their hope exclusive, ^^^y. Their ^elp stands only in his Name, Tutius ad Deum
meum quant ad ullum Sanctorum, vel Auge^rum, says Austin, I can go safelier to
my God, ^an either to Saint or Angel. They know the ^anity and emptiness of the
creature, and the ful^ess and alsufficiency of the Creator, and therefor in
his Name will they set up their banners. and he is their hope signanter, by way
of emi^ency, a sufficient help; when there is no hope in ^he creature at the
best, there is hope in God at ^^e worst. A Saints case is never so desperate as
^earth, but it is hopeful as to Heaven.

Now if we would know or inquire, what it is ^^ God, that is the pillar of
their hope, or the ^ject of their confidence, take we an account of (...),
especially in these five particulars.

First, The glory of his Attributes. This was that he proclaimed before M^ses,
for his incourage^ent of him in the conduct of the people upon ^s earnest
request, when his spirit began even to ^ul him, Exodus 34.6. The Lord God,
merciful and ^acious -- This Name of the Lord is a strong ^ower -- The
consideration of his immutability, that he is a God who changes not amidst all
the ^hanges, confusions and revolutions of this lower world, of his
sufficiency, all power belonging to him, Psalm. 62.11. And above all, his never
failing goodness and mercy, truth and faithfulness, is a^ invincible stay and
support to the Christians hope. See holy Jeremiah bearing up himself with the
meditation of his power, Jer. 32.17, 18. A^^ Lord God, behold thou have made
the Heaven an^ the Earth by thy great power, and stretched-o^^ arm -- As he
has infinite wisdom, and knows al^ things, so infinite power, and can do all
things ^ he is wonderful in counsel, and mighty in working. And thus we find
the Church shoring up her reeling and sinking spirits with the stud o^ his
infinite, boundless, and never failing mercy and compassions, Lam. 3.21. This I
recall to my mind, therefore have I hope. Saints hope in his mercy, Psalm.
33.18. The Attributes of God are as so many props and pillars to uphold a
falling soul, as so many shields, which he may bear before him to fence off the
strokes of evil. When they cannot lay hold on a Promise, they may yet lay hold
upon an Attribute; and though they sit in darkness, and see no light, yet may
they stay upon it. One shine of an Attribute in its full luster and glory, is
able to dispel in a moment all those mists of fear, doubt and temptation, which
have overspread the souls Heavens, and cause them utterly to vanish.

Secondly, The merits of his Son: They are also strong pillars of this hope. He
is that mighty one, on whose shoulders God has laid his peoples help, Psalm.
89.19. All fell and became a ruinous heap in Adam, but is repaired by Christ.
It has pleased the Father all fullness should dwell in him, the spirit without
measure, treasures of wisdom and knowledge. And all the grace and mercy of God
runs through the chanel of his blood, whether concerning our eternal or
temporal condition. He is the Savior of all, but especially of them that
believe; with him we have all things, as being entailed upon him; all is yours,
because you are Christ's, 1 Cor. 3. ult. Through the knowledge of him, all
things are given us which pertain to life and godliness: God supplies all our
wants according to the riches of his glory in Christ. He is represented to us
under all possible names of fullness and excellency, to assure us, that
whatsoever we want, may be had in him. He is called light, life, treasure; yea
the Apostle calls his unsearchable riches, Ephesians. 3.8. (...), unfathomable
wealth. It Is reported of the Spanish Ambassador, that when he had beheld the
Duke of Venice's treasury with great admiration, as indeed being the richest in
the world, yet in the end commends his Masters above it, which the auditors
wondering at, and demanding the reason of, he gives this answer, This treasure,
though vast, has a bottom, but my Masters has no bottom, alluding to the
Isles of Mexico, etc. This is much more true of Christ; he has bottomless
treasures of grace and peace, wisdom and holiness, joy and comfort, life and
glory, bliss and happiness, to give out to his members. And (considering help
in the other notion) he is also the most proper and adequate object of our
hope. For him has God exalted a Prince and Savior, not only to dispense out
the gifts of repentance and forgiveness (as Kings do on their inauguration
days) but also has raised him up to be the (...) and deliverer of his People
from the hands of all their enemies: The Redeemer that shall come out of Sion,
to turn away ungodliness from Jacob. He shall raise the Tabernacle of David
that is fallen, and close up the breaches thereof, Act. 15.16. He is called,
Gods strength, Isa. 27.5. His neck (says the Spouse in her description) is
like the Tower of David, builded for an Armoury, whereon there hang a thousand
bucklers, all shields of mighty men, Cant. 4.4. He is the Saints chief helper,
the Antesignanus or standardbearer of the whole Army, or (as we render it) the
chiefest of ten thousand, under whose conduct himself going in the front before
us, we may rout Armies of sins, fears, temptations, men and Devils, though
never so combined or bandied against us: Though they compass us about like
Bees, yet in this name of the Lord may we destroy them. He is a security
against the wrath of God, and against the violence of men also. Says Bernard
sweetly, ubi tuta firmaque requies nisi in vulneribus salvatoris? Every wound
of Christ is a City of Refuge to the pursued soul of a Christian. The
destroying Angel will pass over those who are sprinkled with Christ's blood: The
avenger of blood shall never touch those who are once lodged in this sure
Sanctuary; and they who have the scarlet thread of his merits tied upon their
hearts, are certain of delivery from wrath to come, and being proximi Jovi, are
yet procul a fulmine. This man (says the Evangelical Prophet of him) shall be
as an hiding place from the wind, and a covert from the tempest; as rivers of
water in a dry place, as the shadow of a great rock in a weary Land, Isa. 32.2.
A shelter against colder and battering storms, and a shadow under burning and
scorchsing heats. He comes forth (says the other Prophet) that is to be Ruler
in Israel, from among the least of the thousands of Judah, whose goings forth
have been from of old, from everlasting. And he shall stand and feed in the
strength of the Lord, in ^he Majesty of the name of the Lord his God. And this
man shall be thy peace, when the assyrian shall come into the Land: strength
against, or comfort under his oppression. This was that the Prophet Zachariah
comforts the Church with against the Babylonish captivity, Zach. 9.9, 11, 12.
Rejoice greatly, O Daughter of Sion -- Behold thy King comes unto thee -- And
what follows upon his advent? As for thee also, by the blood of the Covenant, I
have sent forth thy prisoners out of the pit, wherein there is no water; and so
directs them to turn to him that strong hold as prisoners of hope. Never failed
that soul of help, who made Christ his hope. He never will cast out those which
come to him, and citius clavem ab Hercule, none can pluck his sheep out of his
hand.

Thirdly, The relations of the Covenant. Whom should a child trust to for help
but his Father, and the innocent for right but the Judge? This is that the
Prophet pleads all along in times of calamity and trouble, Gods Paternity,
Kingship, conjugal relations, The Church always goes to him under these
relations of a God, a Judge, a King, a Father, an Husband, all which are moving
his bowels of affection; she lays her claim to God as hers on all occasions. I
am thine, says David, save me. So the Church impleads her interest. The Lord
is my portion, therefore will I hope in him. --

Fourthly, The truth and fullness of his Promises. What God has a tongue to
speak, is ou^ duty to have an ear to hear, and heart too to believe, for what
he has spoken with his mouth, he will fulfill with his hand, 2 Samuel 7.24, 25.
Not one thing has failed of all the good things which the Lord your God spoke
concerning you ^ Joshua tells the people, cap. 23.14. And so Solomon blessing
God before the people, thus bespeaks them; there has not failed one word of
all his good promise, 1 King. 8.56. All his Promises are Yea and Amen, made in
Christ, and confirmed, and made good by him. Now the Promises of mercy are sure
footing for our faith, and serve highly to fix and establish our hope. I had
perished (says David) in mine affliction, but that thy word was my hope, Psalm.
119. This gave him comfort. So as he professes at the 114 verse. Thou art my
hiding place, and my shield: I hope in thy word. And so emphatically again,
Psalm. 130.5. I wait for the Lord, my soul does wait: And in his word do I hope.
The Promises are as so many Magazines for relief, Mines for supply, Springs for
consolation, Breasts for refreshment: They are as the clefts of the Rock, and
secret places of the stairs for the souls security and protection. They are as
an anchor of hope, sure and steadfast (as the Apostle elegantly calls them, Heb.
6.19.) which if well fastened, the ship is sure; so that neither wind or wave
can move it. There cannot be more venom in a judgment, than there is balm in a
Promise. This was that bare up David's soul, and Christ too whom he typifies,
even Gods Promise of not leaving his soul in Hell, nor suffering his holy one
to see corruption, Act. 13.35. This upheld Jonas's spirit from sinking under
all his temptations and distractions, and his faith and hope from drowning,
even when his body was swallowed up, he did not throw all overboard, but yet
looked toward his holy Temple, Jonah 2.4. To which the Promises were peculiarly
made. Though the gate of mercy seemed shut, all hopes of pardon cut off,
mountains of opposition stood in the way of his faith, yet he looks up, and by
faith over-looks all; faith in the Promise made him row against wind and tide,
and bear against all the difficulties and disasters of providence, and hope not
only against reason, but sense too, and believe over not bare difficulties, but
seeming impossibilities also. When David was driven out of all hopes of the
Kingdom, so as peremptorily to conclude he was cast out of Gods sight, should
fall by the hand of Saul, and all God had said was but a story, and his Prophet
Samuel a tale, a lie; he recovers himself from under all these wrestlings, and
animates his soul by the remembrance of the Promise; I had fainted but that I
believed, to see the goodness of the Lord in the Land of the Living. Though God
does not always fulfill his threatenings, but revokes them on repentance
(wherefore the Jews counted not him a false Prophet that foretold Judgments,
though they came not to pass) yet he always fulfils his Promises to them that
fear him, and hope in his mercy. This staid Abraham's faith therefore under all
apparent contradictions, Romans 4.21. He that promised would perform.

Fifthly, Exemplaria Providentiae. The experiments of his Providence are
another sure ground and bottom of hope. Experience is the breeder of Hope, Romans
5.4. They which have tried God, cannot but trust ^i^n, For the Lord will not
forsake his People. This was the ground of David's confidence, 1 Samuel 13.37.
when he went out against huge Goliath. The Lord that delivered me out of the paw
of the Lion, and out of the paw of the Bear, he will deliver me out of the hand
of this Philistine; one deliverance assures another. And it is no less the
Argument of his Prayer in several Psalms, Psalm. 27.9. Thou have been my help,
leave me not, neither forsake me, O God of my salvation. Thou have, O Lord,
taken the care of me hitherto, expose me not now as a destitute O^phan to the
wide world, Psalm 31 2, 3. Be thou my strong rock, for thou art my rock and my
fortres^. Psalm. 42.8, 9. All thy waves and billows are gone over me, yet the
Lord will command his loving kindness in the daytime -- I will say unto God,
my rock -- when he was almost sunk, even about drowning, he catches hold on
the bough of former experience seasonably and opportunely, and so saves
himself. So Psalm. 71.5, 9. Thou art my hope from my youth -- cast me not off in
the time of my old age. So verse. 17, 19. Thou have taught me O God from my
youth, now also when I am old and gray headed, O God forsake me not. There Is
his Prayer; and see how his Faith gets up, and rises still higher and higher,
from hope to assurance, verse 20. Thou which bast showed me great and sore
troubles, shall quicken me again, and shall bring me up again from the depths
of the Earth -- And as he ends the Psalm, so he begins it. Verse 1, 2, 3. In
thee O Lord, I put my trust, let me never be put to confusion -- be thou my
strong rock and habitation -- for thou art my rock and my fortress. When the
Outworks are taken, then he retreats to the principal Fort: when a Christians
present evidences are darkened, or hopes discouraged, he may and ought to fly
to the experience of Gods former gracious dealings, and comfortable
manifestations; to look back to the days of old, and years of ancient times,
and call to remembrance his former Songs under his present sufferings. These
will bear him up as in the days of old upon Eagles wings. I was under such a
temptation, but the Lord strengthened me, under such an affliction, but God
delivered me. Thus David, Psalm. 28.7. The Lord is my strength, and my shield,
my heart trusted in him, and I am helped: He goes to God by a Periphrasis,
Psalm. 17.7. Show thy marvelous loving kindness, O thou that savest by thy right
hand them which put their trust in thee -- And thus the Church, Psalm. 22. and
44. Our Fathers trusted in thee -- We have heard what thou did for our
Fathers in the days of old. And shall not the Fathers unto the Children praise
thy truth? So Psalm. 115.12. The Lord has been mindful of us, he will bless us
-- S. Psalm. 74.12. God is my King of old: Thou did divide the Sea by thy
strength, thou brakest the heads of the Dragons in the waters, Thou brakest the
heads of Leviathan in pieces -- Awake, awake, put on strength, O arm of the
Lord -- Art not thou it, that has cut Rahab, and wounded the Dragon -- It Is
all along observable how the Church and People of God have stood upon this
Giants shoulder of former experience in their pleadings and wrestlings with him
for future mercies. And in an especial manner those two solemn and signal
deliverances, out of Egypt, and from the red Sea: as God makes them a constant
argument for obedience to him, so do they of confidence upon him. And thus the
Church in the Lamentations, in the saddest dumps of her affliction, recurrs to
her experience, Lam. 3.26. It Is good a man should both quietly hope, and wait
for the salvation of the Lord. Thus the Apostle argues against wants and
necessities, Hebr. 13.5. from the Promise. And against dangers from the
experiments of Providence. So that we may boldly say, The Lord is our belper:
And so he reasons against oppositions and persecutions. 2 Timothy 4.17, 18. I was
delivered out of the mouth of the Lion, and the Lord shall deliver me from
every evil work -- Former experiments (like herbs distilled in Summer which
comfort the heart in the dead of winter) may serve to justify, yea to fortify
future expectances. It Is good reckoning (though not from false and deceitful
man,) yet from the true and everliving God, what he has been, that he will be
to his People: He that has delivered their souls from death, will deliver
their eyes from tears, and their feet from falling; he that has delivered,
does, and will deliver (as the Apostle concludes) even when persecutions brake
his back, comforting himself with this, they should not break his neck, 2 Cor.
1.10. but God would make a way of escape. And so much for the Appellation, The
Lord God --

Secondly, Follows the appropriation, or application of this to our selves. The
Lord his God -- Our God. Interest in God is the only sure ground of hope in
him. 1 Samuel 30.6. David encouraged himself in the Lord his God. Psalm. 60.4.
Thou have given a banner to them that fear thee. The Signs of Gods favor and
presence, the assurances of victory and triumph are the Saints peculiar. God
proclaims war against the wicked: No peace, says my God, to the wicked. God
will not cast away a perfect man, neither will he help the evil doers; he will
never take the wicked by the hand. His people only are the objects of his care
and help in an evil day, as of his love and favor in a good. When he roars out
of Sion, and utters his voice from Jerusalem, and the Heavens and Earth shake,
he will then be the hope of his people, and the strength of the children of
Israel, Joel 3.16. a place of repair to, and harbor for them in the worst of
times, as the word imports. An Hypocrite has no such hope. The sinners of Sion
are afraid, fearfulness surprizeth the Hypocrites: They cannot dwell with
devouring fire, or endure everlasting burnings, Isa. 33.14. As it is the Saints
duty, so it is their only Privilege to hope. God, even our own God shall bless
us, Psalm. 67.6. Appropriation is the ground of Benediction: Lo, this is our
God, we have waited for him; interest is the foundation of expectation. It was
the observation of Luther, A Christians duty lies much in Adverbs, his comfort
much in Pronouns. The Ship that is most richly laden with holiness, always may
bear the fairest Sails of confidence. Wicked men may be carnally confident, and
seem to trust in God, but all is but a pretense; they carry the fairest side
outward, and may have fair weather in their faces, while a dreadful storm in
their Consciences. They may presume, but cannot believe, may lie to God, but
cannot rely upon him. They who obey not Precepts, can never rightly hope in
Promises, for where Faith is in the center, Obedience will be in the
circumference. Sin dashes a man's hopes, and guilt enfeebles his spirit. That of
Austin may be applied here, Nonbene creditur vbi non been vivitur. The flagg of
Confidence that hangs outward in his countenance, is but a bare empty sign,
without an approved license of holiness, and will not allow him a drop of the
wine of true Consolation.

But so much for the first particular, the exercise of the Saints Hope, with
its proper Object, the Lord their God. Now follows,

Lastly, Praemium, the reward and retribution of this their hope, Happy are
they: For the predicate of Happiness referrs to both Clauses; Happy is he to
whom God affords help, and happy he that makes him his Help, by trusting to,
and hoping in him, -- Whose hope is in the Lord his God. This is the ordinary
Language of Sacred Writ, Psalm. 2.12. Blessed are all they that trust in him.
Psalm. 34.8. Blessed is the man that trusts in him. Psalm. 84.12, etc. And as
David the Father, so Solomon the Son, that Master of the Sentences, affirms it,
Prove. 16.20. Whosoever trusts in the Lord, happy is he: and so the Prophets
assert this beatitude, which hope in God introduces: Isa. 30.18. Blessed are
all they that wait for him; and Jer. 17.7. Blessed is the man that trusts in
the Lord, and whose hope the Lord is.

Now this blessedness of the Soul by reason of its hoping in God will appear
(not to name many things) and be evident upon this threefold account. As it is
a preserver of the Soul from sin, under trouble, as it is an antidote against,
or relief to the soul under trouble, and as it carries with it an assurance of
deliverance and salvation out of trouble. First, Under trouble it secures the
soul from sinning against God. That is the great matter of the godly's fear in
time of straits and afflictions, lest they should sin against God: Nil timeo,
said Chrysostom to the Emperess Eudoxia threatening of him, nisi peccatum. They
fear to sin by far more than to suffer. Now (as a Mudd-wall choaks all the
Cannon-bullets and Granado's shot against it, so does this grace of Hope quench
all the fiery darts of temptation. It Is that preparation of the Gospel of
Peace, with which the Soul being well shodd, may walk over thorns and briars,
and tread the Lion and Adder under his feet.

There are three evils especially to which a gracious Soul is liable under the
burden and pressure, of afflictions: Dedolency and despair under them,
Discontent and impatience at them, or use of indirect and unlawful Means to
get: out of them, and these necessarily follow one another. Hope is a remedy
against all.

First, Against malcontent under trouble: It quiets, contents, and settles
the Soul, and keeps it from murmuring and repining. This the Church found, Lam.
3.29. She put her mouth in the dust, if so be there might be hope. They are
desperate wretches, who open their mouths wide, and blaspheme God by reason of
the Plagues, Revel. 16.21. Even the Devils blasphemy arises from their
desperacy. 'Twas the Atheistical King that would wait on the Lord no longer, 1
King. 6. ult. Hope waits until the Lord is gracious, is dumb, and has not a
word to say against his doings. A desperate Traitor curses his Prince, but a
penitent Malefactor, who has the least hope or pardon, willingly submits to
his sentence. Indeed hope of mercy is a main ingredient in true repentance, and
raises it from Legal to Evangelical, when a Soul sorrows toward God, mourns
looking on him pierced for as well as by him; and puts the rope about his neck,
and sackcloth about his loins, in his approaches to the King of Heaven, because
he is a merciful King.

Secondly, It keeps from despondency and utter succumbency under affliction. It
has vim sustentantem, a sustaining power in it; bears a man up against his
Infirmities; it keeps the Soul from fainting or sinking: It Is like the Cork of
the Net, which keeps it up, when the Lead of Fear would pull it down, or the
wing of the Bird, that mounts it to Heaven, while the stone tied to the leg
forces it down to earth: But for Hope the heart would break: Now though mercy
deferred may make the heart sick, yet the desire coming is a tree of life,
Prove. 13.12. Good hope and consolation are like Castor and Pollux, commonly in
conjunction. The Palm Trees motto is Hopes, Depressa Resurgo. Believing is a
choice and singugular Cordial, to preserve the Soul from fainting.

Thirdly, From any unlawful course to get out of affliction. He that believes,
makes not haste, Isa. 28.16. He will not leap over hedge and ditch, or find
any back-doors of escape, but wait till God opens a way of deliverance. The
Soldier (though besieged never so close) will not deliver up the City, if he
has any hope of relief. The men of Jabesh were glad when Saul's messengers came
and told them, To morrow by that time the Sun was hot they should have help, 1 Samuel 11.9. Be the case never so sad, the Soul will wait for Gods help, so long
as it apprehends it self not desperate. Hope is not too hasty for or greedy of
mercy, nor will not pluck the fruit thereof too soon, before it be full ripe.
The patient (though brought never so low,) if in the hands of a wise Physician,
still hopes to recover, and is content, as knowing, the more desperate and
tedious his sickness, the more will the joy be of his cure. The Captain though
beaten by the Enemy, will by no means yield and take quarter, so long as he
sees any probability of fighting him; he is pleased with these thoughts, the
sharper the en^ounter, once overcome, the greater glory of the Victory. The
Christian knows Gods time is the ^est, and therefore is willing to attend it,
and will not himself make his way out of trouble, ^ut find it made by Gods hand
for him; he will ^ot pluck a prick out of his foot, to put it into ^is heart,
but had rather carry about him a woun^ed skin or torn estate than a wounded
Consci^nce, rather choose to endure trouble which ends to ease, than get a
little ease at present, which leads to, and will end in trouble. He dare ^ot
shackle his Spirit to discharge his Body, but ^ad rather be a Prisoner, and for
this hope bound with a chain, than a Freeman without it. David, although heir
apparent of the Kingdom by Gods Promise, and in great danger of missing it by
Saul's violence, yet dare not make more haste than good speed, by making his
death a stirrup to ascend the Throne by; nay, though he had opportunity, dare
not take off his head for destruction, though for his conviction he cut off the
lap of his garment; and that was animo renitente too; but rather waited Gods
time of his advance to it, and settlement in it. The Primitive Christians did
not only, not seek or offer themselves to a composition; no, but would not
accept of deliverance on unworthy terms, Heb. 11.35. That Is the first. Hope
secures against sin.

Secondly, It does admirably remedy affliction by sanctifying and sweetning of
it. To name no more, it has a fourfold energy in time of affliction, each of
which has a wonderful tendency toward the souls blessedness.

First, Vim quiescentem, a calming and quieting virtue; it stills and sedates
the soul, and does motos componere flucius. The soul is still, when it once
knows it is God, and his hand, and is no more disquieted, Psalm. 43. ult. It Is
filled with his peace, which passes all understanding, and tranquillo Deo,
tranquillant omnia, and ipsum quietum aspicere est quiescere: It gives not God
an ill word, but holds its peace; nay, gives good words, blesses his name, and
says, Good is the Word of the Lord; as David, 2 Samuel 15.25. If I shall find
favor in the eyes of the Lord, he will bring me again, and show me both the
Ark and his habitation. But if he thus say, I have no delight in thee: Behold,
here am I, let him do to me as seems good to him. It Is reported of a precious
stone called Bufonites, that cast it into the Sea, and although it be never so
tempestuous, it will procure a calm. This precious grace is hope, which calms
and settles the soul under its greatest tumults and commotions, and stays it
under its most restless inquietations. The Rabbis tell us, that all the
letters in the name Jehovah, are literae quiescentes. Faith and hope can
perfectly spell this his reverend name, and out of every letter thereof gather
a quickening lecture influential on the Christian to compose him into a serene
temper under the greatest ruffles and discomposures he meets with in the world.
This lower Region is subject to storms and tempests, but the upper Region is
serene and clear, no storms above the Moon; and Historians report, that they
which are at the top of the Alps can behold great showers fall under^^eath
them, but not a drop above or upon them. Hope mounts the soul up to God,
advances it to Heaven, and then it is out of the dint of every storm, and reach
of every tempest whatsoever.

Secondly, It has vim sublevantem, a supporting and sustaining virtue. Faith
and hope are (like Jachim and Boaz, the Pillars of Solomon's) the support of the
souls Temple. They are not only kept in perfect peace, but securely too, whose
minds are stayed on him, Isa. 26.3, 4. -- The fear of man brings a snare, but
whosoever trusts in the Lord shall be safe, Prove. 29.25. He that confides in God,
dwells in his holy mountain, Isa. 57.13. Is as Mount Sion, which cannot be
removed. Mole-hills may be scattered, but Mountains are immovable. God is a
buckler (says the Psalmist) to all that trust in him, Psalm. 18.30. The soul
can never be cast down that has hope to lift it up. No sooner David's spirit
and countenance under a dejection, but hope gives it an^ erection and
elevation. A secret hope will bear up the soul under the sorest trials and
temptations, even though pressed down above measure, so as to despair of life,
yet this Pillar will shore it up from tottering and falling; as it did Paul, 2
Cor. 1.7, 8, 9.

Thirdly, Vim consolantem, a comforting power. It will not only quiet the soul,
make it stand still, and see the Lords salvation, and cause it to glorify God
in the fires, but rejoice it also, give it music upon the waters, always most
ravishing, Romans 15.13. The God of hope fill you with all joy and peace in
believing. So 1 Pet. 1.8. Yet believing, ye rejoice with joy unspeakable and
full of glory. The Prophet having pronounced the blessedness of hoping in God,
Jer. 17.8. illustrates it by the metaphor of Palms, or Laurels, Myrtles and
Olive Trees, which retain their greenness, and endure under the scorching heats
of the Sun, and are always flourishing and prosperous. God is a Sun for
consolation, as well as a shield for protection to them that trust in him.
David's heart was glad, and his glory rejoiced, while his flesh did rest in
hope, Psalm. 16.9. The flower of comfort grows on the tree of hope.

Fourthly, Vim confirmantem, an establishing virtue: That fixes the soul on
God, so as it does like a meteor hover in the air of uncertainties, but wholly
acquiesces in him as his entire and resolute dependant, under all emergencies
of providence, Psalm. 112.7, 8. His heart is fixed trusting in the Lord, his
heart is estal lished -- Believing establishes the soul, and keeps it, as from
sinful compliances, so from unworthy despondencies, and doubting fluctuations,
that it does not reel to and fro like an house that wants a solid foundation,
but is like the City of Venice, which (though it stands on the very Sea) nec
fluctu, nec flatu movetur, neither wind nor wave does move it; neither is like
the Willow shaken with every wind, but like the Oak, that abides its place in
storms and tempests. Hope in the Lord, is the anchor that fastens the ship of
the soul, so as it remains unshaken and immovable amidst all the shakings of
Satanical temptations, or worldly concussions. I have set the Lord always
before me: because he is at my right hand, I shall not be moved. The true
Believer is (...), like a die, cast him which way you will, he falls upon a
square. The Earth may remove off its foundation, and the Mountains be hurled
from their place, the Sea roar, and its waters be troubled, and yet the Church
not be moved. Though weak in themselves, beli^vers are strong in the Lord; and
like the Boat (though wavering of it self) yet tied to the Ship, it is sure: Or
like the Vine, Ivy, and Apricock; though some of the weakest of trees, yet
leaning on the wall, and twining about the Oak, they stand firm and immovable.
A carnal man, or hypocrite, in time of distress, is soon moved, yea removed off
his principles and profession, like a door that goes on its hinges, in a
spiritual storm, he becomes the sport of every wind and wave, but a believer
gets up on God that impregnable Rock; and being homo quadratus, having his foot
set for all assaies, bonds and afflictions, do not unhinge or unsettle him;
nay, like a Paul, none of these things move him, Act. 20.24. Faith upholds the
soul, holds the head up above water, and keeps a man from sinking; yea, were he
cast into a Sea of troubles, by this bladder would he swim to shore, being put
under him by the everlasting Arm of Omnipotency. The hoping soul stays himself
upon the mighty God of Jacob, in truth and righteousness; and though never so
weak a creature in himself, and subject to fall, being supported by the strong
hand of invincible power, he stands firm and steadfast. Like the Spouse coming
out of the wilderness, and leaning upon the Arm of her Beloved, he rests
himself upon an Almighty Arm, so as it is infinitely easier to pluck the
strongest fabric off its basis and foundatiion, than to remove him off his
hold on God his only strength and support; so that even the gates of Hell
cannot prevail against him. Indeed the strongest faith, and firmest hope may be
exercised with variety of fears, doubts and temptations, but shall never be
finally overcome: Perfect love shall in the end cast out fear, and this aguish
and shaking spirit of bondage (of which a Christian has yet always two well
days for one ill) at length give place to the more stable spirit of Adoption.
That Is the second.

Thirdly, It Is a certain prognostic and infallible assurer of mercy and
deliverance. The soul that hopes well, shall have well. The only way to have a
mercy, is to believe it. According to our faith, so is it to us. A wavering
soul must expect nothing, but a believing soul may expect any thing from the
Lord. Never did any soul perish in a way of believing. Hope, though it may
sometimes meet with a delav, yet it never meets with a disappointment. It Is the
glory of hope, not to make ashamed, Romans 5.5. They that wait on the Lord, never
wait on him for nothing, but their expectations are crowned with answerable
successes. I dare challenge all the world to give but one instance of a soul
that was failed by God while he trusted in him. All that depart from him shall
perish, and that turn aside to crooked ways, be led forth with the workers of
iniquity, but it is good to hold fast to God. The end of faith is salvation, 1
Pet. 1.5. Such as trust in God may be relict sometimes indeed, but shall never
be left desolate. They may be sometime disappointed, but never wholly
destitute. The Psalmist having acted his faith and hope in God, confidently
demands and challenges deliverance, wilt not thou O God -- give us help from
trouble? Psalm 108.12. Hope presages mercy a coming. It lays a man under the
Promise, and confirms his right and title to it. Now as a man, though he has
little in ready cash, yet if a great deal in hills and bonds, is rich and
wealthy: So the Christian, though he has never so little in hand, yet having
all in hope and reversion, is really blessed and happy. The Promise runs, He
that believes shall not be ashamed. And therefore it is very observable, that
the Church in her petitions to God, begs for mercy proportionable to her hope,
Psalm. 33.22. Let thy mercy (O Lord) be upon us, according as we hope in thee.
Hope prepares the soul for deliverance. Whatsoever is received, is received
according to the capacity of the receiver. Now hope enlarges the heart,
biggens and swells the desires, dilates and expatiates all the affections, that
the soul is no longer a narrow-neck'd vessel, which cannot receive the full
infusions of mercy, but opens its mouth wide, so as God fills it. Whatsoever ye
ask believing, ye shall certainly receive. They who travel with a big
expectation, commonly are delivered of a double blessing.

And finally, hope lays hold on Gods strength, and engages him to save and
deliver, even because the soul trusts in him. So that the state of a Believer,
though never so sad and disconsolate, yet is never desperate, but while he
lives he may hope, yea, he lives, because he does hope. For we are saved by
hope, says the Apostle. The sinner indeed may have a seemingly hopeful
beginning, but he is sure to meet with an hopeless, as well as to make a
graceless end. His hope is like the Spiders web, when the besome of death comes
to give him his fatal sweep, down goes his hope and himself together to Hells
bottom. But the godly has hope in his end, Jer. 31.17. Though what he hopes
for may be long a coming, yet long-lookt for shall come at last, and be doubly
welcome. The greater the travel, and sorer the labor, the fairer and stronger
the birth. And the longer the fruit of mercy hangs on the Promise, the fuller
and sweeter shall it be, when it comes once to fall into his lap, and drop into
his mouth. The prosperous gales of faith and hope shall send home the ship of
his soul richly laden at last to the shore of Heaven, where he shall have a
full satiety of that happiness of which he had here but a slender repast; and
be inebriated with those rivers of pleasure that bubble up from the well head
of eternity, whereof here he had a more imperfect taste, and of whose sweetness
and sulness he was a longing and languishing expectant. To conclude with David,
(with whom we began) he shall then behold Gods face in righteousness, and be
(abundantly and eternally) satisfied with his likeness.

And so much for the opening the leases of the Text in its several doctrinal
conclusions. Now what remains but to come and see, and taste the fruit of this
happiness, in its proper and particular branches of Application. And the Text
is not a barren and dry Tree, but like the Tree of life, bearing all manner of
fruit; yea, its leaves good for the healing of souls. Though we must but top
the outmost branches, ipsa anal cia sunt pretiosa, the filings of this gold are
precious. And in the first place, by way of Inference, we may deduce from the
consideration of the promised Truths, these three Corolaries.

First, It presents us with the different character and transcendent privilege
of the godly above all the world besides. Here Is a discovery,

First, Of their different frame, temper and disposition of spirit. They have
not received the spirit of the world, but are men of another spirit; they hope
in the Lord their God. As for the ungodly, it is not so, they are men without
hope, either as it is a mercy, or a duty: they have no God to hope in, neither
do they hope in the God they pretend to have. They trust in their wealth, and
boast themselves in the multitude of their uncertain riches, instead of
trusting in the alsufficient and ever-living God: When they increase, and he
grows full-handed, he sets his heart on them. As in a day of fullness, he
blesses himself in them, instead of the God of Truth, rejoicing in the flesh
of his own arm, and concluding he has gotten his wealth by his own hand and
power: so in a day of want and emptiness he places all his strength and
confidence in them: He goes not to God, but creatures, for his help; not to the
Lord, but to the Physicians, if he be sick; not to the storehouse of divine
Promises, but to the bag and granary, if he be in want; not to the great and
sovereign Creator, but to his fellowcreatures, friends, relations,
acqu^intance, when once he comes to be forsaken; He leans on his house as the
prop of his security. As in time of prosperity he offers sacrifice to
creature-enjoyments, saying, These are the gods that have gone before us: so in
time of affliction he bows down to them, and does them homage, crying out,
Arise and save us. Is he under trouble of conscience, it may be, with Cain, he
goes to his music, his sports and recreations, hop^ng to dill the obstreperous
noise of his own conscience in the crowd of outward enjoyments, or to smother
its clamorous voice in the tumult of his own disordered affections. In time of
outward perplexity, he flies to means, instruments, and second causes, it may
be to unlawful and indirect courses, as Saul to a Witch, and Judas to a rope;
because there is not a God in Israel, he goes to Baalzebub the God of Ekron.
Ashur (he says) shall save us, and we will go down to Egypt, and ride on
horses. Like those desperate and distracted wretches, Isa. 8.19, -- 21. They
went to their Arts of Necromancy, instead of the Living God, to Wizzards,
Peepers, Mutterers, and such as had familiar spirits: And being hardly bested
and hungry, fretted themselves, and cursed their King, and their God, and looked
upward: When reduced to a state of necessity or distress, they grew so
impatient, that like men in a frenzy, or in shipwreck, or people starved in a
siege, or a woman in the sore pangs of her travel, they make hideous outcries,
and in this forlorn, distressed, and distracted condition, are like people
desperate, and at their wits ends, knowing not whither to run, or what to do,
or what course in the world to take, and instead of an holy silence, and
gracious possession of their souls in patience under the load of their
afflictions, like a boiling-pot, they send forth nothing but scum and filth; or
a burning mountain, evaporate continually the flames of their passion, and
flashes of their indignation, in cursed and direful blasphemies both against
God and instruments, Heaven and Earth together. So desperate a case is every
wicked man in in a distressed condition. And when death once comes and looks
him in the face, then either he pleases himself with a false hope, and blind
presumption, which ends in death, founded on Gods mercy, Christ's sufferings,
common grace, outward calling and profession, immunity from some gross sins,
performance of some external duties of the first or second Table, or some such
like grounds (all too rotten and sandy a foundation to build the stress of an
immortal soul on for eternity) or else he becomes desperate and hopeless. This
is the genuine temper of every ungodly person. But now on the contrary, what is
the genius of a true Christian? He trusts and hopes in God, and in God alone.
God is his song and his salvation, Isa. 12.2. He trusts in Gods mercy, and his
heart rejoices in his salvation, Psalm. 13.5. In a good day, when he receives
most from God, he attributes and ascribes most, nay all to him. The hand of our
God is upon us for good. Thou have given me power to get wealth -- Yea, when he
enjoyes most of God, he still depends most on God: when he is surrounded with
creature comforts, and compassed with outward mercies even on every side, Gods
Candle shines on his Tabernacle, his Mountain made most strong, the lines
fallen to him in pleasant places, he washes his garments in Wine, and his
clothes in the blood of Grapes, yet he looks over and above all creatures as
insignificant ciphers, empty cysterns, insufficient supports and comforts, to
the Rock of Jacob, and hope of Israel, trusting and confiding in him alone in
his utmost weal, as well as in his greatest want and woe, which is the most
high, generous, and refined act of faith. Thus we find holy David, when he had
taken a survey of the graspings, gripings, and hoardings of the factors of this
world, and of all their heaps and banks, he turns from them with an holy scorn,
or rather zealous indignation, in the due ascent of his heart to God, and
anhelations after him, Psalm. 39.7. And now Lord, what wait I for? my hope is in
thee. And so in an evil day, a day of adversity, when, though a child of light,
he walks in darkness, God follows him with breach upon breach, all his waves
compass him, and his billows go over his soul; while his arrows stick fast in
his flesh, and his hand presses him very sore; while he sows sackcloth on his
skin, and defiles his horn in the dust: When all the songs of Sion are at an
end, and he has none but the sad and mournful ditties left him of lamentation
and woe; the joy of his heart is ceased, and he weeps sore in the night, and
has none to comfort him; all his mercies, yea and his hopes are gone too, and
perished from the Lord, and for peace he has great bitterness; yet then he
mounts up (as on Eagles wings) by fiducial acts to Heaven, and says, Lord,
though I know not what to do, yet mine eyes are toward thee. He still
remembers the years of the right hand of the most High. He may meet with
distress, but never fall into distraction; perplexity, but not passion or
perturbations. Though he be troubled on every side, yet he is not distressed,
though perplexed, yet not in despair, though persecuted, yet not forsaken,
though cast down, yet not destroyed; as the Apostle triumphs, 2 Cor. 4.8. -- He
may be at his wits end, but never at his faiths end. Though his faith wants
wings to fly, yet it has a foot to go, or at least a knee to creep. He yet
dwells in the secret of the most High, though he has no corner to lay his head
in here below, he casts his burden upon the Lord, when he finds his own
shoulders too weak to bear under it, and commits his way to him, to bring it
for him to pass, when so dark and intricate as he cannot find the least path
out of it: He casts his care on him, who takes care for him. That Is the first.

Secondly, And as this gives us an account of the different temper, so likewise
of the different happiness of the Saints above all the world besides. He not
only hopes in the Lord, but has the God of Jacob for his help. While we stand
on the turret of this comfortable doctrine, and take a Pisgah-view of the
godly's felicity, we may cry out of them, as Baalam standing upon Mount Peor
once did of Israel. How goodly are thy Tents, O Jacob, and thy Tabernacles, O
Israel! O thrice happy and unspeakably blessed souls that have this interest in
God. Happy are they indeed, who are in such a case. There are four choice
privileges which flow from the souls interest in God, each whereof is an
Herald to proclaim to all the world his felicity.

First, holy peace and serenity, tranquillity, acquiescence and satisfaction. I
will lay me down in peace, and sleep, because thou (O Lord) only keep me in
safety. There may be trouble and turmoil abroad, but always peace at home;
storms without, but a calm within. The peace of God is the Christians
Lifeguard. In the world they may have tribulation, but in him they have peace,
John 16. ult. --

Secondly, A grounded certainty as to enjoyments; for God never disappoints
them who trust in him. The mercies he gives his People, (though slow in coming)
are sure mercies; The sure mercies of David. The Covenant he has made is
everlasting and sure. The promise both of Spirituals and Temporals being of
Faith is sure to the seed, Romans 4.16. It was part of Moses blessing, Deuteronomy.
33.28. Israel shall dwell in safety alone, the fountain of Jacob shall be on a
Land of Corn and Wine: also his Heavens shall drop down dew.

Thirdly, An undoubted security. As certainty of mercies, so security from
evils and mischiefs is their portion. They are secure from Treachery at home,
for no fear of Apostasy to him who has God as his Help: He shall overcome, and
be made a Pillar in the House of his God, Revel. 3.12. And secure from Foreign
Violence. For if God be on his side, who dare engage on the contrary? He may
sing with David in that heavenly Canticle of his, The Lord is my light, and
salvation, whom shall I fear? I will not fear what man can do unto me; No, not
of ten thousand which have round beset me. God is a sure defense to his people;
Benjamin the beloved of the Lord shall dwell between his shoulders, Deuteronomy.
33.12. The Enemy may thrust sore at him (as a man against an House side) but
the Lord helps him, Psalm. 118.13. Gods protection is a Pillar to shore him up
under every blast of the adversary to overturn him. A Saint being enchanted (as
I may so speak) with the Name of the God of Jacob, is shot-free, secure from
gunshot, out of the reach of all dangers, enemies, evils, and afflictions
whatever.

Fourthly, Supply or sufficiency, Prove. 28.5. He that trusts in the Lord,
shall be made fat. He that has God, has all in him engaged for his good. Son,
I am thine, and all I have is thine; says God to his Children. What power,
wisdom, mercy, or any other excellency is in God, is active for his peoples
good; yea all Creatures in Heaven and Earth, are at their command and service.
And we may well close this Use with that of Bernard, Si Deus tam bonus
quaerentilus, quam lonus fruentibus? If God be so good to them that ^ow seek
him, what is he to them that find him? It so sweet to Hope, what to Fruition?
This consideration should make us cry out with Austin, Fecisti nos Domine, ad
te, and non requietum est c^r^n strum, donec requiescat in te. Lord, Thou have
made us for thy self, and our hearts can never rest till we come to rest in the
full enjoyment of thee.

Now because this Happiness of the Saints stands in con^radis^^ction, or rather
in contradiction to the infelicity of sinners; As the doctrine puts a cup of
Consolation into the hand of the godly, so of Trembling into the hands of the
wicked; bespeaks by way of terror, and convinces of the sad misery, and grand
unhappiness of all that want, and are strangers to an Interest in God. In a
good day they have no ground of comfort, and in an evil, no assurance of help.
That Is the second practical Inference.

It they be happy who have this title to God, and blessed, certainly they must
needs be cursed and miserable that are without it, unless they had any thing
equivalent with it, which is impossible. O sad and dreadful condition, to be at
once both hopeless and helpless: This is the utmost aggravation of unhappiness,
the desperate condition of the Devils and damned in Hell. Such as are without
God, are without hope, yea without both hope and help. And should a man speak a
thousand words, he could not more fully express the dismal complexion of any
state, than is done in this one, To be hopeless.

The wicked have no Heaven hereafter, no hope here An ungodly man may run and
read his condition in the glass of this point, who has no God to go to, he
has not the least ground or color of hope, but continually occasion of fear,
and perpetual cause of terror. He has no just hope in the day of Mercy, and
that is sad enough, much less in the day of misery, and that is worse. His
defense is departed from him, the Lord being not with him, and he is bread for
the teeth of every Judgment, as Joshua told them of the Nations they were to
invade, Numb. 14.9. In the day of abounding of all Creature Comforts, a carnal
man can have no content or satisfaction: One thought of his distance from God
will sufficiently imbitter all his Cups of pleasure, so as they shall be no
other than waters of Marah to him. Under the tides of external Joy his heart is
sorrowful, and his brightest Sun of outward felicity has sad reflections,
especially if the Clock of Conscience answers the Dial of the Word, and amidst
his ^ight rises to him thick darkness, or gathers upon him. His heart is black
as an Oven within, while the Corn, Wine and Oil, makes his face shine without.
As a Child of God often carries the ^ight of a rejoicing Soul in the dark
Lanthorn of a soiled and withered face, so does the sinner often disguise a sad
heart with a cheerful and smi^ing countenance. Neither can he expect any
succor or relief, either from within, or from without in the day of
affliction. As fear of losing eats up all his comfort and content in enjoying,
so forfeiture of title makes his lost Soul eternally despair of a recovery and
repossession. I wonder on what acquaintance the sinner can challenge any
interest, or pretend to any hope in God, or what possible should be the
groundwork and foundation of his professed, but mistaken confidence? He may
build Castles in the Air, and make to himself a refuge of lies, please himself
with conceits and fancies of supposed and imaginary happiness, but they will
prove mere delusions in the end. As his confidence is a lie in the foundation,
so it will be in the event, Isa. 28. Gods wrath is all this time smoking
against him, and will break forth in fiery flames of indignation, while he
promises himself peace in the walks of the imagination of his own heart, Deuteronomy.
29.19. If God once forsakes him all the world cannot help or relieve him:
Neither any of the Persons, nor all the things of the World can give him
comfort. If the Lord helps not, who can help? The world usually deceives her
Confidents. The Rock of Worldlings is not as the Rock of Believers: Carnal
confidences in the issue, render ashamed, God has blown upon them with his
curse. Thou shall be ashamed of Egypt, as thou wast of Assyria: says God to
his people, Jer. 2.36. Our Fathers inherited lies, vanity and things wherein
there is no profit, Jer. 16.19. The very houses of Achzib^ shall be a lie to
the King of Assyria, Mic. 1.14. A^ wicked man has no hope, and all the help h^
has, will prove but a vain and deceitful help. There is a weakness and
infirmity, an uncertainty and instability, an unfaithfulness and inconstancy, a
vanity and vexation attends all Creatures. They are cracked Cistorns, Jer. 2.13.
Lying vanities, Jonah 2. empty duggs, and dry breasts, failing Brooks, Egyptian
reeds, which do not only fail but pierce. God has put a perishing nature into
all created supports and sufficiencies, and over and above cursed such as make
flesh their arm. Men of low degree are vanity, and of high degree a lie, may
promise much, but perform little or nothing; like the Indian Tree, the Leaves
of their professions are as big as a Target, but the Fruit of their actions as
small as a Bean. They are broken staves, deceitful bows; the portion of Jacob
is not like them, Jerem. 10.15, 16. Take the choicest of created helps, and a
man cannot promise himself any safety in them, or help from them. Friends and
Relations may fail, Estates and Possessions may fail, health and strength,
comforts and accommodations, favor and friendship, supplies and assistances
may and will fail; yea, Kings and Princes may and have failed their de^endants.
It Is better to trust in the Lord than in ^rinces, Psalm. 118.8, 9. Multa cadunt
inter cali^em -- Methinks I see every wicked man bring^^g (as once a Noble and
Learned person was) (...) his final execution with those (as his last dy^^g
words in his mouth, spoken in the bitterness (...) ^is Soul) Put not your trust
in Princes, nor the ^on of Man, in whom there is no help! What a ^d
disappointment did that Noble and worthy ^arl meet with, who thought he had
assurance (...) his Princesses favor, only by the intervening miscarriage of a
treacherous person? What said that great Cardinal when under Attainder, and
given up into his Enemies hand as a sacrifice, If I had but taken that care to
have pleased my God, which I have done to serve my Prince, he would not have
left me now in mine old age. The World deals with her familiars and favorites
as great men with their servants, keeping them, while young, healthy and able,
but turning them off when they grow old, infirm and unserviceable. All mere
Creatures will fail, external privileges, high profession (it is not Jacobs
profession, but his God that is his help) choice parts, common graces, and
useful g^fts, great confidences, yea, a man's flesh and heart will fail. Wit
and wealth will not help in the day of present trouble or eternal wrath: Gold
and Silver will not deliver then Lo this is the man (proclaimed he stands to
all the world) that made not God his trust, Psalm 52.7. Aids and allies cannot
help. Who can stand before, much less against Omnipot^ncy? What Jerusalem
complains of under her Captivity will b^ sooner or later the sense and
expression too of a^ that trust in any thing on this side God the gre^ Jehovah,
and stay short of Heaven, Lam. 4.17. A^ for us, our eyes as yet failed for our
vain help. I^ our watching we have watched for a Nation the could not save us.
What Senacherib told Hezeki^ upon this account will prove most true, 2 King
18.21. Now, behold, thou trustest upon the staffe^ this bruised reed, even upon
Egypt, on which if (...) man lean, it will go into his hand, and pierce it so
is Pharaoh King of Egypt to all that trust i^ him. We may cry to these Idols,
but they cann^^ answer nor save us out of our trouble. Isa. 46.7. They were all
ashamed (says the Prophet) of a people that could not profit them, nor be an
help, Isa. 30.5. -- Let a private distress, a public calamity come, a Sword, a
Plag^e, a Famine, a Fire, Creatures cannot help; how much less when death and
damnation comes to seize on the poor undone sinner? What will they do in the
day of that their Visitation, in the desolation which comes from far, to whom
will ye fl^e for help, and where will ye leave your glory, as the Prophet
speaks, Isa. 10.3. O the dreadful and desperate case of every poor sinner, to
be left thus without help and hope! Oh that careless and pr^sumptuous sinners
that now forget God, would a little turn aside and see this sad and ruefall
spectacle! Did thou never see (O man) a poor condemn^d Malefactor, when
receiving his Sentence, we^ping, wailing, and lamenting, wringing his hands,
furrowing his cheeks with tears, down on his bended knees for mercy? did thou
never behold him haling to his place of Execution, roaring and yelling with the
hid^ous thoughts of death and damnation? Sinner, this is t^y case, or will be
shortly. Thou must be sentenced before Gods most righteous Tribunal, and there
adjudged for Treason and Rebellion against the God of Heaven; and what will the
Hypocrite do in the day that God comes to take away his Soul? Job 27.8. The
expectation of the wicked shall then perish. Thou lookedst for life, but b^hold
death, a blessing but meetest with a curse, for mercy but art sent away with a
portion of remediless, easeless, and endless misery. Now while life lasts, it
may be, because ye have no changes, ye fear not God; but when God comes by his
Providence to ring the changes as to thy temporal life, and plucks thee off the
stage of the World, O what a dismal hour, what a sad Catastrophe will then
attend thee! The hope of the Hypocrite is as the giving up of the Ghost, Job
11.20. It may hold as long as his life continues, but at the utmost it shall
expire with his breath. Then this bubble will fall, and the bladder of his vain
hope (though swelled with windy conceits to never so great a proportion) being
pricked by the Lance of death shall evaporate into air, wind, and confusion.
The Hypocrites condition is now uncertain, he stands on a Quag-mire, every
moment ready to drop into Hell. When he rises in the morning he has no
security of being out of Hell till night, or lies down at evening, is at no
certainty of immunity from divine wrath and vengeance while morning. But though
he goes quietly to the grave when he dies, not only his privileges, prayers,
comforts, means, friends, but even all his hopes too, vanish and die with him.
Prove. 11.7. The hope of the hypocrite shall perish. In that great day of Gods
anger, he will be as a man in a rain without a shelter, as a Soldier in a
battle without Armor, as a Ship at Sea in a furious storm without Anchor, he
shall not be able to stand. Wretched Sinner, Thou may run and read the
sadness of thy condition in thy Predecessors, Saul, Esau, and Judas, and other
Reprobates, and see what dismal Tragedies they acted under their terrors of
Conscience, and desperations of Spirit. In a word, (to turn from this doleful
knell) none knows what it is to want an interest in God, but an ^wakened
conscience on Earth, or a damned wight in Hell. All the hope a carnal wretch
has in this world, is only that he is on this side Hell.

Thirdly, This presents us with the excellency of God above all creatures, men
and Angels. He is that blessed object alone who can make the soul happy; and
therefore the Psalmist here gives him the prelation and pre-eminence above
whatsoever is mortal and mutable; and should we take a strict examination of
all creatures in Heaven or Earth without God, this summum bonum, they could not
by their united force, and utmost influence, bespeak or make the soul happy.
The depth would say, it is not in me; and the Sea, it is not in me -- All
creatures would be found miserable comforters, Physicians of no value. I have
seen an end (says David) of all perfection. The total of all creatures in
their natures improved and advanced, and their quintessence extracted and
refined, amounts but to this, Vanity of vanities. But in God there is enough to
make the soul unspeakably and eternally blessed. There is in him a sufficiency
to supply all the wants, and answer ^ll the demands and cravings of the soul of
man. In his presence is fullness of joy. He can support their hearts when
weakest, and supply them when ^mptiest: he can remove whatsoever threatens the
souls destruction, and confer whatever tends ^o its, perfection. It was David's
conclusion of faith, when the Lord was his Shepherd, that he should never want.
God is a comprehensive good, containing all that virtue and influence eminently
in himself, which is in the creatures formally. He can fill the soul, and yet
never cloy it; give it a fullness, and yet no burden. The world delights nothing
but in change and variety. The most choice meats, if common, prove nauseous;
and delightful musicks, if constant, tedious and burdensome. But in unico Deo,
is all the heart can desire or wish, and the constant enjoyment of him is
Heaven to the soul, without any the least glut or disrelish. There is a
suitability in him to the souls of his People. He is the center of all their
desires. And the degree of their satisfaction arises as from the degree of
their union with him, so the degree of his proportion to them. He is an
adequate and commensurate good to the desires and hopes of a gracious soul.
There is an exact agreement between his sweetness, and the souls taste, which
creates a most savoury relish of him in the souls palate. God alone being the
highest object of faith, is the greatest ground of joy and satisfaction. And
such a suitableness is in him to the soul, that it desires nothing like,
nothing but himself. Heaven it self would be but Hell without him. The Kings
presence is that makes the Court. A Saint is more pleased with the enjoyment of
God, than of Heaven, glory, salvation it self. He is his Peoples salvation. As
no sacrifices content God which his People offer him without the oblation of
themselves; so nothing of all his donations delights his People without he
bestows himself as a Legacy upon them. And then his Eternity in his being, and
fidelity in his Promises is a great aggravation of his Peoples happiness, as
well as his own excellency. It Is the main scope of the Psalmist in these verses
to recommend God to us, and represent him as a fit object of our faith, and
assured ground of our blessedness from his truth and faithfulness. Creatures,
as they are all unsatisfying, like drink in a dropsy, that is so far from
quenching our thirst, that it rather enflames it; so likewise deceitful, like
Absoloms Mule running from under us, when we have most need of their stay, and
Halcyonbirds that abide with us in Summer, but when Winter once comes, are upon
the wing, and gone. But God is the faithful and living God, whose truth never
fails, mind never changes, good will never abates toward his People. He may
change his outward dispensations, but not his inward disposition. Non deserit,
etiamsi deserere videatur: We may lose our vision of, and influence from him,
but never our union and communion with him. He may for a time desert us, when
we extravagate from him, but will never utterly disinherit us, and cast us out
of his favor and protection; but though for a moment he forsakes, with
everlasting kindness he remembers us.

Fourthly, This teaches us the folly and danger of all oppositions against,
and oppressions of the People of God. If God be their help, who shall be their
destroyer, or dare be their opposer? And yet such is the madness and frenzy
of the world, as they will venture to set themselves against those God has set
himself for. The wicked have shamed the counsel of the poor, because the Lord
is his refuge. They know what to do well enough with him for all that, they are
resolved to persecute him, let him save and deliver him. Many there be (says
David) which say of my soul, there is no help for him in his God, Psalm. 3.2, 3.
These in their triumphant bravado's, and flourishing vapors are their vain and
cursed conclusions; I will pursue, I will overtake, that is their desperate
resolution. The world is resolved to hate those God loves, and persecute them
God has undertaken to protect. They will kick against the pricks, and though
they cannot reach the person (Christ, whose Image the Saints do but represent)
yet Panther-like in their rage, they will tear the picture: Either by secret
fraud they are consulting against Gods hidden ones, to undermine them, or by
open violence endeavoring to overthrow them. But such is the Saints stability
in God, that the very gates of Hell shall never prevail against them. They are
as Mount Sion that cannot be moved. They do but throw stones against the wind,
go about to pluck the Sun out of Heaven (as those Barbarous Nations, who when
scorched by the heat of it, endeavor with their arrows to shoot at it.) There
is no enchantment against Jacob, nor divination against Israel, says Baalam
himself a Wizzard, Numb. 23. And God has set a noli me tangere about his
People, Psalm. 106.15. Yea promised, that no weapon formed against them shall
prosper. God will turn those weapons against themselves, and cause all their
arrows to return on their own heads. God will be an enemy to his Peoples
enemies, and bring ruin on all the Churches oppressors. It Is Solomon's counsel
not to oppress the poor, because his Redeemer is mighty. The Most High regards
it, and will reward it too, and relieve them under it. For the oppression of
his poor and needy he will also arise, and set him in safety from him that
puffs at him, Psa. 12.5. God is his Peoples second, and stands at their back;
he will uphold Jacob, though a Worm; he has undertaken their defense, and will
vindicate their cause. They therefore have no cause to fear, or their enemies
to triumph. God stands Sentinel over them, never slumbers or sleeps, and they
may sleep securely, while he awakes; as that great Commander did when his
Captain was watching the enemies motion. David will never fly, or run for it,
as long as he has God for his shield, Psalm. 11.1. In the Lord (says he) put I
my trust: how say ye to my soul, fly as a Bird to your Mountain? And neither
have their enemies any ground of confidence. Would not you think that man worse
than mad, whom you bend setting his shoulders against a strong and well built
house, thinking to overturn it of its foundation, or against an impregnable
Rock, endeavoring to remove it from its place? Such and infinitely far worse
is their vanity, who set themselves against the Lord and his Anointed. None
ever yet set himself against the Almighty, or shall ever do, but will be sure
to have the worst of it. God says, Zach. 12.3. He will make Jerusalem a
burdensome stone for all people: all that burden themselves with it, shall be
cut in pieces. Heerom tells us, that at the entrance of the gate of Jerusalem,
there lay very great stones, by the lifting whereof men used to try their
strength: He that could heave them came off without any harm, but they which
attempted, and could not lift them, were sorely bruised and battered, if not
utterly spoiled by them. Such will be the issue and success of all wicked men's
designs and enterprises against Gods People, who have him as the stone of their
help, all their powers, policies, attempts, and underground devices shall come
to naught and confusion, their mischief come down on their own head, and their
violent dealing on their own pate; yea, all their conf^deracies and
combinations as well as conspiracies, and secret machinations shall be broken
in pieces, Isa. 8.9, 10. And as God told the Israelites once when leaning on
the Egyptians, both he that helps, and he that is helped shall both fall
together, Isa. 31.3. -- O that the world would at length learn the wisdom not
to oppose God, and so run on the pikes of their own inevitable ruin; but rather
kiss the Son, lest they perish in his wrath when kindled but a little -- And
(which is a consequence of this, or rather a just inference upon it) let all
that pretend to bear good will to Sion, beware openly or covertly of taking in
against Gods interest and cause, whatsoever be their disguises or pretenses,
lest it comes home by them in the end. If Meroz was cursed for not helping the
Lord against the mighty, what will be their doom, who dare help the mighty
against the Lord? If good Jehosaphat had so sharp a reproof for helping with
the ungodly, and those who did not fear the Lord (2 Chronicles. 19.2.) They must
needs not only be blamed, but also cursed, who will venture to aid, abet or
assist the wicked against those who fear the Lord, and are the objects of his
help and protection -- And so much by way of deduction and inference.

Secondly, This provokes to examination. If they be thus happy who are
interested in God, and have him as their help and hope, it is worth our enquiry,
whether this God be our God, and consequently our help and hope in the day of
evil. Now, if we would know this our interest, let us take first some general
signs of an interest in him: Secondly, some more particular evidences or
discoveries of our making him our hope and help. --

The first mark or sign of an interest in God, is union with him in and through
Christ. All creatures (through the fall) are out of favor at Heaven, and there
is no coming to God but through his Son, He is the way, the truth, and the
life. The way in which, the truth by which, the life unto which the soul moves
and comes. No man comes to the Father, but by him, nor knows the Father, but
it is of his revealing. We are far off from God by nature, but draw nigh through
Christ's blood, that new and living way -- If we know him, we know also the
Father. Are our souls united then to Christ by faith? have we received him as
our Lord and Savior, Prince and Priest, to save and sanctify, redeem and rule
us? are we joined to him by the same spirit? does he dwell in our hearts by
faith? is he in us, and we in him, and abides in us as the hope of our glory?
our interest in him is a sure and infallible evidence of our interest in the
Father. He is the only Jacobs ladder whereby we can climb up to communion with
the God of Jacob. His foot is on Earth, but his top in Heaven.

The second is our covenant obligation to him. I entered into a covenant with
thee says God, and thou becamest mine, Ezekiel. 16.8. Isa. 55.3. There is a
mutual covenant between God and his People: as he has engaged for their
salvation, so have they for his service. O Lord, I am thy Servant, (quoth
David) and so the Church, Micah 4.5. For all people will walk every one in the
name of his God, and we will walk in the name of the Lord our God for ever and
ever. She gives up her self to God, not only in a way of single considence, but
resolute obedience. The relations are mutual between God and his People; he
becomes theirs, and they his. They are betrothed (in the marriagecovenant) to
him in judgment, righteousness, tender mercies, and faithfulness, and they
know the Lord. Art thou then, O soul, brought into covenant with God? have thou
broken off that accursed league with sin and Satan, by righteousness, and
engaged thy soul solemnly to become a faithful servant to him as thy only
Liege-Lord, and no other? Art thou resolved to fear, love and serve him in
holiness and righteousness all the days of thy life, and to glorify him in
thy soul, body and spirit which are his? Thy engagement for his glory, is an
hopeful sign of his engagement for thy good.

Thirdly, Intimate acquaintance, and indeared communion with him. Abraham had
great interest in God, and as great acquaintance with him. We may see in Sodoms
case, how boldly he goes to him. Friendship with God breeds an holy
familiarity. So Moses had a large share in Gods favor, and God spoke to him
face to face, and he talked with him again as a man with his familiar friend.
There are sweet communications of counsel between God and a gracious soul. Our
fellowship is with the Father -- 1 John 1.3. David was a man after Gods own
heart, and had intimate acquaintance with God, went to him by faith and prayer
on all occasions. It Is good for me (says he) to draw near to God; and one
days communion with him, is worth a thousand. It was said of Charles the great,
he conversed more with God than men. As all communion is founded in union, so
true union discovers it self by flowing forth in acts of communion. Now,
Christian, what communion maintains thy soul with God in prayer, private,
secret, in meditation, in public Ordinances? Is it thy meat and drink, thy joy
and rejoicing, to work righteousness, and meet him in his ways? Thou can
have no interest in God, if thou live without him in the world, nor can
call him Father truly, if thou have not, or do not know him.

Fourthly, Sympathy and fellowship with him. Gods interest and the souls are
not two, but one; they are like two Turtles, if one dies, the other never lives
comfortably after, but sorrowing for the loss of her Mate. God is sensible of,
and well-pleased with all the good done to his People, his language is,
Inasmuch as ye have done it to these, ye have done it to me. And his people are
affected with, and rejoice in all the glory is brought to him; and had rather
lose their comfort, than their God should lose his honor: They desire he alone
should be magnified, and are willing to be made stirrups for him to rise by,
though it be by their utter downfall. And as they are satisfied in each others
good, so sensible of each others evil. God sympathizeth with his Peoples
sufferings; In all their afflictions he is afflicted. And they with his
affronts and injuries. The interest of God lies nearer their hearts than any
thing else in the world. They count not their own lives dear, so they may but
save his honor, and so he be magnified; though they be reproached,
impoverished, imprisoned, bamshed, p^rsecuted, they think themselves well
apaid: What sympathy have thou with Gods cause and interest? do thou account
the glory brought to him, as good done to thee? and take the injuries he
suffers as offered to thy self? Can thou wish thy self a shield to sense off
those dishonours which are cast on the face of thy Lord and Master? Art thou
meek as a Lamb in thy own cause, but fierce as a Lion in Gods, zealous for the
Lord God of Israel? how art thou affected when thou hear his holy Name torn
by the black mouths of the wicked, and their tongues set on fire from Hell?
when thou see his Creatures abused, his Ordinances profaned, his People
trampled under foot, his Truth despised, his Attributes blasphemed, his
Sabbaths unhallowed, his Worship polluted? If thou be in the relation of a
Son, thou will not endure to see one spit on thy Fathers face; or an ingenuous
Servant, wilt not bear thy Masters wrong behind his back.

Fifthly, Suitable affections. Where there is interest in God, all the
affections of the soul have their outgoings after him. Thou have,

First, An high esteem and valuation of him. Whom have I in Heaven but thee?
Interest raises estimation. The Father esteems his Child, and the Husband his
Wife, and so vice versa, above all other, though they be deformed, and others
beautiful; they weak, and others healthful; they rich, and others poor; they
ignorant, and others learned and knowing, because of their propriety in them. A
Saint values God above all the world, above all things visible or invisible;
counts all loss, dross, and dung in comparison of him. He alone is to him the
Pearl of true price. Gods People are precious to him above all others, and so
is he to them likewise. They will part with all for him, preferring him before
all, and venture all rather than lose their hold of him, or sacrifice their
interest in him, omnia levia preterquam quod tui carendum -- How stands their
esteem poised?

Secondly, Thou have an ardent and affectionate love toward him. I will love
the Lord my strength, says holy David, Psalm. 18.1. Self-interest makes a man
love his own. Whom believing we love. The applications of faith are always
seconded with the embraces of love. He that has God for his God, has had
experience of his love in Christ, some tastes of his love shed abroad in his
heart by the Holy Ghost; and he cannot but love him by whom he was first loved.
This love constrains him, Amor meus Pondus meum -- Does mercy love misery, and
shall not misery love mercy? beauty affect deformity, and shall not deformity
re-affect beauty? glory shine on dust, and they not reflect on glory? Nimis
durus animus, qui etsi amorem non vult impendere, tamen non vult rependere.
Bernard. No soul so unworthy, as not to return love for love.

Thirdly, Thou have an earnest desire and longing after him. How does the young
heir (having interest) in his minority, long for the time when he shall be
actually invested in his estate and inheritance? O how does the gracious soul
pant and breathe, and hunger and thirst, look and long for God! Never did the
hungry man more desire bread, the hydroptical drink, the barren wilderness
rain, the thirsty traveller water, the pursued Heart the waterbrooks, the
longing woman the hour of her delivery, than it does the presence and enjoyment
of God. All my desire, Lord, is before thee, says our David, Psalm. 38.9, 10.
My heart pants, my strength fails -- My soul has fainted for thy
salvation, and it breaks for the longing it has to thy judgments at all
times, Psalm. 119. It is athirst for God, for the living God, not siti miserae
indigentiae, but copiosioris fruitionis. Parthian-like, the more the soul has
imbibed of this Helicon fountain, the more it thirsts. Oh the secret
breathings, earnest longings, importunate cravings, vehement ejaculations,
restless inquietations of a gracious soul after its God! By these wings of
desire, the soul (like David's Dove) would fly up to Heaven. Others may desire
gold and silver, friends and relations, pleasures and preferments, comforts and
conveniences in the world, but the desire of the Churches soul, is only to his
Name, and to the remembrance of him, Isa. 26.9. Could we be privy to the
private devotions of the Saints, how many affectionate oh's and options should
we hear breathed forth! how many even unutterable sighs and groans sent up for
this to Heaven!

Fourthly, Thy delight is wholly placed in God, and thou find sole
satisfaction in him. The soul is wrapped up into an holy joy and rejoicing, drawn
up to an exceeding complacency in him. God alone is the feast of the Saints
delight, and with the one dish of the light of his countenance, he is
infinitely more satisfied, than the worldling is with his most largely spread
and fully furnished table. His Attributes are the souls cheer, and his Promises
his choice delicacies. He is abundantly satiated with the goodness of his
house, and drinks of his pleasures as a River: his communions are meat and
music too. Because thou have been my help (says David) therefore in the
shadow of thy wings will I rejoice. My soul shall be satisfied as with marrow
and fatness, Psalm. 63.5, 7. The enjoyment of God is to the carnal wretch but a
dry husk, but to the Saint a feast of fat things, and as Wines well refined on
the Lees. Though a thousand Torches of creature comforts be light, its night,
dark with his soul, till this Sun of Righteousness shines; but one smile of his
face, and beam of his countenance, puts more gladness than could all Corn, Wine
and Oil, or does to those who daily suck out their virtues and sweetnesses. God
is his Peoples portion, and the only Paradise of their pleasures; and while
carnal men sit chirping on the dunghill of outward felicities, he with the
winged Lark sings never so merrily as when mounting up to Heaven.

His heart greatly rejoices in him, and his Song does praise him, Psalm. 28.7.
The Joy of the Lord is his strength, and it is so lively and vigorous, as even
in Winter time it buds and blossoms forth from the God of his salvation.

A Fifth might be added, of Faith and Confidence, it is his Periphrasis in the
Text, whose hope is in the Lord his God; in his Name does he lift up his
Banners. As propriety is the ground of delight, so of dependence: Though he
kills me, I will trust in him, though he damns me, I will love him: The just
shall live by Faith. But not to prevent what follows.

A Fifth and last character or impression of due affection flowing from an
Interest in God is resolution to cleave to him with full purpose of heart, to
live and die with him, and whatsoever befalls him, not to forget him, or deal
falsiy in his Covenant, his heart starts not back, neither does he decline a
step from his Law. Whatsoever opposition he meets withal in the way of his
duty, he leaps over it all, being resolved though Princes speak against him, to
meditate in his statures, and seeing him that is invisible, he fears not with
Moses to venture on the wrath of Man, rather than forfeit the love and favor
of God, but with holy Daniel will continue in his Supplications, and abide in
the way of his duty, though it costs him his life. And as good old Jacob, when
to part with his Benjamin: If I be bereaved, I am bereaved; and Queen Esther,
If I perish, I perish.

A Fifth character of one interested in God, is a renouncing and abandoning all
other interests for him, of sin, Satan, or the World. The Soul that has once
steept and bathed it self in this Ocean of delights, yea tasted once of divine
sweetness, will never relish those waters of bitterness again; that has been
fed with the bread and dainties in his Fathers House, will never return with
the Swine of the World to feed on husks; That has eaten of that heavenly and
delicious Manna, will never fall to the Leeks and Onyons of this worldly Egypt
again. Ad majora nata es O ansina mea -- Regular apprehensions of God raise and
advance the Soul above the World, None in Heaven but thee -- The Servant who
engages with his new Master, takes a Release from his old, a discharge from his
former service. Lord, other Lords (says the Church) have ruled over us, but
now we will make mention only of thy Name, Isa. 26. None of us, says the
Apostle, live to our selves, but to the Lord, Romans 14.8. They are men of
another Spirit. Hebr. 11.24. Moses chose rather to suffer affliction with the
people of God, than to enjoy the pleasures of sin for a season.

A Sixth mark or evidence is earnest Endeavor, and vehement pursuit after God*
The Soul makes it his (...), to follow after him. My soul presses hard after
thee, says David, even as the Hunter after his prey, Psalm. 63.8. He follows
God fully, Numb. 14.24. full chase he drives after God, more knowledge and
experience of him, more communion and acquaintance with him. He sets himself to
seek the Lord. His heart does not hang down; but he is lift up in the way of
the Lord, and to his Commandments which he has loved. He sings in the ways of
the Lord. He walks in them and is not weary, runs in them, and is not faint; he
exercises himself to Godliness, makes Religion his trade and business. He
walks with God, and worthy of the Lord in all well-pleasing, and it is his meat
and drink to do the will of his Father in Heaven: He thinks nothing too much,
all too little for God; spares no labor, cost or pains, to acquaint himself
more with him. He prays, he hears, he reads, he meditates, he weeps, he
watches, he runs, he fights, he strives, and all to obtain further assurance,
to apprehend that for which he is apprehended of him.

And so much for the more general signs of our Interest in God. To touch
secondly about a few more special signs of having him our help and hope.

First, If God be our Help, and we so make him, there will be a disobligation
to, and utter discarding of, rejection, and casting away all
creature-confidence. The Soul has no confidence in the arm of flesh, as to its
spiritual condition, not in Means and Ordinances, gifts, parts, duties, graces,
enjoyments, but accounts all loss; -- as to its temporal condition, it trusts
not to its power, wit, policy, strength, wealth, estate, friends, -- makes not
fine Gold its hope, as Job speaks in vindication of his integrity, cap. 3.24.
Ezra was ashamed to go with a request to the King, though in a good Cause,
having first declared his trust in his God, Ezra 8.12. A gracious Soul
renounceth all carnal dependencies whatsoever. Neither Circumcision or
Uncircumcision avails him; he glories only in the Lord. He will not pluck the
Crown off the head of Free grace, or snatch it out of the hand of Divine power,
to set it on the head of a poor finite Creature. A carnal heart can trust any
thing but God, a Christian can trust nothing but God, him before any thing, all
things. A Worldling can trust God in nothing, a Saint in all things, at all
times; can trust him with his Name, Estate, Liberty, Life, Soul, his all; trust
him in good days, of peace and prosperity, in evil days, of trouble and
adversity; being careful for nothing, but in every thing making his requests
known to God with Prayer and Thanksgiving; committing his whole way and care to
him and his Providence.

Which is a second Note. A constant exercise of dependence on God, and on God
alone. He is his hope, and his habitation to which he continually resorts,
Psalm. 71.2. Does he want any mercy, he goes by Faith and Prayer, to his God for
it; does he meet with any mischief or injury, he goes again and pours forth his
overwhelmed Soul in complaints before the Lord; he waits for him, and looks to
him. His eyes are up to the Heavens, whence his help comes, Mic. 7.7.
Therefore, says the Church, will I look to the Lord, and wait upon the God of
my salvation. And so David, Psalm. 5.3. In the morning will I direct my prayer
to thee, and will look up. When he has shut his mouth, he will open his eye,
his ear, and when himself knows not what to do, hear what his God will say. He
is always confident in the Lord, and triumphs in the God of his salvation.

Now because an Hypocrite may harbor a false dependence, and a counterfeit
hope, as well as a Christian a well-grounded confidence, let us try it by some
following Touch-stones; which is the third and last particular concerned in
this Inquisition, with which I shall dismiss it, namely, to give some Notes, or
lay before you some properties and effects of a Saints fixed hope in the Lord
his God, which may discriminate and contradistinguish it from the languishing
and vanishing hope of Hypocrites, and carnal Professors. And them take in these
following particulars.

First, A godly man's hope is a grounded Hope. He has the root of the matter in
him. The righteous has an everlasting foundation; the Hypocrite has no
bottom. These have no root, Luke 9.13. The house on the Sands was raised to an
equal height with that on the Rock, and the difference was not in the
superstructure, but only in the foundation. A carnal man may have as firm a
confidence as a Saint, and an Hypocrite as strong a presumption as an upright
Soul has a persuasion, but not so good an evidence. Now confidence is always
naught without evidence. The jetting hope of an Hypocrite is built upon his
external profession and privileges, as a worldlings is on his mere outward
enjoyments. His confidence is in the flesh, but a Saints hope is bred and
maintained too by the Word, and Promises, Heb. 6.18, 19. It Is nourisht by
spiritual influences and experiences. As it is founded on the Lord Jesus
Christ, that bringing in of a better hope, that hope in us of our glory, so
it is backed with good evidence. I will trust in him, says Job, though he kills
me, I will maintain mine own ways before him. He also is become my salvation:
but an Hypocrite shall not come before him, cap. 13.15, 16. The Apostle calls a
Believers, a good hope through grace, 2 Thessalonians. 2.16. through grace favoring as
the Spring, and grace sanctifying as the suel of it.

Secondly, It is an Effectual hope, has a blessed virtue and efficacy in it,
especially a six-fold virtue.

First, Ad purificandum; to purify the heart and Conscience of a Christian.
What the Apostle says of Faith may be said of Hope, it purifies the heart.
Yea, he says it expressly of this grace also, 1 John 3.3. He that has this
hope purifies himself even as God is pure: Secundum speciem, though not gradum,
in kind and quality, though not equality: If not in act, yet at least in
endeavor and affection. Hope purges the Conscience from dead works to serve
the living God; by it the Soul draws nigh to God, and comes to have a sight and
view of him, and Omnis visio affimilat. Proportionable to our Faith is our
Holiness, and to our Expectations our Conversation. This distinguishes it from
all Formalists presumption. Hypocrites lean on the Lord, and are confident of
his presence amongst them, though they perpetrate all manner of wickedness, and
do all kind of abominations, Mic. 3.11. But in vain do sinners load Gods back,
and yet pretend to lean on his Arm. Security and presumption lead men to sin:
Isa 57.10. Thou art wearied in the greatness of thy way, yet thou said not,
there is no hope: Thou have found the life of thine hand, therefore thou wast
not grieved. And desperation also makes them rush on in courses of Iniquity.
Jer. 18.12. They said, there is no hope, but we will walk after our own
devices, and we will every one do the imagination of his evil heart; a sad and
desperate conclusion. But true hope draws the Soul off from sin. Whatsoever a
Child of God does, he will not sin against, and away his hopes; but having
hope in Gods Word, and in those great and precious Promises, he cleanses
himself from all filthiness of flesh and spirit, Tit. 2.12, 14.

Secondly, Ad excitandum, it quickens unto duty. It Is a living, yea, a lively
hope, 1 Pet. 1.3. Where hope is in the center, obedience is in the
circumference. David conjoyns them, Psalm. 119.166. Lord, I have hoped for thy
salvation, and done thy Commandments. Believing puts upon doing. Hope of mercy
quickens and animates to duty. We believe, and therefore we speak and act too:
and no good hope of the end without due use of the means; means must be used,
if a blessing expected. Faith has a piercing eye, and a powerful hand; a
receptive faculty, to take in the comfort of the Promise, and a reverberative,
to return, and reflect its benefit received in ways of duty and obedience.
Hoping to the end, and girding up the loins of our minds, are paired, 1 Pet.
1.13. In order to a progress in our spiritual Journey. The sweetness of the
Promise drawn out, incourageth and engages in obedience to the command. The
Plowman ploweth, and Seeds-man sows in hope. Expectation of reward edgeth to
work. Disuse and neglect of means, does not trust God, but tempt him. True
confidence spurs up to duty, especially to prayer. Trusting and calling are
coupled in Scripture, Zeph. 3.2. Hope of speeding puts a man on seeking. Hope
of an expected end, put holy Jeremiah on praying, Jer. 19. And of salvation
holy Paul on laboring and suffering reproach, on active and passive obedience,
1 Timothy 4.10.

Thirdly, Ad commorandum, to take the soul off all carnal dependence, and stay
it by a firm dependence on God alone. The hoping soul goes not to creatures, to
second causes, leans on none of these broken staves, and vain confidences; but
rejects and renounceth them all, both upon a spiritual and temporal account.
It Is the brand and mark of an Hypocrite, even carnal confidence. It Is the
character of a Christian, to have no confidence in the flesh, Phil. 3.3. He
does not only call himself of the holy City, but stays himself on the God of
Israel in truth, Isa. 10.20. A Christian will not have two strings to the bow
of his trust. The Psalmist puts a direct opposition to trust in God, and all
other trusts, Psalm. 40.4. Blessed is the man that makes the Lord his trust;
and respects not the proud, nor such as turn aside to lies. And the Church
solemnly professes her rejection of all humane helps in time of her straits,
Psalm. 44.6. I will not trust to my bow, neither shall my sword save me -- not
to the bow, but the arm that helps to do it. And so she seals a renunciation of
all creature-aids and assistances, Hos. 14.3. Ashur shall not save us, we will
not ride upon horses -- Carnal men (like weak and ignorant people) go first to
the Kitchen, and then to the Physician. When Ephraim saw his sickness, and
beheld his wound, he goes to the Assyrian, and sends to King Jareb to heal him.
But the Church eccho's to Gods call, Jer. 3.22, 23. In vain is salvation
expected from Hills or Mountains, in the Lord our God is the salvation of
Israel -- We come unto thee, for thou art the Lord our God. She goes first to
the Lord, and then to the Physician.

Fourthly, Ad componendum, to pacify the soul, and make it wait patiently the
returns of providence. Jacob waited for Gods salvation, and Joseph of Arimathea
for the Kingdom of God. I waited patiently for the Lord, says David, Psalm.
40.1. As they who watch for the morning, Psalm. 130. As the poor traveller,
beweildred all night, longs for the mornings approach to direct him in his
passage: and the industrious labourer waits the morning light, and dawning of
the day, that he may go about the work of his calling: or the vigilant
soldier, and diligent watchman desires the break of day, when they may be
relieved: so does a gracious soul wait for his God. The Church was resolved
thus to wait upon the Lord. Micah 7. Though an Atheist will wait no longer, a
Saint will both wait for instruction and consolation. Hopes conclusions are.
Gods time is the best time. The vision is but for an appointed time, it will
come, and not tarry, wait for it. If deliverance comes not this, it may come
another way. If mercy comes not to day, it may come to morrow. It Is better
staying a day too long, than having salvation come an hour too soon. The
expecting soul waits for the hope of righteousness by faith; yea he hopes to
the end for the grace to be brought at the revelation of Christ, 1 Pet. 1.13.
He waits till the Lord be gracious; he is not too quick or hasty (hasty births
he knows are commonly abortive) he will not make more haste than good speed; he
understands it is but manners to wait the Lords leisure, and attend his
pleasure. God waited long for his coming in, in a way of duty, it is but meet he
should wait for his approaches in a way of mercy. If God could stay so long for
his conversion, it is but reasonable he should stay for his consolations.
Resolved he is to wait so long as God pleases for incomes of mercy, and wholly
resolves his will into the will of his Maker, even let us it be buried and
swallowed up of it, with a Father, not my will, but thy will be done. Carnal
men would limit God to their desires, and scant him to their time, they are for
duty to morrow, but mercy and salvation to day. Now mercy must come, or never.
But a Christian would not have his time Gods; but makes Gods time his; and
whatsoever pleases God, therefore pleases him. It Is not (says true hope) for
us to know the times and seasons, better to wait for the Lords salvation.
Better want of mercy in a way of waiting and dependence, than its approach
without it: Does God delay, he does not deny; is mercy deferred, it is not
resolved against; does God withdraw, hide his face, seem to slight, and cast
out his Peoples prayer, yet I will not give over praying, waiting, believing,
and expecting, I will yet attend the motions of providence in the use of means;
and though God seems to cast us off, yet we will never cast off him.

Fifthly, Ad elevandum, to raise the soul above all worldly expectations. He
that by hope has gotten his foot up to Heaven, looks upon all this inferior
world only as an inconsideral point. Our conversation (says the Apostle) is in
Heaven, whence we look for the Savior. Heavenly expectations, and heavenly
conversation go together. Alexander, when he once received a report of the
American world, gave all the Kingdoms he had conquered amongst his Captains,
and upon this division, being asked what he had left to himself, answered, spem
majorum annorum; the hope of further years. A Christian hearing of the
Alsufficiency of God, and glory of Heaven, of so much (in scriniis) in hope, is
willing to part with whatsoever is in hand, and (like a provident and
foreseeing person) will part with all in possession, for what he has in
reversion; so did those worthies, Heb. 11.13. A carnal man uses God, and
enjoys the world; a Saint uses the world, but enjoys God only.

Sixthly, Ad corroborandum, to fortify and confirm the soul against all
opposition. Abraham rowed against the stream. Hope will ride the storm. It may
be said of hope, what the Apostle speaks of charity, it endures all things.
There is the work of faith, labor of love, and patience of hope, 1 These. 1.3.
I will hope continually, says David; Psalm. 71.14. Though his enemies be
lively, yet his hope is not dead; and while they threaten more, he yet hopes
more and more. All the waters of humane opposition cannot quench this fire, but
it is like the fire of the Sanctuary, which never goes out. True hope grows by
discouragement, and the wind of worldly affliction serves but to increase this
holy flame. When as the spies gave a discouraging account of the Land, Caleb
and Joshua were not dismayed at their own sight, or their report, but conclude,
Their defense is departed, and they are bread for us. They that wait on the
Lord, shall renew their strength, and their hope too; and under the lowest
providence, they have yet a spero meliora in their mouths, which keeps them
from fainting and sinking. And that leads to the third and last qualification
of the Saints hope. It Is steadfast and permanent. A Believer has hope in his
end, and he hopes to the end, Heb. 6.11. The full assurance of hope to the end:
And so cap. 3.6. Whose house we are, if we hold fast the confidence, and the
rejoicing of the hope firm unto the end. God perfects this grace, wheresoever
he begins it. An Hypocrites is a dying hope; a Saints, a living hope; there is
a vigor and vivacity, and also a constancy and perpetuity in it. We are not of
them who draw back to perdition -- An Hypocrites hope is an empty and vain, and
so a vanishing hope, it has no solidity in it, but appears a mere husk, when
Satan comes to thresh it by his temptations, it will not stand, or endure a
trial. When he comes to go out of the world, his hope perishes for ever, and
breaths forth it self into a puff of wind, though swollen to never so huge a
bulk, and great a proportion. It has no stalk, and when the Sun of divine
indignation, or humane persecution arises, it wholly withers: But a Saint
(though for a while he may lose the exercise) never wholly loses the habit of
his hope; his hope is a fixed, stable, settled hope, Col. 1.23. A carnal wretch
can hope in good days, while providence looks on him with a favorable and
pleasing aspect; but let the Lord come to frown on him, and lay affliction on
his loins, his heart (...) like Nabals) dies within him, he sinks like a stone,
he carries with him a sad heart, and looks with a lowering and dejected
countenance: but a child of God, as no outward comfort does much encourage him,
so no outward cross do^s much dishearten him. Mercy does not much (...) him up,
nor misery cast him down; his conclusion is, I will yet hope in God, and never
cast away my confidence, which has great recompense of reward. Quo malis
presenti^us durius deprimor, eo de futuris gaudiis certius praesumo, says holy
Ignatius; by how much the more I am oppressed with present miseries, so much
the more confident I am of eternal joys, 2 Cor. 4.17.

Thirdly, This speaks sharp reproof, even to the People of God themselves, who
are so apt to depend on, and run to means and second causes in times of trouble
and affliction, and not lay their hope and help on this God of Jacob, and his
truth and faithfulness only. Israel was very prone to this corruption, to seek
to, and rely on foreign aids and helps, neglecting and refusing to rest upon
God. This is sinners wickedness, and Saints weakness and infirmity. This was
the fault of good Asa, zealous Hezekiah, holy David, who thought nothing better
for them, than one to go to the Physicians before the Lord; another, to curry
favor with the King of Babylon; and a third, to fly into the Land of the
Philistines, 1 Samuel 27.1. Vitium ostendit (says a Commentator on the Text) dum
ostendit remedium. This is natural to the lost, but yet proud Sons and
Daughters of Adam. The first man had a spice of pride in him, and all his
posterity have gotten a tang of it. The stout soldier will never accept
quarter, as long as he can stand out against the enemy, or defend the besieged
City against his power and violence. Proud stout-hearted man would neither be
beholden to God or Christ for his help, could he but be his own Protector and
Savior. We are all by nature run-aways from God, and having a backsliding
heart within us, are apt to revolt more and more, leaning on any broken Reed
before him the eternal Rock. But this our way is our folly. This is our great
sin, and runs us also into an inextricable labyrinth of calamity and woe. It Is
no less than crimen laesae Majestatis, when we have the covering of the
Almighty's protection, and the wing of the great and everlasting Jehovah to
come under, yet to shroud our selves under the alien shadow of any creature;
and when we may delighfully sollace our selves under the Vines sweetness, and
Olives fatness, yet to shelter our selves under the vain show of the Bramble.
It Is too convincing an Argument both of the weakness of grace, that our
strength is small, and also of the power and predominancy of corruption. It Is a
plain and demonstrative Argument of a carnal heart, to satisfy our selves with
any outward enjoyment in the day of mercy, or support, in the hour of misery.
How sadly does God complain of this in his Israel of old? Psalm. 78.22. They
believed not in the Lord, nor trusted in his salvation. So Deuteronomy. 9.23. Ye
rebelled against the Commandment of the Lord your God (to go up against the
Nations) and ye believed him not. God taxes it of high disingenuity and
disloyalty, Jer. 2.5. What iniquity have your Fathers found in me, that they
are gone far from me, and have walked after vanity. So Jer. 18.13, 14. The
Virgin of Israel has done a very horrible thing: Will a man leave the Snow of
Lebanon, which comes from the Rock of the field? or shall the cold flowing
waters that come from another place be forsaken? It Is a tincture of Apostasy
from God: Indeed a plain contradiction to our conversion. In that we turn from
the Creature to the Creator, in this from the Creator to the Creature. It Is a
more spiritual and refined Idolatry, and therefore it is observable, these two
are Couzen-Germans, neighbour-sins, and but one remove one from the other. Yea,
the ^dolatry charged by the Apostle upon the Gentiles, has this inscription on
its forehead; They worshipped and served the Creature more than the Creator,
God blessed for ever, Romans 1.25. And indeed whatsoever a man sets up above or
equal with God, it is his God, or at least his Idol. And as it is a great
iniquity, so it is commonly rewarded with exemplary punishment. This trust is
both wicked and vain; it makes us neglect God the eternal Refuge; and while it
deceives us, and makes us miss of a better ground of trust, it also weakens and
debilitates both our hearts and hands; our hands in duty, and our hearts in
confidence. (who will ever set upon that of which he has no hopes of
accomplishment? and who ever will go to God that can go any where else?) It Is a
following lying vanities, and forsaking our own mercies; a running from the
fountain of everlasting waters, and hewing out broken cisterns. It lays us
under a curse, and that a dreadful one, Jer. 17.5, 13. Cursed is he that makes
flesh his arm -- All that forsake thee shall be ashamed, and that depart from
thee, their names written in the Earth; than which nothing more sad and dismal.
A cursed change it is to leave God, and go to the Creature; such confidence
commonly ends in shame and confusion. Dependence on the Creature forfeits
divine protection; it clips the wings of mercy: It Is a going out of Gods
blessing into the warm Sun. Nay, the Hypocrites bow, which never aims right on
at the mark, is not only erring and deceitful, but often recoils, and proves to
him deadly and destructive. They who repose in humane help, do not only miss of
the prosperity and safety, which by these means they made account to attain to,
but bring evils on themselves, which they both sought and thought to escape,
and lose the lives they went about so industriously to save. And indeed God
takes himself highly wronged by this abuse at the hands of his People, and will
sooner or later say to them as to Israel, Judge. 10. Go to the gods ye have
chosen, and see if they can deliver you. See how God threatens them, Isa.
30.12, 15. -- In returning and rest I would have saved you -- and ye would not,
but ye said, no, we will flee upon horses -- therefore shall ye flee -- They
who will not rest on God, shall be forced to run for all the creature. May I
not say to you, as once Saul to the people revolting to David, Can the Son of
Jesse give you Vineyards and Olive-yards -- Can the creature give you souls
satisfaction in its fullest enjoyment, and can it afford you relief in the day
of distress? Can these gods of your own making arise and save you? Can they
cheer your hearts, when God is frowning? succor you, when Satan is tempting?
comfort you, when the world is failing? Can they give you any peace in an hour
of trouble, ease under horrors of pain, life under pains of death, settlement
and composure in a day of distraction and confusion? have you not sufficiently
experienced, and so may be effectually convinced of the vanity of the whole arm
of flesh? That all flesh is as grass that fades, and the flower thereof that
withers. That men of low degree are vanity, and of high degree a lie, That
there is no salvation in Hills or Mountains, no help in Princes, Senates,
Armies, Navies, if God does but blow upon them? Have you not by sad and woeful
experience known the failure of friends, contingency of estates, the
uncertainty of worldly advancements, the moth, the worm, the dying perishing
nature that is in all created comforts and contentments? and will ye yet lean
upon these weak bulrushes, and make his your refuge? May not God say to you, as
once to his People, Numb. 14.11. How long will it be ere ye believe me? Nay,
may not God justly leave you, when ye have first left him? and then what will
become of you? To which of all the Saints will ye turn? what will ye do in the
day that he comes out to visit? Suppose God coming out with the glittering
sword in the one hand (nay, he is come out already) and the destroying Plague
in the other, and fire and famine become his followers; whither will ye fly?
where will ye hide? how shall you escape or endure his fierce wrath, and
burning indignation? what will you do in the day of your calamity? or where
will you leave your glory? Well, to close this point (for I would hope better
things of all you that fear God, though I thus speak) know assuredly, that by
going from God your Center, unto the Creature, you will either run into the
mouth of danger (like a bird far from her nest, never under such danger of the
snare) you cannot be established, but may be (as they were Jude 5.) for their
unbelief destroyed; or however you will cut short the arm of mercy and
deliverance. As impatient snatching at mercy, makes it not half so sweet;
fruits plucked too soon, or raw eaten, commonly gripe. Jacob had not only a
blow, but a piece of a curse, a deal of turmoil and trouble with his blessing,
because he would be his own Carver, and not stay to receive it at his heavenly
Fathers hand, and discontented murmurs and repinings against God under
affliction, cut short of mercy and salvation; a sad instance whereof we have in
those two prime Leaders of Israel, Moses and Aaron, Numb. 20.12. Because they
believed not the Lord, to sanctify him before the eyes of Israel, they were
not privileged to lead the Congregation into the good Land. So confident
reposes in the Creature, without God, or conjunction of it in our dependence
with him, will certainly breed in the issue disappointment and destruction; and
the soul that with Babylon, sits Lady-like in its Chair of State and Ease, will
become a Widow and desolate in one day. And (which is the great aggravation of
the mis^ry of all such confidence) the more we lean, and greater stress we lay
on any creature-comfort, when God comes once to blast it, and take it away (as
'twere) by a stroke, it will become so much the greater cross, and so much
affliction we may expect from it, as we have had affection to it, and placed
dependence upon it. Put not your trust therefore in man, or place your
confidence in bare Creatures, for whose shoulders an immortal Soul carries too
great a burden, but Trust in the Lord from henceforth and for ever. Let me
conclude this with the Prophets advice, Jer. 9.23. Let not the wise man glory
in his wisdom, nor the strong man in his might, nor the rich man in his riches,
But let him that glories glory in the Lord: And with that of the Psalmist,
Psalm. 62.8, 10. Trust not in Oppression -- if riches increase, set not your
heart upon them. But trust in him at all times, and finally with that of the
Apostle, 1 Timothy 6.17. Trust not in uncertain riches, but in the living God.

Fourthly, Solamen ministrat. This Doctrine comes full fraught with comfort,
and speaks abundant and matchless consolation to all the People of God, who
have this Interest in him, and exercise dependence upon him as their hope and
help. The godly man is the only blessed man. The World may count and call her
darlings happy but no such blessedness to be found as in the fruition of God,
and derivations from him. Blessed he is,

First, In all his Relations and concernments, as to his spiritual state, and
as to his temporal. He having an interest in God, has an interest in all that
is Gods; all his Attributes, Relations, Promises, Providence, gracious and
merciful Benedictions; he has a right to all spiritual blessings, pardon of
sin, peace of Conscience, Joy in the Holy Ghost, grace and glory; and all
temporal mercies too, the fatness of the Earth, as well as the dews of Heaven,
the Nether as well as the Upper Springs: All is his by right and inheritance,
and shall be by possession, if good for him. As a stranger from God is
universaily cursed, so is one united to him universally blessed. He may say,
God has dealt graciously with me, and I have enough, Genesis 33.11.

Secondly, He is also happy in all Estates and Conditions. Nothing amiss can
befall and betide a Christian. Though never so evil in it self, Gods Power and
Providence can work it for good. Art thou under desertions, yet thou art happy.
His lest hand is under thee, and his right hand embraces thee: Thou art graven
upon the palms of his hands (so as to be no more defaced or obliterated) and
thy walls are continually before him. Have thou lost thy hold of God, he has
still his hold on thee, can thou not cast thy self, and roll thy Soul on
Christ in the Promise? yet, when thou come out of the Wilderness, thou may
lean on the arm of thy beloved. Though thy Soul be never so much in the dark,
thou have the staff of Jacob to lean on, and need never fear stumbling,
especially falling, for the Lord also upholds thee by his hand, Psalm. 33.24.
Art under Temptations, still thou may be happy. Thy Redeemers Intercession is
a shore of thy Faith, and pillar of thy Perseverance, Luke 22.32. Though weak
in thy self, with the Conies thou may fly to the Rocks: When pursued by that
mighty Nimrod and hunter of Souls, and furiously chased by the avenging
Executioner of Divine wrath, haste into the arms and bosom of thy Savior which
stand extended on the Cross, and are now wide open to receive thee: When these
proud waters overwhelm thee, swim to that impregnable Rock of his Merits which
is higher than thou; and then thou may (like a man gotten on the top of a
rock in the midst of the Sea, outbraving with an invincible courage and
undaunted resolution all the waves and billows about him) dare Satan to do his
worst against thee. Though the Beast makes war against thee being a follower
of the Lamb, God is on thy side, and stands by thee in the combat: this Dragon
shall not swallow thee up: the Lord will rebuke him, yea tread him under thy
feet shortly. Though thy own heart be a Traitor, thy God is thy Keeper. Art
thou engaged with strong and violent corruptions, do these Masters of misrule
bid control to Gods grace in thee, and is the battle so sharp as sometimes
the flesh seems to overcome the Spirit, thy pride, passion, unbelief,
earthly-mindedness are too hard for thee? be not discouraged: Though thou be
foiled, thou shall not be overcome; sin shall not have dominion over thee,
though it may tyrannize against thee; but those thine enemies that will not bow
before the Scepter of Christ's Sovereignty, shall be slain before his face, and
very shortly those Egyptians thou see to day, thou shall see no more for
ever. Art thou exposed to wants and exigencies? The Lord is thy Shepherd, and
he will supply thee as to thy spiritual, and also thy temporal condition. Do
thou want the presence of Divine Ordinances, are all these Conduits stopped, and
windows shut? God will himself be a Tabernacle to thee; he will prepare a Table
for thee in the Wilderness, spread with all the delicious sweetmeats of grace
and comfort, and the Sun of Righteousness shall arise on thee with healing in
his wings. Do thou want Creaturecomforts? The Earth is the Lords Granary, and
the fullness thereof, and the Sea thy Fathers Fishpond, and therefore thou
shall have what either can afford thee. Art thou sequestered of all that is dear
and precious in thine eyes? Thou have yet a Deus providebit to live on, a
Promise to bear thee up, that God will never forsake thee, all things shall be
added to thee. Qui majora curat, non minora negliget. The Accessory follows the
Principal. There is no Promise indeed of adding Spirituals upon our seeking
Temporals, but there is of adding the things of Earth, if we seek the Kingdom
of Heaven. Thou shall have food and raiment in the way wherein thou art to go;
enough, though not too much; according to Gods will, though it may be not thine
own; bread for thy body, though not for thy lusts; to satisfy thee, though not
surfeit; content, though not cloy thee. God will give thee the World as a
blessing, though not lade thee with this thick clay as a burden. As thou have
the sure Mercies of David, whereof none can deprive thee, so thou shall have
all external accommodations, or at least a proportion between thy Heart and
Condition, wherein the only comfort of life consists. Art thou compassed
about with fears and dangers, of enemies or evils imminent or impendent? Let
not thine heart be troubled, for Mercy compasses thee about on every side: As
Elisha told his servant, 2 King. 6.16. There are more with thee than are
against thee. Thou have a guard of Angels round about thee, yea Christ himself
for thy Protector. And Fortior est Christus caput Ecclesiae ad protegendum,
quam Diabolus hostis Ecclesiae ad oppugnandum. Cyprian. This may be a bottom of
confidence, and sufficient ground and encouragement to the People of God in the
darkest and gloomiest day, the most evil and discouraging time; and serve to
allay, and antidote all their fears and misgivings of heart, that they have an
infinite and everlasting God for their help, and have everlasting strength,
wisdom, faithfulness, mercy and compassion engaged for them. Men count it an
happiness to have a Cottage of their own to hide their heads in. God is his
Peoples shelter, Sanctuary, and hiding place under all their scatterings, and
dispersions, oppressions and oppositions, they meet with in the World. The Lord
knows how to deliver the Godly out of all their temptations. The Apostle brings
it down to an experience, He delivered Lot, and he knows how to deliver us.
It Is all one to have no storm, or to have an hiding place. Under all private
injuries and oppressions we may trust in God who is a present help, and go to
him with the Prophet Jeremiah's words in our mouths when the men of Anathoth
sought his life, Jer. 11.20. To thee O Lord, do I reveal my cause, and be
confident as he was, cap. 20.11. of deliverance; or as Hezekiah, when
Rabshaketh opened his mouth so wide against Heaven, he went and spread the
Letter before the Lord. Though a man meets with nothing but incivilities,
unkindnesses, discouragements, disappointments, reproaches, persecutions and
violences from men, yet there is enough in one God to counter-ballance all. God
will work all mischiefs about for good; and as for Enemies, in the Name of the
Lord we may go out against them and overcome them. Art thou under crosses and
losses, and sore and vexatious trialls that way? have lost thy Estate, and
Possessions, thy Relations, thy former Friends, thy present comforts, thy
hopes, thy all? yet thou have not lost thy God, who is better than all. And as
Zeno the Philosopher said once, when he had lost all by Shipwreck, Licet me
tutius philosophari. Thou have now the better leisure to attend thy Soul, and
study Heaven. Though a man loses his Moneys, and is rich in Bills and Bonds,
it is no great matter: When thou have not a penny in thy Purse, thou have
thousands in the Promise. Gods providence, or men's violence may take away thy
Estate, thy Children, thy Livelihood and subsistence, but never take away thy
Christ. When thou have lost all things else, yet thou can never lose thy God,
and thy inheritance, the hope laid up for thee in Heaven; that heavenly and
never-failing treasure is out of the reach both of Men and Devils. Art thou
under afflictions personal, family? Has the hand of God touched thee? Has his
destroying Angel come with the Arrows of the Plague, and shot into thy
habitation, so that thou art left alone, and become wholly comfortless, even
swallowed up of sorrow? Thy Relations are gone, thy Friends fled from thee, all
thine acquaintance stand aloof off thy sore; thou sighest and mournest by day,
weepest by night, and have none to comfort thee; thou art become like a Pelican
in the Wilderness, an Owl in the Desert, and sit like a Sparrow on the
housetop: Death is entered in at thy windows, and men have written Lord have
Mercy on thy doors, and thou have neither Minister nor Phyfitian to come at
thee; yea, want Bread it self to uphold thee: Yet fear not, Thy God is still
with thee, and then nightest, when all Creatures run away to the greatest
distance. Christ comes in yet familiarly at thy doors, God stands by thy beds
side. Though the Plague has seized thy body, he is not afraid to come near thy
soul, and while thy Friends forsake thee, he will be Friend, Physician and
Comforter to thee. He is the Lord that heals thee: And thou shall at last
say, in faithfulness and mercy to thy Soul did he afflict thee; yea, that thou
were not sick, because the Lord had forgiven thy iniquity. Nay, here is comfort
for thee even in Death it self, if thou have God for thy help, and he affords
thee his gracious presence, thou shall not need fear to walk through that dark
suburbs of Eternity. As dying, and yet shall thou live. Death is but to thee a
Portall into Everlasting Life; and what is a grimm Sergeant to arrest others,
and Pursevant to hale them to the place of Execution, shall be a welcome
Messenger to carry thee into thy Fathers House, and usher thee into the
Presence Chamber of thy endeared Bridegroom. And when thou art gathered to thy
Fathers, though thou go to thy long, yet thou shall not go to thy last home.
Thy Exodus of Earth shall be thy Genesis of Heaven; and when the great Landlord
of Heaven and Earth, by a Commission directed from his Royal Court summons
thine immortal Soul out of this Clay-tenement of thy Body, thou shall enter
upon thine upper House, those ever-blessed Mansions prepared for thee; and this
Bird in thy breast, when once let loose this present cage where now it is
imprisoned, and set upon the Tree of life in the midst of that heavenly
Paradise, shall warble out the most melodious tunes, and sweet and harmonious
music to its Creator, even to the days of Eternity. Let me conclude this
consolation with that of Solomon, Prove. 14.32. The righteous has hope in his
death: And add only this challenge on this side the grave for him against the
sinner. Take a child of God clothed with all possible disadvantages, poverty,
sickness, persecution, even at the worst that can befall a man on this side
Hell, and his condition is infinitely far better than any wicked man's on Earth,
that has sumptuous buildings, furnished tables, pleasant children, great riches
and revenues: So happy is he above all the world besides that has God for his
help, the Lord for his God.

Fifthly and lastly, Let this consideration be a strong persuasive both to the
Saints and People of God, to walk worthy his help, and sinners, to labor to
make him their God and help against an evil day.

First, To Christians, to walk answerably to divine help and influx, both in a
good, and in an evil day. Take the sum of this exhortation in five or six
branches. Let the influence of Gods help be to you a ground of praise and
thankfulness, of satisfaction and acquiescence, of access to him on all
occasions, of confidence in him in every condition, of return to him according
to your receivings from him, and of engagement and firm adherence to him,
notwithstanding all temptations to Apostasy from him.

First, Matter of thankfulness. Rejoice in the Lord at all times; Let songs of
benediction to him be ever in your mouths; pay him the constant tribute of
acknowledgement. What an holy Panegyric does David sing? Psalm. 18.12. What a
famous avouchment makes he? Psalm. 144.1, 2. Where he gives God all his titles:
My strength, my goodness, my fortress, my shield, my high Tower, and deliverer:
And so does Jeremiah, cap. 16.19. Even proclaim Gods Name to the Gentiles, that
they might trust in him. In Gods Name set up all your banners: Say with the
Church, All our fresh springs are in thee. Nilus ab ignoto font -- but our
salvation comes from Sion; thence the Lord commands the blessing. We find our
Psalmist frequent in these confessions, The Lord is on my side, Psalm. 118.6. I
will sing of thy power, yea I will sing aloud of thy mercy in the morning, for
thou have been my defense and refuge in the day of trouble -- Psalm. 59.16, 17.
And so again, Psalm. 94.17. Unless the Lord had been my help, my soul had almost
dwelt in silence, when I said, my foot slippeth, thy mercy, O Lord, held me up.
And so the Church solemnly sings, under the sense of her miraculous deliverance
from variety of enemies; If the Lord had not been on our side -- they had
swallowed us up quick -- And see how sweetly she closes all, Psalm. 124. ult.
Our help stands in the Name of the Lord who made Heaven and Earth. So may the
soul say, I was under such a temptation, and had not the Lord helped me, where
had my soul been? under such an affliction, and had not he relieved me, I had
sunk and perished in it for ever. How often have I sinned and he pardoned me,
prayed, and he heard me, waited, and he was gracious to me? I was weak, but he
strengthened me, sad, but he comforted me, troubled, but he spoke peace to me.
And so may the Church of God say, If the Lord had not been on my side, when the
Sons of Belial associated and bandied against me, complotted and conspired
against me, saying, Come, let us blot her name out of the book of remembrance,
they shall neither know nor see till we come in the midst of them, and cause
the work to cease, I had been long ago overthrown and overturned. It was not my
own bow or sword saved me, but thy right hand that helped me out of all my
distresses. It is our great duty to rejoice in the confession of Gods Name in
all our deliverances and salvations, and to ascribe to him the glory that is
his right and due. This Psalm is Eucharistical, penned on purpose as a grateful
acknowledgement. We should erect standing Monuments of his goodness and love,
and say, Hitherto has he helped us; showing to the generations to come, the
praises of the Lord, and the wonderful works he has done for our souls, (
Psalm. 66.16.71.18.78.4, 5, 6. -- That they might also hope in God -- And (as
there always appears that in mercy, which calls aloud for praises) so there
are some deliverances that have such signal remarks upon them, as we cannot
possibly pass over without special observation. How often does mercy come
undeserved, unexpected, undesired and unprayed for, is distinguishing (we are
plucked as firebrarnds out of the fire, and taken when others are left) yea
exceeding and superabundant to all our hopes or thoughts? How many deliverances
do we know, before we know our dangers? the danger was only to be read in the
deliverance. How many mischiefs do we escape, that by all our forecast and
prudence, we could never have prevented, nor yet by our power opposed? how many
mercies come pouring upon us, not one of which by all our diligence and
industry we could have purchased or procured? what good often arises to us out
of our evils, and that proves our greatest advance, which we thought would have
been our fatal and final downfall; and conduces to our salvation, which seemed
to promise nothing but utter and irrecoverable ruin and destruction. Gods
mercies thus renewed on us every morning, and his faithfulness every moment,
require a constant return of the sacrifices of thanksgiving; but our sin and
misery is, that our thankfulness for mercy granted, is no way proportionable to
our importunity for mercy wanted and desired. In our straits and afflictions we
promise a great deal to the Almighty, but when once gotton out of those depths,
we sacrilegiously rob the God of our salvation, and put him off with the
farthing candle of a little lip-devotion instead of a thank-offering of heart
and life, wherein only lies the life of thankfulness. But where there is an Ark
for deliverance, there should be an Altar for thankfulness.

Secondly, Let this draw and engage us to a constant access to God in all
conditions, under all emergencies and occurrences of providence. Go^ to this
God for help at all times. Trust in him at all times, and pour forth your
prayers before him. Have recourse to him for spirituals, to his promises, for
temporals, to his providence. Do your souls want pardon of sin, peace of
spirit, assistance to duty, strength against corruptions, grace for trials and
sufferings, fly to your God. Does Satan tempt, the world frown, friends prove
unkind, hopes disappoint, all creatures fail, enemies compass you about, yet go
to him your help, and cry with David, Plead my cause (O Lord) with them that
strive with me, and fight with those that fight against me. Whatsoever
condition befalls you, your state is never hopeless, why should it not then be
fearless? never desperate, why should you be disconsolate? There Is hope at the
bottom, dum spiro spero, may be your Motto. The Royal aid of Heaven will assist
and enable you against all oppositions on Earth. Whom should a people go to,
but to their God? He is the confidence of the whole world; The Isles shall wait
upon him, and on his arm shall they trust, Isa. 51.5. It Is the great duty and
safety too of the soul to trust to and hope in the Lord. It Is the character of
a Saint to depend on God, Psalm. 33.20. Our soul waits on the Lord, for he is
our help and shield. It Is a sign of sincerity, to trust in the Lord, and the
evidence of an Hypocrite, to trust to any thing besides him, Job 8.15. Isa.
14.31. The poor of his people shall trust in him; and Zeph. 3.11. Thou shall
leave in the midst of them a poor afflicted people, and they shall trust in the
Name of the Lord. Not patience, but faith is the highest commendation of a
Christian. This was Hezekiahs grand Encomium given him by the Spirit of God
himself, 2 King. 18.4. He trusted in the Lord God of Israel, and clave to him.
God takes pleasure, and delights in them that hope in his mercy, Psalm. 147.11.
God has cursed all creature-confidence. He has pronounced them blessed, which
hope in himself: Yea, Blessed are they that have not seen, and yet have
believed. It Is the highest piece of honor and happiness, that any created
being is capable of, to receive influence from, and exercise dependence upon
its Creator. There is an utter insufficiency in all creatures to help; they may
give painted comfort, ape a counterfeit happiness, but never afford real or
lasting consolations. Yea, the soul may be reduced to such st aits and
exigencies, as all the power, wisdom and industry of all creatures cannot give
him relief, none but God help him (as under troubles of conscience, and
perplexity of spirit, none else can succor.) A wounded spirit none can bear,
and only God can heal. If help comes there, it must come (...), immediately
from Heaven. Friends cannot help, Ministers not help, experimental Christians
not help, prayers, tears, and duties not help, only the God of Heaven. And as
he is sometimes only able, so he is himself always able, when none else can,
either on the right hand, or on the left. It Is all one with him to help by
many, or by few, or by none at all. He can destroy by friends, making the
Governors of Judah to their subjects, as well as the^r enemies, like an hearth
of fire among the wood, and like a torch of fire in a sheaf, so as they shall
devour all people round about, on the right hand, and on the left. He can make
the choicest and most hopeful instruments, to prove our vexers, and not our
Saviors: He can cut off the spirit of Princes, and be terrible to the Kings of
the Earth. An Host without him, much more against him, is a vain thing for
safety; and a multitude as insignificant as a single person; he can smite heaps
upon heaps, with the touch of his little finger, as Sampson did once the
Philistines with the Jaw Bone of an Ass: He can blow on the most likely
projects used for help and supply, so as they shall utterly fail, Jam. 1.11.
The rich man shall fade away in his ways; not only the careless Prodigal in
his ways of profuseness, but the most careful Usurer, diligent Merchant,
industrious Tradesman in his wai^s of providence, to get the world. God can
blast the fairest hopes, and greatest designs whatsoever. And as he can ruin by
the hand of friends, so he can save by the hand of an enemy; when there is no
healer unto a soul or people, he can, he can yet do the cure: what is designed
and intended for evil, he can work good out of, and order for good to his
People. And as he has ability enough, so readiness to work for his People.
Though Father forsakes children, as Herod did his Antipater, and Husband Wife,
as did Henry the eighth, and Prince his Favorites, as Ahashuerus did his
subject Mord^cai, and Haman his Courtier, yet he will never forsake his People.
And he can facilly help too in the greatest extremities. It Is but a turn of his
hand, a shine of his face, and look of his countenance, and we are saved. And
he is a sure, steady, and faithful help, that will stand by us to the end, and
in the end. And have not our souls had plentiful experience? and is there any
thing that can more fortify and strengthen faith, than the remembrances of his
past succors? Psa. 61.3, 4. Oh therefore persuade we our souls (by all these
twisted Arguments) and lay them under a perpetual and irrevocable obligation to
hope in the Lord. O you that are young men, you that are old men (for the
Psalmist calls on all sorts of men to trust in the Lord) you that are coming
into the world, make him the hope of your youth; and you that are going out of
the world, make him the staff of your age: You can never trust God too much,
nor the Creature too little. Hope in him for your bodies, for your souls, in
good days, in evil, under private evils, under public. Are you cast into a
troublesome world, (as indeed you are in this present generation) going to Sea
in a storm, never such a ruffle in the world, yet cast your Anchor on God. When
your credits, estates, liberties, health, wealth, trade, religion, your all
lies at the stake, still depend upon him. In times of greatest hurlyburly,
distraction and confusion, yet be found waiting for him and his salvation. Were
you in prison, in exile, in a wilderness, do not despair, Gods presence is with
his People wheresoever they are cast: God can be with you in a prison, as he
was with Joseph; in a dungeon, as with Jeremiah; in a Lions den, as with
Daniel; nay, if you were in Hell with Jonas, he can make it an Heaven to you.
God is with his to the end of the Earth; he can supply all your wants, even
spread a table for you in the wilderness, relieve all your straits, rid you out
of all your dangers, deliver you from all your fears, do for you beyond your
thoughts, desires or hopes. Should, or does it go ill with Sion? are the Church
and People of God low? do her enemies grow high, insolent and triumph? Is the
Church upon the Cockboat of distractions? are there great disorders and
confusions abroad, divisions and unsettlements at home, impediments in the way
of reformation, so as ye look for peace, and no good comes, and for healing,
but behold a time of trouble; go to God who governs the world, and the Church
too. He steers the ship, and though now tossed with the tempestuous waves of
animosity, pride, and contention, will yet command a calm, and bring it safely
to shore. Deliverance shall come the way he has appointed, and the day he has
determined too, if not this or that, yet another day, and another way. He has
made a standing promise, that no weapon formed against her shall prosper, Isa.
54.17. And though Gebal, Ammon, and Amaleck, should join together their heads,
hearts and hands, and unite in never so many deep contrivances, close
conspiracies, and factious cunning stratagems, bold and daring attempts, strong
combinations: Though Papists and Atheists, Jews, Turks and Devils, should all
enter a league and confederacy, yet shall they be broken: though they dig as
deep as Hell, the counsels of Heaven would undermine them, and divine
providence counterwork them ( Isa. 29.15. Though they lay the train of never so
cruel and politic a design, God would blow it up, and return the blisters upon
their own faces. In the worst of times, it is your duty to hope for better; baec
non durabunt aetatem. God will give these an end also, he will create on every
dwelling place of Mount Sion ('it is a Gospel-promise) and upon her Assemblies a
cloud, and smoke by day, and the shining of a flaming fire by night (as he did
to Israel in the wilderness, to whose pillar of cloud and fire the Prophet
alludes.) For upon all the glory shall be a defense. And though there be never
so many lets in the way of mercy, God is able to turn hindrances into
furtherances, poisons into medicines, destructions into deliverances. O
therefore at all times and seasons, in all cases and conditions, go to God as
your help and hope. And if you would know how to make your applications to him,
and at what special times and seasons you should hope and depend upon him, take
a short account in a few particulars.

First, What are the special seasons we should go to God in? I answer, no time
is amiss. There is as welcome going to God in a Sunshine, as in a storm. There
is no time of address to God, but it is an accepted time. There may be a time
when God will not be found, but never any when he will not be sought. In time
of felicity, when we sit under the warming influence of gracious providence,
God spreads a table for us, and our cups overflow with his goodness: This is
one of the most noble, but yet one of the most difficult exercises of faith.
When a man enjoys the fullness of the creature, yet to rest purely upon the
Creator. It was an high pitch of Paul, when having nothing, yet to be as having
all things; but yet a far higher attainment, when having all things, yet to be
as having nothing: This is one of the sublimest acts faith can possibly exert.
But the ordinary use of hope is in days of adversity, when the soul eats the
bread of carefulness, and drinks the wine of astonishment. When the waters come
into his soul, and all Gods billows are ready to cover him, and swallow him up.
A tempest is the seasonable time for the Believer to throw out the anchor of
his hope; especially when a man ^s,

First, Under pursuits of divine wrath. Gods terrors drink up his spirit; his
arrows stick fast in him, and his hand presses him very fore. While God is
killing, his people should be trusting. There Is no way (under those) but of
running from God, unto God, from the bar of his Justice, to the Throne of his
Grace; from him as an angry Judge, to him as a reconciled Father, from him as
the destroyer of sinners, to him as the Savior of souls, and preserver of his
creatures. As the Malefactor fled to the City of Refuge, crying all along as he
went, Refuge, Refuge, so should the soul fly to God either under the pourings
out of personal wrath, as the Prodigal to his Father, or offender to the Judge
for pardon; or under the popular executions of his wrath on the world, as a
Wife flies to her Husband for protection. When God is coming out against the
world with sword, fire, famine, or pestilence, then it is our wisdom to repair
to him, who is an harbor in every tempest, a shelter in every storm, a
sanctuary wherein the soul may securely hide and repose under every stroke of
divine vengeance.

Secondly, Under the oppressions of Satan, or oppositions of humane violence.
Go as beggars to the Throne of Grace, to beg help in that time of need. When
the Kite comes, get under the wings of Gods Providence and presence. So Did
David, Psalm. 57.1. Psalm. 143.8. I fly to thee to hide me: Thus Luther, I will
go and tell my God.

Thirdly, In the failure and disappointment of all Creatures, when all second
Causes fail, then it is time to go to the first, and when the arm of flesh
breaks, then to lay hold on the Father of Spirits. So David, Psalm. 73.23. --
and 1 Samuel 30.6. when he had lost his wives, yet he rejoices in God as his
husband. So the Church, Hab. 3.17. -- As Gods solemn appearances for us, engage
us to trust in Him, Exodus 14. ult. Then they believed the Lord, and his servant
Moses. So do the Creatures appearances against us, and discouragements to us.
This was the foundation of Mordecai's conclusion of Faith, Esth. 4.14.

Fourthly, Upon Imposition, or undertaking of extraordinary burdens, whether of
service or suffering. Thus Moses goes to God for Eloquence when he was to go in
to Pharaoh, and become his accuser and Gods advocate, spokesman for Israel. So
David going out against Goliath, went out in the Name of the Lord, and
Jehosaphat, when to combat with the Ammonites beggs help from Heaven. Our
Savior falls earnestly to Prayer when about to suffer. New services call for
new Supplies, and great sufferings proportionable strength and support to carry
us through them.

Fifthly, Under falls into deep and sore afflictions and distresses: As under
surprizals by fears and dangers (what time we are afraid, trusting in him) so
under the feeling of piercing afflictions. In my distress, says David, I cried
to the Lord, and out of the depths he heard me. When the shipwrackt Soul cannot
swim to shore, yet let him cry for help. The end God brings us into afflictions
is that they might bring us to himself, that we might not trust in our selves,
but in him the living God. In times of personal distress or Visisitation,
wants, weaknesses, sicknesses, scandals, confinements, banishments from our
house and home, and native soil, yea under the most cruel persecutions, by
tongue or hand, we may appeal with Job and David to Heaven, and have right done
us. When the Soul is like Noah's Ark floating upon the top of these waters, it
may rest on God's holy Mountain. Thus we find the Church betaking her self to
God, in an ill time, a time of general corruption, sore oppression, and extreme
depopulation, Mic. 7.7. though it was foul under feet, she hopes to find it
fair above head; and while she found nothing but a louring Earth, presumes to
spy a similing Heaven. Our Savior bids us, not in glorious times, but sad,
not hang down, but lift up our heads, Luke 21.28.

Sixthly, Under dying apprehensions. Thus David flies to Gods Covenant, and
confirms by the fresh attestations of his Faith his Vision with, and interest
in his God, when to take his leave and farewell of all worldly interests, and
the union between his body and soul was to receive its dissolution. So holy Job
when marching out of the world, goes out to his Redeemer. There is no such time
as a dying hour, to trust in the living God. And so much shortly to that first
Qu^stion.

Secondly, How must we make our addresses to God so as in an evil day to find
help from him: Especially these five manner of ways: First, By Soul-abasement
and humiliation, acknowledging our own unworthiness and insufficiency, that we
are less than the least of all Gods mercies, unworthy any crumm that falls from
his Providential Table. Indeed as long as we can stand upon our own legs, we
will not go to God. (The Child as long as he can maintain himself, will not
come home to his Father,) but when we are fallen, then we are glad of help:
This is that has always obtained with God for particular mercy and public
salvation; and has been the constant carriage and behavior of his people in
their addresses to him, though they come to him boldly as to a Father, yet
withal humbly as to their King. Thus the Centurion, I am not worthy thou
should come under my roof. Thus the Prodigal, Father, I have sinned against
thee, and against Heaven: So the Woman of Canaan, Truth Lord, the dogs, etc. So
in public suits, Abraham comes not with dust and ashes on his head only, but
in his mouth also, when a solicitor for Sodom. Ezra, Nehemiah, and Daniel,
present themselves with great humiliation before God, when praying for the
people. So the Princes of Israel when captivated by Shishak humble themselves,
and say, the Lord is righteous, 2 Chronicles. 12.6, 7. and so the Church, Isa. 64.7.
When she stirs up her self to take hold upon God, she confesses he had hid his
face from her for her sins, and consumed her for her iniquities. The Lord
upholdeth all that fall, and raises up them that be bowed down, Psalm. 145.14.
If we would find acceptance with God, we must go to him, as that good King,
Lord, we know not what to do. Lord, I am under such a guilt, under such a
temptation, under such a want, or affliction, and I know not what to do, but
mine eyes are toward thee. And that is the second, with renunciation of all
Creature-helps, and carnal confidences: God never loves to give his people
mercy, till they know not where to have it else; when they know not what to do,
then he will let them know what he can do. Thus the Church goes to God, Jer.
3.23, 24. -- and cap. 14.22. and so Isa. 26.13. -- When all our Cisterns are
dried up, then is a fit time for God to open the windows of Heaven. If we would
have Soulhelp we must deny our selves, and disclaim all creature-props, and
stays, ordinances, duties, graces, privileges, and if outward help, we must
abandon all Creature-dependencies. The hand must be first emptied, that
receives any gifts of grace and mercy from Heaven.

Thirdly, By Prayer and Invocation. Its Gods promise in leading his people to
their resting place, that with weeping and supplications he would lead them,
Jer. 31.9. Asa in his great strait goes to God by Prayer, and beggs and
implores help, 2 Chronicles. 14.11. He cried unto the Lord, and said, Help us, O
Lord our God. So Hezekiah, Lord, undertake for me. The Apostle directs us to
the throne of grace for help, which Paul attending found this answer, My grace
is sufficient. Prayer is the bucket of Heaven. It Is the Psalmists little River
in the City of God, Psalm. 46. At which come up all the souls goods. I sought
the Lord, and he heard me, Psalm. 34.4. Then shall ye pray unto me -- and I will
give you an expecied end, Jer. 29. For all these things I will be inquired of
by the house of Israel, Ezekiel. 36.37. Prayer is the condition of mercy: We must
call, though we never so fully expect. If we stop our mouths, God will stop his
hand; and leave off asking, God will leave off giving and granting. Sometimes
God is found of those who seek him not, (potest inveniri, non perveniri) as to
the first grace, but having once given his Spirit, he will be sought of all
that find him. Prayer is vehiculum divinae misericordiae, the Chariot in which
the King of Heaven comes down graciously into our souls. Prayer indeed cannot
hasten mercy as to Gods time, but it may as to ours; not as to the time he has
appointed (but his Promise being conditional) it may as to the time by us
expected. And the assurance of mercy should not prevent duty, but enforce it:
the certainty of the end, establishes and confirms the use of the means. If we
would have mercy from God, we must not be too proud or shameface't to beg it,
but take words with us, and say, Take away iniquity, and receive us graciously.
When we are laid by affliction flat on our backs, then have we a fit
opportunity to look up to Heaven, and say, Behold us, O Lord, look upon us, and
our afflictions, remember the troubles and sorrows of our hearts, come and heal
us, and help us; for thou alone art our stay and trust, our succor and
support, our prop and pillar, our only help and hope. God has made many large
and excellent promises to prayer under personal, and also public calamities, 2 Chronicles. 7.14. If my people pray -- And Jehosaphat urges this promise in prayer,
2 Chronicles. 20.9. If when evil comes on us -- and we cry to thee in our
affliction, then hear and help. God knows how to give out mercy, but he will
have this homage of us, first to ask, and then will not, cannot deny, Luke
18.7. Quanto magis?

Fourthly, By faith and believing. He that speeds in his accesses must believe.
As prayer must be made, so faith must be acted. He gives grace and glory to
them that trust in him. Faith trades at Heaven, and fetches in large incomes
of mercy. Prayer may knock and beg for mercy, but says receives it, though not
as manus laborantis, yet, mendicantis. An unbeliever can receive nothing from
the Lord. Faith is to prayer, as fire to powder; the piece will not off without
it, nor make any report. Without faith wings it, prayer can never reach Heaven,
and therefore not bring down any thing thence. Prayer is the ship, but faith
the wind, whereby we must sail to the cape of good hope. Faith without prayer,
is but a bold bravado, or daring presumption; Prayer without faith, is but a
beating the Air, an uncertain sound, or vain canting in the ears of Heaven.

Fifthly, By returning resolutions. He that would come to God, so as to obtain
mercy, must resolve so to come, as never to depart from him more by iniquity. O
Israel, return to the Lord, says the Prophet, from whom thou have fallen, Hos.
14.1. So Jer. 18.11. Behold I frame evil, and devise a device against you,
return you now every man from his evil way, and make your ways and your doings
good. There is no coming to God to beg only further liberty of sinning against
him. I will hear, says David, what God will speak, for he will speak peace to
his People, and his Saints, but let them not turn again to folly. God will
never bestow his salvation for us, to make it only a fomentation to our
corruption. When Israel kept close to God, then he helped them when in all
their straits and calamities they called upon him; but when they rebelled
against him, he gave them up into the hand of the Nations. Surely his salvation
is nigh them that fear him, and keep his Covenant; a penitent, humble, obedient
frame, is requisite in all our approaches to Heaven; a turning to God with
fasting, weeping and mourning, a resolve to offer him the calves of our lips.
The Prophet has it excellently, Isa. 21.12. We must enquire, return and come.
Such approaches to God always are welcome to him, and successful to his
People. That Is the second.

Thirdly, This is a ground of satisfaction and acquiescence to the People of
God. His help may be sufficient to give our souls contentment under all the
fails or wants of the creature. The Apostle (in that holy paradox) bids us be
careful for nothing, not anxiously -- but in every thing make our requests
known to God with prayer and thanksgiving -- Phil. 4.6. Duty and service is our
work, care and providence Gods. The child takes no care, because he has a
Father to provide for him; nor is the Wife sollicitous, because she is provided
for by her Husband; we must not (...), distract our hearts with needless fears
and cares about worldly reliefs or comforts; (...), was our Saviors caution,
let not your hearts be roiled, as waters with stirring, or troubled, as a ship
with tossing. Nec habeo, careo, aut curo, may be the Christians Motto. We
should not envy wicked men's fullness, when as we have an interest in Gods
Alsufficiency; nor necessitate him for lower blessings, when he has given us
the better part. Holy Jacob was brought to an excellent pitch of contentation,
upon his experience and observation of providence, when he vowed to God, that
if God would be with him, and keep him in the way he was to go, and give him
but bread to eat, and raiment to put on, then the Lord should be his God, Genesis
28.20. If God gives us necessaries, why should we stand on superfluities? Let
me ask thy soul (Christian) but this one question, whether thou would part
with thy hope of an interest in thy God for all the world? And if God has
given thee the best things, why should thou doubt or distrust his providence
for the worst? why doubt ye, O ye of little faith? does God provide for Ravens,
and will he not provide for his Sons and Daughters? he that feeds the Sparrows,
and clothes the Lillies, will never see his children starve or perish. It Is
strange to see how carnal men can trust their Mammon of the world, and yet
Christians cannot trust the ever-living God. Strange, that we can trust God
with our souls, and yet hardly trust him with our bodies. This speaks a living
by sense, more than by says: strange, that we could trust him before we knew
him in a way of gracious acquaintance with him; and now doubt him, when we have
had such plentiful experience of him? They who know his Name should trust in
him.

Fourthly, This lays a just ground for return unto God for all receipts of
help and influence from him. Grace should ascend, where it does descend;
privilege asks service. What shall I render? says David, Psalm. 116.12. It was
charged on Hezekiah, that he returned not to the Lord according to the benefit
done to him (the help afforded him against the King of Assyria.) 2 Chronicles.
32.25. But who can give to the Lord? or what can man be profitable to his
Maker? Indeed we have nothing worthy his acceptance; all our duties have no
further value in them, than what grace puts upon them: as gilded and enameled
with his gracious acceptance in Christ, so they become only beautiful and
precious in his sight. But though God expects no full compensation, he does a
right and just improvement. And there is but a twofold way of improvement. By
studying the advance of Gods honor and glory, and communicating to the wants
and necessities of our Brethren.

First, For Gods glory. Does the Lord help us? it is but reasonable we should
help him. Let us help him against the mighty: but God stands in no need of our
help; he will maintain his own cause, we may let God alone to govern the world:
yet we find God himself once asking the question, Psalm. 94.16. Who shall rise
up for me against the evil deers? who shall stand up for me against the workers
of iniquity? Who is on my side? who? The cause and interest of God sometimes is
leaning, seems falling; and though God does not need our help, yet he sometime
requires it, not choosing to act in a more immediate way, but like the Master,
stands and looks on, while his men do his work. And we may be assured, God will
take it very heinously, if we see it carted for want of putting to our
shoulders. O let us then be zealous for God, and appear for his cause; truth
and glory; appear in our places against sin, and for holiness. As we would ever
have God appear for us at the last day, when he comes out against the world; so
let us appear for God in our day, when the world are going out against him.
With what face or confidence dare we look God in the face at judgment, and
desire him to stand then by us, when our consciences shall accuse us? Time was
when we would not stand by him, or venture any thing for him, and tell us
withal, that he that denies Christ before men, he will deny before his Father
in Heaven.

Secondly, For our Brethrens supply. As we have received, so let us
communicate. Communicate to other poor souls that need our help. When converted
our selves, we ought to strengthen our Brethren. The world is for use, not for
enjoyment, grace for both: We are not owners, only Stewards of those talents
God has concredited, and he will expect an account of us, according to our
receipts ought to be our disbursements; and never did any soul lose by his
layings out for God, but he sufficiently reimbursed him. The liquor of mercy is
on purpose put by God into broken Vessels, that it might run out to others. We
should do what in us lies to hand Christ and Grace, those gifts of God to our
Brethren; our Lamps should be filled with Oil, that others might borrow of us,
at least light from us. It was Jobs commendation, that he was eyes to the
blind, and feet to the lame; he fed them with his morsels, clothed them with
his raiment, harbored them in his house, Job 31. It Is much more our duty to
endeavor the illumination of blind minds, and recovery of lame souls, and help
them by the crutches of our prayers, tears, and counsels, who cannot as yet
step without them. If our neighbors beast be in the ditch, we ought to help
him out, and much more his soul, when about plunging into Hell. When one
neighbors house is on fire, all the neighborhood will contribute their best
ability to quench it, and shall we not lend our helping-hand to extinguish the
flames of divine wrath, which our Brothers soul has already kindled upon him,
and wherein he is like to burn else to all eternity? And as graceless sinners
stand in need of our help, so oftentimes do comfortless Saints; they are weary
and heavy laden, and would be glad of a lift at their burden. To a man
afflicted, pity should be shown of his friend. No truer sign of grace than a
compassionate sense of the wounds of a troubled conscience; and no surer sign
of a desperate mind, devoted to destruction, than a want of sympathy with them.
The end God comforts us, is, that we may comfort others? 2. Cor. 1.4. And he
expects, being our selves converted, we should strengthen our Brethren; we
should not be cisterns, to keep all in, but conduits to let run out our gifts,
graces and experiences to others. It Is the rarest Art in the world, to comfort
afflicted consciences; every Christian should endeavor to be well skilled in
it. By distributions of grace and comfort to others, we shall become gainers,
and lose no more than the Sun does of light, or the Fountain of water, by
affording us their beams and streams. Virtus eundo crescit. Natural motions may
spend, but this spiritual increases. It Is pity the talents of grace should
ever lie dead by us, and such holy usury and improvement always brings in the
greatest increase, and largest revenue. And indeed a Christian has no more
grace, than he well improves for Gods glory, and his own and others good. And
as we must communicate to others souls, so to their outward conditions too that
need our help. Feed the hungry, cloth the naked -- As we have opportunity, do
good to all men, with such sacrifices God is well pleased. Charge them (says
the Apostle) that are rich, that they be ready to distribute -- And he that
has this worlds goods, and sees his Brother need, and has no compassion on
him, how dwells the love of God in him? The merciful is blessed, and he shall
find mercy, but let him never expect mercy from God, that has no mercy for
man. God will one day shut his heart as close as ever he did his purse, and
straiten his bowels to him, as he did his bounty to his Brethren. The bill at
the last day runs in negatives, and God will cause both the gallant and worldly
muck-worm, shortly to know, that he gave them estates, not to lay out on their
backs and bellies; and moneys, not barely to trade with, and treasure up for
their followers, but to do good with in their generations by acts of piety and
charity as occasion was offered them. Christ will go on the other side from
their Souls another day, who now passed on the other side with a bare naked
view of their Brethrens bleeding condition. It was good Nehemiahs glory, That
he did not oppress the poor, but relieve them. It will be a fearful cry
against rich hoarders at the last day, which all the cravings, and starvings of
the poor amongst them will send out against them. The Apostle gives us a report
of it, Jam. 5.4, 5. Pure Religion and undefiled is to visit the fatherless and
widow, and to keep a man's self unspotted in the World. It Is reported of the
Deer, that they in swimming over a River help each other by leaning on one
another backs, and when the foremost be weary he comes hindmost. And the story
of the Belly in the Fable is not unknown. So should we help each other in our
passage to Heaven.

Fifthly, Let this be a ground of confidence in God under all trialls and
troubles; let us not cast away our confidence, for it has a sure foundation,
and therefore shall have great recompense of reward: Let us not despond, but
depend on God for help in all our straits: lift up our eyes to the heavens,
whence comes our help, as the Psalmist has it, Psalm. 121.1, 2. Not that we
should not make use of all lawful means, under trouble, and do like him (who
being plunged into a ditch, would not stir, but stay till God helped him out).
This is to tempt God, and not to trust him. Qui vitat molam, vitat farinam.
Reliance on the first Cause destroys not the use of the second. There is a
great deal of difference between using of means and resting on them: As it is
evil to use means, and not rest on God, (this is carnal confidence) so it is
vain to depend on God out of the use of Means, (that is daring presumption).
Though God has determined all states, conditions and changes, notwithstanding
his decrees, a man may staive for want of food, and die for want of Physic
too. God has decreed necessary means in order to such and such ends, and he
that would obtain the mercy God has promised, must use the means he has
appointed. But notwithstanding this Caution, we must not so look down on the
Valley, as not withal, yea, chiefly and principally to look up to the Hills,
nor so view Earth, as not in the mean time (with that Cardinal) to have leisure
to look up to Heaven. O it is a sweet thing to see our mercies and supplies
coming from Gods right hand, and dropping to us from Heaven. Happy it is in all
conditions to have a God to fly to, and to encourage our selves in. When we are
reduced to great straits, and all the World seems to be in an uproar, and
blended in a Chaos of confusion, and we are amuzed and amazed, then to have a
God to repose and confide in, is an infinite mercy. O learn we to trust and
hope in this our God at all times: Who would not trust this God, who is so able
and so ready to help? Trust him for your selves, with your Bodies, your
Estates, your Souls, your all: Trust him for the Church; trust him in time of
men's fiercest persecution; trust him in time of his own immediate visitations.

But it may be you will object and say, we are unworthy of any such help or
influence, and therefore cannot put forth such confidence. But remember, God
does all for his people gratis, all graciously from first to last, for his
Names sake: He blots out iniquities, heals backslidings, repairs his peoples
breaches, and all for his Names sake. Take one place for all, Isa. 48.9. For my
Names sake will I defer mine anger -- This is the grand argument Gods people
insist on in all their applications for mercy, Jer. 14. -- Dan. 9. And the
flagg of defiance he hung out, and the standing challenge he made to Israel in
all his Benefactions to them, Not for your sakes -- Consideration of our
unworthiness (if sensible of it, and rightly affected with it) is so far from
being a discouragement, that it should be to us rather an encouragement to come
to God on all occasions, whether for our spiritual, or our temporal estates and
conditions. God is worthy to give, and will not say as Alexander once, when one
asked him a groat, that that was too little for a King to give, and a talent
too much for a Beggar to receive, but will give like a King, like a God, though
we be never so unworthy to receive. Free grace delights to triumph in sinners
unworthiness.

But it may be, unbelief will object and say, It Is in vain, we have waited a
long time upon the Lord for help, and none comes, for strength under such a
temptation, for comfort under such an affliction, for deliverance out of such
and such straits and trialls, for salvation for his Church and people, but yet
no sign of his coming, the Chariot-wheels of mercy draw heavily: God has
forsaken us, there is no hope, why should we wait on the Lord any longer?
Notwithstanding all this (my Soul) It Is good to hope, and quietly to wait for
the salvation of the Lord.

In answer to this cavil, consider but, First, That God does not always work
according to our platform. We would chalk out the way of Providence, limit the
holy one of Israel, prescribe to Omnipotency and Eternity for the time and
manner of our deliverance: but this is to go beyond our last, over-sawcy
boldness, and malepert presumption. Who art thou O man, that would sit at
God's Councel-table, or become his Director? Shall the Clay prescribe to the
Potter his way of workmanship? God does all things in infinite wisdom and
holiness, and works all things according to the Counsel of his own will. God
indeed is a sure help to his People, yet he does not always help them,
perfectly, visibly, or presently.

First, Not perfectly, mercy is at first an Embryo, and Infant, before it comes
to any stature and proportion. The motions of Providence are great (God is
doing many things at once, and one design is lodged in the bosom of another)
and therefore slow, though sure. Providence is forced to ride circuit, go far
about, before it can effect and accomplish Gods intended purposes; and often the
furthest way about proves the nearest home. We must not (as Luther was wont to
say) judge of God's Comical Tragedies before the last act. The Picture though a
rude draught at first, before the Limner has done with it, becomes a polished
piece. God does (as that famous Painter answered, when he was taxed for his
tediousness in drawing Venus's Picture) aeternitati pingere, carries on a
design for Eternity, by all the present revolutions of Providence, which though
the blind World cannot now behold the beauty of, yet at the last day will
appear glorious to the view of men and Angels.

Secondly, Not visibly. Gods Providence often, when it works for a man, seems to
work against him. Jacob thought all things were against him, when all went well
on his side. It was a good observation of Luther, that God uses to work by
contraries for his Church, to bring light out of darkness, and Heaven out of
Hell. Gods ways are often in the Deep, and his paths hidden and unknown. Thou
hidest thy self, O God of Israel, the Savior. The Devil first comes with the
sweetest, and at last with the sharpest; God on the contrary makes a sad
beginning, but a blessed and comfortable end. -- ye have seen the end of the
Lord. God indeed usually comes to the wicked first with a blessing, and last
with a judgment, but to his people first with a judgment, and last with a
blessing. The wicked have the top of the Cup of mercy, but the dregs of that of
wrath: The Saints sip of the Cup of wrath, but have the bottom of that of
mercy. Now the further off the approaches of mercy are, the more invisible. The
Prophet speaks of the Interstitium between the Law, and the Gospel, that it
should be a day half dark and half light, Zech. 14.8. And it is always darkest
and coldest a little before break of day: We are no competent Judges of divine
operations. God was in that place, and Jacob knew it not; we often fear a Devil
of fury, when, there is nothing but an Angel of mercy, and look not on that side
of the Picture, which has the face of a beautiful Virgin, but the other that
has the affrighting look of an ugly and deformed Monster. Manoah, when God
came to visit him, thought he came to murder him: when God comes to comfort us,
then we are well-pleased, but let him come to humble, refine and purge, better
and reform us, then we cry out Undone. We are sensible when he gives us fuller
assurance, but not when he works in us more holiness. So let Christ appear in
his glory in his Church, let him give her a Year of Jubilee, then her Children
lift up their heads; but let him appear in the prefiguring signs, and shake all
Nations, come with Fire and Sword, then men's hearts tremble for fear, and
scarce is faith to be found in the Earth. But the infinitely wise God has
private Channels and Conveyances of grace, which are not a whit less sure,
because more hidden and secret.

And thirdly, not presently. As God works not according to our model, so he
takes his own time. That leads to the second. He always observes not, nay
seldom or never our time. Christ would do nothing before his hour came. It is
not for us to know the times and seasons which God has reserved in his own
Power. All things shall (not do at present) work together for good; take the
whole piece, when finished, and it will appear excellent. God has an appointed
time, which once come, mercy shall stay no longer. Exodus 12. ult. The very same
day Israel went out of Egypt by their armies. In that instant Daniel was
praying, the seventy weeks being determined, comes a Dove with a Letter in its
wing, an Angel flying to him with intelligence of the return of their
Cap^ivi^y. There is a set time when he will have mercy on Sion. God sent his
Son in the fullness of time. When the Ammorites sins be full, he will judge
them, though it be four hundred years first, he had not forgotten them; one day
with him is as a thousand, and a thousand years but as yesterday, as a Watch in
the night. And when Gods peoples graces be at the full, he will then come and
save them. He gathers his fruit when once ripe. God does not always ride post,
or mercy come on the wing, but though it be long first, it shall surely come at
last, and the longer in coming, the better and more welcome; mercies soon ripe
are soon rotten, soon gotten soon lost; but those which cost us dear, and are
the fruit of many prayers, tears and sorrows, and results of much faith and
hope, waiting and patience, are sweetest and surest, our Benjamins and most
beloved darlings. God has bound himself by promise to his people for the
thing, but not for the time, and he does not therefore observe the soonest but
the seasonablest time, nor so confider our need, as not also to respect our
fitness, and so his own glory. He can work when he pleases: Nullum tempus
occurrit Regi -- and if he does not when we desire, it is but a just requital;
for as his time was not ours in coming to him, so it is but equal our time
should not be his in coming to us. But yet his delays are no denials, and
mercy may be nearest, when it seems furthest off: Faith knows Gods time is the
best, and is willing to stay for its portion, till he pleases to pay it;
always saying, Not mine, but thy will be done. If God comes not ad horam, he
will ad salutem: the longer the Physic remains in the body of the Patient, the
more effectual will be its operation: And the longer the vessel of prayer be
gone, the greater lading it brings with it, when it once comes home. Hasty
births commonly miscarry, and how sad a case will it be to lose a mercy, or
have it spoiled, and have half a mercy instead of it, for want of a little
longer waiting? The Soldier will be vexed to purpose, if he delivers the
Castle, when as if he had staid but a few days longer, relief had come
certainly. What gat Saul by posting the Sacrifice before Samuel came? It might
have cut him to the heart, if it did not to think, that had he waited but a few
days longer, he had saved both his life and his Kingdom. Impatience has lost
or impaired many a mercy. God will grant our patient, sober, submissive
requests, but never in mercy our restless and too importunate desires. These
make him often give us royal favors in anger, and let his wrath enter our
souls, while yet our meat is in our mouths. The Church had learnt better
manners, than to be so hasty, so quick and snatching, Isa. 26.9. In the way of
thy Judgments have we waited for thee. It Is too great a boldness to make our
watch a rule for Gods Sun; our seeming distructions often usher in our
deliverance, and our too great haste for deliverance often proves our destruction.

But thirdly, We may say, our case is sad, our misery great, we are under sore
trials and temptations, have met with many disappointments, so as we have no
hope, our case is desperate, our disease is grown incurable. To which I answer,
the sadder our condition, the more hope. The greater man's misery, the more Gods
pity, and deeper our affliction, the higher his affection. It Is the more honor
to God to work, when others have thrown it up; and the greater glory to this
heavenly Physician to do the cure when it is grown opprobrium medicorum, the
scorn to all others. God delights to come in at a strait, to know his People in
a day of adversity: To stay till all our power be gone, our hope perished, and
we have given over praying, seeking, waiting, hoping and expecting, and given
up all for lost, that so he may have wherewithal to set all his Attributes on
work at once; his power, wisdom, goodness and mercy. When Israel had committed
a great sin, yet Ezra comforts them with this, There is yet hope in Israel. Art
thou troubled with the guilt of sin, defilement, and power of corruption? art
thou disturbed with fears, doubts, temptations? do thou want the evidence of
Gods favor, and blessed assurances of his love? art thou pressed down with the
weight of thy afflictions? do thy feet stick in the mire, and thy soul is born
down, and sinks through the load that is upon thy shoulders? yet look up by
faith to Heaven; God can open a door of hope in this valley of Achor. Lo he is
behind the curtain, though thou see him not, and will step in and help thee,
if he sees the swoon or faint. He is praesto, ready at hand to save thee;
though he seems to sleep, he and his arm can awake ( Isa. 51.9.) as a mighty
man out of sleep, for his enemies confusion, and eke his Peoples consolation.
He will arise, Psalm. 44. ult. He can turn thy captivity as the streams of the
South, and a word of his mouth shall do it, as well as an act of his hand. Be
not discouraged or despondent, but wait his approach. Though thy heart fail, be
of good courage; and he will strengthen thine heart. Thou have an omnipotent
arm to lean upon, therefore give not in, nor give over. Still be found in the
way of thy duty, pray still, believe, wait still, and for ever hope in the Lord
and his mercy. God often suggests his Creatorship in Scripture to encourage his
People in great extremities. As to Jacob, Isa. 40.27, 28. So Psalm. 124. ult.
Our help is in the Name of the Lord, who made Heaven and Earth. And thus in
this present Psalm, in the words following the Text: Which made Heaven and
Earth, to teach us, that God can do any thing, who made all things. What is it
God cannot do, as well as he did create the world out of nothing? What should
we doubt in his way of providence, whose power we have such demonstrative proof
of in the work of creation? And the Apostle Peter seems to make that relation
speak mercy too, as well as power, and goodness as greatness, 1 Pet. 4.19.
Where he exhorts Saints in a suffering condition, to commit the keeping of
their souls to him in well doing, as into the hand of a faithful Creator. This
title alone speaks comfort and assurance to Gods People, and abundant
encouragement to wait and hope in him: not crying out in their passions, I
shall one day fall by the hand of this evil; but staying themselves on him in
the worst of humane miseries and calamities. Let me leave it with this Memento,
That thy condition is not such, neither can ever any such state befall thee,
that either God has not helped in, or cannot help in. No temptations betide
thee, but what are common to the Saints; and should there, God can do that he
never did, as well as thou need that none ever had; and being thy God and
Creator, thou may be sure his help shall always be sufficient to thy needs,
for he will not forsake the work of his hands. He can work, and none shall let
him. He that said, Let there be light, and there was so in the world, can say,
Let there be grace, peace, comfort, and there shall be so in the heart; Let
there be truth and peace, and there shall be so in the Church. If God be your
help, then make him your hope in all conditions and cases, public or private.
Has God broken your estates, your families, or man ruined them? God can repair
them: Has he broken his Church and People, broken down her hedge, so that the
Boar of the Wood does waste her, and all the wild beasts of the Forest devour
her? he can yet look down upon her, and raise her up when lowest, and throw
down her enemies when highest. Let the house of Aaron and Levi, yea, and all
that fear the Lord, trust in the Lord, and ye that have no helper, make him
your hope and help. Say, This God is our God, and shall be our guide to death.
I shall dismiss this branch of Application, with an answer to these two
Questions.

First, What are the conditions upon which we may challenge help from God in an
evil day?

Secondly, What are the times and seasons when we may most confidently expect
it? All evils are reduceable to two general heads. They are either Gods
immediate visitations, or humane afflictions and p^rsecutions. The former of
these I shall answer with special reference to the first, the latter to the
second.

First, On what terms may Gods People expect help, when he is going out in the
way of his Judgments, as Sword, Pestilence, etc? I shall but name these five
conditions, (the discourse being swollen far beyond what it was intended.)

First, A religious severity, which consists in an accurate walking before God
in a day of prosperity and mercy; a setting strait steps to his Kingdom, a
cleaving to him, a dwelling in him as our habitation, a maintaining strict and
close communion with him, Isa. 32.17. The effect of righteousness shall be
peace, quietness and assurance for ever. Communion with God in a good day,
lays a sure foundation for confidence in him in an evil. He that remembers God
in his high estate, God will remember him in his low; that makes God his song
in Sunshine days, shall find him his strength in tempestuous times; who give
God a room in their hearts and houses in times of felicity, shall have room in
his Ark in the day of adversity, Genesis 6.8, 9. Noah found grace in the eyes of
the Lord; he was a just man, and perfect in his generations, and walked with
God. Whereas, they who forsake God in the time of mercy, he will forsake them
in the time of extremity; those who now turn the back on him, he will then turn
the face from, Jer. 18.17. As they gave a deaf ear to the voice of his mercy,
shutting the door of their hearts to him, he will give a deaf ear to the voice
of their cry, and shut the door of his grace on them, Prove. 1.24. This also
consists in an immunity from the sins of the times, not only a sympathy of
their sufferings, but a freedom from their sins and defilements. When a
Christian saves himself from a perverse generation, is unspotted with the
times, keeps his garments fair, though he lives in a contagious Air, yet
preserves himself free from its infection; and like the fish keeps the
freshness of his grace, though swimming in the salt-waters of sin and
wickedness. When out of an holy and reverential fear he dares not comply with,
but withstands, opposes, protests, witnesses against, and mourns for the
abominations of the times. This was Noabs carriage, being warned of God, and
moved with an holy fear of his threatened Judgments, he makes an Ark, Heb.
11.7. which the profane and secure world flouted and derided. This was Lots
security in the overthrow of Sodom, his soul was vexed with their filthy
conversation, 2 Pet. 2.7, 8. And the Apostle makes him a president, his
deliverance a ruling case, so as to argue and draw up a firm conclusion from it
for all the godly under like circumstances, verse 9. This tenderness of
conscience was that which removed Josiah out of the dint of suffering, 2 King.
22.19. -- Jealousy of sinning, is the best security against suffering. Such as
fear Gods Name, shall have the bright side of the cloud, when others have the
dark; he will be to them a Sun, when to the rest a fire. This holy carriage
protected Jeremiah, and kept him out of captivity; and exempted Baruch, and
gave him his life for a prey. Gods mourners, who gave him their testimony, by
wearing his livery, shall also have his mark of distinguishing favor, Ezekiel. 9.
They are plucked as brands out of the fire. We may invert that of the Prophet
Ezekiel, and make the subject the predicate, cap. 7.16. They who are as Doves
of the Valleys mourning for their iniquity, shall escape. They who feared the
Lord, and thought on his Name (minded Religion, and made it their business) had
a book of remembrance written, Mal. 3.16. Phinehas's zeal procures him the
covenant of Gods peace, Numb. 25.8.

Secondly, A fiducial recumbency. God saves them that trust in him, and because
they trust in him, Psalm. 37. ult. He that believes shall never be confounded.
God is a buckler to them that trust in him, Prove. 2.8. The scope of the whole
91 Psalm, is to assure preservation to them that exercise faith in God, and
keep in viis, in ways of strict and close walking with him: Not an absolute
faith, that God certainly will protect and deliver (for that cannot be without
a special revelation) but a steadfast faith, and firm dependence on God, and his
power and providence, both as able and willing to do it. Jobs confidence in God
gave him assurance of his being his salvation. This obtained a special
privilege for Obedmelech, Jer. 39. ult. Thy life shall be for a prey to thee,
because thou have put thy trust in me, says the Lord. And this gave Daniel a
marvelous, yea miraculous protection, Dan. 6.22, 23. Innocence was found in
him, and he believed in his God.

Thirdly, A praying importunity. When Gods Spirit is poured out from on high,
and his stir up themselves to take hold on God, plead and wrestle, call and
cry, being his remembrancers day and night, Psalm. 32.6. And so Zeph. 2.3. Seek
the Lord all ye meek of the earth, which have wrought his Judgment, seek
righteousness, seek meekness: it may be ye shall be hid in the day of the Lords
anger. in the most desolating Judgments God reserves a remnant, and they are
the seeking, praying ones, Joel 2. ult. Whosoever shall call on the Name of the
Lord, shall be delivered. So Psalm. 91.14, 15.

Fourthly, A perfect and exact integrity. He saves the upright in heart, Psalm.
7.10. He compasses them about with favor as a shield. The way of the just is
uprightness: thou most upright do weigh the path of the Just, Isa. 26.7.
Integrity is the ground of hope. This gave Job a certainty of his coming out of
affliction, and of a glorious restoration, Job 13.18. I have ordered my cause,
I know I shall be justified. This was that Hezekiah pleaded under Gods
correction, Isa. 38.3. And Nehemiah under his enemies rage and opposition:
Think upon me my God for good. Christ's Righteousness is only pleadable at the
bar of Gods Justice, but our own in the Court of his mercy. A man may as well
rear a building on a quagmire, or quick-sand, as build a just hope on
Hypocrisy; but righteousness is a sure soundation. The morning star being once
up and visible, it is never very dark: Such as walk always in the view of their
uprightness, have always some glimmerings of comfort, and are never hopeless
and desolate. This was Gods own assignation of the reason of Noah's deliverance,
Genesis 7.1. Thee only have I found righteous in this generation. He that walks
uprightly, walks securely. When men are upright to God, to men, exercise a
conscience void of offense in duties of the first and the second Table; keep
themselves from their iniquities, and have respect to all Gods Commandments,
and whatsoever comes on them, do not forget God and his Covenant, they are upon
the fairest ground of security. The Prophet Amos puts them into not a bare
capacity, but at least a probability of mercy, Amos 5.15. Hate the evil, seek
good, and establish Judgment in the gate, it may be the Lord God of Hosts will
be gracious to the remnant of Joseph. Nay the Prophet Isaiah goes further, and
puts them under a certainty, Isa. 33.16. (When Hypocrites were bundled as
thorns, or packt as brands into the devouring fire of Gods wrath) who should
abide now? He that walks righteously -- He shall dwell on high, his place of
defense shall be the munition of Rocks: bread shall be given him, his waters
shall be sure.

Fifthly, A resolved singularity, and courageous zeal and magnanimity for God
in the worst of times, both as to doing and suffering. When Christians shine
with an eminent luster of piety, like stars in a dark night, with greater
brightness, and burn with an holy zeal, as fire in frosty weather, always
hottest, are none such of the times, and do not only keep themselves untainted
from the sins they embrace, but se on the duties they oppose; resolving with
Joshua, that they and their house will serve the Lord, and with Daniel, that
they will as formerly (notwithstanding all prohibitions to the contrary) make
their supplication to the God of Heaven: They will keep up private family
duties, public attendances, though all give them up; maintain those duties of
Religion most zealously, strenuously, and industriously, that are most
momentous, though most opposed and despised; dancing before the Lords Ark,
though laughed to scorn by the Michaels of the world. Though Princes speak
against them, they will meditate and speak of Gods statutes. They will appear
for God, when all appear against him; as did Elijah, whom God wonderfully
secured; and Paul, whom he stood by miraculously; and Luther, whose language
was fiat justitia ruat Coelum, whom God signally protected at Worms, and
elsewhere, though he were the only butt his pretended holiness then had to
shoot at. When a man is resolved to consult duty, and not safety, to suffer
before he sins, to burn in a fiery furnace, before bow to a graven Image; and
with an holy fortitude, to stand up for God against the sins of the time and
place, though he has none to back him, though all the neighborhood, Town,
City, be otherwise affected, (as it was with him as to Baals Altars, and Paul
to the Athenian worships) and is determined to venture all for God, and in his
Cause, with a Caesarem veho in his mouth, if I perish, I perish; and can
confidently look danger, bonds, death in the face, being willing with Paul, for
the hope of Israel, to be bound with this chain, Act. 28.20. As holy fear, so
this invincible faith, and undaunted courage, is an evident token of salvation,
and that from God, Phil. 1.28. Whom in the world should God help, if not them
that help with him? or stand close to, if not those who stand fast to him?
distinguishing duty shall certainly be rewarded with distinguishing mercy.

Secondly, At what special times may Gods People look for help in time of men's
violence and oppression? Let me resolve that one question (in case the cause of
the People of God should be brought to an extremity) and leave it with them as
a fortification of their hopes and spirits. Now, though as it is impossible for
us infallibly to determine the periods of Gods grace to sinners, when abused,
so the times and seasons of his giving out mercy and salvation to his People,
when wanted; (times being in his hand) yet so far as we have the Scripture for
our guide, we may assign some particular and extraordinary cases, wherein help
is promised, and so may be justly expected.

As First, When Gods Cause lies a bleeding, and the general concern and
interest of Religion is at stake. God is jealous for his great Name. Thus
Joshua pleads when Israel fell before their enemies in battle, cap. 7.9. And
Jeremiah, cap. 14.9. We are called by thy Name, leave us not; and verse. 21. Do
not abhor us for thy Names sake, do not disgrace the Throne of thy glory --
When the enemy houted Gods People, pointing with the finger at them, These are
the People of the Lord, he had pity for his holy Name, Ezekiel. 36.21. When the
whole interest of Religion, and Gods people must go off at a blow, God will
step between the Axe and them. We have such a memorable example of this, in
Gods deliverance of the whole body of the Jews from Haman's conspiracy, as the
defeatment thereof may be a standing encouragement to his people in all ages.

Secondly, When a cloud of reproach and scandal is cast upon his Peoples
innocence and integrity, and thereupon arises an unjust oppression of them.
This was Job's case; all along his Friends falsely accused him, but his God did
compurgate him, and so David's, as appears almost in every Psalm, where he now
appeals to God, and makes protests of his innocence; as Psalm. 7.3. then prays
for relief, Psalm 38. ult. and 71.11, 12. and 109.26. professes his hope in God
notwithstanding, Psalm. 35.15. promises himself redress, Psalm. 37.6. So
Jeremiah, cap. 20.11. and the Church, Mic. 7.8, 10. who promise themselves
salvation, and prophecy their enemies destruction, upon their slanders and
scandals cast upon them. God will take part with his people, what is done to
them he takes as done to himself, whether in way of kindness or abuse. As they
vindicate his Name and glory in the World, so will he theirs from all reproach
put upon it.

Thirdly, When there is a failure and disappointment of all humane help. This
is the Psalmists argument, Psalm. 44. ult. and the ground of his plea, Psalm.
79.8. Let thy tender mercies speedily prevent us, for we are brought very low
-- When Pharaoh said, The Israelites were entangled, the Wilderness had shut
them in, God comes and cuts a passage for them. Exodus 14.3. God commonly helps
his People at the lowest; the taking the weakest part is to him no
disadvantage. When vain is the help of man, and the cause is concluded
desperate for want of an Advocate, then God is called in by our Prophet, Psalm.
12.1. Help Lord, for the godly man cease, -- Cum nemini obtrudi potest --
Psalm. 116.6. I was brought low, and he helped me. When Sion is called an
Outcast, and no man seeks after her, then God chooses to have mercy on her,
Jer. 30.17.

Fourthly, When the Enemies of Gods Truth and Cause blaspheme his Name, and
insult and triumph over his people. Whom have thou reproached, says God to
Rabshaketh? Isa. 37.23. There Is the ground of his appearance against him: The
King of Heaven may pardon his Peoples rebellions, but revilings are too saucy
for subjects to give, or the infinite and eternal God to bear from a vile worm,
a sinful and mortal creature. It Is time for God to arise, when wicked men thus
make void his Law, and so far usurp upon his Supremacy and Prerogative, as to
offer a competition with him, who, he or they, shall be Lord Controller in the
World. When the Assyrians talked blasphemously, that God was the God of the
hills, and not of the valleys, therefore did he deliver them into Israel's
hand, 1 King. 20.28. God dare wrestle or engage with them, though on
disadvantagious ground. This argument the Church uses for deliverance, Psalm.
74.10, and strongly urges, Psalm. 79.10, 11, 12. -- and the cruelty and
blasphemy of the enemy may prevail with God sometimes, when cannot the Prayers
of his Saints and People, Isa. 47.6, 7, 8. God will save the afflicted People,
and bring down the high and proud looks, Psalm. 18.27. It Is observable, when God
assigns to his people the reason of the expulsion of the Nations, and the
introduction of Israel in their room, he gives it thus, Not for your
righteousness but their wickedness, Deuteronomy. 9.5. when Saints holiness cannot
avail for mercy, sinners iniquity may call for justice.

Fifthly, When the spirits of the Saints begin to despond and fail, and yet are
carried out with serious humiliation for their sin, and (recovering these fits
and qualms) with outgoings of Faith and Prayer to Heaven. When Christ comes,
there will scarce be Faith in the Earth: when the hearts of Gods people begin
to swoon, he will contend no longer, lest their spirits should fail before him.
When the wicked are flesht and pufft up with vain hopes, God breaks their bones
asunder, and their horn in pieces: when Gods people are as dry bones he life's
and fleshes them, Ezekiel. 37. When the Question is asked, By whom shall Jacob
arise, for he is small, the answer is, The Lord repented for this, Amos 7.2, 3.
God will not always suffer the rod of the wicked to rest on the lot of the
righteous, lest he puts forth his hand to iniquity, Psalm. 125.3. God passes by
his People, when as tall Cedars, and beholds them when low and weak Shrubs; he
delights in them when in an abject low condition, and shows them mercy. When
the Locusts do most overrun the Cassians, then the Seleucidian Birds come and
are their devourers and destroyers. God is willing his people sometimes should
be brought to that pass, that they know not whither to turn, that so they may
know what their God can, and will bring about for them. When Gods people are
laid upon their backs, then is a fit time for him to take them up into his
arms, and put them into his bosom. Especially, when their uncircumcised hearts
are humbled by their afflictions (though oft-times not so sincerely, at least
not thoroughly) God will come in for their help, as Judge. 10. 2 Chronicles. 12. --
Especially where there is a spirit of true humiliation, Faith and Prayer, that
conjunction is a sure Prognostic of mercy, and sign of deliverance, Zach.
12.10. compared with cap. 13.1. -- No sooner Daniel begins his Prayer, but the
Captivity makes its end. Hos. 5. ult. -- I will go to my place till they
acknowledge -- When they come to seeking, God soon comes to saving. God never
puts his people hard on begging, or inclines them to asking, but he stands
ready handed with, and fully bent and disposed to mercy. When the Sea gets into
the Ship, and Peter cries out, Christ reaches out his arm to save him.

Sixthly, Let this be a ground of adherence and firm conjunction and cleaving
to God at all times, always cleave to this God who is such an help, with full
purpose of heart. As Ruth to Naomi going where he goes, and living where he
lives. Let nothing separate you from your God. Like the Spaniel, couch close to
your Master: It Is good for you to draw near to God; lose all rather than lose
him; part with all the World before him. Better God your Friend to stand by
you, than all the World without him. God is faithful to you, be you so to him,
and though all else do, do not you forsake him. Forget your Kindred and Fathers
house: love not father or mother, wise or children, house or land, but hate
them, if coming in competition with him. Throw off your Father (as holy Jerome
said) though he hangs about your neck, and trample on your mother, though she
lay in the way, to go out unto him. Give not up the cause of God to Satan, or
the common Enemy, because ye meet with a little trouble. Though the Captain
has not present relief, he will not deliver up the City, if in any hope or
expectation of it, but hold out if possible; he knows not how nigh he is
relief. Sacrifice not God's interest, help may come before you expect it.
Christians, on your first coming in, you gave your selves up to the Lord, and
indeed as that Noble person said, In undertaking Religion you might be
deceived, if you thought to save any thing but your Souls. Oh take heed of
making a breach of promise. Take heed of using any sinister course, any
unlawful and indirect means, to evade the sufferings of the Gospel never
accept a deliverance which is worse than bondage, better have help Gods way
than your own, as finding it, than as making it. Infinitely far better that
trouble which ends in peace, than that peace which ends in trouble. Fight
therefore the good fight of Faith, so as at last ye may lay hold on the Crown
of eternal life. So run as ye may obtair. Go on securely and courageously in
the way of your duty whatsoever occurres, fear the Lord only, and keep his way.
Esther, though under strict interdiction, yet ventures to approach the King,
having fasted and prayed with her Maidens, in hope of divine benediction: The
Apostles though under a prohibition (if not a suspension) to preach choose to
obey God before man, Act. 5.29. Be neither drawn or courted by the fawning
allurements of the world, nor yet frighted by it is terrors, to give up, or in,
in your profession. Take our Saviors advice, Luke 12.4. Fear not him that can
only kill the body, but rather him that can destroy both body and soul in Hell.

Lastly, A word to sinners, and strangers from God and his hope and help
concludes all. This offers first a word of direction to poor sinners, whether
they must go for help: They are all lapsed fallen creatures, plunged into a
state of guilt and corruption, brought under the supremacy and dominion of
Satan, and have no power or sufficiency of themselves to recover, but God alone
is their help, Hos. 13.9. O Israel, thou have destroyed thy self, but in me is
thy help to be found. Man fell by his own free will, but cannot recover without
Gods free grace, Homo libertatem quam accepit nisi Christo liberante non
recipit; as Saints therefore must bless him, so sinners go to him as their only
help; go to him for light, life, by Prayer, in the use of Ordinances, which are
media cultus, and gratiae too; and though God will not hear you as sinners, he
may as creatures.

Secondly, Labor all to get an interest in God, that he may be your help. Time
may, nay, will come, when you will stand in need of an help. You may have many
storms in your journey to eternity. It Is good in a Sunshine to provide for a
storm. A day of affliction may come, of death and dissolution must come. A
sword, a plague, a fire, a famine, a captivity may come, and what will ye do in
the evil day? All worldly helps will then be in vain; ye may kindle a fire of
your own sparks, but the end will be to lie down in sorrow. You may with him
that took up an hand-full of Gloworms in a dark night, hope to warm your
fingers with them, but it will be a false fire, and afford no heat with its
light. These Gloworms may shine till you come to the light of Sun or Candle.
These fair-fac'd nothings may please till you come to be convinced of a better
beauty, but then will vanish. What will it profit to have a little comfort from
them for a moment, and at last be cast into the hellish dungeon? Though ye have
all creatures for you, and God against you, your case is as sad and miserable,
as had you God for you, and all the world against you, it were comfortable.
Time may come too, that you may have all the world against you, and the Devil
too, yea, your own consciences, and what will ye do, if ye have not a God, a
Christ to stand for you? Created-comforts cannot help you, if God has once
forsaken you; though he can supply their absence, who is the Sun of
Righteousness, and make day, though there be not the star of any creature
visible, yet they cannot his. If the Sun be gone down, it is night for all the
stars. They have no Oil for themselves, much less can afford to others. There
is no trust in riches, friends, men, Angels; they are all a vain hope. The
Parent may leave his Child, the Husband his Wife, the friend his friend, when
time of trial comes. God has stood on Mount Ebal, and blasted all carnal
confidence, as well as on Mount Gerizim, and blessed confidence in himself:
Yea, he may justly give us up to our own trust, and those things we have
confided in, if we repose in any thing short of himself, so he did them, Jer.
2.28. And will the creatures Mantle be a sufficient covering to us? Will the
great Tree of outward mercies, profession, privileges, protect us under the
soaking and lasting storm of Gods wrath? The whole 49 Psalm is a conviction of
the vanity of all the Pageantry of this world. They are as birds, or a string
that at one time or other will deceive us. And is not God in the mean time, a
necessary, free, universal, sole, sufficient help? Who ever trusted in the
world, and was not deceived? and who ever trusted in God, and was disappointed?
The ends of the earth look to him and are saved -- O cease then from these
lying vanities, and endeavor to make God your God, that so he may become your
help. And if you would do so, labor first, to get an humble sense of your own
helpless and hopeless condition by nature. Bethink your selves, and see the
plague of your own hearts. As long as the soul has any crutch to lean on, it
will never go alone; while it knows whither to run, it will never go to its
God. O labor to be weary and heavy laden in your selves, and disclaim all
creature-dependance, as Paul did, Phil. 3.7, 8. Renounce all for Christ, and
Gods free grace and mercy in him. And when in this wilderness, lean on the arm
of your Beloved. Secondly, Fly to Gods Name and Covenant by faith in Christ. If
ever God be yours, it must be through Christ. For there is no other Name; God
has laid help on his almighty arm, you must lay your hope there: All Gods help
runs through Christ: he has determined never to pardon one guilt, or give out
one dram of grace, but through his blood. He is the only daismen, the true
Sampson, by whose strength, the heavy weights of sin and wrath may be removed
your souls. All the souls fresh springs are in him: He is the well head of
salvation. Without union, no interest or influence. No flying or abiding Gods
presence, escapeing, or enduring his wrath, unless your souls get under the
skirt of his love. He that would have interest in God by any other proxy, must
expect salvation by a deputy only. O come to him then by faith, venture on him
as the Lepers did on the Camp, 2 King. 7 s. Do not only take Ropes about your
necks, and put Sackcloth about your loins, but come before this King of Heaven,
he is a merciful King -- And thirdly and lastly, Strike Covenant with God,
enter into a confederacy with him. Kings keep those confederate, and in league
with them. The wickeds is a vain, a strumpets confidence, that challenge God as
their Father and Husband, and yet wantonize from him, and care not for his
company and communion, Jer. 3.4. A good conscience only is the ground of a good
hope and conndence, 1 Pet. 3.16. God may help and save by the wicked, but never
will he be the Savior of them. Break off from sin then by righteousness, and
engage in, yea, keep covenant with God. There Is a league both offensive and
defensive between God and his People, and the Promise made to Abraham
(observing the conditions) stands good to all his faithful children, Genesis 15.1.
If we walk before God, and be perfect, he will be our shield, and our exceeding
great reward. To conclude all with the Apostles options, Romans 15.13. Now the
God of hope fill you with all joy and peace in believing, that ye may abound in
hope through the power of the Holy Ghost -- And 2 These. 2.16, 17. Now our Lord
Jesus Christ himself, and God, even our Father, which has loved us, and given
us everlasting consolation, and good hope through grace, comfort your hearts,
and establish you in every good word and work.

FINIS.

