ENGLANDS UNIVERSAL DISTRACTION In the Years 1643, 1644, 1645.

Left to the World by a judicious and conscientious Author, for the use of his
Friends, Children, and Grandchildren, when they come to years of discretion.

And may be very useful for all men to read and practice in these distracted
times.

Printed in the Year of our Lord, MDCLIX.

ENGLAND'S Universal Distractions in the years 1643, 1644, 1645.
I Confess I am one of Queen Elizabeth's Protestants, being above my full age
in her time, and now grown an old man, and in all my time we ever believed
(notwithstanding the bold and desperate Treatises of some few enemies to Kings
and Kingly power, to the contrary) that the Jura Regalia of Kings are holden of
Heaven, and cannot for any cause escheate to their Subject; nor they for any
cause make any positive or active forcible resistance against them; but that we
ought to yield to them passive obedience by suffering the punishment, even
though their commands are against the Law of God; and in such case Arma nostra
sunt Preces nostrae, nec debemus aliter resistere: for who can lift up his
hands against the Lords anointed, and be guiltless? so that in all my time it
was conceived that the Jesuists and some Papists only believed that the Pope
had authority to depose and destroy Kings. But now some amongst our selves, who
having the jaundies see all things yellow; have their eyes so dazzled by looking
after Reformation, which yet they know not cither what it is, or will be,
through those cracked and broken spectacles of Innovation, and ambition of
singularity and faction: that they think themselves should become stark blind,
it they should but cast one good look upon the peace of the Kingdom, and not
trample under foot Monarchy and Magistracy, and by floods of popularity drown
us in confusion and Anarchy: as if Imperium in Imperio quaerendum esset: this
being the only difference between those Papists and them; the former by Gun
powder seeking to destroy both King and Parliament together; and the latter,
first the King by Parliament, and then next both Parliament and Kingdom by the
People. For can it be doubted but time when Appeals are made to the People, and
they employed and set on work about public actions, which ought hot to have
been done, but by the hand of Authority, they will too soon learn their own
strength, that summa potestas radicatur in voluptatibus hominum, and that then
Popularis potentia optimorum potentiam superat.

The Senate of Rome seared it upon a less occasion, when they recalled their
Edict, that Slaves should wear a certain Mark to discover them from Freemen,
lest by comparing the multitude, of the one, by the paucity of the other, some
like great danger might ensue to their Senate, and Republic. And in truth some
fear that this Mystery countenanced under the Title [King and Parliament]
works by such hidden and secret influences, and insinuations, that Solons
decree that every man that in a general commotion was of neither party, should
be adjudged infamous, would be now amongst us too severe and penal: for
certainly there be some conscientious men, who albeit in respect of their
allegiance and love to their King on the one side, and the honor and reverence
they owe to Parliaments on the other side, they may seem to other to stand at
gaze in this via bivia, conceiving it to be via nivea; yet are they
nevertheless in truth of the number of those in Amos, Chap 5. Verse. 13. The
prudent shall keep silence at that time, for it is an evil time. And howsoever
there be diverse others of better resolutions, as men both informed and
persuaded: yet are there many more of a third sort (of an Ostrich digestion)
that are persuaded before they arc informed, and now will not be informed,
because they will not be persuaded.

By this confusion, became my thoughts distracted, and my self incountred with
such and so many difficulties in my way, which my apprehensions are too narrow
to apprehend, or my knowledge to resolve: and the more I strive to melt my
brains into an invention of this allay, the more I find them like the Jewels of
the Israelites, turned into a Calf, mere foolishness, and therefore so repute,
and accept them, as from a distracted man, of a distracted subject, in a
distracted time wherein we all now live, and labor sub universali quadam
dementia, of which to examine the causes, besides our sins of this Nation,
would far exceed the slender capacity of a mean Subject, and is become a
question too deep and dangerous, sithence the same already have long been, and
yet are urged with more violent arguments, and sharper Syllogismes then by the
weak weapons of Instruments made with paper, and with more forces and
distinctions, then can proceed from any legal or logical Engine. It is thou O
God, that have moved the Land and divided it, and have showed thy people heavy
things, and have given them a drink of Deadly Wine, let them to be eaten up
like sheep, make them to be rebuked of their Neighbors, to be laughed to
scorn, and had in dirision of them that are round about them; the dead bodies
of thy servants are given to be meat to the fowls of the Air, and the flesh
of thy Saints unto the beasts of the land, and those that remain thou have
smitten in the place of Dragons, and covered them with the Shadow of Death.

Our Fathers slain by their own Sons, they by their own Brothers, they by
their own Kindred and Allies, they by their Friends and near Neighbors, and
those by their own Nation, of their own House, of their own Faith, of their own
Religion. Tacitus reports that in the civil wars between Vitillius and
Vespatian, it happened that a Soldier had killed his own Father which was of
the Enemies Army, which thing was no sooner published, but every man begins to
Abhor, Condemn and Execrate that War, the cause of such an unnatural fact,
though there might have been said, quare fremuerunt Gentes infidiles Romae, yet
here it shall be said quare fremuerunt Gentis Christiani Angliae.

It is become a crime amongst us, to say, Nulla salus bello, pacem te poscimus
omnes. When even all, on either part, or Enrolled, Proclaimed or Declared,
either for Rebels, Delinquents or Malignants, though many of them (I am
confident) fight with no other weapons, but precibus and lachrimis, on their
bended knees to their offended and revenging God; incessantly praying for the
peace of the Nation. One, that Numa's Temple dedicated to Janus, might not be
still kept open; that the Dice of this civil uncivil war, may not still be
running, which ever runs hazard on both sides, and draws the heart blood as
well of the innocent as nocent.

It is made an Aphorism, or General Rule in Physic, that in the natural
bodies the longer they are in health, the more dangerous is the Disease when it
comes, and the longer in cuting, as having none of those humors spent, which
by distemper gave sovent and force to the approaching Malady.

So in Politic bodies, when civil war once seizes upon a Country, rich in
the plenty of a long peace, and full with the surfeits of a continual ease; it
never leaves purging those superfluities, till all be wasted and consumed, quae
alia res civiles furores peperit, quam mini^a faelicitas, the Sins of our
Peace brought upon us the miseries of man; and now we are denied the Blessing
of Peace.

If a man disingaged and in his right wits, shall seriously ponder the printed
passages between King and Parliament; and those hostile Proceedings, and
Plunderings, Rapins and Ruins, Distractions and Destructions on both sides,
and then demand unde haec dementia, his Genius cannot readily prompt him to
find it out, unless by a Divine Scrutiny, for it is not to be found in this
Emblem (as some perhaps do dream of a mad conceit of some of old,) that a
huge Giant bears up the Earth with his Shoulders, which he changes every 30.
years for ease. And that such Removal, causes Earthquakes; which they also
observe^ for an Emblem of Kings; because the burden of the whole world lies
on the Shouldiers of Sovereign Authority. And then we marvalle if they cannot
say with King David, Ego sustinco calumnas ejas, that we have such Earthquakes
in their change, as turns our brains into this Universalem dementiam, for
some in this turning of their brains, began to think in their fi^s, that
because by the Law of the land, it is unlawful for a King to give a way his
Kingdom from his lawful Heir; so that for a King to give power to hold not
for a year, two or three, but a perpetual Parliament, a power inseperably
incident to his Crown, had been inconsistent with Monarchy. And albeit that
suprema potestas seipsum dissolvere, yet ligari non potest, like as it is in
the power of a man, to kill a man, but not in his power to make him alive, and
yet to restaine him from breathing. But this new conceit, I hold as mad as
that before mentioned.

O* hers would have it in this, that the Sovereign was too blame, too give,
and the Subject too bold to ask the perpetual Custody of that key, which shuts
and opens the Cabinet of State, wherein all the parts of the Republic are
locked up from the making too near approches upon Royalty.

Solomon say they, upon a jealousy far more foreign, could deny the suite of
his own Mother, for when Bathsheba desired a small petition of him, although he
answered he could not say her nay; yet when she said, Let Abisha the Shunamite
be given to Adonia^ his Brother to Wife, he could not reply, why do thou ask
Abisha the Shunamite for Adoniah? ask for him the Kingdom also. And our Savior
Christ's answer to the Mother of Zebedees Children, might (say they) have taught
the King to have satisfied such a demand of his Subjects, for she with her Sons
coming to Christ, and desiring a certain thing of him which was to grant, that
those her two Sons might sit, the one at his right hand, and the other at his
left in his Kingdom; they received this answer, ye know not what ye a k. And it
is observable, that even in this Kingdom, as the Sovereign has seldom
prospered, that trampled down the subjects just liberties, so the subjects as
seldom prospered, that climbed up to lop off the Kings just Prerogative; for
in Truth God so disposes in Justice, both of King and Subject, that as that of
the subjects liberties does in his own hands breed a comfort to support him in
his allegiance and loyalty to his King, yet does the same in the hands of the
King breed a Canker to eat him out of the love and affection of his subjects.

So that if the Kings prerogative which in his own hands becomes a Scepter to
protect us from ruin, yet does the same in the hands of a Subject become a
Spade to Grave us to death.

The truth is, that the best Princes being ever the least jealous, have
sometimes for a just satisfaction to their People, been drawn to part with some
of their Royal power to them; and the People no doubt demanded the same of
their Prince without any evil intent at first, which nevertheless being once
obtained, through some after-error, either in the end or in the means, in the
motion, or in the moderation thereof, have proved unto them little better then
the stolen flesh from the Altar, which by the (...) that stuck unto it,
consumed both her self and the young ones, with the Nest it self.

We need not travel into aliena Republica, being not without E^samples here at
home of this kind; but now unseasonable, either for recital or application.

We know that God gave unto the Israelites Quails and Manna, Angels food, when
they lusted in the Wilderness, yet withal sent leanness into their souls, and
it came out again at their nostrils, and was sour unto some of them, for they,
murmured against Moses their Prince. And it was not to be doubted but that this
Act for the continuance of the Parliament was by both Houses at the first
generally intended for the sovereign antidote to cure all diseases of the
Kingdom. Yet observe its Omen in their Remonstrance of December 15. 1641. It is
acknowledged that there seems to be in that Act some restraint of the Royal
power, in dissolving of Parliaments, not to take it out of the Crown, but to
suspend the execution of it, so then the power shall remain, only the exercise
of it is taken away; though some may object that Vdna est illa potentia, qua
nunquam venit in actum. And it is also in that Remonstrance said, that without
that Act they must have lest the then both Armies to disorder and confusion,
and the whole Kingdom to Blood and Rapine: whereas the event has woefully
showed, that upon confidence of that Act (for without it they had never been)
are raised many more Armies, which has already brought to disorder and
confusion, to blood and rapine almost the whole Kingdom. So that this Act
intended to avoid civil war, has proved the ready means so to kindle it, as
that the flames thereof, are like to consume us all, ta^^^ est haec universalis
dementia. This Royal Slip, or Root of Monarchy became no sooner to be
transplanted into a Popular soil; but from them have in a short time sprung
forth all the fears, and jealousies, all the disturbances, and tumults raised
by factious, and seditious spirits. The dividing of the King from the two
Houses, of the Lords from the Lords, and of the Commons from the Commons,
Remonstrances, Declarations, Protestations* and Covenants on either part;
seizing on the Kings Forts, Revenues, Customs, Ammunition, and Navy; the Tenth
part, Taxes, Seisures, Sequestrations, Plunderings, Excises, raising of great
Armies of Soldiers, Milites Armati, Milites Literarii, and Milites Clerici,
the whole Army marching in their several postures.

First, the Milites Literarii with their distinctions between Monarchy
absolute, and limited; limited and mixed; between a Power Radically limited,
and not only in the use and exercise of it between a Moral Power to resist,
and an authoritative and civil power; between resistance of the King himself,
and of his Agents, and Officers; between Resistance positive and active,
negative and passive; between Jus Regiminis and Usurpationis, according to Gods
Law and Man's Law. Also the resistance in such case, is not a resistance of
Power, but of his Will; not fighting against the Magistrate, but against the
Man: And the King not performing his duty, the Subjects are released from
theirs, with many more ejusdem farinae, which (they interpret) is to fear God,
and honor the King.

Nex^ to them do march Milites Clerici, many of them armed with F^rebrands,
Tongues of Sedition, having their very Pulpits made chaires of Juglers;
entertaining the people with shameless Pasquils and Discourses grounded upon
the malice of the time, and stuffed with Schisms, Heresies, and Tyranny; and
they also becoming Trumpets to sound forth Quaerelas and ambigu^s de Principe
Sermones, and quaeque alia turbamenta vulgi, having weekly to follow them, that
no excrement be lost (that may averse and bring in odium Majesty and
Government) the mendatious Mercuries, and Pamphlets of the time.

And in the last rank do march the Milites armati, who as the Sabeans and
Chaldaeans did with Job, have taken away our Oxen plowing, and Asses and
Camells feeding, and have slain our Servants with the edge of the sword. And as
the Prophet complains, have spoiled our Houses, ravished our Wives, Burned our
Cities, Desolated our Country, and scattered abroad the inhabitants thereof,
and still continue their battles with confused noise, and garments rolled in
blood, and non est haec universalis Dementia?

But thou O God be merciful unto us, under the shadow of thy wings shall be our
refuge until this tyranny be over-past, and before the morning they are not:
this is the portion of those that rob us. But let no man think that the
Parliament has caused all these things, no surely, for (I am confident) the
not being of Parliaments might perhaps bring the Monarch more power, but less
glory; more Lords, but few Nobles; more slaves, but fewer subjects; and might
perhaps make his Signiories more ample but less royal; and himself in all of
them less prosperous and happy: whereas on the contrary, it cannot be denied by
any honest English heart, that Englands Parliaments are unto her, her
Philosophers stone, which turns all it touches into gold* with which it
cures not only the Disease of the King's Evil, but also all other diseases, as
well in Church as State: it cures Schisms, Heresies, Exhorbitances of
Prelacie, and maintains the true and Orthodox Doctrine, and wholesome Discipline
in the Church: It cures Tyranny and Oppression, and maintains Uunity and
Strength in the Monarchy, it cures Factions and Divisions, and maintains just
Liberty and Respect of the common good in the Democracy.

Our Parliaments are the Hercules pillars to every one of our Herculesses, and
Princes; and the ne plus amplius both to Aristocracy and Democracy. And in all,
either their Excesses or Defects, reduces them to their Golden Moderation, and
just Temper: and such was this present Parliament in its first beginning; Nay
the President of all former Parliaments fall much short of what this then
brought forth for the Sovereign, in point of Grace and Favor to his people, to
whom he denied nothing which they challenge by Law.

But it is thought by some, that some former Parliaments having been
unfortunately blasted, that thereupon the Crown had invaded both upon the
Subjects liberty and property; and that albeit they had then a little before
obtained a Triennial Parliament, and other Acts to redress all their
grievances, so to prevent the like pressures in the time to come; yet, that
they finding that the King to be then under a cloud with the people, they the
better to pay the debts of the Kingdom, and to discharge the then Armies before
the Parliament should be either prorogued or dissolved; pressed for the Act of
Continuance, by which (as a Member of the Assembly of Divines in his Sermon
Martii 27. 1644. imprinted by their order, and entitled A Prospective-Glass
for England 's Case, tells and assures them) they are become fastened as Nail
in a sure place. But yet has it not wrought so kindly as both Parliament and
People did expect: and as by the fruits before mentioned which it so
plentifully and suddenly produced appears, for then as if some few new
Statists, or reserved Politicians, who Honores quos quieta Republica desperant,
perturbata consequise posse arbritrantur, and who are not always the best
servants, either to King or Kingdom, but are in Novandis, quam in Gerendis
rebus aptiores, had designed this perpetual Parliament to bear the name of
that, which wrought wonders in King Richard the second's time. And in case that
failed, then to bear the name of the mad Parliament, as a King Henry the thirds
time; and to that end had introduced certain new Ordinances, and strains of
Law, pretended Parliamentary, not understood of the people in this Age: and in
truth Lex nostra Parliamenti est ab omnibus quaerenda, a multis Ignorantia, a
paucis Cognita.

And yet some conceive it had been much better for those Statists and Engineers
(if any such be) Nescire Centrum, quam non tenere Circulum: and thus to run in
Meanders and Mazes into this universalem dementiam, whereby (as some think)
they have sought to make the cause of the King, and who (sai h Job) will say
unto the King thou art wicked? And as Ecclesiasticus, Who shall say unto him,
what do thou? And as Solomon, He that provokes him to anger, sins against
his own soul.

To moralize with that of the lion, who having lost his power and strength,
then the Wolf pincheth him, and the Bull goars him, and the very Ass kicks at
him, Nam Principis nomen habere, non est esse Princeps, and whereby (some also
think) they have made the cause of the people, whose disease was thought to
have been a consumption of their properties and liberties.

First for care of properties, to let them blood, and purge them of their
estates.

And next for cure of their liberties, to open another vein, either by
imprisonment or banishment of their persons, from their Wives and Children, and
their own habitations; to let out a certain Malignant blood still remaining in
them, for that they will not pay more then they are able, and so
impossibilities in this reforming generation, non est haec universlis dementia.
But admit this perpetuity of Parliaments has wrought any such change or
excesses, yet it is for Reformation in case of Religion, Et summa est Ratio qua
pro Religione facit.

Besides it is a Rule, that the policy of Statebean-not admit any Law, or
privilege whatsoever ut in some particular or other (especially for
Reformation in Religion) is necessarily broken. But has it no other ends? what
means then the bleating of the sheep in mine Ear, and the lowing of Oxen I
hear, and what means th s that they have taken, and possessed to themselves,
and given to others, several Officer and places of honor, preferment and
profit in the Commonwealth, which none but the King himself could lawfully
give or dispose of?

But grant it were for Reformation; yet do we not know, that Reformation is a
work of Medicine and Healing, and not of destruction and desolation; That
Divine zeal is a benign flame, giving light as well as heat; But an Erroneous
zeal all Heat and no Light?

The Reformation wrought by the former is Reformatio bellicosa, effected per
Gladium oris; the latter is, Reformatio bellicosa done per os Gladii: And
certainly true Religion, is rather a Setler then Stickler in Policy, and rather
confirms men in obedience to the Government established, then incites them to
the erecting of a new, which they neither do nor can know till it be discovered
and declared; wherein our present Religion is Erroneous. And whether in
Doctrine or Discipline, if it be not in Doctrine, but Discipline and matter of
Ceremony only of the Essence of our Religion, then whether w^ll the
Reformation of it deserve the expense of so much Christian blood; and whether
without the shedding of any blood at all, has it not been graciously offered,
that no indifferent and unnecessary Ceremony, should be pressed upon weak and
tender consciences, and that both in that and other d fferences in the Church
and Synod of Orthodox and Learned Divines should be chosen and consulted with.
Those Statists have done well to pull down Images, not so to set up
Imaginations, and then make the Kings people to kill and murder one another,
to uphold them before they can either know or approve them, non est haec
universalis dementia? But yet those Statists have another Rule, that to yield
to peace before a Victory, were again to trust in whom they cannot confide:
Whereunto I answer, that we are to confide in whom the Law has confided, and
if we place Gaurdians over him, then whom shall we place over those Gaurdians?

And for Victory, should we have it, and have with it also what Laws our
selves please? though it be true, that Leges a victoribus dicuntur and
accipientur a victis, yet for how long? for can we think but that Laws, which
have too much force in the making, do many times prove to have too little in
the binding?

Does all binding of a King, upon the advantage of necessities make the breach
it self lawful? No peace made by the water of Stix can be longer held
inviolable, till that River be dried up. And shall we then keep that River
running, by drawing out all the blood of the Kingdom? Nay, think we, that
Victories on either part will amend the matter? would they not be like those
Victories of Pyrrhus against the Romans; in the first they might Gloriari non
Gandere; and in the second he himself said, if we overcome once more, we a e
undone.

Besides, let us consider, he was a wise man that said, the Battle is not of
the strongest, nor yet the bread for the wise, nor Riches to men of
understanding, nor favor to Men of knowledge. No King or Parliament can be saved
by the multitude of an b^ast, neither is any mighty Man delivered by much
strength, why then will we prefer Force before Peace? shall we not see order
till disorder shows it, nor learn to do but by undoing? non est haec
universalis dementia? It is said, that when King Alexander the Great wrote to
the Senate of Rome, ut se Deum facerent, and they denying it, one stood up and
told them, videndum est, ne dum Coelum nimis custodirent, terram amitterent:
Which caveat made them for the peace and safety of themselves and their
Country, to decree, quonian Alexander Deus esse vult, Deus esto. But our
Carolus desites not, utse Deum facerent, but ut se Restituerent, and that to no
other Deity but that which both the Law of God, of Nature, and of our Nation
has bestowed upon him. Yet it seems also to be denied him, unless he will
admit some to be partners with him, or Gaurdians over him.

But certainly, if Valentian the Emperor (so chosen by the Soldiers) could
say unto them, when they would have joined another with him; no said he, it was
indeed in your power to give me the Emp^e whilst I had it not, but now I have
it, it is not in your power to give me a partner.

Much more may our Emperor, for Rex est Imperator in regno suo, not as he by
Election of the Soldiers, but by the strongest Title of Succession, after more
then twenty descents, demand that there be no sharers with him in the
dispensation of his Regal power; but that we do trust him whom God has
trusted with it; the Bed and the Throne can abide no Rivalls.

Non been cum sociis, regna venusque manent, but how then, shall those Statists
and Men so active in this great work, stand in the displeasure of their King
and dread Sovereign? why, who reads, unless with blood-shot eyes, the several
Expresses and Declarations published to the world, offering both the settling of
our Religion, just Liberties of the Subjects, Privileges of Parliament, and
also the suppressing of Popery, and preventing of Tyranny, but has not his
Soul been amazed at the continuance of these distractions? Or that can have a
thought that the head cannot think to live, where the body is in this great
Consumption? but he will rather yield to the feet when they are grieved, (for
they lying in fetters, the head cannot be free.)

If the hand offend the eye, or the tooth the tongue, in such case to punish,
would not the head find that the revenge would make all the Members of the body
to become, felo's dese, and then what kind of head will remain without a body?
certainly Consiliarius nemo melior est, quam tempus, which do now if ever
Council Majesty, rather safety then force, and rather pardon then
prescription, for Nullum stabile regnum nisi benevolentia munitum. No King can
long Reign, who is not Walled and Gaurded about with the love of his Subjects.
And it is a Rule infallible for a King of England to greaten himself, there is
no way so assured as by the love of the People.

And for the Honorable City of London, (the Kings Chamber) who can doubt, but
they shall remain honored, both with all the Immunities, Charters and
Privileges, and still with more, be more and more honored.

I am persuaded, that they even most desire to forget their glorious Rule by
Ordinances and Committees, and will remember what Agesilaus answered a Citizen
of Sparta, who desired an alteration of Government, that that kind of
Government which a man would disdain in his own house, were very unfit to
govern great Regions by; and who is not of his mind that said he had rather
live under one wiseman (though cruel) then under the barbarous cruelty of the
multitude? And for those in Parliament, are not all they, all those new Statists
accepted so Just and Honorable, and the rest so Honest and Loyal, that they
will never harbor in their Breasts such monstrous and unnatural thoughts
against their King and Country? howbeit, some do think that there are many of
them of both Houses, which are used but as Codicils to a Testament, or as small
Boats to great Ships, to which they be fastened, and from which they are let
loose, at the pleasure of the Testator in the one case, and of the Pilot in the
other; but the Mass of the Esta^e is disposed of by the Testament; and the
tall Masts, broad Sails, Tackle and Furniture born by the greatest Ships,
which having so fastened their Boats unto them, would enforce them (as some
think) to adventure a Voyage to the Red Sea, rather then fail of their prizes,
which those great Ships, these new Statists, so much labor for, though they
even also as in Charity I am bound to think) if when the Act for perpetuating
this Parliament was to have been passed, they could have been informed (as
Hazaell was by an Elisha how thereby it would come to pass, that the strong
holds of the Kingdom should be set on fire, and their young men slain with the
Sword, and so many thousand of souls perish by Blood and Rapine, they would
not then have answered with Hazaell, what are are we dogs, that we should do
this great thing? Howbeit, since they making no medium inter praecipitia and
summa, seem to take delight in that which before they had prosest to detest and
abhor, and non est h ec universalis dementia?

But thou O Lord, stillest* the raging of the Sea, and the noise of the Waves*
and the madness of the people, thou make wars to cease in all the world,
thou breakest the Bow, and snappest the Spear in sunder, and burnest the
Chariots in the fire.

But ye^ it is safest trusting when we take from the King all means of
breaking: we have our brethren the Scots with a great Army to assist us. And
that Member in the Assembly of Divines in his Sermon 27 Martii 1644
beforementioned, assures us that the cause is invincible, and that God had
smitten the generality of the Land with Madness, Blindness, and Astonishment
of Heart; and that it may be feared lest the Spanish, or Irish, or other
Forraigners, may beg the whole Land of the King, and obtain it, alleging that
the Nation is not Compos Mentis. And that this Work in hand is a Mystery, a
Parad x, a Riddle, a Secret that does require a Revelati^n and that shallow
headed, narrow hearted Carnalists are pusled in it. But yet I say there is a
God that frustrateth the tokens of the liars, and makes D^ines mad; that
turns wise men backwa d, and m keth their knowledge foolish, Isaiah 24.2.
Th^ugh Balaam was hired to curse, yet he was ^n^orced to say, that the shout of
a King is amongst them, Numb. 23.21. And it is true that God by the assistance
of our brethren, has made us prevalent, and that has also put into the Kings
heart to trust him with his person, when we proclaimed it Treason to those here
that should harbor or conceal him. And that has also moved the Kings heart to
do, and consent unto whatsoever the Parliament shall in reason require for the
good of his people.

And do we yet hesitate? It seems that we having done we know not what, we now
know not what to do: and is not this Universalis Dementia?

Oh my soul! come not thou into their secret, into their Assembly, mine honor
be not thou united, for in their anger they slew a man, and in their self-will
they dug down a wall: Cursed be their anger, for it was fierce; and their
wrath for it was cruel.

But for those Worthies and the rest of the Parliament, bless God for their
brethren, who he has made the happy instruments for our happy peace, so near
at hand; if not hindered by those before mentioned.

However I will rest assured that if this fail, that nevertheless deliverance
shall arise to our King from another place, and at another time.

I confess that with God Dies hora momentum in evertendis omnibus sufficit,
quae adamantinis radicibiu videntur esse fundata, and that Englands sins
deserve these plagues. It is God that changes the times and the seasons, and
removes Kings and sets up Kings, it is the Lord, let him do what seems
him good. But yet in this if they should prevail, the best that shall be said
of it concerning themselves will be, that for some short time prosperum scelus
vocatur virtus, but afterward the rods themselves shall be cast into the fire,
in the mean this of the Poet may chance to be verified:

Committat eadem diverse Crimina fato:
Ille Crucem sceleris praetium tulit, hic Diadema.
But these sad and melancholy considerations has brought me so far into this
Universalem Dementiam, that if I conclude not quickly, I must be committed to
Bedlam into Bethlehem: yet who but a Nero can sit and sing when Rome burns? and
who but a Faux mourns not at the destruction or his Country, for the
transgression of the land?

Many are the Princes thereof by a man of understanding and knewledge the state
thereof shall be prolonged.

My Son, fear thou the Lord, and the King, and meddle not with them that are
given to change, for their calamity shall arise suddenly.

It is high time that in this great prease we hasten to come with the Woman in
the Gospel, and touch the garment of our Savior, and so have the fountain of
blood dried up, for which we have suffered many things of many Physicians, and
have spent all that we had, and are nothing better, but rather grow worse

And if this land enjoy either a settled peace, or a lasting prosperity until
this perpetual Parliament be either ended or limited; then have I not erected
my Figure aright, but my Star has mis^led me. It would be too too vain for me
to go about by guesses, and surmises to say who are the Impostors, new
Statists, or the evil Counselors that have continued this Tragedy to be acted
in our Nation.

S. John who was a burning and shining light, did bear record of him who
wrought our salvation, and the same light will also in due time bear record of
those who have wrought our destruction; only my prayer for the whole
Parliament to Almighty God is, that they may be reconciled to the King, and his
royal heart to it, that so these flames may be quenched, that do so much
threaten ruin to them both, and to the whole Church and State.

And thus having told you my thoughts, if the time present or future, shows
any thing herein serious, account it then to be done in my Lucida intervalla,
and till then both that and the rest to be done in my fits of this Vniversalis
Dementia: therefore fi st read them and silence them. Only let my Friends,
Children, and Grandchildren know in what faith I died, and in what fear I
lived: and so vale, and in haec, and ab haec universali dementia.

FINIS.
THere is a very useful book for these times lately printed, Entitled A Legacy
left to the World by (that able Lawyer) Richard Creswel Sergeant at Law, late
one of the Judges of the Court of Common Pleas. Addressed (in his life time) to
his four Sons in Law: and are to be sold by any un-biassed Stationers any
where. Wherein is handled the Matters of Government (which has so much
distracted these three Kingdoms so long) and resolves the right out of Gods
Law and Man's: for the satisfying of all indifferent men.


