Nor Truth, nor Error,
Nor Day, nor Night;
But in the Evening
There shall be Light.
ZACH. 14. 6, 7. BEING The Relation of a PUBLIC DISCOURSE IN Mary's Church at
OXFORD, BETWEEN Mr. Cheynel, and Mr. Erbery. January 11. 1646.

Printed in the Year. 1647.

TO THE READER.
WHen the little Book was open in the hand of the Angel, the Angel cried,
Revel. 10. 1.

Verse 2.

Verse 3.


as when a Lion roareth, and seven thunders uttered their voices, etc. That is,
when there was a powerful appearance of the Mystery of Christ; when the Mystery
of God (which before was sealed, Revel. 5. but afterward to be finished and
fully manifested) began to be opened, and that so powerfully, Verse 7.
even to the terror of the Christian world, and of the Churches also (for the
seven thunders respect the seven Churches; that is all the Christian Churches
under Antichristian Apostasy) I say, when the little Book began to be open,
John began to write, etc. that is our weakness; Verse 4.
when any light breaks forth in us, any new discovery of Truth be made out to
us by the teachings of God in us, we begin presently to be Teachers of men, to
write, to publish it in Pulpit and Print, or in our private Teachings. This was
John's weakness also; who was therefore commanded to seal those sayings, and
write them Verse 4.
not, till he had eaten the Book, and better digested that heavenly secret, The
Mystery of God, Verse. 10.
and of Christ; afterward, he was to Preach it, and Prophecy to Nations,
Tongues, People, and Kings. Verse. 11.


This is another Mystery in the next Chapter, Reve. 11.
where that prophesying begins. Those two witnesses who prophecy in sackcloth,
signify a few Saints, who yet make a full witness, Verse 3.
witnessing Christ in Spirit, and against the spirit of Antichrist: These are
the two Olive trees as having Verse 4.
their teachings immediately from God, Zach. 4. 11, 12. And these are the two
Candlesticks, the true Church in Spirit; for the seven Candlesticks were fallen,
and removed out of their place through the Apostasy; but these two witnesses
have the Testimony of Jesus, which is the Spirit of prophecy, Revel. 19. 10.
Which Spirit is that fire Verse 5.
going out of their mouth, devouring their adversaries, and that spirit of
Antichrist, appearing in several forms, the Dragon, the first beast, second
beast, Babylon, the great whore, all is but the various appearances of that one
spirit of Antichrist in the Christian Church, for there Antichrists seat ever
was, and is, set up this day, though in a more glorious form, which is but the
flesh of the whore, whose flesh is now fairer, and her forms, her array more
fine in scarlet, etc. Revel. 16. 4. Yet these two witnesses in sackcloth (who
were also in former ages) these few poor persecuted Saints still stand up,
burning her flesh with fire, and by their prophesying, though in silence,
plague men by shutting Heaven, that the rain (or waters from above) the
Teachings Verse 6.
of God, fall not on their fellowships, and turning their waters into blood,
their formal worships, and teachings of men from below, into the blood of a
dead man, Revel. 16. 3, 4. And all this those two witnesses do, as often as they
will, which needs must be none else, but Christ in them, God in their flesh,
coming forth in power and Spirit from them, plaguing and tormenting them which
dwell on earth, (i. e.) earthly Christians and Churches also. For this, the two
witnesses suffer (their sufferings being shadowed forth by that sackcloth, and
bitterness of the Book in their belly) yet all this is but the sufferings of
their flesh, and filth of it (as 'twere in the belly) but yet they suffer with
Christ, and Christ suffers in them; for they are slain where Verse 8.
our Lord was crucified, that's (spiritually) fleshly Jerusalem, Christian
carnal Churches, where spiritual Saints, and Christ in Spirit is still slain
and crucified: but after three days and a half, Verse. 11.
(that is a little longer then Christ in flesh lay buried) the spirit of life
enters into those dead and unburied witnesses, who rise with Christ, and Christ
rises in them; yea, they ascend in glory, a greater glory (at least in the
Letter) then Christ Verse. 12.
ascended; for none but Disciples and friends, were witnesses of his
Resurrection, and saw him ascend; but the ascension of the Saints, their Acts
10. 43.
very enemies shall behold.

The sum of all is this, That which this man writes, he writes not as a clear
Truth to publish to the world, not to put off his Earth, that heap of Heresy
and Blasphemy cast upon him by enemies, to bury his name and make it rot; nay,
he is content to lie unburied yet, to the loathing of his person; that the
people who dwell on earth, may look on, rejoice, and glory over his dead
C^^cass, lying in the streets of the great City.

It Is well, if Truth shall rise in them that Read.

Farewell.
The Relation of a public Discourse and Dispute at OXFORD, January 11. between
Mr. Cheynel and Mr. Erbery, who spoke thus:
CHristian friends and fellow Soldiers, and worthy Scholars also; I am your
servant: I am called this day to come here in public, from my private
walkings; not by my desire or seeking, but as sought out and drawn forth by a
twofold cord, a public charge; and a private challenge: The charge was
publicly given out in a Pulpit, of Heresy and Blasphemy against me; the
challenge was privately sent unto me, by word, and writing also, in a Letter
from Master Cheynel, that I should give him a meeting in the Schools, or some
meeting place in the University; the place appointed is Mary's Church, where I
now present my self to wait on you all, and to answer what shall be objected,
or to desire a satisfactory Answer to this my Quere I am questioned for.

That which I have in private, I also profess in public; whatever I spoke was
not spoken as a Minister by outward call, though twice I was made one; nor as a
guifted man, knowing Christ, though once I was accounted some body by others,
and by my self also: but now I am nothing; know nothing; and let all men know
so of me: that I can neither see nor speak (as Ministers, or gifted men should)
with any clearness in my self, or conviction to others; but inquiring only,
and seeking the Lord our God, and David our King. This is that condition the
Church shall be brought unto, into a Wilderness, where no path nor company
shall be to walk with; but being left alone, the Saints shall be all set in a
seeking way, as the Prophets have foretold, That about Babylons destructions,
and their deliverance Jere. 50. 2, 4.

Verse. 5.


from thence, Judah and Israel, those who were a divided Kingdom in
Church-fellowships, shall come together in one, to seek the Lord their God, and
the way to Zion; that i^, not the way to Church, as the Churches this day are
divided about, by a confused preposterous way; seeking that first which should
be last, (as if they had found the knowledge of the Lord God already) but first
seek the Lord their God, and then the way to Zion; that is, to know God
dwelling in us, and our selves the habitation of God; for this is Zion.

Another Prophet points at a time, that all the Saints shall be left for many
days without a King, and without a Prince, and without a Sacrifice, and
without an Image, and without Hosea 3 4, 5.
an Ephod, and without a Teraphim: that is, without all public Worship or
Ministry, true or false; false they will not, and true they cannot have, [not
a King, or Prince] that is not meant of crowned men or Civil Magistrates, but
as I conceive, an Ecclesiastike, or Church Ruler, Officer, or Minister of
Christ, to go before them; nor yet a Sacrifice or Ephod, or any Church
Ordinance among them, no not the least means of knowledge or enquiry left; for
an Ephod was the least Ordinance under the Law (as all Ordinances under the
Gospel, are legal also:) by an Ephod men that were not Ministers or Priests
might enquire of the 1 Samuel 23. 9.
Lord in doubtful cases, or in a distress as David did, and as men do now a
days seek by fasting and prayer; but this Zach. 8. 19.
also at last shall be taken from the Saints, and they shall fit still in
submission and silence, waiting for the Lord himself to come and reveal himself
to them; then they shall return Hos. 3. 5.
and seek the Lord their God, and David their King, and fear the Lord and his
goodness in the latter days: that is, every Saint is yet running about,
changing their ways, and gadding abroad after one of these three, Men, Means,
and Jere. 2. 36.
Self. But the Saints after they are wearied out with their whoredoms, shall
return to their first husband, to Hosea 2. 6, 7.
God their Maker; of whom they first proceeded and came forth, and shall see
God in their flesh; that is, David their King. This I have been seeking, and by
seeking I find in the Scriptures, these seven things taught by the Spirit.

First, That Christ is a mystery, Col. 4. 3.

Secondly, That the mystery is Christ in us the hope of glory, Col. 1. 27.

Thirdly, That the riches of the glory of this mystery was kept secret, since
the world began, hid from ages and generations, and not made known to the sons
of men, Romans 16. 25.

Fourthly, That this mystery of Christ in us the hope of glory, was manifested
by revelation to the Apostles, and Prophets, and primitive Saints by the
Spirit, Ephesians 3. 3, 4. Col. 1. 26.

Fifthly, That what was manifested to them of the mystery of Christ, was only
made known in part then to the Saints, yea, to the Apostles themselves; who as
they 1 Cor. 13 11.

Acts 4. 27, 30.

Ephesians. 4. 13.


knew but in part, and had the knowledge only as of children, so they knew
Christ, but as the child Jesus; that is, they were not come to the knowledge
of the Son of God, to a perfect man, to the measure of the stature of the
fullness of Christ, or full age of Christ; that is, in the mystery to know the
Son of God so in them, and themselves in the Son, as tall and high in stature
as he, and taken up in the glory of the Son, and with him into God himself: For
that which was manifested visibly to men in the days of his flesh, that Christ
was made of a woman, formed and conceived in a Virgin, brought forth and born
into the world, living in Judea, dying in Jerusalem, rising and ascending into
Heaven; all this was the manifestation of the mystery of Christ in us the hope
of glory, which was a truth from the beginning of the world, though not
manifested to the Saints, before Christ came visibly in flesh: yet then, even
before Christ was in the flesh of the Saints, he was all in all, Christ the
same to day, yesterday, and for ever; formed in them, brought forth in them,
living in them, and suffering in their flesh, as well as in the Saints
afterward. Christ in David, was the knowledge and faith Psalm. 22. 22.

Heb. 2. 12, 13.

Gal. 1. 16 and 2. 20. and 3. 1.

crucified in you.

Gal 4 19 and 5. 27. and 6. 15.

2 Cor 13. 3.

Heb. 2. 11, 12, 13.

Rev 13. 8

Col. 1. 24.

Isai. 63. 9

1 Cor. 2 2.

Phil. 3. 11, 12, 14

2 Pet 1. 19.

1 Pet. 1. 13.

Isa. 66 7.

Jere. 31. 22.

Rev 12.

5 compared

Isai. 26. 19. and 60, 1, 2.


of David; and David's faith and knowledge, was the knowledge of the Son of God,
and faith of the Son of God, who lived also in David, as well as in Paul, in
whom as Christ was speaking so in David also; yea, as Christ was all in all,
Christ only acting in them, doing all their works in them, so Christ suffered
in them as the Lamb really slain from the foundation of the world. In Abel, the
first believing Saint, Christ was slain; and as Paul said of himself, I fill up
what is behind of the sufferings of Christ in my flesh: So the Saints who were
also from the beginning, suffered what was before of the afflictions of Christ
in their flesh. Thus Christ has been the only man of sorrows, and is still
suffering, till he shall rise in us. This neither Peter nor Paul had attained
to, to know Christ risen in them: Paul knew in part Christ, and him crucified,
and desired to know also more fully the fellowship of his sufferings (yet he
knew not this so as those, Revel. 12 11. Who overcame by the blood of the Lamb,
who saw their sufferings to be the sufferings only of the Son.) But as for
Christ risen in him, the resurrection of the dead, Paul knew not, nor was yet
perfect, knowing not himself and the Son, one perfect man: Neither did Peter
(though he suffered for Christ, and Christ in him) see the day of Christ, or
Christ as the day star risen in his heart; no, this was not to be revealed till
the last times: When Christ should be so conceived and brought forth of a woman
(the weakest Saint) that the weakest Saint should see, not only Christ in them
the hope of glory, Christ formed in them, brought forth in them, living in
them, dying in them; but Christ rising in them, and revealing himself so
gloriously, as if he should say, I am the root, and the offspring of David,
the bright and morning Star. I am he, who was, and is, and Rev. 22. 16.
is to come; I was all in all in David before; I was his root, from whom alone
sprang up all that he did, said, or suffered; all David's fruit and glory rose
up from Christ in him, and returned to the root, to Christ in David's lowest and
most dead estate; so Christ is the offspring also, and is also that to the
Saints to day, as he was to David yesterday, their substance, strength, and
song: But Christ in the Saints will be as the morning Star, and rise in more
glory yet, when the new heaven and new earth shall be, and new Jerusalem shall
come down out of heaven, that is, when God shall Revel. 21. 3.
dwell with men on earth.

Sixthly, This mystery of Christ in us the hope of glory, of God manifest in
man^ flesh, which was manifest, and in part made known to the Apostles and
primitive Saints before, has been hid again from ages and generations, ever
since the apostasy and spirit of Antichrist came into the world with power, and
so has been kept secret since the (Antichrstian) world begun, and not made
known to the sons of men. This is plainly foretold in the old Prophets, and in
that last Prophet of the New Testament, who speaking of things to come in the
apostasy and days of Antichrist, says, That he saw a book written within, and
on the backside sealed with seven seals; and no man in heaven or earth, nor
under the earth, was able to open the book, nor to look thereon, Revel. 5. 1,
3. This Book is the mystery of Christ, the Word of God, and the Book of God, in
whom both the will and good Will of God, are written, and by whom all the
counsels, decrees, and deep things of God are declared; the mysteries of
heaven, and all the treasures of wisdom and knowledge, are hid in him, yet
manifested, as I said, to the Apostles and Prophets, and primitive Saints: But
the Book was since sealed, and that with seven seals; that is, perfectly
sealed, and sealed from the seven Churches; that is, from all the Churches
comprised under the number of seven (for the seven seals has reference to
those seven Churches) now no Church; yea, no man in heaven or earth, or under
the earth, none in Church Fellowship, or not in fellowship; no man of never so
high apprehension, or deep discoveries of spiritual things could open or read
the Book, or look thereon, that is more; not look thereon, that is since the
apostasy; no man has had scarce an outward knowledge, not a knowledge of the
mystery of Christ in the Letter, much less in the Spirit; not seen what was
written without, much less within. This the old Prophets spoke by the Spirit
also, Isai. 8 16, 17 Bind up the Testimony, seal the Law among my Disciples:
The Testimony is the Book, the Word in the Letter, the Law is the Spirit, the
Law of the Spirit of life in Christ; the mystery of Christ both in the Letter
and Spirit of life, were bound and sealed, and that from the Disciples of
Christ; and therefore as John wept, so Isaiah waits for him who hides his face
from the house of Jacob, and looks for him; that is, for Christ, in whose face
the glory of God shines, that was hid from the whole Church, the house of
Jacob. So Isaiah 29. 10, 11. The vision of all is become as a Book that is
sealed, that neither learned, nor unlearned could read it: Neither Prophet, nor
Ruler, nor Seer, no Prophet in the Church, no Ruling Elder, nor the most seeing
spiritual Member of the Church could see it to the Mystery, nor look thereon;
yea, the v^sion of all, nothing was seen, not in the Spirit, scarce in the
Letter, the Reason is given, Verse 13. Because the fear of me is taught by the
precepts of men; that is, the knowledge and worship of Christ was taught by
men's traditions, forms framed, by old Creeds and Councels, new Catechisms and
Confessions of Churches (as if the Scriptures and Spirit, were not sufficient
to teach men all the knowledge of God and Christ clear enough) therefore God
proceeds to do a mavelous work and wonder, The wisdom of their wise men
Isai. 29. 14.
shall perish, and the understanding of the prudent shall be hid; that both
Fathers, Doctors, and Divines could not read the Book, nor look thereon; yet
there is a promise, Verse 18. That in that day the ears of the deaf shall hear
the words of the Book: They that erred in spirit shall come to understanding,
and they that murmured, shall loarn doctrine, Verse 24.

Seventhly, That Book which was sealed before, shall be open again, and so it
is, Revel. 10. 1, 2. There the little Book is open. The mystery of Christ in
us, is called a little Book, in opposition to those huge Tomes and mighty
Volumes of Fathers, Councels, and Commentators, Treatises, etc. which have been
all the days of Antichrist; But in the day of Christ, when Christ shall appear
in the Saints, then shall the Mystery be but a little Book; 'ti^ no more then
God manifest in man's flesh; if a man could manifest this Mystery to the World,
as the Apostles could, there would be an end of the Church controversy this
day; for without controversy, great is the mystery of godliness, God manifest
in flesh, etc. But this is that I would say, That the mystery of God shall be
more gloriously revealed in the last times, after Antichrists destruction and
deliverance of the Saints from the apostasy, then ever it was by the Apostles
themselves at first. This I have shown more fully in our private speakings, and
shall, if called to, give a public account.

But now it is enough, that when the seventh Angel begins to sound, the mystery
of God shall be finished, as he has declared by his servants the Prophets,
Revel. 10. 7. What is the mystery of God, but the man Christ Jesus? -- how that
man is God; how God is manifest in man's flesh; this has been declared by the
Prophets more fully, then in the writings of the Apostles, excepting John; and
he gives but some hints of that high and heavenly Mystery, which the Scriptures
of the Prophets do more gloriously speak out, by whom the Mystery is revealed,
though not to them, Romans 16. 27. 1 Pet. 1. 13. compared. And as the Prophets
did minister not to themselves, but to the Apostles; so the Apostles do
minister many things of the mystery of Christ, not to themselves, but to us in
these last times, to whom the mystery of God shall be fulfilled, which was to
them revealed but in part, Revel. 10. 7.

I date not say, that any thing of this Mystery is revealed to me, nor yet dare
I deny the teachings of God: But what I have taught, as I would no man to trust
me; so I wish all men to try me, and to hold fast that which is good: This is
all that I know of this yet, if yet I know any thing:

First, That the Son and the Saints make one perfect man, and that the fullness
of the Godhead dwells in both, in the same measure, though not in manifestation.

Secondly, That the fullness of the Godhead shall be manifested in the flesh of
the Saints, as in the flesh of the Son.

These two things, which others see as Heresy and Blasphemy, seems to me as
Truths, both in Scriptures, and by that Spirit which speaks in me: If any man
can convince me by proofs or power of Argument, I shall submit and be silent.

But because I am forcibly commanded and called forth to speak in public, I
shall according to the power of God in me, do these two things: First, Prove
the Doctrines by plain Scriptures. Secondly, Then propound my Arguments from
thence.

My proofs for the first are from Christ and his Apostles, both to me teach
this one thing, viz. That the fullness of the Godhead dwells in the Saints, as
in the Son, in the same measure, though not in the same manifestation, he being
in this last sense Anointed above his fellows, and God manifest in flesh; But
seeing we are his Brethren, we Heb. 2. 11.

2 Pet. 1. 3, 4.


have the same divine Nature, our Fathers Nature as full in us as he: and we
being his body and fullness also, though the Oil first appear powered forth on
the head, yet it running down to his hem, all his Members are anointed with him;
yea, though the crown be only put on the head, yet every member is crowned
also with it; and though there shall be but one King in all the Earth, yet all
the Saints shall Zach. 14. 9.

Revel. 5. 10.


reign on earth also: How could this be, that so many shall reign at once, and
yet but one King, if the Saints and the Son were not one perfect man? And that
the fullness of the Godhead is in both, in the same measure; Christ himself
witnesses in those words, John 14. 1. Let not your hearts be troubled: ye
believe in God, believe also in me. The Saints before Christ's believed on God
in Covenant, but not on God in Christ; that was the mystery which Moses Exodus
33. 18.
himself saw not, nor should see the glory of God in the face of Christ; for
all that doctrine of Free Grace and Mercies, etc. was but Gods back parts: but
now says Christ, Ye believe in God, believe also in me; that is, believe on
God by me; for as Christ is only the Way to the Father, Verse 6. so the Father
only is the end and ultimate object of all our Christian knowledge, faith, and
worship: therefore Christ adds this Verse 2. In my fathers house are many
mansions; what is the Fathers house? but the Father himself, God himself, the
fullness of the Godhead: there are mansions in it; there is not only a mansion
for me says Christ, in God, but mansions for you also in him, I go to prepare
a place for you: But how does he prepare a place for them in the Godhead with
himself? Why, 'twas by going to God, going to the Father to receive the promise
of the holy Spirit. Why? Christ received the Spirit before in Acts 2. 33.
the fullest measure; yea, but not in that full manifestation: he was the Son
before, but not declared so to be the Son of God, but by the resurrection; God
was in his flesh at his first conception, but God was not so manifest in flesh,
till he was received up to glory, and received the promise of the Spirit, to
shed it forth also on every believer to bring them to God also: For if I go, I
will come again, and receive you to my self, that John 14. 3.
where I am ye may be also. It Is not meant of his coming to judgment in the
end of the world, nor of our receiving to himself in the end of our lives after
death, as men conceive and comment: but when he should come in Spirit, he would
receive them to himself, take them up to his own glory, to be in the Godhead
with him; that where I am ye may be also: Therefore it follows, Verily, verily,
he that John 14. 12.
believes on me, the works that I do shall he do also, and greater works then
these shall he do, because I go to the Father: that is, he that believes on
me, as says the Scriptures; that believes so on the Son, that he sees
himself with the Son in Joh. 7. 38 and 17. 20, 21.
God, and God in him, as in the Son; he shall do greater works then the Son did
in the days of his flesh: as we see Peter did convert more at one Sermon, then
Christ did all Act. 2. 41 and 3. 19.
his life long; and the Apostles gave the Spirit by the laying on of hands,
which Christ did not whilst he lived in flesh: Again says he, John 14. 18. I
will not leave you comfortless, I will come to you, I will not leave you
Orphans, or fatherless, you shall have a father as well as I, when I come to
you in spirit, (not his coming at the last day, that was a long time, the
Apostles should not live to that, but) yet a little while and the world sees
me no more, but ye see me: The world a carnal Christian can see no further then
Christ in flesh, when that is gone the world sees him no more, but ye see me.
How? Because I live, ye shall live also; that is, ye see me in God, and living
in God only; and because I live, ye shall live in God also; For our life is
hid with Christ in God, as Paul says: It Is in God our life is, and as the Son
lives, Col. 3. 3.
for it is with Christ, though this be yet hid: But in that day ye shall know
that I am in the Father, and you in me, and I in you, John 14. 20. That is, in
the day of Christ's coming, and appearing in us, we shall know that as he is in
the Father, and has his being in God only, so we also shall see, that we are
in him, and he in us; and that we have the same being in God: We shall appear
with him in glory, 1 John 3. 2.

This is plainer expressed, John 17. 21. In Christ his last prayer to his
Father for those given him; Neither pray I for these alone; but for them also
that shall believe on me through their word, (believe in the sense before said)
That they all may be one, as thou Father art in me, and I in thee; that they
also may be one in us: One in Glory, one in the Godhead; so it follows, John
17. 22. The glory which thou gave me, have I given them. What Is the glory
which the Father gave him? God himself, the Father gave himself, as it is Verse
5. And now Father, glorify me, with thine own self, the glory which I had with
thee before the world was: That glory was then given, and that glory which God
gave the Son, the same is given the Saints: The glory is given already to them,
though they enjoy it not, nor that glory revealed in them, nor the Godhead yet
manifest in their flesh: Therefore Christ prays there, not for the matter of
glory, as if that were not yet; but for the manifestation of that glory. What Is
the glory? First, Perfect union; That they may be one, as we are one; as
perfectly and fully one. Verse 23. I in them and thou in me, that they may be
perfect in one, that the world also (as well as they) may know that thou have
sent me, and have loved them, as thou have loved me. That Is the second part of
glory; The same love God bears to the Saints, as to his beloved Son, as hearty
and as high a love, as intense, and eternal for extension also, as full
expressions of love go forth from God to the Saints, as to the Son; yea, more
in the Letter is said of them, though it be the same love in Spirit with the
Son also. How do the Prophets power forth all the tender heartedness, and
truest love of God on the Saints saying, besides many other woing words, that
he their Maker, is their Husband, and they his Hephzibah Isa. 54. 5.

Isai. 62. 4, 5.


and Beula: that there land shall be married also to him; that is, that he will
manifest himself in their flesh, (that is their land) and make it one with
himself, then love them as his Son: as a Bridegroom rejoices over the Bride,
so shall thy God rejoice over thee, yea, joy over thee with singing too, as
another Prophet adds, resting in his love. Why? Because the Lord thy God is in
the midst of thee, Zeph. 3. 17.
God in our flesh: This again is a third story of that glory the Saints are
taken up with the Son, not only perfect union with the Father, and sulness of
love, but living for ever also with the Son in God; for that is the meaning of
that Verse 24. Father, I will that they also whom thou have given me, may be
with me where I am; in the same mansion, in the same place; that is, (as I
said) in the fullness of the Godhead; in all the fullness of God, that they may
behold this, he says, That this may be manifest to them, and the world also;
for the Saints sit with the Son already in heavenly places, yea, are with him
at the right hand of God, and therefore are said to dwell in Heaven; whom
therefore the Dragon does blaspheme, even God and his Tabernacle, and them that
dwell in Heaven; that is, the Saints who Revel. 13. 6, 7.
are the Tabernacle of God, in whom God dwells; and so they blaspheme God in
them, calling them for this blasphemers. But let us hear what the Apostles of
Christ can say for this. Paul prays for the Ephesians, That they may
comprehend with all Saints, what is the breadth, and length, and depth, and
height; and to know the love of Christ, which passes all knowledge, that they
may be filled with all the fullness of God, Ephesians. 3. 18, 19. Here Is a great
word and wonderful Glory, a Mystery that has all dimensions in it; such a
height, that no carnal man can reach unto; a depth that none can dive into; a
length that none can compass the end thereof; and such a breadth, that none can
comprehend with all their vast understandings; yet he prays, that they with
all Saints of the lowest size, the least capacity may comprehend and know the
love of Christ that passes all knowledge; that is, the love of God in Christ,
(as the Geneva notes well) that we may be filled with all the fullness of God;
that is, that all the fullness of the Godhead, may be manifest to them and
others also: That he prays for, For they were already filled with all the
fullness of God. Again, the Apostle is plainer in his proof, Col. 2. 2, 9, 10.
where he speaking of the mystery of God, and of the Father, and of Christ, so
we read, but falsely as in other places of this nature; as if there were first
God, the divine Nature, then the Father, then Christ; whereas it is in Greek,
The mystery of that God and Father, there is the first, and then of Christ, as
also 1 These. 3. 11. Now God himself, and the Father; it is, now that God himself
and Father, or as the Geneva reads in both places, the mystery of God even the
Father, that is the first part of the mystery; then the mystery of Christ is the
second, what is that? In him dwells all the fullness of the Godhead bodily. And
ye are complete in him; complete, it is in the Greek, ye are filled; Col. 2. 9,
10.
with what? with all fullness of the Godhead, as we showed before, Ephesians. 3. For
as it pleased the Father that all fullness should dwell in the Son, so its his
pleasure the same fullness and measure should dwell in the Saints; though the
Son has in all things the preeminence in manifestation, yet the fullness of the
Godhead shall be also manifested in the Saints; which is my second to prove,
That the fullness of the Godhead shall be also manifest in the flesh of the
Saints, as in the Son. This, John, as he did in his Gospel, so in his Epistles
makes plain to me at least. Beloved, now are we the sons of God, but it does
not yes appear what we shall be; but we 1 John 3. 2.
know that when he shall appear, we shall be like him; for we shall see him as
he is: When he shall appear, that is, in us, when that glory shall be revealed
in us: Then we shall be Col. 3 4.
like him, that is, appear with him in glory, in the same glory of the Son, we
shall be like him: For we shall see him as he is; the Saints under the Gospel
saw Christ in Spirit, and the glory of God shining forth in his face, yet only
in a glass darkly; but after the apostasy, no man at all could see the least
glimsp of that glory, or look into the Book, The Mystery of Christ, or look
thereon, but after the apostasy; and falling away being full, the day of Christ
follows immediately, and then we shall see him as he is; how is that? we shall
see him in God, even the Father, John 14. 19, 20.
and in us also, and our selves in him, and with him living in God, as I said,
The Saints shall be seen in the Son: this is called by Paul, The manifestation
of the sons of God: the Romans 8. 18, 19:
glorious liberty of the sons of God; For if the Son (that is in us) make us
free, we shall be free indeed, John 8. 36. Therefore, as the first falling
away, and apostasy of Churches, 1 Timothy 4. 1.
was in doctrine, not in worship; so the first doctrine which was darkened with
the smoke of the bottomless pit, Revel. 9. 2.
with the spirit of Antichrist, it was the Sun: The Son was darkened, and so the
Father also; for he that denies the Son, the same has not the Father. Now
here is the first deceit of Antichrist in denying the Father and the Son, 1 John
2. 22. No Protestant or Papist denies this, say they: Joh. 2. 22.
But Antichrist is a liar; though in a form of words father, and son is
confessed; yet in truth, in power, and spirit, they deny both. They deny the
Father in the Son, and deny the Son in the Saints; denying God in Christ, and
the Father all in all in his flesh: For God, even the Father, the everlasting
Father, Isai. 9. 6.

Matthew. 1. 23.

Acts 20. 28.

1 John 3. 16.

Psalm. 68. 1, 17, 18.

John 14. 10, 20.


was born and brought forth in that flesh; God in flesh lived with men, and in
flesh God gave his life for men, purchasing the Church with his own blood;
'twas God rose, and God ascended in flesh; yea, the Son was nothing, but as he
was in God; the Son could do nothing of himself, but the Father in him did all
the works; and as God was in Christ, and God all in all in his flesh, so Christ
in us all in all in our flesh; Christ the man-child is brought forth in us,
lives in our flesh, suffers in us, and shall rise in us, and we shall ascend
also with him; for as the two witnesses (those few Saints who yet are a full
witness for Christ, and against Antichrist) were killed in the City where our
Lord was crucified, Revel. 11. 8. That's spiritually in the Mystery, being
crucified with Christ in their flesh; so those Saints are said to rise, Verse
11. and to ascend, Verse 12.

Secondly, Antichrist denies Christ to be come in flesh, 1 John 4. 3. Not to
come in flesh of the Virgin made of a woman; this all carnal Christians confess
in their Creed: But Antichrist denies Christ to be come in our flesh, and our
flesh to be anointed of God, and with God; for that's 1 John 4. 4.
Christ the anointed of God, God manifest in flesh: Now God was ever manifest
in the flesh of the Saints, though they knew it not before; and the flesh of
the Saints is the anointed of God, anointed with all the fullness of God; for so
it follows. 1 John 2. 20. Ye have an unction from the holy One, whereby ye know
all things; that is, as he that is born of God sins not at all, because the
seed remains in him, there is a principle, the Son, the Word, the immortal
Seed is in them: so he that is born of God, in whom God is brought forth,
knows all things; because there is a power in him, God in his flesh teaching
him all things, that's the unction. Therefore 1 John 2. 27. the anointing
abiding in the Saints, teaches them all things, and they need not that any man
teach them, etc. that is, while they abide in the anointing, and attend on God
in them, and hearken to the Father as the Son did, As I hear, I John 5. 30.

John 8. 28.


judge, and I speak to the world the things I have heard of him: I can do
nothing of my self, but as my Father has taught me, I speak these things. Thus
the Son had no Tutor or Teacher, but the Father, God in his flesh; if the
Saints saw this fullness in themselves, the fullness of God anointing their
flesh, this would free them from that bondage to Men, Means, and Ministers.
This is Babylons destruction; first by mutual divisions, Isaiah 10. 26. as the
Churches divided: secondly, by the manifestation of the anointing, the
discovery of Christ in the midst of the Church, God in their flesh: In that day
(the day of Christ) his burden shall be taken from of thy shoulder, and the
yoke from of thy neck, and the yoke shall be destroyed, because of the
anointing, Isaiah 10. 27. This is the glorious liberty of the sons of God, the
manifestation of the sons of God, which we hope for, God to be manifest in our
flesh, then Christ comes in flesh: and thus, if the Son shall make ye free, ye
shall be free indeed; but ye are of God, little children (the least Saint is of
God, as the Son is of 1 John 4. 4.
the Father) and ye have overcome them; that is, (the wisest and most powerful
Impostors of Antichrist) for greater is he in you; then he that is in the
world; that is, Christ in you, God in your flesh; who is greater then all;
whose very foolishness Zach. 12. 3, 8.
and weakness is wiser and stronger, then all the strength and wisdom of men,
and whose wisdom and strength shall be manifest also in the most foolish and
feeblest Saints. This John in the Revelation more clearly yet reveals; Rev. 1.
13
for as he saw the Son in the midst of the Saints, Christ in the midst of the
Church; so he shows that all the power of the Son, the glory and honor of the
Son, shall be manifested in the Saints. Not to speak of the old Prophets, who
are abundant in holding forth this glory, The sons of them that afflicted
thee, shall come bowing unto thee; and all Isai. 60. 14.
they that despised thee, shall bow themselves, down at the soles. of thy feet,
and call thee the City of the Lord; that is, the Saint in whom God dwells: And
therefore, as at the name of Jesus every knee shall bow; that is, to God in
him, for that's his name; so says God, to me shall every knee bow, to me in the
Saints; and therefore, Revel. 3. 9. The Lord God says, I will make them of the
Synagogues of Satan, that say they are Jews, and are not, but do lie: behold, I
will make them to come and worship before thy feet, and know that I have loved
thee; that is, as the world shall know that the Father loves the Saints as the
Son, Joh. 17. 23. So the apostatized Churches; that is, the Synagogues of
Satan; for Peter himself was called so, when he savored the flesh, the things
of man, more then of God: So the Jews, that is, legal Church members, who have
belied themselves into a liberty they have not, boasting because of their
fleshly forms, and fellowships, that they are above other Saints; these false
Churches shall come down and worship at the feet of scattered Saints, who are
gathered up into Christ, and with Christ into God; they shall worship not them,
but God in them, and confess that God is in them of a truth. The Spirits power,
and Mich. 7. 16, 17.

Zach. 8. 23.


honor, and glory, as I said, shall be manifested in the Saints.

First, His power, Revel. 2. 26, 27. He that overcomes, to him will I give
power over the nations, and he shall rule them with a rod of iron; and as the
vessels of a Potter shall they be broken in pieces, even as I have received of
my Father. See here the power of the Son, manifested in the Saints; for so the
second Psalm speaks of the Son, The Kings of the earth, and the rulers, stand
up against the Lord, and against his Christ; who is Christ the anointed of God?
But the Saints with the Son, Verse 3. Who would think that poor Saints should
have such power, yea, such honor have all the Saints, as to bind Kings in
chains, and Nobles with links of iron; and to execute the judgment written of
the Son, Psalm. 149. 8, 9. Who believes that all the blood shed, and slaughters
this day in the world; the dashings of Kings and Kingdoms one against another,
is done by the Saints, though they stir not, but are quiet in the land; yet the
Lord goes forth of them, working all, and wasting all by them, by the weakest
Saints. Thou worm Jacob, thou shall thresh mountains, and beat the Isai. 41.
14, 15.
hills to chaff: that is, as another Prophet phraseth it, O Jacob, that is, the
weakest Saints; for Israel is the name of power, but Jacob, thou art my
battle-ax and weapons of war, with Jere. 51. 20, 21.
thee will I destroy Nations, and dash Kingdoms in pieces like a Potters
vessel: This the Saints have done, and do still, God in them doing all in all:
Though this be not yet manifest in them, nor to the world, yet it shall be,
says the Scripture, The Saints shall have the same power manifest in them as
in the Son.

Secondly, The honor also of the Son shall be manifest in the Saints; He that
overcomes, shall sit with me in my throne; as I overcame, and am set down with
my Father in his throne. Revel. 3. 21. What Is the throne of Christ, but the
honor given him of God, to reign and to judge also? The Saints shall have both,
not only a rod or scepter of Iron to break Nations, but a scepter of Gold, of
Righteousness to rule Nations; and that Nation which will not serve thee, shall
perish, and be utterly wasted: Who will not Isai. 60. 12.
serve God in the Saints? But then again, The Saints shall judge also with
Christ (not by approbation only, as Gentlemen who sit on the bench with the
Judge) but the Saints as the Son shall sit in the same judicial throne: The
Saints 1 Cor. 2. 3.
shall judge the world, yea, Angels; not only the world, common Churches, with
all their worships, but the Angels of Churches also the Saints shall judge; as
Christ judged none more hardly then the Priests, and Elders of the people.

Thirdly, He that overcomes shall inherit all things, and I Rev. 21. 7.
will be his God, and he shall be my Son. Here Is the glory of the Son; that he
is appointed heir of all things, Heb. 1. This glory is given to the Saints
also, though the Saints know it not, no more then a crowned Child in the
cradle knows he is a King. Here Is the mystery of Christ, and of a believing
Christian also: Who is he that overcomes 1 John 5. 5.
the world? but he that believes that Jesus is the Son of God, believes in
that sense I said before.

It Is strange, that the Saints who dare not judge any man, yet are said to
judge all things, and to be judged of no man; that they who hurt no man, should
be said to destroy all men; that those who have nothing, should be said to be
heirs of all, and inherit all things; how could this be? but that the Son is in
them, God in their flesh; and so he is their God, and they are not only his
sons, but his Son. This seems to be a truth in it self, though not manifest to
them till they overcome.

This overcoming is seven times repeated, Revel. 2. and 3. and once more here,
Revel. 21. 7. There Is a mystery in that also, in this overcoming, what is it,
and what is the thing to be overcome? In a word, it is the number and name of
the Beast that the Saints must get victory of, Revel. 15. 2. But what is the
Beast, his name, and number? it is the number Revel. 13 18.
of a man, that is more mysterious yet: But sure it is clear, That every man is
brutish in his knowledge; and though vain man would be wise, yet man is born
but a wild Asses colt; yea, Man in honor understands not, but Psalm. 49. 20.
is like a beast that perishes: So that man is the Beast, who counts himself
wise, or to have the knowledge of a man, which the wisest man, even Agur the
Prophet would not own, when he was to speak of Ithiel, and Ucal; that is, Prove.
30. 2, 3.
of Christ, and God in Christ; for Ithiel is the same with Immanuel, God with
us; and Ucal is a name, signifying power, as Christ is the wisdom of God, and
power of God: So then, when man sees only of the humanity in himself, the
wisdom of man or power of man, and sees not God all in all, and the Godhead in
him; This is the Beast, this the number of his name, the number of a man; when
we shall overcome this, this manhood, this self, and submit to the Godhead in
us; when we shall see God only manifest in our flesh, and the flesh nothing,
profiting nothing, having no power, nor wisdom; when thus we deny our selves,
follow me, says Christ; follow him who is our forerunner, and gone before into
the holiest, into the fullness of the Godhead with him; then we are said to
overcome and inherit all things. God is our God, and we are his Son, then this
shall be manifest; for Revel. 22. 3. we shall see his face, and his name shall
be in our foreheads, as the Fathers name with Christ, Rev. 14 1. so the name of
Christ also shall be read in our foreheads. Men shall see the Saints as the
Son, That Is Revel. 3. 12.

Revel. 22. 4.

Isa 62. 2.

Isai 65. 15.


his new name, which he will write on us; and we shall be called by another
name, by a new name, which the mouth of the Lord shall name. Men's mouths have
still formed new names on the Saints, as from the beginning so of late: In
Queen Mary's days, the Saints suffered as Protestants; in Queen Elizabeth's as
Professors; in King James's as Puritans; in King Charli's as Separatists; in
our days as Sectaries, Heretics, and Blasphemers: But the Lord God will give
us a new name shortly himself, when ye shall leave your name as a curse to my
chosen; for the Lord God shall slay thee, and call his servants by another
name, Isaiah 65. 15.

So far concerning the proof of those Truths, so far as I conceive them to be.
Now I shall come to the Arguments, which are three; the first from the Old
Testament, the second from the New, the third from both:

The first Argument is from Isaiah 61. thus,

Those who are the anointed of God with Christ, to preach the Gospel to the
world, whom the world shall own as the only Ministers of God, and honor as the
Son, they have all the fullness of the Godhead as the Son: But the Saints are
the anointed of God with Christ, to preach the Gospel to the world, and the
world shall own them as the only Ministers of God, and honor them as the Son.

Therefore the Saints have all the fullness of the Godhead with the Son.

There are four parts in the Argument to prove in this Chapter.

First, The Saints are the anointed of God with Christ, that is plain, Isaiah
61. 1, 3. The same spirit or oil powered forth on the Son, is powered forth on
the Saints, and that in the same fullness:

For secondly, They are anointed with him to preach the Gospel to the world;
the Spirit was on him, that he might preach to the world, and they shall preach
to the world also; for they shall build the old wastes, and shall raise up the
former desolations, they shall repair the waste cities, the desolations of many
generations, Verse 4. What wastings has war made, not only in the visible
world, but the invisible? in the inward man are more wastes; and for many
generations, men have been desolated of that glory once given them. Now to
repair all things in the world visible and invisible, to build up the ruins
made, not by Rome, but even by the most reformed Churches; to raise up a new
building, a city for God to dwell in, this is the work of the Son only, yet
the Saints shall do it also; but I believe the world shall be a little more
wasted first.

Thirdly, The world shall then own the Saints as the only Ministers of God.
Verse 6. Ye shall be called the Priests of the Lord, and men shall call you the
Ministers of our God.

Fourthly, All that see them shall acknowledge, that they are the seed which
the Lord has blessed, Verse 9. Now the blessed Seed is Christ, Gal. 3. 16. He
speaks not of Seeds, as of many, but of One, the Seed, which is Christ. All
the Saints being many (in flesh) make up but one Christ (in Spirit); yea, God
even the Father that eternal Spirit, shall be manifest in their flesh, as in
his: That not only themselves shall see it; but all men shall say, that they
are the seed which the Lord has blessed.

This full Discourse, and first Argument of Mr. Erbery is set forth, not that
any man should approve, but prove it; not to justify himself, but to be judged
of all. He will not mention any thing in the Dispute at present, being content
to suffer in silence, and fit still in his own abhorrency, while others walk in
their honor, and applause, which he does not envy them; for they have their
reward, and he his wages, That all men speak evil of him; yet could he with a
few words wipe of all his personal wrongs, but then he should be sprinkle
others with some spots and shame, which he is loath to do. Let the true God who
judges righteously, clear up all men's falsehoods (and truth also) in his due
time.

This is all he has now to say, That as he first professed, he knew nothing,
nor maintained any thing as Dogmatical, but only delivering his mind, drawn
out to speak, because he should not be silent; so he confesses himself not yet
carried out of the way of further inquiry, and seeking the Truth, that God
shall teach him, and not men; wishing all the Saints were in that way, to cease
from man, whose breath is in his nostrils; for wherein is he to be accounted
Isai. 2. 11, 22.

Reve. 13. 18.


of? especially now, when the number of the Beast may be read (in men's
foreheads) to be the number of a man: And the Lord alone to be exalted in that
day.

Well, when wise men err, and the Princes of Zoan are Isai. 19. 2, 13, 14.
become fools, that is, the chief leaders in (spiritual) Egypt are causing to
err, and wander; there is a way, a highway, that wayfaring men, though fools,
shall not err Isai. 35. 8.
therein. If any man would be wise still, he dares not call him fool; but as
for him who has found himself a fool already, and sees himself be-wildernessed
as a wayfaring man, seeing no way of man on earth, nor beaten path to lead him,
let him look upward and within at once, and a highway, the way is found,
Christ in us, God in our flesh: Wait here a while for that Spirit and Power
from on high to appear in us, walking in the Spirit of holiness, love and
peace; and at last, yea, within a little, we shall be led forth out of this
confusion, and Babylon, wherein we yet are not clearly knowing, Truth nor
Error, Day nor Night; but in the Evening there shall be Light.

Cant. 1. 7. Tell me (O thou whom my soul loves) where thou feedest, where
thou make to rest at noon. FINIS.

