Advertisement from a noble and potent Earl, John Earl of Errol, Lord Hay and
Slaines; high Constable of Scotland, Sheriff-principall of the Sheriffdom of
Aberdeen; Mr. William More of Hilton, Advocat, Sheriff-depute of the said
Shyre; and Andrew Skene younger, of Pitmuckston, Heritable Mair of Fee of the
said Sheriffdom: To the several Mair-deputs within the samen.
WHereas the Office of Mair of Fee, of this Sheriffdom, has been of a long
time bygone neglected and slighted, and that several persons have presumed to
assume unto themselves the Name and Office of a Mair-deput, who were never
lawfully admitted thereto; As also, those who have been admitted by the said
Andrew Skene, have maleversed in the exercise of there Offices, and altogether
deficient in the performance of any duty incumbent upon them; To the great
abuse of the said Office, and of his Majesty's Liedges. These are therefore
giving Advertisement to the whole Mair-deputs, and Officers within this
Sheriffdom, that they are not to exerce nor use, and hereby they are discharged
to use or exerce the said office after the feast of Michelmas next to come,
under all highest pain that can be inflicted upon them, requyring and
commanding all such persons who presently are, or do intend to be Mair-deputs
within this Sheriffdom, that they present themselves to the said Andrew Skene,
betwixt and the foresaid day, and to receive from him formal Admissions, and
find sufficient caution to him for their faithful administration in their
Offices: and for payment of such Aunuities as are due and payable be them: And
his MAJESTY'S Liedges within the said Sheriffdom are hereby discharged to
employ any persons who shall not be formally admitted by the said Mair of Fee.
And to the effect none pretend ignorance, their pesents are appointed to be
printed, and published at each Parish Church door within the said Sheriffdom.

Given under our Hands at Aberdeen, the twentysixth day of August 1680. Erroll.
Mr. William More. Andrew Skene.
For the Parish of (...)


