The Abridgement OF A SERMON Preached on the Fast Day appointed to be held for
the good success of the TREATY That was shortly to ensue between the KING and
the PARLIAMENT, September. 12. 1648.

By Mr Despagne Minister of the Gospel at the French Church at Durham-house.

Faithfully translated into English By Umfrevile, Gent.

LONDON, Printed by Ruth Raworth for Tho. Whitaker at the Kings Arms in Paul's
Churchyard. 1648.

Mr. John Despagne's Advertisement to the Reader, showing the reason why be
abridged his Sermon, and puts it not forth as large in Print, as he delivered
it to his Audience.
I Set not down here all I said on the following Text, but only a short Sum
of the chief heads, and rather the Application in very deed, then the
Explication of it: For I hold it more profitable to read Sermons shortened, and
brought into a small compass, then long-winded, and tedious Discourses; in
which a man oftentimes must spend much time, and tumble over a whole mountain
of Sand, before he can there find one grain of Gold.

The TEXT, 2 Samuel 5.1, 2, 3. Then came all the Tribes of Israel to David unto
Hebron, and spoke, saying, Behold, we are thy bone, and thy flesh. Also in time
past, when Saul was King over us, thou wast be that leddest out, and broughtest
in Israel: and the Lord said to thee, Thou shall feed my people Israel, and
thou shall be a Captain over Israel. So all the Elders of Israel came to the
King to Hebron, and King David made a league with them in Hebron before the
Lord.
Here Is an Agreement sworn between David and the States of his Realm, after a
Civil War of seven years continuance: Ours is now come to its seventh year; God
grant it may be the last: and that having so long a time implored the God of
Battles, we may at length give thanks unto the God of Peace. Let not any make
here sinister interpretations: The History that I have chosen to be the subject
of this Discouse is not directly in and throughout applicable unto the present
state of our condition. But what though our War both in its causes and success
has been far different from that which fell between David and Israel, yet is
there great conformity in other matters, which I forbear to speak of.

So then, the Tribes of Israel sent toward David, and treat with him about the
conditions on which he shall reign over them. Not to enter into the
particularities of this Text; let us speak only of the demands, promises and
agreements that past on the one side and the other: and this will afford us two
Points, on the which at this time I will only insist. 1. David's duty, and in
general that of all Kings. 2. The People's duty toward their Kings, and toward
themselves.

Of the first.
What Conditions were then imposed upon David? Questionless, those that God
had expressed in his Law Deuteronomy. 17. There are five Articles whereunto the Law
bound the Kings of Israel. 1. That they should leavie no great Cavalry: the
reason of that was to hinder them from holding correspondence with Egypt their
Neighbor; or else that they might have no mind to make war there, for revenge
of the wrong their forefathers had received from the Egyptians. 2. That they
should not have plurality of Wives: The end of that was to prevent seducements,
and other mischiefs that Polygamy has often produced. 3. To make no
extraordinary hoarding up of Gold and Silver: that was to the end they should
not put their confidence in their treasures. 4. To have a transcript of the Law
ever by them, and daily to study it: This was that they might learn to govern
according to the contents of it. 5. Not to carry themselves over-high toward
their Subjects; but to remember that they were their Brethren.

But did David observe all this? He committed five notorious faults after his
establishment over all the Tribes. 1. Although he had Wives enough before, yet
then he recruited the number; which was accordingly lessened by reason of the
prodigious incest of his own Son Absalom, which enforced David to forbear the
company of ten of his Concubines. 2. He gave way that the Ark of God, which he
caused to be conducted toward Sion, should be put into a Cart, and drawn by
Oxen; which was an exceeding great oversight: For the Law ordered that the
Priests or Levites should carry the Ark on their shoulders. 3. He contrived
that horrible act against poor Uriab: which was rather an accumulation, and
knot of many crimes together. 4. He plundered and spoiled the innocent
Mephibosheth (Son of his deer friend Jonathan) without ever hearing the matter:
and even afterward, although he had acknowledged the injustice of that rash
sentence his own credulity had drawn out of his mouth; yet he revoked it but in
part. 5. And lastly, Without any other motives, save those of his own pride,
he caused the people to be numbered, and drew upon his Kingdom a Plague that
in three days swept away threescore and ten thousand men. Where shall we
find the Throne that is clear of taint or spot? Where shall we find (in what
kind of Government soever it be) men wholly blameless; seeing that he of whom
God himself had made the choice, and with his own hand placed in the chair of
State, was so irregular and extravagant? This notwithstanding, the miscarriages
of the person were not of force for the abolishing of his Office and Authority
established by God himself.

It Is a great marvel, if the head, yea of the strongest brain, runs not round,
that is promoted to so high a place. Of all the Kings that governed the ancient
people of God, there are but three reckoned that have not been faulty either in
Idolatry, or some accessory of this crime: For, to say nothing of them that
reigned over the ten Tribes, who were all soiled with such abominations, those
that ruled over the Kingdom of Judab to the number of 22 Kings (from Saul to
Zedekiah) dipped and died themselves in the like horrible Superstitions: David,
Ezekias and Josiah only excepted; they would fain put Josaphat into the number
(making four) had it not been for the unfortunate League that he made with the
idolatrous house of Ahab: But these very three (the best of the pack) have they
not cost their people dear? David (as I have already said) was the occasion of
that wonderful mortality in Israel; Ezekias, through his pride and
unthankfulness, was the cause that after his decease all the treasure of the
Kingdom, and all the arms of his Magazine were carried away into Babylon. And
Josias, by a War undertaken without just grounds, caused the shedding of his
peoples blood, and made them tributary to the King of Egypt: a fair warning for
all Monarchs to take heed to their actions.

He that was the most wise, and the most fool among all the Kings, tells us in
his wisdom, Prove. 25.3. that there are three things not to be sounded; viz. the
height of heaven, the depth of the earth, and the breadth of the heart of
Kings: His meaning is, that their knowledge, and the trouble requisite to the
attaining of it, ought to be (as it were) infinite, it being impossible to
discry any bounds or measure of it: Though their minds remain between heaven
and earth, yet should they endeavor to be elevated as sublime as the one, and
likewise as profound as the other; yea, to lock within their dimensions all
this vast fabric of the Universe: as they desire to resemble God in power and
greatness, ought they not to be like him in wisdom and understanding?

I speak this not only in regard of Princes; but also in respect of the
Superiorities and Powers which are adjoined unto them in the administration and
managing of the Commonwealth; and who are or seem to be their collaterals, and
to share some part in the Sovereignty: now if it so happen that these two
Authorities justle one with another, and that there be contestation about
Jurisdiction; the example of God himself obliges both parties to surpass one
another rather in wisdom then strength. See how this mighty God deals with
them that oppose him; he puts them to the worst rather by his wisdom then his
strength. Should he ever use his might, would he not ruin them in a moment?
but he takes more delight to overcome them by his wisdom. And by reason that
this power of his cannot be discerned by a multitude of successive events which
require time, he forbears to employ all his puissance against his adversaries.
To be brief; he had rather be acknowledged wiser then they, then to show
himself stronger then they.

Amidst this study of wisdom, let Kings also be mindful of the shortness of
their days. Amongst all those that reigned over the people of God, there was
none but David that lived 70 years: none of the rest reached that age. O ye
Kings, I verily have said, ye are gods, ye are the children of the Highest;
Nevertheless, ye shall die like men, and fall as soon as any other.

2. The peoples duty toward their Kings, and themselves.
Now let us speak of the people: and here I put a Question: Wherefore our Lord
commanding ( Mat. 22.21) to render to God and Caesar what to them belongs,
mentions in the first place the dues toward Caesar, before the duties
appertaining to God? We know full well, that Gods interest is to have the
precedence before any whatsoever of Kings: some distinction notwithstanding
must be made herein.

1. Through all the inward and secret inclinations of the soul, our affections
ought to be for God rather then any creature whatsoever: in this respect we
must fear God before we honor the King, 1 Pet. 2.17. Yet are there many
external acts, which though they may have a reference to the service of God,
ought sometime only to follow after those that we owe to man: So he that will
offer sacrifice, and is at ods with his brother, must let alone his oblation,
and agree first with him.

2. The chiefest graces give the lesser leave to work first in matters of this
nature; and commonly all graces begin from the inferior functions. To give
alms is a more excellent work then to pay a debt; nevertheless upon just
demand, the payment of the debt ought to precede the giving of alms; and
Justice goes before Charity, although this last be the greater grace. In
Charity it self, to love our enemy is a far greater gift, then to love our
friend: nevertheless, in a like straight and exigency of them both,
benevolence toward a friend ought to take place.

3. Under color of Gods right many Jews made scruple to pay tribute to Caesar:
But our Lord approving of both the duties, mentioned that first whereof they
made doubt, and proposed the question to him.

This Sovereign Lord God has further manifested, even by his own example, what
esteem we ought to have of Royalty: Many times he has so far favored some
certain persons, as to offer them their choice of diverse things that concerned
them; but never gave he this privilege save to Kings. We find four of them
that had this prerogative; David, to whom it was permitted to choose one of the
three judgments that were propounded to him. Solomon, who amidst so many
blessings that a Monarch could desire, had permission to choose, and promise to
obtain what he should ask. Ahaz, who had order to ask what miracle he pleased,
either in heaven or earth. Ezekiah, to whom was offered the election of two
great wonders; viz. that the shadow of the Dial should leap forward, or return
backward ten degrees in equal distance. It Is a special favor when God
presents the choice to men: But this he never did yet except to Kings only.
And by this singular privilege he has declared the account that men should
make of their just desires.

Let Us here touch another remarkable Point: When God was minded to overthrow
the Jewish State, the first act of his justice was to remove their Kings. We
know that this people had also both Prophets and Priests: but God took not from
them these lights all at once. He begins with the Regal power, which was wholly
extinct and suppressed in Zedekias, that was their last King; they had still
Prophets, yea, after their return from Captivity: but soon after God took away
their Prophecy likewise, and nothing was left them but a corrupt Priesthood,
that in its time was also abolished. So that it is evident, the ruin of their
State arose from the subversion of the Seat Royal.

I have one question more: When is it that a Kingdom is in most danger? when
the King is good and the people bad? or when both, viz. King and people are
alike wicked? One would judge (at first sight) that there is more likelihood,
and more reason of ruin when both are evil, then when one of the two is good:
The contrary, notwithstanding, falls out sometimes, and we are able to bring
instance of it. A man may very well report here what is observed of Hoseah the
last King of the ten Tribes, (2 King. 17.2, etc.) viz. that the Text says of
him, that he sinned not so much as the Kings his Predecessors had done: and
yet in the days of this Prince (the less blameable of all those that had
swayed the Scepter before him) the people were carried away prisoners into
Assyria, whence they never more returned, and the Kingdom was laid in the
dust, that had stood and endured so long under the Dominion of so many wicked
Kings: Why did not this final desolation befall it under Jeroboam, author of
the idolatrous golden Calves? Or under the detestable and bloody Ahab, that
brought in Baalisme, and massacred the Prophets? The Hebrews render some reason
for it. When the King is evil (say they) the people have some pretense to be
so too: For the greatness of such an example, the naughty influences of a
depraved Court, the incitements it yields to do evil, the disgraces and
discountenances that it puts upon good men, bring the world to that pass, that
it is a fault to be without fault. But when the King is good, the wickedness
of the people has no excuse: but on the contrary, they are so much the more
condemnable, and liable to greater punishment. But oh, how happy is that
Kingdom, where the King and his People are united in goodness! Oh how precious
and odoriferous is that oil which descends from the head to the feet!

For the remainder, I will not here handle again the Question we treated of
not long since, concerning two parties that make war one upon another; viz. if
it be always true, that one is always in the right, the other in the wrong:
it often happens, that both are in the wrong in diverse respects. In the War
between Abimelech and the Sechemites, both sides were faulty, and God destroyed
the one by the other, Judge. 9. often also he that is in the wrong, thinks he
has good title. In this War of David upon the Tribes, if God had not decided
the strife, would not any man living have said, that the right had been on the
peoples side? David for title of his Royalty, alleged that he was anointed by
the hand of Samuel. The Tribes that were willing to continue the Crown in the
house of Saul, pleaded Readiness unction, his installing in the Royal Throne
performed by the hand of the same Prophet, not only in private, as was the
unction of David, but in the presence of all the States of the Kingdom, after
he had been chosen of God, and by him recommended to the people. Besides, might
they not have stood upon the many years of Readiness Reign, and his Family in
possession of the Garland? Does not all this, I say, seem to condemn David's
claim, and justify the arms of the adverse party?

But to conclude, Put case the right be all on one side; shall the sword devour
continually? O doleful sword! How long shall it hold? do we not know that the
fruits of War are bitter, even to the Conquerours themselves? Shall we never be
glutted with eating bread kneaded in tears, and tempered with humane blood? For
the Countries are all bedewed with blood, and all our channels run over with
it, as well as did sometime those of Egypt; our cups are full of it, and our
drink is nothing but horror: all the veins of the body of this State are open;
from the soale of the foot unto the top of the crown, there is nothing but
black and blue, bruises and bloud-shot; she is stretched out at length upon the
ashes that our combustions and firings have left; her heart is quashed, hardly
panting between life and death: with a dying eye she looks about, if there be
any will have pity upon her wounds. O King, and ye Ancients of Israel, how
many souls this day conjure you with tears of blood (which would move the very
rocks themselves) and that by the holy bowels of Christ, that you would put
some end to these calamities! Let then the Heads of Israel go tell their King,
Behold, we are thy flesh, and thy bones; Thou and we together, let us stanch
this blood, quench this fire, and remove these pitiful ruins: let us restore
to the Church its luster, to the Laws their vigor; to the Commonweal an
happy peace. Let both sides endeavor to out-goe one another in benignity,
sincerity and piety. Let all ambitious aims, private interests, sinister
respects, cunning wiles, and fraudulent designs be far apart from this
Meeting. When they shall treat thus on both sides, will it be matter of
difficulty (think you) to find means of agreement? The highest mountains will
stoop, and become plains before you; the lowest valleys shall be filled, and
this great gulf which severs both sides, shall be levelled, that both may come
together into one.

Now let us call upon the God of heaven, that he would be pleased to come and
take his place betwixt the King and the Ancients of Israel, as Judge of their
Treaty, Moderatour and Decider of their differences. If we be not enemies to
our selves, if we have not sworn our own utter ruin, if we do not take
pleasure in perishing, Mercy yet and Truth shall meet one another,
Righteousness and Peace shall mutually kiss; Truth shall bud forth out of the
earth, and Righteousness shall look down from heaven.

FINIS.

