Epipapresbyter, Grandchild TO SMECTYMNUUS. OR, The Worlds HUY and CRY, After
TITUS OATS. Ordained Doctor of DEVILITY, at SALAMANCA.
Dr. T urn-coat I ncubus. T ymist. U nthankful S educing O ld Serpent. A
rrogant T raytour. E nchanting S orcerer.: The Devil of Sham PLOTS.
COme hark and hear and draw me nigh,
Good People all that pass me by:
Give Audience, and slight me not,
And give your Ears an Antidote:
Of late the whole Worlds great Trapan,
That Is half a Hog and half a Man
Has run; none knows from whence nor whether,
But all affirm that he came hither.
A Linsy Wolsy Emp'rick Doctor,
A Spiritual Hocus Pocus Proctor;
Who did ('against Natures Civil Laws)
Betray himself and Romish Cause:
And (tho the Lady kissed and dandl'd
Him on her Knee, and softly handled)
He did her slight and vilify,
When he had almost sucked her Dry.
He forged he urged a thing (God wot*)
Called Bloody Babels Popish PLOT:
And when he could it Build no more,
He kicked the Castle, and threw it o'r.
He Is all Religions, yet none True;
He Jack of all Trades does outdoe;
An oaten, whiten, know not what,
Pretended Christian, Apostat:
No Papist, for he has no Merit;
No Quaker, for he has no Spirit:
No Protestant, for want of Grace;
Proteus Lodges in his Face:
He is no Turk, for (like a Swine)
He wallows in a Tub of Wine.
The Devils he does most resemble,
Because he needs must fear and Tremble.
He Mumps to gain his daily Bread;
And he does wear upon his Head
Both Cowl and Presbiterian Callet;
He bears a Knapsack Bag and Wallet:
He Bauls, he Barks, he Roars, he Grins,
He Swears, he Lies he pardons Sins.
The Race of Mankind he Abuses,
And all his Brethren he Accuses.
He that does meet him (with a Cane)
May thresh him till he Stink again.
This Tymist Turncoat of our Age,
Would be a Show, if put in Cage;
For he is elivate (preserve us)
Above the Sphere of Hirco-cervus:
And all the World desire to see
What Human Monster can he be,
Who did set Daughter against the Mother,
The Father against both Son and Brother;
And (from the King to Country Clown)
Has turned the Nation up-side-down.
He so bewitched the London Pedlers,
The Cobblers, Tinkers, and the Sadlers,
That they (for snuffing up the Air)
Might with the Ephesians well compare;
For Rag, and Tag, and Bob-tail, all
The Ribble Rabble what ye call
Did Mold an Image Rood like Ape,
They called the Romish Papish Pape,
And in a fury past its Doom,
As it had been the Pope of Rome:
And then (to satiate their Desire)
They Burned the Heritick in Fire.
Had he proved True to any one,
His Knavery might have been unknown;
But Justice did most wisely Reckon
To fix this Rascal for a Beacon;
That all self-Interest Rogues may see
The end of Treacherous Loyalty;
To be an Hissing to the Nation,
And an abhorring Detestation.
For Sense and Reason both controles
To mend a Breach by making Holes:
He Is Traitor that betray's by Lies
A PLOT; to raise Conspiracies.
He needs must be a Tinker's Brother,
Who mends one hole, and makes another.
He Conjurs, (tho I blush to tell it,
How he did use poor Doctor Ell'ot)
For with a Wind-bal mouth Granado
He turned him Turkish Runagado,
Swore seriously, (not in Derision)
That he was of the Circumcision;
And (for a Witness) did detect
His Cod-peice to Condemn his Neck
He was half Hanged, but not Defacto,
Condemned but in signato Actu:
But 'ere he swang the Soveraing Tree,
A Demonstration made him free.
This Brutish Man, or Homo-hog
Was Mufty once to Haman-gog;
Yet all his antic Tricks and Trade
Could hardly gain his daily Bread;
Therefore he (in a Hocus Prank)
Did turn a Spiritual Mountebank;
And (like a cunning Fox) crept in
Amongst the Romish Men of Sin,
Pretending that himself was nigh
Religious sick, in Piety.
With them he lived, fed-ox well,
Till Wanton Flesh began to swell;
And then his Brains began to breed
A Poisoned Spider Homicide,
And Treason-big began to cry
A PLOT or damned Conspiracy:
And chose poor Babels Whore, that she
Might Midwife to the Monster be.
Now when it was brought to the Light,
It seemed a Screech- Owl of the Night;
But when he saw its Cloven Feet,
He swore it was a Jesuit.
And threw the Brat down at his Door
That Is called the Husband of the Whore:
Then all the Noise that filled our Streets
Was Papishes and Jesuits;
The brand of Papist was enough
To interchange an English Cuff;
But Jesuit was cause indeed
Enough to knock one in the Head.
The Huy and Cry was Fifty pound
To Catch where any could be found;
And Vulgar (that unruly Beast)
Did Law and Reason so Arrest,
That Bedridden Justice seemed to die,
And Order turn to Anarchy.
London, Printed by George Croom, at the Blue-Ball in Thames Street, over
against Baynard's- Castle. 1685.


