Epistola Medio-Saxonica, OR, Middlesex first Letter to his Excellency, The
Lord General Cromwell: Together with their Petition concerning Tithes and
Copy-holds of Inheritance, presented to the Supreme Authority, The Parliament
of ENGLAND. Wherein the tortious and illegal Usurpation of Tithes, contrary to
Magna Charta, is discovered, the blemished dignity of Copyholders revived, and
how Lords of Manors have formerly incroached upon their liberties, by imposing
Arbitrary Fines, and multiplying of Heriots. Whereunto is annexed two
Additional Cases concerning the unreasonable exactions of Fines and Heriots,
contrary to Law, in these latter times. Published for the satisfaction and
vindication of the people of England, from all Decimal Oppression and Lordly
Tyranny. The Second Edition; To which is added a Reply, Styled, Tithes totally
routed by Magna Charta.

LONDON, Printed by F. L. for William Larnar, at the Blackmore, near
Fleet-Bridge, 1653.

In Decimas and serva Praedia, Carmen Hexastichon.
SI mos Angliacus, nec sacra oracula suadent,
Cur solvis Decimas, Anglia lusa, tuas?
Si felix rediit seclum, victique Tyranni,
Cur servile feres, Anglia maesta, jugum?
Sic pia vota tulit Miles, totusque Senatus,
Reddere cur differs, Anglia, vota Deo?
Upon Tithes and Copy-holds, an Hexastick Verse.
IF English Custom, nor Gods Words persuade,
Why yet are Tithes, deceived England, paid?
If the age of Gold be come, and Tyrants broke,
Why do thou, England, bear the servile Yoke?
If the Army, and the Senate, Vows have made,
Why are they by them, England, thus delayed?
Middlesex first Letter to his Excellency.
May it please your Excellency.
THe sweet odor of your name, and unparalled affection toward goodness,
and good people, has imboldned us, in the behalf, and at the entreaty of the
well-affected of this County, to communicate to your Excellency, our intended
Addresses by way of Petition to the Supreme Authority, for the removal of some
grievances which have layen long and heavy upon the freeborn people of this
Nation; that so receiving your judicious approbation and assistance, we might
with the greater alacrity make our procedure. Now Sir, the Heads of our
Petition are only two; namely the removal of that usurped Popish relic
Tithes, and the abolishing of that Tyrannical Oppression and slavish tenure of
Copyholds of inheritance, finably at the Lords will, as things Diametrically
repugnant to divine and humane Laws, Lev. 25.14. Ye shall not oppress one
another, and Ier. 30.20. I will punish all that oppress the^: where your
Excellency may be pleased to take notice of a prohibition not to oppress the
people of God, and of a punishment threatened to those that do it. And in Exo.
23.5. There is a command, that if we see the Ass of our enemy lying under a
burden, that we shall not pass by but help him: If therefore an oppressed
brute Creature ought to be relieved by us, how much more a rational? how much
more a Christian and well-affected people? who in the blackest times of danger
and peril, have adhered to the State with undanted resolutions, adventuring
lives, goods, and all, for the glory of God, and the preservation of this
Commonwealth; wherefore let not, O let not our State bury in silence the day
of this peoples love, who, next to your Excellency and renowned Army, under
God, have been a principal means of the glorious freedom our State now enjoyes.
But because most men look more upon humane, than divine Authority, especially
where their own private interest falls in; and as it is in the 5th. Book of
Aristotle's Ethics, Can be virtuous and just in matters of their own
concernment, but not so in what concerns the public, which occasioned Nobile
illud dictum Biantis, that noble saying of that Grecian Sage, (...), Power will
discover the nature and disposition of every man. Therefore for the
satisfaction of those, whose judgments are over-ballanced in the scale of
earthly interest, (not in the least reflecting on your Excellency, whom we
experimentally know to be of a more divine temper) we shall in brief produce
some humane authorities, as motives to the removal of the aforesaid grievances:

First by the 29th. Chapter of Magna Charta, It is enacted, That no man shall
be disseissed, or put out of his free Tenement, Liberties, or Customs, but by
the lawful judgments of his Peers, or Law of the Land: which Charter is of so
great authority, that it has been confirmed above thirty times. Now Tithes
being a part of every man's free-Tenement, or freehold and birth right, ought
not to be taken away from him, either by the Impropriate Person, or Appropriate
Parson, for these reasons.

First, Because by the Stat. of 25. E. 1. chapter 2. All judgments given against
any points of the Charters of Magna Charta, or Chartade Foresta, are adjudged
void.

Secondly, by the Stat. of 42 Edw. 3. chapter 1. If any Statute be hereafter made
against either of these Statutes, it shall be void. Cooks 1.^. Just. fo. 81.

Thirdly, in Bonhams Case, in the 8th. Book of Cooks Reports, and in Dr. and
Student, it is laid down for Law, that Acts of Parliament against common Right
or Reason, are ipso facto void.

And lastly, it is proved by Jenkins, fol. 139. That the Common Law shall
control Acts of Parliament made against Right or Reason, (such as all Statutes
for Tithes are) and adjudge them to be void, because they deprive men of a part
of their right, contrary to Magna Charta, and against the will of the
Proprietor or owner; so that hence it will plainly appear, that those Statutes
which have been made by former Parliaments concerning Tithes, in times of
Popery and ignorance, and upon false grounds of their Divine Right, being
Diametrically repugnant to Magna Charta, and destructive of common right, then
were, and now are, totally void, null, and of no force; and that all Tithes
taken by virtue of them, have been usurped, illegal, and unwarrantable. And
because some seeing the weakness of their Statute Law foundation, may fly from
thence to the Umbrage and shelter of custom; we answer. It is a Maxim in Law,
that a man cannot claim any thing by Custom or Prescription, against a
Statute, unless the Custom or Prescription be saved by another Statute, Cooks
2. p. Just. fo. 21. Now by the aforesaid Charter of Magna Charta, which was
confirmed by H. 3. about the year, 1218. Tithes as well as the rest did belong
to every man's Tenement and Freehold, and so far were the Clergy at that time
from claiming any Tithes to be due unto them by any Custom, as that, on the
contrary, it is acknowledged at the Council of Lateran, under Gregory the
10th. Anno 1274. and in the Decretal Epistle sent from Pope Innocent the 3d. to
the Archbishop of Canterbury, about the year 1215. that the people of this
Nation did by a general Custom till then observed, dispose of their Tithes
according to their own free will and pleasure. So that it is very clear at the
confirmation of Magna Charta, no Custom of the Land for Clergymen to have
Tithes out of every Proprietors Estate, but that they were the proper right and
inheritance of the owner of the Land. And for confirmation hereof, it is said
by learned Seldom in his book of Tithes, that in H. 2. his time, which was a
little before the said Decretal, Parochial right was the right of having the
Cure and offering of the Parishiones; and that to that Parochial right, no
right of Tithes was annexed by the practice of that time. Whereupon it was
usual with the Religious and secular of the Clergy, to covenant with their
Tenants to pay them the Tithes of their Lands, that so they might prevent the
Minister of the Parish, where the Lands lay. Now if there had been then any
Parochial right or custom for receiving Tithes, how could such a Covenant have
prevented the Parochial Minister? And that this is a clear truth, is evidenced
by an Act of Parliament, in the first year of Rich. the 2. and in the year of
our Lord 1377. in these words, It is accorded, that at what time any person of
Holy Church be drawn in plea in the Secular Court for his Tithes taken by the
name of Goods taken away; and he, which is so drawn in plea, makes an
exception, or allegeth, that the substance and suit of the business is only
upon Tithes, due of right and of Possession to his Church, or to another his
Benefice, that in such case the General averment shall not be taken without
showing specially how the same was his Lay Catall: that is to say, for him to
aver and maintain, that the Tithes he laid claim to, did belong unto him by
Parochial right and custom, as Minister of the place, was no good and
allowable plea in Court, but that he must show in special, and in particular,
how the said Tithes he laid claim to, became his Lay Catall; whether by grant,
gift, or otherwise: So that here is not only an acknowledgement of the Pope and
Clergy, but an Act of Parliament against Parochial right and custom of Tithes.
And yet should we grant them a custom for Tithes, which they cannot claim
without blushing; of what weight, how like a feather would it be, being put in
the scale with Magna Charta? And although it may be objected, that they have
now a long time enjoyed them, even time out of mind; yet that will not avail
much, since it is not a lawful user, but an abuser, and tortious Act, carried
on with a power contrary to all Law, equity and justice.

Moreover in customs, Non diuturnitas temporis, sed soliditas rationis est
consideranda, Not length of time, but soundness of reason is to be weighed:
Upon which ground at a Parliament at Kilkenny in Ireland, in the 40th. of Edw.
3. The Irish customs called the Brehon Law, though of long continuance, were
nulled by that Parliament, upon this ground or Maxim, that malus usus est
abolendus, an ill custom (as Tith-taking is) ought to be abolished. So that
the plea of a long continued custom of taking Tithes, contrary to Magna
Charta, ans common right, will but little conduce to the justification of its
authority and lawfullnesse. And if from hence, any shall fly to Scriptures
refuge, which none but avaritious Sciolists in sacred law and language will
attempt; we shall, if the weakness of their own arguments be not a clear
confutation of their errors and injustice, return a modest and sober answer.

Secondly and lastly, as to the other branch of our Petition concerning
Copyhold Lands of inheritance, finable and also heriotable, by the Tyrannical
practice of many, at the will of the Lord of the Manor, we humbly conceive,
that by the equity of the tenth chapter of Magna Charta, Let no man be
distreined to do greater service for his free Tenement than he ought, grounded
upon the 25. chapter of Levit. v. 17. Ye shall not oppress one another: all those
arbitrary and unreasonable exactions, of Fines and Heriots, exercised of late
years by Tyrannical Lords of Manors, have been illegal, and repugnant to the
equity, if not the letter of the said Charter, and have run beside the channel
of charity, law, and justice; But because many of late and former times have
labored much to vilify and obscure the credit and esteem of Copyholders of
inheritance, and their tenure, thereby to make way for their pride, avarice,
and Tyranny, we shall therefore make a little further inquiry into the
discovery of them. Bracton lib. 4. chapter 28. says, that Villenagiorum, aliud
purum, aliua privilegiatum, Of Villenages, one kind is pure and perfect
Villenage, the other a more free, honorable, and privileged. Where note, that
Villenage in its proper and genuine signification, is nothing but the service
of a Husbandman, which may be either honorable or base, according to the
quality of the person and tenure: and therefore he says, Pure or base
Villenage is that, whereby either a free man or a bondman so holds of his
Lord, as that he is tied to do whatever he shall command him, not knowing over
night what he must do the next morning, and always in all things is held to
uncertainties; and of this sort is Littletons Tenure of Villenage, whose large
Tract upon that subject might well have been spared, since there were very sew,
if any, even in his time, who held by that base and unworthy I enure.

Now the other sort called by Bracton, Privilegiatum, Privileged Villenage, or
as he terms it in his 2d. book, and 8th. and and 35th. Chap. Villanum
Soccagium, qualified Soccage, which is the same with Littletons Tenure of
Copy-holds, where the Tenants hold their Land by Copy of Court Roll, as Cook in
his Commentaries upon Littleton 1. p. Inst. fo. 58. acknowledges. So that
Bractons qualified or privileged Soccage, and our Copy-holds, are one and the
same, which is more clearly proved by the same manner of conveyance in
alienations: for says he in li. 2. cap. 8. Si Villanus Sockmanus Villanum
Soccagium; if a qualified Sockman or Copyholder, will convey his qualified
Soccage to another, let him surrender the same unto the hands of the Lord, or
his Steward, and let the other receive it from them; which is the form we now
use. And in his 1. Book and 2d. Chapter they are called Gleba ascriptitii, Enrolled
Tenants of the Glebe or Manor, and who did enjoy such privileges, as that they
could not be put out, so long as that they paid their certain and yearly
pensions, whosoever was Lord; neither might they be compelled to keep their
Tenement. but might alien when they pleased, and they them, as we now, did hold
their Tenements, ad voluntatem Domini, secundum consuetudinem Manerii, at the
will of the Lord, according to the custom of the Manor: Yet was not that such
an unbridled will, as many pragmatical Novices in Iurisprudential Learning now
Imagine, not a natural will, but a legal will, bounded by reason, Law and
custom; So that if the Lord of the Manor did at any time go about to disturb,
or put them out of their Tenements, although they might not have an Assize, yet
they had Parvum breve de Recto secundum consuetudinem Manerii, a small writ of
right, according to the custom of the Manor, for to regain their Estates.
Bracton lib. 1. cap 2. lib. 5. cap. 2 where the writ is likewise expressed. And
in his 4th. book and 28 Chap. He says, That if the Tenant be ejected by his
Lord, he shall have a jury impannell'd, to enquire of the Covenant, and consent
of the Lord, in admitting of him to be his Tenant, whom he ejected, and he
shall be restored; because, Jura non debent juvare dominum, contra voluntatem
and consensum suum, quia semel voluit conventionem, The Laws ought not to
relieve the Lord against his own will and consent, because he has made a
Covenant, that his Copyhold Tenant shall enjoy his Tenement, performing his
services and customs, li. 2. cap. 8. and li. 4 cap. 28. And in the Reign of E.
3. and E. 4. Sir John Danby and Thomas Brian Lord chief Justices, were of
opinion, that Copyholders ejected by their Lords, might have an action of
Trespass. Neither is Bracton single in his good esteem of privileged Sockmans,
or Copyholders, since Fieta writ by a great Lawyer about E. 2 his time, and
Ockam in H. 2. his Reign, do both of them honor Copyholders in those elder
times, with the name of customary Tenants: And Ockam not only spoke worthily of
them, but of their Original, whose works through the envy and Tyranny of the
times, have not had the liberty to appear in public. And Lambard in his book
De Priscis Anglorum legibus, of the ancient Laws England, says, That
Copy-holds were long before the Conquest, and then called by the name of
Book-land: and since the Conquest they have been honored with many worthy
appellations, as of Copyholders, in H. 5. of Tenants by the Rod, in H. 4. of
Tenants by the Roll, according to the will of the Lord, in E. 3. of Customary
Tenants, in in E. 1. Cooks 1. p. Just. fol. 58. And because Copyholders have
been much abused in the late corrupt times of Monarchy, not only in the
disgracing of their Tenure, but also in the altering and multiplying their
Customs and services: great persons falsely pretending, as if poor Copyholders
had nil de jure, but all de gratia, nothing of right, but all of favor.
Therefore for further satisfaction, we will make some brief discovery therein.
Bracton in his first Book and second Chapter, says, That the works of
privileged Sockmans or Copyholders were, though servile, yet certain and
nominated. And again in his 4th Book and 28th Chapter, That qualified Sockmans
had their Tenements granted unto them to hold by Covenant, for certain services
and customs named and expressed, although the services and customs were
servile; that is with Cart, Plough, or the like, at certain set times in the
year, according to agreement. And again a little after, Villani Sockmanii
villana faciunt servitia, Qualified Sockmans do servile works and services, yet
certain and determined. Now Cook upon Magna Charta, chapter fol. 13. says, That in
these words, reasonable customs, and reasonable services, all Fines, whether
certain or uncertain, and other Customs and Duties are comprehended: And if
so, then for certain all Fines of Copyholds were in Bractons time certain, and
not as now uncertain and Arbitrary. But yet by the way take notice, that he
does not speak of any Fines to be paid by Qualified Sockmans, upon death or
alienation, that word under that notion being unknown to him or any other (as
we conceive) of that age. And having in his second Book and five and thirtieth
Chapter, treated at large, who ought to do Homage, and who Fealty, and having
showed that both free and qualified Soccagers ought to do Fealty to their
Lords, comes in the following Chapter to treat of Reliefs: and in the eighth
branch of the Argument of that Chapter, makes this Quaerie, Si de Soccagiis
dari debet relevium? If of Soccages (speaking plurally) a relief ought to be
given, which must be understood both of free and qualified Soccage; and toward
the latter end of the Chapter, says, Et nunc videndum, si de Soccagio dari
debet relevium? And now next comes to be considered, whether a Relief ought to
be given of Soccage? which being spoken indefinitely, and in general, without
adding any Epithet, either of free or qualified, must in all construction, if
you consult the beginning of the Chapter, be understood both of free and
qualified Soccage. So that that duty or performance, which upon the death of
the Ancestor, was given in recognitionem Dominii, by way of acknowledgement of
his Dominion and Lordship; and as he says, ad relevandam haereditatem, to
relieve and raise the Estate and Inheritance into the hands of the Heir, was
Praestatio quaedam loco relevii, a certain prestation or performance, instead
of a Relief, (for he will allow it properly to be a Relief, which the Soccager
either free or qualified paid) due only upon death, but never upon alienation,
and was ever certain, namely a double Quitrent, that is to say, one years Rent
due to the Lord, besides the yearly Quitrent. And this is that Duty as we
clearly conceive, which since they have new named and called a Fine, and
exacted not only upon deaths of Copyholders, but Alienations also; and not
only according to two years Quitrent, as by Law they ought, but according to
their unreasonable lusts and desires, forcing from their Tenants not only two
years, but even three years Fine and more, according to the yearly value and
Rent of the Land: So that the Copyholder, who was wont according to the
ancient Law and Custom, to pay for a Fine upon Death only, but two years
value according to the Quitrent, is now driven to pay two and three years value
according to a full and rackt Rent; and that upon alienations too, concontrary
to the said ancient Law and Custom, and all good conscience. Neither is Bracton
alone in ascertaining the services and customs of Copyholders, but others
have said the same, and namely Britton a Bishop, in E. 1. and very learned in
the Laws; and who at the Kings Command composed them into a complete Volum:
where treating of Copyholders of Inheritance, sets it down for positive
Law, that such were their privileges, that their Lords might neither increase
their services (under which as before is showed, are comprehended Fines) nor
change them, to make their Tenants do other services or more. Brit. fo. 165.
And accordingly was the judgment of a whole Parliament in the same Kings
Reign, though ill, (if not of purpose) and vitiously translated; which yet for
further satisfaction we will here set down, as we have received it pointed, and
comma'd by Cook in his 4th book of Reports, in Browns Case, in these words,
Inquirendum est etiam de custumariis, viz. quot sunt custumarii. and quamtum
terrae quilibet custumarius teneat, qua opera, quas consuetudines faciat, and
quantum opera and censuetudines cujuslibet custumarii valiant per annum, and.
quantum redditur de reddit. Assisae per annum, praeter opera and consuetudines
qua possunt talliari, and quae non ad voluntatem Domini, which in English
according to a true and Grammatical translation, is as follows.

Inquity is to be made also of customary Tenants, that is to say, How many
customary Tenants there are, and how much Land every customary Tenant holds,
what works, what customs he does, and how much the works and customs of every
Customary Tenant are worth by the year; and how much is paid (meaning by every
one) of the Rent of Assize by the year, besides their works and customs which
may be rated and valued; (as two or three days work in a year with Plough and
Cart) and which are not at the will of the Lord: Whereby it appears, that a
whole Parliament esteemed of them as customary Tenants, that their Rent was
accounted then parcel of the Rent of Assize; and that all their works and
customs were certain, according to the opinion of those two great Lawyers
before-quoted, who lived in or near the said times, one whereof was Lord Chief
Justice of England, and the other a great and learned Bishop. And for as much
as Copyholders have been as much oppressed in Heriots, as in any other duty or
service, we will therefore in brief speak a word or two concerning the ancient
Law in that point. Fleta lib. 2. cap. 50. and Brit. fo. 178. both say, that the
Copyhold Tenant, making his Testament upon his Deathbed, ought to make an
acknowledgement of his Lord, by giving of him one Heriot. And Bracton lib. 4.
cap. 26. says, that the Soccager, whether qualified or free, ought at his
death to respect his Lord with one Heriot, Quae tamen praestatio est magis de
gratia quam de jure, which prestation or performance, says he, is rather of
favor than of right, and does not at all touch the inheritance. And if we look
a little higher, Glanvill Lord Chief Justice of England, in H. 2. lib. 7. cap.
5. De legibus and censuetudinibus Angliae, of the Laws and Customs of England,
says in these words, Potest quilibet liber homo majoribus debitis non
involutus, etc. Every Freeman not greatly indebted, may in his sickness make a
reasonable devise of his goods under this form, according to the custom of the
Country, that he do acknowledge his Lord with the best and principallest he
has; next the Church, and afterward other persons, as he pleases: but says
he, whatsoever the customs of diverse Countries and places are in this point,
according to the Laws of the Kingdom, no man is bound, in his Testament to
leave any thing to any person, but at his free will and pleasure. For every
man's will, says he, is free, as well in reference to Testamentarie Laws, as to
other Laws. So that here you may plainly perceive, that by the Law of the Land,
according to the opinion of this great Judge, no Heriot was due; and if there
were any due by any particular custom, it was but one, and that upon death
only, and must be given by the Testator by Will too, and not be much in debt
neither, whereby it appears according to the opinion of those great Lawyers,
Fleta, Britt. Bracton, and Glanvill, all those Heriots which have been exacted
of late in such multiplied numbers, have been illegal and unjust, and contrary
to the good Laws and Customs of this Nation in former times.

Now by what has been briefly said, it may easily appear to any indifferent
man, who has incroached most upon each others Liberties; Whether the great and
potent wealthy Lord of the Manor, carrying all things before him by the virtue
and charm of his unrighteous Mammon, or the poor despised
trampled-under-foot-Copy-holder, who has been forced to lose his Liberties, to
preserve his livelihood. Whereas according to those great authorities of
Bracton, Britton, and others above quoted, all Fines, Customs, and other
services of Copyholders, ought neither to be changed nor increased; and that
according to others, who have strained the Law beyond its due bounds, in favor
to Lords of Manors, all unreasonable Fines and Services are forbidden; and if
all unreasonable, then certainly all Arbitrary, since it is abundantly made
known by long experience to the People of this Nation, that all Arbitrary
power, (as is the power of Lords of Manors, to set what Fines they please upon
their Tenants, at Death or Alienation) is oppressive, Tyrannical, and contrary
to the peace and freedom of this Common wealth, as fully manifested in a
Declaration of this Parliament, set forth in March 1648. In these words, The
Parliament of England, elected by the People, whom they represent, have long
contended against Tyranny, and endeavored to remove oppression, Arbitrary
power, or power of will, and all opposition to the peace and freedom of the
Nation. And again in another Declaration of the 7th. of April, 1646. in this
manner. And as both Houses have already for the ease and benefit of the people,
taken away the Court of Wards and Liveries, with all Tenures in Capite and
Knight services: So we shall take special care, that as speedy and as great
ease, may be had otherwise in other grievances, as the pressing occasions of
the Commonwealth will admit. Wherefore (these arguments premised, being
seriously considered) we humbly crave of your Excellency, that you would be
pleased to intercede with our Representative, for the removal of that unjust
and slavish bondage and yoke, which neither we nor our forefathers have been
able to bear, that so we may not only in spirituals, but also in temporals,
enjoy that freedom and liberty, which not only by Law, but by right of Conquest
is due to the well-affected people of this Commonwealth. It is the Law of
Nature; yea and the Law of Christ too, Fac alteri, quod tibi vis fieri, do to
others, as you would be done to. If so; How can freedom and liberty be denied
to those who with the hazard and loss of their lives, goods, and all, have
purchased freedom and liberty, not only to their Representatives, and
well-affected Potentates, but also to those who have been enemies to this
Commonwealth? whereby they, who under the Monarchical yoke were in bondage, not
only in respect of their estates, but of their persons also, are now restored
to a noble and glorious liberty, whilst their fellow brethren, who ought to be
sharers in this freedom, lie under the burden of Tithes, and bondage of
Copyholds; many whereof do at this day retain the dishonorable names of base
Tenure and Villanage in the worst sense, as if we were rather returning back to
Egypt, than in our progress to Canaan. Ah most religious Sir! did we not Demas
like mind our own present power and profit, more than our trust and promises in
times of danger, these things could not be: but what shall we say, Deus dabit
his quique finem, God will in his due time put a period to these things. Now to
conclude, we once more humbly desire your Excellencies favor and assistance,
in gaining freedom to those, who have been greatly instrumental in the work of
the Lord, and for whose sake paradventure God has been gracious to this our
Sion and Commonwealth; and we shall not only pray for the eternal happiness
of your Excellency, but also take the boldness to subscribe, as in all duty
and gratitude we are bound,

Your Excellencies most humble Servants in the Lord Christ.

The Petition of the Inhabitants of the County of Middlesex, concerning Tithes,
and Copy-holds of Inheritance, presented to the Supreme Authority the
Parliament of England.
Shows,
THat as your Petitioners are really sensible of the unwearied labors this
honorable Parliament has undergone, in the Vindication of the Rights and
Liberties of the freeborn people of this Nation, from the incroaching Tyranny
of Kingly and Lordly power, for which they return a grateful acknowledgement:
So they desire to mind you, that the well-affected of this Nation, have, in this
common cause of public freedom and preservation, faithfully served you in
their several places, willingly undergoing all burdens, either of Tax or
Free Quarter; besides the voluntary loans of very many, even beyond their
abilities, upon the Propositions. And since it is the undoubted right of the
freeborn people of this Nation, from whom all just power is derived, to
present to their Parliament, or Representative, all their grievances, that so
Adaequate remedies may be duly applied; Therefore we offer to your more
serious considerations, these ensuing particulars to be speedily redressed.

First, Forasmuch as all Tithes, relics of the late destroyed Hierarchy, are
declared in the 2d. Book of Cooks Reports, in the Bishop of Winchesters Case,
to be things merely spiritual, and due by divine right; and for which there is
no remedy at the Common Law: and also in his 2d. Book of Instit. and Chap. of
Tithes, that by the Common Laws and customs of this Nation, Lands are
undecimable: which is fully evidenced by a Canon of the Council of Lateran,
under Greg. 10th. 1274. in this manner; Let no man give his Tithes where he
pleases, as before, but let them be paid to Mother Church. And Britton, though
a Bishop, treating of Ecclesiastical power, and of what things the Church had
counsance, does wholly omit Tithes, knowing very well that those Popish Canons
and constitutions, which not long before had been made for the taking away the
Tenths of men's Estates, were totally void, being Diametrically repugnant to
Magna Charta. Which likewise is further attested, by a decretal Epistle sent
from Innocent the 3d. Pope of Rome, to the Archbishop of Canterbury, about the
year 1215. wherein it is clearly acknowledged, That the freeborn people of
this Nation, did by the General, and till then observed custom of this Land
dispose of the Tithes or Tenths of their estates, according to their own free
will and pleasure. So that it is very clear, Tithes have been formerly by the
Popish Clergy subtly persuaded, or rather extorted from our Ancestors, under
the notion and consideration only of a Divine right, and chiefly by virtue of
the said Decretal, which so awed our forefathers, that it frighted them into a
servile and unwilling obedience. Wherefore we humbly desire that all Tithes and
Tenths (under the notion whereof we pay a fifth) may be speedily removed, as a
great Oppression and Usurpation, that so Husbandry and Tillage may thereby
receive the greater encouragement; and that all Impropriators may thereby
receive such reasonable satisfaction (notwithstanding much may be said to the
contrary) as you in your wisdoms shall think fit. And that likewise a
comfortable maintenance may some other (...) and peaceable way according to the
Word of God, be provided for the Ministry, that so the glorious Gospel of Jesus
Christ may no longer be impeded, by that sensual and earthly Remora of
litigious Tything, but that Evangelical Messengers may with the Apostle Paul,
by the sweetness of their lives and conversation, convince gainsayers, that
they come not to seek ours, but us.

Secondly, That all Copyhold Lands of inheritance, may be made free from all
Fines, Heriots, and other slavish services brought in by, and after the Norman
Tyranny, as may appear by Bracton a great Lawyer in H. 3. his time, in his
first Book and 7th. Chap. of the Customs of England, where he says, That, in
the Conquest, men held their lands freely, by free services or customs, and
certain, until being thrown out by usurping Normans, and their adherents, they
were enforced to retake them again, to hold by unjust and unequal terms and
services, yet still certain and nominated, which through the avarice, cruelty,
and oppression of succeeding Lords of Manors, have been increased illegally, to
a strange multiplication of Heriots, and Arbitrary raising of Fines, from two
years value, according to the Quitrent, to two and three years value according
to the sull Rent, a thing altogether unreasonable, and unconscionable, as has
been clearly adjudged. And although your Petitioners humbly conceive, that
Copyholders of inheritance, ought by their Tenures to have been protected by
their Lords, and to have been freed in this time of War, from all public
burdens, and taxes; yet so far have they been from affording the same unto
them, that they have for the most part, forsaken and denied them protection,
whereby their Copyhold Tenants by them deserted, have for a great part most
willingly adhered to the Commonwealth, and have laid out themselves to the
utmost, in bearing an equal share in all public hurthens with the
Freeholders, to the impoverishing of themselves, their Wives, and Children.
And Moreover since, as we are informed, much of the Lands settled upon Soldiery
for their Arrears, are freed from all Tithes, Fines, and other slavish
services, which we envy not, but exceedingly congratulate; nay since all Lands
held in Capi^e and Knights service, are by an Act of this present Parliament
freed from all ward-ships, and other slavish imcumbrances, notwithstanding the
greatest benefit thereof does redound to the advantage and emolument of those
who have bee^^ ^^^ctual Arms against the State, or who at least in their
declared affections have been utter enemies thereof: Seeing we say, that not
only the Army, but your enemies have tasted so deeply of your grace and favor,
Let it not be said in Gath, nor published in the streets of Ascalon, that your
dearest Friends, those out of whom your Armies have been raised, formed, and
supplied with men and money all along; those by whom you have in the greatest
danger, and times of exigency, been most readily and willingly assisted, even
to the hazard and loss of their lives: Let it not be said, we humbly
reiterate, that those who have been your friends, Gods friends, and their
Countries friends, should now at length be left to remain in bondage, and
Gibeonitish slavery, whilst their enemies riot and abound in liberty and
freedom. Wherefore we humbly desire, that all Copyholders of Inheritance, may
according to your several Declarations of the 7th. of April, 1646. and of
March, 1648. be restored to christian freedom and liberty, the fruits of
Conquest, and the just reward of their expense and hazard, that so of victors
they may not become slaves and vassals in their estates, to their conquered
Lords, whom they begin already to feel, and are daily like to find more cruel
and unreasonable, than ever, if they shall return again to reign over them,
with the full sail of usurped power.

Thus hoping that the same God, who has even miraculously given you Victory
over your enemies, rest from wars, peace in your Habitations, and put a power
into your hands to do righteous things for the good of this Nation, will also
put into your hearts and minds, to do these things represented unto you; and
what else, you in your wisdoms shall know to be for the good and welfare of
this Commonwealth.

And we shall ever pray, etc.

The Case of Copyholders stated, according to the Quando lex accommodatur ad
causam and personam, and non e contra. When the Law is applied to the cause and
person, not they to it.
Lesbian Rule of the Law, in the corrupt times of Monarchy; wherein is clearly
proved, that no Lord of a Manor of Copyholds of Inheritance, can take for a
Fine where (as they say) uncertain, of his Copyhold Tenant two years clear
yearly value of the Land.
FIrst, Because it is resolved by Popham Chief Justice, Clench, Gaudy, and
Fenner, Justices of the upper Bench in the 42. and 43 Eliz. between Hubbard and
Hammon; that if the Fines of Copyholders of a Manor are incertaine upon
admittances, yet the Lord may not demand or exact an excessive or unreasonable
Fine; and if he does, the Copyholder may deny to pay it without forfeiture;
and according to this resolution, it was then said, that it had been formerly
adjudged in the same Court, in one Hoddesdons Case. Cooks Reports, lib. 4to.

Now it is a Rule and Maxim, that all excessivenesse is abhorred in Law; and
that all things ought to be interpreted with equity and moderation. As put
case, the Lord of a Manor, where Fines, through his Tyranny are uncertain, has
taken time out of mind, about a years value, not much under nor over: If there
one of his Copyhold Tenants shall improve his Land by great charge and
industry, from 5 l. per annum, to be worth 20 l. per annum, and then dye, and
after the Lord shall set two years Fine, viz. 40 l. upon his Heir, this will be
an excessive and most unreasonable Fine. First, Because where a Lord has
usually taken about a year, though a little under or over, there to take a year
and half, (though according to the value before improvement) is excessive, and
so illegal; if the Rules of right reason, moderation and equity, were closely
held to and kept. Next, it is altogether unreasonable, because, through this
improvement of the Tenant, with a vast expense and charge, perhaps treble to
the Land, the Lord now comes to take in a little compass of time, at a year
and halfs Fine, six years years value, at two years Fine, eight years value
according to the yearly Rent and worth of the Land before improvement: So that
now a covetous and unconscionable Lord, (as too many there are) will take
advantage to enrich himself out of the Tenants vast expense and industry,
contrary to the Rules of Justice, equity and honesty.

Secondly, and lastly, no Lord of a Manor can by the present Law, take two
years clear yearly value for a Fine, where (as Lawyers say) they are uncertain,
(though repugnant to those great Authorities in the Letter before recited, and
contrary to their own Maxims, and abundantly savouring of tyranny) upon the
admittance of a Copyhold Tenant, as is clearly resolved in an action of
Trespass between Stallon and Brady, commenced in the first year of King James,
in the Court of Common Pleas; where the Lord of the Manor did set a Fine at two
years clear yearly value, which the Tenant denying to pay, being unreasonable,
the Lord enters, and thereupon the Tenant brings an action of Trespass, and
after five years demurre, consultation being had with all the ludges and great
Lawyers of England, it was at length (viz.) in the sixth year of King James, by
the Judges of the said Court of Common Pleas, fully and unanimously resolved,
that the said Fine of two years was unreasonable, and so no forfeiture by the
Tenants denial.

Now from hence it must be concluded that for any Lord of a Manor to demand a
year and a halfs Fine, is the very utmost rigor and extremity of the Law, as
it has flowed to us out of the impure fountain of Monarchy, and all those who
have exacted more, have done illegal, and unwarrantable Acts, according to that
Lesbian Rule.

But where Tenants have at their great charge, made improvements as is above
declared, there for the Lord to take a year, much more a year and half, is
altogether unconscionable, and against the Rules of equity.

The Case of intolerable Oppression in point of Heriots.
A Copyhold Tenant holds a 100. Acres of Land, worth per annum 5 s. per Acre,
and 20 s. Rent yearly, and for which, the Lord claims a Heriot upon Death. The
Tenant aliens his Land to a hundred men; now by our Book-Law, made in corrupt
times merely in favor of Lords, and to oppress poor people, the Lord of the
Manor shall have his 20 s. Rent, and besides, a Heriot for every Acre upon the
death of every particular Tenant; for this reason, which is no reason, because
a Heriot is an indivisible service: so that it may so fall out, that the Lord
shall have Heriots in a short time, to the value of one thousand pounds,
whereas the whole is not worth five hundred pounds; and besides, a poor man
having an Acre of his Land not worth five pound, and dying seized, the Lord
shall enter upon his Goods, and take away for a Heriot, a Cow or Horse worth
six or eight pound, to the utter ruin of his Wife and Children.

Now from a division of Land to urge a multiplication of Heriots, has neither
ancient Law, reason nor honesty in it, notwithstanding those slight Arguments,
and fond distinctions of Heriot Service, and Heriot Custom, which are used to
the contrary.

REader these names should have been placed at the end of the 13th Page.

Col. Pride, Aug. Wingfield, Robert Cromwell, Col. Potter, Henry Arundell,
Nich: Beale.
FINIS
Vindiciae Medio-Saxonicae, OR, Tithes totally Routed, BY MAGNA CHARTA IN A
Reply to an Answer of Middlesex Letter and Petition, in the latter end of a
Tract, called, A Treatise of Tithes. WHEREIN The Invalidity of the said
Treatisers Arguments are fully manifested, and the said Letter and Petition
clearly vindicated from Error and Mistake. BY AUG. WINGFIELD, A Member of this
present PARLIAMENT.

LONDON, Printed by F.L. for William Larnar, at the Blackmore near
Fleet-Bridge, 1653.

Tithes totally routed, by Magna Charta.
HAving perused a Treatise of Tithes penned by way of Answer to its Opponents,
by one, as it is conceived, of the long Robe; we thought fit to give timely
admonition, that though he pretend to be a well wisher to Religion and
Propriety, yet when he speaks fair, men believe him not; for there are, it is
to be feared, seven Abominations in his heart, who though his Sophisticated
Arguments be covered with deceit, yet shall his wickedness be showed before
the whole Congregation. Prove. 26.25, 26.

In his Epistle to the Reader, he discovers both his spirit and his pride,
censuring his Antagonists, as clamorous malicious ignorants, though perhaps in
the judgment of unbiased Moderators, more learned, peaceable, and more
Evangelically spirited than himself. But fearing lest his great Diana Tithes,
the Nursery of contention and strife, should in these days of Reformation, and
restoration of public Freedom and liberty, like Dagon before the Ark, fall
to the ground and come to naught; he has therefore, out of his worldly wisdom,
judged it very opportune (both in reference to himself and also to his Clients
the Tith-taking Priesthood and Impropriator) in this extremity of time, to
force into his Aid a Catalogue of Acts of Parliament, though to little purpose,
since few of them before the Statutes of H. 8. intimate so much as a right,
much less command the payment of Parochial Tithes to Priests or others, as if
this Respondent would make us all believe, that Ubi nomen Decima, ibi
argumentum Decimandi, that wheresoever in any Statute the word Tith is found,
there is an argument for Tithing: though by his leave in some of them by him
quoted there is not so much as the name Mag. Char. c. 1. Marl. c. 5. 25 E. 1.
2^ E. 1. etc.
: But although he and his Tith-taking Brethren have a long time, like Simeon
and Dovi, confederated together, not only to make us ignorants, but still to
keep so, by persuading of us and our fore fathers, That Tithes were first due
by Divine Law, then by Canon Law, and now by Statute Law; yet are we and the
good people of England resolved to be no longer deluded by them with their
Paralogisms, and deceitful reasonings.

And therefore that we may no longer digress by way of preface, we shall now
come to reply, and to examine those two grand objections, which the Author of
the said Treatise raises against the Middlesex Letter and Petition in the
Expository opening of those two Statutes of Magna Charta. chapter 29. and 1. R. 2.
chapter 14. where this Respondent says page 13. That for the Penner of the said
Letter and Petition to make the People believe, that the payment of Tithes is
against Magna Charta, is such an exposition as was never made upon that
Statute, and therefore to rectify this Error (as he calls it) he has
labored, though in vain, to overthrow the said exposition, and those
invincible arguments built upon it, and to set up his own contrary
interpretation and false affertion, (viz.) That Tithes and the payment thereof
by the people, were confirmed by Magna Charta, chapter 1. under the Notion of
Church rights.

And first for proof thereof he says, page 14. That by the Common Law of this
Land, at the confirmation of Magna Charta, Ecclesiastical persons had remedy to
recover their Tithes in the Spiritual Court, and then concludes, that the Law
gives no remedy but where there is a right: which assertion is very untrue. For
Cook upon Tithes says, That by the Common Law Lands are undecimable, and if
undecimable, then certainly by that Law there can be no Church right to Tithes,
neither to be recovered by virtue thereof in the Spiritual, or Popes Court,
Since the people of England were not bound in Law by his Cannons. Neither is
Cook single in his opinion, For Seldom fo. 291 says, That Arbitrary
disposition of Tithes used by the Laity, as well de jure, of right, (as the
positive Law then received and practiced was) as de facto, of deed and
practice, is that which Wickleff remembered in his Complaint to the King and
Parliament under R. 2. The substance whereof in brief, is, That the proud and
pompous Priests did constrain the poor People of England ( viz. by Popish
Canons) to pay their Tithes unto them, whereas within a few years before, they
paid their Tithes and Offerings at their own free will and pleasure. Which is
also attested by Ludlow a Judge of Assize in E. 3. who says, That in ancient
time a man might give his Tith to what Church he would; which is true says
Judge Brook in Abridging the case. Seldom fol. 252.

And the said Author further says, fo. 290. That under Innocent the 3d. it was
usual in fact for Laymen by the practice of the Law at that time both Common
and Canon, to convey the right of their Tithes, as Rent-charges or the like, to
what Church or Monastery they pleased, and such Conveyances were clearly good.
And whereas the Author of the said Treatise, p. 14. quoteth Mr. Seldom for his
Authority of Parochial right, he is clearly mistaken, since Mr. Seldens
judgment in the same place immediately following is clearly to the contrary,
and that which is here alleged as the Treatisers main Argument, is nothing but
the opinion of the Canonists recited by Mr. Seldom, and by him in the same and
following pages fully confuted, page 144, 146.

Moreover Magna Charta is, by Act of Parliament made in 25 E. 1. called, the
Confirmation of the Charters, adjuged and declared to be the Common Law of the
Land; which if true, as it is most true, then Tithes being not so much as
named, much less confirmed by Magna Charta, are not due by the Common Law, (as
the said Respondent weakly supposes) and so not at all under Ecclesiastical
cognizance.

But he objecteth and says, That Tithes are contained in these words, The
Churches Rights, Mag. Char. cap. 1. for further satisfaction whereof, see Cooks
exposition upon the very same words, where he says, that Ecclesiastical
persons shall enjoy their lawful jurisdictions, and other their rights (but
not one word of Tithes) without diminution, and that no new Rights were given
unto them hereby, but such as they had before confirmed: Now if no new Rights
were given, then not Tithes, since the Author of the said Treatise confesses
p. 14. that the Common Right of Tithes due to the Rector of the Parish, is but
from the time of K. John, and then, as M. Seldom (whom he quoteth) p. 146.
declares, not so much as in opinion established, whereby it is evident, not
only by Seldom and his own confession, but also in the judgment of Gook, that
at the confirmation of Magna Charta, Tithes were not at all comprehended in the
Rights of the Church.

Which will yet more fully appear if we consult Mr. Seldens book of Tithes, and
the Roll of Winten. In the first whereof page 137. It is delivered for a clear
truth, that there never was any Canon of any General Council as yet found, that
purposely commanded payment of Tithes, nor any that expressly supposed them a
duty of Common right, before the Council of Lateran, under Pope Innocent the
3d. 1615: So that at the Council of Lateran, which was in the latter end of K.
John, and but 12 years or thereabouts before the confirmation of Magna Charta
by H. the 3d. Tithes were not due by common right, that is by Common Law, and
so consequently no rights of the Church. And if not then due by Common Law,
then certainly not at the confirming of Magna Charta, since in the judgment of
all, both Canonists and Common Lawyers, 12 years is not a competency of time,
either for custom, or prescription, the one allowing 40 years at least, the
other time out of mind.

And yet to proceed, this Respondent does further acknowledge, p. 14. that
there was no Parochial Right of Tithes till after the Council of Lateran
aforesaid, 1615. and that after the Decretal Epistle of Innocent the 3d sent to
the Archbishop of Canterbury in the year aforesaid, the right of Tithes was
allowed (but you must know by whom, (viz.) the Pope and his Clergy, not the
People) and so became Lex Terrae, a Law of the Land, which are likewise the
words and judgment of Cook: Now of what force and validity, a Right of Tithes,
grounded upon a Canon of the Pope, and diametrically repugnant to Magna Charta
can be, let all men judge; since Cook their Oracle has declared in his Chapter
of Tithes, that all Canons which are against the Common Law, or Custom of the
Land, are of no force.

Now as to the Roll of Winton, called by some Doomsday Book, which was a survey
of all the Lands and Revenues both of Clergy and Laity, exactly taken by
Commiss. in every County throughout the Nation, and returned into the Exchequer
about the latter end of the Conquerours Reign, It is there Recorded in
particular what the Revenues and dues of every Presbyter and Church were, but
yet notwithstanding very rarely, if at all, are any Tithes found among the
Church Revenues. So that bence it is most clear, First, that in William the
Conquerrors time, Tiths were no Revenue nor rights of the Church; nor yet
Secondly, in H. 2. his time, see the Letter and Petition, p. 5. And lastly, by
the Authors own confession they became due only but from the latter end of K.
John's Reign, and that grounded merely upon a Popish Canon, contrary to Magna
Charta, which is acknowledged by the Learned, to be the Common Law of England,
both before and after the Conquest.

The second and last objection which the Author of the said Treatise makes, is
upon our exposition of the Statute of 1 R. 2. cap. 14. which we shall here
make good to be most genuine and true, notwithstanding his false calumniation;
and that his Anti exposition is most absurd and false, and such as had not
Custom wrought another Nature in him to speak and write untruly, could never
have fell from him. Now the question between us is, whether the Averment there
spoken of be Lay Averment, and so to be made by the Plaintiff, according to his
exposition, or Church Averment, and so to be made by the Defendant, according
to our exposition: whether of which is most true, we shall leave to every one
to judge, by opening unto you the Nature of Averment out of the judgment of the
Learned, and by holding forth such reasons as shall in brief be produced.

And first Cowells Interpreter says, That Averment signifies (according to
the Author of Terms of the Law) an offer of the Defendant to make good or to
unstifie in exteption pleaded in abatement or bar of the Plaintiffs Act. And
Sir Hen. Smith in his book of Law fo. 359 also says, That Averments must be
offered to be proved true in Bars. 1. Answers, Replications, Rejoinders, etc.
but not in Counts andDeclarations. And of the same judgment is Sir Edw. Cook,
in his first part of Institutes fo, 362. So that it is evident, Averments are
properly to be made by Defendants in their answears, or in after pleadings, and
not by Plaintiffs in their Declaration: unless in some few particular cases,
of which this is none, as is evident, not only by the Grammatical, and Logical
Construction of the said Statute, but even in the judgment of Learned Rastal,
a Justice of the Common Pleas, in Q. Mary's days; who to put the question out
of doubt, has set it down in the margent of his Abridgement of the Statutes,
to be Church Averment, which we conceive to be a final determination of the
question.

And as to your Ordinance of Nov. 1644. for the payment of Tithes, we clearly
conceive it to be the judgment of all the learned, that it is of no longer
validity than during Parliamentary Session, which is now dissolved upon sure
grounds of Piety, Public freedom, right reason, and honesty: and that
notwithout the General consent of the major part, either precedent, or
subsequent, of the Supreme Authority, the People.

Now by what has been said it will easily appear who does most abuse and
mislead the People, and whether exposition of Magna Charta and the other
Statute of R. 2. is most true. That of the Letter and Petition, backed with
right reason, and the Authorities of great Lawyers and learned Judges, or that
of the Author of the Treatise, being a fancy of his own brain, and raised out
of implicit Terms, which he that believes, had need of of a Popish and
implicit faith.

FINIS.

