EPICVRI EFFIGIES.
portrait Ex Cimel. Cl. Vivi Eviel Putearij.



EPICVRVS's MORALS, Collected Partly out of his own Greek Text, in DIOGENES
LAERTIVS, And Partly out of the Rhapsodies of MARCUS ANTONIUS, PLVTARCH,
CICERO, and SENECA. And faithfully Englished.

Mea quidem ista sententia est (invitis hoc nostris popularibus dicam)
Epicurum, and recta praecipere, and, si propius accesseris, tristia.

Seneca lib. de vita beata cap. 13. LONDON, Printed by W. Wilson, for Henry
Herringman, and are to be sold at his shop, at the Anchor in the Lower walk in
the New Exchange. 1656.

AN APOLOGY FOR EPICVRVS, As to the three Capital Crimes whereof he is
accused.
Written in a Letter, to a Person of Honor.
SIR,
YOur beloved EPICVRVS, having lately learned English, on purpose to converse
more familiarly with you; comes now at length to wait upon you, and at your
vacant hours to entertain you with grave discourses, touching the Happiness
of Man's life, and the right means of attaining it, Wisdom, I have no reason
to doubt of his welcome and kind reception by you, considering that he comes
not, but upon your frequent, and (I am confident) hearty invitations of him;
your own ingenious and commendable desire to be intimately acquainted with his
Principles, and Doctrine of Morality, and to hear him speak his own Thoughts
purely and sincerely, having been the only occasion and motive to my
assistance of him in his Travells from Greece into this Country, and my
accommodation of him with such an equipage, as might be exactly suitable as well
to your wishes, as to his own mind. Nay more, I have reason to presume, that
a few days conversation will create in you a very great dearness toward
him, as well because I am assured you will soon find him what you expect, a
sublime Wit, a profound Judgment, and a great Master of Temperance, Sobriety,
Continence, Fortitude and all other Virtues, not a Patron of Impiety, Gluttony,
Drunkenness, Luxury and all kinds of Intemperance, as the common people (being
misinformed by such learned men as either did not rightly understand, or would
not rightly represent his opinions) generally conceive him to be; as because I
have perceived him not only to give strong and lively hints to sundry of those
sublime speculations, wherewith your thoughts are sometimes delightfully
employed; but also solidly to assert many of those Tenants, which I have often
heard you defend, with the like Reasons, and which indeed nothing but the
voluntary and affected Ignorance of Superstition will deny. So that, if the
Rule hold, that Similitude of Opinions, is an argument of Similitude in
Affectons, and Similitude of Affections the ground of Love and friendship,
certainly I am not altogether destitute of support for my conjecture, and
consequently that you will soon admit him into your bosom, and treat him
withal the demonstrations of respect due to so excellent a Companion.

But, as there is no Beauty without some moles, no Crystal without some
specks; so is not our EPICVRVS without his imperfections, and you will discover
in him some things which cannot escape your reprehension; and yet I expect,
that your censure of him should be much more moderate and charitable, then that
of the ignorant and scarce humane Multitude has been for many ages together.
And therefore I ask leave to state the Nature of his guilt unto you, and
afterward to give you my Judgment thereupon; in the mean time humbly leaving
you to the Liberty of your own more judicious sentiments of both the one and
the other. For, my design therein, is not to possess your breast with my
thoughts concerning the crimes usually charged upon this Philosopher, but to
dispossess it of an opinion that I might have the same indignation against him
in respect of some unjustifiable positions of his, as not only the common
people, but even the greatest number of Scholars, have for many hundred of
years, entertained. And what I shall say to that purpose I humbly desire you
will be pleased to understand to be intended as an Exercitation, to take off
from his memory the greatest part of that unjust Odium, and Infamy which envy
and Malice on one hand, and Ignorance and Inhumanity on the other, have cast
upon it, to the eclipsing even of all his excellent meritts from the
Commonwealth of Philosophy, and not as a defense of any unreasonable or
dangerous Error, whereof he is found really guilty. Which was more perhaps
then was needful for me to advertise you of, who well understand the difference
betwixt a Vindication and an Excusation; that it is one thing to mitigate a too
severe and rash sentence, and another to justify the Offendour. And therefore
without any further Apologizing for my short Apology for EPICVRVS, I directly
address to my Province.

The Opinions, which, being asserted by him in this Treatise concerning
Ethics, have so much incensed the world against him, are principally these
three. (1) That the Souls of Men are mortal, and so incapable of all either
happiness or misery after death. (2) That Man is not obliged to honor, revere,
and worship God, in respect of his beneficence, or out of the hope of any Good
or fear of any evil at his hands, but merely in respect of the transcendent
Excellencies of his Nature, Immortality, and Beatitude. (3) That Selfe-homicide
is an Act of Heroic Fortitude in case of intolerable or otherwise inevitable
Calamity. These, I confess, are Positions to be rather wholly condemned and
abominated, then in the least measure patronized by us Christians, whose
understandings (thanks be to the mercy of the fountain of Wisdom) are
illuminated by a brighter light then that of Nature; and yet notwithstanding
when I remember, that our Philosopher was a mere naturalist, borne and
educated in times of no small Pagan darkness, and consider that neither of
these Tenants will be found upon due Examination so destitute of all support of
Reason, as rash and unexamining heads have apprehended, I profess I cannot but
think it an argument of much more inhumanity then judicious zeal in any man,
upon this account alone, to invade him with the crimination of superlative
Impiety, Blasphemy, and absolute Atheism. For.

As to the FIRST, viz. That the humane soul does not survive the funerals of
the body, but absolutely perish in the instant of death, as I need not tell
you, how uncomfortable an Opinion it is to all Virtuous persons, and how
manifestly repugnant to Christianisme, and indeed to the fundamental Reason of
all Religions beside (if I may be admitted to use that improper phrase of the
vulgar, while I well know that there can be but one Religion truly so called,
and that all the rest are more properly called Superstitions) so I need not
advertise you how highly difficult it is to refute it, by satisfactory and
convincing Arguments defumable from mere reason. For, to suspect the light of
Nature, is scarce strong enough by its own single force, to dispell all those
thick mists of difficulties, that hinder our discernment of the full nature of
the human soul, and scarce bright enough clearly to demonstrate the immortality
of that noble Essence, so, as to leave no room for diffidence or contradiction*
I hope it can be no Heresy in any man, because no disparagement to either his
Faith or Reason. You have, Sir, I presume, attentively perused that so worthily
commended discourse of Plato, touching the immortality of man's soul, and
acquainted your self moreover with all those mighty Arguments, alleged by
Saint Thomas, Pomponatius (who will hardly be outdone in subtlety, touching
the same Theme, by any that comes after him, and yet he was forced to conclude
himself a Sceptick, and leave the Question to the decision of some other
bolder Pen) Des Carts, our noble friend Sir Kenelme Digby, and diverse other
great Clerks, to prove the Soul of Man to be a substance distinct from, and
independent upon that of the body, and to have eternal existence a part post;
and yet if I were not assured, that your persuasion of its immortality is
founded upon a much more firm basis, then that of the most seemingly
apodicticall of all their Reasons, I might well doubt of the impregnability
thereof* And this I may say somewhat the more freely and boldly, both because I
my self, having with all possible attention, and equity of mind, examined the
validity of most of those Arguments, for the immortality of men's souls, which
their Authors have presented as perfect Demonstrations thereof, cannot find
any of them to make good that glorious Title, or satisfy expectation to the
full; and because I have observed many learned men, Divines, and others, who
have long labored their thoughts in the same Disquisition, to concur with me
in opinion, That to believe the soul of Man to be immortal, upon Principles
supernatural, is much more easy, then to demonstrate the same by Reasons
purely Natural. Now, if for the most sublime wits, even of our times (wherein
the Metaphysics have, doubtless, received a very great increase of
clearness, and men's speculations seem to be highly refined, in regard of
sundry lively and fruitful hints, that are inspersed upon the leaves of sacred
writ, concerning as well the Original and Nature of the Soul, as the state of
it after death) it be so hard a task to erect a firm persuasion of the
immortality of the human soul, upon a foundation of Natural Reason alone; I
appeal to every imprejudicate man, with what justice our EPICVRVS is so highly
condemned, for being ignorant of that unattainable Truth, when he could steer
the course of his judgment and belief by no other Star, but that remote and
pale one of the Light of Nature; that bright North-Starre of Holy Scripture
appearing not at all to the Horizon of Greece, till many Ages after his death.

Again, EPICVRVS is not the only man amongst the Ancients that is to be
accused, for entertaining and divulging erroneous conceptions of the nature and
condition of the reasonable soul after death, it being well known, that most of
the Grecian Philosophers did indubitate the incorruptibility thereof, either
implicitly and upon consequence, or immediately, and in direct terms. This
perhaps may seem a Parodox to you, and therefore I ask leave to make it good.
The Grecian Scholiarchs may all be divided into two Classes, in reference to
this subject; the first consisting of those who asserted, the other of such as
expressly denied the Immortality of Man's Soul, the former containing the
greater, the latter the lesser number. And among all those that are on the
affirmative part, you shall not find one that is not (more or less) tainted
with that so common Error, of the Refusion of all men's souls after death, into
the Anima Mundi, or general Soul of the Universe, which is upon consequence,
That, they cease to exist, per se, or to be what they were before, so soon as
they are separated from the body. For your further satisfaction of this
unfrequent Truth, be pleased to observe, that, as they generally conceived the
soul of every individual man, to be a certain particle of the Mundan, or
universal soul, immitted into the body at its conception, and therein
contained, during life, as a drop of water is contained in a glass Phiall; so
did they also conceive, that the same soul, upon the breaking of the glass, or
dissolution of the body, does flow forth, and again return and unite it self
to the universal soul, front whence it was at first desumed. Thus Plutarch (4
Placit. 9.) expressly tells us, that Pythagoras and Plato maintained, that Man's
soul having taken its farewell of the body [(...)] in congeniam sibi animam
Mundi concedere, does return to the soul of the world, which is of the same
substance and nature with it. Now by this common soul of the world, it is
manifest, that they sometimes meant God, in respect they acknowledged him to be
the supreme Intelligence, or Mind, which disposes and orders all parts of
the body; and sometimes the Heavens, because as Heaven is the most pure and
noble part of the Universe, so is the soul the most pure and noble part of Man.

This considered, you have here an opportunity (at least, if a short and
pertinent digression may be opportune) of taking notice in what sense we are to
understand some remarkable passages in their writings, touching the buman soul,
which are often mentioned, but seldom rightly interpreted.

First, we may hence collect what their true meaning was, when they said,
Animam esse divinae aurae Particulam, that the Soul is a particle of Divine
breath, or as Cicero speaks (in Cato Major) Ex Divina mente universa delibutos
animos habemus: We have our souls derived from the universal divine mind;
And again, when they affirmed, that our Souls were taken from Heaven, and to
return thither again after their emancipation from the body: All which the
Prince of Poets elegantly insinuates in these Verses

-- Deum namque ire per omnes
Terrasque tractusque maris, coelumque profundum;
Heinc homines, armenta, viros, genus omne ferarum,
Quemque sibi tenues nascentem arcessere vitas,
Scilicer huc reddi deinde ae resoluta referri
Omnia, nec morti esse locum; sed viva evolare
Sideris in numerum, atque alto succedere coelo.
Secondly, we may hence learn the sense of Empedocles, as well in that saying
quoted by Plutarch (de exilio) Praesentem vitam esse exilium, e quo tandem
animus sit in pristinam sedem demigraturus, That this present li^e is a
banishment of the soul, from which it is at length to be recalled to its
primitive place; as in that mentioned by Clem. Alexandrinus (Lib. 4. Stromat.
2. hypotypos. 24.) Animos sapientum Deos fieri, That the souls of Wisemen
become Gods.

Thirdly, we may hence know how to understand the true sense of Plato's
opinion, that all learning is only Reminiscence. For supposing the Soul of the
Universe to be omniscient, and each particle thereof to be of the same nature
and faculties with the whole; he thereupon inferrs, that the soul of each man
being a particle of that universal and omniscient soul, must be likewise
omniscient, though in the moment, when it is immersed into the body, it becomes
dim and beclouded, so that as if it had been made drunk with Lethe, or the
Waters of Oblivion, it forgets all its Original knowledge, and must recollect
and call to mind the notions of particular things, by the help and mediation
of the senses.

Lastly, why Pythagoras and Plato, to this opinion of the souls Remigration to
the Universal Soul, connected that their other so famous one of the
Transmigration of souls from body to body successively. For, having imbibed
this latter error of the souls transmigration, in their conversation with some
Egyptian Priests, as Stobaeus informs us (in Eccl. Physic.) they strived to
accomodate the same to their own former opinion, of the souls being a particle
of the Anima mundi; insomuch as it might thence follow, that the soul being
exhaled from its first body, and wandering up and down in quest of its fountain,
the universal soul, might probably enough light upon some other body then in
the act of Conception, and being united thereunto, animate it; or, being by
inspiration attracted into some living creature, unite it self to the soul
praeexistent therein, and so become one with it, especially if the body it meet
with be of the same, or like conditions and affections with the former, which
it has so lately forsaken. True it is, nevertheless, that they delivered this
Doctriue of the Transmigration of souls, very obscurely, and wrapped up in
Fables and Allegories, but their design herein was to make men more mansuete
and mild in their dispositions, by bringing them to put a greater value upon
the lives of Animals (for, according to this Doctrine, who would kill a Beast,
when for ought he knew, his Fathers Soul might animate that Beast) and a
greater degree of horror against shedding of Blood, that so having divested
them of all savagenesse and cruelty, they might have a greater detestation
against Homicide, and preserving the peace and safety of Societies.

Nor can the Stoics be exempted from the same Error, of the Refusion of all
souls into the universal one; insomuch as it was their constant tenent, that
the world was animated by a certain fire, which they called Jupiter; that men's
souls were particles derived from that fire, and should again be reunited
thereunto, some sooner, others latter, but all in that general Conflagration
of the Universe, when all things shall be (as they dreamt) sublimed into Jove
again.

Now if we look narrowly into the business, we shall discover even Aristotle
himself to be in some measure guilty of the very same delusion, as well in
respect of his Animal Heat, which, discoursing of the Generation of Animals
(Lib. 2 Cap. 3.) he affirms to be respondent in some proportion to the Element
of Celestial bodies, and wherewith all things in the world are impraegnated;
as of his Intellectus Agens, which he teaches to be diffused through the whole
world, after the same manner as the light of the Sun is diffused through the
Air, and so applied and conjoined to the Intellectus Patiens, or proper soul
of every man, as the external light is applied and conjoined to the eye, and
as the eye by the conjunction of external light comes to see visible objects,
so does the proper passive Intellect of every man, by the illustration of the
general active Intellect, come to understand intelligible Objects. Adding
thereunto, that the Intellect passive is separable, corruptible, and capable of
utter dissolution; but the Active, inseparable, incorruptible, immortal. For,
thus much may be collected from several places of his Books de Anima, and thus
are those places explained by the best of his Greek interpreters, Alexander,
and the best of the Arabians, Averrhoes, whose opinion of the Unity of the
Intellect in all the world, is sufficiently known.

And thus much of the Philosophers of the former Classis, who though they seem
to affirm, do yet in reality, upon natural consequence, deny the Immortality
of the Humane Soul, in that they all concur in that contradictory Error of the
Refusion thereof into the Anima mundi. For, the proper Notion of Immortality,
is, the eternal existence of a thing in the self same nature, and perse; and
therefore, if a thing be divested of its own proper nature, so, as to become
invested with that of another, and to have no existence or subsistence, but
what is dependent upon its union with that other, to which it is assimilated
and indentified; for my part, truly, I cannot understand how it can be said to
be immortal without manifest contradiction. And whether it be not as gross an
absurdity to say, that the soul of a man shall be for ever the same (i. e.) the
soul of a man, and yet that it shall be identified, or made the same with the
soul of the world; as to say, that such a thing shall before ever the same, and
not the same, is no hard matter to determine.

As for those of the latter, who in down right terms denied the Immortality of
the soul, they subdivide themselves into two different Sects, some having
contended for the total destruction, or absolute Annihilation, and others for
only the exsolution and dispersion of it into the matter or principles of which
it was composed.

To the former of these Sects we may justly annumerate all such, who conceived
the soul of man to be only a certain harmony, not of Musical sounds, but a
contemperation of parts, humors, and qualities, and consequently, that as of
Musical Harmony, nothing can remain after the sounds are vanished, so of the
soul nothing can remain, after death has once destroyed that harmonious
Contemperation of parts, hunours, and qualities, from whence it did result. And
this purely was the opinion of not only those antienter Greeks, Dicaearchus,
Aristoxenus, Andraeas, and Asclepiades, all which are thereof strongly accused
by Plato (in Phaed) and Aristotle (Lib. 1. de Anima Cap. 5.) but also our
Master Galen, who was positive and plain in his definition of the soul, to be a
certain Temperament of Elementary Qualities. In the same list may we also
inscribe the names of all those, who imagining the soul to be nothing else but
a certain Act, or Form, or Quality inseparable (i. e.) a certain special
Modification of Matter, have accordingly concluded, that as the Figure, or
special Mode of a thing must inevitably vanish, immediately upon the
immutation or change of the thing figurate, so must the soul, being only a
special Mode of the Matter, necessarily vanish immediately upon the immutation
of that Mode by death. Which Origin, Iustine, Theodoret, and some other
Fathers, understanding to have been the Tenent of Aristotle, have written sharp
invectives against him, as an assertor of the souls mortality, and this so
justly, that if his Zealous Disciple, honest Mr. Alexander Rosse, were alive
again, he would never be able to discredit that their charge.

To the latter we are to refer all such, as held the soul to be Corporeal.
For, as they would have it to be composed of material principles, so would
they also have it to be, by death, again resolved into the same material
principles; so that in their sense, the extinction of the soul is no other, but
the dissipation thereof into those very corporeal particles, of which it was
composed. And this seems to be the true meaning of Demonax in Lucian, when
being interrogated whether he thought the soul to be immortal, he answered,
mihi videtur, sed ut omnia; it seems to me to be immortal, but no otherwise
than all things are immortal, (i. e.) as to the matter only, or component
Principles of it, which are incapable of Annihilation. In this Catalogue we may
worthily place Marcus Antoninus, in regard of his saying (Lib. 4.) Animas
hominm dispergi in auras, that men's souls are dispersed into Aer: and Seneca,
for his Animam hominis magno pondere extriti permeare non posse, et statim
dispergi, quia non fuerit illi exitus liber; as also Democritus and Epicurus,
who equally contested, that the soul was nothing but very Atoms, in such a
special order, in such a special position, etc. contemperated, and Death
nothing but a discomposure of that determinate Contexture, and a Resolution of
the soul into separated Atoms again; and therefore are they always conjoined
by the good Lactantius (Lib. 3. cap. 7. and lib. 9. cap. 8. and 13.) as
confederates in the Doctrine of the Dissolution of souls.

And thus, Sir, you may at once plainly perceive the justice of my Attainder of
the most, and most eniment of the ancient Grecian Philosophers, with the guilt
of having been (either obliquely or directly) Impugners of the Souls
Immortality; and the great Injustice of their Sentence, who more particularly
condemn Epicurus for the same Error, when so many others were equally culpable
with him therein.

As to the SECOND, viz. That man is not obliged to honor, revere, and worship
God upon the motive of his Beneficence, or upon the account of either Good of
Evil expected from him; but only out of a sentiment of the superlative
Excellencies of his Nature, and chiefly of his Immortality and Beatitude. I
might well plead for him, that living in a time, when there was scarce any
Religion, but sottish Idolatry, when there were more Gods then Nations, yea,
then Temples; and when all Devotion was absurd and ridiculous Superstition: He
seems rather to be honored, for that he came so near to the knowledge of the
true God, then condemned for coming no nearer; rather to be admired for having
so clear and genuine an apprehension of some of the Divine Attributes, then
reproached for not comprehending them all. Especially, when I should not
infringe the Law of charity, to doubt, that among us Christians, and even such
as think themselves not a little versed in Theology, there may be some, who,
if they were put to give but an Adumbration of that mysterious piece, the
Divine Nature, would discover themselves to have as imperfect an Idaea thereof,
as EPICVRVS had. But this excuse would be too general for his particular
vindication, from the imputed crime of perfect Atheism, and therefore we shall
fix only on such Reasons as are more properly accomodate to that purpose.

First, I dare say, his Piety, in deriding the incompetency of those
Conceptions, that men in his time commonly entertained of the supreme Essence
(for they ascribed generally unto it, all the self same passions and
affections, which they perceived to be in themselves, and so copied out an
imperfect Divinity, by the infinitely disproportionate Original of Humanity)
was much greater then his Impiety could be, in teaching, that the Deity was of
so transcendently excellent a nature, as to be wholly unconcerned in any thing
but it self, and far above all sentiments whatever, besides those of its own
eternal and complete Felicity; and consequently, that it was to be reverenced
and worshipped solely and purely for its own sake, without the least mixture of
selfe-Reflections. For, as by the one, he judiciously attempted to subvert the
false and unreasonable Religion, or (rather) Superstition, in the worship of
Bacchus, and other the Imaginary Deities, wherewith his Country swarmed in his
days (there being no better way to alienate men's minds from the Veneration of
False Gods, then to acquaint them with notions comprehending the Essential and
Incommunicable attributes of the true God) so by the other, he seems to have
laid a very firm foundation for the true Religion, in that he would have the
Right or Justice of all Divine worship to be founded wholly and entirely upon
the Excellency of the Divine Nature. How far therefore he was from being a
Professor and Seminary of downright Atheism, as some (whose zeal may well be
thought to have been much greater then their knowledge, as to that particular)
have represented him to the World; every man, who has but so much reason, as
to understand, that Polytheisme is the greatest Atheism, may easily judge.

In the next place, I can hardly allow him to deserve the odious Epithete of,
most highly Impious, which most men brand him withal, upon the account of this
latter Doctrine only, because I meet with not a few, nor contemptible Reasons,
that incline my judgment to more moderation. In particular, you well know, Sir,
how highly unreasonable it is, for any man to expect, from EPICVRVS, the
knowledge of the true and legitimate worship of God, when that was by God
himself praescribed only to the ancient Hebrews, and professed only by their
Posterity, and no other Nation in the World; if so, why should more be expected
from Him, then from Plato, Zeno, Socrates, Aristotle, or any other of the elder
Grecian Philosophers, they being all equally benighted with Paganism? Why
should he be so severely sentenced, and all the rest pass unquestioned, one
and the same charge of invincible Ignorance of the true Religion lying against
each of them? Besides, Human Justice will hardly permit, that any man should
suffer merely for wanting that, which, without supernatural means, was
impossible for him to obtain; and he that will adventure to determine, whether
or no, at the Tribunal of Divine Justice, any one shall be condemned simply
upon that score, must have dived very deep into that fathomlesse gulf of
Praedestination.

You likewise know, that our Christian Doctors assign only Two causes, or
Fundamental Consideration, why men should worship God: The one they teach to
be the transcendent Excellency of the Nature of God, which singly, and without
any respect to our own Vtility or Advantage, does justly claim the highest
veneration of our minds. The other, they admit to be the benefits, we either
have received, or (which is the stronger motive of the two) hope to receive at
his hands. Hereupon, if any man be induced to revere and worship the Divine
Majesty solely and simply upon the former motive, they say that he bears a
Filial respect and affection to God; and if only by the latter, a mere servile
or mercenary. Now though the servile or mercenary love of God, be not
altogether to be disliked, in regard it is a kind of gratitude due to him as a
Benefactor; yet I conceive no man will gainsay, but the filial and free love
is much the nobler and more acceptable, insomuch as it has no other then the
noblest of Objects, God Himself. And sure I am (however) that the most
Learned, most Pious, and most Religious of our School Divines, have been
earnest in their advisoes to us, to extract all selfenesse from our love of
God, and (as much as our frailties will admit of) to fix all our affections
entirely upon Him, as he is infinitely Good, and Amiable in Himself.

Moreover, you may remember, Sir, that Cicero in his Book touching the nature
of the Gods, has these very words, Quid est cur Deos ab hominibus colendos
dicas, cum dii ipsi non modo homines non colant, sed omnino nihil curent? Et
quae porro Pietas ei debetur, a quo nihil acceperis? Aut quid omnino, cujus
nullum meritum fit, ei deberi potest? By which it is evident, that he would
exclude all other inducements to Religion, besides a mere mercenary and servile
respect: And yet I dare say, that you do not remember, that ever you heard him
accounted Impious for that opinion. Why therefore should EPICVRVS have such
hard measure, as to be stigmatized with the name of Atheist, Impious wretch,
Secretary of Hell, Enemy to all Religion, etc? and all for asserting, that man
ought to be induced to a reverence and veneration of the Divine Majesty, only
by the Sentiments of a Filial Piety (not supernatural Piety, arising from
Grace justifying, and by which we are made the Sons of God, but a pure Natural
one) such as Right Reason had suggested unto him? Certainly, of the two
opinions, Epicurus's will appear much more venial, to an Equitable Arbiter.
Sundry other arguments there are, which might be advantagiously-alledged on our
Authors behalf, in this case. But, considering that these few already urged,
are of importance enough, to evince the temerity of his Accusers judgment, and
that the prolixity of this discourse, has long since, given you just occasion
to question, by what right I call it a Letter; I perceive my self obliged in
good manners, no longer to exercise your patience, then, while I briefly
express my sentiments of the LAST Article of his Charge.

Which is, His asserting of Selfe-Homicide, in case of intolerable, and
otherwise inevitable Calamity. This, as a Christian, I hold to be a bloody and
detestable opinion, because expressly repugnant to the Law of God; and yet in
the person of a mere Philosopher, I might, without being unreasonably
Paradoxicall, adventure to dispute, whether it be so highly repugnant to the
Law of Nature, as men have generally conceived. For

First, if all the praecepts of the Law of Nature concenter in this one point;
Fly Evil, pursue Good; as those who have most labored to conduct our
understanding out of that intricate Labyrinth, the ambiguous Sense of the word,
Law of Nature, have unanimously determined; certainly, that man assumes no very
easy task, who undertakes to prove, that in case of insupportable distress,
and where all other hopes of evading, or ending that misery (then which there
can be no greater Evil) for a man to free himself from that extremity of
Evil, and seek the Good of ease and quiet, by taking away his own life, which
chiefly makes him subject to, and only sensible of that misery, is an
infringment of the Law of Nature.

Again, if we understand Selfe-praeservation (which all men allow to be the
foundation of Natural Law in General) to be no other, but an innate Love, or
Natural affection to Life, as a Good, when life cease to be a Good, and
degenerates into an Evil, as commonly it does to men, in cruel torments of
the body, or high discontent of mind, (the more desperate affliction of the
two by much) and when all the Stars of hope and comfort are set in the West of
black desperation, why should not the force or obligation of that Law also,
cease at the same time? Or rather, why should not self-homicid, in such cases,
be an absolute accomplishment of the Law of Self-praeservation, it being
manifest, that we are by the tenor of that Law, obliged to use such means, as
conduce to our praeservation from the greatest Evil; and as manifest, that to
free onesselfe from misery, which cannot otherwise be avoided, but by breaking
as under the Ligaments of Life, is a pursuance of the only means we can
discover, to beconducible to our end: that is, to preservation from more
sufferings, and to Indolency, which in Death we propose to our selves as a Good?

But lest we seem to give any encouragement to that, which God, the Church, and
the Civil Power so highly condemn; let us grant, that Selfe-murther, in
whatsoever case, is a violation of the Law of Nature, and yet we shall have one
consideration left, that seems strong enought to refract the violence of their
malice, who exclaim against EPICVRVS, as the grand abettor of
selfe-assasination; and that is, that he was not single, nor most vehement in
the justification of it. For, if we look upon the Doctrine of other
Philosophers, we shall soon perceive, that the Stoics generally, not only
approved thereof, but strictly enjoined men to embrace death voluntarily, and
from their own hands; That Cicero does (Lib. de Legibus) implicitly allow of
it in these words, Eum damnandum esse censeo qui seipsum interficit, si neque
ex decreto Civitatis fecerit, neque ullo Fortunae casu intolerabili
inevitabilique coactus, neque obrutus ulla pauperis, miseraeque vitae
ignominia; and expressly confirms it (in 2 Tusculan.) in these, Eam in vita
servandam Legem quae in Graecorum conviviis obtinet, Aut bibat, aut abeat;
quoniam ut oportet aliquis fruatur pariter cum aliis voluptate potandi, aut ne
sobrius in violentiam vinolentorum incidat, ante discedat; sic injurias
Fortunae quas far nequeas, defugiendo relinquas. And if their Practice, we
shall as soon find many of them to have laid violent hands upon themselves, and
that in cases offar less moment, then that of insupportable and inevitable
Calamity, to which only Epicurus's praecept is limited; while He, leaving
others to become examples of that Rule, with admirable patience, and invincible
magnanimity, endured the tortures of the Stone in the Bladder, and other most
excruciating Diseases, for mamy years together, and awaited, till extreme old
age gently put out the Taper of his life. Thus Zeno, a man of the most
spotless fame of any Philosopher among the ancients, having by a fall bruised
one of his fingers against the ground, and interpreting that to be a summons of
him to the earth, went presently home and hanged himself, and was therefore by
Diogenes Laertius honored with this Elogie; Mira felicitate vir, qui
incolumis, integer, sine morbo e vivis excessit. Thus Demosthenes, you know, to
prevent his being beholding to any man but himself either for his life or
death, drank mortal poison out of his own quill, which had given him
immortality long before. Thus also Democles, to praevent his pollution, by the
unnatural heat of a certain lustful Greek Tyrant, who attempted to force him,
leaped into a Furnace of boiling Water. And thus Cleanthes, Chrysippus, and
Empedocles, all brake open the gates of death, and forced themselves into the
other world. To these you may please to add the memorable Examples of that
Prince of Roman wisdom (as Lactanrius calls him) Cato, who with his own hands
and sword, opened a flood-gate in his bowels, to let his life flow forth,
having all the night before prepared himself to fall boldly, with the Lecture
of Plato's discourse, of the Immortality of the Soul; and of the famous
Cleombrotus, who, upon no other incitement, but Plato's reasons in the same
discourse, threw himself from a precipice, as if he went instantly to
experiment the truth of what he had newly read; and though Aristotle would not
admit, that he did it upon any other account, but that of Pusillanimity and
Fear, yet Saint Augustine (De Civit. Dei. Lib. 1. cap. 22.) ascribes it
altogether unto Greatness of mind, his words being these; When no Calamity
urged him, no Crime, either true or imputed, nothing but greatness of mind
moved him to embrace death, and dissolve the sweet bonds of life. And
Lactantius, who was severe enough in his censure, both of the Act, and the Book
that occasioned it, says of him; Praecipitem se dedit nullam aliam ob causam
nisi quod Platoni credidit.

SIR, By this time you are satisfied, both of the injuries done to the memory
of the Temperate, Good, and Pious EPICVRVS, and of my willingness and devoir
to redress them. And my dull and unequal Apology for him being now ended, I
should begin another for my self, in that I have rather disturbed, then either
delighted or informed you. But this being much the greater difficulty of the
two, I think it safer for me, to put my self upon your mercy for an absolute
forgiveness, then to trust to my own wit, to make excuses for my failings
herein; especially, since your patience cannot but be already overcome by the
Tediousness of

Your very Humble Servant, W. CHARLETON.

The Contents.
Chap. 1. INtroduction. Fol. 1. Chap. 2. Of Felicity, or the Supreme Good, so
far forth, as Man is capable thereof. Fol. 7. Chap. 3. That pleasure (without
which, there can be no Notion of Felicity) is a real Good, in it self. Fol.
12. Chap. 4. That Felicity does consist generally in Pleasure Fol. 17. Chap. 5.
That the Pleasure wherein Felicity does consist, is the Indolency of the Body,
and Tranquillity of the Mind. Fol. 22. Chap. 6. Of the Means to attain this
Felicity. Fol. 29. Chap. 7. Of Right Reason, and Free Will; from whence all the
Praise of the Virtues is derived. Fol. 33. Chap. 8. Of the Virtues in General.
Fol. 38. Chap. 9. Of Prudence General. Fol. 44. Chap. 10. Of Prudence Private.
Fol. 48. Chap. 11. Of Prudence Domestic. Fol. 55. Chap. 12. Of Prudence
Civil. Fol. 60. Chap. 13. Of Temperance in General. Fol. 66. Chap. 14. Of
Sobriety, opposed to Gluttony. Fol. 71. Chap. 15. Of Continence, opposed to
Lust. Fol. 79. Chap. 16. Of Lenity, opposed to Anger. Fol. 86. Chap. 17. Of
Modesty, opposed to Ambition. Fol. 92. Chap. 18. Of Moderation, opposed to
Avarice. Fol. 97. Chap. 19. Of Mediocrity, betwixt Hope and Despair of the
Future. Fol. 104. Chap. 20. Of Fortitude, in General. Fol. 109. Chap. 21. Of
Fortitude, opposed to the Fear of the Gods. Fol. 114. Chap. 22. Of Fortitude,
opposed to the Fear of Death. Fol. 118. Chap. 23. Of Fortitude, against Pain of
the Body Fol. 128. Chap. 24. Of Fortitude, against Discontent of Mind. Fol.
133. Chap. 25. Of Justice, in General. Fol. 139. Chap. 26. Of Right, or Just;
from whence Justice is denominated. Fol. 143. Chap. 27. Of the Original of
Right and Justice Fol. 149. Chap. 28. Between whom Justice is to be exercised.
Fol. 159. Chap. 29. How rightfully Justice is to be exercised. Fol. 167. Chap.
30. Of Beneficence, Gratitude, Piety, Observance. Fol. 172. Chap. 31. Of
Friendship. Fol. 178.


EPICURVS in this Treatise discourses of the
1. Summum Bonum of man's life, which is PLEASVRE, consisting in the Indolency
of the Body, and Tranquillity of the Mind. 2. Means to attain it, viz. Honesty,
which comprehends all the Virtues, namely, 1. Prudence or the Dictamen of right
Reason; and that 1. General, which teaches to order all ones Actions and
desires to the attainement of Pleasure. 2. Particular, which divides it self
into 1. Prudence Private, which admonishes us to elect (if it be in our own
choice) that course of life, which is most agreeable to the inclination of our
Genius, and such as may make our Condition rather Mean, then either High, or
Low. 2. Prudence Domestic which concerns a man as a Husband. Father. Master
of Servants. Possessor of Goods and estate
3. Prudence Civil, which concerns a man as he is the Member of a Society:
which advises to Affect privacy, and yet not to decline public employments,
in case the present Necessity of the Common Wealth, or the Command of Superiors
shall call thereunto.
2. Temperance 1. General, consisting in the Moderation of all Cupidities. 2.
Particular which is either 1. Sobriety 2, Continence 3. Lenity 4. Modesty 5.
Moderation 6. Mediocrity betwixt Hope and despair of the Future.
opposed to Gluttony. Lust. Anger. Ambition. Avarice.
3. Fortitude

1. General, consisting in the prevention of all Fear. 2. Particular against
The Fear of the Gods. The Fear of Death. Pains of the Body. Discontent of
Mind.
4. Justice, whereof there are five. branches, viz. 1. Beneficence to All. 2.
Gratitude to Benefactors. Piety toward Parents. Kinsfolks. Country. Governors.

Observance of All Superiors in (1) Nature, as the Gods. (2) Power, as Princes
and Magistrates. (3) Learning. (4) Uirtue. (5) Obligations.
5. Friendship, which extends to the mutual Participation, not Community of
Saints, and to Death it self.




EPICVRVS'S MORALS.
CHAPTER 1.
Introduction.
IF Action be the end of Speculalation, and the knowledge of Nature, but the
way that leads Man to the knowledge of himself; and the best of man's knowledge
be that which teaches him how to order his Mind, and regulate his Actions,
Esse illius Philosophi orationem prorsus inanem, quae Affectum nullum in Homine
curat; quia, ut Medicinae usus nullus est, nisi a Corpore morbos abigat: sic
nec Philosophiae, nisi malum ex Animo pellat; inquit Stobaeus in Sermon. 8.
so as that he may assuredly attain to the highest degree of Happiness, of
which his Nature is capable, during life: then, certainly, must ETHICS or
MORAL PHILOSOPHY be the noblest part of all Human Learning, the Crown and
perfection of all our studies; insomuch as it is that alone, which both gives
us the infallible Tokens, by which we may know what is truly the summum Bonum
of life, and prescribes us most plain and certain Rules for the Acquisition of
it.

II.
By Ethics, or Morals, we understand that part of Philosophy, which has for
its proper Object the End, or Final and main scope of Man's Life; containing
certain Directions and Precepts, for the right information of his
Understanding, and (consequently) the conduct of his Will, in the Election of
real Good, and Avoidance of Evil, in order to his attaining the true End of
his life, the Supreme Good, or Felicity.

III.
That the End of Man's Life is Felicity; all men most readily allow: and, if
you ask him, no man will deny, that he aims at that End. But, seeing it is too
certain, that most men miss of that end; it cannot be doubted, that the
Frustration of their Hopes and Endeavors does of necessity proceed from hence:
either that they do not propose to themselves that Felicity, which they ought;
or do not use such Means, or pursue such Courses, as to conduce thereunto.

IV.
We cannot but observe, that there are Myriads of men, who though their
propitious Fortunes have abundantly accommodated them with all things necessary
for the uses of life, (for, their exchequers overflow with treasure, their
bodies enjoy perfect health and vigor, their titles swell with attributes of
honor, their fair, chaste and fruitful Wives furnish them with troops of
beautiful and ingenious Children, in a word, they possess all things, that all
that are below them usually measure happiness by:) do yet live full of Anxiety
and Complainings, having their minds perpetually on the rack of cares,
solicitude, and fears: so as they cannot but confess, that they lead lives
truly miserable. Considering this, we may from thence safely conclude, that
these men are wholly ignorant wherein true Felicity does consist, and whence or
how it is to be attained: and therefore, that the Heart of every such person
may be fitly compared to a vessel, which being in some part full of holes, can
never be filled; and in other parts deeply imbued with some evil tincture, does
deprave and corrupt the most wholesome and cordial Liquor that is poured into it.

V.
Well worth our labor, therefore, is it, by the help of this Philosophy (which
teaches the nature of, and way unto Felicity) to cleanse and make sound that
Vessel, the Heart of man; that so it may be easily filled with a few things,
and find a sweetness and comfort in every the smallest thing that ocurrs unto
it. And to this Atqui, non cum vacaveris, Philosophandum est: omnia alia
negligenda sunt, ut huic assideamus; cui nullum tempus satis magnum est,
etiamsi a pueritia usque ad longissimos humani aevi terminos vita protenditur.
Seneca, Epist. 59. vide etiam Galenum de affect dignoscend. and vitand. cap. 3.
itemque, Epictetum, in Enchir. lib. 3. cap. 15.
Philosophy we are to addict our selves betimes, as soon as possible, even this
very day; not to defer it so much as till to morrow: because it highly concerns
us to live happily to day; and Folly has this evil always annexed unto it,
that it does always begin to live, or purpose to begin to live, but in the
mean time never does live.

VI.
Once we were, twice we cannot be born: and our Age must have a period; but
when we know not. If so, is it prudence, or folly in thee, O man! when thou
have not To morrow in thy power, to Marcus Antoninus [(...)] notans
procrastinationem studii and conatus ad optima enitendi, inquit: (...). De
seipso lib. 3. Sect. 4.
procrastinate thy making thy self happy till the Future, and in the mean time
lose the opportunity of the present, of which only thou art certain? By such
delay is it, that the Lives of most men are lost: and hence comes it, that
every one Ille potens sui Laetusque viget, cui licet in diem dixisse, Vixi.
Flaccus Carmin. lib. 3. ad. 29.
dies in the Immaturity, if not the Beginning of his Designs. Every man so
goes out of the World, as if he had but newly entered into it: and therefore
Maxima jactura vitae dilatio est. Illa primum quemque extrahit diem: illa
cripit praesentia, dum ulteriora promittit; etc. Senec. de brevit. vit. cap. 9.
old men may justly be affirmed, not to have survived the rawness and folly of
their Infancy: because trifling away their years in business that concerns them
not, they have scarce known that they have lived at all, and in the chief
Harvest of life, they have never reaped the Fruits of it.

VII.
Let us, therefore, endeavor so to live, as that we need not repent us of our
time past: and so enjoy the present day, as if we were nothing concerned in
Tomorrow. Omnem creed diem tibi diluxisse supremum; Graca superveniet, quae
non sperabitur hora. Hor. lib. 1. Epist. 4.
For, He ariues most sweetly at Tomorrow, who does, the least need, or desire
it: and an hour comes most grateful to him, who had the least expectation of
it. Since it is troublesome, always to begin to live: let us make every
moment, the Total snmme of life; as if no part of it remained behind. The life
of a fool is unpleasant, and full of Fears, and depends wholly upon the Future:
but it become's us so to order our Minds and Actions, as that Ours may be
pleasant, secure, and sixth in the safety of the present.

VIII.
Certainly, the way, at length, to avoid Foolishness, is for a man to advance
himself into the Arsenall, or Fortress of Wise men, from whence, as from a
Watchtower, he may look down upon the swarms of other men, led, by their
passions, wandering up and down in a Wilderness of Errors; and uncessantly
afflicting themselves in the pursuit of such things, which, being found,
increase their miserable Deviations. If you account it a pleasure, to stand
upon a safe Rock, and behold Mariners at Sea distractedly striving with a
Tempest; or, from a secure Castle to look upon two Armies maintaining a long
and fierce Battle: assuredly, it must be much more delightful, from the serene
Tower of Wisdom, to contemplate the Tumults, Hurries, and Contentions of the
foolish Multitude below. Not that it is delightful, to see others afflicted
with Evils; but, to see our selves not to be involved in those Evils.

IX.
Now that we may, to the utmost of our power, afford assistance to those, who
desire to arive at this height of Wisdom; we conceive our selves obliged, in
humanity, so to collect and compile such Notions, concerning these things,
which our frequent Meditations have brought unto our mind: that we may
discourse first of Felicity, which is Man's Chiefest Good; and afterward, of
such Means, as certainly conduce to the Creation and Conservation thereof, and
which, indeed, are no other but the Virtues themselves.

CHAP. II.
Of Felicity, or the Supreme Good; as far as Man is capable thereof.
FElicity is therefore called the End, Extreme, and Heighest of Goods, because
there are some things named Goods, which invite the Appetite to prosecute them
immediately for themselves; and others again which are desirable mediately or
in relation to others, that are Superior: but, as for Felicity, it is that
Good, to which all other Goods ought to be referred, and cannot it self be
referred to any thing.

II.
Nor does it hinder, since felicity and Beatitude, or a Blisful Life, Eadem
prorsus ratione Cicero (de finib. bonorum) finem boni appellat, bonum omnibus
numeris absolutum, quod qui sit assequutus, praeterea nihil desideret.
are one and the same; that it is sometimes styled the End of a blisfull life:
for in that we speak the phrase of the Gentiles, which accept the End of a
blisful life, and a blisfull life it self, for the very same thing; not that we
thereby intend, that there is any further End, to which a blisfull life may be
conceived referrible.

III.
This premised, it behooves us to Distinguish Felicity into Supreme, viz. that
which is incapable of intention and remission, or Floods and Ebbs of pleasure:
and Subalterne or Graduall, viz. such as is subject to Addition and Detraction,
or Increase and Decrease of pleasures.

IV.
The Former, we conceive to be a certain State, than which none can be thought
more sweet, more desirable, more perfect; wherein there is no Evil to be
feared, no Good, which is not fully enjoyed; wherein is nothing to which the
Will can have an inclination, and may not possess it; finally, which is more
Constant than ever to be lost.

V.
The Later, we understand to be a certain state, in which a man may be as Happy
as the Frailty of his Nature will permit; or such, wherein he may enjoy very
much of necessary Goods, and suffer very little of Evils: and consequently,
wherein He may spend his days pleasantly, calmly, and permanently, so far
forth as the Condition of his Country, Society, Course of life, Constitution,
Age, and other Circumstances shall give leave.

VI.
Nor is it without good reason, that we thus Distinguish, and define Felicity.
Because, though it be manifest, that the Former, or Supreme Felicity is
competent only to the Divine Nature: yet there have bin some, The Stoics
who thinking overhighly of themselves, and speaking magnificently of their own
Wisdom, have so far dared to promise and arrogate to themselves this perfect
Felicity, as to affirm themselves to be, in that respect, equal to God, and
account the expression modest, when they said they were inferior only to
Jupiter himself.

VII.
These, truly, may be judged to have been forgetful both of the Mortality and
Imbecility of their Nature; when all that are conscious or mindful of either,
must soon acknowledge, that Men are capable only of the Latter, or imperfect
Felicity: and that Wisdom does perform a very high work upon a man, if, while
most others remain surrounded with diverse Miseries, it advance him to such a
condition, as renders him the least miserable of all men; or, if, among those
various Degrees of miseries, to which his Birth has made him obnoxious, it
place him in such a state, wherein he may have the least share of those
miseries. For, to be happy, in this life, it is sufficient to be exempted from
those miseries, by which one might have been afflicted: and in the mean time,
to enjoy such Goods, as that the condition of our Nature is not capable of
greater.

VIII.
And this, seriously, is the Reason, why we conceive; that a Wise man, though
he be deprived of the two best of his Senses, his Sight and Hearing, may yet
partake of a happy life: forasmuch as he may nevertheless continue in the
fruition of such and so many Goods, as his maimed nature is capable of; and
want those Evils, if not of his Body, yet at least of his mind, which might
otherwise have vexed him.

IX.
Nay upon the same ground we further profess, that a Wise man may be Tormented
most cruelly, and yet continue the possession of his Happiness. For, still he
may enjoy, not that Divine, but this Human Felicity; since in a Wiseman it is
always as Great, as the Condition of the present time will permit him to make
it.

X.
We confess, that in the midst of his torments, he cannot but be sensible of
pains; and may sometimes, by the violence of them, be forced to groan and roar
out: but, in the mean while, because calmly submitting to the necessity of his
suffering them, he does not exasperate or increase his pains, either by his
Impatience, or Desperation, but rather mitigates and lessens them, by as great
Constancy of mind, as his generous resolutions can fortify him withal: in
that respect, doubtless, he must be much more happy, than if he had, with
pusillanimity, fear, reluctance, and despair, entertained them; or than another
man, who being under the same torments, does not endure them with equal
courage and constancy, as not having the like encouragements and supplies from
Wisdom: (which adfers, at least, Innocence of life, and security of Conscience)
by which those torments might be lightened.

XI.
Wherefore, there is no reason neither, why any man should, by way of Cavil,
object unto us; that according to this Assertion, Phalaris Bull, and a bed of
Roses must be all one to us; and consequently, that a Wise man ought, while he
is in the flames of that Brazen Engine of torture, to smile, and cry out, O how
pleasant this is! O how much am I above these torments! how little do I fear or
care for them! Forasmuch as we do not gainsay, but there are some things, which
a wise man had rather should happen to him, as the health of his Body,
exemption from all incommodity, and freedom of his Mind, that so he might
solace himself in the contemplation of his Goods: and other things, which
though he would not, they should befall him; yet when they do befall him, he
does not only constantly and bravely endure, but also welcoms and commends
them, insomuch as they give him an opportunity to experiment and gratulate his
Virtue, and with internal alacrity, to exclame, I am burned, but not overcome;
why should it not be more desirable, not to have the fire overcome my
Constancy, than not to have it consume my Body? And this we say, in regard it
is not to be expected, but that a Wise man may also be obnoxious, as to the
pains of Diseases, so also to the tortures of Tyrants: though he neither
incur those, nor provoke these willingly, so far forth as he can, with safety
of his Virtues, avoid it.

CHAP. III.
That pleasure (without which there is no Notion of Felicity) is a Good, of its
own Nature.
FOrasmuch as it is sweet, or pleasant, for a man to live without pain; and
sweet, or pleasant likewise, to enjoy Good things, and be recreated by them: it
is an evident truth, that without both these sweetnesses or Pleasures, or one
of them at least, Felicity cannot be understood (for, we accept Pleasure,
Suavity, Jucundity, and other Terms of the like importance, for one and the
same thing:) though there have not wanted some, who with great pomp and
ostentation, have so discoursed of Pleasure, as if it were a certain Evil, in
its own nature; and upon consequence, concluded it to be not only inconsistent
with, but wholly Alien from wisdom and Happiness. And therefore, before we come
to enquire, whether Felicity does consist in Pleasure, or not; requisite it is,
that we remonstrate, that Pleasure is a real good, in it self; and that its
Contrary, Pain, is a real Evil, in it self.

II.
Since that is Good, which helps, which pleases, which is amiable and
inviting to the Appetite; and on the contrary, that is Evil, which harmeth,
which displeases, which is ungrateful, and so inciteth the Appetite to an
odium and aversion: certainly there is nothing, which does more please, more
delight, is more amiable, more desiderable, than Pleasure; and on the contrary,
nothing that does more incommode, more offend, is more to be abhorred and
avoided, than pain: Wherefore, Pleasure seems to be not only a Good, but also
the Essential Reason, or very Root of Good; insomuch as it is that very and
only thing, for whose sake, or in respect whereof an object is Good or
Desirable: as on the reverse; pain seems to be not only an Evil in it self, but
also the Formal Reason, or very Root of Evil; insomuch as it is that alone,
in respect whereof any thing is Evil or Hateful. For, though we sometimes
avoid Pleasure; yet is it not the pleasure it self which we avoid, but some
pain that is annexed unto it, or impendent on it: as likewise if we sometimes
court and pursue a pain, it is not the pain it self, that we pursue, but some
pleasure that is conjoined unto it.

III.
To speak more expressly; No man does neglect, hate, or decline pleasure, as it
is pleasure, but, because usually very great pains follow and overtake such,
who know not to follow Pleasure with Reason and Moderation; nor is there any
man, that loves, desires, and pursues Pain, simply as it is pain; but because
he expects some very great pleasure to accrue to him thereupon; and such
frequently may be the constitution of the time, as that he has no other way
that leads him to the pleasure he aims at, but what lies in the rough tract of
Labor and Pain.

IV.
To instance in very small things; who is there among us, that undertakes and
endures any laborious exercise of the body, unless to the end, that he may
thereby acquire some commodity or benefit? And who can justly reprehend him who
desires and endeavors to enjoy that pleasure, upon which nothing of trouble or
discommodity does attend? Or him, who endeavors to eschew that Pain, by which
no pleasure can be procured? But, we may justly accuse, and esteem those
persons worthy of contempt, who being intricated and corrupted with the
blandishments of present pleasures, do not foresee nor provide against those
pains and troubles, that must ensue, as being inevitably impendent upon all
heads that are blinded with cupidities. The like blame is due also to those who
forsake their stations, and desert the duties of their places and offices, out
of a certain softness and weakness of Mind, i. e. of Fear, of Labor, and
Pains.

V.
Now, of these things, the Distinction is easy and expedite. For, in times of
freedom, when all lies open to the arbitrary disposition of our own choice, so
that there is no impediment, but we may do that which is most pleasing to us;
in such case, it is lawful for us to pursue and embrace all pleasure, and
avoid all pain. But, such frequently may be the constitution of the times, as
that pleasures are rather to be repudiated, and labors and troubles not to be
refused.

VI.
So, though we esteem all pleasures to be a real good, and all pain to be a
real evil; yet we do not therefore affirm, that we ought, at all times, to
pursue that, and avoid this. For, it is good for us, to sustain some pains,
that we may afterward enjoy more abundant pleasures; and expedient to abstain
from some pleasures, that we may not by them incur more grievous pains.

VII.
Hence, as from a fountain, was it, that discoursing of the true Criteria, or
judges of good and evil, we deduced several Canons, or Rules, for the
guidance and regulation of our Affections, or Passions: accounting Pleasure and
Pain, for the most certain Criterion of Election and Aversion. And this upon
very good reason; seeing that from the Benefit or Harm that redounds unto us
from the fruition of them; all the Objects of our Affections or Passions ought
to be judged Good or Evil; and that we sometimes use Good as Evil, and other
times Evil as Good.

VIII.
From these Considerations, therefore (that we may inculcate the matter) we
conclude, that no pleasure is of it self Evil; but some things there are,
which albeit they afford some pleasures, yet they are such, as occasion and
induce pains much greater than themselves. Whereto, by way of Consequence, we
superadd this; if any one pleasure could be so collected into it self, or
sequestered from all dross, as that it should neither comprehend in it, nor
leave behind it any the least measure of pain: assuredly, by that Collection
and simplicity, it would become no less perfect and absolute, than are the
chiefest Works of Nature; and so pleasures could have no Difference either of
Qualities or Degrees among themselves, but would all be equally desirable.

IX.
Further, if those very things, which are the Efficients of Pleasures to
Luxurious men, were such, as that they could render them superior to the
terrors of Meteors, Earthquakes, Thunder and Lightning, Eclipses, and other the
like accidents, caused by bodies superterrestriall; and free them from the base
fears of pains and Death: truly, we could find nothing in them to be
reprehended; insomuch as they would be wholly filled with Pleasures, and could
not, in the least, know any thing of Pain, of Trouble, of Sickness, i. e. of
Evil.

CHAP. IV.
That Felicity does consist Generally in Pleasure.
WE are now come to our main purpose, viz, That Felicity is rooted in Pleasure;
and therefore; we are first to demonstrate it to be so in the General, that we
may afterward the more securely determine in what Pleasure it does consist in
Special.

II.
In the General, pleasure seems to be as the beginning, so also the end of
happy life; forasmuch as we deprehend it to be the first Good, and Congenite to
our Nature, and to all other Animals whatever; and that very and only thing,
according to which we direct our selves, in the Election and Rejection of any
Object whatever, and define it to be Good or Evil.

III.
That Pleasure is the First Good, and Congeniall, or, as Philosophers speak,
the First Aptum and Accommodatum to Nature, may be demonstrated from hence;
that every Animal, as soon as born, does affect, pursue, and delight in
Pleasure, as its chiefest Good: and on the contrary, does hate, avoid, and to
the utmost of its power, repel Pain, as its Chiefest Evil; provided that the
sense of the Animal be not depraved, but its Nature remain in its primitive
perfection, so as to enable it to judge truly.

IV.
This considered, there is no further need of any Reasoning, or Disputation to
evince, why Pleasure is to be desired, and pain to be avoided; since the sense
alone does evidently demonstrate it, no less than it does that Fire is hot,
that snow is white, that Honey is sweet: and sufficient it is for us only to
observe it. For, if when we have taken away from man all his senses, the
Remainder must be nothing; necessary it is, that what is according to Nature,
what against Nature, must be judged by Nature it self: and consequently, that
Pleasure is to be desired for it self, and pain to be avoided for it self. For,
what perceives, or what judges, that it may either pursue, or avoid any thing,
beside pleasure and pain?

V.
That Pleasure is also the Last or Highest of Goods, or the end of all
desiderable things, may be soon understood even from hence; that it is Pleasure
alone, for which we desire all other things: and never desire Pleasure for any
thing but it self. For, other things we may desire, to the end we may be
affected or delighted with Pleasure: but no man did ever require a reason, why
we would be affected and delighted therewith; truly, no more, than for what
Cause, or to what End we should desire to be happy. Seeing that Pleasure and
Felicity ought to be reputed as in the same degree, so also for one and the
same thing: and consequently, for the end, Extreme, or Supreme of Goods, to
which all other things subordinately conduce, and which is it self subordinate
or referrible to nothing.

VI.
The same may be Confirmed from hence; that (as we have praemonished) Felicity
cannot be understood, unless it be conceived to be a certain state wherein a
man may live most sweetly, most pleasantly, i. e. in the greatest Pleasure, of
which his Nature is capable. For, but take away from life that sweetness, that
jucundity; and pray, what Notion of Felicity can remain? we say of Felicity;
not only such as we termed Divine, but also that, which we account Human, and
which is not otherwise capable of more and less, or of Intension and
Remission, than only as it may admit of more and less of Pleasure.

VII.
That we may further manifest this Truth, by a Comparation of Pleasure with
pain; let us suppose a man to enjoy many, great, and lasting pleasures both in
mind and body; no pain molesting him in the present, nor threatening him in the
future: and then what state can be imagined more desirable, more happy than
this? For, in him, who is thus affected, there must be a Constancy or firmness
of Mind, fearing neither Death, nor Pain; because Death is insensible of any
pain, and in life, if pain be long, it must be light, if great, it cannot be
long; so that the Brevity is a comfort against the violence thereof, and the
Levity against Diuturnity. When a man arrives at such a Condition, as that he
does not tremble at the thought of Divinity, nor suffer the present pleasures
to slip away unenjoyd, while his mind is taken up either with the memory of
past Goods, or expectation of future; and does every day solace himself with
the assiduous recordation of them: what greater Good is there, that can be
added to increase the Happiness of this man's Condition?

VIII.
Suppose again, on the other side, that a man is afflicted with as great
anguish of Mind, and violent pains of Body, as his nature can receive; that he
has lost all probability, all hopes of any the least Extenuation of his
Miseries; and that his tempestuous thoughts cannot lay hold of any comfort in
the apprehension of any pleasure, past, present, or expected: and what can be
imagined more wretched, more miserable than this man?

IX.
If, therefore, a life surrounded with pains, be most chiefly to be avoided:
seriously, the Highest Evil, is to live in pain; and of necessary consequence,
The Highest Good is to live in Pleasure. Nor, indeed, has the mind of Man any
other point, wherein, as in the Center and Period of all his hopes and desires,
he may consist, but only Pleasure. And all Diseases, Languors and Distempers
are referred to pain, nor is there any thing beside pain, that can invade
Naturein her Throne, eject her from it, or dissolve her.

CHAP. V.
That Pleasure, wherein Felicity does consist, is the Indolency of the Body,
and Tranquillity of Mind.
FOrasmuch as there are Two kinds of Pleasures, viz. One, that may be
considered as dependent upon, or radicated in Quiet; and so is nothing else but
a constant placability, Calmnesse, and Vacuity or Immunity from all
perturbation and dolor: and Another, that may be considered as resident in
Motion; and so consists only in a certain sweet affectation, or pleasant
titillation of the sense, as may be exemplified in joy, hilarity, eating and
drinking when we are hungry and thirsty, the pleasure of all which does arise
only from a pleasant motion in the Organs: therefore is it necessary for us to
determine, Whether Felicity does consist in both these Kinds of Pleasures
conjoined; or in one of them alone; and in which of the Two.

II.
Accordingly, therefore, we affirm; that the Pleasure, wherein Felicity does
consist, is only the Former, i. e. in the stable kind of pleasure: and so can
be no other, but the Indolency of Body, and Tranquillity of the Mind.

III.
And, therefore, when we say; that Pleasure in the General is the end of a
happy life, or the Chiefest Good; we are very far from understanding those
Pleasures, which are so much admired, courted and pursued by men wallowing in
Luxury, or any other pleasures that are placed in the mere motion or action of
Fruition, wereby, the sense is pleasantly tickled; as some, either out of
Ignorance of the right, or dissent of opinion, or praejudice and Evil will
against us, have wrongfully expounded our words: but only this (the importance
of the matter will excuse our repetition of it.) Not to be pained in Body, nor
perturbed in Mind.

IV.
For, it is not perpetual Feastings and Drinkings; it is not the love of, and
Familiarity with beautiful boys and women; it is not the Delicacies of rare
Fishes, sweet meats, rich Wines, nor any other Dainties of the Table, that can
make a Happy life: But, it is Reason, with Sobriety, and consequently a serene
Mind; investigating the Causes, why this Object is to be Elected, and that to
be Rejected; and chasing away those vain, superstitious and deluding opinions,
which would occasion very great disquiet in the mind.

V.
Now, that you may the more clearly understand, why we affirm this kind of
pleasure alone to be the end of life, or chiefest good; be pleased to observe,
that Nature does not tend to any other pleasure, primarily, or as to her
principal scope, but only to what is stable; which follows upon the remove of
all pain and Molestation. For she does not propose to her self the Moveable
pleasure, as the end at which she aims; but has provided it only as the
means conducible to that end, that it might be as it were a Condiment to
sweeten that Natural operation which is necessary to the Eradication of all
Pain and Molestation. For instance; seeing that Hunger and Thirst are things
troublesome and incommodious, in the present, to an Animal; the Primary End of
Nature, is to constitute the Animal in that state, in which it may be free from
that trouble and offense: and because that cannot be effected, but by Eating
and Drinking; therefore has she wisely provided, that the Action of Eating and
Drinking should be accompanied with a certain pleasantness and jucundity, that
so the Animal might be thereby invited the more willingly and readily to
perform that necessary Action.

VI.
Most men, indeed, living praeposterously, and being carried away with
inconsideration and intemperance, propose to themselves, as the summary of
their desires, and accomplishment of all their Hopes, that meaner Pleasure,
which depends upon Motion: but, Wisdom being called to our assistance, does
soon reduceall Pleasures to order and Decorum; and teaches us that we are not
to look upon any pleasure, as the perfection and End of our lives, but what
Nature her self has ordained for that End, and which can be no other, but what
we have declared. For* while Nature is our guide, whatever we do, must conduce
only to this; that we may not be pained in body nor perturbed in mind: and when
we have once attained to that state, all the Tempests of our mind cease, and
all our Hopes and Desires are lost in Fruition, and there can be nothing beyond
it, to which to aspire, in order to the Complement of our Happiness. For, we
then want Pleasure, when the absence of it does produce pain in us: but, when
we are not pained, then do we want no pleasure.

VII.
Hence comes it, that the Sum or Height of all Pleasures, does consist only in
the Amotion of all pains, or in that state which follows upon that Amotion:
for, wherever Pleasure is, there can be nothing of pain, of Anxiety. And
hereupon it follows also, that the highest Pleasure terminated in the privation
of pain, may indeed be varied and distinguished; but can never be Augmented or
Amplified; for, Nature so long as she has taken away all pain, does increase
pleasure; but, all pain being removed, she suffers not pleasure to be increased
in Magnitude, but only admits some certain Varieties thereof, that are not then
at all necessary, as being such, that are not comparated to this, that we may
not be pained.

VIII.
Moreover, from hence it appears, that those men insult without cause, who
accuse us, not to account this, To want all Pain, to be something consisting in
the middle betwixt pain and pleasure: but, so to confound it with the other
member of the Division, as to make it not only a Pleasure, but even the Highest
of all Pleasures. For, because, when we are Exempted from pain, we join in that
very Exemption and Vacuity from all molestation, and every thing wherein we
joy, is a pleasure; as every thing wherewith we are offended, is a pain:
therefore is the privation of all pain, by us, rightly named a Pleasure. For,
as when Hunger and Thirst are expelled with meat and drink; that very Expulsion
of the trouble of them does adferr the Consequution of a pleasure: so, in every
thing else, the very Amotion of pain causes the succession of pleasure.

IX.
Hence also may we desume a convincing reply to those, who urge against us,
that there is no Reason, why this Middle state of Indolency should be esteemed
rather a pleasure than a pain. For, upon the detraction of pleasure, discontent
does not presently ensue, unless perhaps some pain immediately succeed into
the room of that former pleasure: but, on the contrary, we always conceive a
joy upon the loss of any pain, though none of those pleasures succeed, which
consist in the delightful affection of the Sense. By which we may clearly
understand, how great a pleasure it is, Not to be in Pain: whereof if any man
doubt, let him ask of those, who are infested with those sharp pains of the
Gout, Toothach, or any other Acute disease.

X.
There are also, who deride this our opinion, Objecting, that this pleasure of
Indolency, is like the condition of a sleeping man, and fit only for Slothful
and Unactive Demetrius Cydonius, sermonem de Epicuri Commisitonibus instituens,
homines notat (...), Fatiscenteis Socordeis, enerveis.
spirits. But, these consider not, that this Indolent constitution is so far
from being a mere Torpor, or sluggishness, as that it is the only state,
wherein we can perform all the actions of life vigorously and cheerfully. And,
as we would not have the life of a wise man to be like a Torrent or rapid
River; so would we not have it to be like a standing and dead Pool: but rather
as a clear stream sliding on in a constant silence and gentleness. Wherefore
we contend; that a Wise man's pleasure is not that, which is Dull, Heavy, and
Unactive; but that which Reason makes Constant, Firm and Sprightfull unto him.

XI.
But, to leave these our Opponents, and return to our Theme; there are two good
things, of which our Highest Good, or chiefest Felicity does consist; viz. To
have the Mind free from pertubation, and the Body free from pain; and so, that
these goods be full, and above the capacity of Increase. For, how can that which
is full, be increased? If the Body be immune from all pain, what addition can
be made to that Indolency? If the Mind be constantly serene and Impertubed,
what Addition can be made to that Tranquillity? Nor do those External
Blandishments of the Sense, in any measure augment; but only serve to condite
and sweeten this state of Highest Felicity: for, that Consummate Good of Human
Nature, is contented with only the peace of mind, and quiet of body.

CHAP. VI.
Of the means to procure this Felicity.
NOw seeing that this Tranquillity of mind, and Indolency of Body, do
constitute the chief Felicity of man; nothing can more concern us, than to
consider those things, which conduce to the attainment and conservation
thereof: insomuch as while we have that, we have all things; and while we want
it, all we do is to attain it, though (for the Causes aforesaid) we seldom do
attain it.

II.
In the first place, therefore, we are to reason of Felicity, no otherwise than
of Health; it being manifest, that that state, in which the mind is free from
perturrbation, and the body from pain, is nothing else, but the perfect Health
of the whole man: and naturally consequent thereupon, that as in the body, so
also in the mind, those things which produce and conserve Health, are the very
same with those, which either prevent the Generation of Diseases, or cure and
expel them when they are generated.

III.
As for the Diseases of the Body; since the excellent Art of Medicine is
ordained as well for the prevention, as Cure of them; leaving the praescription
of both praeservative and Curative remedies to the learned professors of that
Art, we shall sufficiently discharge our present duty, if we admonish you of
only two things. The one is, that we always observe Temperance, and live
soberly and Continently, to the end that we may avert all diseases, or at least
make them more gentle and more easily curable; since for the most part, the
Harvest of Diseases does arise from the seeds of Intemperance and Incontinence.
The other, that when we are invaded with Diseases, we instantly have recourse
to Fortitude; that so we may both endure them with Constancy of Mind, and not
exasperate them by impatience, and comfort our selves with this, that if our
pain be great, it must be short; if long, light.

IV.
And as for the Diseases of the Mind, against them Philosophy is provided of
Remedies; being, in that respect, justly accounted the Physic of the Mind: but
it is not with equal facility consulted, nor applied by those who are sick in
Mind. And this, because we judge of the Diseases of the body, by the Mind: but
the diseases of the Mind we neither feel in the body, nor know or judge of them
as we ought; because that, whereby we should judge, is distempered.

V.
Hence it appears, that the Diseases of the mind are more grievous and
dangerous than those of the body: as among diseases Corporeal, those are most
dangerous, which deprive us of our senses; such are the Apoplexy, Lethargy,
Frenzy, etc. Again, that the Diseases of the Mind are more pernicious than
those of the Body, is manifest from the same reason, which demonstrateth that
the Pleasures of the mind are much better than those of the Body, which is
this, that wefeel in the body nothing but what is present, bnt in our mind we
are sensible of also what is past, and what is to come. For, as the Anxiety of
the mind, arising by consent from the pains of the body, may be very much
aggravated, if we have possessed our selves with a conceit, that some Eternal
and Infinite Evil is impendent over us: so may it be very much mitigated, if
we fear no such Evil. And this likewise is manifest; that the greatest
Pleasure, or Trouble of the mind, does more conduce to an happy, or miserable
life; than either of the other two, though it should be equally lasting in the
body.

VI.
Now, because there are two Capital diseases of the Mind, namely Cupidity and
Fear, with their several branches, and with discontent or trouble conjoined,
after the same manner as pain is adjoined to the diseases of the body;
therefore is it the part of Philosophy to apply such Remedies, as may prevent
them from invading the mind; or at least overcome and expel them, when they
have invaded it. Such chiefly are the vain Desires of Wealth, of Honors, of
Dominion, etc. and the Fear of Celestial Powers, of Death, etc. which having
once assaulted and taken possession of the mind, they leave no part thereof
sound or unshaken.

VII.
Now the Remedies, which Philosophy does apply, are the Virtues, which being
derived from Reason, or more General Prudence, easily drive away and expel
those Desires and Fears. We say, from Reason, or more General Prudence;
because, as there is a more Special Prudence, inservient to the direction of
all the particular actions of our lives: so also is there a more General
Prudence, which is nothing else but very Reason it self, or the Dictamen of
Reason, and is, by most, accounted the same with Sapience or Wisdom: and Virtue
is only a certain perfect Disposition of the Mind, which Reason, or prudence
does create, and oppose to the Diseases of the Mind, i. e. to the Vices.

CHAP. VII.
Of Right Reason, and Free will, from whence is all the praise of the Virtues.
HEnce, we are to advance to the consideration of Virtue, and the several
Species thereof; but, not without Praemising a few Observables, touching Reason
it self, and that which does consist therein, viz Free Will: forasmuch as all
the praise belonging to Virtue, does derive its right only from thence; as
likewise does its Opposite, Blame, which is due to Vice.

II.
Since Reason, in the General, is nothing else but the Faculty of
Ratiocinating, or judging, or inferring one thing from another; we do here
understand that Reason, in Special, which discourses, judges and determines
of such things, as fall under the power of man's Election, or Refusal.

III.
But, because this Reasoning or judgment may be as well False, as True, Wrong
as Right; therefore can we not well allow that Reason, which makes a false
judgment, to be called Reason, but rather Opinion: however, if you please to
keep constant to the vulgar phrase, let it still be called Reason, provided it
be understood to be Wrong; as on the other side, Right Reason may also be
called Opinion, provided we understand it to be Right.

IV.
As for Right Reason; that arises to us both from the Goodness of our Nature,
or Ingenuity, and from the sedulous Observation or frequent Experience of
things: whence it comes, that being grounded upon firm and corrected
principles, our Reasoning comes at length to be solid; and we, of right, appeal
to the judgment of him, who is Expert and Prudent in the things, of which
judgment is to be given.

V.
In the mean while, when we say, of things which fall under our power of
Election or Refusal; we suppose, that there is in us also a Free or Arbitrary
power of Reason, i. e. a Faculty of Electing and Prosecuting what Reason it
self has judged to be Good; and of Refusing and Avoiding what it has judged
to be Evil.

VI.
Now, that this Arbitrary Freedom of our Will, is the congeniall praerogative
of our Nature; is Demonstrated unto us not only by our own Experience, but also
by Common Sense: which manifests, that nothing is worthy of Commendation or
Vituperation, of Praise or Blame, but what is done Freely, Voluntarily,
deliberately, and of Election; and therefore must depend upon something within
us, which is above all Compulsion, superintendency, command, or controllment,
and in respect whereunto all Rewards and Punishments are rightfully ordained by
the Laws: Then which Laws nothing can be more unjust, if the actions of men
were to be imputed to that rigid Necessity, which some have derived from Fate,
as the sole Commandresse of all things; declaring, that what event soever comes
to pass, or whatever action is done, does inevitably flow from an Eternal
Decree, and the succession of connected Causes.

VII.
Truly, it is much better, to be addicted to that false Opinion, which vulgar
heads entertain, of the Government of the Universe, and all things in it, by
the Gods; than to be slaves to the belief of the Fate of some Naturalists,
imposing the same upon our necks, as a Sempiternall Lord, or Tyrant, of whom we
are to be afraid night and day. For, that opinion, that the Gods are to be
Revered and Entreated, has the Comfort of Hope annexed unto it: but, the other
of Fate, imports an inexorable Decree, and indeclinable Necessity, and
consequently the highest of miseries, Despair.

VIII.
Most true it is indeed, that in things void of Reason some Effects are
Necessary (though not so necessary, as not to have been prevented, as we have
declared in our Philosopy) but in Man, endowed with Reason, and especially so
far forth as he makes use of that reason, there can be no Necessity at all: and
therefore was it, that we endeavored to assert the Declination of motions in
Atoms, to the end we might from thence deduce, how Fortune might sometimes
intervene and put in for a share in the success of Human affairs, and yet the
Freedom of man's Will remain absolute and Entire.

IX.
And requisite it is for us, to turn the edge of our Wit wholly against Fate or
Necessity; that we may by all means possible conserve our Will free from that
Sempiternall Motion imagined by the Fatist; and so not permit Pravity or
Wickedness to escape inculpable.

X.
But, what we here say of Fortune, does not in the least import, that we ought
to ascribe any Divinity thereunto; not only as the Vulgar, but those
Philosophers also, who accounting Fortune as some instable Cause, though they
do not conceive, that she does distribute to men any thing of Good or Evil,
that may conduce to an happy life; do yet think, that she does give occasions
of very considerable Goods and Evils. All that our words of Fortune imply, is
only this; that as many things are effected by Necessity, and Counsel, so also
by Fortune: and therefore, that it is the Duty of a Wise man, to arm and
provide himself against Fortune.

XI.
Now, seeing that whatever of Goodness, or Malice there is in Human actions,
has dependence upon no other foundation, but only this; that a man does those
Actions Knowingly and Willingly, or Freely: therefore is the Mind to be
accustomed to this, that it may know truly, i. e. use Right Reason; and Will
truly, i. e. that the Will be bent to that, which is truly Good, and averted
from what is truly Evil. Forasmuch as this Assuefaction does beget that
Disposition in the mind, which we have defined Virtue to be: as the
Assuefaction of it to the Contrary, does beget that disposion, which we may
justly define Vice to be.

XII.
We insist not upon this; that that is truly Good, which produces Pleasure, as
sincere, so also without any pain, trouble, or repentance attending and ensuing
thereupon: and that truly Evil, which produces pain, as sincere, so also
without any Pleasure or Allubescence to succeed upon it. Only we touch upon
both, that we may discriminate either from what is only Apparent and
Dissembled; such as that Good, which creating present Pleasure, introduces
future pain and trouble: and that Evil, which procuring pain or trouble in the
present, draws on pleasure and content in the future.

CHAP. VIII.
Of the Virtues, Generally.
FOrasmuch as Virtue is either Prudence it self, or the very Dictamen of Right
Reason, as we accustom our minds to the constant exercise thereof; or is, at
least, regulated by, and dependent upon Prudence, or the Dictamen of Right
Reason: from thence it is manifest, that to this Latter Kind belongs both that
Virtue, whereby a man stands affected toward himself; and that, whereby he is
affected toward others; since Prudence is that, whereby a man is comparated and
enabled to Govern not only himself, but others also.

II.
That Virtue, which relates to Others, is commonly called by the name Justice:
and that, which concerns only a mans-self, is vulgarly Distinguished into two
branches, viz. Temperance and Fortitude. But, we use to comprehend both under
the simple term of Honesty; as when we say, that to do an act out of Virtue,
is no more nor less than to do Prudently, Honestly, Justly: and this, because
they, who live soberly and Continently, are said to live honestly, according to
Decorum, or as becomes them; as they, who behave themselves Magnanimously, or
Bravely, are reputed to behave themselves honestly or Becomingly.

III.
Hereupon, we (as others) make Virtue Fourfold, viz. Prudence, Temperance,
Fortitude, and Justice. But so, as that we oppose not Prudence so much to any
affection, as to Incogitancy, Ignorance, Foolishness; unless it be by
accident only, as any perturbation does eclipse Reason, and make a man do
imprudently: nor Justice so much to any Affection, as to Malice, whereby a man
is inclined to Frauds; unless by accident only, in as much as Anger, Hate,
Avarice, or some other passion may cause a man to do unjustly: and Temperance
we oppose to Cupidity, and Fortitude to Fear.

IV.
It appears from hence, that what we formerly said [viz. that it is sober and
well ordered Reason, which procures a pleasant or happy life] aimed at this;
that Right Reason does produce a pleasant or happy life, by the means of those
Virtues, which it ingenerateth and maintains. Likewise, that what we
subjoyned, as the Reason thereof. [viz. that Reason does investigate the true
Causes, why things are to be elected, or Rejected, or chaseth away such
opinions, as might occasion very great Perturbations of mind] was intended only
to teach, that Right Reason is the very same with more General Prudence, the
Principle upon which we ground all our Elections and Avoydances, and so a very
great Good; because the Virtues, arising from that Reason or Prudence, are able
to appease and prevent all Perturbations, and this by convincing, that no man
can live pleasantly or happily, but he that lives Prudently, Honestly, Justly;
as (e converso) that to live Prudently, Honestly, Justly, is to live pleasantly
or happily.

V.
By this you may perceive the Ground of our Assertion, That Happiness and
Virtue are Convertible; or, that the Virtues are Congenite and Essential to a
happy life, so as it is impossible to separate these from that. For, all other
things, as being caduce and mortal, may be abstracted from germane and
constant pleasure: but, Virtue alone, being a perpetual and immortal Good,
can never be separated from it.

VI.
From these things we may further understand, that all the Virtues are
connected together; and that by a twofold relation: the First, because all the
other Virtues are conjoined to, and dependent upon their Princess, Prudence, as
the members of the body are conjoined to the Head; or as the streams are
conjoined to the Fountain, from which they flow; the other, because as well
Prudence, as all the others concur and unite in the point of a happy life;
being that a happy life cannot consist without the Virtues, nor the Virtues
without a happy life.

VII.
However, though the Virtues be all Connected thus together; yet are not they
therefore all Equal; as some The Stoics.
have conceived, who contend that all Vices and Faults, or Crimes are also
Equal. For, a man may be comparated more to Justice than to Temperance; and
Temperance may be more perfect in one man, than in another: as may be
exemplified in My self (without envy be it spoken) who have attained to so high
a degree of sobriety, that I make a sufficient meal usually for less then an
halfpenny; and Metrodorus, Metrodorus Lampsacenus, qui ex quo tempore primum
Epicurum novit, nunquam ab codem discessit, nisi sex tantum menses; quibus cum
domi abfuisset, ad Epicurum reversus est, and per totam deinceps vitam, illi
arctiss. necessitudine conjunctus, in iisdem and hortis and studiis convixit.
Legendus est Gassend. cap. 8. lib. 1. de vita Epicuri.
my Friend and Companion, who cannot satisfy himself with altogether so course
and spare a diet. Besides, experience assures, that one man is Wiser than
another: and all that walk in the ways of Virtue, have not the like Rewards
alottetd to them; nor all Delinquents the like Punishments. Lastly, we appeal
to Common sense, whether or no they are in the right, who make all Virtues, and
all Vices Equal; that he offends as highly, who beats his servant without
Cause, as he who beats his Father; that it is all one, for to eat a Bean, or
ones Fathers Head.

VIII.
Others there are, who condemn and bitterly inveigh against us, for affirming,
that the End of all the Virtues is Pleasure; as if we meant that kind of
Pleasure, which is obscaene and infamous: but, let these men rail upon us as
they please, we are wholly unconcerned in their malice. For, as they, so
likewise do we make Virtue the Summum Bonum; at least, if the discourse be
touching the Means that conduce to an happy life: nor is there ought does so
much conduce thereunto, as Virtue: but, if the discourse be touching Happiness
it self, why should not Happiness or Pleasure be a greater Good than Virtue,
since it is the End, to the attainment whereof Virtue is but inservient?

IX.
They cry out upon us again, for making Virtue Enervous and Ineffectuall, while
we seem not to allow it to have so much power, as to render a Wise man Superior
to all Passion or affection whatever, but leave him obnoxious to sundry
vexations, as (for instance) to lament, weep, sigh, and with all the
expressions of sorrow to deplore the death of a friend: but, seeing we put a
very high value upon Virtue, in that it is able to exempt us from vain Terrors,
and superfluous desires, which are the Heads or Fountains of all Grievous
Percurbations; manifest it is, that we grant it to be of such excellent use, as
to moderate all subordinate affections, insomuch as it refracts and reduces
them all to such a mediocrity, in which there remains some sense of Humanity.

X.
Certainly, that Total Exemption from Grief and sorrow, which these men so
much boast of; must proceed from some Greater Evil, viz. from Immanity,
immoderate ambition of vain Glory, and in a manner downright madness. So that
it seems much better, to feel some Passion, to be affected with some Grief, to
shed such tears, as are to distill from their eyes, who profess Love and
tender affection: than to Grinn, and declare a Brutish insensibility, according
to the rigid rules of that inhuman Wisdom, to which these so much pretend.

CHAP. IX.
Of Prudence General.
THus far of the Virtues in General; we now come to treat briefly of Each in
Particular. Which that we may do the more methodically, let us begin at
Prudence: whose office being to Govern a man's life, and so to provide, as that
all Occurrents may be directed only to Happiness; well may we allow it to
comprehend the offices, or Duties of all the other Virtues.

II.
And, that it is the Office, or Duty of Prudence, to order and compose all the
accidents and actions of a man's life, so as that they may conduce only to
Felicity, or the Pleasure formerly described: is more than manifest. For, as we
esteem the Knowledge of Physicians, not for the art of Physic it self, but the
End of it, Health; and as the skill of a Pilot is not liked of and commended
for the ingenuity, but Utility of it: even so Prudence, which is the art of
Living well, would never be considered nor desired, if it were of no use or
benefit in a man's life; and it is studied and desired, as the sole art, by
which Happiness, or pleasure is to be acquired.

III.
For, it is Prudence (or if you please Sapience) alone, which does not only
prevent the incidence of any thing, that may cause Pain in the Body; but also
above all things does expel sadness from the mind, and suffers us not to
startle at those things, at the very mention whereof the multitude usually
trembles with fear: and which being our Directresse, conducts us to
tranquillity, by extinguishing the arder of all cupidities. For, cupidities are
insatiable, subverting not only single persons, but also numerous and opulent
Families; yea sometimes the most potent and flourishing Commonwealths. From
Cupidities arise Hatred, Dissentions, Seditions, Wars; nor do they only
diffuse themselves abroad, or invade others with blind fury: but being included
in private breasts, they cause intestine mutinies therein, and totally evert
the economy and peace thereof. So that it follows, that they must of necessity
make life most irksom and bitter; and that none but the Wise, or Prudent man,
who have cut off all Inanity and Error, and circumscribed his desires with the
modest boundaries of Nature; can live without solicitude, without Discontent,
without Fears.

IV.
It being evident, therefore, that all the Perturbations of our life arise
originally from Error and Indiscretion; and that it is Prudence alone, which
vindicates us from the violence of Lusts and Fears, and teaches us gently to
bear the injuries of Fortune, and points out unto us all the ways, that lead
to Quiet and Tranquillity: pray what reason is there to discourage us from
affirming, that Prudence is to be sought after, in respect of Pleasure; and
Imprudence to be avoided, for the prevention of Troubles?

V.
Now the Reason, why we say, that a Prudent man does temperately bear the
injuries of Fortune, is this; that albeit he does not previse and provide
against any injury in particular, yet does he foresee and provide against all
in General. Nor does he, if any infortune intervene cross to his Hopes, or
Counsels, therefore afflict himself: because he well knows it not to be in the
power of Human Reason, Sagacity, or Policy, either to praevise, or praevent the
intervention of every adverse and troublesome Accident. Yea, he holds it much
better, to be Unfortunate with Reason and sage advice (such as Human frailty
will admit) than to be Fortunate with Inconsideration and Temerity: and thinks
nothing more grateful, than, if Fortune bring about any thing fairly and
prosperously unto him, that he did not enterprise it without judgment and
deliberation.

VI.
He moreover so deports himself, as that cutting off all vain Cupidities, he
contracts his desires to only Necessaries; which are indeed, so few and small,
Occupavite, Fortuna, atque cepi, omnesque aditus tuos interclusi, ut ad me
adspirare non posses: fidenter excl. mass legitur Metrodorus, Epicuri amicus
and discipulus, apud Ciceronem, Tuscul. 5.
as scarce any unkindnesse of Fortune can rob him of them: so that since very
little of Fortune can intervene to a wise man; he may well say to her, I have
prevented thee, O Fortune, and so barrocadoed all thy ways of access, as that
thou can not approachme!

VII.
But, concerning the way of Cutting off all Cupidities, hereafter; in present,
forasmuch as Prudence may be considered, either as a man does thereby govern
himself, or order his Family, or govern a City or a Commonwealth; and so as it
is distinguished into Private, Domestique, Civil: it is convenient, that we
speak somewhat of each.

CHAP. X.
Of Prudence Private.
OF Private Prudence the whole sum consists in no more but this, that a man
well understand his own Genius, and enterprising nothing, to which Nature has
a repugnancy, he looks well into the conditions of that state, in which he is
to spend his whole life, and to which he is so to accommodate all his actions,
as that, as much as possible, he may live in Indolency and Tranquillity.

II.
For, it behooves him to have the eye of his mind constantly and immoveably fixed
upon this end, or scope of his life; and consulting with right reason, to
proceed according to the evidence of those Criteria, by which we are wont,
when we perpend the Good or Evil of objects, to erect our determinations.
Since otherwise, all things will be full of indiscreet temerity and confusion,
and late Repentance will attend upon all his undertakings.

III.
Moreover, in case you do not direct every one of your Actions, upon what
occasion soever, as to this grand scope, so also to that very end of Nature
which you proposed to your self in the designment of it: but turn aside to any
other sinister purpose, either in the prosecution or avoidance of any Object
whatsoeever: then, certainly, shall not the Actions of your life be
consentaneous to your discourses; but extolling Tranquillity (for instance) in
your words, you shall betray your self to be really addicted to multiplicity of
business, and obnoxious to very much trouble.

IV.
Now, that man does clearly understand the Ends prescribed by Nature, in the
course of life to be instituted and undertaken; who well knows, how easily that
is procurable, which is necessary to life, or what is sufficient to the
detraction of all, that can, by indigence, cause pain in the Body. For, from
thence he so well knows how to order the whole series of his life, as always
to be above the want of such things, as are full of business, and Contention,
and consequently of Chance and Danger.

V.
Hereupon a Wise man has no reason to be much afraid of Poverty; because it is
very rare to find a man so poor, as to be in want of those things, which are
necessary to life. But in case our Wise man should be reduced to such a low ebb
of Fortune, as to want things necessary to the sustenance of his life: yet will
he not, with the Cynicks, betake himself to the shameful refuge of Begging; Tu
poscisvilia; verum es dante minor, quavisfers te nullius egentem. Horat. Epist.
17. lib. 1.
but, rather undertake the Erudition of some others in Wisdom, that so he may
both take a course beseeming the dignity of his Prudence, and at the same time
deservedly accommodate himself with necessaries, from those, who have abundance.

VI.
And while he is constrained, to take this, or some other honest and beseeming
course, that by an acquired confidence of mind, he may generously receive those
things, which happen to him for the instant day, he is to have recourse to the
Oracle of his own Wisdom, and call Philosophy to his relief: for we then resign
the arbitration of those things, that so nearly concern us, to an Evil
Counselor; when we measure and provide against indigence, by any other
proportion but the simple necessities of Nature, and the rules of Philosophy.

VII.
Wherefore, it behooves a Philosopher to provide for such competent means, as
may supply his necessities; and so long to apply himself to that provision, as
till his diligent care has furnished him: but, so long as any part of them may
be spared, and his confidence yet remain perfect; he is in no case to addict
himself to the getting of riches, and storing up of provisions.

VIII.
In the provision of these things, therefore our care is to be proportioned by
Philosophy; and so, in a short time, we shall come to know, what a Virtue, and
how great a Good it is, to require only what is simple, light, and very small:
because, what is most sweet, and free from trouble in all a man's life, depends
wholly upon this; to be contented with the least, i. e. only so much, as
suffices nature. And, as for those impediments, which the sollicitous hunting
after more does draw upon us; when they once discover themselves (as soon they
must) either by the great labor of the body, or the difficulty in the very
procuring-them, or the abduction of the mind from more worthy and advantageous
speculations (which we ought evermore highly to esteem) or the insatisfaction
resulting from the fruition of them: certainly, we shall clearly perceive the
same to be altogether fruitless, and insufficient to compensate the consequent
perturbations.

IX.
And, whereas we praemonished, that every man should, before he determines,
upon what course of life to put himself, strictly examine his own Genius, and
advise with himself concerning the inclination thereof; that so he may at
length happily devote himself to that, which he finds most agreeable to the
Destination of it: our purpose therein was, to intimate, that nothing can be
more miserable and more inconsistent with tranquillity, than for a man to be
engaged in that course of life, to which Nature made him unfit:

X.
It follows from hence, that an Active life is not fit for a slothful and
heavy person; nor a slothful lazy kind of life fit for an active: for as
idleness is quiet, and action labor to the one; so to the other idleness is
a labor, and action quiet. Thus, a Soldiers life is unfit for a Timorous and
softly man; and an umbratile life odious to an impatient and bold man: for one
cannot endure the heat of War; nor the other the cool shadow of peace. So that
nothing can be more safe or hopeful, than for a man to devote himself to that,
to which he finds no adversnesse or repugnancy in his nature.

XI.
Whereunto you may please to add this one rule; that every man, to the end the
state of life which he chooses, may be the more secure and tranquil, ought to
choose a mean state, or such as is neither very eminent, nor very abject; at
least if it be in his own power. Because, it behooves him to live in a Civil
society, neither as a Lion, nor as a Gnat: lest he be exterminated, as the one;
or ensnared and crushed, as the other.

CHAP. XI.
Of Prudence Domestic.
THis sort of Prudence divides it self into Two branches; the First concerns a
man in the capacity of a Husband, and a Father; the other, as he is a Master of
Servants, and Possessor of House, Goods, Lands, etc.

II.
Concerning the Former, viz. Conjugall and Paternall Prudence, let us observe
only what may be inferred from the Praemises, touching the Directions of a
man, in the Election of his course of life. Thus if you find your Constitution
to be such, as that you cannot, without the ardors of the flesh, live single;
that you can with patience endure a morose and unquiet Wife, and untoward and
undutifull Children; that you shall not be subject and apt to vex, repine and
grieve, when you shall hear your Children crying and bawling, see them groaning
on the bed of sickness, or snatched away by death before you; and that you
shall not be perplexed and distracted with those Cares and sollicitudes, that
accompany the provision of all things necessary to a Conjugall state: why then,
indeed, it may be convenient for you, to take a Wife, and beget Children; for
which you may provide by a Conjugall and Paternall Prudence.

III.
You may presume, indeed, that your Wife will be sweet and Complacent; that
your Children will be of ingenious and tractable dispositions; that your cares
for them will not be great, nor many; that you have so laid your designs, as
that you cannot expect any thing but prosperity and good success: and yet you
can but presume all this, nor do I know any God, who will oblige himself, that
your affairs shall succeed according to this your presumption. Wherefore, seeing
the business is very doubtful; it is far below the part of a Wise man,
willingly to put himself upon Chance, to undergo the hazard, and engage himself
in that condition, from whence, in case he should afterward repent, he cannot
withdraw himself.

IV.
We say, Willingly; because there may be some such Circumstance, as may require
a man, though much against his will, to marry and generate Children; as, for
instance, in case he live in a Country but thinly peopled, and where he is to
be serviceable to the Commonwealth by increasing the members of it. Some, we
know, pretend the propagation of their species, to which Nature seems to oblige
all; but, certainly, there is no fear that mankind should fail, there being in
all times and places enough that give themselves to Marriage and Procreation:
so that some few Wise men may well be permitted to abstain, and leave the
business of Propagation to be performed by others.

V.
Now if any such Case, or certain Council, or any Necessity shall constrain
you to marry; then are you so to dispose your Wife, as that she may be loving
and complacent to you, and a partner in your Cares: and to take such care for
your Children as is prescribed to you partly by Nature, which by strong
instinct obliges us to love and cherish them as soon as they are born (and so
much even Wolves, Tigers, and all other wild Beasts always do) and partly by
Prudence, which admonishes so us to educate and instruct them in the rudiments
of Morality, as that they may be obedient to the Laws of the Country, and
desire nothing so much, as to be made Wise themselves.

VI.
Nor are we to take this care only for our own Children; but also for those of
our friends, and especially if they be our Pupills. For, nothing is more
beseeming the Dignity of Friendship, than for a man to become a Tutor, and
supply the place of a Parent to those, whom his deceased Friend both dearly
loved, and left as Orphans, and so in need of Protection and Tuition.

VII.
And as for the other branch of Domestic Prudence, which teaches a man how to
deport himself in the Capacity of a Master, or as he has Servants at his
Command, and Possessions at his Dispose; both which though necessary, are yet,
for the most part, not very pleasant: the sum of it consists in this. Let him
endeavor to prevent the sauciness, morosity, and insolence of his Servants;
deport himself with mildness and gentleness toward them, so far as may stand
with his superiority, and their obedience; with a kind of Qui placidus delicta
domat; nec dentibus unquam, Instrepet horrendum, fremitunec verbera poscit.
Claudian. de Macil.
unwillingnesse Chastise and Correct even the perverse and disobedient, as
remembering that they also are men; Connive at some involuntary faults, and
forgive some others, especially if they be diligent, and not of an evil
disposition. Nor this only, but, if he find them to be capable of, and inclined
to the study of Wisdom (such we have sometimes met with, and chiefly my servant
Mus Hunc servum Epicuri, Murem inter Philosophantes clarissimum (...) evasisse
testatur Laertius, lib. 1. cap. 12. neque Macrobius (Saturnal. cap. 11.)
oblivioni dat inter eos, qui Philosophis exservis non incelebres evaserunt.
) it is his duty to encourage and assist them therein, to allow them the
Familiarity of Friends, and account it pleasant or good to permit them to
Philosophize together with himself.

VIII.
In the matter of his Estate, he is not only to live within compass, but so
to proportion his Expenses, as still to be laying up somewhat for the Future;
yet without Avarice, and the sordid desire of heaping up Wealth. For, it is not
the part of a Wise man to neglect his household Affairs; insomuch as his
livelihood depends thereupon, and if he through negligence permit all to run to
ruin, so that he come at length to want Necessaries; he must very much
obstruct his progress in Philosophy: being that then he must either addict
himself to the laborious Getting of what might have been kept with little Care;
or to the importunate Begging of that at the Charitable hands of Others, which
his own easy Providence might have furnished him with all; or grow old, crazy,
diseased, and die in such want, as must be no small hindrance to the
Tranquillity of his mind.

IX.
And besides such things as are absolutely necessary to the uses of life; there
are also others, that may be accounted necessary Respectively, or according to
the Condition of the Person, Place, Time, and other Circumstances, and
therefore they ought not to be neglected. But the chiefest of our Familiar Care
must be for those things, without which, Nature her self must suffer and decay,
and such is chiefly the provision of Grain and other lasting Fruits of the
Earth; and for that reason, we more commend those, who have their Granaries
well stored with Corn, than those who have their Houses adorned with gaudy and
rich Furniture. It much delights me to remember, that not long since, when, in
our City long and straightly besieged, many perished by Famine; Quum Demetrius
obsedit Athenas, circa annum Epicuri, 44.
we were able to preserve our selves and diverse Ftiends in good plight: not
with delicate Cates, but good plenty of Beans, whereof each person had a
certain number allowed him daily. Quanta autem fames civitatem oppresserit
eadem obsidione, describit Plutarchus [in vita Demetri;] ubi inter caetera
inquit: Ferunt etiam Epic urum Philosophum familiares suos sustentasse,
partitum cum ipsis ad manerum fabas.


CHAP. XII.
Of Prudence Civil.
LAstly, as for the concern of Civil Prudence; we are likewise to deduce the
sum of it, from what we have insinuated touching the Course of life to be
elected.

II.
Thus, if there be any, who are by Nature Ambitious, desirous of Glory, Active
and fit for the manage of Public Affairs; and have besides the advantages of
Birth, Fortune, and opportunity that seem not only to invite, but also to open
them an easy and safe way thereunto: for these men it may be convenient to
obey the inclination of their Genius, by addicting themselves to Action, and
the administration of affairs, wherein the Republique is concerned; because,
They are so disposed by their Constitution, as that they cannot but suffer
perturbations and disquiets in an obscure and unactive life, while they labor
with a restless desire of what they do not obtain.

III.
But, as for those, who are not by Nature Comparated to much employment, but to
Quiet and Eases or have by force of Reason repressed their Natural Ambition and
vain Affectation of Popularity; or having learned, by their own costly
Experience, the certain troubles, and uncertain duration of Grandeur, have
withdrawn themselves from the storm, that frequently threaten men of Public
Charges; or have been made wary and cautelous by the sad Examples of other
Statesmen, whose aspiring humors occasioned their praecipitous Downfalls: good
reason is there, that these should esteem the quiet of a Private condition,
much better than the disquiet and dangers of a Popular; unless, perhaps, some
accident intervene on the part of the Commonwealth, that does require their
industry. And hereup on we conclude, that a Wise man is not to engage himself
in the administration of Public Affairs, unless some intervening Necessity
call him thereunto.

IV.
And why should we not thus conclude, since to a Wiseman, addicting himself to
Leisure and Quiet, it may be both much more easy, and safe to attain to that
End, which ambitious men propose to themselves to be acquired by Dangers and
restless Labors?

V.
For, that we may speak of the scope, or end, at which the Ambitious aim,
there never wanted some, who, to the end they might attain security from others
(and according to the condition of Principality and Dominion, by which they
conceived that security chiefly acquirable) have affected to render themselves
illustrious with Glory and Renown: thinking by that means to advance themselves
to a state of security and tranquillity. But, if the lives of these proved
really secure and tranquil (as, in truth, it could hardly be) then did they
indeed, attain that very thing, which, to Nature is so good and pleasant: and
if they were not, then did they fall from their hopes, and wholly miss their
aim, insomuch, as they in vain sought after what is congruous to Nature, in
Greatness and Dominion.

VI.
Now, seeing the scope of a Wiseman is the very same, namely, Security and
Tranquillity of life; pray, by how much nearer a way does he arrive at that
end, when avoiding the tumults of a civil life, he directly and immediately
places himself in a most profound quiet, and a state of highest silence and
tranquillity? Truly happy is that man, who knows, that the chiefest good, or a
happy life, does not consist in power and Sovereignty; not in a full Exchequer,
nor in ample possessions: but, in freedom from pain, a calm of all affections,
and that disposition of mind, which circumscribing all his desires by the
simple boundaries of Nature, makes him content with a few things, and so to be
Master of that, which the ambitious despair to obtain, unless they could bear
rule over all others, and heap up treasures inexhaustible.

VII.
Certainly, if it be fit for me to speak of my self, I account it for a very
great Felicity, that I never yet enterposed my self in the Factions of our
City, nor ever sought to flatter, please, and endear the people. And what
Reason, why I should; since the people does not approve what I know, Scribit
Plinius [lib. 19. cap. 4.] Epicurum primum instituisie Athenis agrorum,
villarumque delicias, nomine Hortorum in ipsa Urbe possidere; cum ad usque eum
mos non fuisset in oppidis habitari rura. Hinc accipi solet pro ipsa secta,
seudoctrina, quae ab Epicuro, sectatoribusque in horto ejus tradita est: unde
and Epicurei dicuntur esse (...) ex Hortis Philosophi; sicut (...)
intelliguntur Stoici; apud Empirium [i. advers Physic.]
nor I know what the people approve? Besides, how far was it from Harm, that I
and my familiar friend Metrodorus have lived together, not only privately, but
in a manner concealed: when among so great Goods, as we were capable of
enjoying in my narrow Gardens, and in obscure Melite, we were not only unknown,
but almost unheard of in our own noble Country of Graece.

VIII.
We said, Unless something intervene on the Commonweals part: because, if the
Republique call a Wise man to the Helm, and really stand in need of his advice
and assistance: in such a case, it would be downright inhumanity in him, not to
do a Public Good, when it lies in his Power; nay, he would be injurious even
to himself, because unless the Commonwealth be in safety, he can very hardly
obtain what he chiefly desires, Leisure and Quiet.

IX.
Let not a Wise man, therefore, behave himself, as we have observed some to do;
who professing Wisdom, have, through excessive pride, had so high a conceit of
their own judgment and abilities in the Politiques, as that they were confident
they could rival, if not outdo even Lycurgus and Solon, in the Art of Ruling.

X.
But, in case he be desired to make Laws, and to prescibe both a Form of
Government, and Charges for the several Magistrates: He is in no wise to
decline it; as well knowing, that those, who first made Laws, and Ordinances
of Justice, and constituted Government and Magistracy in Cities, did
principally aim at, and prudently provide for Tranquillity and Security of
life; forasmuch as if those Laws and Constitutions be once taken away, we
should lead the life of Wild Beasts, and the stronger would at least despoil,
if not devour weaker.

XI.
Again, if he shall be Elected to the Highest Sovereignty, and to rule
according to the Laws formerly made, and the Government already established;
neither will he refuse that: as well knowing, that though the condition of a
Prince be for the most part full of incertitude, and above all others open to
sinister Chance; yet a Wise man may look so prosoundly into all Affairs, and so
provide against Casualities, as that while Fortune intervenes in somelesse
important Occurrences, the Greatest and most weighty Affairs of state are
happily managed by his Council and Reason. His chief and first Endeavors will
be, to provide, that the weaker, while they do their duties toward the
stronger, be neither oppressed by them, nor live in want of those necessaries
to life, wherewith the others superabound. For, the End of every Society of
men, or Commonwealth, is only the Common Good, or that all conspiring and
cooperating to the Public interest, the life of every man may be safe, and (as
far as may be) Happy.

XII.
Finally, in case his Prince, upon some urgent occasion, summon him to come and
afford him his Council, or Assistance; neither will he refuse that: as
knowing, that, since it is not only more honorable, but also more pleasant to
give, than to receive a Benefit, it must be an Act as most honorable, so also
most pleasant, to confer a benefit upon a Prince, from whom it is to redound to
Millions of others. And thus much of the Principal, and Sourse of all the
Virtues, Prudence.

CHAP. XIII.
Of Temperance in General.
THe next place belongs to Temperance, which is the first part of Honesty, and
that which seems to comprehend the chief Reason of what is Honest, or
Beseeming. For, since it is the office of Temperance to repress a Desiring, so
is it of Fortitude to erect a Fearing mind; it is justly accounted a less
Indecorum to be let down by Pusillanimlty, than to be wound up by Cupidity:
and, therefore, it is a greater Decorum to resist Cupidity, than to strive
against Fear.

II.
Concerning Temperance, this is first to be observed; that it is not to be
affected and pursued for its own sake, but for the Pleasure it brings with it,
that is, because it adfers peace to a man's mind, and pleasantly affect it with
a certain Concord. For, its proper operation is the Moderation of our
Cupidities; and therefore, that we may follow the conduct of Reason, in the
Election or avoydance of Objects, it admonishes us, that it is not sufficient
for us to judge rightly what is to be done, or not to be done: but it behooves
us also to stand to and execute that judgment.

III.
Most men, being not able to hold and keep to what they have resolved upon, as
overcome and enfeebled by the appearance of a present Pleasure; resign up
themselves to the fetters of Lusts, and never foresee what is to follow
thereupon: and, for the same cause, inconsiderately pursuing a small,
transitory, and unnecessary pleasure, and such as they might have otherwise
enjoyed, or wholly wanted. without any offense to Nature; they precipitate
themselves into grievous diseases, into losses, into disgrace, and many times
into the penalties decreed by the Laws.

IV.
But, they who would so enjoy pleasures, as that no pains shall ensue
thereupon; and constantly retain their judgment, not to be overcome by
Pleasure, to the doing of what they know ought not to be done: these men
acquire the greatest Pleasure, by pretermitting Pleasure; and frequently suffer
some pain, to prevent their falling into greater.

V.
And hence is it understood, that Temperance is to be desired, not because it
avoids some Pleasures, but because by restraining a man from them, it declines
Troubles, which being avoided, he afterward obtains Greater Pleasures. And
this in the mean time it so does, as that the action becomes Honest and Decent:
and we may clearly understand, that the same men are Lovers as of Pleasure, so
also of Decorum; yea, and that such, who esteem and pursue all Virtues, do for
the most part perform those actions, and attain to those Ends, as that by them
it is made manifest, how odious to all men Cruely is, and how amiable Goodness
and Clemency; and that those very Pleasures, which Evil men most eagerly
desire and hunt after, do fall into the lapps of only good men.

VI.
Moreover, for as much as among Cupidities, about the restraint and Moderation
of which Temperance is employed, some are Natural, others vain or merely
opinionative; and of the Natural ones some are Necessary, other Not-necessary
(we omit, that of the Necessary ones, some pertain simply to Life; such is the
appetite of meat and drink, together with the Pleasure, which consists only in
Motion: and others absolutely to Felicity it self; such as that of Indolency
and Tranquillity, or the stable Pleasure) manifest it is, that not without good
cause we have, in our Physiology, made Three kinds of Cupidities, viz. (1.)
some that are both Natural and Necessary: (2.) others that are Natural, but
Not-necessary: and (3.) others that are neither Natural nor Necessary, but
merely Vain, or arising from vain Opinion.

VII.
And because we said, that those are Natural and Necessary, which cause damage
and pain in the body, if they be not satisfied; it is evident, that such
Cupidities, which infer no damage nor pain, if not satisfied, and yet are
joined with earnest and vehement instigations, do become such, not by any
Necessity, but by Opinion: and though they have their seeds from Nature, yet
when they run up to Excess, their growth is caused only by the evil, but
powerful influence of Opinion; which makes men far worse then Beasts, since
they are not obnoxious to any such diffusion, or Excess; and again, that such
Cupidities may be proved to be not only Not-necessary, but also Not-naturall,
only by this, that they import an appetence in Excess, and very hardly or
never to be satisfied, and are, for the most part, worthily accounted the
Causes of some Harm or other even to Nature.

VIII.
Now, that we may discourse of the chief sorts of Temperance, respectively to
the Chief sorts of Cupidities; we are to pitch upon (1.) Sobriety, which stands
opposed to Gluttony, or the excessive desire of meat and drink: (2.)
Continence, which confronts Lust, or the unbridled desire of Venus: (3.)
Lenity, the adversary to Anger, or the desire of Revenge: (4.) Modesty, the
contrary to Ambition, or the affectation of Honor: (5.) Moderation, the
antagonist to Avarice, or the Cupidity of Riches: and (6.) in respect of the
affinity betwixt Desire and Hope, Mediocrity, the mean betwixt Hope and
Desperation of the Future.

CHAP. XIV.
Of Sobriety opposed to Gluttony.
IT can hardly be expressed, how great Good redounds from Sobriety; which
reducing a man to a thin, simple, and spare Diet, by happy experience teaches,
how little that is, which Nature requires, and that her Necessities may be
abundantly satisfied with slender and easily-provided Aliment, such as decocted
Barley, Fruits, Herbs, and Fountain Water.

II.
For, these things sufficiently remove the trouble of the body arising from
want of sustenance; are every where to be had, in good plenty; and contain the
Faculties of dry and moist Aliments. Whatever is more than this, amounts to
Luxury, and concerns only the satisfaction of a Cupidity, which is neither
Necessary, nor occasioned by any thing, whose defect does necessarily infer
any the least offense or detriment to Nature: but arises partly from hence,
that the want of somewhat, after which the exorbitant appetite longs, is
imagined real, and born with impatience; partly from hence, that an absolute
Delight, or such as is entire and neither accompanied with, nor attended on by
any trouble, is presumed from the satisfaction thereof.

III.
And forasmuch as such things, as are commonly provided to our hands,
abundantly suffice to supply all Natures wants; and these Aliments are such, as
partly for their simplicity, partly for their Exiguity, are easily providible:
hence it follows, that he, who feeds upon flesh, has need of other things to
eat with it; when he, who is satisfied only with Inanimates, has need of but
half so much as the other, and sustains himself with what is easy in the
provision, and of small cost and pains in the preparation.

IV.
Now, as for the Commodities, which redound from Sobriety, they are principally
Four. The First is, that it brings and conserves Health, by accustoming the
body to simple, course, and spare Diet. For, sumptuous Feasts, and full meals,
and various dishes, are they which generate, exasperate, and prolong Crudities,
Headaches, Rheumes, Gouts, Fevers, and other Diseases: not that plain and
simple fare, which Nature affords both as Necessary and wholesome, and this not
only to other Animals, but also to man, who yet depraves them by his
exorbitancy, and corrupts them by such Delilicates as which while he affects,
he affects only his own Destruction.

V.
Who so is Wise, therefore, let him always beware of that Dish, which his
irregular Appetite earnestly covets and pursues; and upon which he cannot feed,
without being afterward convinced, that it was grateful to him only to his own
harm. Of this sort are all costly, fat, and luscious meats; and therefore the
use of Flesh must be rather Hurtful, than Beneficial to Health; of which this
may be a very good Argument: that since Health is preserved by the same means,
which restore it, when lost; and abstinence from flesh is generally prescribed
by learned Physicians, in most diseases, especially acute ones; certainly, the
best way of conserving health, must be a spare diet, and no Flesh.

VI.
It is no wonder, that the People commonly cry up the use of Flesh, as an
Aliment highly conducing to Health; for, they magnify all things that please
the Gust, and think that the direct way to Health lies in the wallowing in
Pleasures, nay, even of Venereall pleasures; whereof, notwithstanding there is
none, which is beneficial to any man, and that constitution is very rare, to
which it is not hurtful at all time.

VII.
The Second is this; that it makes men ready, vivacious, and quick, in the
doing of all actions necessary to life. For, if you regard the Functions of the
Mind, it conserves the same in serenity, acuteness, and vigor: if the offices
of the Body; it conserves it in health, and so in strength, agility, and
hardiness. Whereas, on the other side, Repletion, overmuch satiety,
surfeiting, beclouds the mind, dulls the edge of it, and brings it to an
unmanly languor and stupidity: and the body it makes as diseased, so feeble,
unactive and burdensome. Now I beseech you, what great matters can you expect
from that man, whose members are oppressed, joints enfeebled, sinews relaxed,
head beclouded, tongue heavy and paralyticall, eyes floating in rheums, veins
glowing with heat and Choler, mouth full of brawling and clamours, and all by
reason of Wine drunk in excess.

VIII.
Verily, a Wise man, who ought to content his stomach either with less then a
pint of small Wine, or with Water from the Fountain, the most not only wholesome,
but sweet of all Drinks; will be very far from spending the night in
Compotations and Drunkenness: and as far from gorging it, and oppressing
Nature with meats fat, sweet and gustfull, and of heavy and slow digestion;
since he well knows, that the most simple Cates, such as only Nature gives and
cooks, will equally satisfy the stomach, and better preserve Health.

IX.
And, what though such simple and slender Diet will not make a man as strong as
Milo was, not pamper the flesh and corroborate the sinews? yet this does no way
disparage the use of it to a Wise man, who has no need of such Robustnesse of
body, and intension of strength, the business of his life being chiefly
Contemplation, not Activity and Petulancy.

X.
A Third advantage accrewing from Sobriety, is this; that a sober man, coming
to a Feast, eats his meat with ten times more delight than another, because he
brings an exact palate to taste, and a clean and sharp stomach, to entertain it.
Not that course and homly Cates do not afford as much delight both to the Gust
and stomach, as the most sumptuous Banquets, when a man brings with him the
best of sawces, hunger (for, every man knows, that in case of perfect hunger
and thirst, decocted Barley and clean Water are highly grateful, and supply
that defect of nourishment, from whence the trouble of hunger and thirst arise)
but because those, who are daily used to more sumptuous entertainments, have
their palates so furred and imbued, and their stomachs so oppressed and weakened
by the continual use and ingurgitation of them, that they neither relish nor
swallow their meats and drinks with pleasure comparable to that, which a sober
man receives, whose Gusto is sincere, and Appetite strong. Thus also a Wise
man, who comes but now and then to public shows and spectacles, is sensible of
far more pleasure than those, who daily frequent them.

XI.
Nor can what we say, concerning the resultance of as much pleasure from the
coursest food, as from dishes of the greatest cost and most exquisite Cookery;
be contradicted by any, but him, who exposes himself to the Tyranny of vain
opinions; who does not observe, that those only enjoy magnificence with
greatest pleasure, who do the least need or care for it; and who never tasted
the pleasure of Bread and Water, when pressed with pure hunger and thirst. For
mine own part, seriously, when I feed upon simple Bread and Water, and sometimes
(when I would entertain my self somewhat more splendidly) mend my cheer with a
little Cheese; I apprehend abundant satisfaction therein, and bid defiance to
those pleasures, which the ignorant and sensual Vulgar so much like and cry up
in the magnificence of great Entertainments: and hereupon, if I have no more
than brown Bread, Decocted Barley, and clean Water; I think my Table so well
furnished, as that I dare dispute Felicity even with Jove himself.

XII.
We farther affirm, that the magnificence of Feasts, and variety of Dishes, do
not only not exempt the mind from Perturbations; but not so much as heighten
the pleasure of the Body: forasmuch as the end of Nature in Eating, is the
remover of Hunger. For Example; the use of Flesh does neither more especially
take away any thing, that is a trouble to Nature; nor perform any thing, which
might occasion or convert to a trouble, if not performed. But, in the mean time
it does affect nature with a certain violent Gratefulness, and such as perhaps
may be contrary to it, insomuch as we observe, that it does the least of all
meats conduce to the prolongation of life: and all that it serves to, is the
Variation of Imaginary Pleasures, like the blandishments of Venus, and the
drinking of Exotique wines, without which Nature, or Life might very well last;
since those things, without which nature cannot subsist, are altogether
compendious, and may with great ease, and with the safety of Justice,
Liberality, and Tranquillity, be obtained.

XIII.
Finally, the Fourth advantage of Sobriety is this; that it makes us superior
to the threats of Fortune. For, they only are afraid of the frowns of Fortune,
who being accustomed to live delicately and sumptuously, conceive that their
lives must be most miserable, unless they can have wherewith to spend pounds
and Talents every day. And hence comes it, that such, for the most part, become
obnoxious to various and great troubles; and frequently commit Rapines,
Murders, and the like horrid and detestable Villainies, and all to foment their
Luxury, and maintain their Profuseness. But, as for that sober person, who
contents himself with course and cheap food, such as Fruits and Sallets, Bread
and Water; who has bounded his desires with only the Necessaries of Nature;
what reason is there, why this man should stand in fear of Fortune? For, who is
there in the whole World so poor, as to want these things? and what malignity
of Fortune has ever reduced a man to a lower ebb, than Bread and Water?

XIV.
As for my self, truly (I speak modestly, and therefore may be permitted) I am
not only well content, but highly pleased with the Plants and Fruits growing in
these my own little Gardens; and have this Inscription over the door: Stranger,
Here, if you please, you may abide in a good condition; Here, the Supreme Good
is Pleasure; the Steward of this homely Cottage is hospitable, humane, and
ready to receive you; He shall afford you Barley broth, and pure Water of the
spring, and say Friend, are you not well entertained? For, these Gardens do not
invite Hunger, but satisfy it; nor increase your thirst with drinks, while
they should extinguish it, but wholly overcome it with a Natural and Grateful
Liquor.

XV.
And in this Pleasure have I grown old; finding upon my accounts, that my
expenses do not amount to quite a Halfpenny a day: and yet, in some certain
days, I abate somewhat of that too, and fare harder; and this, that I may
observe, whether that could detract awhit from my full pleasure, or whether
more then that were worth my labor of seeking after.

CHAP. XV.
Of Continence, opposed to Lust.
THE next species of Temperance, is Continence or Abstinence from the sensual
delights of Venus; which being never beneficial to any, and pernicious to most
(as we have already hinted) the forbearance of them must be an Eminent Virtue.

II.
For a man to abuse venereall delights with intemperance, is, in brief, to make
his life void of vigor, (...) Totus in estraenem ne abeas mulieris amorem;
Quippe Amor haud Deus est; tacita est Affectio cuique. Phocylid.
anxious with Cares, painful with Diseases, short in Duration: and therefore a
wise man ought not to suffer himself to be Captivated by the Charms of Love,
nor to conceive it to be a Divine Passion, and so to be indulged.

III.
And that he may be the less prone to be ensnared by the specious allurements
thereof, and want the chief Incentives and Fuel to the flames of Venus; let
him be punctual in the observance of a spare diet, than which nothing can be
more available to Continency, in as much as the plenty and turgescence of seed,
which arise from a too liberal diet, are both sparks and fuel to the fire of
Love. The Praeservatives next to this, are constant employment, especially
about the study and practice of Wisdom; and Meditation of those many and great
Incommodities, to which they are obnoxious, who suffer themselves to be carried
away by the violence of Love.

IV.
For, as to the Incommodities in the General of the immoderate courtship of
either Women or Boys; they are, Consumption of strength, decay of industry,
unfitness for business and labor, neglect of Domestic Prudence, impairment
of Estate, Pythagoras, interrogatus quando ad mulierem foret accedendum; quando
voles, inquit, fieri imbecillior. Ex Laertio, lib. 8.
Mortgages and Forfeitures, ruin of reputation and fame: and while the pamperd
Body shines again with jewels and other precious Ornaments, the poor neglected
Mind, as conscious to it self of its own Guilt, and wretchedness, becomes its
own continual Tormentor, for that it has spent the flower of life in dull and
slothful effeminacy, Res essesaluberrimas [(...)] citra saturitatem vesci, ad
laborem impigrum esse, and substantiam seminis conservare dixit Hippocrat. 6.
Epidem. Sect. 4.
and sufferd so many good years to be lost in that Nothing of Dalliance.

V.
And, as to the Special Incommodities; what Evil does it not draw upon a man,
to desire to have to do with that woman, whose company the Laws interdict him?
Doubtless a Wise man will be very far from admitting such a design into the
company of his thoughts; since he must be deterred from it even by that great
solicitude, that is necessary to the very praecaution of those many and great
Dangers, which threaten him therein: it being observable, that such as attempt
to enjoy forbidden women, are frequently rewarded with wounds, death,
imprisonment, banishment, and other grievous punishments. Whence it comes, that
(as we said before) for a Pleasure, which is but short, little, and
not-necessary, and which might have been either otherwise enjoyed, or wholly
omitted, men frequently expose themselves to very great pain, or most tedious
and fore repentance.

VI.
Besides, to be Incontinent, to resign up ones self to this one kind of
Pleasure, is it not in the mean time to defraud himself of other pleasures many
and great? which that man enjoyes, who living Continently and according to the
Laws, so applies himself to Wisdom, as that he does neither blunt the edge of
his mind, nor excruciate it with cares, nor perturb it with extravagant
Affections; and for his Body, he does neither enfeeble it with excessive
venery, nor vex and macerate it with Diseases, nor torment it with pains. And
so he comes to attain the summum Bonum, which (as we formerly insinuated) does
not result from the familiarity and embraces of Boys or Women, nor from the
taste of rare and delicious fishes, or other blandishments of a Table richly
furnished.

VII.
We need not to insist upon this; that there is no reason why any man should,
from this our Commendation of General abstinence from Venereal Embraces,
infer, that therefore a man ought to abstain from the legitimate and moderate
pleasures of the marriage bed: since, what our judgment is of that particular,
we have formerly declared. What is more necessary here to be added, is this;
that what we said, of Loves being no Divinely-immitted Affection, has this
importance, that if a man have no issue by his Wife, he is not to ascribe it to
the anger of those Imaginary Deities, Cupid and Venus, but only to some
Natural Defect, on his own or his Wifes side: and consequently that he is not
to hope to become a Father by Vows, Prayers, and solemn Sacrifices, rather than
by Natural Remedies.

VIII.
We superadd this also; that a wise man ought not to live after the beastly
manner of the Cynicks, or to deport himself with that Immodesty and Impudence,
which they not only show but boast of in public. For, when they plead, that
they therein follow the directions of Nature, and reprehend and deride us, for
calling such things Flagitious, Filthy, or shameful, which have no Turpitude
really, or in themselves; and calling by their names such things, as are full
of real Turpitude (for, to rob, defraud, commit adultery, is filthy in
reality, but named without obscoenity: and to beget a Child, is an act honest
and decent in it self, but obscoene in the name) and allegde diverse other
arguments against shamefastness: They seem not sufficiently to consider, that
they live in a Civil Society, and not single, and at random abroad in the
Fields, and after the manner of Wild Beasts.

IX.
For, from the time we have given up our names to a Society, Nature it self
commands us to observe the Laws and Customs of that Society; to the end, that
participating of the Common Goods, we draw no Evil upon our selves, such as is
the Infamy at least, or Ignominy, which follows upon that Impudence, or the
want of such shamefastness, as the Customs and Manners of the Society, wherein
we live, commonly praescribe, and from the observance of which in voice,
aspect, and other seemly gestures, that Verecundity, which all Virtuous persons
so worthily commend, is derived and denominated.

X.
Finally, we add, that it does not a little conduce, as to Verecundity in
special, so also to Continency in General, to abstain from Music and Poetry;
insomuch as they conjunctively afford those amorous songs, and passionate
streins of the voice, which diffusing themselves with a certain sweet violence
upon the sense, prove very strong Allurements and Incentives to Lust.

XI.
And this is the ground of our Opinion, that a Wise man ought to have no more
to do with either Music or Poetry, than what may consist with right Reason,
and the severe rules of Virtue. Because, while others being most easily taken
with the flattering temptations of each, indulgently devote themselves to both;
the Wise man duly perpending and foreseeing the Evil consequent upon them,
does wholly repudiate them: declaring, that Music is an allurement to drink,
an exhauster of moneys, a friend to Idleness, an impediment to every good,
honest and generous work; and that its sister Poetry is that, which has in all
ages corrupted men's manners, made them prone to all sorts of Vices, and chiefly
to Lust, and this by the Examples of even the Gods themselves. Whom the Poets
have feigned and frequently introduced as inflamed with Anger, so furiously
enraged with Lust: and in their Fables we read of not only their Divisions,
Animosities, Discords, Wars, Conflicts, Wounds, Deaths, but also their
Complaints, Laments, Imprisonments, Coition with Mortals, and Mortal Births
of Immortal Parents; and other the like Wildnesses, from which every man, in
his right mind, does abhor.

CHAP. XII.
Of Lenity, opposed to Anger.
ANother species of Temperance is Lenity, Mansuetude or Mildness;
comprehending also Clemency and Pity, or Commiseration. This is so excellent
an Antidote against the malignity of Anger, or the Desire of Revenge; that it
is worthily esteemed a most laudable Virtue: forasmuch as Anger, if high and
excessive, is a perfect Madness, for the time. For, in a fit of anger, the
mind is inflamed, the light of reason eclipsed, the blood boyls with choler,
the eyes sparkle with fire, the breast distended and ready to burst with rage,
the teeth gnasht, the voice interrupted, the hairs stand on end, the face
glowing with heat, and distorted with menacing postures, becoms horrid,
truculent, and frightfull; so that all the frame or economy of Nature seems
wholly subverted, and the mind as well to have lost the command of it self, as
to have forgotten all decency and Decorum: but then comes Lenity, and that
recomposeth all again, becalms the mind, and keeps it in such a becoming
temper, as that it is neither moved in it self, nor suffers any passionate
eruption or salley of the spirits and blood forth into the members, that may
cause any the least indecorum.

II.
But, forasmuch as anger is commonly kindled and blown into a flame by the
opinion of some injury received; and no man does an injury to an other, but
upon the score of either Hatred, or Envy, or Despite and Contempt: how can it
be, that a Wise man should so bear an injury, as to deport himself with Lenity
and sweetness toward him, who offered him that injury? Why, truly, only by
committing himself to the Government of right Reason, Velle, improbi ne
peccent, insaniae est: id enim, quod fieri non potest, appetit. Tum concedere,
ut adversus alios tales sint: sed ne in re peccent postulate, and stolidum est
and tyrannicum etiam. Marcus Antonin. de seipso, lib. 2^ Sect. 18.
by which we have already declared he is to fortify himself against the blows
of Fortune. For, he accounts an injury among Casualties, or things of mere
Chance; and well knows, that it is not in his power, to make other men just,
honest, and superior to the transports of unruly passions: and therefore he is
as little moved by wrongs done him by men, as by the incommodities or losses
sustained by misfortune, Quando alterius cujuspiam impudentia offenderis,
statim sic percontare teipsum; Fierine ergo potest, ut impudentes in mundo ne
sint? non potest; tu itaque quod non potest, ne poscas. Idem eodem lib. Sect.
42.
and generally by any other event occasioned by things beyond his power of
ordering and controlment.

III.
He is not moved (for example) by those extreme Heats and Colds of different
seasons or tempests; because he knows the Nature of such seasons to be such, as
he cannot alter. Nor is he moved by injuries, which petulant, dishonest and
malevolent men do him, because it is from the depravity of their nature that
they do them: and it is not in his power to amend that depravity, and make them
do otherwise. Again, he conceives it not to be Congruous to Reason and Wisdom,
to add one Evil to another (i. e. to the harm arising to him from Causes
without him, to superadd a greater harm from Causes within him, Optimus
injuriam ulciscendi modus est, inferenti ne sis similis: Marcus Antoninus, in
de seipso lib. 6. S. 6.
namely, to raise a perturbation in his mind, by opinion) or because an other
man would afflict his mind with vexation and anxiety, thereupon to be so
foolish, as by admitting and fomenting that vexation, to prosper that design,
and gratify the evil intention of his Enemy.

IV.
Fit it is, we confess, that a Wise man should so far look to his Good Name,
and be careful of his Reputation, as not to lie open to Contempt and Scorn;
seeing there are some Pleasures that arise to a man from a Good Fame, and the
esteem from thence resulting; as on the contrary there are some Troubles, that
arise from Contempt, and the Consequents thereof: but yet is he not to be
tender of his Good Name so much for the Revenging of injuries, or offending of
those that do them; as for living well and innocently, and giving no man a just
cause or occasion of Contumely and Malediction. For, thus to do, is wholly in
his own power: not to hinder an other from discharging the malignity of his
Nature upon him.

V.
Hereupon, in case a person, who has, though without cause, conceived an anger
against you, and declared himself your Adversary, shall demand any thing of
you, upon praetext of expiation or satisfaction; you are not to refuse to give
it him: provided, what he demand be Lawful, Minuti semper and infirmi est
animi, exiguique voluptas. Ultio; continuo sic collige, quod vindicta
Honorable, and conducible to your certain security from his rage; because he
differs not from an angry and invading Dog, and so is to be appeased with a
morsel. Nevertheless nothing is either more honorable, or more safe, than to
confront his malice with Innocence of life, Nemo magis gaudet, jam foemina.
Iuvenal Sat. 13
and the security of your own Conscience, and for the rest, to declare your
self to be above his injuries.

VI.
Moreover, it may come to pass, that a wise man may be sued at Law, brought to
the Bar, and there in the face of the whole Court suffer not only injuries, but
gross calumnies, false accusations, yea, and receive condemnation: and yet he
ought still to remember, that though it be in his power to live uprightly and
Virtuously, yet it is not in his power not to fall into the hands of such, as
may show themselves Envious, malignant and unjust toward him; nor to hinder
them from accusing him contrary to all right and equity, or himself from
receiving a sentence from unrighteous Judges. It becomes him not therefore to
be angry with either his Accusers, or the Witnesses, or the Judges; but
trusting in a good Conscience, still to keep up his Lenity and Tranquillity at
the highest: and accounting himself far above this infortune, to entertain it
without fear or trouble, and deport himself toward his Judges with constant
courage and serene boldness.

VII.
Now, there is not why any man should Object, that what we here advise
concerning Lenity, is repugnant to what we formerly said of the Wise man's
Chastising of his offending Servants: Because we there limited this Castigation
only to Refractary, obstinately Perverse and disobedient Servants: and manifest
it is, that punishment ought to be inflicted as well upon the delinquents in a
private Family, as in a State or Commonwealth; and as the Prince, or
Magistrate does punish the Crimes of Subjects without anger at their Persons;
so likewise may the Master of a Family punish the offenses of his Servants, not
only with Lenity, but Good will also to their persons.

VIII.
We add, that a Wise man is not only to bear injuries from others, with Lenity;
nor only to pardon the faults of his Servants, with mildness and sweetness:
but even with kindness to encourage and gratulate such as Repent of, and
resolve to reform their evil ways. For, since the first degree of
Reformation, is the Knowledge of ones Fault; therefore is this Gratulation and
Encouragement to be given to the penitent Delinquent, that as he is affected
with contrition and horror at the apprehension of the foulness of his offense,
so he may be reanimated by the pulchritude of what he ought to have done
formerly, or is to do in the future.

CHAP. XVII.
Of Modesty, opposed to Ambition.
COncerning this great Virtue, which is the Fourth branch of Temperance, there
is very little need of saying more, than what we have formerly intimated, when
we declared it not to be the part of a Wise man, to affect Greatness, or
Power, or Honors in a Commonwealth; but so to contain himself, as rather to
live not only privately, but even obscurely and concealed in some secure
corner. And therefore the advice we shall chiefly inculcat in this place, shall
be the very same we usually give to our best friends. Live private and
concealed (unless some circumstance of state call you forth to the assistance
of the Public) insomuch as Experience frequently confirms the truth of that
proverbiall saying, He has well lived, who has well concealed himself.

II.
Certainly, it has been too familiarly observed, that many, who had mounted up
to the highest pinnacle of Honor, have been on a sudden, and as it were with a
Thunderbolt, thrown down to the bottom of Misery and Contempt: and so been
brought, though too late, to acknowledge, that it is much better for a man
quietly and peaceably to obey; than by laborious Climbing up the craggy Rocks
of Ambition, to aspire to Command and Sovereignty; and to set his foot rather
upon the plain and humble ground, than upon that slippery height, from which
all that can be with reason expected, is a praecipitous and ruinous Downfall.
Besides, are not those Grandees, upon whom the admiring multitude gaze, as upon
refulgent Comets and Prodigies of Glory and Honor; are they not, we say, of
all men the most unhappy, in this one respect, that their breasts swarm with
most weighty and troublesome Cares, that uncessantly gall and corrode their very
Hearts? Beware, therefore, how you believe that such live securely and
tranquilly: since it is impossible but those, who are feared by many, should
themselves be in continual fear of some.

III.
Though you see them to be in a manner environed with Power, to have Navies
numerous enough to send abroad into all Seas, to be in the heads of mighty and
victorious Armies, to be guarded with well armed and faithful Legions; yet for
all this take heed you do not conceive them to be the only Happy men, nay, that
they partake so much as of one sincere Pleasure: for all these things are mere
pageantry, shadows gilded, and ridiculous Dreams; insomuch as Fear and Care are
not things that are afraid of the noise of Arms, or regard the brightness of
Gold, or the splendour of Purple, but boldly intrude themselves even into the
Hearts of Princes and Potentates, and like the Poets Vultur, daily gnaw and
consume them.

IV.
Beware likewise, that you do not conceive, that the Body is made one whit the
more strong, or healthy, by the Glory, Greatness and Treasures of Monarchy;
especially when you may daily observe, that a Fever does as violently and long
hold him, who lies upon a bed of Tissue, under a Covering of Tyrian Scarlet, as
him that lies upon a Mattress, and has no Covering but Rags; and that we have
no reason to complain of the want of Scarlet Robes, of Golden Embroideries,
jewels, and ropes of Pearl, while we have a Course and easy Garment to keep
away the Cold. And what if you, lying cheerfully and serenely upon a truss of
clean straw, covered with rags, should gravely instruct men, how vain those
are, who with astonished and turbulent minds gape and thirst after the Trifles
of Magnificence, not understanding how few and small those things are, which
are requisite to an happy life? believe me, your Discourse would be truly
magnificent and High; because delivered by one, whose own happy Experience
confirms it.

V.
What though your House do not shine with silver and gold Hatchments; nor your
arched roofs resound with the multiplied Echoes of loud Music; nor your walls
be not thickly beset with golden Figures of beautiful youths holding great
lamps in their extended arms, to give light to your nightly Revels and
sumptuous Banquets: why yet, truly, it is not awhit less (if not much more)
pleasant, to repose your wearied limbs, upon the Green Grass, to sit by some
cleanly and purling stream, under the refreshing shade of some well-branched
Tree, especially in the Spring time, when the head of every Plant is crowned
with beautiful and fragrant Flowers, the merry Birds entertaining you with the
music of their Wild notes, the fresh Western Winds continually fanning your
heats, and all Nature smiling upon you.

VI.
Wherefore, when any man may, if he please, thus live at peace and liberty
abroad in the open Fields, or his own Gardens; what reason is there, why he
should affect and pursue Honors, and not rather modestly bound his Desires
with the Calmnesse and security of that Condition? For, to hunt after Glory, by
the ostentation of Virtue, of Science, of Eloquence, of Nobility, of Wealth, of
Attendants, of rich Cloths, of Beauty, of Garb, and the like: seriously, it is
altogether the Fame of ridiculous Vanity; and in all things Modesty exacts no
more then this, that we do not, through Rusticity, want of a decent Garb, or
too much Negligence, do any thing, that does not correspond with Civility and
Decorum. For, it is equally vile, and does as much denote a Base or Ahject
mind, to grow insolent and Lofty upon the possession of these adjuncts of
Magnificence: as to become Dejected, or sink in Spirit, at the Loss or want of
them.

VII.
Now, according to this rule, if a Wise man chance to have the Statues, or
Images of his Ancestors, or other Renowned Persons of Former Ages; he will be
very far from being proud of them, from showing them as Badges of Honor, from
affecting a Glory from the Generosity of their Actions and Achievements: and
as far from wholly neglecting them, but will place them (as Memorialls of
Virtue) indifferently either in his Porch, or Gallery, or elsewhere.

VIII.
Now will he be sollicitous about the manner, Nec tu mulum curo; sepelit Natura
relictos.
or place of his Sepulture; or command his Executors to bestow any great Cost,
or Pomp and Ceremony, Nil agis hac ira; tabesne Cadavera solvar, an rogus, haud
refert; placido Natura receptat cuncta sinu. Lucan. lib. 7.
at his Funeral. The chief subject of his care will be, what may be
beneficial and pleasant to his successors: being well assured, that as for his
dead Corpse, it will little concern him, what becoms of it. For* to propagate
Vanity even beyond Death, is the highest madness: and not much inferior
thereto is the Fancy of some, who in their lives are afraid to have their
Carcasses torn by the teeth of Wild Beasts, after their death. For, if that be
an Evil; why is it not likewise an Evil, to have the Dead Corpse burned,
Embalmed and immersed in Honey, Mel enim tanta adversus putredinem facultate in
signitum est, ut Babylonii nebilium Cadavera eadem sepelirent; ut Herodotus, in
Thalia, testis est.
to grow cold and stiff under a ponderous Marble, to be pressed down by the
weight of Earth and passengers.

CHAP. XVIII.
Of Moderation, opposed to Avarice.
NOw comes Moderation, or that Disposition of the Mind, which makes a man
contented with a little, and than which he can hardly possess a greater Good.
For, to be content with little, is the highest preferment, the greatest wealth
in the world: as on the other side, great riches without moderation, are but
great poverty. Thus, to have wherewithal to prevent Hunger, Thirst, and Cold;
is a Felicity not much inferior to that of Divintiy: and who so possesses so
much, and desires no more, however the world may account him poor, he really is
the Richest man alive.

II.
And how honest a thing is this Poverty, when it is Cheerful, serene and
Contented with only what is sufficient, i. e. with those riches of Nature,
which suffice to preserve from Hunger, from Thirst, from Cold? Truly, seeing
that these riches of Nature are Terminated and easily acquirable; but those,
that are coveted out of vain opinions, are difficult in the acquisition, and
have no measure, no end: we ought to be highly thankful to the Wisdom and
Bounty of Nature, which made those things easily procurable, that are
Necessary; and those Unnecessary, that are hard to come by.

III.
Again, since it behooves a Wise man to be always Confident, that in the whole
course of his life he shall never want Necessaries, does not the very easy
parability of such few, small, cheap and common things, as are Necessary,
abundantly cherish that Confidence in him? when, on the other side, the
Difficulty of acquiring those many, great, sumptuous and rare things, that
belong to superfluity and magnificence, cannot but very much stagger and weaken
it. And this clearly is the Reason, why the vulgar, though they have great
possessions, do yet uncessantly toil and afflict themselves in the acquisition
of more: as if they feared to outlive their riches, and come to want, what, if
they used with Moderation, they could never live to spend.

IV.
This considered, let us endeavor to Content our selves with what is most
simple and most easily procurable; remembering, that not all the wealth of the
world, congested into one heap, can avail in the least measure to cure the
least disease, or perturbation of the Mind: whereas mean Riches, such as Nature
offers to us, and are most useful to remove thar indigence, which is
incommodious to the Body; as they are the occasion of no Care or other passion,
during life; so will it not be grievous to us to part with them, when we think
of Death.

V.
Miserable truly, are the Minds of men, and their Hearts surrounded with
blindness; in that they will not see, that Nature does dictate nothing more to
them than this: that they should supply the wants of the Body, and for the
rest, enjoy a well pleased mind, without care, without Fear; not that they
should spend their days in scraping together more than Nature knows how to
make use of, and that with greediness, as if they meant to outlive Death, to
prevent want in their graves, or never bethought themselves of the uncertainty
of life, and how deadly a Potion we all drink at our very entrance into the
World.

VI.
What though those things, which are purely Necessary, and in respect whereunto
no man can be poor, do not afford those Delights, which Vulgar minds so much
love and court; yet Nature does not want them, nor does she in the mean time
cease to afford real and sincere Pleasures in the fruition of mere
Necessaries, as we abundantly declared. Hereupon the Wise man stands not only
so indifferently affected toward those things, in relation whereunto money is
desired (such are Love, Ambitition, Luxury, etc. all which require expenses to
maintain them) but so far above them, as that he has no reason either to
desire or care for money.

VII.
Now, as for what we said, of the Immensity of such Riches, as are coveted upon
the suggestion of vain Opinions; the Reason of it is this, that when Nature is
satisfied with Little, vain Opinion ushering in Desire, always engages the
mind to think of something, which it does not possess, and, as if it were
really needful, converts and fixes the Desire wholly and entirely upon it.
Whence it comes, that to him, who is not satisfied with a little, nothing can
ever be enough: but still the more wealth he possesses, the more he conceives
himself to want.

VIII.
Wherefore, seeing there can never be want of a Little, the Wise man,
doubtless, while he possesses that little, ought to account it very great
Riches: because therein is no want, whereas other riches, though great in
esteem, are really very small, because they want multiplication to infinity.
Whence it follows, that he who thinks not his own Estate, how small soever,
sufficiently ample; though he should become Lord of the whole World, will ever
be miserable. For, Misery is the companion of Want; and the same vain opinion,
which first persuaded him that his own Estate was not sufficient, will continue
to persuade him that one World is not sufficient, but that he wants more and
more to infinity.

IX.
Have you, then, a design to make any one Rich indeed? Know, that the way is
not by adding to his Riches, but by Detracting from his desires. For, when
having cut off all vain and superfluous desires from his breast, he shall so
compose himself to the praescripts of Nature, as to covet no more than she
needs and requires: then at length shall he find himself to be a Rich man in
reality, because he shall then find that Nothing is wanting to him. Hereupon
may you also inculcate this maxim to him; If you live according to Nature, you
shall never be poor: but if according to Opinion, you shall nover be rich.
Nature desires little, Opinion infinite.

X.
Truly, this Disposition, or (if you please) Faculty of the mind, whereby a man
moderating himself, cuts off the desire of whatsoever is not Necessary to
Nature, and contents himself with provisions the most simple and most easily
procurable; this Disposition, we say, is that, which begets that Security, that
is perceived in a pleasant Retirement, and Avoidance of the Multitude;
forasmuch as by the benefit thereof, when a man converseth with crowds of
people, he shall want no more, than when he lives sequestered.

XI.
Finally, when a man wants this Faculty of Detracting or Abdicating from his
Desires, whatever is not purely Necessary; how great is the Misery, to which he
is continually subject? his mind being, like a vessel full of holes, always
in filling, but never full. And certainly (that we may not insist upon this,
that most, who have heaped up vast masses of Wealth, have therein found only a
Change, not an End of their misery; either because they loaded themselves with
new Cares, to which they were not subject before; or because they gave them
occasion to fall into new Vices, from the snares whereof they had formerly
escaped) this alone is a very high misery; for a man to have his Appetite
Increased by the satisfaction of it, i. e. the more plentifully he feeds, the
more to be tormented with hunger.

CHAP. XIX.
Of Mediocrity betwixt Hope and Despair of the Future.
FInally, since all Cupldity, or Desire whatever is carried to that, which is
not possessed, but proposed as possible to be attained, and accompanied with
some Hope of obtaining it; and that Hope, as it were nursing and cherishing
that Desire, is accompanied with a certain pleasure; as the opposite to Hope,
Desperation, creating and fomenting Fear, that what is desired may not be
obtained, is accompanied with a certain Trouble: upon these considerations, it
seems necessary for us to bring up the rear of this File of Virtues, with the
discourse of Mediocrity; which is of very great use, as well in respect of
objects in the General, either hoped for, or despaired of, in the Future; as
in particular of the Duration, or rather perpetuity of life, whereof as there
is a Desire kindled in the breasts of most men, so does the Despair of it
torment them.

II.
In the first place, therefore, we are to adhaere to this, as a General Rule;
that what is to come, if it be in the number of simple Contingents, is neither
absolutely ours, nor absolutely Not ours. More plainly; we are neither so to
hope for a thing that is Contingent, as if it were certainly to come; because
it may be prevented or diverted by some cross accident intervenient: Nor so to
despair of it, as if it were certainly not to come; because it may fall out,
that no Accident may intervene to prevent or divert it. For, by the observation
of this maxim, we shall reap the benefit of Moderation; so as not being
destitute of all Hope, we shall not be without some Pleasure: and being
altogether frustrated of our hopes, we shall be affected with no trouble.

III.
For, herein consists the Difference betwixt the Wise man and the Fool; that
the Wise does, indeed, expect things Future, but not depend upon them, and in
the mean time enjoyes the Goods that are present (by considering how great and
pleasant they are) and gratefully remembers what are past: but the fool, fixing
all his thoughts and dependence upon the Future; makes (as we said in the
beginning) his whole life unpleasant and full of fears.

IV.
And how many may we daily see, who neither remember goods past, nor enjoy
present? They are wholly taken up with Expectation of Future things, and those
being uncertain, they are perpetually afflicted with anguish of mind, with
fear, and at length become most grievously perplexed, when they too late
perceive, that they have in vain addicted themselves to the getting of Riches,
or Honors, or Power, or Glory: in respect they fail of obtaining those
Pleasures, with the hopes whereof being enflamed, they had undergone many and
great Difficulties and Labors. That we may not say any thing of that other
sort of fools, who being abject and narrow-hearted, despair of all things, and
are for the most part, Malevolent, Envious, Morose, Shunners of the light,
Evill-speakers, Monsters.

V.
Now the Reason, why we say, that the wise man does gratefully remember Goods
Past, is, because we are generally too ungrateful toward the time Praeterite,
and do not call to mind, nor account among Pleasures, the Good things we have
formerly received: forasmuch as no Pleasure is more certain, than what cannot
now be taken from us. For, present Goods are not yet Consummate and wholly
solid; some chance or other may intervene and cut them off in half; Future
things hang upon the pin of uncertainty, what is already Past, is only safe and
inamissible.

VI.
And among Past Goods we account not only such as we have enjoyed; but also our
Avoidance of all those Evils, that might have fallen upon us; and our
Liberation or Deliverance from such other Evils as did fall upon us, and might
have lasted much longer; as also the Recordation, Reputation, Gratulation, that
we sustained them Constantly and Bravely.

VII.
As for the Desire of Prolonging life to Eternity (the special Evil to be
prevented by Mediocrity) we have already hinted, that a Wise man is to
entertain no such desire: because thereupon instantly succeeds Desperation,
which is always accompanied with Trouble and Anguish. And this Cogitation
imports thus much, that the greater Pleasure cannot be received from an Age of
infinite Duration, than may be received from this, which we know to be finite;
provided a man measure the Ends of it by Right Reason.

VIII.
For, seeing that to measure the Ends of Pleasure by right reason, is only to
conceive, that the Supreme pleasure is no other but an Exemption from Pain and
Perturbation; it is a manifest Consequence, that the Supreme Pleasure of man
cannot be increased by the Length, nor Diminished by the shortness of Time.

IX.
The Hopes of a more prolonged Pleasure, or of a longer Age, we confess, may
seem to render the present Pleasure more Intense; but, it can seem so only to
such, who measure the Ends of Pleasure not by right Reason, but by vain
opinion, and the Consequent thereof, Desire; and who look upon themselves so,
as if, when they shall cease to be, they should be sensible of some trouble
from the privation of Pleasure, as they might in case they should survive. And
hence it comes, that perfectly to understand, that Death does nothing concern
us; makes us fully to enjoy this Mortal Life, not by adding thereunto any
thing of uncertain Time, but by Cutting off all Desires of Immortality.

X.
Wherefore, since Nature has prescribed certain bounds or Ends to the
Pleasures of the Body; and the Desire of Eternal Duration takes them wholly
away: necessary it is, that the mind, or Reason supervene, so as by
ratiocinating upon those ends, and expunging all desires of Sempiternity, to
make life in all points perfect and consummate, and us so fully content
therewith, as not to want any longer Duration.

XI.
And this Reasoning moreover, causes, that we shall not be frustrated of
Pleasure even then, when Death shall take us by the hand, and show us the
period of all these mortal things, insomuch as we shall thereby attain to the
perfect, and so delectable End of a very Good Life, rising from the table of
the World as Guests well satisfied with the Good Entertainments of life, and
having duly performed all those Duties, which to perform, we received life.

CHAP. XX.
Of Fortitude, in General.
HItherto of Temperance, and the Chief sorts of it, respective to the Chief
Objects of our Cupidities. We are now come to a new Lesson, FORTITUDE; which we
called the other part of Honesty, in respect that the use of it is against
Fear, and all its Causes, and that those, who behave themselves, in any
Difficulty or Dangerous Enterprise, as especially in War (from which the Vulgar
seem to have transferred the word to all Generous actions) not timidly and
unmanly, but Courageously and valiantly, are generally said to behave
themselves Honestly and Becomingly.

II.
That this Virtue also is to be embraced, in order to Pleasure, may be inferred
from hence; that neither the undergoing of great labors, nor the suffering of
great pains, are things inviting and desirable in themselves; as likewise is
not Patience, nor Assiduity, nor Watchings, nor Industry it self, which is so
highly commended; nay, nor Fortitude: but the reason why we commend, and pursue
them, is to the End we may live without Care and Fear, and so free both body
and mind (as much as possible) from all molestation.

III.
For, as by the Fear of Death (for example) the quiet of life is wholly
perturbed; and as to yield to pains, and endure them with a dejected and weak
mind, is a great misery, and by that baseness and weakness of Spirit, many
have uttterly lost their Parents, Friends, Country, and most themselves: so, on
the other side, does a strong and sublime mind make a man free from all Care
and Anguish, insomuch as it contemns Death, upon this account, that all who
suffer it, are in the same case, as before they were in being; and is fortified
against all Pains, as being assured, that the greatest pains are soon
determined by Death, that small pains have many intervalls of quiet, that mean
pains are not above our patience; that if they be tolerable, they are to be
endured with constancy, which much mitigates them; and if intolerable, he is
quietly to depart the world, as a Theater that does not please him.

IV.
Now, from these considerations it is plain, that Timidity and unmanlinesse are
not to be dispraised, nor Fortitude and Patience to be praised, for their own
sakes: but those are Rejected, because they induce Pain; and these Embraced,
because they produce Pleasure.

V.
And, as for what we said of the Efficacy of Fortitude both against Fear, and
all things that are wont to cause it; the intent of it is, that we may
understand, that they are the very same Evils, which torment when they are
present, and are feared, when expected as future: and consequently that we
learn not to fear those Evils, which we either feign to our selves, or any
ways apprehend as to come; and with Constancy and Patience to endure those
that are present.

VI.
Now, among such Evils, as we Imagine to our selves but are not really Future,
the chiefest are those which we fear either from the Gods, as if they were
Evil themselves, or could be the Authors of any Evil to us; or from Death, as
if that were evil in it self, or brought us to some eternal Evil after it:
and among such Evils, as are in possibility, and may come, and do sometimes
come and affect us with pain and trouble; they are all such, as infer either
Pain upon the Body, or Discontent upon the Mind.

VII.
Those which produce Pain, are Diseases, Scourgings, Fire; Sword, etc. and
those which induce Discontent, are External Evils, and either Public, of
which sort are Tyranny, Wars, destruction of ones Country, Pestilence, Famine,
and the like; or Private, of which sort are Servitude, Banishment,
Imprisonment, Infamy, Loss of Friends, Wife, Children, Estate, etc.

VIII.
Now, the difference betwixt all these things, on the one part, and pain and
discontent on the other, is this; that Pain and Discontent are absolute evils
in themselves: the others are evils only Respectively, or as they may be the
Causes of pain and discontent; nor is there any reason, why they should be
avoided, unless in that respect only.

IX.
Upon the Chief of these Causes of fear we shall touch, and in order as they
are here enumerated. In the mean time be pleased to observe, that Fortitude is
a Disposition of the mind, not ingenerate by Nature, but acquired by long
consulting with Reason. For, Fortitude is very much different from Audacity,
Ferocity, inconsiderate Temerity, which is found even in the Bruit Animals: and
being proper to man, and to such men only as act according to Prudence, and
the advice of right Reason; is not to be measured by the hot Temperament and
strength of the Body, but by the firmness of the Mind, constantly adhaering to
an honest intention or purpose.

CHAP. XXI.
Of Fortitude, opposed to the Fear of the Gods.
IN the first place it seems convenient, that we discuss a certain Twofold
Fear, much transcending all others; forasmuch as if any thing has produced the
Supreme Pleasure, and that which is proper to the Mind; doubtless, it has
been the Expunction of all such Opinions, as have impressed the greatest Fears
upon the Mind. For, such is the condition of miserable Mortals, that they are
generally led, not by sound opinions, but by some certain Affection void of
Reason: and so, not defining Evil by reality, but imagination, they render
themselves obnoxious to, and frequently suffer as high perturbations from such
things, as they only Imagine to themselves, as if they were Real.

II.
And that, which is the Ground of the Greatest Fear, and consequently of the
Greatest Perturbation to men, is this; that conceiving there are certain
Blissfull and Immortal Natures (which they call Gods) in the World, they do
yet think them to have such Wills, such Passions, such Operations, as are
plainly repugnant to those Attributes of Beatitude and Immortality; such are
perpetual solicitude, Employments, Fits of Anger and Kindness: and hereupon
they infer, that Losses and Afflictions are by way of punishment, derived to
Evil men, and Protection and Benefits, by way of reward and encouragement,
derived to Good men, from the Gods. For, Men, being nursed up in their own, i.
e. Human affections, imagine and admit Gods in most things like themselves: and
what they find incorrespondent to their own inclinations and passions; the very
same they conclude to be incompetent to the Deities.

III.
Hereupon it cannot be expressed, how great unhappiness Mankind has drawn upon
it self, by ascribing such attributes to the Gods, as resemble those of Human
nature, and especially those of Anger and Vindictivenesse; in respect whereof
men's minds being made low and abject, as if the Gods perpetually threatened to
call them to a severe account for their actions, and to inflict punishment upon
them: you shall scarcely find a man, who is not appaled and struck with terror,
at every clap of Thunder, at every Earthquake, at every high wind, at every
storm at Sea, and the like natural occurrents.

IV.
But, so are not Those, who being educated in the school of Reason, have
learned, that the Gods live in perptuall security and Tranquillity; and that
their Blisfull Nature is so far removed from us and our Affairs, as that they
can neither be Pleased, nor Displeased at our actions. And, unfeignedly, if
they were touched with Anger at our misdeeds, or heard the prayers of men: the
whole race of man would soon be destroyed; there being not an hour, wherein
Millions of men do not imprecate mischief and destruction each to other.

V.
Be very Cautious, therefore, that when you have conceived God to be an
Immortal and Blissfull Nature (or Animal, as the common Notion, concerning
God, does suggest) you do not destroy that Conception, by giving any other
Attribute to him, which may be either inconsistent with, or repugnant to those
of his Beatitude and Immortality.

VI.
Gods, in truth, there are; for the Knowledge of them is evident, as we have
elsewhere declared: but, they are not such as men commonly conceive and
describe them to be. For, when they have described them to be Immormortall and
Blissfull, they contradict themselves, by affixing other Repugnant Attributes
upon them; as that they are always taken up with business themselves, and
create business for others; that they are affected with pleasure or displeasure
at the good or bad Actions of men; that they are delighted with human adoration
and sacrifices, etc. all which presuppose great Disquiet, Imbecility, Fear,
and the want of external assistance.

VII.
Nor need you fear, that this Tenent should subject you to the censure of being
Impious; because, in truth, He is not Impious, who denies and casheirs the
Vulgar Gods of the multitude: but he who ascribes to the Gods the opions of the
multitude. For, those are not Genuine Praenotions, but False Opinions, which
are commonly delivered by men, concerning the Gods.

VIII.
By the same reason likewise, he is not the truly Pious man, who bows down upon
every stone, sacrifices upon every Altar, and besprinkles the doors of every
Temple with the blood of victims: but, He, who contemplating all things with a
serene and quiet mind, frames to himself, out of a genuine Praenotions, true
and correspondent conceptions concerning the Divine Nature; and being thereunto
induced, not by hope or reward, but merely by apprehension of the Majesty and
Supreme Excellency of its essence, does love it, and worship it with the
highest Reverence and Veneration of his mind; and admitting no such
Cogitations, as may suggest any Opinion repugnant to its Attributes, and
destructive to the Veneration due unto it, does thereby exempt himself from
that base fear, which others suffer, in whose minds that Contrariety of
Attributes does beget the highest and most lasting of all Perturbations.

CHAP. XXII.
Of Fortitude, opposed to the Fear of Death.
THE other thing which invades, and strikes the Minds of men with extreme Fear
and Terror, is Death; and this, because of we know not what Everlasting Evils,
that are expected, immediately to ensue thereupon (and that is very strange,
you will say, that men should fear to suffer Evil, then when they shall be
deprived of all sense, and utterly cease to be) they being ignorant, that all
those solemn stories, that are commonly told of Hell, Rhadamanth, the Furies,
etc. are the mere Fictions of Poets: and that if they contain any thing of
truth in them, they are but cunning allusions to the miseries, which many men
suffer during life, since those, who are uncessantly vexed with vain Fears,
superfluous Cares, insatiable Desires, and other violent Passions, lead lives
so truly miserable, as that they may well be said, to suffer the torments of
Hell.

II.
That you may exempt your self, Nil igitur mors est, ad nos neque pertinet
hilum. and mox; Multo igitur mortem minus ad nos esse putandum, si minus esse
potest, quam quod nihil esse videmus; Lucret. lib. 3.
therefore, from these Terrors; accustom your mind to this thought, That Death
does nothing concern us; and upon this Argument: whatever of Good or Evil we
are capable of in life, we are capapable thereof only in respect of our Sense;
but, Death is a Privation of all Sense, therefore, etc. That Death is a
Privation of all Sense, is consequent from hence, that it is a Dissolution; and
what is once dissolved, must henceforth remain without all Sense. So that Death
seems a thing most easily Contemptible; insomuch as it is an ineffectuall
Agent, and in vain threatens pain, where the Patient is destroyed, and so
cease to be capable of pain.

III.
True it is, indeed, and too true, that men generally abhor Death, sometimes
because they look upon it as the Greatest of Pains, sometimes because they
apprehend it as the Cessation of all their Enjoyments, or Privation of all
things that are Dear to them in life; but in both these Respects, altogether
without Cause: since this thing, Not-to-live, or Not-to-be, ought to be no
occasion of Terror; because when once we come to that, we shall have no faculty
left whereby to know, that Not-to-live has any thing of Evil in it.

IV.
Hereupon we may conclude that those are great Fools who abhor to think,
that after Death their Bodies should be torn by wild beasts, burned in the
flame of the funeral pile, devoured by worms, etc. for, they do not
consider, that then they shall not be, and so not feel, nor complain, that
they are torn, burned, devoured by corruption or worms. And that those are
Greater Fools, who take it grievously, that they shall no longer enjoy the
conversation of their Wives, Children, Friends, no longer do them good
offices, nor afford them their assistance; for these do not consider, that
then they shall have no longer Relation to, nor Desire of Wife, Children,
Friends, or any thing else.

V.
We said, Natura sic se habet, ut quomodo initium rerum omnium ortus noster
afferat; sic exitum Mors; quae ut nihil pertinuit ad nos ante ortum, sic nihil
post mortem pertinebit. In quo quid potest esse mali, cum mors nec ad vivos
pertineat, nec ad mortuos? Alteri nulli sunt; alteros non attingit. Cicero,
Tuscul. lib. 1.
that Death (accounted the King of Terrors, and most horrid of all Evils) does
nothing concern us, because, while we are, Death is not; and when Death is, we
are not; so that he, who profoundly considers the matter, will soon conclude
that Death does concern neithe Living, nor the Dead; not the living, because
it yet touches them not, not the Dead, because they are not.

VI.
And, Paratus exire sum; and ideo fruor vita, quia quamdiu futurum hoc sit, non
nimis pendeo. Seneca Epist. 61.
as the assurance of this that Death nothing concerns us, does exempt us from
the greatest of Terrors, so also does it make us to enjoy life to the most
advantage of pleasure, not by adding thereunto any thing of uncertain Time,
but by Detracting all desire of Immortality. For, in life there can be nothing
of Evil to him, who does perfectly understand, that there can be nothing of
Evil in the privation of life.

VII.
Again, He cannot be excused of Folly, who says, that He fears Death, not
because of any Trouble or Anguish that it can bring, when it comes; but because
of the perpetual Grief, and Horror, wherewith it afflicts the mind, till it
comes, or while it is expected: forasmuch as that, which can bring no trouble
or anguish with it, when it comes, ought not to make us sad before it comes.
Certainly, if therebe any thing of Incommodity, or Fear in the business of
Death, it is the fault of him that is Dying, not of Death it self: nor is
there any trouble in Death, more than there is after it, and it is no less
folly to fear Death, than to fear old Age, since as old Age follows close
upon the heels of youth, so does Death upon the heels of old Age.

VIII.
Further, we are to hope at least, that when we come to the point of Death, and
are even at the last gasp, either we shall feel no pain, or such as will be
very short; for as much as no pain that is Great, can be Long; and so every man
ought to be confident, that though the dissolution of his Soul and Body be
accompanied with some torment; yet after that is once past, he shall never feel
more.

IX.
That Philosopher was very ridiculous, who admonishes the young man to live
Honestly, and the old body Honestly; because a Good Life and a Good Death are
not things to be parted, and the Meditation of living honestly and dying
honestly, is one and the same: and this in respect that a young man may die
Immaturely; and to an old man something of life is remaining, and the last act
of his life is a part, yea, and the Crown of his whole life.

X.
And both young and old are to consider this, that though man may provide for
his Security, as to other things; yet against Death there is no security, the
youngest nor strongest cannot promise themselves immunity from it, for so much
as one hour; all men living as it were in a City without Walls, without Gates,
to keep out that common Enemy.

XI.
Moreover a young man may die Happy, who considers with himself, that should he
live a thousand years, yet he could but see and act over the same things again:
and an old man may live Unhappy, who, like a vessel full of holes, receives
the Goods of life only to let them run through him, Cur non ut plenus vitae
conviva recedis? Iucret. lib. 3. Rarus, qui exacto contentus tempore vitae.
Cedit, uti conviva satur. Flaccus, Satyr. 1.
and so is never full of them, nor as a sober Guest of Nature, after a
plentiful meal of all her best dishes, willing to rise and go take his rest.

XII.
This considered, we are not to account an old man Happy, in that he died full
of years, but in that he dyed full of Goods, and sated with the World.

XIII.
Finally, most of all foolish and ridiculous is he, who says, it is good
either not to be born at all, or to die as soon as born. For, if he speak this
in Earnest, why does he not presently rid himself of life, it being very easy
for him so to do, in case he has well deliberated upon the matter beforehand?
And, if in jest; he is perfectly mad, because these are things that admit not
of jesting. Again, in life there is something Amiable in it self; and therefore
he is as much to be reprehended, who desires Death, as he that is afraid of it.
For, what can be so ridiculous, as for a man to desire Death, when himself
makes his life unquiet by the fear of Death? or out of a weariness of life, to
fly to the Sanctuary of Death, when his own Imprudence and Irregular course of
life, is the only cause of that weariness?

XIV.
Every man, therefore, ought to make it his care, so to live, as that life may
not be ingrate or taedious to him; and not to be willing to part with life,
till either Nature, or some intolerable Case call upon him to surrender it. And
in that respect, we are seriously to perpend whether is the more Commodious,
for us to stay till death come to us, or to go and meet it. For, though it be
an Evil, indeed, to live in Necessity; yet is there no Necessity for us to
live in Necessity: since Nature has been so Kind as to give us, though but one
door into the World, yet many doors out of it.

XV.
But, albeit, therebe some Cases so extreme, as that in respect of them we are
to hasten and fly to the Sanctuary of Death, lest some power intervene and rob
us of that liberty of quitting life: yet nevertheless are we not to attempt
any thing in that kind, but when it may be attempted conveniently, and
opportunely; and when that time comes, then are we to dispatch and leap over
the battlements of life bravely. For, neither is it fit for him, who thinks of
flight, to sleep: nor are we to despair of a happy Exit even from the greatest
Difficulties, in case we neither hasten before our time, nor let it slip when
it comes.

CHAP. XXIII.
Of Fortitude against Pain of the Body.
Corporal Pain is that alone, which deserves the name of Evil in it self, and
which indeed would carry the Reason of the Greatest of Evils, if so be our own
delusive Opinions had not created and pulled upon our heads another sort of
pain, called the pain of the Mind; which many times becoms more grievous and
intolerable than any pain of the Body whatever, as we have formerly deduced.
For, Discontent of mind, conceived upon the loss of Riches, Honors, Friends,
Wife, Children, and the like; does frequently grow to that height, that it
exceeds the sharpest pains of the body: but still that which gives it both
being and growth, is our own Opinion, which if right and sound, we should never
be moved by any such Loss whatever; in regard that all such things are without
the circle of our selves, and so cannot touch us but by the intervention of
Opinion, which we coin to our selves. And thereupon we may infer, that we are
not subject to any other real Evil, but only the Pain of the Body: and that
the mind ought to complain of nothing, which is not conjoined to some pain of
the body, either present, or to come,

II.
The Wise man, therefore, will be very cautious, that he do not wittingly draw
upon himself any Corporal pain; nor do any action, whereupon any such pain may
be likely to ensue: unless it be in order either to the Avoydance of some
Greater pain, that would otherwise certainly invade him; or the Comparation of
some Greater Pleasure dependent thereupon; as we have formerly inculcated. This
considered, we may very well wonder at Those [Philosophers] who accounting
Health, which is a state of Indolency, a very great Good, as to all other
respects; do yet, as to this respect, hold it to be a thing merely Indifferent:
as if it were not an indecent playing with words, or rather a high piece of
Folly, to affirm* that to be in pain, and to be free from pain, is one and the
same thing.

III.
But, in case any Necessity either of his native Constitution, in respect
whereof his body is infirm and obnoxious to Diseases; or of any External
violence done him, which (so subject to Casualties and the injuries of others,
is the condition of frail man) he could not prevent or avoid; (for experience
attesteth) that a Wise and Innocent person may be wounded by his malicious
Enemies; or called to the bar, impleaded, condemned, and beaten with rodds, or
otherwise cruelly tormented by Tyrants) we say, in case either of these shall
have brought pain upon him: then is it his part, to endure that pain with
Constancy and Bravery of mind, and patiently to expect either the Solution, or
Relaxation of it.

IV.
For, certainly, Pain does never continue long in the Body; but, if it be Great
and highly intense, it cease in a short time, because either it is determined
of its self, and suceeded if not by absolute Indolency, yet by very great
Mitigation; or is determined by Death, in which there can be no pain. And as
for that pain, which is Lasting; it is not only gentle and remiss in it self,
but also admits many lucid intervalls, so that there are not many days, nay,
not hours, in which the body may enjoy not only ease, but very much Pleasure
also.

V.
And may we not observe, that all long or Chronique Diseases have many more
hours of Ease and quiet, than of Pain and trouble? For, (to omit this, that if
a Disease increase our Thirst, it does as much increase our pleasure in
Drinking) they give us time for our Refection, frequent respits to hold
comfortable Conferences with our Friends, leisure to recreate our selves with
some gentle Game, and admit many and long intervalls of ease, in which we may
apply our selves to our studies and any other necessary affairs. Whereupon it
is most evident, that Great pain cannot be Long; nor Long pain Great: and so,
we may consolate our selves against the Violence of pain, by an assurance of
the shortness of it; and with the Remissness against the Diuturnity of it.

VI.
Let this, therefore, be our frequent succor, that No pain is either
Intolerable, De jiciat miseram tibi nulla molestia vita^; Si longa est, levis
est: si gravis est, brevis est. Morus noster.
or Perpetual; because, if it be long, it must be light; if great, short.
Provided always, that we remember the Ends or bounds prescribed to things by
Nature; and do not by our own opinion add any thing thereunto, which may make
our pain greater, or us to apprehend it to be greater, than really it is. For,
the only way to heighten pain to the degree of intolerable, is to exasperate
it by impatience, and oppress and wear out nature by effeminate Complainings:
whereas, on the other side, nothing does so much alleviate, mitigate and blunt
the edge of any pain, as Constancy, and Custom of suffering; since thence it
comes, that a Wise man, who has been used to Diseases and Pains, does very
often rejoice and smile even in the highest fury of his sickness.

VII.
Thus much we can testify of our Friend Metrodorus; who has at all times born
himself undauntedly, and with exemplary Constancy* as against Death, so against
all Pain. For concerning our selves, we need not say much; it being very
familiar to us, to suffer such tortures of the Bladder and Bowels, as none can
be greater: and yet, as we find them fully compensated with that Alacrity of
mind, which redounds to us from the remembrance of our Philosophy and former
Inventions; so do we entertain them with that Constancy and Patience, as that
we are not destitute of very great delights even in those very days, wherein
we are most tormented with those sharp Fits of the Stone and Colic.

VIII.
And indeed, this is the very Reason, why we formerly said, that a wise man,
though invaded and surrounded with the cruellest of Torments, may yet keep
possession of his happiness: because he does both by his Patience soften that
Necessity, which he cannot break; and as much as possible, withdraw his mind
from being concerned in the sufferings of his body, conversing no more with it,
than as with a fragil and complaining part. He reflects the eye of his mind
backward, and considers what Honest, what Generous and Magnanimous Actions he
has at any time done; and fixing his cogitations upon those things, which he
has most admired, and which have most delighted him: he recreates his mind
with the Remembrance of Past Goods, for which he is very far from showing
himself Ungrateful, as Unwise men usually are.

IX.
He considers, that he can do nothing more worthy that Virtue and Wisdom, which
he professes, than not to yield the victory to Pain, the most hard to be
sustained of all things; than to hold up his head nobly in so difficult a
conflict; to vanquish so potent and malicious an Enemy, and at length to make
so perfect a Conquest thereof, as that the very Remembrance of it will be at
all times delightful, and especially in the time of absolute Indolency; which
will be so much the more Grateful, by how much the greater pains shall have
praeceded, as a Calm, or Haven is always most welcome after a tempest.

X.
Now, if a wise man is not without his Alleviations and Comforts even in the
most Grievous pain; what shall we say of him in Remiss and Gentle pains, or in
the loss of some Member, or Privation of some one of his Senses? Truly, it was
not without good reason, that we formerly said, that a Wise man might still be
Happy, though deprived of the best of his Senses, his Sight: for, if the Night
does not diminish the Happiness of life; why should Blindness, that so nearly
resembles Night, do it? and however he may want some pleasures, that depend
upon the light: yet are there many others that lie open to his enjoyment, and
what is much above all others, the pleasure of Contemplation.

XI.
For, seeing that to a wise man, to live, is to Think, certainly his Thoughts
are not beholding to the assistance of his Eyes, in the business of
investigating Truth. And that man, to whose Doctrine we sometimes gave up our
Name, did live long and Happy, without being able to distinguish of Colors:
but, without the Notion of Things, he could not have lived happy. Nay, that
Great man was of opinion, that the Perspicacity of the Mind was very much
dimmed by the sight of the eyes: and while others could scarcely be said, to
see the things, that were before them; the optics of his reason flew abroad
into all Infinity, nor could the acies of his mind be terminated by the
Extremes of the Universe.

CHAP. XXIV.
Of Fortitude, against Discontent of Mind.
YOU may remember, we said even now, that all Discontent of Mind is conceived
for such things, that are External Evils, and the Contraries to those Goods
that we most love and desire. For, men usually call some things Adverse, and
others Prosperous: and we may generally observe, that the Mind, which is
elevated and insolent with Prosperity, and dejected with Adversity; is low,
abject and base. This considered, you may easily collect, that all we should in
this place say, concerning Evils inducing Discontent, and in respect whereof,
we have need of Fortitude; may be sufficiently inferred from what we formerly
said, concerning those Goods, that are the General objects of our Desires or
Cupidities, and in respect whereof we have need of Temperance.

II.
Let this General Axiom, therefore, suffice; that Discontent of Mind is not
grounded upon Nature, but upon mere Opinion of Evil; and in respect respect
thereof it becomes necessary, that every man be in Discontent, who conceives
himself to be under some Evil, whether only praevised and expected, or already
come upon him. For, how comes it, that a Father, whose Son is killed, is not a
whit less cheerful or merry, if he know not of the death of his Son, than if
he were yet alive and in health? or, that he, who has lost much of his good
fame abroad, or all his goods and Cattle by robbery at home; is not at all
sensible of either loss, till he hears of it? Is it not Opinion alone, which
makes him sad and discontented thereupon? Certainly, if Nature it self were the
Author of that sadness, the Fathers mind would be struck with a sense of the
loss of his Son, in the same moment wherein he was slain: and in like manner,
he that has suffered Detraction from his honor, or been robbed of his Goods
and Cattle, would in the same instant receive intelligence of his loss, from
the secret Regret impressed upon his mind.

III.
To the production of Discontent, therefore, in the mind, it is absolutely
necessary, that Opinion (not Nature) intervene betwixt the supposed Evil and
the Mind. However, that you may be the more confirmed in this truth, be pleased
to observe this; If a man have an opinion, that such a one is his true Son, who
was indeed begotten by another man; and again, believe, that such a one is not
his Son, though himself be the right Father of him: let it be told him, that
He, whom he accounts not to be his true Son, but really is so, is Dead; and he
shall never be moved at the sad tidings: but let him hear of the death of the
other, whom he took for his true Son, but really was not so; and he shall
instantly be moved at the news, and suddenly break forth into sorrow and
laments. And this, not from any Natural Instinct, or Sentiments Paternall: but
only from the delusive suggestions of Opinion, that the one, who was his Son,
was not so; and that the other, who was not his Son, was so.

IV.
Hence is it a perspicuous Truth, that those things, for which the mind becomes
malcontent and contristate, are not Real Evils to us; forasmuch as they are
without the orb of our Nature, Nihil quicquam ad mentem faciunt, quae extra
mentem sita sunt.
and can never touch us immediately or of themselves, but by the mediation of
our own Opinion. And this was the ground of our former Assertion, Marc.
Antonin. in lib. de seipso 7. Sect. 2.
that it is Reason alone which makes life happy and pleasant, by expelling all
such false Conceptions or Opinions, as may any way occasion perturbation of
mind. For, it is Discontent alone, that perturbs the mind, and wholly subverts
the Tranquillity, and so the jucundity thereof.

V.
But, Non possidemus propria mortales bona, Sed jus Deorum, nostra dispensatio
est. Et commodata, cum volunt, repetunt Dii. Euripid. Phaeniss. (...). Marc.
Anton. lib. 12.
how can Reason expel all such erroneous Opinions, after they have once taken
possession of the Mind? Why, truly, only by teaching, the Wise man to arm his
mind against the blows of Fortune. For those very External things, which
persuaded by opinion, we conceive to be Good, and for the loss of which we
conceive such Discontent of mind; are also justly called the Goods of Fortune;
because they are not reeally our own, but may be possessed, or taken away, as
Fortnue pleases.

VI.
This the Wise man well knowing, Quicquid est hoc, quod circa nos ex adventitio
fulget, liberi, honores, opes, ampla atria, nobisis aut formosa conjux,
caeteraque ex incerta mobilique sort pendentia; alieni commodatique apparatus
sunt. Nihil horum dono datur: collatitiis and ad dominos redituris scena
adornatur. Alia ex his primo die, alia secundo referentur. etc. Grotius in cap.
10. Marc. Sic accipe, ne fastuosus fias; sic posside, ut dimittere proclivis
sis. Marc. Antonin. de seipso lib. 8. Sect. 33. in codice Gatakeriano.
accounts such Goods no more his own, than other men's, and does never so
possess them, as not to be willing and ready at any time to part with them.
For, he has divested his mind of that opinion, which would persuade him, that
they are real Goods, that they are his own, that they are permanent and
inamissible: and put on that right opinion, which assures him, that they are
neither really Good, nor absolutely his own, nor inamissible, but transitory
and subject to be blown away from him by every gust of adverse Fortune. And
hereupon He foresees what to do, in case he should be deprived of them; that
is, not to cruciate himself with vain sorrow and fruitless Discontent; but to
take it quietly and contentedly, that Fortune ha^h redemanded what she did not
give, but only lend him.

VII.
Certainly, to those, who account it an Evil to be deprived of these External
Goods, it cannot but prove of grievous consequence, that Praemeditation should
increase those Evils which it might very much have diminished at least, if not
wholly praevented. For by this they come to be discontented not only at present
infortunes, but also at such as they apprehend are likely to befall them but
perhaps may never befall them: and so every Evil is troub^esom, not only when
it comes, but when it is only expected, though it never come. Doubtless, it is
most vain and foolish in a man, to run in^o a voluntary misery; and he that
does so, shall always be Discontented, either by receiving, or thinking of
Evil: for, who so always thinks, that some Evil or Adversity may befall him;
this very thought does prove an Eternal Evil to him.

VIII.
And, as for the Wise man, in case it happen, that by being long accustomed to
the possession and use of the Goods of Fortune, he has not totally expunged
out of his Mind that Opinion, that they are real Goods, and wholly his own;
and so some little of Fortune intervene, and give him a blow, that may put him
to some small Regret and Discontent: in this case, he is for the Alleviation of
that his Discontent, to have recourse to those two things formerly prescribed
by us, as the most potent remedies for the mitigation of Pain in the body; viz.
Avocation of his thoughts from his loss and the Causes of it; and Revocation
of them to those things, which he knows to be Grateful and Pleasant to his
Mind.

IX.
For, the Mind, of a Wise man is instructed to conform to the Laws of Reason,
and precisely follow the conduct thereof; and Reason forbids him to fix his
cogitations upon those things, which may advance and foment his discontent, and
by that means helps him to abstract his thoughts from all regret, and convert
them upon Goods either to come, or formerly enjoyed, and especially such as he
has frequently found to be delightful.

X.
And, what though sad and importune thoughts are apt frequently to recurre; yet
is he still to insist upon that Avocation and Revocation of his Mind: because
the mind, by continual Diversion to other objects, is, brought by little and
little to wear out and deface the Characters of sorrow imprinted upon it by a
misfortune; nor, indeed, does Time conduce to the cure of Discontent, by any
other way, but any by exhibiting various occasions of Divertisement, by which
the mind being by degrees taken off from the Cause of its trouble, is brought
at length to almost an absolute forgetfullnesse thereof.

CHAP. XXV.
Of Justice, in General.
THus far of that part of Honesty, which concerns Ones-self: we are now come to
the other, that relates also to others, and belongs to a man as living in a
Civil Society; and that is Justice. For most certain it is, tha^ Justice is as
it were the common Tie, or Ligament, which ho^ds men together in peace, and
without which no Society can subsist: insomuch as it is a Virtue, which gives
to every one his Due, and provides that Injury be done to none.

II.
What we have formerly said, of the Foundation and Benefits of the other
Virtues, hitherto handled; does exactly correspond also to this Virtue: for as
we have taught, that Prudence, Temperance and Fortitude are inseparably
conjoined to Pleasure; so may we affirm the very same of Justice, which does
not only never cause Harm to any man, but on the contrary, always preserve and
nourish something, that may calm and quiet the minds of men; and this as well by
its own and Natures power, as by a constant Hope, that none shall ever want any
of those things, which pure and depraved Nature can desire.

III.
And, as Temerity, Lust, and Cowardice do always excruciate the mind, and stir
up troubles: so is it impossible, that a mind, which lodges Injustice, should
at any time be quiet and at peace either with it self, or others; because
though such a mind should attempt any unjust action, with the greatest secrecy
imaginable; yet can it not persuade it self, that the Injustice thereof shall
never be brought to light, And though some may think themselves so great, as to
be walled in and fortifyed against all revenge of their injustice, by their
riches, honors, power, etc. yet do they still lie open to the revenge of an
Evil Conscience, which whispers them in the ear, every moment, that all those
solicitudes and perturbations, wherewith their minds are uncessantly tormented,
are inflicted upon them, by the Immortal Gods, by way of punishment for their
improbity.

IV.
There is no man can propose to himself a Diminution of the troubles of life,
by any unjust way; but he must be sure to find them to be highly Increased and
Aggravated by the remorse of Conscience, the penalties of the Laws, and the
Odium of all his fellow-Citizens. And yet notwithstanding there are Millions of
men, who never think they have enough of Riches, or Honors, or Power, or
Lusts, of Riotings, and the like exorbitant Cupidities; which no wealth
unjustly gotten can diminish, but does rather increase and inflame: so that
such men seem fitter to be Restrained by severe Laws, than to be instructed by
the mild precepts of Reason.

V.
All sound judicious men, therefore, and are by Right Reason invited to Justice
Equity, Faith; and as for Impotent persons, and such as in their Nonage,
neither can unjust actions any way avail them, who can neither easily effect,
what they endeavor, nor obtain their Ends, when they have effected it: and
Riches are more convenient to Fortune, or Liberality of ingeny; which whoever
use, thereby procure to themselves the Respect and Good Will of others, and
(what is most conducible to quiet living) render themselves Dear and Beloved;
especially when there is no cause of offending.

VI.
For, those Desires that arise from simple Nature are easily satisfied: and all
others, that are derived from vain Opinions, are not to be obeyed, but
suppressed; because they incite us to the fruition of nothing that is truly
Desiderable, and always there is more of Detriment accrewing from the injury
its self, than there is of Emolument or advantage from those things, that are
gotten by that injury.

VII.
Nevertheless, no man can say rightly, that Justice is a Virtue to be wished
for, embraced, and pursued, immediately for it self; but mediate^y, or for the
great Pleasure it brings with it. For, to be beloved by, and to be Dear to
oothers is very Pleasant; why? only because it conduces to the greater Safety,
Peace and Pleasure of a man's life. This considered, we infer, that Improbity is
to be avoided, not only in respect of those many and great external
Incommodities, which happen to Unjust persons; but also, and much more, in
respect of those internal Disquiets and Perplexities of mind, which it always
causes.

VIII.
Now, though these Considerations seem sufficient to the Endearment of this
excellent Virtue, Justice; yet we are concerned to enlarge our Discourse,
partly touching Right: or what is Just, that so we may come the better to
understand the Original of Justice, among whom it is to be practiced, and with
what Advantages: and partly touching some other Virtues, that are nearly allied
to Justice, as Beneficence, Gratitude, Piety, Observance, and Friendship.

CHAP. XXVI.
Of Right, or Just; from whence Justice is named.
IN the first place, therefore, forasmuch as it is evident, that Justice is
denominated from hence, that the Right of another man is conconserved, or that
what is Right or Just, is performed: it is worth our knowing what that is,
which ought to be accounted Right or Just.

II.
Since Justice was excogitated and instituted in order to the Common Good;
necessary it is, that that Right or Just, to which Justice has respect, should
be such a certain Good, as may be in Common to all and every sing^e member of
the Society. And, because every one, by the direction of Nature, desires what
is Good for H^mself: it is also necessary, that what is Right, or Just be
something of Natures own institution, and so may be called Natural.

III.
Nor is it for nothing that we touch upon this particular; because it sometimes
comes to pass, that in a Society that may be prescribed for Right and Just,
which is not really Good for the Society: and so being not Natural, or
according to the dictates of Nature, it cannot, but by abuse, be reputed Right
or Just; since that, which has the true reason of Right or Just Natural, is
such, as that it is not only prescribed as Profitable and Good, but is also
Really so.

IV.
To speak plainly and properly, therefore; Right or Just Natural, is nothing
else but Tessera Utilitatis, the Symboll of Utility, proposed and agreed upon
by the concurrent votes of all in the Society, to the end, that they may be
kept from mutually harming each other, and that each one may live securely;
which as it is a Good, so does every man, by the direction of Nature, desire it.

V.
Here we take Profitable and Good, for the same thing; and judge that there are
two Reasons, that require the preservation of Right: the one, that it may be
Profitable, or respect the Common Utility, i. e. the Common Security; the
other, that it be Prescribed by the Common Consent of the Society, for nothing
is completely Just, but what the Society has, by common Consent, or common
Pact, decreed to be observed and kept inviolate.

VI.
And hence it, that the name of Right or Just is usually given to each of these
Two; since not only what is profitable is said to be Just, but also the very
Paction, or Agreement, or Prescription of the Society; which is also called
Law, as being that, which expressly prescribes to every one what is Profitable
or Just.

VII.
Some there are, we know, who conceive and affirm, that all things, that can be
said to be Just, are so of their own proper and invariate Nature; and that
Laws do not make them to be just, but only declare and prescribe them to be
so, in respect of their own Nature: but truly the matter is far otherwise,
the case in this point being as in most other things that are Useful and
Profitable, as in those which concern Health, and many others of the like
nature; of which some may be beneficial to one man, and hurtful to another,
and so being oftentimes misapplyed, they fail of the end proposed, as well in
common, as in private.

VIII.
And, certainly, since every thing is every where, always, and by all men,
deprehended to be such, as really it is in its own Nature; because that Nature
is invariate: we may justly demand of the Authors of that opinion, whether or
no such things as are accounted just at some times, in some places, by some
men, are so at all times, in all places, and to all men? Ought not such to have
observed, that many of those things, that are constituted by Laws, and so
accounted Lawful and Just; are not so constituted, nor accounted among all
Nations: but are partly negected as things Indifferent, by many; and partly
rejected as Hurtful, and condemned as absolutely Unjust, by as many others?
And are there not some, who accept some things as Universally Profitable, which
really are rather universally Destructive; and accordingly embrace and enact
them to be Universally accommodate, in case they judge them to be Accommodate,
and to promise some General Emolument to that particular Society, in which
they live?

IX.
This duly considered, the most that can be said, in favor of that Opinion, it
only this; that that is Universally Just, which is Profitable, or conform to
the Notion of Right or Just, even now described: for, in special, indeed, as
Utility is varied among various Nations, so also is Right or Just; so as what
may be accounted and really is Just in respect of one Nation, may be Unjust in
respect of another. And, therefore, if it be demanded, Whether or no the same
thing be Right or Just among all men? our answer must be, that as to the
General, it is the same, as being somewhat that is profitable in mutual
Society; but as to particulars, it may come not to be the same among all men,
particular Countries, and particular Causes in several Nations considered.

X.
And (that we may deduce a few observations from hence) whatever is by
Experience found to be Profitable to mutual Society, or the Common
participation of such things, as are reputed Just; that, certainly, has truly
and fully the nature of Just, in case it be such, as that the Utility thereof
may be extended to all: but, if any man shall determine and establish such a
thing for Just, and the same shall notwithstanding happen not to be Profitable
to mutually Society; in that case, it does not fulfill the nature of Just.

XI.
Again, and though the Utility of that, which was accounted Just, and so
embraced, does sometimes fail; yet nevertheless, if therebe some Utility
therein sometimes, so that it respond to the Notion, which we have given of what
is Just; it is truly Just, for that time: especially with those, who do not
confound themselves with vain loquacity, and look into Human Affairs with the
eye of more General observation.

XII.
Finally, where, no new Circumstance of Affairs intervening, those very things,
that were accounted and decreed to be Just, concerning the actions of men, are
found by experience, not to be fully correspondent or congruous to the Notion
of Just: there are they in no sort just. But, where, upon the innovation or
change of affairs, those things, which were formerly decreed to be just, have
ceased to be Profitable: there also do they cease to be just; because, when
they cease to be Profitable to mutual Society, they at the same time cease to
be congruous to the Notion of Just.

CHAP. XXVII.
Of the Original of Right and Justice.
BUt, that we may go much higher, and derive Right or Just from its first
Fountain or Original; it appears that Right and Justice are as ancient as
Societies of men.

II.
For, in the Beginning or first age of the World, men lived wandering up and
down, like wild Beasts, and suffered many incommodities both from the fury of
Wild Beasts, and the inclemency of the Aer; till, Reason advising them theunto,
they convened and conjoined themselves in certain Companies or Societies, that
so they might the better provide against those incommodities, by Building
themselves Huts or Cottages, and furnishing themselves with other Defensatives
against the fury of Wild beasts, and against the injuries of weather. But, in
this state every one being desirous to have his particular condition better
than another, and striving to make it so; there arose various Contentions and
Clashings among them, about Food, Women, and other Commodities, which the
stronger always took from the weaker: until at length they found, that they
could not live secure and commodiously together; unless they made a Common
Agreement, and entered into mutual obligations not to do Harm or Injury each to
other; and that in case any one did harm or injure another, the rest would
punish him for it accordingly.

III.
And this was the first Tie, or Bond of Society; which, as it supposed, that
every one might have something peculiar and Proper to himself, or that might be
called his own, as being his either by primire usurpation, or by gift, or by
purchase, or by invention, or by acquisition of his own industry, or otherwise:
so did it provide, decree and enact, that the same should continue entirely his
Own, till he should willingly and freely alienate his propriety therein, by
disposing of it to another. And this Bond, or General Paction among them, was
nothing else but a Common Law, which all were equally bound to observe, and
which did confirm to every man a certain Right or Faculty of Using and
Disposing of whatever was his own, according as himself thought meet. Whereupon
that very Law also came to be (as we formerly intimated) as it were the Common
Right of the Society.

IV.
We need not commemorate, how the whole Society, by Common Consent, transferred
their Power of Coercing or Punishing Delinquents, upon some few Wise and Good
men; or upon One single person, who had the reputation of being the Wisest and
best among them all. That which will be more pertinent and useful for us to
observe, is this; that in a Society those only were accounted Just, or
Favorers and Maintainers of Justice, who being content with their own Rights,
did not invade the Rights of any other man, and so did injury to none: and
those Unjust, or Doers of Injustice, who being not content with heir own
Rights, did fly out and invade those of others; and so doing them harm either
by rapine, or personal violence, or some other way, were the Authors of an
Injury.

V.
And thus, truly, for some time, men lived Peaceably and Happily, and
especially under either many Wise and Good Governors, or one only Wise and
Good Prince or King; who being wholly intent upon the conservation of the
public Utility, made, and by the Consent of the People, established diverse
Laws, by which they might either prevent Dissentions among the People, or,
compose them, if any did arise. But, (such was the Corruption of men's manners)
in process of time; it came to pass, that the Government delapsed into the
hands of Princes, or Kings that were not Good, but Vicious and Tyrannical: and
they being either Deposed, or killed, the whole returned again upon the People,
who instantly destroying each other, by reason of Tumults and the Factions of
those who affected superiority and aspired to Empire; and being at length weary
of living by force and hostility, and exhausted by Enmities and Dissentions,
they became willing again to submit to the Government of Magistrates, Princes,
or Kings. But, having by sad experience found, that the Wills and mandates of
Princes had formerly passed for absolute Laws; the People enter into certain
Compacts, or Covenants with their Governors, about those Laws, according to
which they desired to be Governed: and thus they again brought themselves under
Laws, i. e. under strict Rights.

VI.
But, not to descend to Latter times; and that we may touch upon only that
Chief Head, which regards the preservation of man's Life, (as the Dearest of
things) whereof special Care was had from the beginning, that every man's
security might be established by Common Pactions and Laws: it appears that
those most Wise and Good Founders of Laws, fixing their eye of Providence upon
the Society of life, and those things, which men usually do each to other; did
not only declare that it was a wicked act and heinous Crime, to kill a man, but
also decree that the Murderer should be punished with more than common
Ignominy, and the loss of his Head. And to this they seem to have been
induced, partly by considering the Conciliation of men among themselves (of
which we hinted somewhat even now) in respect whereof men ought not to be as
forward to destroy an Animal of the same species with themselves, as to destroy
one of another species, over whose life they have a power granted them by
Nature: and partly by the consideration of this, that men ought to abhor, that
from which no emolument or advantage toward the quiet and happy spending of
their days can accrue, but on the contrary, must be wholly destructive
thereunto.

VII.
For, indeed, from the Beginning, to those, who fully understood and attended
to the Utility of that Constitution; there was no need of any other Cause or
Respect, to make them contain themselves from doing any act toward the
Violation thereof: but, as for those, who could not sufficiently comprehend of
what high moment or Concern that Cause, the common Utility, was; these
absteined from committing mutual slaughters, only upon the account of Fear of
those sharp Punishments, which the Laws, in that case made, threaten to inflict
upon those who break them. And this we may observe to be frequently Exemplified
even in our own days. And, truly, who so well consider, how great the Utility
of such a Constitution is; they are sufficiently instructed and comparated to
the constant observance thereof, without any other sinister respect: but, such
as are not capable of understanding that grand and fundamental respect, the
Utility of it, do conform themselves thereunto only out of Fear of those
Punishments, that the Laws threaten them, and which were, by the more prudent
sort of men, invented and made against such, as had no regard to the Utility of
the Constitution, the Major part of the multitude admitting them as Legitimate.

VIII.
For, at first, no one of those Laws, which have been either in Writing, or by
Tradition, derived to us, and are to descend down to our posterity, did subsist
or depend upon any Force or Violence whatsoever; but (as we touched before)
upon the mere Consent of the People that used it. For, it was not by strength
of Body, or imperious sway, but only Prudence of mind, whereby those
transcended the Vulgar, who proposed those Laws to the suffrage of the People;
and this by inducing some men to consider what would be profitable (especially,
when they did not before so well understand it, as they ought) and by
terrifying others merely with the greatness of the punishments annexed. Nor
could they, indeed, make use of any other remedy for the Cure of the peoples
ignorance of the Utility of those Laws, than that of their own Fear of the
Punishments prescribed by the Laws: because even in our days, it is Fear
alone which contains Vulgar men within the bounds of their duty, and hinders
them from committing any thing against either the public or private Commodity.

IX.
And, assuredly, if all men could equally both understand, and bear in mind,
what is truly Profitable; they would need no Laws at all, but would of their
own accord beware of doing such things, as the Laws forbid, and do such as the
Laws prescribe and injoin: since, only to know what is profitable, and what
hurtful, would be more than sufficient to induce them to avoid this, and
pursue that. But, as for those, who do not discern what is Beneficial, what
Hurtful; doubtless, the Commination of Punishments against them, is highly
necessary: insomuch as the very Fear of the Punishment impendent does cause
them to suppress and bridle those heats of their passions, which instigate
them to unjust actions; and in a manner compel them, though against their
Wills, to do what is right and consentaneous to Reason.

X.
Hereupon was it, that the Ancient Lawmakers ordained, that even the
Involuntary and merely Casual slaughter of a man, should not be free from all
Mulct, or punishment. Not that they might not, to such as affected Voluntary
manslaughter, give any occasion of praetext or excuse for what they should do
of set purpose in that kind: but that they might not seem not to have used
sufficient Caution and Diligence, as to that Difficult particular. Nor could
this course but prove Beneficial, for the same Causes, for which men were
expressly prohibited to kill each other. So that considering, that of those
actions of this kind that are done involuntarily, some happen to Human Nature
from Causes that could not be foreseen, nor any ways prevented; and others
again happen merely through our Negligence, want of circumspection, and
incogitancy of the danger imminent: therefore, that they might, as much as
possible, prevent our negligence and heedfulnesse, that may conduce to the
destruction of our Neighbors; they provided, that even an involuntary
slaughter of a man should not pass altogether unpunished, and by the very fear
of that punishment or Mulct, making men more heedfull and circumspect, they
most happily diminished the Frequency of this Crime of Homicide.

XI.
Nay, we farther conceive, that even those slaughters of men which were
permitted by the Law, were made liable to those accustomed Expiations by
public Lustrations, for no other cause but only this; that those, who first
introduced the use of those solemn Expiations of Human blood, had it in their
thoughts, to deter men from involuntary slaughter, which was too too frequent.

XII.
For the Vulgar sort of men stood in need of something to restrain even their
Heedlessnesse, that so they might be kept from doing, out of rashness, any
action, that should not conduce to the Public Utility, or Security which the
Ancient Sages and first Lawmakers well understanding, did not only decree
severe Punishments, but struck also a certain grievous Fear into their Minds,
the Reason of which was not equally manifest to common heads, with that of the
punishments expressed: and this chiefly by declaring, that such, who had killed
a man, by what means or Accident soever, should remain Impure and Polluted,
till they had purged themselves of that blood by solemn Lustrations.

XIII.
For, the Brutall part of the Soul, or that wherein the Affections and Passions
have their residence, being by wholesome Laws as it were new molded and framed,
came at length to that Mansuetude and Gentleness, which now adays so much
flourishes in the World: those Arts of Taming and Civilizing men's minds, which
were from the beginning invented and practiced by those Sages, who first ruled
the rash multitude, being applied as Sovereign and effectual Remedies against
the violence of their Wild and furious Affections; of which this is one chief
act among the rest, that men should not indiscriminately destroy each other.

CHAP. XXVIII.
Between whom Right and Instice is to be exercised.
THe premises considered, it may with good reason be enquired of us, between
whom as well Right and the violation of it, which is Injury, as Justice and what
is opposed unto it, Injustice, does properly consist, or is to be found? and
therefore we are to state and explicate the matter, by a comparison betwixt Men
and other Animals.

II.
As therefore, Omnia, quae in hoc capite tradita invenies, verbatim desumpta
fuerunt, ex Porphyrii libro [(...)] de Abstinentia primo.
there is no Reason of Right or Injury, or Just and Unjust, betwixt Animals
that could not make a common Agreement, not to hurt, nor be hurt by mutual
invasion: so neither is there between those Nations which either would not, or
could not enter into a Common Pact and reciprocal Engagement, not to hurt each
other, or to suffer hurt each from other.

III.
For, Just or Right, the conservation whereof is Justice, has no being at all,
but in mutual Society, and so Justice is a Good of a Society, insomuch as the
effect of it is, that every single person of the Society may live in security,
and void of that anxiety, which the continual Fear of harm does create.
Whence it evidently follows that whatever Animals, or whatever men either
cannot or will not make an Association among themselves, upon the condition of
mutual safety, must want that Good, or be reciprocally obliged by no bond of
Right or Justice, in oder to their living securely: and so to them there can
remain no other Reason of security, but only this, to do harm to others,
that they be not harmed themselves.

IV.
As, therefore, when one of those Bruit Animals, among which there has past no
such Agreement or Pact, does hurt another; though it may be said that he does
harm or hurt to the other, yet it cannot be said, that he does an Injury to
the other, because he was not bound by any Right, Compact, or Law, not to hurt
him: exactly so, if one man of that Nation, among which is no Paction or
Society, does hurt another man; though it may be said, that he does hurt him,
yet not that he is Injurious to him; or does him an Injury, because he was not
obliged by any Compact or Law, not to hurt him.

V.
We here speak of Bruit Animals, not as if there were any even of those, who
live in Herds or Companies, that are capable of entering into Agreements or
Pacts not to harm each other; and so might be conceived to be Just, if they do
not hurt each other, and Unjust, if they do: but only to the end, that from
thence it may be the better understood, that even among Men Justice of it self
is nothing, insomuch as it is found only in the mutual Societies, according to
the amplitude of every Country, in which the Inhabitants may conveniently euter
into Agreements and Covenants of doing nor receiving any hurt; since otherwise,
and in a man considered as Solitary, or out of all Society, there can be no
Justice at all; and what is Justice in one Society of men, may be, and
frequently is, in respect of Contrary Pactions and Covenants, downright
injustice in another.

VI.
But can Justice intervene betwixt Men and any other Animals? Certainly, not.
For, if men could make a Covenant with Bruit Animals, as they can with other
men, that they should not Kill, nor be indiscreetly Killed by them; then,
indeed, might the Reason of Just or Right be founded betwixt them and us,
insomuch as the end of that covenant would be the Security of both Parties:
but, because it is impossible, that Animals void of Reason should be obliged by
a Law common betwixt them and us, who are endowed with Reason; it must also be
impossible for us to obtein more assurance of Security from Animals, than from
things Inanimat; so that there is no other way for us to secure our selves from
Bruits, but only to execute that power of Destroying them, which Nature has
given us.

VII.
And here, perhaps you will ask us, by the way; Why is it that we usually Kill
even such Auimals, as are weak and innoxious, and so ought not to be feared?
Whereto we answer, that most men destroy such Animals, out of Intemperance and
a certain Savagenesse or Cruelty in their nature; as many do, out of Immanity
or Cruelty, commit outrages also upon men living out of their Society, though
there be no reason why they should fear any harm from them. But, still it is
one thing, to offend against the rules of Temperance, or any of its subordinate
Virtues, as Sobriety, Lenity or Mansuetude, or (if you please) mere Humanity,
or Goodness of Nature: and another thing to violate Justice, which
presupposes certain Laws and Pacts established by mutual Consent and
Obligation.

VIII.
Nor can it be truly said (what some affirm) that we have a power granted to
us by Law, to destroy any such Animals, as can be no way offensive or
destructive to Mankind: though, to speak freely, there is scarce any kind of
Living Creatures, among all those, which we have a power granted us to destroy,
but, being permitted to increase to infinite multitudes, would prove permicious
to Mankind; however, being preserved alive in Competent numbers, they are many
ways very useful to our lives.

IX.
This may be exemplified in sheep, Kine and Bulls, Horses, etc. which being
kept alive in a Competent number, afford as many necessaries for life; but, if
they were let alone to multiply to excessive numbers, certainly they could not
but prove very hurtful, if not altogether destructive to us; and this partly
in respect of their strength, partly in respect of their Consuming or Devouring
the fruits of the Earth, that should serve for our subsistence; And, for this
very cause is it, that we are not prohibited to destroy such Animals: and
reason advises us to preserve so many of them alive, as may be both useful to
us, and easily ruled by us,

X.
For, as to Lions, Bears, Wolves, and other Beasts called Wild (whether little
or great) we cannot take such a certain number of them, as being preserved may
afford us any necessary relief, or be of use to us in our lives; as we may of
Kine, Sheep, Horses and the rest that are called Tame and Gentle Animals: and
thence is it, that we endeavor wholly to exterminate and destroy those; and of
these to cut off only so many, as are over and above a competent stock.

XI.
Hereupon (that we may highly touch upon that also) we may conceive, that even
among those Nations, who make their choice of certain sorts of Animals for
their food, the matter was determined and prescribed by certain Laws, grounded
upon Reasons correspondent to those, we have now given: and as for those
Animals, that were not to be eaten; there was respect had to their Utility, and
Inutility in other other respects, and for some reason peculiar to each
Country; to the Constitutions whereof there is no necessity for us to adhere
who live not in any of those places.

XII.
Now from these Considerations we come to understand, that from the very
Beginning a Difference was put betwixt the Killing of Men and the Killing of
all other Animals. For, as to other Animals, it is manifest, that no one of
those ancient Sages, who have expressly prescribed what we should, and what we
should not do, did forbid us to kill them: because that Utiity, which is
perceived in respect of them, arose from a custom of acting, contrary to that,
which we have mentioned concerning men; nor could it be, that men, living
promiscuously among Beasts, could preserve themselves in safety otherwise than
by expelling, or destroying them.

XIII.
But, as concerning Mankind; when among those, who lived in the days of old,
there were some more Comely and Graceful than the rest (and likely enough it
is, that such were the First Perswaders of men to enter into Pact, for the
Common safety) who remembering how they had sometimes absteined from slaughter,
in respect of that Utility, which concerned their safety; had also, when they
were congregated into one Company, put others in mind of what had then happened,
when they lived promiscuously; that by absteining from the slaughter of an
Animal of their own species, they might defend the Society of life, which is
Generally the cause of his proper safety, to every single person; and that it
had been formerly profitable to go apart from the Society of other Animals, or
men flocking together, that so they might not provoke or incense them, that
were ready enough of themselves to do harm: Hereupon, we say, men came to
restrain themselves from laying hands upon an Animal of their own species, that
came and offered himself into the Communion of things necessary to safety of
life.

XIV.
But, in process of time, their Progenies multiplying on each part, and
Animals of different species being depulsed and kept apart; men began to make
use of their Reason (whereas before that time, they had trusted altogether to
Memory) and to enter into Consultation, about what was to be done in order to
their safety, when they should come together and conjoyn their habitations.
For, they mainly endeavored to coerce those, who rashly and impudently cut
each others throats, and thereby made the mutual assistance, that men were
able to afford each other, daily the weaker; and this, chiefly because those
great incommodities, which had frequently fallen upon their Predecessors, in
the like cases, were utterly forgotten. And earnestly striving to bring matters
to that good passet, hey at length made and introduced those very Laws and
Constitutions, which continue in all Cities and Nations even to this very day:
the multitude of their own accord consenting to them; forasmuch as the Major
part were already very sensible, how much greater Utility would from thence
accrue unto them living in mutual Society. In like manner, it conduces also
to Common security, as to destroy whatever is pernicious: so also to preserve
whatever is useful to the extermination of what is pernicious.

XV.
And thus is it profitable; that upon these conconsiderations, the slaughter of
all other Animals came to be permitted, and that of Men, expressly prohibited,
by the Law: but we have stayed too long upon this argument.

CHAP. XXIX.
With what right Justice is to be exercised.
IT being Certain, then, that Justice is founded upon the mutual agreement,
and Common Paction of men living in Society; it remains that every man, whether
Native, or Stranger admitted, ought, from the time he has given up his name to
a Society, to account himself to be a Member of that Society, upon this
Condition, either expressly, or tacitly, that he hurt none of his Fellow
Members, nor be hurt by any other. Wherefore, let him either stand to this
Condition of the Common Paction; or depart out of the Society: because he is
not to be tolerated to live in the Society, upon any other Condition, but the
very same, upon which he was incorporated into it. Whereupon it necessarily
follows, that since, by Nature, no man is willing either to receive harm from,
or to do ham to another: therefore ought no man to do that to another, which he
would not another should do to him.

II.
This considered, it may well be thought, that the Laws of all Societies were
made principally, if not solely for the sake of Wise men; though not that Wise
men should not do unjustly by others: but that others should not do unjustly by
them; who are so well prepared and disposed of themselves, as to need no Laws
to restrain them from doing harm to any man. For, they have prescribed bounds
to their Cupidities, and composed their desires to the simple rules of Nature,
which requires nothing that cannot be obtained but by ways of injustice: nor
indeed, is there any of Natures Pleasures, that does induce a man to do injury
to another; but that which does induce him thereunto, must be some such
exorbitant Cupidity, as is created by vain and unbridled Opinion.

III.
For, Nature having (for example) in abundance produced Herbs, Corn, Fruits,
for food competent and useful, and Water for Drink pleasant and wholesome; it
cannot be the pleasure of satisfying pure Hunger and Thirst, that should cause
a man to robb, spoil, defraud or murder his neighbor, or do any of those
Injuries to others, which men usually do: but it must be the vain desire of
living more opulently, splendidly and wantonly, that so he may acquire wealth
enough to discharge the expenses of his Luxury. The same may be said also of
those, who not being content with simple Clothes, simple Houses, simple Wives,
etc. and carried away by Ambition, Pride, Lust and the like enormous passions,
desire imfinitely more than what sober and temperate Nature either wants or
knows how to use.

IV.
Furthermore, seeing that the Wise man does all things for his own sake, or
with reflection upon himself; nothing, certainly can more conduce to his own
advantage, than strictly to celebrate and constantly uphold Justice. For, in
giving to every one his Due, and harming no man; he, to the most of his power,
does keep the Society whole and sound, and consequently preserve himself in
peace and safety: forasmuch as he cannot be safe, when the peace of the Society
is disturbed and endangered, nor does he provoke any man to avenge an injury
suffered at his hands, or fear any Mulct or punishment to be inflicted upon him
by public decree; and so, being Conscious to himself of no Evil by him done,
he remains free from all Perturbations; from which to be free, is the Chiefest
of all the fruits of Justice, and while he reaps that, what can he do, that
should more conduce to his own advantage.

V.
Nor is there why you should conceive, that He, who violates the Right of
another, though secretly and without the Knowledge of any man, can live in the
same security and freedom from Perturbation, as the Just man does, because as
we said before) he cannot assure himself, that his Injustice shall never be
brought to light; for, Crimes, though they may be secret, yet can they never be
secure; nor does it avail an Offender, to be concealed from others, while he
can never be concealed from himself.

VI.
And, truly, though his offense be never so much concealed in the present; yet
is it very uncertain, whether or no it will remain so concealed till his death.
For, first, there is a Kind of Jealousy and Suspicion that always follows
close at the heels of Improbity: and again, there have been many, who have
detected themselves, some in dreams, others in fits of Deliriums in Fevers,
others in their Wine, others out of forgetfulness for the time. So that a
Wicked man, though he may for a time deceive even the Gods and men (as they
say) yet ought he not to be confident, that his Deceits shall always continue
undiscovered.

VII.
Upon these grounds, it is manifest, that notwithstanding Injustice be not
Evil absolutely, or in it self, because, what is reputed Injust in one place,
may be very Just, and Legal in another: yet nevertheless it is always an vil
in respect of that fear which arising from, and fomented by the horror and
stings of an evil Conscience, creates a continual suspect in him, that some
time or other his unjust deeds may come to the ears of the Avengers of
Unjustice, and so he be called to a severe account for them. And so there is
nothing that more conduces, as to Security, so likewise to a quiet and
pleasant life, than to live Innocently, i. e. upon no occasion to Violate the
Common Covenant of Peace.

VIII.
Wherefore, since the Just and Unjust have this Contrariety between them; that
the Just of all men are most free from Perturbations, and the Unjust, of all
men, most obnoxious to Perturbations: what can be more profitable than Justice
to those; what more hurtful than Injustice to these? For, can Anguish of mind,
Sollicitudes, and continual Fears be profitable to any man?

IX.
Justice, therefore, being so great a Good, and Injustice so great an Evil;
let us always embrace the one, In scriptis Epicureis praecipitur, ut in mente
ac memoria semper habeamus Antiquorum aliquem eorum, qui Virtutem coluerint.
and abhor the other. And if at any time our mind seem to stagger, and incline
toward Injustice; let us think upon some Grave, Wise and Good man, and
supposing him to be always present with us, and overlooking all our actions:
that so we may do nothing, which we would not do, Marc. Antonin lib. de Seipso.
12. Sect. 26.
if he were really present.

X.
Hereby we shall not only avoid the doing of any thing openly against Justice,
but also of offending in secret against the rules and principles of Honesty.
For, this Wise and Good man will be to us instead of a Guardian or Tutor, whom
because we revere, we shall be afraid to offend. Following this Counsel
therefore, thus argue with your self; if this Reverend Person were present,
Consonum plane monito illi Pythagorico, in aureis carmi:
I would not do this: why therefore shall I do it in his absence? He
doubtless, would check me for doing this, because it is Unjust: why therefore
shall I not check my self, (...).
and not do it? And if you do all things so, as if some Reverend Person saw all
you did; Tu plus quam cunctos alios te disce reveri.
you shall soon learn to do nothing amiss: for, if you so fear another man, you
will quickly come to fear your self.

CHAP. XXX.
Of Beneficence, Gratitude, Piety, Observance.
HAving done with the consideration of Justice, we come to those Virtues that
are Cousin-Germans thereunto, as we formerly intimated; in that each of them
also does concern others directly, and our selves but by reflection: and though
they be not, as Justice is, prescribed by Laws and Covenants; yet do they
import a certain obligation like that of Justice, and that from Decorum, Office
and Use.

II.
Of these, the first is Beneficence, or the doing of Good turns to others; to
which all are obliged, who are able either by their assistance, or purse, to
help, such as stand in need of their help. Forasmuch as if they refuse to
afford the needy their assistance, Diis acceptum tulit optimus and Imperatorum
and Hominum ille vir, Marcus Antoninus; quod, quotiescunque illi animus fuit
pauperi alicui, aut alias indigo, opem far, numqua^ responderit, non
suppetere illi nummos, unde id fieret; quodque nulla illi unquam talis
necessitas obtigerit, ut ab alio sumere cogereti 1. in de seipso lib. 1. sub
calcem.
then do they inevitably incur the censure of being Barbarous, Cruel, Inhuman:
and if to relieve their wants with their purse, then cannot they escape the
opprobrious terms of Sordid, Tenacious, Avaricious persons. Whereas, on the
contrary, if they assist them in one kind; then shall they be reputed Benign,
Officious, Good natured: and if they relieve them in the other, presently they
are cried up for Liberal, Munificent, Magnificent, and Noble-minded persons.
So that hence it appears, that all men, who are able, in respect either of
Power or Estate, to assist and relieve others of the Society; are obliged
thereunto, (provided it extend not to Prodigence, or the impairing of their own
Fortunes) upon the Consideration of their own Good or Utility.

III.
For, those, who practice this Virtue of Beneficence, thereby certainly procure
to themselves Respect, Good Will, and (what very much conduces to their quiet
living) a Dearnesse or tender Estimation from those, upon whom they practice
it: as, on the other side, who neglect the exercise of it, gain to themselves
the Disrespect, Ill Will, and (what very much conduces to their troublesome
living) the odium and Contempt of others. Take special heed, therefore, that
you do not omit to be Beneficent at least in small matters; that so you may not
lose the advantage of being accounted ready to gratify others even in Great:

IV.
It was not without good Consideration we formerly said, (...). Pluttarch. 2.
advers Coloten. Conform plane est sacrae illi Sententiae: (...), beatum magis
est Dare, quam Accipere. Act. 20.
that it was not only more Honorable, but also more Delightful, to Give, than
to receive a benefit: because, the Giver thereby makes himself Superior to the
Receiver, and reaps moreover the interest of Thanks; and nothing adferrs more
joy to a man, than to be heartily thanked for a favor. For, a Beneficent
person is like a Fountain; to which if you but grant a Reasonable Soul, or
Mind: what joy will it not be possessed of, when it shall see how many spacious
Cornfieldsd and Pastures do flourish and even smile again with plenty and
verdure, and all by the Diffusion of its streams upon them?

V.
The second is Gratitude, to which every man is reciprocally obliged, who
receives a benefit: at least, unless he has a mind to expose himself to
common Hatred and the greatest of shames. For ingratitude is worthily hateful
in the eyes of all men; because seeing nothing can be more according to Nature,
than to be propense to receive a Good; it must be highly Contrary to Nature not
to be propense to return the tribute of Thankfulness to the Author of that
Good.

VI.
But, seeing that no man stands more gratefully affected toward his
Benefactors, Solum Sapientem scire Gratiam, qualem oportet, refer, affirmat
Seneca, Epist. 81
than the Wise man; it may be lawful for us to assert, that it is the Wise man
only, who knows how to fulfill, and does fulfill the duty of Gratitude: because
he alone stands ready, upon all occasions, to express his thankfulness to his
Friends both present and absent; yea, though they are extinct.

VII.
Others, indeed, many times pay the debt of thanks to their present friends,
and this perhaps for their own farther ends, and to encite and encourage them
to some new favor: but, how few are there, who gratefully commemorate the
beneficence and liberality of their absent Benefactors? Where shall we find
him, that honors the memory of his deceased Patron? that does not in his heart
rejoice, that his Benefactor is dead; as if death had cut off all the bonds of
his Gratitude, and cancelled all the obligations of his Good turns? that
studies all ways of Retribution Kindness, Respect, and Assistance to the
Wife, Children, Friends, Family, and Kindred of his Dead Reliever?

VIII.
The third is Piety, the most sacred species of Gratitude. This Virtue we are
to exercise primarily toward our Parents, to whom we are more obliged, than to
all the World beside: for, we may owe our education, fortune, erudition, etc.
to others; but to our Parents we owe even our selves: and therefore if
ingratitude to others be hateful, that which is shown to our Parents must
certainly be most hateful and detestable.

IX.
We say, Primarily to our Parents; because Piety is secondarily, and as it were
upon consequence, extended to our Kindred, and chiefly to our Brothers and
Sisters, to whom we are obliged by the bond of Consanguinity, and the
intervening interest of our Parents: so that we cannot show our selves
disrespectfull and unkind to any of our blood, but we must be, at the same
time, highly ungrateful to our Parents, Grand-Parents, and all the line of our
Progenitors; who in the circle of their love and benevolence, comprehended all
that were, and should be derived from their loins.

X.
Nor is this Piety distinguishable from that Charity or Dearnesse, we are to
conceive, and constantly bear toward our Native Country, which comprehends our
Parents and all our Kindred, and does both receive us when we are born, and
nourish and protect us afterward. Wherefore, as we are, by the relation of our
blood, obliged to bear Respect and Kindness toward those of our Kindred; so
are we by the more General interest of our Country, obliged to respect and
tender the good of all those of our Society; but more especially the
Magistrates and Princes, or Monarch thereof, who by defending our Country, and
the Laws of it in General, confer this benefit upon us in particular; that
under the protection of their Care and Power, our Rights are so preserved, as
that we may live securely and peaceably.

XI.
The fourth is Observance, or that Veneration we owe to all persons of
Eminency, in any kind. And this affection af Awe and Reverence is accompanied
partly with Gratitude and Piety; insomuch as we cannot any way better express
the Gratefulness of our minds, than by giving due Veneration and Worship to
our Benefactors, Parents, Governors, Princes, and all men of Dignity and Power:
and partly with Honor and Respect; insomuch as it is the best testimony we can
give of our internal sentiments of their deservings, who excel in Age,
Wisdom, Learning, and especially Virtue; which is the most Honorable of all
Human Excellencies.

XII.
To this Observance belongs also that, which men call Religion and Sanctity
toward the Gods, whom we ate bound to Revere and Honor no otherwise than we
are our Parents; yet, not in respect to any Good either received, or expected
at their hands; but (as we formerly intimated) only in respect of the
transcendent Excellency, Majesty, and Supremacy of their Nature. Because,
whatever is Excellent deserves a just Veneration; and no Excellence can equal
that of the Divine Nature, it being Immortal and and most Blisfull. And thus,
understanding that the Dum plus aequo Pius in Deum esse vult, Impius and
Blasphemus deprehenditur.
Gods do neither create troubles to themselves, nor give any occasion of
troubles to us; we shall come to be truly Religious, i. e. piously and holily
to Revere and admire their most Excellent Nature, without all Hope or Reward.

CHAP. XXXI.
Of Friendship.
TO the exercise of this Virtue (the last of all those, that retain to Justice)
all are obliged, who Love, and are beloved again by the same persons. And well
may we make it the Crown of this our Discourse upon the Virtues, or means to
make life happy; when nothing that lies in the power of Wisdom to obtein, does
afford more Comfort, more Delight, than true Friendship: and the same Reason
that confirms the mind not to fear any lasting or eternal Evil; does also
assure, that during life there is no Sanctuary so safe, no protection so
secure, as that of true Friendship, which together with that Security, does
adferr also very great pleasures.

II.
For, as Enmity, Hate, Envy, Despite, are adverse to, and inconsistent with
Pleasures; so are Friendships, and Amities not only the most faithful
Conservers, but also the most effectual and certain Causers of Pleasures, and
that as well to ones Friend, as to one self: in that thereby men do not only
enjoy the Good things of the present more fully; but are erected and animated
with hope of such as as are to succeed in the future. And, since Solitude and
want of Friends exposes a man to dangers and fears; certainly it must be very
highly rational in us, to procure Friendships, whereby the mind may be
confirmed in the present, and possessed with lively hopes of enjoing very great
Pleasures in the future.

III.
But, in the choice of our Friends, we are to be exceeding cautious and
prudent: for, it concerns us to be more circumspect with whom we eat; than
about what we eat: To eat ones meat alone, and spend ones days in Solitude;
indeed, is to live the life of a Lion or a Woolf: and yet no Friend is better
than such a one, that is not as well pleasant, as faithful, so that his
Conversation may be the best sauce to our meat. Such a Friend, therefore, is to
be sought for, to whom nothing is more in esteem, than Candor, Simplicity and
Verity; and who is not morose, querulous and murmuring at all things, but full
of Complacency, Alacrity, and pleasant hopes, that so his conversation may not
sour; but sweeten the occurrences of life.

IV.
Friendship, we acknowledge, does consist in, and is kept alive by the mutual
participation of Pleasures, or Goods; and yet we cannot admit it to be
therefore necessary, that betwixt friends there should be a Community of the
Goods of Fortune: as that Philosopher conceived, who was the Author of that
saying, that among Friends all things are Common. And our Reason is, that
Community of Estates implies mutual diffidence or distruct of each others
Constancy, in case of Adversity or Poverty on one part: and Distrust is wholly
inconsistent with Friendship. Then only are friends, who can with full
Confidence and freedom take and make use of so much of their friends Goods or
Estate, as the necessity of their present condition does require; and this no
otherwise, than as if it were absolutely their own, though each partly still
reserves a propriety in the full of his own Estate.

V.
This, we are assured, will sound strange in the ears of the Vulgar; but, what
are the Common People to us, seeing that no Faith or Constancy is to be found
in their Kindness and Friendship? For, being wholly incapable of any part of
wisdom, that might render their Conversation commendable and grateful; and as
incapable of either understanding what is privately, what publicly profitable,
or what is the difference betwixt Good Manners and Bad: it is impossible they
should have any Sentiments of the Goods of Amity and Friendship; and
consequently that they should in any measure fulfill the duties thereof.

VI.
We speak, therefore, of Wise men only, among whom there is as it were a firm
Covenant and League, not to love their Friends less than themselves. Reason
dictating, that it may, and should be so; and Experience assuring that it
frequently has been so. So that it is most evident, as well that such a
perfect Conjunction (you may call it Union) may be made betwixt Wise men; as
that nothing does more conduce to the Quiet and Pleasure of life; than such a
Conjunction once made and conserved.

VII.
For, as it is impossible for us, to conserve the sweetness and security of
our lives firm and lasting, without the influence of Friendship: so is it
equally impossible to conserve Friendship firm and lasting, without that Cement
of Loving our Friends, at the same rate, as we do our selves. This, therefore,
and Pleasure are the inseparable Adjuncts of Friendship: and who so does not
hold so full a sympathy with his Friend, as to rejoice at his joy, and condole
with him in his sorrow; does but pretend to the noble title of a Friend.

VIII.
Considering this, the Wise man will be sure, to stand equally affected toward
himself, and his Friend; what labors and pains he undergoes for his own
Security and Pleasures, the same will he undergo for the Security and Pleasures
of hls Friend: and as he rejoices to think, that he has one, with whom he may
sit, and to whom he may administer in his sickness, whom he may visit and
assist in case of imprisonment, and whom he may relieve in case of want; so
will it rejoice him to be confident that he has one, who will stick close to
him, in sickness, imprisonment; want and all other Calamities. And not only
this; but his love will be so great to him, as to oblige him to suffer the
greatest of torments, nay, if occasion be, even Death it self for his Friends
sake.

IX
We have known, Certainly (and from our Fathers, in whose memories it was
fresh) that many of those Wise and Good men, who had the happiness of
procuring to themselves full Confidence and Security in the Society of men,
living in one and the same opinon, and the selfsame affections with themselves;
have lived in a most pleasant and mutually comfortable League of Friendship,
and been conjoined with so absolute a Neernesse each to other, as that they
could heartily, and without the least of reluctance, wish to suffer death in
the place of their friend destined to die.

CONCLUSION.
AND this is the sum of all we had to say, concerning ETHICS or MORALS, which
from the very beginning we asserted to be the Noblest and most Useful part of
Philosophy. We now, therefore, Conclude with this Admonition to you, whoever
you are that aspire to true Wisdom (for, our Design herein was to do a piece
of acceptable service to all such) that you both meditate upon, and earnestly
endeavor to put in practice each one of those many Rules and Axioms of
Prudence, that we have here laid down: assuring your self, that they are the
very Elements or Fundamentals of the art of Living Honestly or Virtuously, and
(upon consequence) peaceably and Happily.

We say, to Meditate upon them night and day; and as well when you are alone,
as when you are in company of some faithful Friend, such to whom you may
safely and comfortably say: We are (indeed) Alone: but so much the better,
insomuch as we have the greater opportunity of discoursing things sincerely,
and making the stricter inquisition for Truth: I speak not to many, but to you
alone; and and you speak not to many but to me alone, and that is enough, since
we are an ample Theater each to other.

By this time, we presume, you are fully convinced, that he is the only Brave
and Happy man, who has his mind possessed with true and correspondent
Conceptions of the Nature of the Gods: who is at all times prepared to bid
death welcome, without the least of Fear: who has so reasoned concerning the
end of Nature, or the highest of Goods, as fully to understand, that it may be
attained with the greatest facility imaginable: who stands confirmed, that
whatever of Evil is to be endured by him, must, if Vehement, be short in
duration; if not Vehement, easy in tolleration: who does not emasculate and
soften himself with the Childish apprehension of any such thing as inevitable
Necessity, or the vulgar belief of Fate; but well understands, that he has an
absolute Freedom of Will, in all his actions, and is not subject to the
Control of any influence, besides that of his own Reason; and knows also that
nothing at all, or (at most) very little of Fortune can at any time intervene
to cross his designs, defeat his hopes, interrupt his Felicity: and, finally,
who has composed all his Desires to the sober model of Nature, and the Rules
of Wisdom, by us prescribed in this small Treatise.

And, Sapiens uno minor est love. Horat. lib. 1. Epist. 1. Sapiens ille, plenus
gaudio, hilaris, and placidus, inconcussus, cum Diis ex pari vivit. Ac rursus:
Hoc est summum bonum, quod si accupas incipis Deorum socius esse, non suppiex.
Seneca. Epist. 21.
assuredly, when you shall come to be such a Man as this; you shall never know
a Perturbation, day nor night, waking nor sleeping (for, a well composed Mind
keeps the same constant tenor of Serenity as well in sleep, as waking: and
unquiet Dreams are but the effects of Solicitude and unquiet thoughts in the
day) and shall live like some Diety among men. For, that man has sublimed
himself to a whole Sphere above the common condition of Mortality, Cum Diis
vivendum. Hoc autem faciet, qui animum exhibuerit ita jugiter affectum, ut
rebus sibi destinatis acquiescat; faciatqque quaecunque Genius ille voluerit;
quem sui particulam a seavulsam Jupiter cuique attribuet, praesidem ducemque
eidem futurum. Hic autem cujusque men's est and ratio. Marc. An^onin. de seipso
lib. 5. Sect. 27.
who spends his days in the possession of Immortal Goods.

FINIS.

