A BRIEF NOTE OF The Benefits that grow to this Realm by the observation of
Fish-Dayes.

With a reason and cause wherefore the Law in that behalf made, is ordained:
Very necessary to be kept in the houses of all men; especially common
Victuallers.

Together with an estimate of what Beefes might be spared in a year, in the
City of London, by one days abstinence in a week.

Collected out of several Statutes in the Reign of Queen ELIZABETH.

Published by John Erswicke Gentleman.

London printed for Tho: Banks. 1642.

A brief note of the benefits that grow to this Realm by the observation of
Fish-dayes.
WHere heretofore by the Queens most excellent Majesty, of her clemency and
care conceived, for diverse private benefits that might grow to her loving
Subjects, especially for the Navy of this Land, has with the assent of the
whole State of her Realm, caused to be made and published sundry Statutes,
Laws, and Proclamations for the expense of fish, and observation of
fish-dayes, with great penalties to be laid on the offenders; that by the
certain observation thereof, fishermen (the chiefest Nurse for Mariners)
might be increased and maintained. The common sort of people contemning this
observation, to avoid the ceremony in times past therein used, and not
certainly knowing the benefits thereby growing to this Realm; nor remembering
the penalties by the same Laws appointed, do not only fall into the danger
of the said Laws, but by the same has caused a great decay to fishing,
whereby grows many other great detriments to the Commonwealth of this Realm:
For the better instruction therefore of such persons, as for the benefit of
their Country will be persuaded: In this brief Table is set down the
punishment appointed for the offenders, the discommodities that happen to the
Realm by the said contempt, and the great benefit that might grow to the
people by the observation hereof, with the opinion that ought to be conceived
in the eating of fish at the days and times prescribed, being briefly set
down as hereafter follows.

The breaches of the Statutes.
In the fifth year of her Majesty's most gracious reign, it was ordained that
it should not be lawful for any person within this Realm, to eat any flesh
upon any days then usually observed as fish-dayes, upon pain to forfeit three
pounds for every time he offended; or suffer three months of imprisonment,
without bail or maine prize. And every person within whose house any such
offense shall be done, being privy, and knowing thereof, and not effectually
punishing or disclosing the same to some public officer, having authority to
punish the same, to forfeit for every such offense forty shillings: The said
penalty being great, and many of poor estate favored by reason thereof, but
the offense thought necessary not to be left unpunished: The Queens Majesty
of Her great clemency in the Parliament holden in the 34. year of Her most
gracious reign, has caused the forfeiture for the eater to be but twenty
shillings; and for him in whose house it is eaten* but 13s. 4d which being
executed, will prove very damageable to the offenders.

In the 17. ye^re of Her Highness reign it is further ordained, and remains
still in force; That no Inholder, Vintner, Ale-house-keeper, common Victualler,
common Cook, or common Tablekeeper, shall utter or put to sale, upon any
Friday, Saturday, or other days appointed to be fish days, or any day in time
of Lent, any kind of flesh victual, upon pain of the forfeiture of five
pounds, and shall suffer ten days imprisonment, without bail, mainprize, or
remove, for every time so offending.

The cause and reason.
First, forasmuch as our Country is (for the most part) compassed with the
Seas, and the greatest force for defense under God, is the Kings Majesty's Navy
of Ships, for maintenance and increase of the said Navy, this Law for
abstinence has been most carefully ordained, that by the certain expense of
fish, fishing and fishermen might be the more increased and the better
maintained, for that the said Trade is the chiefest Nurse, not only for the
bringing up of youth for Shipping, but great numbers of Ships therein are
used, furnished with sufficient Mariners, men at all times in readiness for
his Majesty's service in those affairs.

The second cause, for that many Towns and Villages upon the Sea coasts grow
of late wonderfully decayed, and some wonderfully depopulated, which in times
past were replenished; not only with fisher men and great store of shipping,
but sundry other Artificers, as Shipwrights, Smiths, Rope-makers, Nett-makers,
Saile-makers, Weavers, Dressers, Carriers, and Utterers of Fish, maintained
chiefly by fishing, that they hereby again might be renewed, the want thereof
is, and has been cause of great numbers of idle persons, with whom this
Realm at this time is greatly damaged: and this happens by reason of the
uncertainty of the sale of fish, and the contempt which in eating of fish is
conceived.

Furthermore it is considered, that the Trade for grasing of cattle, through
the excessive expense of flesh, is so much increased, that many Farme-houses
and Villages, wherein were maintained great numbers of people, and by them the
Markets plentifully served with corn and other victuals, is now utterly
decayed, and put down for the feeding and grasing of Beefes and Muttons only,
by means whereof the people which in such places were maintained, are not only
made vagrant, but also Calves, Hogs, Pigs, Geefe, Hens, Chickens, Capons,
Eggs, Butter, Cheese, and the like things, do become exceeding scarce and
dear, by want of their increase in those places, so that the Markets are not,
nor cannot be served, as in times past it has been.

Many other things for confirmation hereof might be spoken, as the great number
of Ships decayed, which has been maintained by fishing; the wealth and
commodity that fishing brings to this Realm; the cause that certain days
and times for expense of fish, must of necessity be observed, grown by reason
the provision of flesh for the peoples diet must be certainly provided,
whereof the gentle Reader shall be more at large instructed in a little book,
published to that effect; with sundry other arguments, which for brevitie is
omitted, in hope the consideration hereof will be sufficient to persuade such
persons as esteem more the benefit of the Country then their own lust or
appetite; setting before their eyes the fear of God, in obedience to the Kings
Commandment, especially in such things as concern the benefit of a
Commonwealth; considering S. Paul says, There is no Power but of God: The
Powers (says he) that be, are ordained of God; and those that resist these
Powers, resist the Ordinance of God.

It is further to be considered, that there is no conscience to be made in the
kind or nature of the meat being Flesh or Fish, as in times past a famed
Ceremony therein was used, neither is the meat concerning it self unlawful
to be eaten at any time, but the use thereof unlawful, being forbidden to eat
by the Prince, having power and authority from God, and done by the consent of
the Parliament: For a Commonwealth, wherein obedience ought to be showed, not
for fear of punishment only, as S. Paul says, but for conscience sake; not
esteeming the meat, nor the day, but obedience to the Law, and benefit to our
Country and poor Brethren; remembering, that the Magistrate bears not the
Sword for naught, but to take vengeance upon them that do evil: For S. Paul
says further, He that will live without fear of punishment, must do well,
and so shall he have praise for the same.

And although fear of punishment will not reform such persons as by affection
continued has been addicted from the expense of Fish, and the observation of
Fish-dayes; yet the foresaid things considered, let obedience to their Prince,
and benefit to their Country, persuade them to bridle their affectioned lust
for a small time, so shall they both see and feel the great benefits thereby
growing, and escape the punishment for the offense appointed. And for that the
commodities may in some part more plainly appear, hereafter follows an
Estimate of the Beeves that were killed and uttered in the City of London and
Suburbs for a year, and what number of them might be spared in the said year
by one days abstinence in a week; by which also may be conjectured, what may
be spared in this whole Realm.

An Estimate what Beeves might be spared in a year, in the City of London, by
one days abstinence in a week; Collected out of several Statutes in the
Reign of Queen Elizabeth.
FIrst, in the year are 52 weeks, for every week seven days, in all 365.
The Lent, with Friday and Saturday in every week, and the other accustomed
Fish-dayes, being collected together, extends to 153. So, in the year is 153
Fish-dayes, and 212 Flesh-dayes, that is, 59 Flesh-dayes more then Fish.

So the year being 52 weeks, abate seven for the time of Lent, wherein no
Beeves ought to be killed, and there remains but 45 weeks. Then let us say,
there be 60 Butchers that be Freemen within the City, and every Butcher to
kill weekly the one with the other five Beeves a piece; that same amounts to
13500 Beeves.

The Forrainers in the Suburbs, and such as come out of the Country to serve
the Markets in the City, as it is credibly affirmed, kill and utter in the
City weekly four times so many as the Freemen* which amounts to 54000. So
joining the Beeves uttered by the Freemen and Farriners together, they extend
to 67500.

If we will now know, what number of Beefes might be spared in a year, by one
days abstinence in a week; let us say, in the week are five days
accustomably served with Flesh, (for that Friday and Saturday by the Law are
days of abstinence) whereof one being taken away, the rest but four; in like
case, divide the said 67500 into five parts, and the fifth part spared by the
fifth days abstinence, is 13500.

By this is not meant, that any more Fish-dayes should be ordained then already
are, but that Friday and Saturday might be in better sort observed, for that
Flesh Victuals on those days, in most places, are as commonly spent as on
Flesh-dayes, and therefore may well be accounted for the expense of one
Flesh-day; the due observation whereof would spare the number of Beeves
aforesaid, or more, besides those things sold by the Poulterers, and other
small Cattle, as Calves, Sheep, and Lambs innumerable killed by the Butchers.

Seen and allowed by the most Honorable Privy Council in Anno 1642. the 22
of February.
FINIS.

