

EPICTETUS lived at Rome in a little house, which had not so much as a door;
All the Attendants he had was an old Servant maid, and all his household stuff
an earthen Lamp.

Vincent Obsop: l: 3 Anth: ad Epig: Epictet: EPICTETI ENCHIRIDION Made ENGLISH,
IN A Poetical Paraphrase.

BY ELLIS WALKER Of LondonDerry.

LONDON, Printed, by Ben. Griffin, for Sam Keble, and are to be Sold at the
Great Turks-Head in Fleet Street over against Fetter-Lane-End. 1692.

(...) Now what Misfortunes Vulture-like attend
The poor defeated Wretch, that fails of's end?
And, ah! What real grief does him surprise,
Who suffers that, from which with care he flies?
If then you only do such things decline,
As are within thy power, by Nature thine,
Nothing shall ever frustrate your design.
But if from Sickness, Want, or Death, you fly,
In Sorrow you shall live, with Terrors die.
VII.
Therefore be sure, that your aversions fall
Only on things which you your own may call,
But for the present all desires suspend,
For if to things not in your power they tend,
Folly and Grief you will find, but lose your end.
And as for things, even in your power, what is fit,
It may be well presumed, you know not yet.
What Is most to be esteemed, what most admired,
What with most fervency and zeal desired.
Be wary then, as cautious Generals are,
When they for entrance at some breach prepare,
Where Ambuseade, or bursting Mines they fear.
Do not engage so soon, till Reason scout,
And first survey the object round about;
Think that dark Snares thick in your way are laid,
Think that each step may on some danger tread,
Approach with prudent leisure, that with ease
You may withdraw your Forces when you please.
VIII.
In things that charm the Soul, which love incite,
By Natures force, use, profit, or delight,
Beginning from the meanest things, that share
Your tender thoughts, consider what they are.
As thus: Suppose some modish new Device,
Of Potters skill in Earthen Ware you prize,
Consider it is but varnished Clay, that is broke
By every light and accidental stroke;
This when the pleasing Toy you broken find,
The puny loss shall not disturb your mind.
Thus if a kind soft Wife, or prattling Boy,
With Beauty charm, and a Paternal Joy,
Consider these dear objects of your Love,
Which round your heart with so much pleasure move
Are but mere Mortal Pots of finer Clay,
Wrought with more Art, more subject to decay;
Poor, feeble, sickly things, of humane kind,
To the long cares of a short life confined,
The riotous sport of Death, whose Beauties must
Crumble to their first principles of Dust.
Armed with these thoughts, you never shall bewail
The loss of things so ruinous and frail.
IX
In every thing you undertake, it is fit
You in true Judgments Scales examine it;
Weigh every circumstance, each consequence,
And usual accident arising thence.
As thus: Suppose you for the Bath prepare,
Consider the disorders frequent there,
One throwing Water in another face,
Some railing, others justled from their place,
This Bully giving, that receiving blows,
Some picking Pockets, others stealing Clothes.
With safety thus you the wished Port may make,
If thus you Preface what you undertake:
I Will instantly go wash, resolved to do
What Nature and my Will incline me to.
And thus, in all things else, prepare your mind,
And though, perhaps, you some disturbance find,
When you prepare to wash unshockt you will say,
This hindrance we expected in our way
This we considered, when resolved to do,
What nature, and our will inclined us to.
This we resolved on, for we needs must miss
Our purposed end, when vexed at things like this.
X.
Unjustly Men of nature's laws complain,
As cause of all their misery and pain.
Nothing in Nature can afflict them, no
It Is their opinion only breeds their woe;
If wretched, that alone has made them so.
They their own Bridewel in their breasts do bear*
And their own Judge, and Executioner.
Not death it self (how grim so ere it seem,)
Is truly Terrible, or it had been
As dreadful to great Socrates as thee,
Even his strong Soul had shrunk with fear, but he
Outstaid the prejudice, and showed it was mean,
A Notion void of sense, a waking dream,
Such as from ill disgested thoughts does steam.
A Monster, which you paint with hollow eyes,
Attended with sad looks, and mournful cries.
A Scarecrow, which thine own opinion made,
From this you fly, of this you are afraid.
Here I join two Chapters together, because in some Books* find them so, and
the sense requires it.
When then we meet some check in some design,
When at each little hindrance we repine,
Let Us lay the fault at our own doors, and blame
The giddy whimsies which our fancies frame,
Those ill-shapt Centaurs of a cloudy brain.
To blame another; for things managed ill,
Things subject to thy power, and Sovereign will,
Shows want of thought, Philosophy, and skill.
To blame thy self, shows thou have but begun
The glorious Race nor have it thoroughly run;
He that blames neither, only wins the prize,
Is justly Crowned by all, is only wise.
XI.
Be not transported with too great a sense
Of any outward objects excellence.
For should the pampered Courser which you feed
Of swiftest heels, and of the noblest breed,
Through sense of vigor, strength of Oats and Hay,
From his full Manger turn his head, and say,
Am I not beautiful, and sleek, and gay:
It Were to be born in him, the speech might suit
The Parts and Education of the Brute:
But when with too much pleasure you admire
Your Horses worth, and vainly boasts his sire,
And tire us out with endless idle prate
About his crest, his color, or his gate.
It Is plain, you think his owner fortunate.
You're proud he is yours, and vainly claim as due
What to the Beast belongs, and not to you.
Too plainly is your selfish folly shown,
Adding your Horses virtues to your own.
Well then perhaps you will ask what is yours of these
Dear outward things; that seem so much to please?
Why nothing but the use: if then go choose
What Is truly good, what is not so refuse,
If the well chosen good you righly use,
As Nature's light informs you, then alone
You may rejoice in something of your own.
XII.
As in a Voyage, when you at Anchor ride,
You go on shore fresh water to provide;
And perhaps gather what you chance to find,
Shelfish or Roots of palatable kind;
Yet still you ought to fix your greatest care
Upon your Ship, upon your business there:
Still thoughtful, least perhaps the Master call,
Which if he do, then you must part with all
Those darling trifles, that retard your have,
Least bound like Sheep you by constraint are cast
Into the hold. Thus in your course of Life,
Suppose you a lovely Son, or beauteous Wife,
Instead of those forementioned trinkets find,
And bless your Stars, and think your fortune kind;
Yet, still be ready, if the Master call,
To cast your burden down, and part with all,
Forsake the beauteous Wife, and lovely Son,
Run to your Ship; without reluctance run;
Nor look behind, but if grown old and gray,
Keep always near your Ship, and never stay
To stoop for worthless lumber on the way.
Short is the time allowed, to make your coast,
Which must not for such 'tastless joy be lost.
Your reverend play*things will but ill appear,
Besides you will find they will cost you very dear:
It Is well if Age can its own weakness bear.
Unmanned with dotage; when you're called upon
How will you drag the tiresome luggage on?
With Tears and Sighs, much folly you will betray,
And crawle with pain undecently away.
XIII.
Wish not that things not in your power may run'
As you would have them; wish them as they are done'
Wish them just as they are, just as you see;
Thus shall you never disappointed be.
You seem some sharp disease to undergo,
Alas it is vain to wish it were not so:
It Is but the Bodies pain, a surly ill;
Which may impede the body, not the will:
For all the Actions of the obsequious mind,
Are in your power, to your own choice confined
Thus strength and vigor may your nerves forsake
And lameness from your Feet all motion take,
But can in thee not the least hindrance make.
It Is in thy power to resolve not to go,
Judge if it be an hinderance or no.
You on your Feet may an embargo lay,
As well as chance or natural decay.
Consider thus, in all things else you will find
Nothing can hinder, or confine the mind;
In spite of every accident you're free,
Those hinder something else but cannot thee.
XIV.
In every thing that happens search your mind,
And try what force, what faculties you find
For the encounter of the object fit,
In the same moment when you meet with it:
As if some Beauteous Female you espy,
Whose powerful air detains your wandering eye,
Straight Ransacking the Treasures of your Soul;
You Will find strong Temperance will that power control,
Whose cool directions presently assuage
The keenest Fires, the Dog Star Beauty's rage.
These (if you mean to conquer) soon disarm
Each softning Smile, and each obliging Charm.
Are any Hardships of laborious weight
Imposed, by Fortitude they are conquered straight*
Nor rolling Seas, nor an impetuous Wind
Can overset this ballast of the Mind;
Secure of Storms you on the Billows ride,
And stem the furious current of the tide.
Are you abused? Has any done you wrong
By the base Venom of a railing Tongue?
Soft patience gives an easy remedy,
Deadens the force of the Artillery;
The Poison spreads into the yielding Air,
Unhurt you find it pass and vanish there.
In your own Breast you will always find supply
Of aid: provide you make this scrutiny,
No entrance of the Foe you need to fear,
You Will find the Avenues guarded every where.
XV.
With men it is usual, when deprived of ought*
Which with much pleasure entertained the thought
To say, that such a thing they have lost. In you,
Who the great search of Wisdom do pursue,
To say you have lost is mean; say you have restored
What bounteous God did for a while afford.
Your only Son, your dearest Hope is dead;
Why do you beat your Breast, and shake your Head?
Why Man? he is but restored, returned again,
To the kind owners hand from whence he came.
You Have lost your Land by Fraud, a vain mistake,
How is that lost that is but given back?
But he that thus deceived me, was not he
A Villain; and a Knave, What Is that to thee.
What is it to thee? is he a Knave or no
By whom he takes, who did the gift bestow?
Was It not his own? you will grant me, I suppose,
To whom he would, he might of's own dispose.
While he allows use what belongs to him,
Not as your own, as Travelers their Inn,
Who as at home are treated while they pay,
But claim no title longer than they stay*
XVI.
You would be wise, I Will teach you if you please,
Withdraw your mind from such wild thoughts as these;
If I my wonted diligence forget,
My gainful drudgery; how shall I eat?
I certainly shall starve for want of meat.
If I indulge, and not Chastize my Boy,
My Lenity his Morals may destroy;
He still will steer the course he has begun,
And to the very height of Lewdness run.
I tell thee Mortal, that it is better far,
To dye with thirst and hunger, free from care,
With a serene and an undaunted mind,
Than live in Wealth, to its dire cares confined.
As for the Boy, it is better far that he
Become a Proverb for Debauchery;
It Is better he were hanged It Is desired that the Wise will not be offended at
this Word, for if it be no matter, and of no concern, whether the Boy be lewd
or no, it is no matter, and of no concern, whether the Boy be hanged, for this
likewise, (...).
, than you should share
A moments grief by your reforming care:
But this is more than difficult you will say;
Too hard a Rule for flesh and blood to obey;
Yet by a former rule it is easy made;
Begin by smallest things, as I have said;
Suppose your Wine be stolen, your Oil be shed;
And thus take comfort, where is the loss? if I
At such a rate Tranquillity can buy?
If Constancy at such a rate be bought?
And there is not any thing that is got for naught.
Suppose you call your Servant, he is at play;
Or when he is present, minds not what you say:
And is the quiet of your Soul perplexed
At this? he gets the better if you're vexed;
He grows your Master, while he can torment*
Give not such power to the vile negligent.
XVII.
Would you be wise? never take it ill you're thought
A Fool, because you tamely set at naught
Things not within your power, but pass 'em by
Without a wish, with a regardless eye;
A senseless Stock, because no loss or pain
Makes you lament, or childishly complain.
Never pretend to skill, nor wish to seem
Deep Learned, nor court a Popular esteem:
But if, admired by men, you pass for wise,
And draw their listening Ears, and following Eyes,
Rather mistrust, and doubt your self from thence,
They Are oftener fond of Folly than of Sense.
While they admire, while you their praises hear,
You're nearer to the Fool than e're you were;
It Is very likely some gross Vanity,
They fancy in themselves, and love to see
Ripened in you to full maturity:
As lust of Glory, or a strong desire
Of Wealth, or Power, or Splendor in attire.
It Is altogether vain, to think to adhere
To the strict principles agreed on here,
While you the course quite contrary do steer,
To things not in your power; which if you reach,
You needs must quit the Discipline we teach.
XVIII.
If you desire your Children, Friends, or Wife
Should never dye, but share Immortal Life
With the blessed Gods, it is perfect Lunacy;
Bedlam has many a wiser man than thee:
A Doctor and dark Room may do thee good;
Take Physic, I advise thee, and let Blood.
Will nothing but Impossibles go down?
You wish that what is not in your power may own
Subjection to your Will; and would confine
What Is in another power to be in thine.
Thus if you wish your Son may blameless be,
Though he has raked the sink of Infamy,
It Is a return of your Infirmity;
A spice of madness still: As well you might
Wish Vice were Virtue, wish that Black were White.
Is wishing then denied? And must our mind
To the dull present only be confined?
No, doubtless you may wish; nor need you fear
Defeat, provide you wish within your Sphere.
XIX.
Him, and him only, we may justly call
The powerful Lord, the Sovereign of all;
Whose power's such, that as he please he may
Keep what he will, or give, or take away.
If then thou would be free, a Monarch still;
Nor wish, nor shun, what is in another will.
Thus what you would you shun, or wish you have;
Thus are you free; if otherwise, a Slave.
XX.
With the same manners, which when you're a Guest
You use at some rich Neighbors sumptuous Feast,
Manage the rest of your affairs of life
With easy Conversation, void of strife;
Void of rude noise: As when some Novelty
Is handed round the Table; if it is nigh
Stretch forth yourhand, take share with modesty.
If it pass by, do not detain by force,
Nor snatch at it, 'twill show your breeding course:
Is it not near you yet, at distance placed,
Show not your greediness by too much haste;
Nor, like a hungry Waiter standing by,
Devour it at a distance with your Eye.
Abstain a while, it is but a minutes fast,
Take patience, Man, 'twill surely come at last.
Now if the same Behavior be your guide,
In all the actions of your life beside,
As in respect of Children, Wife, Estate,
Of being rich, or made a Magistrate;
If modestly you take, and thank kind Heaven
For any of these Blessings to you given;
Or if deprived of ought, you straight resign
All to its will; nor peevishly repine.
Or if as yet unblest, you meekly wait
With humble patience, the Decrees of Fate;
Not desperate, nor yet importunate.
Some time or other, when the Gods think fit,
Blessed with Eternal Banquets you shall sit
Among the immortal Powers, and free from care,
Perpetual Joys and Happiness shall share.
But if so great your Soul, as to abstain,
And bravely with a noble scorn disdain
These outward proffers, which Mankind do bless,
You're sure a God, you cannot sure be less.
For what is a God, but a blessed Being freed
From Cares, that never dies, or stands in need?
You shall not only be the Guest of Heaven,
But with the foremost rank of Gods be even;
Equal in power. By methods such as these
Great Heraclitus, great Diogenes,
And some like them, to deathless honors rise;
Who, with the Immortal, in due Glory shine;
Who, as they well deserved, were called Divine.
XXI.
When you see any one with tears bemoan
The loss of Goods, or absence of a Son,
Whom he perhaps thinks drowned at Sea; beware
You be not biased here, and fondly share
His foolish weakness, and commiserate
His ruined and deplorable estate,
While vainly he in earnest does bemoan
Things in another power, not in his own.
T` avoid this Error therefore keep in mind
This reasoning, it is of mighty use you will find.
What has befallen this man does not molest
His mind, nor plays the Tyrant in his breast;
He by his own opinion is distressed.
For could the thing it self afflict him, then
'T would work the same effect in other men.
But this we see disproved, since some men bear
The like Disasters, without sigh or tear.
You may indeed condole as far as words,
This pity mere Civility affords;
To tell him he is mistaken will inrage
His grief; to call him Fool will not assuage.
Beside it is rudeness, barbarous cruelty,
TO insult even over fancied misery.
Nay, we'll allow that you may sigh with him,
But then beware, lest you perhaps begin
To be too sensibly concerned within.
XXII.
While on this busy Stage, the World, you stay,
You're, as it were, the Actor of a Play;
Of such a part therein, as he thinks fit
To whom belongs the power of giving it.
Longer, or shorter, is your part, as he
The Master of the Revels shall decree.
If he command you act the Beggars part,
Do it with all your skill, with all your art,
Though mean the Character, yet never complain,
Perform it well; as just applause you will gain,
As he, whose Princely grandeur fills the Stage,
And frights all near him in Heroic rage.
Say you a Cit, or Cripple represent,
Let each be done with the best management.
It Is in your power to perform with Art,
Though not within your power to choose the part.
XXIII.
The direful Ravens, or the Night Owls voice,
Frightens the Neighborhood with boding noise;
While each believes the knowing Bird portends
Sure death, or to himself, or to his Friends;
Though all that the Nocturnal Prophet knows,
Is want of Food, which he by whooting shows.
But say this Oracle, with Wings and Beak,
As certain Truths as Delphick Priestess speak,
And that through prejudice you should suppose
This boder could futurity disclose,
Yet be not moved; distinguish thus, you're free,
These Omens threaten something else, not me:
Some danger to my Body, Goods, or Name,
My Children, or my Wife, they may proclaim;
But these are but the Appendixes of me,
To me these tokens all auspicious be,
Since I from outward accidents like these,
May reap much real profit, if I please.
XXIV.
If you would be Invincible, you may;
I Will show y' a certain and a ready way.
You cannot be conquered, if you never try
In any kind to get the Mastery.
It Is not within your power to bear away
The Prize, it is in your choice not to essay.
XXV.
When any man of greater power you see
Invested with the Robes of Dignity,
In Honors gaudiest, gayest Livery,
Dreaded by all; whose arbitrary will,
Whose very breath, whose every look can kill;
Whose power, and whose wealth know no restraint,
Whose greatness hardly flattery can paint:
Take care you be not here entangled by
The too great luster, that beguiles your eye;
Beware you do not envy his estate,
Nor think him happier because he is great.
For if true quiet and tranquillity,
Consist in things which in our power be,
What residence can Emulation find?
What room has restless Envy in the mind?
Envy and Happiness can never reside
In the same place, nor in one Breast abide;
Nor do you wish your self (if we may guess
Your real thoughts by what you do profess)
To be a Senator or General,
But to be free, (that is greater than them all.)
This freedom you would gladly learn, you say,
To which there is but one, one only way;
Which is to scorn, with brave and decent pride,
All things, that in another power reside.
XXVI.
Not he that beats thee, or with slanderous tongue
Gives thee ill Language, does thee any wrong,
Thine own false Notions give the injury:
These slander, give the affront, and cudgel thee.
When words traduce, or blows the limbs torment*
Which it is not in your power to prevent;
This presently you term an injury,
But give no tolerable reason why.
You plead your Carcass, and good Name are dear;
The wound goes to your Soul, that wounds you there;
It Is false, it is but a scratch; nor can it find
An entrance thither, or disturb your mind;
Without your own consent; an injury
To something else without, it is none to thee.
Thus when provoked, your own opinion blame,
It Is that provokes, and causes all the pain:
Wherefore beware, lest objects such as these
Gain your assent too soon, with too much ease,
Lest fancied harms your mind with grief affect,
Lest fancied bliss should gain too much respect.
Thus you will gain leisure, and a thinking time;
Your Notions with due measures to confine;
To add, to prune, to pollish, and refine.
XXVII.
Let Death, let Banishment, and every ill,
Which Mortals thoughts with apprehension fill;
Which most they dread, and with aversion fly,
Be always present to your thoughts, and eye
But chiefly Death, thus no mean thought shall find
Harbor, or entertainment in your mind.
Thus no base fear shall ever force you from
Your noble principles resolved upon.
Not Tyrants frowns, nor tortures shall enslave
Your fearless Soul, but generously brave,
You all their little malice may defy;
Armed only with the thought you once must dye.
Nor can Death truly formidable seem
To you, who with it have familiar been,
Who every day have the pale Bugbear seen.
Yet Death's the worst that you can undergo,
The utmost limit, the last Scene of Woe,
The greatest spite your enemy can show,
And yet no more, than what the Gout, or Stone,
With more malicious leisure might have done.
Armed with the thoughts of Death, no fond desire
Of Wealth, nor the deluding foolish fire
Of power, shall lead you on with hopes to gain,
What Death has sworn you shall not long retain.
XXVIII.
Wisdom, you say, is what you most desire,
The only charming blessing you admire,
Therefore be bold, and fit your self to bear
Many a taunt, and patiently to hear
The grinning foolish Rabble laugh aloud,
At you the sport and pastime of the crowd,
While in like jears they vent their filthy spleen,
Whence all this gravity, this careless mien?
And whence, of late, is this pretender come,
This new proficient, this Musheroom,
This young Philosopher with half a Beard?
Of him, till now, we have no mention heard.
Whence all this Supercilious pride of late?
This stiff behavior, this affected gate?
This will perhaps be said, but be not you
Sullen, nor bend a supercilious brow,
Lest thus you prove their vile reproaches true,
Which are but words of course, the excrement,
The usual malice which alike they vent
Upon the guilty, and the innocent.
But firmly still to what seems best adhere,
As if by Heavens commands you ordered were
To keep that Post, not to be driven from thence
By force, much less a scurrilous offense.
Which if you still maintain you shall become,
Even your Revilers admiration,
Forced to confess their faults, they will court you more
Than they reproached, or laughed at you before.
But if through mockery you tamely yield,
And quit your noble Station in the Field,
You're to be laughed at, on a double score,
First for attempting, then for giving over.
XXIX.
If to please others, studying to be dear
^n their kind thoughts, you move beyond your Sphere
And look abroad, respect, and praise to gain,
And the poor outward trifle, called a Name:
You lose the Character you wish to bear,
You lose your Station of Philosopher.
Let it suffice that such your self you know,
No matter whether other men think so.
Let it be to your self, if wise you would seem;
And it is enough, you gain your own esteem.
XXX.
Let not these thoughts torment you; I, alas!
In low ignoble Poverty shall pass
My wretched days, and unregarded lie
Buried alive, in dark obscurity;
No honor, no preferment, shall I have,
But Schoch'onless descend into the Grave:
This as a wondrous hardship you bemoan,
A grievous ill, when really it is none;
The outward want of power, preferment, place,
Is no more misery, than it is disgrace:
And that it is no disgrace I shall evince;
Where Is the disgrace you are not made a Prince,
Or that you're not invited to a Feast,
It Is none, by every man of Sense confessed,
For where is the man in's Wits that can expect
That things not in your power you should effect?
And why of want of power should you complain?
Who can no place, or honor, justly claim,
Except in things in your own power; in these
You may be great, and powerful as you please.
But then you plead, I thus shall useless grow
To those I love, nor shall I kindness show,
Nor wealth, nor power, on my best friends bestow,
Nor by my interest cause them to become,
Free of each gainful Privilege in Rome,
Nor when I please an Officer create,
Nor raise them to be Utensils of State.
And who e're told you yet, that these things lie
Within your power or capacity?
Or where is the man, that can to others grant
That Place, or Honor, he himself does want?
But they are importunate, alas, and cry,
Get it, that we your friends may gain thereby:
Answer them thus, I Will do it if I can,
So I may keep my self a modest man,
Just to my self, still innocent and free,
A man of Honor and Integrity,
I Will use my best endeavors; if I may
Gain it on these conditions, show the way;
But if you think I Will this true Wealth forgo,
That you may something gain, that is not so:
See how unjust this Self-partiality,
And to be plain, you are no friends for me,
If you prefer a base penurious end,
Before an honest, and a modest friend;
Suppose your choice were such, then show me how
What you so earnestly desire, to do,
And keep my Principles of freedom too.
But think not I will part with happiness,
That you some worthless pleasure may possess.
But thus your Country nothing by you gains*
What Is this advantage that your Country claims?
Is it that Baths you make, with cost and charge?
Or Porches build unimitably large?
Where late Posterity may read your Name,
Which there you Consecrate to lasting Fame;
These gifts from you your Country can expect
No more, than Physic from an Architect.
Or that a Shoemaker should Armor make,
Or of your Foot, a Smith the measure take.
For it is enough, if each perform in's Trade
The Work for which he seems by Nature made*
If each man mind the way, in which he is placed,
The Smith his Anvil, Shoemaker his Last.
And thus if you the height of Wisdom reach,
And what so well you know, as well can teach,
If by these noble methods you profess,
You with another honest man can bless
The City where you dwell, you give no less
Than he, who on his Country does confer
Porches, or Baths, or Amphitheater.
Well then in the City, where I useful am,
What Office shall I have? Such as you can,
Keeping your Honor, and your Conscience free,
With spotless Innocence, and Modesty.
But if while fondly you desire to please
Your fellow Citizens, you part with these;
You labor but in vain, for where is the use
Of one grown Impudent, and Scandalous?
XXXI.
Is any one saluted, or embraced
With more respect than you, or higher placed
At Table, is he thought more grave and wise,
Of better parts, and abler to advise,
Grudge not: but if these things be good, rejoice
They Are placed so well, and meet so good a choice.
And if they are bad, why should you take offense,
That you in these have not the preference?
But how can you, that neither cringe nor bow,
Nor other Antic Spaniel tricks do show,
Nor flatter, fawn, forswear, assent, or lie,
Nor use that servile Knavish industry,
By which base supple Slaves their ends obtain,
The same respect, or the same favor gain?
And how should you, who scorn to condescend,
With early morning Visits to attend
The awaking of a rich, proud, powerful friend,
Expect to share the advantages that fall
To him, that helps to fill his crowded Hall?
Or, like a Sentinel, still walks before
His Patrons House, and almost courts his Door;
Who, after long attendance, thinks he is blessed,
As much as Persian bowing to the East,
When the Sun rises from his watery Nest,
And swears the Eastern God does not dispense
A kinder, or a gentler influence,
And that each look, each smile of his, does bring
Warmth to the Summer, beauty to the Spring.
Who, when his Lordship frowns, admires the grace
And manly fierceness, that adorns his face.
Applauds the thunder, of his well mouthed Oaths,
And then the modish fashion of his Clothes,
And vows the Tailor, who the Garments made,
Happy in making them, though never paid.
These are the means by which he stands possessed
Of favors, by each Fly-blown Fool caressed,
At every Feast an acceptable Guest.
These if you would purchase, and not give the price,
Unjust, unsatiable's your avarice:
As for familiar instance, What Is the rate,
The Gardener holds, and sells his Lettice at?
Let us suppose a farthing, he that buys
Bears off the purchase, but lays down the price,
Your Sallad wants these Lettice, you withhold
The small equivalent, for which they are sold.
Nor is your case a jot the worse for this,
For as the Lettice which he bought are his,
So yours, who did not buy, the farthing is.
Thus if you're not invited out to Dine,
You pay not for his Meat, nor for his Wine,
For he (be not deceived) who entertains,
Does it not Gratis, he too looks for gains.
Right bounteous he seems, but sells his Meat,
And praise expects for every bit you eat,
Each luscious draught, each pleasing delicate,
Is but a specious Snare, a tempting Bait;
You the rich entertainment dearly buy,
By mean obsequious servile flattery.
If then these things, that must be purchased thus,
Seem useful to you, and commodious,*
Lay down the value, do not think to get*
Unless you give the rate at which they are set.
These if on easier terms you would provide,
And without paying for them be supplied,
How can your foolish wish be satisfied?
Well then, but shall I nothing have instead
Of this dear Feast, that still runs in my head?
Yes, if you're not insatiable, you have
Enough in lieu thereof, you're not a Slave,
You have not praised him, who is below your hate,
You Have not admired his Dinner, nor his Plate,
Nor past a Complement against your will,
Nor in low cringes shown your awkward skill,
Nor fed his Dogs, to show the vast respect
The Master of the Favorites may expect,
Nor did y' admire his sumpt'ous Furniture,
Nor all that civil Insolence endure,
With which at meeting he informs you how,
When you depart his presence you must bow.
Nor have you born his arrogance and pride,
While he surveys his board on every side,
And fancies that he is bountiful and great,
And thinks he makes you happy by his meat.
XXXII.
Nature's design, decrees, and will, we read,
In things concerning which we are all agreed,
Which no dispute, or controversy need,
As, say your Neighbors Boy has broke a Glass,
You're apt to cry, these things must come to pass.
So if your own be broke, you ought from thence
To learn to bear it with like patience,
As if 'twere his, thence by degrees ascend,
As thus, suppose your neighbor lose a Friend,
Bury his Wife, or Son, I know you will cry,
It Is not so strange a thing that Mortals dye.
But say the case be yours, the loss your own,
Then what a howling's there, what pitious moan,
What tears you shed? Ah me! forlorn! undone!
I Have lost, you cry, I Have lost my only Son!
The innocent, sweet, beauteous Youth is dead,
He Is gone, and all my Joys are with him fled.
When all this while you should remember how
Your Neighbors case, like yours, affected you.
Without a sigh, without a tear, or grown,
You bore his loss, and so should bear your own.
XXXIII.
As no Man sets up marks that he may miss,
So no such real thing as ill there is;
For should we grant that ought in Nature's ill,
'Twould argue cruelty, and want of skill
In the great Artist, who all wise and kind,
Nothing that is not for thy good designed,
Nothing to grieve, or to torment thy mind.
This you think wisely answered, when you say,
Suppose a Ruffian beat me on the way,
Or force me publicly in open Street,
To take a kick from every Slave I meet,
Unjust the violence, nor can I bear
Such an affront; I must be angry here;
Even you will acknowledge this to be an ill;
Thus you remain in your old Error still.
I thought that we had cleared that point before,
With such plain proof, that it required no more;
I showed you 'twas no ill, and bid you blame
False Notions, the base issue of your Brain.
You're angry at the Man who did expose
Your Body to the injury of blows,
And yet expose your mind to grief and pain,
As often as any Railer's pleased to stain,
With vile Reproach, the beauty of your Name.
Judge then your self, but judge Impartially,
Who Is guilty of the greater injury,
Since you expose your Mind, your Body he.
To grieve, be angry, even or to hate,
Are ills indeed, but such as you create,
For these let not kind Nature be arraigned,
You, only you, are to be justly blamed*
Wherefore in every thing you undertake,
Let Judgment sit, and Just enquiry make,
Of all preliminaries leading to
The action, which you have designed to do;
Of every consequence and accident,
That probably may wait on the event,
Be sure that you can bear it, though it be
Reproach, or Blows, or Death, with bravery;
Which if you carelessly neglect to weigh,
Though brisk and vigorous, at the first essay,
You Will meet some shameful hind'rance by the way:
XXXIV.
You say you would win the Olive Crown, and lust
To reap the Harvest of the Olympic Dust;
That History may reckon by your Name,
From the great Year, when such a one o'recame:
It Is brave, and by the Gods I wish the same.
But then consider first what is to be done,
Through what a course of Hardships you must run
E're you proceed, and what may be the event,
And consequence of such a great attempt.
With a strict course of life you must begin,
Confined by Methods and sharp Discipline,
According to direction; you must eat
Nothing that is Boiled, and such a kind of Meat
As is allowed, then you must drink no Wine,
Nor yet cold Water, and observe your time
For Exercise, you must your self inure,
The Summers heat, and Winters cold t'indure.
These preparations made, you then must try,
If possible to gain the Victory,
And that not without labor, danger, harm,
Or loss of Ribs, perhaps a Leg or Arm;
And when whole pecks of Dust you have swallowed down,
Been lasht, and all things requisite have done,
It Is possible that you may lose the Crown.
These hazards when you have thoroughly surveyed,
You still may venture on; nor be dismayed,
You Will find the burden lighter which you have weighed,
Else you will desist, and jade, like wanton Boys,
Who tired, and pleased, with novelty of Toys,
Scarce warm in one, begin another play,
And scorn the tedious sport of yesterday.
Who sometimes Pipers, Wrestlers, represent,
Or with tough Cudgel try their hardiment;
Sometimes the Horn, or the shrill Trumpet sound,
Act Tragedies, and kill without a Wound.
Thoughtless as they, one while your hand you will try
In Wrestling, Fencing next, then Poetry,
In Rhet'rick; nay, perhaps Philosophy:
But fail in each, and all these pains bestow,
Ridiculous as possible to grow,
And make a wondrous bustle to express
A reverend, and more serious Childishness,
Like a grave Ape, whom Nature did create
A Type of you, who can but imitate;
Who one thing now, another straight admire,
Who hurried on with violent desire,
Plunge over head and ears, before you know
How deep the silent smooth faced Waters flow,
Or weigh the Hardships you must undergo.
Thus some, when any much famed man they spy
Admired for Wisdom, and for Modesty,
Much listened to, and courted every where,
And then, perhaps, some grave Quotation hear,
How true speaks Socrates, nor can it be
That any should discourse as well as he,
Are taken with an Itch of being Wise;
They too, forsooth, must needs Philosophize.
XXXV.
Having considered thus what is to be done,
The hazards, hardships, and the risque you run,
Consider with what strength you are endowed,
What Nature for the encounter has allowed;
As if y' affect the Olimpick Exercise,
Examine well your Back, your Shoulders, Thighs,
What Brawn, what Sinews for the Enterprise.
Nor will each sort of strength suit each exploit,
This runs, that leaps, this wrestles, throws the Coit;
So if the Combat with your self you try,
And by strict methods of Philosophy,
Your own rebellious passions strive to tame,
And thus a more illustrious Conquest gain,
You cannot expect to indulge and gratify
Your Genius with accustomed Luxury.
Nay, it is a Contradiction, it is to obey
Those very Lusts you mean to drive away.
You should consider whether you can bear
The want of far-fetched Dainties, traveled Cheer;
You should consider whether you can Dine,
Without a Catalogue of costly Wine,
Whether that squeamishness you can forget
That makes you keep an Almanac for Meat,
That makes you sweat, and faint, when you behold
A novelty that is more than one day old;
And to be short, and serious, what you think
Of Roots for Food, and the cold Stream for Drink.
Philosophy, like some brave Hero bred,
With Labors hardened, and with Hardships fed,
Awake, she cries, and let the early Sun
Blush that he sees his vigilance outdone;
Arise, pursue, press forward, drive away
With cheerful toil, the tedious lingering day,
Business thy sport, and Labor be thy play.
You should consider how you can dispense
With leaving home to gain experience;
How you can part with Friends, and Native Air;
How the Fatigues of Travel you can bear;
How in a thread bare Garment, old and torn,
You can endure the slights, and saucy scorn
Of Pages, Grooms, who in proud Liv'ries dressed,
Fancy a tattered Coat a mighty Jest;
How it will relish with you to be used
Worse than the basest Slaves, to be refused
All Honor, Power, Trust, Preferment, Place,
Not to be called your Worship, styled your Grace.
In these examine well your self, and try
Whether you're willing, at such rates to buy
Freedom, a quiet mind, and constancy:
Lest like the Boys I told you of, you prove
Now a Philosopher, then fall in love
With frothy trash of Orators, and thence
Straight a Collector of the Excise commence;
Then tired with this, your fond desires dilate,
And wish to be a Minister of State.
These are wide contraries, as opposite
As Virtue is to Vice, as Black to White.
You can but make one single Man, and he
A Wise good Man, or Foolish Knave must be:
He the full sway over himself must have,
Or be to things, not in his power, a Slave;
Skilled in these inward Arts, or those without,
Be Wise, or herd amongst the common rout;
Or a Philosopher, or Idiot.
XXXVI.
Let your respects and services agree,
And be proportioned to the Quality
Of him, to whom these Services you pay;
Is he your Father? Know you must obey,
And cherish him, considering all his care
For you, when weak and helpless yet you were,
And bear with him in all things, knowing how
Nature obliged him to be kind to you;
All this to Gratitude it self is due.
He heard your peevish brawling, strove to allay
Your Childish wrath, and wiped your tears away,
And cannot you bear an angry word, or blow,
From one s'indulgent, one that loved you so,
Who gave you Being? Who may well be said
Twice to have given you life, in that he fed,
In that with so much tenderness he bred
Your younger years* Oh! but perhaps you will say,
He Is wicked and severe, I cannot obey.
A lame excuse, let him be what he will,
Morose, or wicked, he is your Father still;
What e're his Morals are, he may expect
From you at least, a filial respect;
You cannot believe that Nature's bound to find
A Parent for you, suited to your mind.
Well, but you think your Brother injures you,
You ask me here what Nature bids you do?
Nature obliges you to pass it by,
Bids you neglect the fancied injury,
Nor mind what is done by him, but bids you show
The hearty love you to your Brother owe,
Which cannot be shown by more commodious light,
Than when y' oppose your goodness to his spite;
And what long since I told you think on still,
No one can injure you against your will,
The wrong you suffer does from fancy grow;
You then are hurt, when you imagine so.
If by this steady balance then, you try
The mutual Duties of Society,
Which Men to Men, Neighbors to Neighbors owe,
Which Soldiers to their General should show,
Which Citizens should pay their Magistrate;
You Will grant they are to be paid, without debate,
Offense, or envy, prejudice, or hate.
XXXVII.
In this the main point of Religion lies,
To have right Notions of the Deities;
As that such Beings really are, that they
Govern the World with just and prudent sway,
That cheerfully you are obliged to obey
All their commands, well satisfied to rest
On what they do, as ordered for the best;
That whatsoever is by them decreed,
From an All-knowing Wisdom does proceed.
Thus their wise Government you will fear to blame,
Or, as neglected, peevishly complain*
But it is not likely you should have this sense,
These reverent Notions of their Providence,
Nor can you without murmuring resent,
Their partial, and unequal management,
If you distinguish into Good and Ill,
Things not depending on your power and will.
Now if these attributes of Bad and Good,
Of things within your power, be understood,
You lay the fault at your own Door, and clear
The Gods of being partial and severe.
But if you think that outward things can be
Some good, some bad; with this absurdity
You wound the goodness of the Deity;
Your God a vile malicious Fiend you make,
Cruel, or weakly, given to mistake.
Whom, when you foolishly averse would fly
Death, or like natural necessity,
Or any thing, which you have wished for, miss,
You needs must hate, and say the fault is his,
To whom, though he has kindly given you will
To wish, or not to wish, y' impute the ill;
And, as it is natural, with like hate reflect
On him, the cruel cause, as on the effect.
Insects, and Brutes themselves, have thus much sense*
Alike to abhor the offender and the offense;
Thus a fierce Cur follows and bites the Stone,
And then pursues the Man by whom 'twas thrown:
As on the contrary, they love, the admire,
What serves their wants, and answers their desire,
And none, sure, but a Madman can rejoice
In that which plagues him, ruins, and destroys.
Hence it is the Father's hated by the Son,
Hence it is the Grave Old man grows troublesome;
The dry Bones keeps him from a large Estate,
To which he fears he shall succeed too late:
He therefore daily wishes he were dead,
That his kind Heir might flourish in his stead.
Hence that pernicious fatal War arose,
Which Thebes to Blood and Ruin did expose,
For proud Eteocles resolved to Reign,
And Polynices would his Right maintain,
For both would rule, and both would be obeyed,
Each thought his Brother did his Right invade;
Each thought Dominion was a Sovereign good;
Each would assert his Interest with his Blood.
Hence it is the Plowman, when tempestuous Rain*
Or Draught, have rendered all his Labor vain,
Rails on the Gods: Hence it is the Sailer raves,
When tossed with furious Winds, and threatening Waves:
Hence it is the Merchant curses, if he fail
Of a quick Market, or a gainful Sale.
Hence they who lose Children, or Wife, complain*
That they, alas! have Sacrificed in vain;
What e're they suffer, vainly wish, or fear,
The Gods, for certain, all* the blame must bear.
Nor are they pious longer than they find
The Gods are grateful, in remembrance kind:
Only devout while favors they obtain*
They make Religion but a kind of gain.
Now he that only wishes, things may be
Just as they are, as the blessed Gods decree,
Whose wise aversion only does decline
Things he has power to shun, can never repine,
Nor be provoked to murmur or blaspheme,
Nor through false Notions lay the fault on them*
He Is the true pious Man. But here you will say,
If we may only wish for what we may
Bestow upon our selves, pray where is the need
That we raise Temples, or that Victims Bleed?
Why should we Presents on their Altars lay?
And why with Incense Court them every day?
Where Is the Reward for this? What Is the return
Of all this Smoke, and the Perfumes we burn?
Will you not worship them, unless you have
All that your Lust and Avarice can crave?
Methinks they have given enough, in that you live
Under their prudent care, who know to give
Better than you to ask; who that bestow,
Which most for your convenience they know.
Let Us add to this, (if this will not suffice,)
They Have made you capable of being Wise.
Are these mean reasons why you Sacrifice?
Wherefore your Offerings and Oblations pay
With usual Rites, after your Countries way;
Let them be given, as what you really owe,
Without the allay of vanity or show,
Not niggardly, nor with too great expense,
With all devotion, care, and diligence.
XXXVIII.
When you consult the Oracle, or those
Who the deep secrets of the Gods disclose,
Who filled with a Divine* Prophetic Page,
The Will of Heaven, and its Decrees presage,
It Is plain, the dark event you cannot tell,
Else why do you consult the Oracle?
But if you're a Philosopher, you know*
Thus much at least of it, before you go;
That if of things not in our power, the event
Must be infallibly indifferent,
Nor good, nor bad* when therefore you draw nigh
The hallowed Cavern of the Deity,
The Will, and the Decrees of Fate to inquire,
Approach without aversion, or desire,
Else to the Sacred Vault you will trembling come,
Like men who are arraigned, to hear their Doom.
And know, that whatsoever the Fates ordain,
From thence, at least, this benefit you gain,
That rightly using this, or that Decree,
You make a Virtue of Necessity;
And what this benefit does most inhaunce,
It Is such as will admit no hinderance:
Therefore with Courage to the Gods repair,
To whom you freely may your doubts declare,
As to your Friends, in whom you most confide,
Whose Prudence and Integrity you have tried;
And what they bid you do, let it be done
With the most prudent care, remembering whom:
You chose for Counselors, whom you neglect,
If their advice you slight or disrespect.
Nor must you every little doubt propose
To their Divinities, but such as those,
Which as Wise Socrates was wont to say,
Are very dark, abstruse, and out of the way;
Such as are cleared by their events alone,
Which by no humane methods can be shown*
You must not such light Queries here propound,
Which every man of common sense may sound:
As whether Medicines can restore the Dead,
Or Hellebore can purge a Mad-man's Head.
No Riddles here, in which old Wives delight,
With which those aged Sphinxes pass the Night,
Nor such a knot as easily's untied,
Nor questions which by Sieve and Sheers are tried,
But something difficult, and much involved,
Fit only by a God to be resolved.
Therefore when Reason says you're bound to oppose,
Though hazarding your Life, your Countries Foes,
And with Heroic danger to defend
Him you think worthy to be called your Friend,
What need of Heavenly information here,
Of Prophet, Augur, or Astrologer?
Nothing but Falsehood, or base Cowardice,
Can make a scruple of a case like this,
Since Reason has determined long ago,
Whether you ought to exppose yourself or no.
Nay, let us suppose that you're resolved to try
This dubious weighty point by Augury,
And that by some unlucky Omens meant,
Death, or the loss of Limbs, or Banishment;
Yet should these mischiefs really ensue,
Which by foreboding signs do threaten you,
In spite of Exile, Wounds, nay Death, you must
Be to your Friend, and to your Country, Just;
And Reason still commands you to redress,
The one in danger, the other in distress.
Remember how that Miscreant was used,
Who this kind office to his friend refused,
By the Just Oracle, who drove away
The ungrateful Wretch, and thus was heard to say*
Be gone, thou base Deserter of thy Friend*
Thy presence does our Deity offend,
Thou saw the Murderer give the fatal wound;
Thou saw thy Friend lie weltring on the ground
Without concern; thou did behold him bleed,
And not relieving did approve the deed.
Depart, for thou, even thou, thy Friend have slain;
Hence, thou abandoned Wretch, thou do our shrine profane.
XXXIX.
Frame to your self some forms, some rules, whereby
To guide your life, on which to keep your eye,
Which whether to your self you live recluse,
Or which in Conversation you may use;
For there are dangers, which the wise would fly
Both in Retirement and Society.
For neither can a Ship with safety ride
Within her Port, if not with Cables tied;
Nor can she be secure, when under Sail,
Though in fair Weather with a prosperous Gale,
Unless known Rules, by long Experience tried,
Her well-spread Canvas, and her Rudder guide.
Nor only in the Main do Tempests roar,
They strike the Flats, and riot on the shore;
And skilful Sailers, with Just reason doubt
Dangers within, as well as those without.
XL.
Let modest silence be your greatest care
In humane Conversation, and beware
Of being over talkative, and shun
That lewd perpetual motion of the Tongue,
That itch of speaking much, and be content
That your discourse (though short) be pertinent;
And when occasion serves, then speak your sense,
Without an over-weaning confidence.
Nor catch at every Bait, nor open at
The common opportunities of Chat:
As, such a Fencer played his part with skill,
That, like a Wrestler, breaks what Rib he will:
That such a Horse is of the fleetest kind,
And that his Dam engendered with the Wind.
That a full cry of deep-mouthed, long eared Hounds,
Is the most sweet, and ravishing of sounds.
That such a Lord with the best Wines does treat,
Has the best Cook, is the best read in Meat.
These are the threadbare Themes that please the crowd,
The ignorant, the thoughtless, and the proud.
But chiefly shun discourse concerning men,
Nor fondly this man praise, and that condemn,
For all immod'rate, and too lavish praise,
Too great an expectation's apt to raise:
And by reviling others you express
Your little Wisdom, but much bitterness.
Nor with absurd comparisons defame
One man, by adding to another Name:
For thus, by way of foil, the ones disgrace
Sets off the Character you mean to raise;
With Hemlock this you Crown, and that with Bays.
XLI.
Among your friends, with whom you may be free
If vain, or frivolous their converse be,
Or seem to savor of Indecency,
Alter the subject, sure you may invent
Some profitable, pleasing Argument,
Which like a gentle Tide, with easy force
May stop the current of the first discourse;
But among strangers learn to hold your Tongue,
Your good intentions may be construed wrong,
You may be termed impertinent or rude,
Wise out of season, and be said to intrude.
XLII.
Laughter, if rightly used, may be confessed
In some sort to distinguish Man from Beast,
While by due management it is allayed,
While the strict Rules of Reason are obeyed;
But shows, if over loud, or over long,
Your Head but weak, although your Lungs be strong.
For even a smile, not in its proper place,
Too Just a blemish on your Judgment lays;
But causless laughter at each thing you see:
That grinning of the thoughtless Mobile;
That senseless gaping mirth, that is expressed
Without the provocation of a Jest;
That wild Convulsive writhing of the face,
That quite disfigures it from what it was,
Does with humanity so little suit,
It makes you but a different sort of Brute.
XLIII.
Avoid the engagement of an Oath, or swear
As seldom as you can, at least forbear
To bind your self to what you cannot do,
And only swear to that which lies in you;
For it is a wicked, blasphemous offense,
To call the Gods to each Impertinence:
To make them Knights of the Post, to testify
That to be truth you know to be a lie.
XLIV.
If with Civility you can, decline
All public Feasts, and learn at home to Dine
With sober Food, at your own charge content;
But if obliged, in point of Complement,
To eat abroad, be it your care to shun
The vulgar Dregs of Conversation:
As common vile Discourse, and dirty Jests,
The nauseous merriment of greasy Feasts,
For if your Company be Lewd, you may
Soon grow as Dissolute and Lewd as they,
For there is Contagion in each Word they speak,
Each Simile they make, each Jest they break;
Their very breath invenoms all the Cheer,
As if the Harpy-Sisters had been there.
Thus hurtful Vapors, rising from the ground,
Poison what e're they meet, leave nothing sound.
Thus a blear'd weeping Eye is apt to make
The infected Eyes of the beholders ache.
Thus Sheep diseased, palled Wine, corrupted Fruit,
If mixed, the healthful, sprightly, sound, pollute.
XLV.
For Meat, Drink, Clothes, House, Servants, and the rest,
Which chiefly are the Bodies interest,
Take this prescription, you may safely use
Such a proportion as will most conduce,
To the internal welfare of your mind,
And that is as much as Nature has designed.
Take just as much of each, as may suffice
For health, and strengthening of your faculties*
What your necessities require, but fly
Whatever tends to Pride, or Luxury.
The frugal Belly's easily supplied,
With wholesome, homely fare well satisfied;
Nor hungry, does abstain from Meat, because
Not dressed with Art, with some peculiar Sause:
Nor thirsty, do you stay for choice of Wine,
Nor do rich delicates your parts refine:
Nay, the Mind surfeits as the Body does,
Intemperance has the same effect on both.
Our Ancestors on Roots and Acorns fed,
Drank the cool Brook, nor felt an aching Head:
Without Disease, or Pain, they lived to see
A numerous, and a well*grown Progeny,
And were, no doubt, as Witty and as Wise,
Without the helps of studied Rarities.
An Homespun Suit, though course, will keep you warm,
And the keen Winters rigor will Disarm
Better than costly Robes of Tyrian Dye,
Beset with Pearl, or rich Embroidery.
Nor need you such a stately House, as may
Afford a different Room for every day
Through the whole year, with a large spacious Hall,
Since one small Room may serve instead of all;
Since you in one may Eat, Drink, Walk, and Sleep.
And why so many Servants will you keep?
Where Is the necessity of all this State?
Is it below you on your self to wait?
Have you not Limbs, and Health, and Strength, to do
Those Offices, which they perform for you?
But you, perhaps, believe it is base, and mean,
On your own Strength, on your own Legs to lean,
And vainly think it is granted and allowed,
That to be generous is to be proud,
And therefore when you're pleased to take the air,
By Brawny Slaves you're carried in a Chair;
Therefore you hire a Cook to dress your Meat;
It Is much you do not think it is mean to Eat.
XLVI.
Before you're Married, strive to live as free
As possibly you can from Venery;
Though it is a Lust of a Rebellious kind,
That owns the least subjection to the mind,
The effort of Flesh and Blood, the furious Horse,
That bears against the Bit with headstrong force:
Yet you're obliged in Justice to refrain,
And to preserve your Body without stain.
For as you think 'twould lessen your repute
To Marry with a common Prostitute,
So you're obliged to give your self entire
To the chaste arms of her whom you admire;
But if you're borne so forcibly away,
As not for Hymen and her Rites to stay,
Yet still your Countries Laws claim Just respect,
Though you the Rules of Chastity neglect.
Though never so Rampant, sure you may abstain
From what is forbidden, from unlawful gain;
As from Adultery; nor need you wrong
Another, though your Lusts be never so strong;
Since there are other Liberties allowed,
TO assuage this scorching Fever of the Blood.
But if you're thoroughly mortified, and find
No Inclination left for Womankind,
Yet grow not proud upon it, nor those accuse,
Who court those Sensual Pleasures you refuse;
Nor boast your Virtue such, that you defy
The weak attractions of a pleasing Eye:
That you, forsooth, are cold as Scythian Ice,
For boasting is a most intemp'rate Vice,
Not worse the wanton sport that you despise.
No, it is the Letch'ry of the Mind, for which
There Is no excuse of Flesh and Blood, an itch
Of being praised, which rather than you will want,
Even you your self are your own Sycophant.
XLVII.
When you're informed that any one through spite,
Or an ill natured, scurrilous delight
Of railing, slanders you, or does accuse
Of doing something base, or scandalous,
Disquiet not your self for an excuse,
Nor blustering swear he wrongs you with a lie,
But slight the abuse, and make this calm reply:
Alas! he is Ignorant! For had he known
My other faults and follies, he had shown
Those too, nor had he spoke of this alone.
XLVIII.
There Is no great need that you should often appear
At Shows, or help to crowd the Theater:
But if it be expected you should be
Amongst the rest, at the Solemnity
Of Sacred Sports, when it is required that all
Should join to Celebrate the Festival,
See with Indifference, and lay aside
Partiality, and wish on neither side;
And be not more concerned for what you see,
Than your own Quiet and Tranquillity:
Be these your main concern, your greatest care,
And wish that things may be just as they are,
And that the Victory may fall to him,
Who gains the Day, who does the Garland win:
For while to neither, to your self you're kind,
Nor can you any disappointment find.
Be not transported, do not laugh aloud,
Nor roar in Consort with the bellowing crowd.
When the Shows over, when from thence you come,
Dispute not much concerning what was done,
As, who is the tallest Fellow of his Hands,
Who best the Lance, who best the Sword commands;
Or whether such an one was fairly slain,
This is to act the Encounter over again.
But say y' out-talk the other, win the prize,
Are you a jot the better, or more wise?
You only show that you admire the Sport,
When there is no tolerable reason for it,
And why so great a wonder is it made,
That a Man's quick, or dext'rous at his Trade?
That one of greater strength, or greater skill,
Should get the better; that a Sword will kill?
XLIX.
Avoid, if possible, the Impertinence
Of those who prostitute their Eloquence,
Who with a long Harangue, from Desk, or Stage,
Both the rich Mobile, and poor engage:
For what advantage are you like to gain,
By hearing some one a whole hour Declaim,
While Alexander's Justice he commends
For murdering all is best and trustiest Friends?
How are you bettered by a tuned discourse
Of Phaleris his Bull, or Sinon's Horse?
Or a description that is designed to show
The various colors of the Heavenly Bow,
In a discourse almost as long as it,
Which the vile trifling Scribler takes for Wit?
What wisdom can you learn from Circe's Hogs?
From Hecuba turned Bitch, or Scylla's Dogs?
From weeping Niobe transformed to Stone,
Or Bloody Tereus feeding on his Son?
But if in Manners you're obliged to attend,
Because perhaps the Author is your Friend;
Or if that Tyrant, Custom, bring you there,
Be Grave, but not Morose, nor too severe,
Nor play the Critic, nor be apt to Jeer;
Nor by detraction seek Inglorious praise;
Nor seem to weep, when he your Joy would raise;
Nor grin, nor swear, when some sad passion tries
To draw the brinish humor from your Eyes,
Nor to the Company disturbance cause,
By finding fault, or clamorous applause;
Be sober and sedate, nor give offense,
Or to your self, or to the Audience.
L.
When you have ought to do, or are to treat
With Persons whose Authority is great,
Let Socrates and Zeno show you how,
And what their prudence would think fit to do,
Were they to manage this affair for you.
With what a temper; how serene and brave,
In such a case, would they themselves behave?
For neither would they crouch, nor yield through fear;
Nor would they rude, or insolent appear;
Nor would they any thing unseemly say,
Nor yet through flattery give the cause away.
By these great Paterns act, you cannot fail,
Wisdom and Courage joined must needs prevail.
LI.
These things beforehand to your self propose,
When you're about to visit one of those
Who are called great; perhaps he is not within,
Or likely he is retir d, nor to be seen:
Perhaps his Porter, some rough sturdy Bore,
Amongst the Beggars thrusts you from the Door,
Or when, at length, you have admittance got,
His Honor's busy, or he minds you not.
But if in spite of each Impediment,
In spite of Slights, Affronts, you still are bent
To make this Visit, know you must dispense
With such small accidents, nor take offense
When you're despised, nor with the vulgar cry
It Is not so great a matter, what care I;
In whom you through the Visard may discern
(However they strive to hide it) a concern,
Who like the Fox in Aesop, seem to set
Those Grapes at naught, as sour, they cannot get.
LII.
Boast not in Company of what you have done,
What Battles you have fought, what hazards run,
How first at such a Siege of such a Town,
You Scaled the Walls, and won the Mural Crown;
And how your Skill and Conduct gained the day,
While Hosts of slaughtered Foes about you lay:
For while your actions you your self relate,
You from your real merits derogate,
With your own breath you blow away your praise,
And overthrow those Trophies you would raise;
You talk away those Honors you have got,
While some despise you, some believe you not;
Nor is it as pleasant, or agreeable
To them to hear as it is to you to tell
What is it to them what Laurels you have gained?
What Dangers you have escaped, what Wounds sustained?
Perhaps they fancy all that you have said
Does but their Sloth* or Cowardice upbraid,
And vexed, or tired, they wish you all the same
Dangers and Wounds, and Hardships over again.
LIII.
It Is but a sorry sort of praise to be
A droll, the Jester of each company,
A raiser of loud laughter, a Buffoon,
The sport, and the diversion of the Town.
For he that strains to please, and humor all
Into the common shore of talk must fall.
He that would make each merry, must of force
With every folly, temper his discourse;
Sometimes talk down right bawdry, then defy
The Gods, and laughed at dull Morality.
From such behavior, what can you expect
But to be laughed at, and to lose respect,
You think you're much admired, though much deceived,
You're neither loved, respected, nor believed.
For who would trust, love, honor, or commend
The wretch, who for a jest betrays his friend:
To whom there is naught so dear in heaven or earth,
He would not make the subject of his mirth.
LIVE.
You make your self contemptible and mean,
A member of the Rabble, if obscene
In conversation, wherefore when you find
Some one to lewd discourse too much inclined,
Lecture him soundly for it, if there be
A fit, convenient opportunity.
Tell him he vents much filth, but little wit,
And only gains the applause of Fools by it.
Tell him it is such as some must needs resent,
Besides it is needless and impertinent.
But if by Wine, or Company engaged,
He by your good advice may be enraged,
By silence, frowns, or blushes, show that you
That nauseous conversation disallow.
LV.
When some Idea, that excites desire,
Courts you in all its best and gay attire,
As when your fancy lays you on a Bed
Of Roses, and twines myrtle round your head,
Near amorous shady groves, and purling springs,
While hovering Cupids fan you with their wings,
While you in the dear Fetters are confined,
Of some soft Beauties arms, that is fair as kind,
Take heed least here so far you do pursue
That fancied pleasure, as to wish it true:
You're just upon the precipices brink,
Pause then a little, and take time to think;
Examine well the object, and compare
The unequal periods, which allotted are
To weeping penitence, and short lived bliss,
How long the one, how short the other is:
Joy in a nimble moment ends its race,
And rueful, pale Repentance takes its place,
And moves with a sad sullen heavy pace,
Attended all the way with groans and cries,
Self accusations, sighs, and watery eyes.
Think then what joy, and pleasure you will find;
That is, what peace, and quiet in your mind,
How you will praise your self, and bless your care
When you escape the dangerous pleasing snare.
But if you think the pleasure may content;
So safe, agreeable, convenient,
As that you will have no reason to repent;
Take heed you be not by its sweets subdued,
Dragged by its smiling force to servitude:
And think how much it is better to be free,
The Conqu'rour of such powerful charms to be,
And triumph in so great a victory.
LVI.
When you resolve to do what is right, and fit,
Why should you shun being seen in doing it:
Why should you sneak, or why avoid the light,
Like conscious Bats, that only fly by night.
What though the vulgar, who all sense disclaim,
That many headed Monster without brain,
Your actions through gross ignorance condemn,
You're likely in the right, when blamed by them.
But if the action's bad, you ought to shun
The attempting it, for it is not to be done.
If good; what cause have you to dread, or fly,
Their false reproaches, and rude calumny.
LVII.
As we speak sense, and cannot but be right,
When we affirm it is either day, or night,
But rave, and talk rank nonsense, when we say,
At the same instant, it is both night and day;
So it is a contradiction at a Feast,
To take the largest share, to cut the best,
And be a fair and sociable Guest.
You may it is true your appetite appease,
But not your Company, nor Treater please,
Wherefore of this absurdity beware,
And take a modest, and an equal share,
Nor think each sav'y bit that is there your due,
Nor let your Entertainer blush for you.
You may as well say it is both day, and night,
As strive, at once, to indulge your appetite
And please the rest, and him that does invite.
LVIII.
If you assume too great a character,
Such as your feeble shoulders cannot bear,
You must at best, ridiculous appear.
Clad in a Lions skin, you only bray,
The ears stick out, and the dull Ass betray.
Besides you foolishly neglect the part,
In which you might have shown much skill, and art.
LIX
As walking you tread warily, for fear
You strain your Leg, or least some nail should tear
Your feet, let the like caution be your guide,
In all the actions of your life beside.
Fear to offend your Judgment, fear to slight
Reason, the unbyast Rule of wrong and right,
Under whose conduct we more safely may
Follow, where her discretion leads the way.
LX.
As the Shoo's made to serve and fit the foot,
As the Leg gives the measure to the Boot,
So our possessions should be measured by
The body's use, and its necessity.
If here you stop, content with what you need,
With what will keep you warm, your body feed;
Within the bounds of temperance you live.
But if the reins you to your wishes give;
If Natures limits you but once transgress,
You tumble down a headlong precipice
Into a boundless Gulf: This we may see
If we pursue our former similie:
For lets suppose, your Shoe made tight and fit,
Strong, warm, and easy, as it is requisite,
What more can be desired from a Shoe,
It Is all that Hide, and Thread, and Wax can do;
But if you look for more, you're hurried on
Beyond your bounds, and then it is ten to one,
That it must be more modish, pinkt, and wrought,
Then set with Pearls, from farthest Indies brought,
Then with Embroidery, and Purple shine,
No matter if it is useless, so it is fine.
So there is no farther stay, no farther bound,
By those wh' exceed just measures, to be found.
LXI.
Women, when once arrived at dear fourteen,
Begin to be admired, and gain esteem,
They are called Mistresses, and now they find,
That they for Man's diversion are designed,
To which they are not averse, perceiving then
That their preferment lies in pleasing Men,
In being made Companions of their beds,
They straight begin to curl, to adorn their heads,
To Comb, Perfume, and to consult the glass,
To study what attire commends a face,
To practice smiles, and a beguiling air;
Each thinks she is as happy as she is fair,
As she can please, as she can Conquer hearts,
In these, and thousand other such like arts,
They place their only hopes, on these depend,
And earnestly ex'pect the wished for end.
Wheresore it is fit that they be taught to know,
That these respects, and honors, that we show
To them on this account are only due,
That as they are fair, so they are modest too;
That they are spotless, grave, reserved, and wise,
That these engaging virtues are the ties,
That more oblige, than arts, or amorousies.
LXII.
In outward Actions, to spend too much time,
Is of stupidity too sure a sign,
As long to exercise, and long to eat,
To spend whole days, at least, to cram down meat
To try what drink your belly will contain,
To be disgorg'd, to be pist out again,
Than half an hour, like a dull grinning Fool,
To make wry faces, over a Closs-stool;
Or like a brutish Swine, in sensual strife,
To wallow out whole hours with your dull wife,
When all this precious time should be assigned,
For brave endeavors to improve your mind.
LXIII.
Does any strive to wrong you, or design
To stain your reputation with a crime?
Consider he believes this wrong your due,
That he does only what he ought to do,
For it is a thing impossible, that he
Should so in sentinents with you agree,
As not to follow his own bent of mind
And that to which his Judgment is inclined,
Now if through carelessness he judge amiss,
He suffers most, and all the harm is his.
He truly suffers most, whose reasons light,
Is Clouded over, whom error does benight,
He the affront to his own reason gives,
Who thinks wrong right, who falsehoods truths believes.
Then why should his mistakes your Soul torment?
His own mistakes, are his own punishment,
He wrongs his Judgment, not the truth, or you;
You still are guiltless, still what is truth is true,
still it is a certain truth (what er'e he say)
That whensoe're the Sun appears it is day.
And thus prepared, you patiently may bear
His rudeness, and unmoved his slanders hear,
and calmly answer, that such things to him
^it to be done, fit to be said, may seem.
LXIV.
If you a strict enquiry make, you will find
that to each thing, two handles are assigned.
^he not to be endured, that will admit
^o touch, there is none alas can manage it.
^he other tractable, which every hand
^ith moderate skill, and prudence may command.
If then your Brother injur'es you, through Pride,
Or Fraud, lay hold upon the safer side;
And do not straight examine his offense,
Touched, with too deep, and too grev'ous a sense
Of the wrong offered, least you discompose
Your mind, and wrath to injury oppose,
Least in a Tempest you your self engage,
Which only serves to blow, t'inflame his rage.
But rather think how near you are allied,
That such offenses ought not to divide,
And break the knot, which Natures hand has tied;
Remember all the happy years you spent
Under one Roof, and the same managment;
Remembering this, you will soon forget the ill
Your Brother did you, he is your Brother still.
LXV.
If I should boast I wealthier am, than you,
It follows not that I am better too,
If I should say, I Am the more florid Man,
It follows not, I therefore better am.
It rather follows, I am Richer far,
Therefore my well filled Bags the better are.
My tongue is better hung, my Phrase more neat,
Therefore my Language is the more complete,
Your Baggs and Fluent speech, have some pretense
To being better, to more excellence,
But you are neither wealth, nor eloquence.
LXVI.
Does any one bath earlier than the time
That Is usually observed, or drink much wine,
Censure him not, nor say it is not well done,
Say only, he drinks much, or washes soon.
For why should you, till you have understood
His Reasons, judge his Actions bad or good?
Perhaps he washes early, with intent
Thus to refresh himself with watching spent.
What e're your grave soberity may think,
In him perhaps it is temperance to drink.
Perhaps his Constitution may require
More Wine, his Lamp more Oil to feed its fire.
First know the Reasons, then you may proceed
With safety to dispraise, or praise the deed,
Thus will you never any Action blame,
And then on second thought commend the same.
LXVII.
When you in every place, your self profess
A deep Philosopher, you but express
Much vanity, much self conceit betray,
And show you are not truly what you say.
Amongst rude Ignorants, unthinking Tools,
To talk of Precepts, Maxims, and of Rules.
Is to be laughed at, thought a Banterer,
For how can they approve beyond their Sphere.
Your knowledge by your way of living show,
What is it, alas! to them, how much you know?
Act as your precepts teach, as at a Feast
Eat as it is fit, it is vain to teach the rest
How they should eat, who come but to enjoy
The present Cheer, to swallow, and destroy,
Who come to Gormandize, and not to hear
The sober precepts of a Lecturer.
Let Socrates instruct you to despise
The fond desire of being counted wise,
Who being asked by some, (who had designed
TO affront him with a Jest,) to be so kind,
As to instruct them how to find, and where
There dwelt some grave profound Philosopher,
Although the impudent request implied
That he was none, without concern, or pride,
Or the least show of anger, led them thence
To those who sold Philosophy for pence,
Who publicly professed it as a Trade,
And a good handsome income by it made.
XXVIII.
When men of shallow heads themselves advance
Above their usual pitch of ignorance,
To talk of Maxims, and of Rules, forbear
To interpose your sense, or meddle there;
Why should you laugh at this, or that confute,
For what are you concerned in the dispute?
What reason, or what obligation lies
On you, to hinder them from seeming wise?
Besides to be too much inclined to speak
Shows your minds Constitution to be weak,
Your very love of talking does declare
How ill your principles digested are,
And that you do not practice what you know,
As vomiting does a weak stomach show.
Oh! but perhaps you fancy, that they may
Construe your silence, ignorance, and say
That you know nothing; well suppose they do,
If patiently you bear it, know that you
Have the great work begun, you now begin
To feel your precepts strengthen you within.
It Is your behavior that can best express
The well digested Maxims you profess,
Thus well fed Sheep do not cast up their meat,
To satisfy their Shepherd what they eat,
But what they eat, and inwardly digest
By Fatness, Fleece, and Milk they manifest.
LXIX.
If you have learned to live on homely food,
To feed on Roots, and Lupines, be not proud,
Since every Beggar may be praised for that,
He eats as little, is as temperate:
So if you drink cold water, and abstain
From all such Liquors as effect the brain,
Why should you seek occasions to declare
How moderate, how abstenious you are.
For what advantage by it can you gain,
If in your sober Cups you still are vain.
Would you inure your self to undergo
The wrath of Winter, play with Frost and Snow?
Let it not be in public, nor embrace
Cold Marble-Statues in the Marketplace,
But would you to the very height aspire
Of bearing much, first bridle your desire
Of being praised? take Water in your mouth
When your parcht Vitals almost crack with drought,
And in the very pangs of thirst restrain,
And without boasting spit it out again.
LXX.
The hopes, and fears of a plebeians mind,
To outward objects only are confined;
Riches and Pleasures are his chief delight,
The prizes which engage his appetite,
These he thinks make him fortunate, if won,
And if he fail, he is ruined and undone,
Nor has the fordid, thoughtless thing, a sense
Of a more noble inward excellence.
But the Philosopher's exalted Soul
No little outward trifles can control,
No promised Joy, nor fear his mind affects,
His good, and ill, he from himself expects,
Secure within himself, he can despise
The gayeties, that charm the vulgars eyes,
And accidents, which weaker minds surprise.
LXXI.
Such, and so differing is the Character
Of the Plebeian and Philosopher,
Now the Proficient, he that labors on
Toward perfection, by these signs is known,
He no Man blames, he no Man does condemn,
He praises not himself, nor other Men,
Boasts not the greatness of his parts, nor shows
On every light occasion all he knows,
Or if some rub or hindrance he find
In any enterprise, he had designed,
He blames himself, if praised he can despise
The fulsome dawber, and his flatteries,
If blamed he does not study a defense,
Least he be carried on with vehemence,
As Men, who have been lately Sick, take care
Least they relapse, and venture not to far,
Till they be perfectly restord, so he
Declines the making an Apology,
Least he should be too eagerly concerned,
Before his strength of mind be well confirmed.
All his desires, and his aversions fall,
Only on things, which he his own can call,
And as to things in his own choice and will
His apetite he rules, with caution still,
What the World judges him, he values not,
Whether Philosopher or Idiot,
In short he over himself is as a spy.
He over his Actions keeps a watchful eye,
As he would watch a Knave, or Enemy.
LXXII.
Does any Man look big, and boast that he
Does understand Chrisippus thoroughly,
That he has dig'd the Mine, and found the Gold,
That he, his darkest precepts can unfold,
Say thus within your self, why what pretense
Would this Man have to merit, if the sense
Of what Chrisippus writ were plain, but I
Would study Nature, and my thoughts apply
To follow her, but who shall lead me on,
And show the way, it is time that I were gone,
Having made this inquiry, when I hear
Chrisippus is the best Interpreter,
I the dark Author straightway take in hand,
But his hard Writings do not understand,
I find him difficult, abstruce, profound,
I some one seek, who his vast depth can sound,
After much search I find him, but as yet,
I have accomplished nothing, that is great,
Till I begin to practice what I sought,
What he explains, what great Chrisippus taught.
Then, and then only, is the Garland wone,
For practice is the prize, for which we run.
If knowledge be the bound of my desire,
If learning him be all that I admire,
If I applaud my self, because I can
Explain Chrisippus, a Grammarian
Instead of a Philosopher I grow,
For what I should have done, I only know,
Here Is all the difference between him, and me,
Chrisippus I expound, and Homer he,
All that I have atcheiv'd is to explain
What great Chrisippus writ, and blush for shame
That knowing what he taught, I still am vain.
LXXIII.
To these great Rules with constancy adhere,
With noble resolutions, pious fear,
Fear to recede from these, as you would dread
To tear the sacred Garland from the head
Of awful Jove, or wickedly deny
To pay your vows made to the Deity,
And mind not what the thoughtless Vulgar say.
Whose words the winds blow with rank Fogs away,
Whose calumnies you can no more prevent,
Than chain those Roarers of the Element,
When with their airy Wings they beat the Plain,
And buffet the green Surges of the Main.
LXXIV.
Awake, awake, how long will you decline
The happiness proposed, and wast your time,
How long through sloth will you persist to slight,
What reason has informed you to be right.
You have received the Precepts, such as may
Guide you the safest, and the surest way,
To which you ought to have, and have agreed;
What other Teacher seem you now to need?
Do you expect that some descending God
Should leave his blessed, and Heavenly abode
To finish what your reason has begun,
To teach you what er'e this you might have done?
Your giddy years of frolic Youth are fled,
Manhood, that should be wise, reigns in its stead;
Your vigorous reason now has reached its prime*
But from its full Meridian must decline,
If lazily you sleep away your noon,
The night steals on you, and finds nothing done:
If still irresolute you love delay,
And spend whole years in fixing on a day,
And when it is come new resolutions make,
Which your neglect resolves but to forsake,
You strive to grow more foolish than you are,
And for gray dotage by degrees prepare,
A mere Plebeian to the Grave you go,
Laden with Age, with Follys, and with Woe.
Wherefore begin, let no delays defer
The peaceful Life of a Philosopher,
And let, what reason tells you to be best,
Be as a Law, that may not be transgrest.
Begin to live, let your behavior show
What an advantage it is to think, and know,
For this alone we life may justly term,
To live with ease of mind, without concern.
An hundred years in grief and anguish spent,
Are not long Life, but a long punishment,
For sighs, complaints, and groans, and murmuring breath
Are but the gasps of a more lingering death.
Therefore when e're you any object meet,
Whose force is powerful, and whose charms are sweet,
When you encounter hardships, danger, pain,
Immortal ignominy, deathless same,
Remember that the Olympicks now are come,
That you no longer may the combat shun,
On this one Trial does your doom depend,
You in one moment fail, or gain your end,
You either conquer, or are conquered soon,
And lose, or wear, the honors of the Crown.
Thus Socrates advanced his lasting name,
Thus he the wondrous Socrates became.
Him nothing but right reason er'e could sway,
Which he believed 'twas glorious to obey,
He all delay, in what seemed best, thought base,
Not only real loss, but vile disgrace.
And you (though yet you have not the success
To reach the Wisdom of great Socrates)
Should strive to live, as if you meant to be
As Wise, as Happy, and as Great as he.
LXXV.
Philosophy's most useful part is this,
Which shows us what a wise man's duty is*
Which teaches, what we should pursue or fly,
As for example, that we should not LIE.
The next is demonstration, that which shows
By argument, which from right reason flows,
Why we, who study Nature, ought to shun
The baseness of a false, deceitful Tongue;
The Third is what confirms, gives force, and light,
And proves the demonstration to be right,
Shows where the Contradiction lies in sense,
What is, what is not a true Consequence,
'Of Truth and Falsehood gives clear evidence.
This last is useful for the second, that
By reason puts an end to all debate
Touching the first, but that is the part that claims*
(As being the most useful) the most pains
On which we safely may rely, and rest
Secure of happiness, entirely blessed:
But we, O base neglect! the means pursue
Of doing well, but still forget to do,
We dwell on the dispute, our time is spent
Only in framing of the Argument,
Hence it is we lie, and with much Art and Skill,
Act, what we can demonstrate, to be ill.
LXXVI.
In every Action, which you undertake
With great Cleanthes, this Petition make,
Lead me, O Jove, and thou, O powerful Fate,
In every Enterprise, in every State,
As ye determine, for I must obey
The wise injunctions, which you on me lay,
For should I at your dread decrees repine,
And strive your sacred orders to decline;
I should but labor wickedly in vain,
And struggle with an everlasting chain,
And after all, be dragged along with pain.
LXXVII.
Think on this saying of Euripides,
He that submits to Destiny's decrees,
Is justly counted wise by Men, and knows
The due respects, which to the Gods he owes.
LXXVIII.
And this, O Socrates, till aged time
Shall be no more, till Stars shall cease to shine,
Shall never be forgotten; for it is thine.
O Crito, if it please the Gods, that I,
To please the rage of Enemies, must die,
Let it be so, the false Anytus may,
With false Melitus, take my Life away,
But cannot hurt me, or my Soul dismay.
FINIS

