THE POPES Dreadful Curse.
BEING The FORM of an EXCOMMUNICATION OF THE Church of Rome.
Taken out of the Leger-Book of the Church of Rochester now in the Custody of
the Dean and Chapter there. Writ by Ernulfus the Bishop.
BY the Authority of God Almighty the Father, Son and Holy Ghost, and of the
holy Canons, and of the undefiled Virgin Mary, the Mother and Patroness of our
Savior, and of all the Celestial Virtues, Angels, Archangels, Thrones,
Dominions, Powers, Cherubins and Seraphins, and of the holy Patriarchs,
Prophets, and of all the Apostles and Evangelists, and of the holy Innocents,
who in the sight of the Holy Lamb are found worthy to sing the new Song, and of
the holy Martyrs and holy Confessors, and of the holy Virgins, and of all the
Saints, and together with all the holy and Elect of God; We Excommunicate and
Anathematize him or them, Malefactor or Malefactors, -- and from the Thresholds
of the Holy Church of God Almighty We Sequester them, that he or they may be
tormented, disposed and delivered over with Dathan and Abiram, and with those
who say unto the Lord God, Depart from us, We know not thy ways. And as Fire
is quenched with Water, so let the light of him or them be put out for
evermore, unless it shall repent him or them, and make satisfaction. Amen.

May the Father who Created Man Curse him or them. May the Son who Suffered for
us, Curse him or them. May the Holy Ghost who was given to us in Baptism,
Curse him or them. May the holy Cross whom Christ for our Salvation Triumphing
over his Enemy ascended. Curse him or them. May the Holy and Eternal Virgin
Mary Mother of God Curse him or them. May St. Michael the Advocate of holy
Souls, Curse him or them. May all the Angels and Arch Angels, Principalities
and Powers, and all the heavenly Host, Curse him or them. May the Laudable
Number of the Patriarchs and Prophets, Curse him or them. May St. John the
Chief forerunner and Baptist of Christ, Curse him or them. May St. Peter and
St. Pa^l, and St. Andrew, and all other Christ's Apostles, together with the
res^ of the Disciples and the four Evangelists, who by their Preaching
converted the Universal World, Curse him or them. May the holy and wonderful
Company of Martyrs and Confessors, who by their holy Works are found pleas^ng
to God Almighty, Curse him or them. May the holy Quire of the Holy Virgins who
for the Honor of Chirst have despised the things of the World, Curse him or
them. May all the Saints who from the beginning of the World to Everlasting
Ages are found to be the Beloved of God, Curse him or them. May the Heavens and
Earth, and all the holy Things remaining therein, Curse him or them. May him or
them be Cursed where ever he or they be, whether in their House or in their
Field, or in the High way, or in the Path, or in the Wood, or in the Water, or
in the Church. May him or them be Cursed in Living; in Dying, in Eating, in
Drinking, in being Hungry* in being Thirsty, in Fasting* in Sleeping* in
Slumbring, in Waking* in Walking* in Standing, in Sitting, in Lying, in
Working, in Resting, in Pissing, in Shitting, in Blood-letting. May he or they
be Cursed in all the Faculties of their Body. May him or them be Cursed
inwardly and outwardly. May he or they be Cursed in the hair of his or their
head. May he or they be Cursed in his or their Brain. May he or they be Cursed
in the top of his or their Head, in their Temples, in their Forehead, in their
Ears, in their Eyebrows, in their Cheeks, in their Jaw-bones, in their
Nostrils, in their fore-Teeth or Grinders, in their Lips, in their Throat, in
their Shoulders, in their Wrists, in their Arms, in their Hands, in their
Fingers, in their B^^ast, in their Heart, and in all the interior parts to the
very Stomach* In their Reins, in the Groins, in the Thighs, in the Genitals, in
the Hips, in the Knees, in the Legs, in the Feet, in the Joints, and in the
Nails. May he or they be Cursed in all their Joints, from the top of the Head,
to the sole of the Foot: May there not be any Soundness in him or them.

May the Son of the Living God with all the Glory of his Majesty, Curse him or
them; and may Heaven with all the Powers which move therein, rise against him
or them to Damn him or them, unless it shall repent him or them, or that he or
they shall make Satisfaction.

Amen, Amen. So Be it. THE Publication of this is to show what is to be
Expected from the Pope, if he come to be Supreme Head of the Church in this
Nation.



London, Printed and are to be Sold by L. C. on Ludgate Hill. 1681.


