The occasion and manner of Mr. FRANCIS WOLLEYS death, slain by the Earl of
CHESTERFIELD at KENSINGTON, January 17. 1659. Written by a Gentleman of the
Middle Temple to his friend in Ches-shire.
SIR,
TO give you a more exact account of this sad disaster and death of Mr. Wolley;
I hold it proper to impart to you the first rise of their unhappy acquaintance;
Mr. Wolley mounted on a sprightly Maire (about a quarter of a year before the
accident) passed in the streets at London, and riding in the Covent Garden, the
Earl seeing and liking the Maire, dispatched a Footman to him, to know whether
the Maire was to be sold, or not; Mr. Wolley answered she was if he might have
his price, hereupon a second message was sent to him to speak with the Earl,
which direction presently observed, the Earl and he agreed of a price,
eighteen pieces in gold, and immediately the Earl was owner of the Maire, and
the Gentleman of the money. And having acquainted the Earl in the presence of
Master Windam his friend (now of the Middle Temple) that the Maire, before he
had her, was Major Salkills, who lives in St. Martins-Lane; and that she was a
gift bestowed on him; relating likewise that he resided sometimes at the Middle
Temple, and sometimes with his father at Hammer-smith, Whither he was then
returning; his Lordship tendered Master Wolley his Coach to carry him thither,
which civility refused, they then parted, from which time being about three
moenths Master Wolley never saw the Earl, nor received a line or word from
him, until accidentally passing in the street on Saturday last, the Earl
being in his Coach, seeing Master Wolley, called him to him, telling him that
his Maire proved not according to his word, and therefore he required him to
retake the Maire, and refund the money. To which Master Wolley replied, that he
looked on that command of his Lordship, as neither reasonable nor just, for
that he never made him any such promise, and therefore desired his pardon, for
he would not obey it in that particular. To which the Earl speedily added that
he should expect then to hear further from him; so they parted at that time.

It seems from these sparks a greater fire was quickly kindled: on Monday
morning following the Earl did hasten to Hammersmith, where lighting at the
Goat he dispatched Master Philip Howard, son to the Earl of Berk-shire, to
enquire for Master Wolley at his fathers house, meeting presently with him, he
desired him to walk up to the Inn where the Earl of Chesterfield stayed, to
which motion Master Wolley assented and went; but what passed betwixt the Earl
and Master Wolley is not yet discovered, his Lordship or Master Howard best
know. After half an hour, or thereabouts, Master Wolley returning to his
Fathers House, and being demanded what was the result and conclusion with his
Lordship; told his father that he was pressed to retake his Maire, but he
resolved the contrary; and said that the Earl and he parted friendly; after
dinner on Monday Master Wolley rode abroad, and pretended to visit a Gentleman
who lived not far from Fulham, and returned not till it began to grow dark,
discovering no distemper either by his carriage or language: And in this
composure having after Supper craved his parents blessing, he retired to his
Chamber, and so to Bed; the next morning being Tuesday, he rose very early, and
privately without noise got out of his Chamber, walking, as he was wont,
toward the Stable (for so the Cook-maid observed him in his Gown) where he
found his Groom. In the mean time his father having no suspicion of his sons
death and danger so near, continued his repose in his bed, until in the
revolution of some second thoughts he knocked and called for his servant to come
up, and directed her to wish his son to come to his father; who when she
returned told her that Mr. Wolley was not to be found, then she was desired to
enquire for his Groom, and she returned with a second answer that she could
not meet with him. The afflicted parents, in their bed alarmed with these
confused circumstances rose speedily, and in their so divided and distracted
thoughts knew not where to seek and search for their son; yet in their
amaze^^nts and affrights his father entreated a civil person who lodged in the
house, and some neighbors to walk abroad and enquire after him; but no news
was brought to the Doctor of his son, until it was dispatched to him by a
messenger sent from Mr. Colebies of Kensington, who told him, oh Sir your son
is slain, and lies dead in a field below Mr. Colebies house, which sadness
proved too true. The Corpse gored with blood fallen on the ground had received
two wounds; the one on the left hand, which tore and pierced the nerves and
sinews: The other passed quite thorough the body, making the orifice near the
right Pap, and came forth on his back under the plate of his left shoulder.
Having now as near as I can related the occasion and manner of his death, I
shall impart to you what I observed at his Funerals, which were honored by
many Templars and Persons of quality as well as others, who with wet eyes,
testified the dolor and sadness of their hearts for the Gentleman's violent
and untimely death: but that which I conceived most observable was an elegant
Oration of the preacher; Mr. Fowler
who commended the Gentleman to the grave with a large Character, and a
Catalogue of many worthy virtues, which were eminent in him when he was alive;
and therefore more happily now honored him at his death: amongst other graces
and qualities he highly commended him for Piety toward God, Charity to the
poor, Modesty, Chastity, Temperance and Sobriety: and it was a sincere note of
his devotion; That in this Re'ncounter the Common Prayer Book was found in his
pocket when he was dead, as his only best Companion to the last gasp. The
preacher gave him another encomium before he suffered the dust to cover the
Corpse; That his lips were never accustomed or polluted with Lies, nor
blasphemous and horrid Oaths. And as for obedience to his parents; That he was
an unparalleled Example, and truly as he had some advantages by his four years
travel abroad, so for his six years Residence in the Temple he was observed to
be as civil and hopeful a Student as the choicest in that Society.

FINIS.
AN EPITAPH ON Mr FRANCIS WOLLEY, Of the Middle Temple: slain by the Earl of
CHESTERFIELD January 17th 1659.
REst in thy Bed of Honor: till the Just,
And thou shall rise more bright from nobler Dust.
Yet whilst thou sleep'st, how proud is winged Fame
To sound abroad the Honor of thy Name?
Who rather did choose danger, or to dye,
Then breathe one Day in Branded Infamye.
Thy Cause so just, thy Innocent Defense
Claymes Glory as thy Due, and Recompense.
Thy Virtues are thy Heralds and will tell,
In future Ages how Sweet Wolley fell.
FINIS.

