Erasmus Redivivus.

WHEREIN Diverse of the most Remarkable Occurrences OF THE Present Age, ARE
Compendiously Represented In several Select Colloques.

Hic murus ahaeneus esto,
Nil Conscire sibi, nulla pallescere culpa.
Horat. Epist. I. London, Printed in the Year 1699. Price 6 d.

THE PREFACE TO THE READER.
IT has been so long a Custom among the Knights Scriblers to im^ose their
Trumpery upon the world under the shadow of a Preface, that (...) Erasmus
should not be conforma^^e, some of our Squeamish Cox^^mbs would perhaps look
a-wry upon him, and repute him at least to be grown an old unmannerly surly
fellow.

Well Sir, because he shall not incur your displeasure, you shall see he can be as
Prefaceish as the best o^ you; Indeed he wants a Person of Rank for a Patron,
but barring tha^ I suppose he will appear to be as wel^ fitted out as er'e an
Aesop, Trip, Spy^ or Tom Thumb of 'em all.

It Is true his want of a Patron is a very great deficiency; I must needs say it
appears very Noble and Magnificent to see a swinging Piece of Quality fixed in
the front of some of ou^ Modern Pamphlets. A Noble Man conveniently placed with
a Label in his Mouth, in such a Post, looks full a^ great and Majestic as the
Picture o^ the Gallant London Prentice, in the head of a ballade, and indeed
seem to stand much in the same posture with his Arms extended ready to run 'em
down the Throats, and tear out the heart of any Brute, that shall dare to growl
at the blockhead, that has so solemnly owned himself his Eternally devoted, etc.

It Is very hard truly that Erasmus should be so ill provided in his extremity;
however he is resolved to take a short turn among you, and considering his
former Merit and Character, he cannot much suspect your Civility, In proportion
to which you may expect to hear more of him in two or three days.

THE CONTENTS.
COL. I. Between Aesop and Erasmus; the main of their Conference Relates to the
present State of England and Holland: Aesop rehearses two or three Fables to
show the Nature and Consequence of a standing army; gives Erasmus some general
hints of his late business and Conversation in England; and then takes his
leave, ^OL. II. Mimick a Player, Scribler a Mercenary Poet, and Cant a
Puritanical Cit, bandy about the present condition of the Stage, with Respect
to the Conference between Mr. I. C. and Mr. Con -- and Mr. Van -- etc. And then
propose Articles for a general Peace and agreement. ^^l. III. Motion an
Antiquated Sergeant at Law, Snap an Amphibious Attorney, and Catchpole a
Bailiff complain grievously for want of Practice, etc. Motion and Snap agree to
turn Projectors, and make a short discovery of the D -- 's Bank and
Ma^agements. ^^l. IIII. Scrible an Indigent Pamphle^eer, wrangles with Pyracy a
Knavish Printer, and Hawkwell a Rascally Publisher, for ^landestinely Printing
his Copy's; they discover one another tricks, Pyracy charges Scrible with
Filtching and Transposeing, Scrible charges him with Insolent Robbery and
Villainy, etc. Col. V. Industry and her Sister Art walk together toward St.
James's Park; they make melancholy Reflections upon their want of Business;
they encounter M. Cringe, a French Man, in their passage, who plainly discovers
to 'em that his own Countrymen and the Dutch, are the grand occasion of the
decay of the English Trade. Col. VI. Sneak the Quaker, and Infallibility the
Priest, debate the business about the Norfolk Conference; Turbulent the
Presbyterian Preacher, joins 'em; they declare separately their hatred against
the Church of England, and agree upon an Expedient for her Subversion. Col.
VII. Orthodox and Moderation debate seriously the present State of the Church.
Orthodox makes sharp Reflections upon the Author of Milton's Life, and the
Quakers Conference: He urges several things as dangerous to the Church, and
passionately presses a strict Observance of her Rites, etc.
Erasmus Redivivus.
COL. I. Between Aesop and Erasmus.
E. HOW now, Aesop, why, where have you been, I wonder, these six or seven
Months?


AE. I have been in a Beggarly, Factious, Dissolute, Stubborn, Thoughtless,
Ungrateful World.


E. Pray what part of the World is it you have been in, that deserves all these
hard words?


AE. In short, I have been in England, and particularly at London; and if you
had been used as scurvily as I have been, for all your high Morals and
Pretenses, I believe you would have as many hard words as my self.


E. Prithee how have they used thee? Indeed I think you do look something
disordered.


AE. Why, they have raised the Mob upon me, and thrown me into most of the
Houses of Office about Town.


E. What, I warrant you have been writing some foolish Morals, or Satyrs
against the Government.


AE No, I writ nothing my self, but was forced to set my Name to a few Fables
from Tunbridge and Amsterdam: But then indeed there was some other Indigent
Scriblers, that Fathered so much of their dull ridiculous Stuff upon me, that
at last I became obnoxious to every Fool.


E. I confess that is a hard case, that a Man must stand like a Dial-Post in a
Country Church Yard, for every little Cur to piss at, that trots by. But pray
Aesop, what are the people a doing in England?


AE. A doing! why, they are undermining, betraying, cheating, swearing,
forswearing, damning and confounding one another.


E. Oh! forget the Mob, and the Houses of Office now, and don't be partial:
England used to be reputed the Mistress of Christendom, both for Riches and
Plenty, and the Garden of Religion beside.


AE. It Is well if you find it so, for my part, I met with nothing there but
deep Poverty and Hunger. Indeed for Religion I cannot say, but it is multiplied
prodigiously; every one has almost got one of his own, or at least he has got a
toleration to Invent one, or to choose which he best thinks will Square with
his Designs.


E. I Am sorry to hear you give this odd Account of so brave a Country, Old
England did not use to bear such a Character in my time: But you say you have
been at Amsterdam; how stand matters there I wonder?


AE. Never better, take my word for it; they have almost got all the Trade,
Commodities and wealth of Europe! truly I think they have as much sense now;
I Am sure, they have more cunning than some of their Neighbors.


E. Well I Am rejoiced to hear my Countrymen thrive so well; I knew 'em when
they were Low enough, I Am sure; but you say, they are mighty Rich now.


AE. Rich! they are doubless the Richest People in Christendom; 'twou'd do a
man's heart good to see how Brawny and Jocular they look; they have all they
want or wish, but two small things more, and then they would be satisfied.


E. What are these two small things? Methinks a People that are so very Rich,
should not long want two small things.


AE. Only Flanders and the Sovereignty of the Narrow Seas; and as you say,
considering they are so very Rich, I cannot see any great difficulty there is, why
they should not have them too.


E. Oh Aesop, if these are the two (...) things, I Am afraid my Countrymen must
loose their longing; England, I can tell you that, will not so easily quit her
pretensions to the Narrow Seas; she has these still bolonging to her, what ever
Notion you may have of 'em; 'twould soon Lower their Topsails, if they were in
the least sensible they had any such Inclination; and then for Flanders, Lewis
Le grand is a Scurvy Neighbor; if he should once find 'em shouldering, he would be
very angry with 'em too; I can Remember the time since they were as afraid of
a great Frost, as some other Countries are of an Earthquake, or an Inundation.


AE. Then you think that the King of France, has bounded 'em upon the
Continent, and England upon the Maine, and so they are doomed to Rot in their
Native Quagmire.


E. We'll e'n leave 'em, if you please, to be managed according to their
Merits, with this short Character, that they are a Restife Creature, if they get
too much head; Burdensome and Impertinent, when they are poor and distress't;
and Haughty, Insolent and Dangerous when they are high and mighty. But you say,
you have been at Tunbridge; what place is that I beseech you? I think I never
heard of the Name.


AE. Why then I find you're a perfect stranger to this side of the Water.
Tunbridge is an Eminent Place, where Dukes, Lords, Knights, Squires, Citts,
Ladys, Whores, Sharpers, etc. meet to drink the Waters.


E. What kind of Waters are they, that can occasion such a Concourse as you
speak of? Sure there must be some mighty Virtue in 'em.


AE. They are Medicinal Waters, that Purge and Evacuate; but there are several
other businesses done at the Wells beside purely drinking the Waters.


E. What other business can they do there?


AE. There they Intreague and Whore, Dance, Game and Cabal, and forty other
ways they have to squander away their time and their Estates.


E. But Drinking the Waters is the Grand pretense, it seems; What are the
Waters, Naturalor Artificial?


AE. Most People allow 'em to be Natural, some almost miraculous, and truly if
they be, England has been blessed with the discovery of abundance of 'em here a
late.


E. I find then, you have more of these Miraculous Wells beside Tunbridge.


AE Great Numbers, i. e. at Epsom, Barnet, Dullidge, Lambeth, Islington, and
almost at every convenient place, both in the Town and Country.


E. Well, but what are their Effects and Virtues after all?


AE. In troth, in my Judgment, no more than what is common to all Water; drink
great quantities of 'em, and they will press their Passage through you, and make
you S -- or piss, and so will the Water out of any Spring, Brook, or Pump; They
seem to me but to have the same effect, all Excressences and Great weights of
water have, first to force, and then to wash and cleanse their Passage, as it is
ordinarily in Gutters and Sinks; you shall see one of them that are so near
damm'd up by Filth and Nastiness that there is hardly any passage, by an
extraordinary supply of Water, at least sweet and clean; it is the same in the
other respect, they power down two or three Gallons of Water, and that runs
swiftly through 'em, which washes their Nauseous Fulsome Channels, and makes
'em a little more wholesome and passable, which is all the Virtues I know in
'em.


E. This is but a kind of a blunt Comparison Aesop, and yet perhaps it may be
apt enough too, but supposing they had no other property beside wrencing the
Channel as you express it; though I rather, in the general, believe they may
derive their Virtues from some Minerals, etc. That Is a considerable benefit;
but what say the Doctors of 'em?


AE. The Doctors, most of 'em magnify 'em to the Skies, and attend at 'em
constantly, nay, some will tell you, that they are of greater advantage to them
than any body else, for besides the extraordinary fees and gratuities they
Entitle 'em to, they are a very proper means to deliver 'em out of the reach of
the Clamor of their Wives, and give 'em a full opportunity to feel the Pulses
and Examine the secret distempers, etc. Of their Female Patients.


E. I find you're very Skeptical and Censorious, but then I beseech you after
all this Railing, What wind was it that drove you to these Wells, which you
seem now so much to ridicule and despise? I never heard that you was any
Water-Drinker, except it was in the Stratagem you made use of some Hundred
Years ago, in the discovery of the Figs.


AE. Truly, I was Conjured from the other World, to meet a Friend there to
Patronise a few Fables and Morals, with which he proposed to Correct and
Discipline a Degenerate Vicious Age.


E. But then, what business had you at Amsterdam, there is few of the Society of
Water-Drinking Poets, they commonly drink Element of another Nature?


AE. I must own indeed that was pure Curiosity, I was so hourly grated with the
Poverty and Calamities of the English, and the Wealth and Splendor of the
Dutch, that at last, I resolved to go see how Cases stood my self, that I might
have some Intelligence to carry back with me to Elisium.


E. Well, but it seems you Patronized some Fables and Morals from thence too,
what kind of Fables were all these I wonder, methinks this looks like
ambo-dextering?


AE. The Fables, etc. In the main were only the old ones new Vam't and
Liquor'd; indeed, there was a little difference in their Contexture and Design,
but that is no great fault in a scribler, especially at this time a day.


E. What was their difference? I always thought it Inconsistent with the
Dignity and Character of an honest Man and a good Moralist, ^nstedfastly to
shuffle about and change sides; I hope, Aesop, you did not sink your self so
low, to take up with the base and scandalous profession of a Trimmer or a
Time-server?


AE. I don't know what you call trimming and changing of sides; I did that
which most of the World at present do; took the Method which I thought would
best Propagate my Interest and design.


E. But what then is become of Virtue, Honor, and Conscience? What, are they
quite dwindl'd away, and worn out in these Latter Ages?


AE. As to Virtue, Honor, and Conscience, I have been among the
Doggrel-Mongers and Scriblers, and then you know that either of these
Principles are as Inconsistent with the Poets, as they are with some Statesmen,
and they have as Mischievous an Influence too; if they once suffer themselves
to be Infected with a little down right Honesty, the Natural Consequence is
Starving or Hanging.


E. Pray, Aesop, to make short of the matter, what was the design of your
Fables from Tunbridge?


Ae. As for Designs, I Will engage for my Tunbridge Friend, he had no Sinister
ends in his Satyrs; there were some of 'em indeed spic'd with an antiquated
Principle called Loyalty, which if the Publishers Observations signifies any
thing made 'em go down a little the more gratefully with some sort of People.


E. Why then I find your Fables from Tunbridge were Loyal Fables, but then what
must those be at Amsterdam.


Ae. Those were Fables that were leaven' with the good old cause, commonwealth
Fables, and truly sold, and pleased the World full as well as the former.


E. Indeed Aesop, I cannot be reconciled to your ambe-dextering as I told you,
but now you have named the good old cause, how does it thrive in England?


Ae. It Is the only cause that thrives among 'em, those that profess it are
Sedulous and Vigilant, and Slip no Opportunity, that can by any manner of means
Propagate or advance it, and truly as the World beleives have made a
considerable Progress.


E. But then what are the Opposite Parties a doing, what are there no Eyes upon
'em in such a Conjuncture.


Ae. No truly, I don't see any body very much affected, some People talk of a
Comprehension and Union between the Presbyterians and the Church of England,
and that after that the toleration will be suppressed, but whether there be any
thing in it or not I cannot tell, in the main (in my Opinion) they seem strangely
insensible of any danger.


E. Well, come, we will not Launch too far into Politics neither, but can you let
me have a short sight of your Fables?


Ae. In troth, I have none of 'em by me at present, only two that were
accidentally left out of the sheets from Amsterdam, and if you think those
worth your reading, here they are ^t your service.


The Fable of Jupiter and the Statue.
GReat Jove in his Gown
One Evening came down
To divert himself with a Walk,
And finding a-lone
A body of stone,
He thus urged the Statue to Talk.
Mr. Statue says he,
I Am a God you see,
Then let me know why it is you stand,
So shattered and torn,
And look so forlorn,
With but one poor lame Leg and no Hand.
Quoth the Statue, great Sir,
I Am so fixed I cannot stir,
Though you Thunder Lighten and Rain;
I Am confined against my will,
Like a Fool to stand still,
And must neither look back nor complain.
I perceive every day,
How I moulder away,
My glory and strength are quite gone;
And what is worst of all,
I Am afraid I shall fall,
Lamented or Pitied by none.
This so netl'd the God
That says he, thou dull Clod,
And lugg's out of his Pocket a Bolt:
For shame thou base Dumb-thing,
Rouse up and do something,
Then gives him a terrible Polt.
Take that for your Pains,
'Twill teach you more Brains,
And Remember that if you don't mend on it;
You Will find there is some odds,
Between Statues and Gods,
You Will find it, Mr. Statue, depend on it.
The Moral was this:

When warnings from Heaven
To a People are given,
And they still despise and Reject 'em,
Sometimes the kind God
First uses his Rod,
And does genttly Reprove and Correct 'em.
But when he finds still
They oppose his great will,
And will neither be warned nor advised,
Then he takes down his Thunder,
And soon brings them under,
To show be will not be desp^s'd
E. I don't see much of a Commonwealth Principle in your first Fable; it
appears to me to be quite otherwise; I suppose by the Statue your Author
Intends England, and seems to Intimate that She has done something heretofore
that she is under Correction for now, and with-all advises her to repent, least
worse Evils fall upon her; and if these are your Comman-Wealth Principles, they
are doubtless very honest good Principles; but let me tell you too, if they
are, they are strangely altered for the better here a-late; but pray let me see
your other Fable.


The Fable of the Helmet and the Wasps.
A Swarm of rude Wasps that subsist by their Plunder,
By chance were disturbed from the Bank they l^^ under,
And being at a loss for another retreat,
In a Helmet thrown by, they fix a new Seat.
Quoth the Heads of the swarm, we have made good change,
By the Safeguard of this, we may happily range
We Are safe here I Am sure, for who can foresee,
That a Helmet should harbor such Vermi^ as we.
This Fable's too plain to want exposition,
And England I hope, so well knows her condition,
That she never will be wheedl'd, or threatened to suffer
An Army of Infects to Bridle, or huff her.
E. This last Fable I must confess I do not so well apprehend, do me the favor
therefore to let me a little into the mystery of it.


AE. I don't perceive any mystery at all in it, the Author it seems has no
kindness for a standing Army. I suppose his meaning is, that they are both
Dangerous and Chargeable, and Inconsistent with the Situation and Interest of
England.


E. If that be his meaning, I Am of his mind too, but then Aesop, I think with
Submission to your Author, it is something hard to turn off so many brave Men
without any manner of Provision or Reward; I hope, he would not have Good Old
Hospitable England, at last, a President of Ingratitude and Inhumanity.


AE. I told you before, he was a Common-Wealth-Man, and so you must not expect
much Gratitude and Humanity from him, but now I think on it, I have another Old
Fable, which if you please, I Will tell you, and by that time I have done, my
time will be expired.


The Fable of the Old Woman and the Cats.
THere was a certain Old Woman that had her House Infested with vast Multitudes
of Rats, insomuch that she was forced to raise a strong Party of Cats, to guard
and defend her against 'em; the Cats, as it is their Nature, soon freed her from
her danger, and either killed or drove all the Vermin out of her Cottage; but
then the Plunder of the Field ceasing, and the Woman being unable to support
the Cats in their former plenty, they grew Ravenous and Mischeivous, gnawed her
Bacon, her Butter and her Cheese, and in the main, were more Troublesome and
Vexatious to her than the Rats themselves, upon which she concludes,
notwithstanding they had done her this signal kindness, to get quit of 'em as
soon as she could, and so got a Neighbor to take 'em in a sack and carry 'em
as soon as she could, and so got a Neighbor to take 'em in a sack and carry
'em into a Field, and turn 'em out to shift for themselves; the Cats, as ill
luck would have it, made their way to a Barn Contiguous to their Old
Mistress's, where the Farmer perceiving 'em vigilant to catch his Mice, and
useful to defend his Corn from Vermin, etc. Gave 'em food and used 'em very
kindly and tenderly; however, they soon discover their former Quarters, and in
a few Nights afterward in a full Body march th ither, and being very well
acquainted with all the passes and Avenues into the House, at a sink-hole got
in, and devoured every thing almost the Poor Woman had.

E. This was very hard upon the Woman, I confess; but what followed, and what
became of the Cats afterward?


AE. The Cats retired back again; and the Woman perceiving that it must
Necessaryly be them that had done her all this Injury, sends immediately to the
Farmer to request him to banish them his Barn, and punish 'em for their
Unnatural Depredations, which it seems he positively refused with this short
answer, that they were Serviceable and Useful to him; besides, they were come
to him for refuge, and he was obliged in Point of Honor to Protect and use
'em kindly,


E. To save you the Trouble of a Moral, by this Fable I suppose you would Insinuate
how Dangerous it is for England to raise a great Army; if she keeps 'em on
foot, in a little time they grow burden some and perhaps Mutinous, especially
in a time of Peace; if she disbands 'em they consequently straggle from her and
take up with some other Nation, and then doubtless they are the worst Enemies
she has. It Is exactly the Poor Old Woman's Case, and withal I think her
President is the best, e'n to turn 'em out however to shift for themselves; for
though that be but a bad Remedy, yet considering every thing, in my Judgment
it is much the better of the two.


AE. I have nothing to do with any of your Political Matters, I have given you
a shor Fable or two, which if you think worth your trouble it is well enough;
yonder I perceive my Governor's a coming, and so I must leave you, you're for
England it seems, where if you should happen to meet my Tunbridge acquaintance
commend me heartily to him, and let him know I Will be sure to meet him there
next Season.


E. Before you go, Aesop, tell me what sort of Company you have in England,
where a man may pass away a Month or two, with the most Satisfaction.


AE. In troth that is a thing I cannot direct you in; if you fall in with the W
-- mites, they are so Restless Turbulent and Jealous, and withal so Intent upon
their Interest and Advancement, that there is little felicity to be expected
amongst them; If you happen aamong the J -- bites, there you will be entertained
with little but Ridiculous Notions, Forgeries, Romances, Chimerical hopes, and
absurd Projects and Impossibilities; If you herd your self with the
Commonwealth Party you must endure to have your Ears grated with the
Serpentine Hissings of Treason, Faction and Rebellion. In short, as Cases
stand, England's a very difficult place for a Person to form a good
Conversation in; their Poets are Poor, Mercenary and Scandalous, their Priests
and Teachers most of 'em Proud and Inhospitable, and the generality of the Rest
either pursueing Vice, Folly or Interest.


E. You give me an account enough to fright a stranger from coming near the
Climate; I don't think it is possible the Country can be so much altered as you
speak of.


AE, Well, I cannot stay to convince you further; I wish old England as well as
you do, and all that love her, well, I heartily wish she may long enjoy her
present Peace, that she may recover her Pristine Glory, Riches and Plenty, and
be as she once was, the Terror and Balance of Europe, Farewell.


Colloque the Second, between Scrible, Cant and Mimick.
M. Scribble, I am glad to meet you, I have been with most of your Fraternity
to Summons 'em to a Randesvouze to Night, there is a Scurvy non Jurat has
declared War against the play Jobber's, and is already sat down before the
stage, and what is worse (In the Judgment of those that best understand the
Nature of such Attacks,) carries on his Works with so much Judgment and
Regularity, that it will be Impossible for 'em to hold out, if he should give
'em a general Assault.


S. I always thought it would come to a War at last. and truly we have none to
thank but our selves. There Is hardly a Play writ, but if there be ever a Grand
Piece of Villainy or Knavery to be represented, but a Priest forsooth, must be
made the Rogue, or the Cheat that is to act it. Besides, the generality, of our
Characters are so Profane or Obscene or else so fulsome absurd and
Inconsistent, that indeed I wonder the War did not Commence long ago.


M. Why then Scrible, I find you revolt, what I suppose you are a going to be
functionify'd, a cast Poet makes an admirable Country Parson.


Scr. I think Mr. Mimick, you might have saved your Jest till a fitter
opportunity, but pray, how is the place provided, and what kind of defense does
it make, has their been no Sallies nor Rencounters?


M. Truly, the place is but very ill garrisoned; there have been several small
Skirmishes, and two grand Sally's carried on by the Dutch and Irish; but they
were both repulsed with considerable loss, especially the Irish, whom most
people believe will hardly ever be able to repai^ ^t


S. But pray, with submission, how came the Irish and Dutch in particular to be
entrusted with the Command of those grand Sally's? I never heard of many of
either of those Countries that were very great Commanders, especially in a War
of this Nature.


M. How it hap'n'd I know not, but it seems, they had a mind to Signalize their
Valor and Parts, and have been sufficiently swing'd for their Fool-hardiness,
but here comes Cant with a Couple of Books in his hand, let us accost him and
see how he relishes the matter. Mr. Cant, your Servant, you look very brisk,
what two Books are those you hug so comfortably?


C. Do you observe me to look so brisk then, Indeed Gentlemen, I was never
better pleased in my life, these two Books are Mr. J.C -- s, against that sink
of Iniquity, that Mother of Whoredom, Fornication and Adultery, that
abomination to the Godly, that aversion to all Sober and Religious minded
Protestants, the Stage; two Books, that in my Opinion will for ever deserve the
Character, and esteem of all Pious and well disposed People.


Scr. Not to Interrupt you, sure, you don't consider who this J. C. is, you
magnify so much, why he is a Non-Jurat, and as some of your Party report a Rank
Papist in his heart, and as I can assure you, an Inveterate hater of all
Commonwealth Principles and Designs.


C. Why, truly, Mr. Scrible, that is a great thing which you Instance, and
indeed I Am heartily sorry such worthy Books should have so sinful an Author,
but Notwithstanding, the Books are admirable Books, and yet when I consider
they were writ by a Non-Jurat whom I abhor, next to the Whore of Babylon, I
loose a great deal of my regard for 'em.


M. Pox of your Whines and Cants: if you have nothing to object against them
but that, they were writ by a Non-Jurat, I would not give a farthing for your
Judgment nor Objection neither; the Books are damnably writ with a great deal
of Sense, Learning and Wit; and have so confounded and baffi'd the whole Stage,
that it is become Obnoxious or Ridiculous to all the sober part of the Kingdom.


Cant. With your leave Mr. Mimick that is no such Inconsiderable Objection; for
let me tell you that if the Book's had been writ by any other, but by one of
these Contemptible non-Jural's; you would find they would have had another sort of
Effect.


M. Scrible, what do we stay hearing this Old Sanctified Hypocrite, venting his
dull Malice. Sir, can you propose any expedient to do the Stage Service in its
extremity, and be revenged of this Paultry non-Jurat.


C. I propose an expedient to do the Stage Service! I abhor the Notion: if
it were all in a Flame, and all the Actors in the middle on it, and one pail of
Water from my hand would quench the Flames, preserve their lives and their
Souls Eternally; I would not stir a foot to help 'em: do you Remember the
Committee, Sir, the Committee?


M. Do you Remember the Murder of the King; the Rye House Plot, your Counsel
of Six, the Rebellion in the West, and a hundred other Factious and Traitorous
Practices you have been Contriving and Fomenting ever since the Restoration.


S. Well, come Mr. Mimick, we'll leave Mr. Cant to meditate these matters over
by himself Mr. Cant good morrow, pray all due respects to your Wife and
Daughter.


M. Ay, there is the business on it then, you're acquainted with his Wife and
Daughter, it seems, I was wondering how you and he came so familiar.


Scr. I have had 'em at the Playhouse, etc. But this is all Foreign to the
matter, what must be done for the assistance of our Poor Languishing Stage?


M. Nothing that I can imagine, unless it be to hang out a white Flag and
submit to Dishonorable Terms, rather than suffer our selves to be taken by
assault.


Scr. Indeed, I believe that must be the way after all, the longer we hold out,
the more we are still exposed to Danger and Reproach, but then the difficulty
will be in drawing up the Articles.


M. I have thought of some Heads, which if you approve of, we'll send 'em to
the besieged to be drawn into a form against their surrender.


Scr. Prithee, let us hear 'em, and if my assistance will be of any use, I shall
be very ready.


Imp. I think, 'twill be necessary for the Stage to own and recant all its
former Obscenity, Profaneness and Immorality, and to give security according to
the best of their Judgment, never to be meddling with the like for the future.

2dly, That upon no Account they presume, to Intermeddle with the Affairs of
the Church of England, or Introduce any of her Priests, as the Representatives
of Knaves, Fools, or Cheats.

3dly, That they rectify and examine their Characters, and not suffer their
Hero's to Bully and Insult their Princes, to Rebel, Murder, Rape, or to commit
any Base or Mercenary Action, Inconsistent with the strictest Rules of Virtue
and Justice, and the Character of a brave Man and a true Hero.

4thly, That they examine their Plots in general, and where they find them
Deficient, Superfluous, or Impertinent, either to raze 'em quite out or Correct
'em, and not impose an ungrateful din of confused stuff upon their auditors, or
pretend to divert 'em with a few dull Joaks, or Merry Andrew Tricks, so much
below the Dignity of the Theater Royal.

Lastly, That they refrain all Factions, Time-serving and Mob-pleasing, and
that they keep up entirely to their Grand Design, to Propagate and Commend
Virtue, and to discover and discourage Vice.


Scr. All these Articles are highly advantageous to the Enemy, and without
doubt, such as he will readily agree to, but then what must he Covenant for his
part?


M. He shall Immediately draw off his Forces, without committing any further
Hostilities, and shall be obliged upon the performance of the Articles
aforesaid, to enter into a League offensive and defensive, to do the Stage
Justice against all Whiggish Innovations and Antimonarchical Interruptions.


Scr. Why, then, I Will go instantly and propose a Cessation of Arms, till we can
get these Articles agreed to, and Interchangeably sealed and delivered.


Colloque the Third, between Motion, Snap and Catch-pole.
Sn. MR. Motion, your humble Servant, what have you had a good Term? I vow to
God, our People have nothing to do, unless it be now and then the filling up a
Bail Bond, or Engrossing a Mortgage Deed!


M. A good Term! I Protest, I have had but two Motions, and one of 'em was but
a Crown one neither, these three Terms; if it was not for the help of
Procuration and Continuation, and the advantages I make from some Orphans
Money, I have in my management, I could not live.


Sn. Faith, it is a hard World, the People are generally grown so poor, and the
Law is made so chargeable too, that I find there is no good to be done at it; I
think, I must be forced after all, to turn Stock-Jobber, and try what that will
do.


M. Stock-Jobbing's but a Scurvy, Scandalous Profession neither, and yet if it
were not for one cause that I have upon the Anvil, I Would join with you, or else
turn Projector.


Sn. Now you talk of a Projector, there is a great deal of good to be got that
way, let us even join our forces and have a touch at it, we may manage that and
our other business too.


M. Ay, but then where is the Project, for my Part, I am the worst in the World
at Inventions?


Sn. If you will Embark, let me alone for the Project, I know a way to make Money
plentiful, and yet to advance the Interest, to improve Trade, restore Credit,
and double the price of Land, and all this in ^ very inconsiderable time.


M. That Is a rare Project indeed, and if thou could do that, thou would be
a brave Fellow, but art thou confident, thou can make thy Proposition Answer?


Sn. I have the same Moral assurance which all Pro^ectors have, but that is not
the business, ^f it does not Answer the Grand End it is not so much, provided we
can draw Money by it into our own Pockets.


M. But then the World will look upon us for Knaves and Cheats, and we should
render our selves obnoxious to all Honest Men, but Prithee, how do propose to
raise the Money and Great, etc. Thou speaks of,


Sn. If you start Niceties, or boggle at the Reputation of a Knave or a Cheat,
you're very unfit for a Projector; as for the Project I intend, it is this; to
propose a Mysterious Prank, first get a Patent for it, then have it enrol'd,
Cajolle some great Persons into an opinion of it, and get leave to use their
Names, pretend Mountainous Advantages, take a great House for the Office, and
hang a Label at the door, etc.


M. But all this cannot be done without a vast charge, what must be done in that
Respect?


S. Never trouble your self about that, In the first place we must sell shares
and Abundance of Places; for which we must have the Money down, etc.


M. But then supposeing our Project should Miscarry, how must we do then? The
Persons that have given us Money for Shares and Places, will bring their
Actions.


S. To prevent that we must make our Agreements, that their Salleries and
Advantages shall arise out of the Profits of the Office, so that if the Office
should fail, there would be no cause of Action. I know those that have got ten
thousand pound by such a Project, within these two or three Years, and yet it is
like to fail too.


M. That Is hard though, to draw in Poor Men and trick 'em out of their Money, and
what is worse engage 'em to a needless attendance, and after all to shuffle ^em
off without any manner of Compensation.


S. If you're for Compensation and Cases of Conscience, I have done with you:
Yonder I see Catchpole, I Will go see what he says to the World; how now
Catchpole, who are you in Mourning for?


C. For an honest Brother, that fell a Sacrifice to the cause two or three days
ago.


S. How do mean a Sacrifice, what, I warrant he ron himself upon some foolish
attempt, and so was knocked of the head for his pains.


C. Truly he died hard and fair in the Execution of his Office, and his Wife
like a good Woman, buried him as decently, laid him in the vault in St. Andrews
Church, among the Burgers of the Parish, and had a good Sermon for him beside.


S. That was great to lay him in the vault, but who Preached the Sermon?


C. Truly I did not know the man, but every Body said he talked very well.


S. Preached well; how did he Preach?


C. Why, sometimes he talked very loud, and then very gently and soft again, and
sometimes very Familiarly, the chief heads were about Sin and Mortality, and
then when he came to the business about the man, he said as he was stout, he
was merciful, and truly talked over the Duty of a Baily, as if he had understood
it as well as the best of us.


S. Loud, soft and Familiar; that is but a sort of antiquated way of Preaching.


C. I don't trouble my head about forms of Preaching, my thinks he did as it is
common in other cases, talk well for his Fee, and indeed I believe said as
much, as the Nature of the case would bear.


S. What was our deceast Brother, a man of Repution?


C. In short he was my Friend, and a Dead Baily, and therefore I Will neither say
good nor ill of him, and so farewell.


COL. IV. Between Scrible, Piracy, and Hawkwell.
Piracy. FRiend Scrible, good morrow! but why so sower and thoughtful this
morning?


Scrible. Sour and thoughtful! it would make you sour and thoughtful to be in my
condition.


Pir. Why, pray Mr. Scrible, what is the matter, what evil Planet governs now?


Scr. Ten thousand evil Planets Sir, there is none but evil Planets rule here,
and in all the rest of the Regions I believe.


Pir. I find you are very angry and disordered, but come I Will give you a whet
this morning, perhaps that may soften you a little.


Scr. Don't tell me of your whets, my Stomack's sharp enough already, if you
will give me any thing let it be something for Breakfast; if you will treat me
with a piece of hot Tripe and a Pot or two of Ale, I Am for you.


Pir. Faith a good motion Mr. Hawkwell, what say you? I think to be near the
Fountainhead we must even adjourn to Field-lane, and there we may have it
piping hot out of the Kettle.


Hawkwell. With all my Heart, I shall be always ready to oblige Mr. Scrible in
any thing I Am able.


Scr. You're two very honest Gentlemen, and indeed I must needs say you have
both done me singular favors in a great many particulars; but lets first have
the Tripe, and then you shall know a little more of my mind.


Pir. Well, Mr. Scrible, if you and Mr. Hawkwell will step before to the
Bricklayers-Arms, and order the Woman to get Six pennyworth of the best, I Will
be with you immediately.


Hawk. We are all spoiled; there is no Tripe to be had till the Afternoon, but
Mr. Scrible has ordered the Landlady to get a couple of Cow-heels, and fry 'em
with a good quantity of Onions, which I believe will do as well.


Scr. It Is the best Victuals in the Universe, but only this plaguey Woman is so
long in getting 'em ready.


Pir. She Is just coming, but pray in the intrim, let us know Mr. Scrible what it
is that has disordered you? truly I am much affected to find you so much out of
sorts.


Scr. Gentlemen, I am fit for nothing till I have filled my Belly, and when
that is done, if you will be a little patient, I have something of moment to
communicate to you, besides, here comes the Breakfast. --


Hawk. Well Mr. Scrible now we have breakfasted, pray oblige us with the reason
of your uneasiness.


Scr. I find you will have it, and I believe it is your guilt that urges you to
press me so hard; in short you are the 2 Rascals, or some of your gang, that
have been the occasion of my disturbance.


Hawk. Rascals! a scurvy term Mr. Scrible, but how have we been the cause of
your disturbance?


Scr. Why, you for your part Mr. Hawkwell, like a Dog as you are, make it your
business to hunt and listen about Town, and to observe every little Paper that
comes out, and if you find it pleases the Mob and is like to sell, then you
carry it to your Friend Piracy, and he crowds four or five Sheets into one and
Prints it, and sends it abroad at a Penny, or rather then fail at a Halfpenny
apiece, though before 'twas sold at Six pence, or a Groat at least, and so you
Cheat, or rather Rob, both the Author and the Bookseller, and will at last
occasion an embargo upon the Press, and then you and your whole Fraternity may
first starve, and then be damned together.


Pir. Mr. Scrible, You're so passionate that there is no speaking to you:
supposing all this, I cannot see how the Author can be a sufferer; he sells his
Copy to the Bookseller, so that if the Book be privately Printed, the damage
falls upon him.


Scr. A very hansome come off indeed, why then you think it is neither Sin nor
Knavery to cheat the Bookseller, you think I suppose that he makes up his
Markets upon the Author, and so you may Rob him by way of Reprizal.


Pir. Truly, with respect to the Booksellers, I cannot say but there may be
some small Injustice, but for your part Mr. Scribble, you have no Injury done
you at all.


Scr. With your leave, Mr. Compendious, I can demonstrate that the Author's the
only Person that is injured.


Pir. How can that be Mr. Filch? for since you're so good at hard Names and
Demonstrations, I believe it will be easy to prove that most of your Tribe are
as compendious Thieves and Robbers, as any Printers or Hawkers about Town.


Scr. Sir, my Guts are at Peace, and so would I too; and therefore give good
Words and avoid Comparisons, or it is not your Cow-heel Treat, etc. shall save
your Bacon.


Hawk. Gentlemen, here shall be no quarrelling, if you will debate the matter
with Moderation well and good, if not, Mr. Piracy, you and I Will be gone, and
leave him to rave by himself.


Scr. Mr. Hawkwell, I Am not so much for fighting as you imagine, only Mr.
Piracy is pleased to throw his Reflections upon Authors, and withal would have
me believe it is no Injury to us to have our Books printed upon us.


Pir. I tell you again, that if you sell your Copies to the Booksellers, you
can have no Injury, and then for your thieving it is too plain for
contradiction: pray what do you think of that worthy Brother that composed the
Trip to Holland? do ye think he did not make a very large Trip into Felton's
Resolves? And for the Spark that writ the first Trip, with his leave, he made
several Trips into places where he had no Business. The best of you all do but
steal and pilfer from one another, tho some of you have a little better Faculty
in transprosing than the rest, and so perhaps may pass undiscovered.


Scr. Piracy, I tell thee thou art a Scoundrel; I cannot bear to hear the
Dignity of Authors traduced at this rate: what, you will not allow us the
privilege of a little modest Quotations?


Pir. Very modest Quotations indeed, to steal whole Pages, nay sometimes whole
Books, and crowd in a few of your new Words, and some of your own Nonsense, and
then impudently sell it to the Bookseller as if 'twas a Brat of your own
begetting.


Scr. And to make 'em amends you rob 'em again. What if we do make bold with a
Page or two now and then, I hope that is no Argument for you to steal whole
Volumns: In short, you're a Company of Mercenary Varlets, and so I Will trouble
my Head no further with you.


Hawk. Come then Mr. Scrible, we'll call a new Cause; Have you any thing new?
if you have, Mr. Piracy and I Will deal with you for it, for ready Money.


Pir. Faith, as Hawkwell says, let us be Friends, we are all of a-piece, and if
you have any new thing we'll give you as much for it as the best Bookseller of
'em all.


Scr. Supposing you would; I don't see where is the necessity for your buying
Copies, you have them all for nothing I think. Pray where did you buy the
Copies of your Aesops, the Dragon and Grasshopper, the History of the Standing
Army, Elegy on the Death of Trade, Oliver's and Stephen's Sermons, and twenty
other little things you have printed? If you had common Humanity you would be
ashamed, nay be starved before you would be guilty of such insolent Villanny;
robbing upon the Highway, House-breaking and picking of Pockets are but modest
Theevries in comparison to your impudent Piracy. Sell you my Copies! I Will use
'em first as Merry Andrew said of his Tallys and Chequer-Bills, light Fires and
single Pigs with 'em.


Pir. I wish I had known your mind an hour or two sooner, the Devil should have
stufl'd you with Ale and Cow-heel for me.


Hawk. This is but the Copy of Mr. Scrible's Countenance; but if he will be ruled
and take advice, we can put him in a way how he shall live better than any of
his Brotherhood.


Scr. I defy your Advice and Assistance, I Am confident there is nothing but deep
and deliberate Knavery can proceed from such intolerable Wretches; but you are
not worth more of my Trouble, and so I Will leave you (if the Law has not
provided a Punishment suitable to you) to the correction of the Mob, and the
guilt of your own Consciences.


COL. V. Between Art, Industry and Cringe.
Industry. SIster Art, Whither are you so solemnly bound this Evening, and why
so thoughtful and contemplative?


Art. Why truly Sister, I was going to take a solitary walk in St. James's
Park, I have nothing to do, and so was thinking to take a melancholy turn or
two upon the Mall.


In. That Is my condition too, and if I thought I should not be burdensome I Would
bear you company.


Art. A Sister and a Friend can never be ungrateful conversation nor
burdensome, and indeed I Am rejoiced we are met so luckily that we may have an
opportunity to condole and advise with each other; pray Sister direct me if you
^an what we must do for a subsistence in this hard ^ncharitable Age?


In. I was just going to put the same Question to you, but yonder comes Cringe,
let us call him to us, and see what he says to the Case. Mr. Cringe, if your
occasions are not urgent, a word with you.


Cr. Madam me have no occations at all, Begar me have noting to do, no Money,
no Credit, my Wife bawl, my Shildren cry for Bread, my Land^ord dun for Rent,
my Goods all pawned; and Begar me go make hang upon my self.


Art. This Wretch Sister is in a worse condition than either of us: Mr. Cringe
how came all these misfortunes to fall upon you together?


Cr. All des misfortune bin but one misfortune, me have no Money, Begar, dat
bin all my misfortune.


In. But why should you be so turbulent and outrageous? you see the English
bear their wants with the utmost calmness and moderation.


Cr. For what you tell me of de English, Begar, de English have no Head, no
Thought, no Soul, no Brains; England been ou very good Nation, full of ou very
foolish, ou very poor, and, Begar, ou very cheating People.


Art. But why should you give old England all ^hese hard Names? she has been
very kind to your Contrymen the French Protestants.


Cr. De French Protestant! very good, but me be no French Protestant, me bin ou
French Papish, Naturalize in de Reign of King Jaque, and Begar, me have no good
luck never since: for what you call de French Protestant, dey be de French
Scoundrell, dey be in de general de French Vagabond, de Rubbidg, and de
Excrement of de whole Kingdom.


In. Come don't be so severe upon your Countrymen Mr. Cringe, they are a very
sedulous Industrious People, and live very well.


Cr. For what you call live very well? Dey live in de Garret, in de Cellar, dey
eat de Sheeps Head, and the Root, dey starve all de Week to live well, and wear
de fine Clothes upon de Sunday.


Art. Well, they are to be commended for that however: but Multitudes of 'em
are got into great Shops, have large Stocks, good Trades, get Money, and live
much better than the English.


Cr. Begar Madam, you make me laugh, who bin de Fool den? But Madam, me will
tell you, dat bin de Folly of de English, dey must have de French Taylour, de
French Cook, and de French Master; dey must have the French Glove, and de
French Shoe: Begar, must have de French all but the French Policy.


In. Truly what Mr. Cringe says in that Particular is a great Truth, the
English are strangely bigoted to 'em, and tho we infinitely exceed 'em in
every Vocation, and our Commodities are much preferrable to theirs, yet unless
they have a French Stamp upon 'em, they will hardly pass Muster with a great many
of our English Gentry.


Art. I must confess I have often thought upon what you say with a great deal
of just Concern and Astonishment; and withal I am very confident that that was
one of the fatal Causes that brought the gray Hairs of our good old Mother
Trade with Sorrow to her Grave, and is the ^hief Instrument of our present
Misfortunes.


Cr. Dat bin very true Madam, dey live hard, dey under-sell de English, dey
wheedle, fawn, ^atter, and begar dey lie, dey spoil de Trade, and will at last
be de Destruction of de glorious English Nation.


In. But Mr. Cringe, you have not told us the cause of your misfortunes yet.


Cr. Me told you me bin one French Papish, me ^rust, trust, trust de English
Jacobite, dey pay me with noting but News and Romance, dey make me break and
now I may be starve.


Art. Now you talk of King James, what do ^our Friends the Jacobites say of the
matter since ^he Peace?


Cr. For what you ask me dat, me know no^ing, me believe noting, me meddle with
noting, and begar me have noting.


In. What have you got in your Bag Mr. Cringe?


Cr. Dis bin Mourning for Minheer Van Beltch^nd-Fart, for de Death of de
English Trade.


In. What then, does Minheer love the English Trade so well, to go into
Mourning for her Death?


Cr. Begar he love her very well over de left ^houlder, but me say more of dat
another time.


Art. I think Sister it will be too late to Night ^or the Park, and so if you
please we'll defer our ^alk till another time, our Kinswoman Credit I ^ear is
in a very languishing condition, and therefore we'll make her a Visit, where we
may spend the remainder of the Evening in the mutual Co^dolement of each other.


COL. VI. Between Sneak, Turbulent and Infallibility.
Sneak. FRiend Infallibility, I am heartily rejoiced to see thee, and I bring
thee the Thanks of our whole Party for thy late Friendship and Assistance in
our Norfolk Rencounter.


Infallibility. Mr. Sneak, I thank you and your Party for all Favors, but pray
what says the World of that Matter?


Sn. Thou know friend, the World is a common Liar, there is no great matter
of dependence upon any thing the World says; but I can tell thee what, the
Quakers have got more Reputation by thy Letters, and Advice in the management
of that Conference, than in any thing they ever undertook in that nature before.


In. I am glad to hear it, and if they would but observe two things, they would
find their Number and their Interest increase daily. First, to be sure to keep
their Friends behind the Curtain. And secondly, to evade all manner of Methods
and Scholastic Rules in their Conferences, if they do the first, they betray
both their Cause and their Friends; if the latter, they will most certainly be
baffled and confounded.


Sn. Friend, I think these are two needless Cautions; the first is inconsistent
with their Credit and Policy, and the last with their very Nature.


In. If you have any thing of Moment further, be brief; for here will be
Turbulent the Presbyterian presently, and then we must call a new Cause.


Sn. All that I have further at present, is to ask your advice, whether it will
be convenient to send a new Challenge for another Conference; some of our
Brethren seem very urgent for it.


In. By all means, if you can urge your Adversaries to accept it; if you get no
advantage, you can lose none at worst, it will entitle you to a considerable
deal of Reputation, to be thought opposites for so potent an Enemy as the
Church of England; you have Rules before you, i.e. to deport your selves with
Calmness and Moderation, to cajole the People, wrangle when you are pinch't, and
to evade close Arguings; and for answers to their Letters, etc. you may depend
upon your Friends.


Sn. Our Party must needs own and esteem your Friendship, and upon occasion you
may be confident you will find 'em grateful.


In. Gratitude's a God-like principle, but here is Mr. Turbulent. Mr. Turbulent,
your humble Servant.


Tur. Gentlemen both, your Servant, Mr. Sneak I Am glad to find you in such good
Company.


Sn. Why, truly Friend I have a great value for the Conversation of Mr.
Infallibility.


In. And Gentlemen, I think my self very happy in the Society of two such
worthy Friends; but pray Mr. Turbulent how grow the Seeds of Discord, is there
like to be a good Crop this Season?


Tur. In troth I think pretty well, the Anabaptist, Independent your People.
Mr. Sneak, Ours and yours two Mr. Infallibility, are industriously pecking at
the English Church.


In. And what I like best of all, they are pecking one at another, the Jurat
against the Non-Jurat, and the high-flown against the low-flown. Indeed I must
needs b^ of the Opinion of one of their own scurvy Writers, i. e. the Author of
the Decay of Christian Piety, that their Church is a vivacious Animal, and can
never die without killing her self.


Tur. If she dies any how it is no matter which way: but what are the chief
matters in dispute between the Jurats and the Non-Jurats?


In. Why, several very great things, but the two chief are the Legality of
their Deprivations, and the manner and cause of their separation from each
other.


Tur. What then, have they broke their Unity and made a Separation? Why then
one of the Parties must be guilty of a Schism, for it is impossible they should
be both in the right?


In. Truly that is St. Cyprian's Notion of it, Schism says he, consists in the
breaking or tearing the Unity, and dividing that which should be kept together,
Cyp. de unit. Eccl. p. 105. and 119. id. Ep. 44. p. 86. and St. Chrysostom is
of the same Opinion in H. 3. ad Cor.


Sn. I hope Mr. Infallibility, your People will not fail to make the most of this
advantage.


In. No, no, we have it set down in the Book of Remembrance, and shall be sure
to make use of it upon occasion.


Tur. Then I find Mr. Sneak's one of us, I Am glad to see our Party grow so
fast, sure we shall have our ends at last upon this paultry Church of England.


In. Yes, yes, he is effectually one of us, and since we are so happily met, lets
think what each of us can do in his respective Station to carry on the
business: Mr. Sneak, what can you do in the first place?


Sn. First, I can advise the People against paying their Tithes, and give 'em
pretended reasons for it, and that will be a means to set the Ministers and
their Parishioners together by the ears. I can traduce and vilify 'em between
jest and earnest, and fix my Scandals upon 'em, with so much seeming Friendship
and Charity, that the World must at last be inclined to believe 'em true. I can
collect a Catalogue of all the worst Men in their Church, and have 'em ready at
my Fingers ends, to trump up upon every occasion to their disadvantage, and for
a need I can make some Additions too. I can cunningly insinuate their Pride and
Self-Interest: I can reproach their Bishops, revile their Constitution, and
defame their whole Order, and do 'em all with such singular Hypocrisy, that few
shall suspect, either my Hatred or Treachery. Upon occasion I can give the
Spirit utterance and declaim aloud, and publicly against 'em: in a word, I can
be either a Fiend or a Saint, as it best serves for the Destruction, Scandal or
Disadvantage of the Church of England.


In. Mr. Sneak, truly I see you can do very well, pray Mr. Turbulent what can
you do?


Tur. Why, I can do all that Mr. Sneak has mentioned with some Additions of my
own. I can persuade the People that the Ceremonies of the Church of England
tend directly to Popery; that their bowing to the Altar is a sort of Idolatry;
that the sign of the Cross is the true Budg of Antichrist; that their Articles
are inconsistent and impracticable; that their Canons are neither pertinent nor
obligatory; that there Reformation was an innovation and unwarrantable; that
their Rubric, and Common Prayer are an imposition and unaccountable; and that
the whole Church with all its Appendages ought to be new modeled, rectified or
abolished.


In. This is very well too, now I Will tell you what I can do, I can do all what
you both have instanced, with several Amendments, i. e. I can herd my self with
every Party, whine with the Quaker, cant with the Presbyterians, and prate and
yelp with the Annabaptist or Independent; I can cajole and incense the Jurat,
and aggravate and imbitter the Non-Jurat, and set 'em to haggling one another
with poynted Satyrs, and sharp and bitter Reflections: I can put on any shape
or disguise, commit any manner of Wickedness, even Murder or Massacre, for the
destruction of this intolerable Church of England.


COL. VII. Between Orthodox and Moderation.
Moderation. MR. Orthodox, I am sorry to see you loolt with so much concern and
discomposure in your Face; pray what ungrateful accident have you been
encountered with to day?


Orth. I have been encountered with that which should concern you and all
honest Men: a Scurvy-Book lately published, i. e. Milton's Life, wherein the
impudent Author has made saucy Reflections upon the Common Prayer, and what is
more, insolently blasphemed the Memory of our Royal Martyr.


Mod. That Is a bold stroke indeed; but sure the Governors of the Church will
take care to have the Book suppressed, and the Author punished.


Orth. I hope they will; for if such high Offenses should be passed over
without a severe Reprehension, the whole Christian World would be apt to
condemn and censure England for being the Patroness of such a notorious
Imposture.


Mod. I must own the thing is of dangerous consequence; and yet as Cases stand
now we must not run Matters to Extremity. Well! but have you seen the substance
of the Norfolk Conference?


Orth. I! there is another thing too; yes, I have seen i^, and an astonished
that so many learned Men should sink themselves so low to engage themselves in
a Conference, with a few stubborn, surly, illiterate Quakers; and what is worse,
suffer one of their Churches to be the place of Rendezvous.


Mod. You hear that the Quakers sent 'em a Challenge, and that they had leave
to dispute with 'em, and for conveniency-sake to make use of one of their
Churches.


Orth. As for their Challenge, in my Judgment they ought to have rejected it
with the same Scorn and Contempt as a Nobleman should do one from his Groom or
his Foor-man; and then for making use of the Church (which it seems was an
Arcifice of theirs too) all the considering part of the Kingdom seem to be
surprised at it. The Church, if I mistake, not is a place consecrated to divine
Worship, and set apart for the solemn Duties of Religion, and nothing else; but
then to open the Doors to a Mob, and let in a Herd of viprous Creatures to
defend and justify their blasphemous Tenets, seems to me in the literal Sense,
the changing the House of God into a Den of Thieves.


Mod. I will not for my part pretend to justify the thing, tho without question
our Brethren proceeded with the greatest Caution and Regularity; I declare I Am
for condescension, we have too many sad Instances of the danger of Extremes,
and indeed we have ^eason enough to suspect that if we should push things on
with the same Rigor as we did formerly, we should soon spoil all.


Orth. I don't apprehend what you call Rigor and Extremes; I hope the strict
performance of our Duties in the execution of our Office, and the defense of
the Rights and Privileges of our Church can never deserve the Title of Rigor
or Extremity. No, my Friend, you're strangely mistaken! it is the neglect of our
Duty and our easiness and condescension together, have reduced us so low, and
will at last ruin us inevitably. If we had been faithful to our selves and
lived up to our own Rules and Constitution, we might have been long happy; but
yonder I see a Friend I have business with, and so I Will conclude with this
short wish.

Oh may I live to hail that glorious Day,
When England's Church shall her own Rites obey.
True to her self may she at length become,
Admired abroad, loved and carest at home,
The Spite, the Terror, and the Fall of Rome.

FINIS.

