CATECHISTICAL DISCOURSES IN WHICH FIRST, An easy and efficacious way is
proposed for instruction of the ignorant, by a breife Sum of the Christan
Doctrine here delivered, and declared. SECONDLY, The verity of the Roman
Catholic Faith is demonstrated by induction from all other religions that are
in the world. THIRDLY, The method of the Roman Catechism, which the Council
of Trent caused to be made, is commended to practice, of instructing in
doctrine, confirming in Faith, and inciting to good life by Catechisticall
Sermons. By A. E.


Attend to thy self, and to doctrine: be earnest in them, For this doing,
thou shall save both thy self, and those that hear thee. Tim. 1.4.

To the wise and unwise I am debtor. Romans 1.

At PARIS, By P. TARGA, ordinary Printer to the Archbishopric of Paris, Sworn
by the University. In the street of S. Victor, at the Golden Sun. 1654. With
Approbation of Paris, and of England.

I desire the Reader to read with attention the Praeface to him.

A DEDICATORY PRAYER TO JESUS CHRIST.
DREAD Sovereign LORD, King of all Kings, and of all creatures both in Heaven
and Earth. My Maker, my Redeemer, my Conseruer, my Eternal and Omnipotent God.
Whom my soul by nature does fear and reverence, and in whom is all my hope
and confidence. Behold me thy sinful creature trembling for fear before
thee, astonished with the power of my Creator. But, O my sweet Redeemer, thou
do recreate me with thy sacred bloodshed, and give me a new being full of
joy and love toward thee. This fear, and love has brought me to thy feet,
to offer my self, and my work first to thee. I present and dedicate it to thy
infinite Majesty: an unworthy present, if thou make it not worthy. Give life I
beseech thee and vigor for the fruit of it. Thou have the hearts of all in thy
hands, the good spirit is given to none but by thee. Open then my God the hearts
of those that shall read this book, and expel the spirit of stupidity,
infidelity, and all kind of sin out of them; that thy holy inspiration taking
place, they may receive due instruction in thy doctrine; reject all illusions
of faith, and may bring that increase in holiness of life, which I pray and
labor for in them. Grant sweet Jesus that this book, though never so bitter
in it self, may become like honey in those that shall use it, to produce in
them true charity toward thee, and their neighbor; and toward me in
particular, to pray, that in all afflictions and temptations that shall befall
me, I may willingly, pleasantly, and constantly obey and honor thee,
comforted by thy merits, and by thy sweet and comfortable name called upon.
Live sweet Jesus, King of eternal glory. Live, live and reign in our souls,
here and in Heaven for ever and ever. Amen.

A DEDICATORY EPISTLE TO THE HIGH and MOST GRACIOV^ PRINCESS HENRIETTA MARIA
DAVGHTER OF ENGLAND.
HAVING offered my labors first to Jesus Christ, and solicited the favor of
his Sacred Majesty, in the next place I bring them to you for yours: and
I-beseech your Highness with all the earnestness, and humility I can, that
you will be pleased to accept as favorably, as I hope he has done of them. It
is the Doctrine of Jesus Christ that desires your protection. A subject too
sublime to be handled by my insufficiency, or to need to be protected by any;
but that the present state of England required this labor of me, and it to be
more acceptable stood need of your protection. This I ingegenuously confess
to be the true and only motive why next unto God I dedicate my work to your
Highness. Because setting forth this method of doctrine, which the Council
of Trent has so earnestly commended, and which is practiced with so much
profit in some places, and not yet delivered in the English tongue, I have done
il so, as I thought was sit for England; yet not so but that I know a
powerful Protector to be both seasonable and necessary to make it more
acceptable. And therefore as I was careful that it should have a more then
ordinary approbation before it entered the press; so now coming forth in
public, I desire it should go under your name, because I think none so
powerful to commend it to the use and profit of others, as your Highness.

You are the Highest of all English Catholics. You are set in our Crown as
a gemme of singular luster, and our eyes and hearts are filled with the
expectation of you; the wisdom of your Father, which the world in due time
shall admire, and the piety of your Mother, whom the most turbulent of times
could never tax, meeting both together first in you. For you are the first of
the Royal stock of England that now for many years, and for some descents
has professed the Catholic Faith, brought up by special providence in the
bosom of the Catholic Church, that we may say of you as of Jacob, Genesis 48.
God has fed you from your youth until this present day, as though designed
to some eminent happiness. To whom then shall the Catholic Doctrine in
English address it self, but unto you? Where shall it find a Patron, if you
should reject it? A prudent heart shall possess knowledge, Prou. 18.
and the ear of the wise does seek doctrine. This is the doctrine which your
ear has harkened unto, which you possess in your heart; and your Divine
Spouse does require that you outwardly profess what your heart possesses, and
put him as a seal both upon your heart, and upon your arm.

The afflicted Catholics of England will revive with joy, to see this Doctrine
publikly in your hands, and will take it as a pledge of greater felicity, which
from your nearest Progenitour they, may well expect. I will speak here the
truth which I have spoken unto many; that when I read in S. Bid the conversion
of the English, and saw S. Augustine graciously received by King Ethelbert well
disposed to his doctrine by having married a Catholic, who was daughter of
France, it made then such impression in me, and gave such lively hopes of the
like benefit again, that a small knowledge in history represented presently
some other such marriages to me, by which I began to conceive it as a
blessing upon France, that the Flower de Luces should send forth the odor of
Christ unto other nations, the Catholic Doctrine coming from thence for their
conversion. The first fruits of these hopes we have already in you, and by
this they will grow, and increase in us.

Besides this book being so directed to Catholics, as by the way to give
satisfaction to all other Religions that shall meet with it: I was to seek
for such a Patron as without offense to any might ingratiate it to all: and
for this there was none so proper as your self, who as yet in the candor of
your Chrysome, are grateful to all Christians, and by your unspotted innocence
to all the world. Grant then (most Gracious Princess) your desired Patronage,
which is so proper and necessary to this work, that I neither will, nor can
in reason look for any other. What Englishmans heart (tender by nature) will
not so far resent your condition and his own, as at least to receive and
read that which comes commended by you for the good of his soul? It vill
go for pure gold when you have accepted of it: under your Name and character
all will receive and read it, and with Gods assistance shall profit by it.
This is the cause why I dedicate it first to God, and then to you; desiring no
other reward for my self, but your gracious acceptance for the good of others.
Because for a book to do much good, I consider it as necessary, to procure
that it be currently accepted of, and much read, as it is to contriue, and
compose it good in it self. And having now provided as well as I can for both,
I have done all, and will rest,

Your Highnesses, Most humble servant, and devoted Orator to pray for you. A.
E.

APPROBATIO.
NOs infra scripti in Sacra Theologiae Facultate Parisiensi Doctores perlegimus
librum. Anglicano idiomate scriptum, cui titulus est CATECHISTICAL DISCOURSES,
in which first an easy, and efficacious way is proposed, etc. In quo nihil
inuenimus a Catholica Fide alienum, aut bonis moribus auersum. Quinimo
iudicamus Discursuum horum institutum ad Christianam doctrinam elucidandam,
Catholicam fidem confirmandam, veramque pietatem promouendam, non minus
studiose pertractari, quam religiose, and pro Catholicorum Angliae praesenti
condition, vtiliter susceptum esse. Quapropter librum hunc non approbamus
modo, praeloque dignum censemus, verum etiam quantum possunt vota nostra omnium
vsui commendamus. Quod nostris testamur signaturis.

Datis Parisiis 1. Sept. anno salutis humanae. 1654. HENRICUS HOLDEN. P. O.
LONERGAN.


WE the under written Doctors of Divinity in the Faculty of Paris, have
perused an English book entitled CATECHISTICALL DISCOURSES in which first an
easy and effi^acious way is proposed, etc. In which we find nothing dissonant
from the Catholic Faith, or good manners. But we rather judge the institute of
these Discourses for declaring of the Christian Doctrine, confirming of the
Catholic Faith, and promoting of true piety to be noe less studiously
prosecuted, then religiously, and for the present condition of England,
profitably undertaken where for we not only approve of it as worthy of the
press; but also commend it as much as lies in us to be used by all:

given under our hands at Paris, September. 1. in the year of our Lord 1654.
HENRICUS HOLDEN. P. O. LONERGAN.


APPROBATIO.
LEctis testimoniis quatuor Doctissimorum in Anglia Sacerdotum, quorum examini
liber cui titulus CATECHISTICALL DISCOURSES, etc. commissus est, quique illum
non modo in doctrina and moribus sanum testati sunt, sed and communi sententia
laudauerunt, magnumque ex eo fructum sperauerunt, meum erat eorum sententiis
assentiri, and quantum per me licet efficere, vt speratus inde fructus in
medium proferretur, and fidelibus communicaretur. Quare librum hunc and
approbo, and summo desiderio omnibus commendo.

Datum Parisiis Sept. 21. 1654. LANCASTER. Theologiae Professor, and in Anglia
Librorum Censor.

Having read the testimonys of four of the most learned Priests of England, to
whom the examining of this book entitled CATECHISTICALL DISCOURSES, etc. was
committed; who did not only declare it to be sound in doctrine and manners,
but also unanimously praised it, and hoped for much fruit by it; it was my part
to assent unto their sentences, and with all my power to further their hopes of
the public benefit. Wherefore I approve of this book and earnestly commend it
unto all.

Given at Paris Sept. 21. 1654. LANCASTER. Professor of Divinity, and Censurer
of books in England.

The chief Errors in printing.
Page 2 there, their. p. 17. witht he, with the. 20. authoritority, authority
24. some anes, some means 44. declace, declare 45, which which 57. paofesse,
profess 57. lin. 22 not, nor. 58 hy, by 60. voon upon 60 af, alse, a false 68
oue, our. 64. eratederect 64. fi^d, fixed. 64. anotheri, another. 82. life,
like. 85. life, like. 137. condemning, contemning. 153. the eues, thieves. 165.
Danid, David. 183. there in is, there is in. 301. of, of. 301. lsgacy, legacy,
310. lin 23. by, die. lin. 31. consecrate, consecrated 313. lin. 24. then, thee.
316. kinden, kinds. 3^8. barished, vanished 343 absently, absolutely, 358.
hedrew, Hebrew. 384. fathers hold, father should. 426. atheiued, atcheiued.
433. lives on, live on. 439. whorty, worthy, 481. thinigs, things. 483 putting
darknesses, darkness, fulnesses, fullness. 494. and en, an end. 499. be try,
he try. 532. sometihing, something. 5^3. departing, departed. 557. by glad, be
glad. 559. Glory into the ihghest God, Glory in the highest to God. 565. sixty
tens, six tens 589, is patron, his patron. 600. outward, outward. 602. whit
a long, with a long 618. but to mutual, but to exhort them to mutual. 625.
lin. 1. spiritually, supernaturally 626. he will; but, he will but. 630.
laaine, latin, 639. theit, their. 645. consist, subsist. 684. servants of,
servant of. 685. in intentions, in intension. 703. fly grom, fly from. 704. is
in worse, are in worse.

THE DISCOURSES contained in this Book.
The first Discourse. Of the education of children, and of the obligation which
all have to learn the Christian dostrine. The Second Of Faith. The Third Of
the sign of the Cross. The Fourth Of the Creed. The Fifth Of the Sacraments.
The Sixth Of the Commandments. The Seventh Of the Pater Noster. The Eighth Of
the Hail Mary. The Ninth Of the Rosary. The Tenth Of the Mass. The Eleauenth,
Of the Praecepts of the Church. The Twelfth Of Sin.
A PREFACE to the Reader.
THE great want of instruction which I saw in many moving me to apply my self
more seriously to the practice of catechizing, I took into my hands that
Catechism which the Council of Trent caused to be made, and was settforth by
command of Pius Quintus Pope, and is commonly called the ROMAN CATECHISM.
Which as it has the authority not of some one author only, but was made by
express command of an entire, and that so flourishing a General Council,
it may justly take place of all other Catechismes, and is of all others the
most worthy to be followed. And it added not a little to the esteem which I had
of that book to understand afterward that it came chiefly by the care and
pains of that blessed man, and late mirror of pastors S. Charles Borromaeus.

The first thing which I observed in it was an earnest desire, and almost
continual exhorting of pastors to the catechizing of their people. This it
commends not only once of purpose in the beginning, but all over in every
chief subject: which it treats, and almost in every thing which it
mentions it repeateth, and inculcateth over again the necessity of
instruction also in that particular point: that it is a thing very remarkable
to see the great zeal of this holy Council, in so often commending, and
recommending to Pastors the instruction of their people. In the explication of
the Sacraments beginning to speak of Baptism, it says that Pastors should
never think that they had said enough in declaration of that Sacrament; and
exhorts them that not only on the Eues of Easter and whitsunday, when it is
administered with greater solemnity, but also at other times that they take
occasion when they see a good number of people together at the baptizing of
any, to say something if not of all the chief parts of it, at least of some
one or other point of it, as opportunity shall permit. And in another place
(as I remember) it exhorts them to have certain commune places in their
memory for the explicating of any part of the Christian doctrine, as need
shall requite. This was the first thing which I could not but observe in the
Roman Catechism, and which ought to be a great incitement, especially to the
Pastoral Clergy to whom it was directed, and who have by office the charge of
souls, to attend earnestly to doctrine. And indeed he that before God has
undertaken this charge, and considers on one side the dignity, and necessity
of the Christian Doctrine in it self; and on the other side the ignorance of
many, and the stupid neglect of their souls which is caused by it, will easily
see what obligation he has to use his utmost endeauours by all methods and
ways possible to attend to it; but especially in that, which by the sanctity,
wisdom, and authority of a General Council is commended.

I will not here omit to propose the Clergy of France for an example, and
especially those about Paris, in all Ecclesiastical perfections the glory of
Christendom; who considering the Christian Doctrine to be the first ground of
spirituality, have set themselves so earnestly to instruct in it, as though
the words of the Apostle were allwais in their ears Attend to thy self and
to doctrine: be earnest in them etc. Tim. 1.4.
And the sentence of God menacing, Ezec. 34.
Woe to the pastors of Israel which fedd themselves etc. But my flock you fedd
not. How many several institutions have of late years been there erected for
this purpose? How many congregations of Priests are now established in the
Parish Churches of the city for education of the Pastoral Clergy, and with
special care to the Christian doctrine? What methods have they devised? what a
number of books have they settforth? How many little papers have they dispersed
amongst the people? and what extreme and continual pains do they take, to
inculcate that by word of mouth, which they deliver in writing. It is an
admirable thing, and full of aedification to see the sweat and toil, which I
have seen in those grave and excellent men. Nay that nothing might be left
vnessayed by them, they have caused the chief points of the Christian doctrine
to be put into verse for the easyer learning of it without book. But that
which is yet of more moment, and most worthy to be practiced all over the
Catholic Church, is an exercise confirmed by authority as I perceive all over
France, which they call the Prone or Pronaum, as being delivered in the Naue or
open of the Church; in which every Sunday at High Mass the Creed being ended,
the Celebrant or some other for him ascends the pulpit, and joining prayer
with the people for the necessitys of the Catholic Church, for the Popes
Holiness, the souls in Purgatory, and particular affairs that occur; the
Christian doctrine is then read to them, and a speech or Sermon is commonly
made upon some part of it. Is not this a zeal worthy of Catholic Priests, of
the souls of Christians, which they must answer for, of the dignity of that
doctrine which they profess? Why do not all then imitate this zeal in them?
That which they do in this Prone is but in prosecution of the Council of
Trents desire, and that which I here labor for. For what is my Sum of the
Christian doctrine, but the Creed, Sacraments, Praecepts of the Church, and
the other most necessary points which first they read, and what my Discourses,
but as theirs upon some of them* Truly it was noe small satisfaction to me,
when coming into France, I saw that which for some years I had practiced in
private, to be see publicly, and generally there professed, allthough unknown
to me. And besides the profit which I had experienced in it, and the authority
of the Roman Catechism, their example did not a little encourage me to
publish it, and to commend the like practice to our country, which stands
much more need of it then they. And yet for all this care, and pains which
they take, I have heard them sometimes complain to their people, that many of
them were ignorant even in the first principles, and most necessary points of
doctrine: and I know by some experience that it was not altogether without
cause. But if in France, and about Paris, where such care is taken, and where
the common people generally are to be thought more knowing then in any place of
the Christian world, there was reason to complain; what shall we say of other
places where that care is wanting, and where those methods of Catechizing are
not so much as thought of? By all which we may see the dignity and necessity
of Catechizing in the judgment of the wise, and how great a falt it is in some
of the weaker sort of Christians, who slight it as a thing for children
only, and when themselves perhaps remain in damnable ignorance.

The Christian doctrine is the ground and foundation of religion, and the
Catholic Church continues allwais in the world by continual instructing in
it. Christ the Son of God laid that foundation, the Apostles after him
buildded upon it, the Fathers and Doctors of the Catholic Church from time to
time have raised up the structure, and by their preachings and writings
maintained it: and for all that they have said and written, there will still
remain for others to write, until it come to that perfection to which God
has ordained it in this world. This is that doctrine which plane humble and
outwardly despicable, but grounded upon the promises of Jesus Christ, ancient
Philosophy could not withstand it. This doctrine delivers the principles of
divinity, it has beaten down infidelity, dispersed haeresys like smoke, it
abolisheth sin, and inflameth unto virtue the hearts of those that faithfully
embrace it. Finally this is the knowledge of salvation in which the Orient from
on high has visited us. And it should suffize to say that it is the knowledge
of salvation. What esteem then ought all to have of it? with what dillige^ce
to study it, and to be perfect in it? And therefore the Council of Trent after
the decision of controuersys in faith, and declaration of the divine truth, in
the next place would provide for Catechizing, that the true doctrine declared
might be delivered to the people. And for this end they caused the Roman
Catechism to be made; and that not to incite Pastors howsoever to instruct,
but to propose such a manner of instuction, as was most propper for times of
heresy: as it declares of purpose in the Preface, where speaking of the
suttelty of haeretiks in insinuating of their new and poysonsome doctrines, it
has these words; Wherefore to apply some remedy to these pernicious evils,
the Fathers of the Oecumenicall Council of Trent have thought it not
sufficient only to determine the chief points of the Catholic doctrine
against the haeresys of these times; but have also deemed it necessary to
setiforth a certain form, and manner of instructing of Christian people,
which in all Churches should be followed by those who have the office of a
lawful Pastor and teacher.

Now for the form and manner of instructing which it delivers, it is by
Discourses, Speeches or Sermons made upon several parts of the Christian
doctrine; such as the ancient fathers of the Church have left of the same
subject, and have called Homilys, which in Greek also is the same as to say
Discourses, or Sermons. And for the method which it has observed in those
Discourses, it is such, that a more profitable can not be devised: for by it
Catholics are so taught in doctrine, that they are also confirmed in faith,
and piously excited to holiness of life. Three principal things then are
intended in the Roman Catechismes Discourses. The first is Instruction of the
ignorant, the second is Confirmation of the Catholic faith, the third
Aedification to good life. As for instruction it performs it very abundantly,
and more at large in those subjects which it treats of, then other
Catechismes commonly do. As for the second it confirms the Catholic
doctrine, especially against modern heresys, so as in that breuity is very
sufficient for the satisfaction of any that would have a care of his soul. As
for the third which is Aedification to good life, it sometimes threateneth with
such zeal the judgments of God, to make us to fear him, and again, when the
subject requires, it lays open so efficaciously the bowels of his love and
mercy, to draw us to love him, that we have in it not only a Catechism for
instruction; but also so many Sermons and exhortations to virtue; and Pastors
by following of that method in these three things, may well be said to pay the
debt which they owe both to the wise and unwise.

The same method of discourse I desire to observe, and the same three things I
will labor to imitate with that spirit that it shall please God to give me.
For the first which is instruction, considering that in the opinion of authors
some express, and explicit knowledge of the mysterys of faith is absolutely
necessary for every one to have; so^ necessary, that to those that are come to
the use of reason there can be noe salvation without it; I have therefore
collected a short and easy Sum or abbreuiation of the Christian doctrine
contained in the answers to a few questions, which more doubt but compriseth as
much, as is absolutely necessary for Lay people to know, and more then authors
in rigor exact of them. The learning then and indifferent understanding of
that Sum shall satisfy the obligation which all have to learn the Christian
doctrine, and shall excuse them from the sin of ignorance which they might
incur. In which answers I do not intend the rigorous definitions of those
things which are there asked; but only to declare so much as is necessary for
the understanding, and in breife for the remembering of that point. This I often
explicate to the people, and procure that they have it with them to get without
book: for I find by experience that neither explication only withour getting
something without book, nor the getting without book only, without
explication is sufficient for the people to learn the christian doctrine. I
have explicated the same things over and over again many times, and until I
gave them something in breife for their memory, I perceived that my labor was
in a manner lost, especially with the young and ruder sort, who when I came to
examine again were as far to seek, as at first. And on the other side I
have known some children who through their parents care, have known all
Cardinal Bellarmins little Catechism without book; yet for want of explication
have been little, or nothing better for it Wherefore to bring the people both to
understand, and to remember the christian doctrine, I was forced to use these
means, to give them that Sum to get without book for their memory and to
expound it to them, as they do in their ^rones in France: only with this
difference, that where as there the people have only the chief parts of the
Christian doctrine read to them before the explication, I require that they say
it themselves, answering all together alowde to the questions of the Sum; for
by this means the most rude and ignorant hearing others answer, and answering
with them, come in time to learn the answers whether they will or not; and
that much more easily in their own language then those who get without book
whole psalms in Latin by only hearing, and singing them with others in the
Church. As for explication I sometimes expound all the Sum in breife for the
ignorant, and sometimes for the good of all I make a discourse after the manner
of some of the following Discourses; either of Faith, or of the Sign of the
Cross, or of some article of the Creed, or other part, as occasion shall serve,
and as is most agreeable to that days solemnity.

The second thing which I labor for is to confirm in the Catholic faith by
such proofs of the Catholic doctrine as may suffize for that purpose. And that
you may better understand how I proceed in this, I desire you to take good
notice in the Creed. (For in the other Discourses there is noe difficulty.)
For the understanding of which you are to mind well the method which the
Apostles have observed in composing of it, which they carried with them in
their lives, and left behind them at their deaths, as a rule of divine faith.
First against Atheists who would persuade themselves that there is noe God,
they laid this ground I believe in God. Secondly against Pagans, who on the
contrary believe in many Gods, they profess their belief in one only God the
maker of heaven and earth. Thirdly against Jews and Turks, and all such as
they foresaw might believe in one God, yet deny Christ, they profess their
belief in Jesus Christ the only Son of God. Yet all this was not sufficient
finally to resolve in point of faith For being that there might be several
sorts of Christians all of them believing in Jesus Christ, yet all could not
have the true faith of Christ, as being opposite in doctrine, and disobedient
to each others Churches; therefore it was further necessary that the Apostles
should declare which of all Christian Churches that were then, or might be
afterward, was the true Church of Christ. This they did in the ninth article,
when having professed the chief things that concerned the B. Trinity, and the
mystery of the Incarnation, in the next place they added I believe the
Catholic Church. Here noy all controuersys of faith should have an end, we
being allwais bound to believe the Church, and in all points to refer our
selves with obedience to it. And if this article had been allwais truly
observed, there never could have been any haeresys, nor false Churches of
Christians in the world. For if all Christians had allwais kept themselves
constant to the doctrine of the Church, and continued obedient, submitting
allwais to it, noe false Churches of Christians could at first have risen, all
of them first rising in the breach of this atticle; for that they will not
believe the Catholic Church, which is then and must be at all times extant,
for the government of the world in the true worship of God; but will follow the
conceits of some private men, and begin new Churches which then are not in
any place. And if we rightly consider this article we shall find it sufficient
to destinguish amongst all Christian people that now are, which of them is for
the present the true Church of Christ. For as at first the true Church of
Christ was planted Catholic, that is to say a people all over and universally
agreeing in the same faith and doctrine; and those that began false Churches
of Christians were first of it, and went forth to begin a new Church in
disobedience to it; so if amongst all the Churches of Christians that are now
in the world we find one out of which they have all gone forth; all the rest
that have gone forth of it are false Churches, and that out of which they have
all gone forth must have the true faith of Christ, and be that first Church
which the Apostles planted, and called The Catholic Church. This argument of
the Apostles take to prosecute, and to prove more at large that which they in
the Creed have but briefly professed First in the first article against
atheists that there is a God. Secondly in the same article against Pagans that
there is but one God. Thirdly in the second article against Jews and Turks and
all that deny Christ I prove the Christian faith. Fourthly in the ninth
article I show, how that amongst all the Christian Churches that are in the
world, there is none but the Roman (which is commonly called Catholic) that
is indeed the true Catholic Church; for that all other Christian Churches
that are in the world went first out of it, and began at some time in
disobedience to that Church. (And to show this I willingly use the Popes
authority, that the enemies of the Catholic Church may see the truth, and lay a
side their auersion from that holy seat which to the ruin of their souls
they labor to disgrace) This manner of inducing the verity of the Roman
Catholic faith is as you see both according to the Apostles method, and by it
the verity of all, and every particular point of that faith is inferred. For
that being once proved to be the true Church, there needs noe further proof
of any particular point which it teaches, the true Church not being subject to
teach falsehood in particular doctrines; but all whatsoever is taught by it is
to be received for the authority of God so speaking, and we are allwais to say
I believe the Catholic Church. Yet in the other parts of the Christian
doctrine when any points of controversy in religion occur, I give
satisfaction briefly in them also, as the Roman Catechism does; but that
which I desire most to satisfy in is the authority of the Roman Catholic
Church proved out of the first, second and ninth article of the Creed, and
which may be understood by reading the ninth only.

The third thing which I labor for in Catechizing is edificatio^ to good
life, Esa. 27.
for this is the end and fruit of all, to take away sin We lay the
foundation when we instruct in the Christian doctrine, and we build upon it
when we exhort to good life, this being the hight and perfection of our labors.
Wherefor that you may not only know speculatiuely what to believe; but also
how to apply practically that knowledge to the honor of God, and your
advancement in his grace, I have annexed many things both out of the Roman
Catechism, and other authors, as also some examples of my own certain
knowledge, which tend only to devotion. Thus I follow that method which the
Council of Trent has given us to follow in the Discourses of the Roman
Catechism; adding only the Hail Mary in the beginning of every Discourse, as
a pious devotion to implore the assistance of our B. Lady before any good
exercise.

But because the Discourses of the Roman Catechism were but few, as treating
only of four subjects (besides the praeamble which it has of faith) to wit
of the Creed, of the Sacraments, of the Commandments, and of the Pater
Noster: and those also something obscure, as not being intended by the
Council of Trent, as a Catechism immediately to the people, but to pastors, to
give them examples how to Catechize; and were therefore delivered as entire
speeches without titles, until Andreas Fabritius for more cleernesse added
titles unto them: therefore I have treated of more subjects; as first of the
Obligation which all have to learn the Christian Doctrine, of the Sign of the
Cross, of the Mass, of the Aue Maria, of the Rosary, of the Praecepts of the
Church, and of Sin. And I have destinguished the points which are treated in
them by titles sufficiently connecting the former sense with that which
follows; so that I hope you will have here the substance of the Roman
Catechism with that cleernes which Fabritius added unto it, and also some
other subjects in the same manner handled; so requisite for all to know, that
this will appear not only a good, but a necessary book.

As for the style of Catechizing if it be plane and easy, it is propper and as
it ought to be: and for this I have labored all that I could even to the
repearing of the same words often over of purpose for more cleernesse. That
which I fear most is a weak and cold spirit which will appear in many places
of this book; but this must be supplied by your more feruerous desire, and
endeavor of profiting your self by it; yet the judicious will consider that
tenderness of devotion is not much obe expected where instruction is delivered,
much ^sse where controuersys and arguments in religion occur. Yet these by
the method of the Roman Catechism could not be quite omitted, and the public
necessity of England did require that they should come forth more at large then
was necessary only for Catholic assemblys. Therefore for this book to be more
beneficial, every thing is to be sought for in its propper place and nature;
Instruction and Exhortation where, and as intended, to wit, only for
Catholics: and as for confirming the Catholic faith, he into whose hands it
shall come, of whatsoever religion he be, if he desire indeed to serve God,
and will pray to him, I hope he shall have sufficient satisfaction.

Thus much for your direction in this work, which at first I began without
the least thought of publishing any thing, but only to discharge my
obligation, which until then I had not so well reflected upon; but beginning
to obscrue a great ignorance in some, and observing it still more and more, and
considering with my self how pertinent the words of the Apostle are, How shall
they believe him whom they have not heard? Romans 10
and how shall they hear without a preacher? I conceived this the best, and
most profitable manner of preaching, and applied my self most to the practice
of it. And having used it for some years I found it so efficacious to that
which I desired, that some of their own accord acknowledged to me the
benefit which they had received by it, and desiring me to publish something
of it which they might have to read, I brought this book to the perfection
which it has, and was many ways encouraged to grant their desires, especially
by the advice of a grave and learned Prelate who first to approve of my
design, told me that if he himself were in England he would apply himself
most to Catechizing: and having afterward perused a great part of the
Discourses, gave me most satisfaction in it. Finally for the right
understanding of all. I declare here that it is not my intention to give
examples unto others how to Catechize. For that the Roman Catechism has done
already: neither would I undertake so much (although for my Sum of the
Christian doctrine I would willingly commend the use of such an one gotten
without book and expounded as a foresaid) My first intention is to instruct
the ignorant, and for that I made choice of that form which the Council of
Trent has delivered, and which was the sole scope, and mark which it aimed at
by the Roman Catechism: to wit, that Pastors should use such Catechisticall
sermons, as might be both a Catechizing for instruction, an exhortation to
virtue, and in times of heresys might confute them, and confirm the Catholic
faith. Which if it were practiced as frequently as the holy Council desired,
and as other preachings are (which are much less necessary for the people)
exceeding great profit, and a general good might be expected by it.

That Catholic is very careless of himself, who with all this labor does
not learn and know that which is fitting, or at least necessary to be known.
And that Catholic who knowe^h his duty to God, and has it thus beaten into
his mind, yet lives as it were contemning of God, and of all remedys for his
soul, that having sinned does not endeavor to rise again, and to aim at a
new and virtuous life, but will continue in sin, and resolve still to sin,
he deserves not at all the name of a Catholic. And that Christian that
professes himself to believe in God, and to worship him in that faith and
religion which Christ left to his Apostles, and was allwais according to the
ninth article of the Creed to be in the Catholic Church; yet will begin a
religion contrary to all the Christian Churches in the world, or believe in a
religion which so began, he deserves not the name of a Christian. And that
man that being sufficiently satisfied of the true religion (and Mark that I
say sufficiently satisfied: for evidence of reason is not to be relied upon in
any religion) yet will not profess it for temporal respects; but goes on
with a guilty conscience in the profession of a false religion, or rather
lives like an Atheist, or beast without any religion at all, that man I know
not how to call him. A miserable wretch he is, and of all creatures out of hell
the most miserable, who to feed upon the dung of the earth, sins against
the Holy Ghost, hardening his heart wilfully against all heavenly inspirations.
For Atheists, and all false religions I have said enough in the Creed: but for
him that is neither in profession an Atheist, nor yet has indeed any
religion, I know what to say; but to wish him to consider with himself of the
power and goodness of God, and of the evils of sin that depriueth us of him;
and let him read the last Discourse where I treat something of that subject.
If God of his mercy visit these men with some heavy Crosses, and great
afflictions necessary to draw them to his service, it is indeed a singular
mercy by which sometimes they are brought to repentance. But in the mean time
I warn these hard hearted men that they praesume not too far, but that they
think of their souls, and of death which in the end shall surprise them. And
I will tell them one thing which they think not of; that is that they are in
danger of sudden death: not only as all men are, but in particular more then
others; and that God has showed this by many examples in which such kind of
men have been so punished. The example of Pharao and of thousands of the
Egyptians were enough to prove this; who having hardened their hearts against
the manifest light of God, were suddenly overwhelmed in the sea, and miserably
perished. The like examples we have in our Kingdom (but over many) of the
sudden deaths of those who against their consciences have professed a false
religion. I mention only two which happened lately in two near neighbors to
the place where I have lived for dinerse years. They had both been Catholics,
and for plane loosnesse and liberty of life had forsaken the Catholic Church,
and gone to the Protestant Churches, manifesting by many expressions the guilt
of their own consciences to their intimate friends; but continuing still
dissembling in religion, the one of them as he was hunting fell from his horse,
and died presently; the other who had engaged himself further against the
Catholic Church, and would take noe warning by his neighbors example, within a
few years after having been drinking about three or four miles from home, in
his return was suddenly struck with the pains of death, fell down, and was
carried away dead. It is ill dallying with God. Know thou and see, Hier. 2.
that it is an evil and bitter thing for thee to have forsaken the Lord thy
God, and that my fear is not with thee, says the Lord of hosts. And in
another place. Slack not to be converted to our Lord, and differ not from
day to day. Eccl. 5.
For his wrath shall come suddenly, and in the time of vengeance he will
destroy thee. Let bold praesumptuous men remember these words, and learn to
fear God.

Dear Reader whosoever thou art, as thou have a soul which must last for
ever, apply this book to the good of thy soul so as shall most concern it
for a happy eternity. I excuse noe falts, my goodwill shall mende all: God can
and I hope will honor himself even in my falts. Combine thou with me, that
we may honor him for ever, and ever. Amen.

I submit all that is contained in this book, and all whatsoever I shall
sa^^r think as long as I live, to the authority of the Holy Catholic Church.

A SVMME OF THE CHRISTIAN Doctrine expounded in the follovving Discourses.
QVAESTION. What obligation have Christians to learn^ the Christian Doctrine?

Answer. Every Christian is bound under a mortal sin to know the chief
points of the Christian faith. 7.

Q. What is faith?

A. Faith is a supernatural light and gift of God, by which we believe, and
firmly adhare to the Doctrine of the Church. 11.

Q. Make the Sign of the Cross.

A. In the Name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy G^ost. Amen.
49.

Q. What is the Sign of the Cross?

A. The Sign of the Cr^^ is a profession of the Christian faith. 51.

Q. How is the Sign of the Cross a profession of the Christian faith? 51

A. Because in the Sign of the Cross we profess the mystery of the blessed
Trinity, and of the Incarna^i^n; which are the two chief mysterys of the
Ch^stian faith. 51

Q. What is the B. Trinity?

A. The B. Trinity is God the Father, God the Son, and God the Holy Ghost:
One and the same God in three distinct Persons. 51

Q. What mean you by the mystery of the Incarnation?

A. We mean that the Son of God was incarnated, that is became man to
redeem us. 52

Q. Say the Creed.

A. I believe in God the Father Allmighty Maker of heaven and earth. And in
Jesus Christ his only Son our Lord Who was conceived by the Holy Ghost,
borne of the Virgin Mary. Suffered under Pontius Pilate, was crucified, dead,
and buried. He des^en^ed into hell, the third day he arose again from death.
He ascended into heaven; sits at the right hand of God, the Father
allmighty. From thence he shall come to judge us all; both the quick and the
dead. I believe in the Holy Ghost The holy Catholic Curch, the Communion of
Saints. The forgiveness of sins. The Resurrection of the flesh. Life
everlasting. Amen 76.

Q Who is Christ?

A. Christ is the Son of God, incarnated, true God, and true Man: Our
Redeemer, Judge and Glorifyer. 109.

Q. What do we get by Christ redeeming us?

A. We get the forgiveness of our sins, and the acceptance of our good
works by the merits of Christ's passion applied unto us in the Catholic Church.
156.

Q. What is the Chatholike Church?

A. The Catholic Church is the Congregation of all faithful people and
Pastors united together, as a body with its head. 176.

Q. Give me a difference betwixt the true, and all false Churches?

A. The true Church keeps allwais in union, and obedience to its Head and
Pastors: all false Churches begin in dissentions, and disobedience to the
Head, and Pastors of the Church. 214.

Q. Say the seven Sacraments?

A. Baptism, Confirmation, Eucharist, Penance, Extreme Unction, Holy Orders,
Matrimony. 281.

Q What is a Sacrament?

A. A Sacrament is an outward sign which causes grace in us. 266.

Q. What is Grace?

A Grace is a supernatural gift, which makes us grateful and acceptable to
God. 268.

Q. What is the Blessed Sacrament of Eucharist.

A. The Blessed Sacrament of Eucharist is the true body, and blood of our Lord
under the signs of bread and wine. 298.

Q. It shere any bread or wine in the Eucharist?

A. Noe! it seems but so. The bread and wine are converted at the words of
consecration into the true body and blood of our Lord. 305.

Q. What is the Sacrament of Penance?

A. The Sacrament of Penance is that by which we receive the forgiveness of
sins in Confession. 322.

Q. Say the tenn Commandments?

A. Thou shall not have strange Gods before me. Thou shall not take the name
of God in vain. Remember thou keep holy the Sabbath day. Honor thy Father
and Mother. Thou shall not kill, Thou shall not commit adultery. Thou shall not
bear false witness against thy neighbor. Thou shall not desire thy neighbors
wife. Thou shall not covet thy neighbors goods. 378

Q. Say the Pater Noster?

A. Our Father which art in heaven, Hallowed b^ thy name. Thy Kingdom come.
Thy will be done in earth as it is in heaven. Give us this day our daily bread.
And forgive us our trespasses, as we forgive them their trespasses against us.
And lead us not into temptation. But deliver us from evil Amen. 449.

Q. Say the Hail Mary.

A. Hail Mary full of grace, our Lord is with thee. Blessed art thou among
women. Blessed is the fruit of thy womb Jesus. Holy Mary Mother of God pray
for us sinners now, and in the hour of of our death. Amen. 509.

Q. What is the Mass?

A. The Mass is the continual Sacrifice of the Law of Christ, in which his
true body, and blood is offered under the signs of bread and wine. 576.

Q. Say the five chief Precepts of the church.

A. To fast fasting days. To keep holy days. To confess our sins to our
ordinary Pastor, or to another with his leave at least once a year. To
receive the Eucharist at Easter time. To pay tithes. 640.

Q. How do the Precepts of the church oblige?

A. The Praecepts of the church oblige under a Mortal sin. 641.

Q. What is sin?

A. Sin is that by which we depart from the divine Law, and are separated
from God. 673.

Q. Ho many kinds of sin are there?

A. There are two kinds of sin: Original and Actual sin. 715.

Q. What is the difference betwixt Original, and Actual sin?

A. Original sin is that which we are borne in, Actual sin is that which
^e commit. 615.

Q. How many kinds of sin do we commit?

A. We committee two kinds of sins: Mortal sin, and venial sin. 717

Q. What is the difference betwixt Mortal, and venial sin?

A. Mortal sin quite depriueth us of Gods grace: venial sin only lesseneth
and deminisheth the fervor of the love of God in us. 717.

THE FIRST DISCOVRSE. Of the education and instruction of children, and of the
obligation which all have to learn the christian doctrine.
I INTEND now to speak of two things. First unto all those who have charge
over children, and especially to parents to commend unto them the care which
they ought to have of their good education and instruction. Secondly to declare
unto all the obligation which they have to learn the christian doctrine. And
that I may speak to the honor of God, and that all may receive that benefit
which I wish them, we will say the Hail Mary for our blessed Ladies
intercession. Hail Mary, etc.

The Holy Ghost having to describe the life of Job a man fearing God and
departing from evil, Education of children.
and to propose him as it were upon a stage, as a true example for all laymen
and married folks to behold, and to learn at the many virtues with which he
was endowed, he would begin his commendations with the care which he had of
his children; and therefore he first brings him forth rising up early in the
morning to sanctify them, and to offer holocausts for every one of them
speaking these words, Job 1.
least perhaps my sons have sinned and blessed God in there hearts. This was
the first thing which the holy ghost would commend in Job, and which may well
be the first commendation of a married man that has children. For as marriage
was first instituted for the orderly propagation of mankind, and this
propagation finally ordained to the multiplying of souls in the service of
God; so the first and chief end which married folks ought to have in
marriage is to have children to serve God; and there prime commendation is to
see that their children be brought up in the fear of him, and know how to
worship and serve him as they ought.

This obligation of the education and instruction of children is not only
natural in christian parents; but it is also accessory unto them by the
Sacrament of Baptism: for the Apostles as the general Pastors of the world
being bound to provide sufficiently for the instruction of all; and being
themselves more necessarily employed in planting of the gospel of Christ and
converting of souls, placed others as their substitutes who should undertake
that charge and perform it for them: and therefore they instituted this order
in the Church, that Godfathers should be chozen at the baptizing of all
christians to supply the place of Pastors, who as spiritual parents were to see
them instructed in those things which were necessary for them to know, that
none might want sufficient instruction. S. Dion. Eccl. Hierar. c. 7. par. 11.
Denis who lived in the Apostles times speaking of the institution of
Godfathers says that as masters they were to instruct in divine things. Now
these Godfathers having many times noe conuenience themselves to perform in
this their obligation over children; and being sometimes far distant in
place, and perhaps dead when the child grows capable of instruction, they
commend and as it were remitte their charge to the parents of the children as
having better means to perform it: and then there rests a double obligation
upon them, both as they are natural, and also spiritual parents in the
Godfathers place. It is then a great shame and as it were a double sin in
them to be negligent in their childrens education and instruction.

S. John Chrysostom lib. 3. Aduersus vituperatores vitae monasticae, has much
to this purpose; where reproouing the negligence of parents in it, he calls
it the spring and fountain of all evils amongst men, that children are not
well taught and brought up: and on the contrary commending of holy Abraham for
his care of his children, he makes it the cause and means of so many and
great blessings as he obtained. Genesis 18.
For I know (says holy scripture) that he will command his children, and
house after him that they keep the way of the Lord. And having produced some
other examples of this, a little after he relates as large a passage which I
will briefly rehearse. There was says he in the city a youth richly appointed
to study the Greek and Latin tongues, and had a tutour who as I perceived had
followed a monastical institute. I meeting one day by chance with him, asked
him the cause why he would change the pleasure and quietness of that course of
life for the unquietness and trouble of a tutors place. He began then to
tell me how that the father of that youth being a man addicted to the glory of
the world had intended his son for a soldiers life, but his mother a pious
woman disliking of that course sent (said he) for me to confer with her: and
when I came she taking her son by the right hand offered him to me. I
knowing nothing of her mind meruailed at first what she meant to do. My only
care (said she) is for this child and I fear much the evil company which he
is like to fall into, if you assist me not; but if you will be pleased to take
the charge of him and carry him away with you, I shall be out of fear of him
and would persuade my husband that nothing should be wanting for his allowance
and good education. I desire you therefore to take him to your charge and I
refer him wholly to be directed by you. But if you deny me this request then
I call God to witness that I have done my part, and I clear my self from the
blood of my child which shall be required at your hands. And this she said with
so many tears that I could not deny to undertake the charge over him. Which
was (says S. John Chrysostom,) to good effect in the youth, his life
afterward proouing answerable to his education. This would the holy Doctor
insert into his works to propose this careful mother as an example to parents.
O that her example were followed now a days, when there never was so much
need of it! what would this mother have done if she had lived in these times
of ours, in this kingdom, in these varietys of manners and of religion? what
would she not have done for his good instruction and to have secured his
education in the Catholic faith?

When Dunaam a Jew reigned in Arabia about eleauen hundred years since, Sur.
to. 5.14. October.
it was then a time of persecution of the Catholic Church there, as it is now
here, and we have in Surius an example of those times which may serve for our
Catholics of England to teach them to begin by times to instruct their
children and especially in places of persecution to ground and confirm them
well in the Catholic faith. A christian woman was then apprehended and
commanded to be burnt for having sprinkled herself and her child with the
blood of martyrs. When she was tied to the stake, her child (which was but five
years old) ran up and down asking for his mother, and came pitifully
lamenting to the place where the king sat to behold her execution. The king
took him to him, and told him that he would be better then his mother to him,
and that he should stay with him: but the child still cried for his mother, and
desired to be with her. The king persuaded him by fair means offering him
gifts to entice him; but all was in vain; he told him that his mother had
used to exhort him to martyrdom, and that he would be with her. The king asked
him what it was to be a martyr. The child answered (mark this answer) that to
be a martyr was to suffer death for Jesus Christ and to live for ever after.
The king asked him who Christ was? He told him that he might see Christ in the
Church: meaning as a child the pictures and Crucifixes of Christ which were
then to be seen in Catholic Churches: and looking down and getting a sight
of his mother as she was tied to the stake, he cried out let me go, let me
go to my mother; and when the king hindered him he told him he thought he was
a Jew, and bate him by the thigh to get away from him: at which the king in a
fury pushed him away commanding one of his senators to take him to bring up in
the Jewish sect. But as he was carried away he got from him, and running into
the fireto his mother, he had his desire which was to die a martyr. This child
if he were not capable of much of the christian doctrine at that age; yet his
good mother had a care to ingraft in him at least such a zeal and so much
knowledge of the faith of Christ that it was admirable to hear a child of sieve
years old to give such an answer to the question of martyrdom, in which he
publicly professed the faith of Jesus Christ and the assurance of eternal
life by suffering death for it. Our children are as this was, then an innocent
by baptism. But our parents are not as the mother of this child, so careful
to instruct their children; and therefore are there so many weak and feeble
Catholics amongst us; because we want instruction in our youth: and we want it
so much, that many who are past children know not the chief principles of the
christian faith, nor think that they have any obligation to learn them: which
is the ground and cause of all their ignorance. The first thing therefore and
most necessary for every christian to know is the obligation which he has to
learn the christian doctrine. Tell me then.

Question. What obligation have christians to learn the christian doctrine?
Answer. Every christian is bound under a mortal sin to know the chief points
of the christian faith.

This is an obligation under a mortal sin: that is to say a deadly sin: a
sin by which our souls incur death: as great an obligation as can be. The
reason is because all that are come to the use of reason are bound not only
to an habitual faith such as children have; but also to an actual faith: that
is to produce acts of faith: and actual faith supposes some knowledge of what
is to be believed; and therefore every one must have some knowledge of those
things which he is to believe. Children before they come to the use of reason
have only the habit of faith which is given them in baptism; and this is
sufficient to save them that can have noe more: but when they come to the use
of reason, then they come to the use of their faith, and are bound to convert
themselves to a supernatural end, by producing acts of faith, and of the love
of God; which they can not do except they know something of him; and therefore
S. Ep. 119.
Augustine says that knowledge is the engine by which the building of charity
is raised up to endure for ever. Every tradesman must know the trade which he
professes, or else he cannot expect to have by right the wages due to his
trade. The trade which we profess is the true worship of God in the christian
faith; we are therefore bound to know what belongs to that profession;
otherwise we cannot expact the reward of good christians. We deserve not
indeed the honor of that name if we know not what is professed by it. Eccl. 5.
Be steadfast in the way of our Lord and in the truth of thy understanding and
in knowledge. Says holy Ecclesiasticus, Cor. 1.14.
and the Apostle says that if any man know not, he shall not be known.

Now to say in particular how much of the christian doctrine every one is
bound to know, and which are these chief points of obligation to be learned,
can not be done in general terms to all alike: for this obligation is to be
measured according to the difference of capacitys and other circumstances which
are to be considered in several callings of persons. ^. Tho see. ^. q. 1. art.
5.
S. Thomas and the common opinion of authors holds it absolutely necessary to
salvation in every one to have an explicit faith, that is, expressly to believe
the mysterys of the blessed Trinity and of the Incarnation, and the twelve
articles of the Creed, and that it is a mortal sin to be ignorant in the
substance of those mysterys. I should think it a very gross ignorance in any
Catholic not to know all these points; to wit the mystery of the blessed
Trinity in one God and three persons, the mystery of the Incarnation in Jesus
Christ the Son of God incarnated, true God and true man, that redeemed us,
shall judge us, and give glory to the good; What the Catholic Church is, that
the Sacraments of the Catholic Church give grace to sanctify us, what it is
that he receives in the Eucharist, what he comes to confession for, what the
Mass is, whatmortal sin is, and that the Praecepts of the Church oblige
under a mortal sin. This is as little as can well be expected of all
christians. And this is contained in the Sum of the christian doctrine which
I have delivered to be gotten without book; the understanding of which is
sufficient to discharge the obligation which every one has to learn the
christian doctrine. I do not say that it is absolutely necessary for every one
to understand it all, much less to get it all without book. But I say that
it is absolutely necessary for salvation to understand the chief points of it,
and that to be sure it were good to understand it all and to get it all
without book. But it shall suffice for the present for all to know that they
are bound under a mortal sin to know the head points and principal parts of
the christian doctrine. Let all then remember this obligation and those that
have been negligent in performing it, let them confess their negligence and
learn better hereafter. For if any man know not, he shall not be known. Cor.
1.14.


THE SECOND DISCOVRSE OF FAITH.
I INTEND now to say something of faith in general: a subject necessary to be
spoken of; but it is hard to speak well and clearly that which is necessary
and sufficient to be spoken of it. Prou. 25.
Thou have found honey eat that which suffices thee, least perhaps being
filled thou vomit it up. These words are commonly applied by authors to this
purpose. Honey is pleasant to the taste and necessary for many uses; but it must
be caten with moderation, only what is sufficient: many by eating too much
honey have hurt themselves; for our stomachs are not capable of much honey. As
honey is to our bodies so is knowledge to our souls, both pleasant and
profitable. What more pleasant to the understanding then the knowledge of
truth? and some knowledge is necessary even of the points of faith: but many
have received hurt by too much desire and greediness of knowledge, by seeking
too curiously without humility into the mysterys of faith; for our
understandings are too weak and of themselves incapable of those glorious
mysterys. He that is a searcher of the majesty shall be oppressed of the glory
says the same chapter of holy proverbs. This weakness I humbly acknowledge
in my self, and fear that I shall speak obscurely of this subject; and
therefore I will crave the intercession of our blessed Lady. Hail Mary etc.

Quest. What is faith? Answ. Faith is a supernatural light and gift of God, by
which we believe and firmly adhere to the doctrine of the Church.

God gives us his divine light and holy inspiration to believe the Catholic
Church; we by that superuatural light and gift of inspiration believing it have
then the true faith.

Under three titles I will comprehend all that is necessary to be said of this.
In the first place I will show how that faith is a supernatural light and gift
of God. In the second I will show how that this supernatural light and gift of
God is all wais with obedience to the Church. And although by these two titles
the nature of faith be sufficiently declared, and in all points we shall rest
satisfied with the authority of the Church; yet I will add one title more for
the good of those that are out of the Catholic Church, in which I will show
how this supernatural light and gift of God directing to the true Church is to
be sought for and obtained by them.

THAT FAITH IS A SVPERNAtural light and gift of God.
ALthough such be the condition of man's understanding, that by the visible
things which he seeeth made he may discover something of the maker of them; as
is the omnipotent power and eternal divinity of him that made them; yet it
cannot be thought that either man or any other creature can by its own natural
light only attain to glory which is supernatural; but he must be elevated by
a supernatural power to produce such acts as have proportion to the obtaining
of it. The apostle has said this in plane terms. Ephesians. 2.
By grace you are saved through faith and that not of your selves, for it is
the gif^ of God. That which is natural is with in the spha^e of nature; but
supernatural things are in a higher sphaere; and therefore the state of glory
which is supernatural can not be attained unto but by a supernatural light of
faith, as being without the sphaere of nature. God having ordained all
creatures to his scruice serves himself of them according to their nature. He
appoints unto every one its propper office and sets it within the limits
of its own sphaere: out of which of it self it can not pass. Now the most
blessed vision of God in glory which is obtained by true faith and the love of
him is supernatural to us; and therefore is not to be attained unto by the light
of natural reason, as being out of that sphaere. Seeing, hearing and feeling
are in different sphaeres; and therefore they can not reach into, nor meddle with
each others offices. The sight tends to colors, the hearing to soundes, the
feeling to palpable things, and they keep themselves within their own
sphaeres. We see not voices, we hear not the light nor colors, nor do we
feel either of them. Children and fools catch at shadows, and hearing the
Eccoes which their voices make, they look about to see them. But wisemen know
that this is foolish. Why? because they are in different sphaeres. Even so it
is a childish and foolish thing for men to study by natural reason to
comprehend the mysterys of faith and to think by the natural light of humane
faith to attain to supernatural glory; there being a far g^eater distance
betwixt natural and supernatural things then there is betwixt the sphaeres of
hearing and seeing: both of which are within the compass of nature. Therefore
the state of glory which is supernatural can not be attained unto by faith
which is a natural light of reason; but by faith which is a supernatural light
and gift of God.

Secondly we see that there are many natural things which we can not
understand; much less then should we think to comprehend the mysterys of
divine faith. Who can understand how the loadstone and Iett draw to themselves
iron or little sticks, without either corporally touching them or having any
spiritual influence in to them? who can understand the nature of the Remora a
little fish, which yet is reported to stop the mighty force of a ship under
sail by only cleaving unto it? Who can understand the cause of those vast
mountains of water which mariners call Gusts, and say they see in their Indian
voyages to fly in the air and sometimes happen to fall upon their ships and
to break them into pieces? Who can understand the tides of the flowing and
ebbing of the sea depending as they say upon the course of the moon; yet so
different in several harbors? All which things and many more has God
concealed from us to keep us in humility: and shall we think to make the
mysterys of faith to be subject to our understandings? We know not how the
parts of a little chippe or straw are continuated together, and the best
Philosophers acknowledge their ignorance in it, and bless God that has
humbled them in those obuious things, and shall we presume upon the mysterys
of faith? Those wise disputers that held disputation so long with holy Job
proved in the end to have spoken unwisely, and our Lord appearing in a
whirlwinde rebuked them saying Who is this that wrappeth in sentences with
unskillful words? Job. 38.
Gird thy loins like a man: I will ask thee, answer thou me. And then he
puts several hard questions which he continues in the 38.39.40. and 41.
Chapters of Job admirable to read, and which indeed noe man can sufficiently
answer; although they were but of natural things. Now if man with all his
wit can not understand many things which are obuious in nature, what
proportion has he in himself to the mysteries of divine faith? and if God
will have us to see and to confess our weakness in these lower and lesser
things; will he have us to rely upon our own reason in the mysterys of faith
upon which our salvation depends? Eccl. 3.
Seek not things higher then thy self, and search not things stronger then
thy ability: but the things that God has commanded thee, think on them
allwais, and in many of his works be not curious, for it is not necessary for
thee to see with thy eyes those things that are hid. In superfluous things
search not many ways, and in many of his works thou shall not be curious. For
very many things are showed to thee above the understanding of men. God will
have us to humble ourselves and to rely upon him; and then he will eleuate us
by supernatural means to see that which by nature we could not have seen. And
therefore S. Augustine speaking of believers says tract. 40. in Joan. Not
because they have known therefore they have believed; but they have believed
that they might come to know: for we do not know that we may believe, but we
believe that we may know.

Thirdly there is noe absolute certainty in our own understandings, but in God
only; and therefore in all the mysterys of faith we must rely upon him and
acknowledge his authority in them; or else we could be sure of nothing. For our
understandings as long as we live in this world work all there operations by
the corporal organs of our senses; which as weak instruments often fail them;
and therefore by our own understandings only we can never be infallibly
certain of any thing; because in them we have noe firm and certain rule of
truth. And this is the cause why the ancient Philosophers when they came to
speak of God were as it were in amaze or wilderness running forward and
backward, up and down, saying and gainesaying what they had said before
because they wanted the supernatural light and gift of faith, and spoke and
wrote of God only by there own wits and inventions; and therefore they never
kept at a certain, Di^p. 12. Me^aph. c. 1.
but were allwais altering in their conceits and opinions: as Petrus Hurtado
has observed by diverse places which he cites out of Aristotle himself, and
then applies the word of the Apostle to him. Cor. 1.1.
I will destroy the wisdom of the wise, and the prudence of the prudent I will
reject. Where is the wise? Where is the Scribe? Where is the disputer of this
world? has not God made the wisdom of this world foolish? but to us (says
the same Apostle in another place) God has revealed by his spirit. Cor. 1.2.
And truly if we had not the spirit of God inspiring us to believe the Church
and inspiring the Church in all which it teaches; but were left to our own
understandings and were to go only by our own thoughts, it would planely
follow that we should be as uncertain and altering in the mysterys of faith,
as we are upon the disposition of the organs, upon which our understandings
depend: and we should think something, but could believe nothing without
divine and supernatural faith.

Lastly we have the examples of all holy men and of all true believers that
ever were, to have humbly and piously submitted themselves to God, thinking
their own reason to weak a foundation to build their faith upon, and have
acknowledged it to be supernatural, and have chosen rather to rely upon the
divine authority and to receive there faith from God as he spoke to them by the
Church, then to trust to their own understandings, and to believe noe more but
what they saw; as may appear in all times. From the beginning of the world
until the coming of Christ all true believers believed in him as then to come
only, and sawhim not: and when he came he commended their faith. Io. 8.
Abraham rejoiced that he might see my day: and he saw and was glad. That is,
he saw it with the light of faith before it came; and he required the like
faith of all those that were to come after him, and blessed those, that so
believed, Io. 20.
saying blessed are they that have not seen and have believed. But he blessed
not Thomas for requiring to see before he would believe; but he rather
reprehended him for it. After Christ all holy men have ever been of the same
mind with the former, never daring to trust to their own reasons in the
mysterys of faith: but have thought it allwais most reasonable and safe, to
rely upon God for supernatural light, and grace to enable them to believe the
Church, and to assure them by it of all which they believed in the Catholic
faith, confessing allwais an obscurity of reason in those things. And so S.
Peter compares faith to a candle shining in a dark place, and S. Pet. 2.1.
Cor. 2.10.
Paul requires that faith bring into captivity every understanding unto the
obedience of Christ and he calls it the substance (that is a substantial and
sure ground) of things to be hoped for and an argument (that is a certain and
infallible inference of the truth) of things that appear not: Heb. 11.
and he compares it to the seeing by a glass, Cor. 1.23.
saying We see n^w by a glass in a dark sort. After the Apostles the world
continued still in the same mind S. Augustine What is faith but to believe
what thou see^ est not? Aug tract. 40. in Io. Cy il. Cateth. 5. Esa. 7. Chrysostom.
ser. de f^d^pe and Char.
S. Cyril of Jerusalem, faith is the eye which gives light to our consciences
and makes us to understand for the prophet has said unless you believe you
shall not be permanent. S. Chrysostom faith is the fountain of justice, the
head of sanctity, the beginning of devotion the foundation of religion. None
without this has attained to our Lord, none has gotten up to the top of
sublimity without it. Faith is an innocent and pure credulity by which we come
to God, we cleave to his praecepts and with a purifyed mind we worship him. It
excludes all doubts, it holds certaintys and seals up promises. He is
happy that has it, he that forsakes it is miserable. It shows the miracles
it exercizeth the virtues, and accomplisheth the gifts of the Church. By all
which it appears that they held faith to be above reason, and that it is not
a natural but a supernatural light and gift of God.

It is a known story that which Sozomene a grave author about twelve hundred
years since has related Eccles. hist. c. 17. There came unto the great
Council of Nyce many of the learneder sort of Gentiles some to be satisfied and
some of malice to oppose the doctrine of Christ. These by their cunning had
proposed the controuersys of Christians in such terms and vain differences of
words that they had brought all into strife and confusion. A certain
Philosopher glorying in his wit and eloquence derided and contemned the priests
that were present as not daring to contest with him; and none undertaking to
answer him, a good old bishop weak in learning but strong in the faith of
Christ (of which he was an illustrious confessor) confiding in the justice and
truth of his cause (which gives advantage enough against all infidelity)
rises up against him. At which some laughing, others fearing his weakness; at
length giving him leave to speak, he began In the name of Jesus Christ
attend O Philosopher what I say to thee. There is one God the Creator of
heaven and earth and of all things ^isible and invisible. He made all by
virtue of his Word and by the Spirit of the Holy Ghost he established them.
This Word which we call the Son of God taking pity upon mankind would be
borne of a virgin, converse amongst men and die for them; and he shall come
again, and shall give sentence upon every one according to their work. That
this is true we dispute not, but we believe it. Do not therefore loose thy
labor curiously to refute that which by faith only is to be vnderst^ode.
Seek not h^w this or that can be true in faith; but if thou do be leeue
tell me. At which the Philosopher answered presently Credo, I do believe. And
giving thanks to the bishop he persuaded the rest to believe with him
protest^ng by oath that it was the power of God that had changed him, and that
by an inward and secret virtue he felt himself converted to the Christian
faith. Here this Philosopher confirmed what the bishop said, and what we are
saying, that to dispute with curisity of matters of faith is to destroy faith;
which to be certain must be grounded upon the authority of God, and not upon
the wits and disputations of men.

Out of all that which has been said we may gather two principal things.
Scruples of faith are but obscuritys of reason.
The first is for Catholics that they cannot with reason trouble themselves
with any scruples and doubts of faith; for that those are but obscuritys and
vncertaintys of our own reason, and not of the thing it self which is
believed, which is infallibly and infinitely certain; as proceeding from a
supernatural light and gift of God, by which we believe the divine
authoritority. And therefore if we perceive our selves at any time to be led
by the weakness of our reason into scruples and fears concerning any point of
faith (all of which have the very same certainty) let us presently check our
selves and bring back our thoughts to God again to rely upon him, My soul
what are we doing? whither do we go? this is not the way to the blessed
sight of God. We must not think, but believe: we must not go by thoughts but
by certaintys: noe wise man durst ever go by this way which we are in: we
shall confound and loose ourselves. Let us keep the plane and common tracke
which all have gone, which God has commanded, which our blessed Savior has
taught, which his Apostles have followed, and all true believers after them;
and that was to believe by faith which is a supernatural light. If thou do
believe in God rely upon him and upon the Catholic Church guided by him, and
not upon thy own wits. And presently in all temptations let us profess this
belief saying I believe the holy Catholic Church; and that not for my own
reason but for the authority of God. Ho^ 2. de Symb.
Eusebius. Emissenus. The faith of the Catholic religion is the light of the
soul the door of life, the foundation of eternal salvation. Whosoever shall
forsake it, follows the evil guide of his own understanding. Whosoever
thinks by his own wisdom to attain to the secrets of heavenly mysterys
does as one that will build without a foundation or that will not enter at the
door, but at the top of the house; if in the night time he go on without
light, he falls down to the bottom. The second is for those that are not in
the Catholic Church; that they following a religion which began in private
men's wits have not the true faith, nor shall ever come to have it as long as
they seek it by their own wits only and by evidence of reason, which some
of them seem to expect and stay for: for this is to stand watching for larcks
when the sky falls, which shall never be; yet shall as soon come to pass as
that they shall come to have the true faith without supernatural light and
divine inspiration; therefore they ought to seek for this and to have recourse
unto God, humbly beseeching him that he will enlighten and inspire them to the
true faith. And this by Gods grace I shall show them how to have recourse unto
God, for so as to obtain it. All points of faith according to reason.


But we are here to observe that although faith be supernatural, and natural
reason be not sufficient to resolve us finally in matters of faith, nor to be
relied upon in them; yet all which we believe is according to reason: and
although all the mysterys of faith be not to be comprehended by us; yet we have
allwais reason so to believe. For God governs this world wisely and sweetly
according to the natures of his creatures; and having given unto man a
reasonable nature, by reason he brings him to that faith which he will have
him to believe, giving him rational and prudential motius to think in reason
that that is the true faith. First because as by reason we are brought to
believe in God, so also for the certainty of all which we believe, by reason
we ground ourselves upon the divine authority. Secondly reason also tells us
that God governs us not by ourselves without depend^nce of and submission
unto any superior authority upon earth in points of religion; but that he
allwais inspireth us to the obedience of the Church (as in the next title I
shall show.) Thirdly we have motives credible enough to induce an understanding
and prudent man to believe that which is indeed the true Church and to be
governed by it: and so we have all the reason in the world to believe the
christian faith and the Roman Catholic Church: the ignorant because they see
in it all that they can desire to see, or can see in the true Church: to wit
externally a most holy and wise government, learned men giving their lives,
and holy men working of miracles; and those as plane, as miracles can be, and
so frequent that every ignorant man may either see them or hear of them so
certainly, that he cannot in reason doubt of them all. Then for the learneder
sort they see that the faith of Christ by the most authentical writings that
are in all the world is deduced ever from the beginning of the world until the
coming of Christ, and ever since his coming it is deduced unto us in none but
in the Church of Rome: and all other Churches of christians having goneforth of
it, they must either be haeretical or schismatical Churches, or else there can
be noe haeretical nor schismatical Churches in the world. These are sufficient
motius to an understanding man to think by reason that the Roman Church has
the true faith which God will have him to belseue, and is the true Church which
he will have him to obey. Yet if we had not the supernatural light and
inspiration of God moving us to that faith; but that we were to goeby our own
thoughts only, then were it not a supernatural faith of absolute and
infallible certainty, as not proceeding from the authority of God, nor had it
proportion to supernatural glory. But when reason dictateth something to be
true, and God confirms it by the declaration of the Church, which is as his
voice and has his authority; I being illuminated and inspired of him to
believe the Church; then whatsoever I so believe I believe it for the divine
authority; and although unto reason it have some obscurity, and be not
absolutely certain as it is in reason only; yet as it is believed by faith it
is absolutely and infinitely certain; because then it has the testimony and
authority of God. And so wisdom reaches from end to end mihtily and
disposes all things sweetly. Mightily, Sap. 8.
in that God assures us with his own divine word of the truth of our faith:
Sweetly, in that he draws us even by our own reason so to believe in him.
By reason we are brought to believe the true Church, God illuminateth and
inspireth us to believe him speaking by that Church, and by that supernatural
light and gift of inspiration we produce acts of faith. Now we will show

THAT THE SVPERNATVRAL light and gift of faith is all wais to the obedience of
the Church.
BY that which has been said it does appear that faith is not a natural, but
a supernatural light and gift of God, now we will show that by it we are
allwais to adhaere and firmly to believe the doctrine of the Church; which is
the second part of that which you have answered to the question of faith.

The ennemy of mankind envying at our felicity that we should have and
cooperate with that light of faith which he rejected, and should by it attain
to that blessed state of glory which he must never obtain, comes in the night
time to sow in our hearts many dark fallaces against faith, and by false
illusions and conterfeit inspirations often deceives us; and therefore we must
have some anes to try this deceiving spirit and to discover his false
inspirations from the true, and some power to allow or to disallow of
particular men's spirits: and by this we may see how necessary it is that there
should allwais be in the world a continual Church infallibly assisted of God
for the trying of spirits and discerning of them, and that the divine
inspiration should allwais be with obedience to that Church. I refer the
reader to the ninth article of the Creed and to the eleauenth discourse of the
Praecepts of the Church, where I declare more fully the necessity and authority
of such a continual Church; where he may see how that we could neither know
which were the true scriptures, nor which were the true sense of them, nor
certainly destinguish betwixt true and false reason, nor believe any thing as
certain by faith; but that all order and government in religion were quite
destroyed, if we had not a continual visible Church with assurance from God of
his divine assistance with it, and we were bound to obey it in the deciding of
all controuersys in religion, which by proud and contentius men might be
raised of any point though never so clear. Here now I speak only of the
divine light and inspiration upon which we depend in all points of faith, and
I show that being that this necessary light and inspiration may be
counterfeited by our enemy; we must of necessity acknowledge some external
universal power upon earth authorized of God to try and to destinguish the
several spirits of all men. And this external power must either be assured by
the divine assistance of the verity of that which it declares, or else it were
also deceiving as the false spirit is; and we should have noe means to
discern the true spirit of God from the false; but every man might teach what
he list under pretense, of divine inspiration. Inspiration to faith must
betryed by the Church.


There was never yet any man that labored to set abroad any errors in religion
but as he pretended his doctrine to be of God, so he pretended the spirit of
God to be after some sort with him; but he will come to noe trial of his
spirit, but would have all to believe him upon his own bare word that he has
the spirit of God. So the Archhaeretike that begins new doctrines in
disobedience to the whole Church, would have men to take his word against all
the world that then is, that he has the spirit of God; and to prove it he
alleges many reasons of his own, but he will not be tried by any authority;
and so his spirit being brought to be subject to his private reason and all
things being as you see finally resolved by it, the controversy coms in the end
to that which in the former title is refuted, and by which he is convinced, to
wit that we are not to be resolved in matters of faith by our own
understandings and private reasons only; but by the testimony of God inwardly
in ourharts, and externally as now I show by the authority of the Church. Tim
1.4.


S. Paul says that certain shall depart from the faith attending to the
spirits of error, and doctrines of devils. Io. 1.4.
By which we see that men may have false spirits. And S. John says believe
not every spirit, but prove the spirits if they be of God. By which we see the
same; and also that we must have some means for the trial of false spirits.
Now what way can be thought more reasonable for the trial of spirits, then by
the sentence of the whole Church which is given without partiality or respect
of persons in general to all alike. Suppose two men going forth of the Church
obstinatly manteining some new and contrary opinions to the doctrine of the
whole Church and to each other. Both of them pretend that they have the spirit
of God, and yet they maintain contrary doctrines to the whole world and to one
another. First it is certain that both of them have not the spirit of God: for
the spirit of God is the spirit of truth which can not be thus divided. Which
then of them has the true spirit! how shall they be tried? The one of them
allows of such and such scriptures and of such a sense of scriptures: and the
other denies all that he says, and yet pretends that he has the spirit of
God. First, this can not be decided by their spirits; for as long as they hold
contrary doctrines their spirits can never agree for the one of them to be
tried by the other. Shall it be decided by their own reasons? but who shall be
the judge betwixt them? it must not be the determination of any particular man;
for that is as subject to error as they are: and besides this question being
concerning the spirit of God, it cannot be decided by any authority less then
divine; least otherwise the true spirit were rejected for false, as possibly it
might be by any inferior authority. Shall it be decided by force of arms?
That is so absurd that it needs noe refuting: (although perhaps Ioannes de
Zischa was of that opinion: for what absurdity will not an haeretike
maintain?) How then shall they be tried? bring them to the Church and see
whether they will hear it. But they will not be so tried. How then? there is
now noe other way left to try them by. They must then go without any trial at
all to say what they list, and so they shall both prove false spirits, as
being contrary to S. John that sends us to try our spirits, and as being
contrary to the scriptures which command us to hear the Church. Ma^t 8.
Therefore the spirit of God is allwais with obedience to the Church; and the
final resolution of faith is reduced to the word of God speaking to our hearts,
and interpreted by the Church. For there is noe way to try spirits, and to
declare certainly who are rightly inspired, but by the authority of God
speaking by it, and by submitting our selves, to the obedience of it, Lu^ 10.
as to the voice of God. He that hears you hears me: and he that despises
you despises me. Says Christ to the Pastors of the Church, who have the
authority of the whole Church. Mat. 18.
And in another place, If he will not hear the Church let him be to thee as
the Heathen and the Publican. Aug. tract. 109. in Io
S. Augustine, the word of faith and the word of the Apostles; to believe God
and to believe the Church is the very same thing.

Secondly the true faith has been often proved, and false doctrines confuted
by miracles: and these miracles have planely convinced for the obedience to
that Church whose faith was so confirmed. Elias proved by miracles the true
faith of the Israelits, and confounded the Idolatrous Gentiles. So did Christ
and his Apostles by many miracles prove the christian faith against both Jews
and Gentiles. And these miracles obliged all whom invincible ignorance excused
not unto the obedience of the Church of Christ, and showed planely that the
spirit of God was to the obedience of that Church; but noe miracle was ever
wrought to show that men should obey noe Church; but that they might live after
their own liking, and believe what they would without obedience to any
authority upon earth. Neither can there be any miracles wrought for any such
manner of living: for miracles being done in confirmation of the true faith
oblige others to embrace that faith which is so confirmed by miracles; and so
men come to an unity of faith, and make a Church, that is to say a people
united together in faith and religion. But if men might for all those miracles
which they see, still follow their own private spirits and not unite
themselves in obedience to that company whose faith is so confirmed by
miracles; but might disobey it in matters of faith; then they might disobey the
authority of God, and miracles were to noe purpose. Therefore the very being of
true miracles in confirmation of faith proves the being of a Church to which
our spirits must allwais obey. Moreover if every man were to be guided by his
own private spirit without obeying any Church there should be noe need at all
of miracles: for the spirit is an inward and miracles are an outward testimony
of the truth of any thing to draw others unto it; but if all were to follow
the inward testimony of their own spirit without submitting unto any external
power, then were they not to regard the outward testimony nor to be drawn by
it. And indeed to say that every one is to follow his own private spirit
without being bound to the obedience of any external power, is as much as to
say that every one has the true spirit of God: and then what need were there
of miracles? All which is contrary to the words of Christ and of the Apostles,
and contrary to the examples of the scriptures, and to reason and experience by
which we see so many spirits of errors and of sin in proud and evil men.
Miracles may be and have been wrought to prove the true faith: but such
miracles prove that the spirit of God is to the obedience of the Church;
therefore the spirit of God is to the obedience of the Church.

Thirdly God has ordained an orderly government in his divine worship: and all
order includes subordination of inferiors to superior powers, and leaves us
not to ourselves alone subject to noe authority in points of religion: and the
same natural reason that brings us to rely upon the divine authority in
matters of faith tells us also, that it is a more reasonable way for God to
inspire us to the obedience of the Church and to guide it with his sure and
infallible assistance; then to guide every man by himself and his own private
spirit, without being subject to any authority or acknowledging of any
superior: for this were to take away all order, and to bring such a confusion
into the world by making every man his own judge, as would by consequence
destroy the world which without order can not subsist. For if there were not
allwais upon earth some power authorized of God to prove and approve of the
spirits of men; what errors would be broched and what villanys committed and
maintained by wicked men under pretense of divine inspiration? God inspireth
men to an orderly government in his divine worship; therefore the divine light
and inspiration of faith in allwais to the obedience of the Church. So that we
may well say that faith is a supernatural light and gift of God, by which we
believe and firmly adhaere to the doctrine of the Church. God gives us
supernatural light to enlighten our understandings, and by his holy inspiration
moves our wills to submit ourselves and to believe in all things according
to the doctrine of the Church; we cooperating with that light and inspiration
of God submit ourselves to the obedience of the true Church, and then we have
actually true faith. And whosoever he be that pretends himself to have the
spirit of God, yet will not submit himself to any Church but begins a new
religion contrary to all the Churches then in the world, or will maintain a
religion which so began, certainly that man has not the true faith, nor is
the spirit of God in him.

But he says that he has prayed to God for his spirit, and Christ has said
that our father will give the good spirit to those that ask him. Luc. 11.
Many there are that satisfy themselves with this answer; and because they say
their prayers and do moral good works they will stand in disobedience to the
true Church, and maintain a religion which began at sometime in disobedience
to all the Churches in the world; therefore I will say something to show the
weakness of it. I say therefore that this man wilfully deceives himself in
that he either prays not as he ought to obtain the divine inspiration
according to that of S. Ia. 4.
James you ask and receive not; because you ask amiss; or if he obtained it
by his prayer he followed it not. For although it be true that he who prays
as he ought with a desire of following of the truth; although he be then in a
false religion and out of the state of grace obtains not withstanding of
congruity the divine inspiration to the true faith, and shall come to have the
true faith if he will follow that spirit: but if he begin a religion in
disobedience to the whole Church of Christ or follow a religion which so
began, in obedience to no known Church then extant in all the world; I say
that either there is some defect in his prayer, as there was in the Pharisys
prayer who prayed not rightly: or if he prayed rightly, so as that he was then
inspired of God to the obedience of that which is the true Church, that then he
followed not the divine inspiration: but as that young man of the ghospel who
asking of Christ what he should do to receive everlasting life, when Christ
told him Go sell Whatsoever thou have and give to the poor, and come follow
me. Marc. 10.
He followed not the divine calling but was stricken sad and went away
sorrowful. So does he and so do many when God sufficiently inspireth them
to the Catholic Church: for although God speak to their hearts, and have
illuminated their understandings to think at sometime that the Catholic faith
is the true faith; yet they slight that good thought; they are stricken sad to
think of the persecution which they hazard in themselves, children or friends,
endangering their wordly preferment or riches on which they have set their
hearts, and can not so well enjoy in it: and being dishartened with these
things they follow not the calling of God. And although for the present their
conscience accuse them; yet going on in their old way within a while they
forgette that ever they were called and will tell you that they say their
prayers, and that the spirit directs them in the way in which they are. Where
as indeed when they rightly considered of it the spirit of God directed them a
quite contrary way, and would again direct them to the same way; if they would
seek as they ought to be inspired of God, and obey his inspiration when he
speaks to their hearts.

In the next place therefore I will show how the divine inspiration to the true
Church is to be prayed for. I only desire thus much of all those who are out
of the Catholic Church; that being as I have showed that the true faith, which
is by a supernatural light and gift of God, is allwais with obedience to the
Church, they will resolve with themselves to seek unto God to be inspired to
that Church: And that if he speak to their hearts so, as that they come once
to think that the Catholic Roman Church is the true Church; they take that
word of God as a lantern to their feet and follow it: or else they are all
ready condemned in their own consciences, and shall find one day those words
to be true which the Holy Ghost has threatened, Esa. 65.
Because I called and you have not answered: I spoke and you have not heard,
etc. you shall cry for sorrow of heart, and for contrition of spirit you shall
howl. But let us see.

AFTER WHAT MANNER THE divine inspiration to the true Church is to be sought
for by those who are out of the Catholic Church.
Having showed that natural reason without supernatural light and divine
inspiration is not sufficient to direct us in matters of faith, and that this
supernatural light and inspiration to faith is allwais with obedience to the
true Church. The next thing most necessary to be showed is how to obtain the
divine light and inspiration to that Church. Diverse have setforth several
marks to know the true Church by; and in the ninth article of the Creed I
destinguish the true from all false Churches by their continual obedience to
the head and Pastors of the Church. But here I entreat of a more prime subject
necessary to be known before that: to wit that being noe marks are sufficient
to discern the true Church by, so as to become a member of it without divine
light and inspiration by which they are brought to obey it, I now show how that
efficacious light and inspiration is to be obtained.

But first I advertise the Catholic reader that this point has not chiefly
relation to him; but to those that are out of the Catholic Church. Yet thus
far the Catholic is concerned in it, as that he shall planely see by that
which immediately I am going to say, that according to his own grounds, and
according to reason, he can not seek unto any other Church: where as all other
Churches according to reason ought allwais to be seeking until they come to
it. For this is the comfort of Catholics and of none but Catholics, The
Church can not err.
that understanding and firmly believing that the Church shall never fail out
of the world by teaching errors in faith; but that it is the pillar and ground
of truth, Tim. 1.3.
and that the spirit of God is With it until the worlds end to teach it all
truth, that it is builded upon a rock, and that the gates of hell shall never
prevail against it. Io. 14. Mat. 16.
And that Christ has prayed for it that the faith of the chief governor
their of fail not in the governing of it, and that the other governors of it
might be sanctified in verity and that it is the body, Luc. 22.
the spouse, the kingdom, and the house of Christ. Io. 17.
Catholics grounding themselves upon all these places of holy scripture and
upon the ninth article of the Creed I believe the Catholic Church, hold it a
most horrible blasphemy against them to say that the Church can err, and a
damnable heresy obstinatly to contradict it: and having by reason of all these
places continued allwais in obedience to it, and so kept constant to their
ancient religion, which was then extant in the world when all others began
their new professions, which then were not extant in any place of the world:
Catholics according to these grounds must still continue as hitherto they have
all wais done in obedience to the same Church, and can not seek unto any other
religion, nor doubt of their own as long as they adhaere unto it; but must
stick fast to that pillar and sure ground of truth and believe that the spirit
of God and assistance of Christ is allwais with the Church, and that obeying it
they obey the holy Ghost and Christ. They by these grounds can not (as you see)
pray to God to inspire them to the true faith, but must pray to God that they
may allwais continue in the spirit of obedience to the Church as hitherto they
have done. And so this point has only so far relation to Catholics, as
that they may gather by it that as hitherto God has given them his holy light
and spirit to reject all private inventions both of their own and of others,
to obey the authority of the whole Church and to adhaere to it; so they ought
still to do, and to pray to God that they may allwais do so and never
forsake it

But all those who have goneforth of the Church and followed the private
inventions of some particular men (as all others but Roman Catholics have
done) beginning new Churches which then were not teaching, That it behooves
Protestants and those that are out of the Catholic Church to if examine the
state of their own Church
nor governing of people in any place; but were prohibited by the ancient
Church as soon as they began, and would have been prohibited sooner if they
had begun sooner with their new doctrines to oppose it: all these and those
that follow them of necessity mainteining that the true Church had then failed
and that there was then noe true Church in the world which they might submit
unto; but that God sent them to reform the Church and to restore it to its
truth again (as Protestants say that when Luther began to oppose the Roman
Catholic Church the true faith was perished, wholly extinct, destroyed not one
jot of the ghospel had been known, but by his labor and study; and the like
sayings, which may be seen in the book called THE AUTHOR OF THE PROTESTANT
RELIGION, l. ^. c. 1.
and commonly in authors. This they saying, as they needs must by consequence
to their new reformation; they ought in all reason if they will have any care
of their souls to be continually fearful and in doubt concerning their faith:
and being that the true Church may and did (as they say) fail, and was quite
decayed out of the world, they ought to pray to God to enlighten them to see
whether it be not decayed again as then they say it was, and stand not need
of a new reformation, as then they say it did; and if it do that he will bring
them to the true faith. Or else if they will be out of doubt and free from
fears, they must believe as we do that the Church could not stand need of
any reformation at all in doctrines of faith, and so to betake themselves
again to the obedience of it and to rest secure and contented with the
Apostles Creed I believe the Catholic Church, without troubling themselves
about reforming it. But being that they can never be certain in their faith as
long as they hold it lawful to change their religion by reforming of errors in
the Church; they ought to have often recourse unto God to know when they should
change their religion, and to what religion they should change. And this by
Gods grace I will now show them how they shall have recourse to God for. This
question therefore I add here for Cods sake and for those that are out of the
Catholic Church, that being as I have showed in the former title saying their
prayers they obtain not the divine grace, because they pray amiss they may
know how to pray. And because I conceive it the most necessary of all points,
and that on which the conversion of those that are in a false religion chiefly
depends, that they have true recourse unto God: and also because it was
commended to me by a very grave and experienced person to procure of such that
they will commend the state of their souls to God; whose grace works much
more efficaciously in them then our words can do: and because it is a means
which none by reason can except against; therefore I would add this whole title
for their satisfaction and final good, that seeking rightly to God they may
obtain the precious jewel of true faith in obedience to the true Catholic
Church necessary to salvation.

But that the Protestant or any such reader may receive that benefit by ^his
which I wish him, and may have some feeling of that which we are now treating
of, I desire him first to take into serious consideration the state of his
soul and of religion; and that he go not coldly about this business which of
all things in the world concerns him most, and is as important unto him as
his entrance into that happy and blessed state were he shall enjoy the glorious
sight of God; or his entrance into hell where he shall never see the divine
face, but most irefull and full of rage against him to the extreme horror of
his soul: and to think truly that in this I ask nothing but that which is
both according to his own grounds and also reasonable in it self. For his
predecessors having forsaken the common religion of christians which was then
universally professed by that which had the name of the Catholic Church, for a
religion which had then noe name nor being in any place of the world, he may
with great reason fear himself and with much more reason forsake his new
religion for some other that was then extant and especially to that which both
is now, and was then the most famous of all christendom. But that which I now
ask of him is not to change, but only to have recourse to God, and to pray
unto him that if his Church do err (as he says that it may and once did)
that by his divine light and inspiration he will bring him into the true
Church. He that were travailing in a vast wilderness uncertain of his way, and
saw the dark night coming on, and heard the wild beasts sallying out of their
dens roaring and seeking for their pray, in what fear and anguish of mind
would he be? what would he give for a guide that could set him into a safe way
free from dangers? much more fearful is the condition of every man that is
out of the Catholic Church: this world is the wilderness in which he wandereth,
heaven is his home, obedience to the Catholic Church is the only way to it,
death is the night that draws on, and the infernal spirits as wild beasts
surrounde him. Poor soul thou confessest thy self to be in an uncertain
Church which may lead thee to hell, and why do thou not tremble for fear and
cry unto God? betake thy self unto him, call upon him, beseech him earnestly
to guide thee, and that by his holy light and inspiration he will bring thee to
see whether thy Church err or not, and if it do to forsake it and to obey the
true Church. And this I will show thee how thou shall require it of him.

I said before that the spirit of God is denied to none that rightly ask it.
To obtain then the divine inspiration inspiring us to the obedience of the
true Church, we need noe more but rightly to ask it. He therefore that
beleening in a Church which may err is resolved with himself to use all
possible means to know whether it err or not, and to be inspired unto the
true Church, let him take a time of purpose to think of this important
business and to commend it seriously to God; and then the first thing which
he must do is to prepare himself with a calm and quiet mind and ready
promptitude to perform that which God shall inspire him, firmly purposing
that nothing in the world shall hinder him to follow that which he shall think
to be the true way of salvation, Prou. 16.
so that he may truly say My heart is ready o Lord my heart is ready. It
pertains to man (says the holy prove be) to prepare his heart, and again the
heart of man disposes his way. Having thus prepared his heart with an earnest
desire of the divine inspiration and with a full purpose of obeying it, then
let him make his prayer to God not in extrauagant words as some do with the
Pharisee; but with all the humility and fervor of mind that he can possibly
stir up in himself; beseeching his divine and infinite goodness that he will
not permit his soul to perish in a false religion; but that he will
enlighten him to see which is the true Church and efficaciously inspire him to
the obedience of it. Having made his prayer, let him then consider quietly with
himself some grounds of religion; as for example the necessity of a continual
visible Church declared by holy scriptures and by natural reason for the
government of the world in the true worship of God; and therefore that must be
the true Church of Christ which has continued at all times for the salvation
of souls: and that all those Churches which have begun at any time to oppose
the settled Church of Christ, which was then in the world are false Churches, as
being in their beginning guilty of the grievous sin of disobedience to the
continual Church which God has ordained at all times for the government of the
world in his true worship. And if he be a Protestant he may think with
himself how that at that time when Luther beg^nne to oppose the Roman
Catholic Church he submitted himself to noe Church then extant in all the
world; but began to teach a doctrine which all people in the world rejected
for false, and did many things which noe Church that was then would justify
for lawful; but got only some private men to join with him against all
Churches that then were, pretending that there was noe Church which they could
lawfully join themselves unto, and that he was sent of God to reform the
errors of the Church. Buecer. Ep. ad Episc. H^reford. terms him the first
Epistle of the reformed doctrine Fox act. page 400 and 416. that God sent
Luther, and gave him his mighty spirit to reform religion: and that he was a
conductour and chariot of Israel to be reverenced next unto Christ and S. Paul,
above all the saints. VV^i^^k resp. ad Edmund. Camp ration. 8. we reverence
Luther as a father and embrace the Lutherans and Zuingl^ans is very dear
brethren.
Thus Protestants themselves confess that Luther was the beginner of the
reformed doctrine which they profess. And thus did all the several Churches of
Christians but the Roman Catholic Church begin disobeying of it, and
obeying, and uniting themselves to noe Church then extant in the world. Having
quietly with himself considered some such reason, noe doubt but God will
illuminate him to think and to see that this is not the Catholic Church, and
inspire him with pious affections of his will to the obedience of the Roman
Catholic Church, out of which all others wentforth and had their beginnings in
disobedience to it. And being thus moved and inspired of God to the obedience
of that Church which he then thinks in his heart to be the true Church, that
inspiration must be followed as the will of God; and presently without delay he
must get himself united to that Church. He is therefore first to prepare his
heart with an indifferency and willingness to do that which God shall inspire to
him: secondly to pray earnestly and humbly to God to inspire him to the true
Church: thirdly with a quiet and calm mind to weigh with himself some
reasons and grounds of religion according to his capacity: and lastly to choose
and to resolve with himself according to that which God then speaks to his
conscience and to go about presently to perform it. This is a thing easy to
be done by them and a thing which (as I have showed) all those that are not
Catholics even according to their own grounds ought in all reason to do, if
they will have a care of their salvation. And having done all this on their
parts, they have done what in nature they could do; and relying for the rest
upon God for his help, it is then most congruous and agreeable to the divine
goodness to enlighten them and to show them the truth which they desire and pray
for. And if afterward they follow it not; it is not for any defect of his
assistance who by reasons sufficiently conuincing drew them at that time unto
him, and offered them his divine grace to become actually members of the true
Church; but it is of their own wills and stubborn minds that will not make
use of those helps and good motions, which were abundantly sufficient for their
conversion.

This is the way which I direct unto all such trauelers as are out of their way
or uncertain of their way; as all those confess themselves to be who believe
in a fallible Church. Let them have recourse unto God, and see what he speaks
to their hearts, let them open their understandings to his divine light, and let
them prepare their wills to receive those inspirations with which he moves
them to acknowledge his authority in the true Church, and they shall find
comfort in him. By this light and inspiration of God to obey his Church all are
converted that are truly converted: in this consists the security of all
constant Catholics, who not by their own reasons, but by the divine authority
and inspiration are resolved in all points of faith, and that inspiration
finally tried not by their own judgments, but approved of by the continual
Church, by which the true faith and worship of God is allwais conserved in the
world; and believing and adhaering unto that Church, they adhaere unto the
divine authority, and are grounded upon a sure and immovable rock.

I have said now all that I have to say of faith. I have showed in the first
title that it is a supernatural light and gift of God; and therefore it is most
vain and dangerous to seek by natural reason into the mysterys of faith even
as though one should think to fly, and should step down from some high
precipice, or from the top of a house. Secondly I have showed that the
inspiracion of God to the true faith is allwais to the obedience of the Church.
And lastly I have showed how this divine inspiration is to be sought for, and
obtained by those that have it not. In the following discourses I shall declace
the particular mysterys of faith and points of the christian doctrine.

I will add only a word or two to apply all to the greater honor of God, and
your profit, that Christ having given sentence saying, Marc. 16. Heb. 11.
He that believes not shall be condemned and the Apostle having declared that
without faith it is impossible to please God, those that fear the damnation of
their souls and desire to please God will above all things in the world esteem
of the true Catholic faith, as a precious jewel and rich treasure upon which
the love of God and their salvation depends, and will not permit themselves
for any hopes or joys of this passing life, to be deprived of it. It is a
supernatural light and gift of God entrusted to thee that art a Catholic, by
thy obedience at all times to the continual Church of Christ; and they have
miserably lost that treasure that through pride and peruersednes have invented
singularitys of their own or maintained the singularitys of others against
that authority. O wicked pride, O diabolical peruersednes! Lucifer was an
archhaeretike, amongst the Angels by not standing in verity but resisting the
power of God: And archhaeretiks are Lucifers amongst men by defending new
doctrines against the authority of the Church, which is the supreme power of
God upon earth. Lucifer began the disorder of the damned and confusion of
hell, where noe order, but eternal horror dwells: they begin a disorder in
the Church, by drawing others into contempt of their superiors to maintain
their obstinacy against all authority. How highly do these wretches displease
God without faith? How deeply are these misbeleeuers condemned, charged with
the loss of so many souls, as follow them? This is all that can be said for
their comfort, that the disorder which they make and confusion amongst men, is
but a hell upon earth, out of which they may be freed if they will forsake
those singularitys which without authority they defended, and defend that
authority which at first they forsook. And this is the comfort which now I
would give them, that they seek again for the treasure which they have lost.
Consider then the state that you are in, the greeuousnesse of your sin, and
the loss which you sustain, so much to be deplored. It is God which you have
lost, not a God of syluar as that which Michas ran weeping and wailing for:
Judge 18.
but it is the foundation of all true Godliness, the Catholic faith which
Jesus Christ preached and established in his Church, and that Church never to
be interrupted at any time, nor to stand in need of reformation from errors.
That Church you must seek for, there you shall find the faith which you
desire, if you desire indeed the true Catholic faith, and with sincere hearts
pray to God for it. But you prefer perhaps the temporal goods of this world
before the bless of heaven, you fear the loss of riches, of pleasures, of
dignitys, and perhaps of life; and you fear nor to offend him in whose only
power these things are; and besides all that can destroy both soul and body
into hell. How many are there in the Catholic Church rich enough, Matt. 10.
honorable enough, and healthful enough, allthough they hazard all this to
defend the faith of Christ? This advantage we have of thee that our sufferings
for Christ's sake shall be rewarded in heaven, and for that which thou suffer
thou shall have noe reward. Were it not better allthough with hazard of
persecution to save thy soul then to loose thy soul and to be in danger of
miserys here also? Christ gave his life for the love of thee when he needed
not, and do thou repine to give thy life for thy own soul? God can give
comfort in the midst of persecution, that noe threats of our enemies shall
affright us, but that we shall be contented with them, and rejoice in his grace
and divine assistance which then he will give, and which we must rely upon
before hand; and then we shall not fear. We deceive ourselves in that natural
fear: For nature has noe power in that conflict, but supernatural grace
which God will then give to those that desire it. But you, o Catholic
soldiers that defend this treasure, how honorable is the cause which you
defend in it? how powerful and ready is your captain to defend you? and how
rich and liberal to reward you in the end? you defend that faith which
Christ deposited with his Apostles, which they delivered to their successors,
and which descended from them by Pastors to Pastors and from people to people
through all ages and times into your hands. Keep faithfully the depositum thus
given to you and avoid all those noueltys which men take up of themselves, and
are not given by authority to them. Trust in Jesus Christ and he will comfort
you so, that neither shame nor pain shall trouble your minds in time of
persecution. Tim. 1.6.
Fight the good fight of faith: apprehende eternal life where in you are
called by patience to possess your souls. There are noe greater riches noe
more ample possessions, Sermon. de verbis Dom. cap. 4.
nor honors more excellent (says S. Augustine) then the Catholic faith: in
defense of which three hundred thousand martyrs by computation of authors have
suffered only at Rome, twenty seven of them having been without interruption
the bishops of that place. Blessed be God that enabled them to it, Cor. 1.10.
and who will make with temptation issue in us with constancy to follow their
glorious example. Matt 10.
He that shall persevere unto the end shall be saved. Grant us o Lord
perseueran^ in faith and good life to the salvation of our souls. Amen.

THE THIRD DISCOVRSE. OF THE SIGN OF THE CROSS.
I INTEND now to declare unto you the sign of the Cross. Which as it is a
devotion upon all occasions so much frequented in the Catholic Church; it is
very fitting that all Catholics should understand it, and know the mysterys
that are contained in it. But first we will salute the blessed virgin and
require her intercession. Hail Mary etc.

HOW THE SIGN OF THE Cross is to be made.
Quest. Let us make the sign of the Cross. Ans. In the name of the Father, and
of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost. Amen.

Allwais when you make the sign of the Cross say the words leasurely and
destinctly and make a plane and destinct Cross; not hudling it over hastily
without devotion; but do it so that you may show yourselues to honor the
mysterys which are contained in it.

As for the placing of the words some say and of the Holy Ghost upon the left
shoulder and leave nothing but Amen for the right: others say Holy upon the
left shoulder, and Ghost upon the right, and say Amen after that the whole Cross
is made: and because I have been often asked concerning this, I would seek
into authors for their satisfaction; Mich. Bauld. Manual. carem. p. 3. c 3.
but of a long time I could not meet with any that so much as mentions how
the words are to be applied; until at last I found in a very learned and
exact master of caeremonys where he expresses that In the Name of the Father
is to be said at the forehead, And of the Son under the breast, and of the
Holy upon the left shoulder, and Ghost upon the right, and Amen to be said
after that the whole Cross is made. Which manner I should rather approve of.
First for his authority. Secondly because otherwise if all those words And of
the Holy Ghost were to be applied to the left shoulder, the Persons of the B
Trinity should not make a complete and perfect Cross, but only three corners of
it: which is not fitting nor suetable to the perfection of that mystery.
Thirdly The Holy Ghost passing from one shoulder to the other betwixt the
Father and the Son participating of both does in some sort adumbrate the
manner of his procession, by that mutual love which is betwixt the Father and
the Son. Finally howsoever the words be applied the same mysterys are
intended by them: and the substance of their signification is more to be
regarded then the manner of their representation. We will therefore declare in
substance

WHAT IS SIGNIFIED BY the sign of the Cross.
Quest. What is the sign of the Cross? Answ. The sign of the Cross is a
profession of the christian faith.

The sign of the Cross is sometimes called by authors a short Creed; because
it briefly compriseth the chief mysterys of the Creed The Creed is an
abbreuiation of the chief points of the christian faith; and the sign of the
Cross is an abbreuiation of the Creed, professing more briefly the mysterys
which are principally contained in it.

Quest. How is the sign of the Cross a profession of the christian faith? Answ.
Because in the sign of the Cross we profess the mystery of the blessed
Trinity, and of the Incarnation, which are the two chief mysterys of the
christian faith.

Quest What is the blessed trinity? Answ. The blessed Trinity is God the
Father, God the Son, and God the Holy Ghost, one and the same God in three
different Persons.

Quest. What mean you by the mystery of the Incarnation? Answ. We mean that
the Son of God was incarnated: that is became man to redeem us.

We profess in the words the mystery of the blessed Trinity, when we say In
the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost. We say In the
name, and not in the names, to show the unity of nature in the Persons of the
blessed Trinity: all which agree in the name and nature of one eternal and
omnipotent God: every one having the same essence and nature, the very same
power, wisdom and goodness, all and infinite perfections being included in all,
and every one of them: and yet we name three, to wit the Father the Son and
the Holy Ghost to show the Trinity of Persons really destinct and different
from one another. This we intend to profess in the words. Then in the action
we profess the mystery of the Incarnation, in that we make a Cross to show that
we believe in Jesus Christ the Son of God incarnated redeeming us by giving
his life on the Cross for us: and these are the chief mysterys and propper
only to the christian faith; for that none but christians believe them. So
that the sign of the Cross may well be called a profession of the christian
faith; for by professing of that which is contained in it the people of Christ
are destinguished from all other professions of people which are in the world;
and therefore the holy fathers of the primitive Church commend very much the
use of it, (as you shall presently see) and we have great reason to esteem of
it, as the most propper and particular glory of christians, signifying those
blessed mysterys which we must allwais defend against the enemies of Christ. If
then you are christians honor Christ in his Cross and never be ashamed of that
blessed sign. It is the glory of Christ and of all christians. Frequent it
therefore with much reverence, and if any one ask you why you do so? tell him
that you profess your self a christian by it, and that you will never be
ashamed of that profession. Remember then that in the words of the Cross we
profess the mystery of the B. Trinity, and in the action of making a Cross we
intend to profess the mystery of the Incarnation and of our Redemption in
Jesus Christ the Son of God incarnated who redeemed us on the Cross. Now we
will explicate that which is necessary of these mysterys.

The mystery of the blessed Tilnity is one of those in which our faith is most
of all exercized, and by which every one may see his own weakness, and the
need which he has of supernatural light and grace from God to eleuate his
understanding and to excite his will to acts of divine faith. For it is a
mystery which surpasses the natural understanding both of men and angels, and
which teaches us by experience not to search into the mysterys of faith, but
that we are to rely in them upon a surer ground then our own understandings
are. S. Paul writing to the Romans warns them not to be too wise, Romans 12.
but to be wise unto sobriety. Those that would be satisfied in any points have
the priests their Pastors to go unto for satisfaction; for the words of S.
Peter concern them most when he admonishes Be ye ready al^wa^s to satisfy
every one that asks you a reason of that hope which is in you. Pet. 1.3.
Priests must be able to satisfy others
Priests must enable themselves to give satisfaction to the people in all those
things which they are bound to know; and if they be defective in this which
is but a small knowledge, God will reject them from him as unworthy of
priesthood. Ose. 4.
Because thou have repelled knowledge, I will repel thee that thou do not the
function of priesthood unto me. The Prophet Malachy spoke very propperly to
this when he called priests Angels saying The lips of the priest shall keep
knowledge and from his mouth thou shall require the law: Mal. 2.
because he is the angel of our Lord of hosts. The angels are the treasurers
of the divine mysterys who open them in their messages to mankind, as God will
have them to be imparted unto us; so priests have the keeping of the divine
mysterys, and must deliver them to the people as they need them: and therefore
the people must ask of them, and adhaere to the doctrine of the Church when it
is delivered by them. Yet the mystery of the blessed Trinity is a mystery which
is kept even from the knowledge of priests although angels: witness S. Augustine
who was a priest and one of the chief of the Angelical Hierarchy of Priests,
B. Trin.
for he was a bishop; yet he relates of himself how that being on a time
walking on the sea shore studying upon the mystery of the blessed Trinity he
saw a child who having made a little pit in the sand was lauing with a spoone
the water of the sea into Aug. ad volus.
that little pit. S. Augustine earnestly observing him, asked him what he
meant? did he think to empty the maine ocean into that little pit? yes
replied the child as soon will I bring the ocean into this compass, as thou
with thy understanding shall comprehend the mystery of the blessed Trinity. By
which he understood that it was a messenger of God sent unto him to humble him
and to let him know that the mystery of the blessed Trinity is above humane
understanding. We see by reason that God the Creator of all things must needs
be above all things incomprehensible infinite in power, wisdom and goodness:
and therefore for men to think to comprehend God is to contradict the first
principle of reason and above Lucifers pride to think to be equal with him.
It is enough for us to think that God is God, that is to say the supreme and
infinite perfection which putts bounds and limits to the perfections of all
other things; who as he has set a term of time to our lives, so has he
also limited our understandings: and we can noe more by our own power exceed
those limits, then we can by our own power escape death. Great is our Lord,
great is his strength: Psa. 146.
and of his Wisdom there is noe number. If we will build upon a sure ground
let us cleave to that rock which Christ has left, and say as our Creed
teaches us, I believe the holy Catholic Church.

In the law of Moses the mystery of the blessed Trinity was believed as
authors commonly show by diverse places in the old Testament: although the
Prophets have delivered it for the most part in obscure terms to the
Israelits, least they who lived amongst idolatrous nations and were of
themselves prone to idola^ry should take occasion by the Trinity of Persons to
believe in many Gods. But idolatry being to be so much subverted by the faith
of Christ and bu^ little or not danger of it amongst christians; the mystery of
the blessed Trinity is delivered to v^ planely and more expressly in the new
Testament, our Lord and Savior at his last departure from his Disciples
commanding the express profession of it to be made in baptism when we are
made christians. Mat. 28.
Going therefore teach ye all nation^ baptizing them in the name of the Father
and of the Son and of the Holy Ghost: Io. 1.5.
and again There be three that give testimony in heaven the Father, the Word
and the Holy Ghost. And these three be one. Genebrard shows by diverse places
out of the ancient ^hilosophers that the Gentiles by their familiarity and
commerce with the Jews came to hear and to write of the B Trinity. But the
modern Jews which now are, earnestly oppose it; being fallen in this point,
as they are also in the mystery of the Incarnation from the true faith which
their forefathers professed That which we believe of this mystery is to
acknowledge an unity of Godhead, essence, and nature in the Trinity of Perfons.
God the Father is the same God as God the Son, God the Son is the same God
as God the Holy Ghost, and they are not three Gods but one only God The Person
of the Father is not the person of the Son, nor is the Person of the Son
the Person of the Holy Ghost: but they are three really destinct and different
Persons. This we intend to profess when we say in the Name of the Father and
of the Son and of the Holy Ghost.

We also paofesse. in the sign of the Cross the mystery of the Incarnation in
that we make a Cross to remember and acknowledge the love of God with which he
so loved the world that he gave his only begotten Son to become man, Joan.
3.
and to redeem us on the Cross. God had created man in a happy state in
Paradise, as it were in the way to heaven, environed on all sides with
unspeakable pleasures: and in that pleasant way was conducting him to the
heavenly glory. But man sinning lost the favor of God, was debarred of that
blessed state which he should have obtained, and being then out of the state of
grace he could sin still more and more; bu^ he could do noe good work
sufficient to satisfy for his sins, and to be restored again to the divine
grace by it. God of his justice requires satisfaction; but noe man not
creature being able and of sufficient worth to make it, and the divine nature
not being subject to make sarisfaction in in it self, it was the goodness of
God to unite our weakness to his power and our nature to his divine nature in
the incarnation of his son, that the nature of man being united to his divine
person, might by that person, be so dignifyed, that it could make worthy
satisfaction for the sins of all men that should apply unto themselves the
merits of his passion. This is the mystery which was revealed unto Abraham and
the holy Patriarks, which many kings and Prophets desired to see, and which
filled the heart of Abraham so full of comfort that he laughed for joy to hear
and think of it. By this the seed of the Patriarks was multiplied like the
stars of heaven and like the dust of the earth which is not to be numbered and
all kindreds were blessed in it: to wit as Christ came of their seed, by the
merits of whose passion heaven is replenished with saints more glorious than
the stars, and the Catholic Church of all faithful christians have sprung
from him, dil^^ed to the west. and to the East, and to the North, and to the
south not to be numbered: all whosoever are saved being saved by Christ our
Savior. We can never sufficiently acknowledge the love of God in this mystery:
by it man was so exalted as to become the divine Spouse by the mysterious
union of our nature unto God in Christ, that the Apostle might well say we are
made the consorts of the divine nature, for as man and woman are made consorts
by holy marriage, Petr 2 1.
their minds, bodies and temporal riches becoming common and as it were all
one betwixt them; so the Son of God uniting man's nature unto his, they were,
then two natures in one person, and man was made co^sort to the divine nature,
and endowed withal the titles and riches of God, that according to S.
Ath^nasius his Creed, as man consists of a spiritual and corporal nature,
so that of soul and body is constituted an entire man: so does Christ
consist of two natures divine and humane. There is noe good thing which we can
desire but we have it in this mystery. For our souls being sanctified by the
passion of Christ they are made also the consorts of the divine nature by
grace, and God coming to them as to his spouses brings with him all good
things to them, and in the end will carry them into his glorious kingdom.

These two mysterys of the Blessed Trinity and and of the Incarnation, are as I
have said the two chief mysterys of the christian faith, propper only to
christians and destinguishing them from all other people; and therefore the
sign of the Cross which contains them is used in the Catholic Church as a
breife and ready profession of the faith of Christ: that as nations,
commonwealths and noble familys have their arms and cognisants by which they
are known and destinguished, and in which they honor themselves; so
christians have the sign of the Cross as their propper arms by which they are
known and profess themselves to be the children and disciples of Christ; and
therefore we have great reason to glory in it and to think it our chief honor
and security to have the arms of such a king and father, Having declared the
sense and signification of the figne of the Cross now we will speak

OF THE WORSHIP WHICH good Christians ought to give to the Cross of Christ.
BY that which has been said it does easily appear that all Christians have
reason to honor the Cross. Infidels, Jews and Turks have allwais opposed the
honor of it, pulling down breaking and defacing of crosses, pretending that
which is true indeed, that the dishonor which they do to the Cross is done to
Christ, whose enemies they profess themselves to be. Heretics agree with
Infidels Jews and Turks when they pull down chrosses and yet will pretend
themselves to be the friends of Christ and his faithful servants; having
wilfully blinded themselves not to see that which the others by nature see that
the iniurys which are done unto the Cross fall voon Christ for whose sake we
honor it. Heretics as you see agree here in their actions with Infidels,
Jews, and Turks, and differ only in pretense from them: and natural reason
shows that Infidels, Jews, and Turks say truly in that which they pretend
and that such haeretiks have both evil actions and af alse pretense also; and
so they have in this less verity then the former. But the Catholic Church
has never consented to the iniurys of the Cross; because we know that such
iniurys fall upon Christ crucyfied; and therefore as fast as they pull down
crosses we labor to set them up, and as they strive to dishonor the Cross, we
strive against them to honor it. We bless ourselves with the sign of the
Cross, bow to Crosses, kiss and reverence them, we institute holy days in
honor of it, and in all things we glory in the Cross of our Lord Jesus Christ,
as the chief instrument of his passion; and therefore we think it a sit
sign to put us in mind of it and that we may aptly understand his passion
by it. Thus has the Church of God in the Apostles times and ever since used
the Cross to signify the passion of Christ, and honored it in that
signification. Thus did S. Phil. 3.
Paul understand by the enemies of the Cross the enemies of Christ's Passion, and
thus do Infidels, Jews and Turks think that showing themselves to be enemies
of Crosses they show themselves to be enemies of the Passion of Christ, and
haeretiks who profess themselves the Disciples of Christ should by reason
conceive (as without doubt they do) a fear and horror when they abuse
Crosses; and cannot by reason but think themselves enemies of the Passion of
Christ when reason tells them the relation which Crosses have to it; and
therefore we rightly honor and worship them. What did S. Paul but that which we
do when he said God forbid that I should glory saving in the Cross of our
Lord Jesus Christ? Gal 6.
did not he use here the Cross to signify the Passion of Christ and honor it in
that signification? in the very same sense does the Catholic Church use it and
does nothing but that which S. Paul here did: and we may very well make this
argument. S. Paul used the Cross to signify the Passion of Christ and then
honored it in that signification; therefore we may lawfully do so: he gloried
inwardly in his heart in the Cross, and his tongue and lips moved corporally in
honor of it, meaning still to honor the Passion of Christ by it; and this is
that which good Catholics do honoring with their hearts and their whole bodies
moving in honor of the Cross, understanding by it the Passion of Christ. Aug.
tract. 43. in lo.
S. Augustine says that Christ choosing the death of the Cross has fixed the
sign of the Cross in our foreheades that we might say God forbid that I
should glory saving in the Cross of our Lord Jesus Christ.

The Cross is the chief instrument and weapon with which our Savior fought and
obtained that glorious victory by which he saved us; and therefore we ought to
glory in it and to keep it in great reverence. David fighting for the people
of God overcame the Philistaean giant and with a sword cut of his head; and it
pleased God that his sword should afterward be honored by the people, being
carefully lapt up and kept in the temple as a memorial of their champions
victory. This is very propper to our purpose: David may represent Christ who is
our champion, but infinitely more glorious; and therefore more worthy to be
honored by us. But as the sword was to David so was the Cross in respect of
Christ, the instrument of his victory: and if it were the will of God to have
David honored afterward in his sword, because the honor of it redounded to
him, shall not we honor Christ in his Cross, and think that the honor of the
Cross redoundeth unto Christ? If some evil minded man had entered into the
Temple, and taking down king David's sword from behind the Ephod, had abused
and broken it; would not this man have been just y thought to have dishonored
king David himself? and to have committed in this a heinous contempt against
him? yes certainly; because the dishonor which was done would have been
conceived as done to his person; the sword being honored only in relation to
him: so the iniurys which are done and honor which is given to the Cross
redounde unto Christ for whose only sake we honor it.

S. Ignatius who lived in the Apostles times, The power of the sign of the
Cross. Ig. Ep. ad Phil.
and died a martyr does testify the esteem and worship of the Cross in those
days calling it h^erophy of christians against the devils power, wh (says he
abhors the very sight of it. Tert l. de ^or. mil. c. 3.
Tertullian lived not long after those times and he shows that the same
devotion continued still in the Church by these words, when w^ first set
forward, Cyrill. Cate^^ si 13. and S. Hierome Ep. 2^. have the like words.
wh^^ we go forth or come in wh^^ we put on our cloths or shoes, wh n we w^^h
our hands or l^^h acondle, in all exercises w^ wear one foreheades with th
sign of the Cross. So much was the sign of the Cross upon all occasions then
frequented by christians that this author would make so remarkable an
expression of it as though they had even worn it into their foreheades by
often making it. Not long after Tertullian came Constantine the Emperor, who
in his devotion to the Cross may well be called Great; for where as other
Emperors commonly aspire to greatness by enlarging their dominions and by
raising of great monuments to continue their memory in the world; it seems
that he had noe greater ambition then to raise and advance the glory of the
Cross. He undertook for this purpose a hard task in those times: and that was
by his imperial authority to honor the Cross so much, as to make those
ensigues of the Roman Eagles with which they had conquered the world to be
come inferior to the Cross and to raise it more glorious then they in his
chief banner This he wndertooke and notwithstanding all the opposition which
he might expect from the senate and people of Rome, (who were then Pagans) with
gods assistance he encompassed it. Of this banner much mention is made in
Authors. Eusebius who had seen it has given this description of it. Eusebius. l.
1. de vita Const^n.
A high spear was ^^acted set about with gold, which had a corner made a
thwart after the manner of a Cross. On the top of it a crown was placed
wrought with gold and precious stone. Under it there was a symbol of the
sovereign name. The name of Christ was represented in the first letters of two
verses the lett^r P standing vacant in the mi st: which the Emperor in later,
times used to wear in his helmet. Upon the thwart corner which was fied on the
spear a veil hung down of royal purple which with variety of precious
stones matching one anotheri, with the splendor of there shining and with the
abundance of gold that covered them gave an unspeakable luster to the
beholder. Thus did this good Emperor honor the Cross. And the same author
says that this banner was so good a safeguard to Constantins army and to him
that carried it, Eusebius. hi^ l. 9. c. 9.
that which way soever it was carried, in that place they allwais got
victory, and that the bearer of it was never hurt as long as he kept with it;
but that one time for fear forsaking it he was slain. And he says also that
after that Constantine had gotten that memorable victory over Maxentius, L 1.
d^ vita Constan.
in which the Cross miraculously appeared in the air to him, he set up a Cross
with these words, This is a souueraigne sign. And that in the hand of his own
image he caused a Cross to be put with these words. La. de vita Constan.
with this sign of true fortitude I have freed your city. And that he used
often to sign his face with the sign of the Cross. And that in his picture
over the gates of his imperial palace the sign of the Cross was painted over
his head, and a vanqui^hed dragon under his feet All this devotion did this
great Emperor use to the sign of the Cross, and never was condemned for it by
any, but such as were themselves condemned for haeretiks.

Afterward the Emperor Theodosius of reverence to the Cross prohibited it to
be made on the ground. Were it not an imposture worthy of an haeretike to leave
out on the ground, and to say only that Theodosius prohibited it to be made,
as though he had intended to take it away? yet D Kellison has observed out of
Alanus Copus that some haeretiks have done so. K^lli^in tertiom part. Orat. 1.
(...) Iul.


S. Gregory Nazianzen, who flourished a little after those times, relates how
that the wicked Emperor Julian having once apostatized from the faith of
Christ, and become an idolatrous Infidel, amongst the many vices to which he
prostituted his soul, he gave himself to the study of necromancy: and being
affrighted at the first sight which he had of the devils, he made on a sudden
the sign of the Cross, as he had done when he was a christian, and that the
evil spirits fled then presently away from him. And that to satisfy him his
master magitian told him, that the spirits did not fear, but hated the Cross,
and that if he would be their Disciple he must leave it of. And in the same
place he relates how that Julian being on a certain time with his Southsayers
looking into the entrails of beasts they found a Cross in them; and inquiring
the presage of it, they told him that by this it was portended that Julian with
all his power should never be able to root out the faith of Christ; but that
it should last for ever. S. Hiero. ad Eust.
Hierome was something later then S. Gregory Nazianzen, he writing to the Lady
Eustochium his devout penitent exhorts her to frequent the sign of the Cross.
Aug to. 5. l. 22. c. 8. deciu. Dei.
S. Augustine came a little after him, and relates this miracle wrought by it.
There was says he in Carthage a woman by name Innocentia vexed with a Canker
in her breast, who having used all the remedys which the physicians could
praescribe, and at last meeting with one who told her planely that there was
noe remedy for it, but that she must have patience with it and let it alone;
for that according to Hypocrates such cankers are worse for being tampered
with. She being then out of hopes by any natural means, betook herself to
the author of nature who can cure without them. And it pleased God to send her
a vision in which she was admonished to go to the Church when baptism was
administered, and to procure the first that she met with of the newly baptized
christians to make the sign of the Cross upon her breast, and that so she
should be cured. She did so and was restored to perfect health. This happened
in S. Augustines time in the city in which he lived, and himself having had
the examining of it, caused it to be published.

We have then S. Paul and those that lived in the Apostles times honoring the
Cross as we now do, and we may see by the writings of their successors the
Saints of the primitive Church, the power and virtue of the sign of the Cross,
and what devotion was then borne to it. He whom all this is not sufficient to
move, but shall still oppose this blessed sign shows an intolerable
obstinacy, in himself and that he needs rather some means to mollify his
heart, and to move his will, then any arguments to convince his understanding;
and therefore let him have recourse unto God by prayer (as I showed in the last
title of the former discourse) that he will enlighten and inspire him to the
truth; for he may deceive himself, but God can not deceive him.

I have now noe more to say of the sign of the Cross. You have seen first how
it is to be made. Secondly what mysterys are contained in it, to wit the
mysterys of the B. Trinity and of the Incarnation. Thirdly what reverence we
ought to bear unto it. Let us confess the greatness of God in the mystery of
the blessed Trinity, and fear him: let us acknowledge his love in the mystery
of the Incarnation, and love him; and let us honor that holy sign by which
those mysterys are signified. The Cross is the sword of Christ, the glory of
christians, the terror of devils, our arms and armor against all dangers
both of body and soul. It is (says S. Augustine) the chair in which our
master satte to teach us. Aug. tract. 119. in lo. to. 3 1. ad Tim. 3.
He taught us from thence a lesson of all virtues, of perfect charity toward
God and our neighbor, of humility, patience, meekness, fortitude, poverty,
and of perfect resignation with the will of God in all things. If thou feel
thy self cold in the love of God, negligent in frequenting the Sacraments, in
coming to mass etc. and have but little feeling of goodness nor care of Gods
service in thee, behold Christ upon the Cross, hear him how he calls upon
thee to see him paining unto death for the love of thy soul. If thou art
offended at thy enemy, and do not forgive him, behold thy master on thee
Cross, and hear him not only forgiving, but excusing and praying for his
enemies. If thou feel in thy self a desire of praise, worldly glory and
preferment, behold the son of God in his passion become the abject of men,
that a notorius condemned thief was preferred before him. If by sickness,
soars, and other like afflitions thou art moved to impatience, see him in his
Passion how he gius his blessed head, his face, his hands, his feet, and his
whole body as a lamb to his enemies to be bound, to be beaten to be nailed,
stabbed, cut, and wounded, as they would themselves. See the blood running out
of his crowned head by drop after drop, where the thorns pierced it, and out
of his hands and feet and wounded side, not by drops, but by a continual
course until they were left dry. What did he say to those that tormented him,
and in his torments vpbraided him with false crimes? all that time he answered
not a word in his own behalf, but with silence went on, stood still, or
laid down as they would have him that carried him from place to place, and
from one pain to another, he never opening his mouth to desire any ease or to
entreat for any thing, to teach thee meekness He defended innocence against
the power of kings, priests, and presidents, to teach thee fortitude in Gods
cause. He became naked to teach thee poverty. He took the cup of his Passion
willingly from the Angel, and drunk it up to the bottom, more then ne needed
for the health of mankind; because it was for the honor of God, and his divine
will that he should do so. Learn thou to resign thy will to the will of
God, and to be contented in all occasions as he shall dispose of thee. Finally
there is neither writing, nor preaching, nor any words whatsoever that
imprinteth so much the love of God in our hearts, nor moves so efficaciously
to all virtues, noe not the holy scriptures themselves, nor any remedy so good
against all kind of sins as the meditation of Christ's Passion which is read
unto us in the sign of the Cross. L. 6. in Ep. ad Romans
Origin asking by what means we shall perform the Apostles words that sin
reign not in us, Romans 6.
answers where the death of Christ is carried there sin can not reign; for
(says he) the Cross of Christ has such power that if we bear it before our
eyes, and keep it in our minds, noe concupiscence, noe lust, noe anger, noe
envy can overcome us, He ^5 in M^t. to. 2.
the whole army of sin is put to slight. S. Chrysostom, let them attend
that are ashamed of the Cross of Christ's Passion. For if the Prince of the
Apostles (S. Peter) were called Satan when he had not learned the mystery of
the Cross; Mat. 16.
because he said Lord be it far from thee this shall not be unto thee; how
shall they be pardoned that dare to deny the Cross now when it is preached all
over? let none be ashamed of these signs of our salvation; but let us carry
the Cross of Christ about us as a joyful crown; for all things that are
conducing to salvation are accomplished in it. When we are regenerated the Cross
is present, when we are fedd with the most sacred soode, when we are placed in
the order of consecrating, all over, and at all times that sign of victory is
used. Wherefor let us have that sign in our houses, in our windows, on our
foreheades, and in our minds with much devotion. It is the sign of our
salvation, of our universal liberty, of the mildness and humility of our
Lord. When therefore thou signest thy self with the sign of the Cross think of
the mystery of the Cross, and extinguish the fire of wrath and other Passions in
thee. When thou signest thy self with the sign of the Cross, arm thy face
with confidence and thy mind with the thoughts of freedom. For Paul exhorting
to true freedom calls us to the memory of the Cross saying, you are bought
with a great price. Cor. 1.6.
This was the price of the Cross. We must not only make it with our singars on
the body but with conside^ce on our souls: and if so thou make it, none of
the wicked devils will dare to encounter thee, when he seceth the speere of
his mortal wound. For if we are afraid to behold the place where condemned
persons are executed, what do thou think will the devil do to see the
sword with which Christ disarmed him, and cut of his head? be not thou then
ashamed of so great a good, least Christ be ashamed of thee when he comes in
his majesty. Thou shall see then this sign borne before Christ as bright as
the sun. The Cross shall go before him, and shall speak with a loud voice
for him, to show that there was nothing wanting on his part. This sign both
now and of old does open the doors that are shutt, is has extinguished
poison, it has tamed wild beasts, it has cured the mortal stings of
serpents. The Cross has converted the world, it has put away fear and brought
the truth, it has turned earth into heaven, men into Angels, death into
sleep, it has brought all our enemies down to the ground. If a gentill shall
say to thee, adore not him that was Crucified: be not afraid with a clear
voice and countenance to say, I adore him, and will adore him for ever. And if
he shall lauhg at thee, weep thou with many tears to see his madness. Give
thanks unto our Lord by whom we have these things which none without the
divine grace can say. We wi^h a loud and clear voice and with special
confidence will cry out. The Cross is our glory our freedom our crown, the
head, and fountain of our happiness. I would I could say with S. Paul the world
is Crucified to me and I to the world. But my Passions hinder me that I can
not say so? Wh^efore I admonish you and much more my self that we be
Crucified to the world, that we have nothing to do with he earth, but that our
wh le minds be insla^^^ with the desire of heavenly glory. Thus S John
Chrysostom: and there remains nothing for me to add to his words, words
worthy of his holy zeal and eloquence, I would I had an Angels voice to sing
them as they deserve: I would repeato that saying over and over again. Th Cross
is our glory, our freedom, our cr^wne, the head, and fountain of our
happiness. Make it not only with the fingars on the body, but with confidence
on the soul, and make it as a profession of this faith* as an incitement unto
all virtues, as an armor against all temptations, as a defense against all
dangers, as a comfort in all afflictions. It is the beginning of our awaking,
of our sleeping, of our prayers, of our studies, of our preaching, of our
Catechizing, of our eating, of our drinking, of our walking, of our riding of
our working, and of our leaving of from work; all our actions shall begin
and end with this blessed sign and words. In the name of the Father, and of
the Son, and of the Holy Ghost. Amen.

THE FOVRTH DISCOVRSE OF THE CREED. OF THE AVTHORITY AND USE of the Creed.
I INTEND now to declare the Creed unto you, in which not only the chief
mysterys of the christian faith, but all whatsoever the christian doctrine
teaches in some sort is contained. But first we will have recourse unto God,
and crave his assistance by our blessed Ladys intercession. Hail Mary etc.

Before we declare the articles of the Creed in particular, we will say
something of the authority and use of the whole Creed, to show how
authentical and pious it is. Although the Creed be not delivered in any part
of the scriptures, yet it is of equal authority with them to us; neither they
nor it being received by us but for the testimony of the Church, which both of
them have, and which in all things we are bound to believe: the same authority
of the Catholic Church which has delivered the scriptures to us delivering
also the Creed to be believed in the same manner by divine faith; the one by
writing, the other by word of mouth from time to time; both of which traditions
being in themselves by humane means only, a like fallible, and by the power
of God a like infallible. S Paul's writings are received by us as the word of
God; and he himself has said of his preaching although not written, that it
was to be received not as the word of man but as the word of God. These. 1.2.
And again he planely commands them to receive the like traditions which are
delivered by word of mouth as well, as those that are written saying, Breath en
stand and hold the traditions which you have learned whether it be by word or
by our Epistle. These. 2.2.
These are as plane words as S. Paul could speak or write to let us
understand, that the words of the Church are to be received as the writings
which it delivers: and the holy fathers by these words understand the same
authority to be for all the mysterys of faith, and for the lawfullnes of all the
ceremonys generally practiced and allowed of by the Church, although not
mentioned expressly in the scriptures, as is for the scriptures themselves. L.
3. c. 3.
S. Irenaeus bids us in all questions of controversy to have recourse unto
the Apostolical traditions, and to try them by the Apostolical succession of
bishops, and in particular by the chair of Rome: and says that there are many
nations of barbarous people simple for their learning, but most wise in the
constancy of their faith who never had the scriptures.

S. Clement the disciple of S. Peter and the adiutor of S. Paul speaking of the
Creed says, that the Apostles, before that they separated themselves into
several countries to preach the gospel, conferred together, and by the
inspiration of the Holy Ghost made the Creed as a rule to direct them and
others in the faith which they were to preach; and therefore says he it is
called the Symbol, which is a Greek word signifying a collection or a
conference, for that it was made by the general assembly and conference of the
Apostles. S. Ambrose has these words. Ep. 81.
The Apostles like a company of skillfull workmen conserring together made the
Symbol as a kea to lock up the Diabolical darkness and to let in the light of
Christ; and we must deliver this kea to ourbrethren that the Disciples of Peter
may use it to lock the gates of hell, and open the gates of heaven to
themselves. S. Augustine speaks thus of it. Sermon 80. de temp.
The Apostles have delivered a sure rule of faith comprehended according to the
Apostolical number in twelve sentences. They called it a Symbol by which
Catholic union might be conserved and haeretical pranity convinced. It is a
Symbol breife in words but large in mysterys; for whatsoever is praefigured in
the Patriarks, whatsoever is declared in the scriptures, an^ whatsoever is
foretold by the Prophets either of God the Father, of God the Son, or of the
Holy Ghost, or of the receiving of the Sacraments, or of the death and
resurrection of our Lord is contained and briefly confessed in it. Let therefore
every one learn that Apostolical faith when he comes to years of
understanding which he professed in baptism by the months of those that then
carried him. And in another place he says that christians should use it as a
looking glass morning and night to examine themselves in their faith by it. L
1 dosymb. 1.


By all which it does appear first that the Creed is of divine authority, as
made by the Apostles and delivered by word of mouth from them to posterity, as
the written word of the new Testament was from hand to hand to be believed with
divine faith. Secondly out of S Ambrose and S. Augustine, that it being a kea
and a looking glass which the Apostles made for us, we ought with great
reverence to keep it and to use it as such, often frequenting it to lock up
the infernal darkness from us, and to open the divine light unto our souls: and
to examine ourselves in faith by it, as by a looking glass, that so we may
allwais keep constant to the Catholic Church.

Quest. Say, the Creed. Answ. I believe in God the Father almighty maker of
heaven and earth. And in Jesus Christ his only Son our Lord. Who was
conceived by the Holy Ghost borne of the Virgin Mary. Suffered under Pontius
Pilate, was Crucified dead and buried. He descended into hell the third day he
arose again from death. He ascended into heaven; sits at the right hand of
God the Father almighty. From thence he shall come to judge us all; both the
quick and the dead. I believe in the Holy Ghost. The holy Catholic Church,
the Communion of Saints. The forgiveness of sins. The Resurrection of the
flesh. Life everlasting. Amen.

THE FIRST ARTICLE.
I Believe in God the Father almighty, maker of heaven and earth. In this
article the Apostles profess their belief in the first person of the blessed
Trinity: in the following articles they profess the second person and the
third. But we are not here to understand that God the Father without the Son
and the Holy Ghost, made the world; for every external work which God does is
done by all the Persons of the blessed Trinity: the Father, Son, and Holy
Ghost, having all the same undivided power, all equally concurring to the
making of the world and of every thing that is contained in it. The Father is
named first and the creation of the world is here particularly attributed to
him; because he is the first Person from whom the Son and the Holy Ghost
eternally proceed.

God is rightly termed a father to signify his power, love and care over us.
God a father
For as fathers begin the generation that comes of them, and govern their
children and provide for them: so is God the beginner of this world, he
governs it with his power, and by his providence conserueth it. Deuteronomy. 32.
Is not he thy father that has possessed thee, and made and created thee?

By heaven and earth are understood all creatures heavenly and earthly, that
is both spiritual and corporal creatures. And in this the power of God is
expressed by his external works so, as is sufficient to destinguish him as the
supreme power, and to putt us in mind of our duty to him, and dependence of
him, as giving us our being and still conseruing us in the being which we have,
and which all creatures should presently and in an instant loose, if he should
withdraw his divine help from them: and there would be noe creatures at all,
but as there was once nothing but God.

God is the most perfect of all things and therefore a spirit; all over by his
power; and his power is himself. He is not contained in any place now, noe
more then he was before the creation of the world. He was all wais the same
power, the same goodness, and those infinite. He ever had a decree to create the
world; and that eternal decree he performed in time, making the Angels only
spirits, men both spiritual in their souls and corporal in their bodies, and
other creatures as we see only corporal. He made heaven a place of glory for
the good, and hell a place of punishment for the wicked. He desires the
salvation of all and gives sufficient means of salvation to all: that being
the end for which he made us.

In this article we do not say I believe in Gods, makers etc. but I believe in
God the maker etc. In which we have two things professed. Athe^sts.
First the essence and existence of God against profane and wicked atheists,
and secondly against Pagans the being of one only God. This is here but
breisly professed: for the Apostles made the Creed but only as an abbreuiated
profession and rule of faith to ground and guide us in the articles which we
were to believe: they proved them in their preaching, as need required: yet
that there is a God as in the Creed they suppose it, so also they might do
in their preaching, and needed not to prove it to Jews or Gentiles, who were
then only in the world, and were never likely to deny it. But now in these
times of so many heresys, I do not see that any point of faith whatsoever is
more necessary to be proved. For heresy as it is a corruption of the true
faith, so it corrupts and destroys by little and little the very heart and
root of all faith, and as it annulleth the authority of the Church, it takes
away the foundation of all certainty, and opens a gappe to every man's errors
to say what he lists and for shameless atheism to enter in by it. For make
it once lawful to disobey the Church (which is the only authority of God
externally upon earth) as all archhaeretiks do, who begin their new
doctrines with obedience to noe Church then extant in all the world; and then
it follows that every man without control may believe and teach what he will
himself; for there is noe authority upon earth to control him, and so he may
as well teach atheism as heresy. Secondly those that are of God are ordained
(says the Apostle) that is to say they are with order: Romans 13.
and he requires there that we be subject to higher powers, not only of
necessity, but for conscience sake: now order imports subjection and
subordination of inferiors to superior powers: if then you take away this
subjection and subordination of inferiors to superiors, as haeretiks do by
disobeying the Church you take away all order in religion, and by consequence
you take away God, and bring in atheism and a worse disorder then is in hell.
How hateful then is heresy to God which is opposite to all religion? and how
dangerous is atheism, In Collar. Patrum.
and necessary to be prevented in haeretical times? Cassianus relates an
example of this in which he shows by experience that heresy leads into
atheism. He says that there was a certain religious man, who beginning first
of indiscretion to make comparisons betwixt the Saints, and being reprehended
by his superior for it, he took in such evil part his reprehension, that he
fell to say that the Saints were noe better then other men; and when he was
reproved for his temeratious speech he fled to the scriptures, demanding the
contrary to be showed by them: and when the scriptures were produced against
him, he interpreted them after his own sense and liking: and when the
interpretations of holy fathers were alleged against him, he scorned all,
saying that they were men and might err. Lastly the authority of the Church
guided of God for the orderly government of the world is objected against him:
and when he saw that he must either stick to the authority of God governing us
by the Church, and deny his own singularity; or stick to his own singularity
and deny allorder and government of God; he stuck like an haeretike to his
own singularity and rather then he would submit unto the Church he denied
God and fell to atheism. The end of this obtinate brute was at last to become
mad and to die roaring like a beast. Now his last proposition was but
consequence to the former: for he that in matter of faith will begin a
nouelty by which he separateth himself from all religions and will obstinatly
maintain it against all Churches, why may he not as well deny that there is a
God seeing that he has but his own opinion for both?

The same experience we have now a days of too many who by long continuance in
heresy and disobedience to the true Church, seem to have lost the very belief
of God and all fear and feeling of him out of their hearts: and in this
haeretical kingdom it is long since come to that, that every man in religion
might in a manner hold what opinious he liked, so that he were not a Roman
Catholic, and as an enemy of the Catholic Church would but go to their
Churches. A neighbor yet living not far from this place maintained publikly
against the mystery of the blessed Trinity, and the divinity of our Savior,
and being many years since apprehended for it when he was brought to his
trial he was cleared and by public authority set at liberty to teach his
blasphemys as now he does to all that will hear and learn them; the Foreman
of the sury who was a knight of the best rank in this country (of what
religion I know not) declaring (as I have heard) that he would rather take the
lines of twenty Papists then to have the blood of one such man upon him. Tell
one of our libertines that he is an atheist (which a Roman Catholic presently
would abhor to hear) most English Protestants make but a jest of it; and
many there are who seem as though they would gladly be so indeed, that they
might let go the bridle to all liberty and follow their sensuality without
restraint. They seeing the wicked sometimes to prosper in their lives, and in
the end to die life other men, do what they can to persuade themselves that
there is neither heaven nor hell, and to say in their hearts that there is noe
God. This is now the plane case of many amongst us; and I could rehearse the
profane sayings of some of our great ones which I have heard of to this
purpose many years since; but they are not worth the repeating. He that will
read The Author of the Protestant Religion. l. 1. c. 4. may see more
particularly how the doctrine of Protestants tends to atheism, and the
unworthy and atheistical speeches of their authors: and in The Survey of the
new Religion l. 8. almost all over, but especially c. 3. he may see the same.
This is easy to be seen in all heresys, that they beginning allwais in the
contempt of the Church, assume to themselves liberty of doctrine, and that
liberty of doctrine brings liberty of life: now who does not see the next,
and last consequence, which liberty of life, and doctrine runs into.

It is therefore very necessary in these times to say something for haeretiks,
in proof of this first article of the Creed, to preserve it as the heart,
root, and foundation of faith from their corruption, and to let those
libertines see their extreme folly, that labor to beat out of their hearts the
fear of God. But Catholics, who believe it as a point of the Catholic, and
Apostolic faith, need noe proof of it, because they have it as they have all
other points of faith, by the testimony of God manifesting himself to them;
who can not deceive us as we may do our selves by our own reason. God is
true, Romans 3.
and every man a liar faith the Apostle, and therefore we may mistrust
ourselves, but we can not mistrust God, nor contradict the Church by which he
speaks to us, and governs us. If it be an irreuerence to stand in
contradiction with a grave and reverent person; how much more must it be to
contradict God? were he not a madman that should oppose his physician, and
denying that to be poison which he affirms to be so, should take it, and
kill himself? or if a man seeing a caldron full of melted led prepared by some
workman, and were warned by him to take heed of it, yet would not regard his
words; but because he saw not the fire under it nor any smoke in it should deny
it to be hot, and throw himself into it? would not you think that he were
worse then mad? we ought to believe God the workman of the world, and not
like atheists, who because they see not the fire of hell, will not believe it,
but throw themselves into it, and damn themselves. And we must not only
believe in God, and receive for his authority all points of faith; but we must
also with our mouths Confess our belief, and defend it with our lives when
need requires. Romans 10.
With the heart we believe unto justice: but with the mouth Confession is made
to salvation. Says the Apostle And the holy king says I believed for which
cause I spoke. And as S. Peter, Psalm. 115.
and S. John answered to the high Priests; and Princes of the Jews, we can not
but speak the things which we have seen and heard; so ought we in the like
occasion to speak resolutly the things which we see, Act. 4.
and hear in the Catholic faith, and say with S. Paul I am not ashamed of the
gospel. And in all temptations both public and private, stand to our
Creed, Romans 1.8.
and profess I believe in God and the Catholic Church. This I wish that all
the world could truly say, and I will bring all that I can to say so: and to
begin with the atheists of these times who in words say I believe in God, but
not in heart, he shall see first that all the Angels and all nations of men give
testimony against him. Secondly he shall see God and feel him by experience in
himself. Thirdly he shall see him by natural discourse.

ALL ANGELS AND ALL nations of men give testimony of God.
So great is the subordination which every understanding has to the supreme
wisdom; and so great is the inclination which all reasonable creatures have
to confess, and to acknowledge the supreme reason which ordered theirs; that
all nations of men that ever were and the whole nature of Angels have consented
allwais unto it, and conspired against atheists to choke atheism as the
monster of nature, and as the common enemy of the world. And even as bees join
together to drive waspes out of their hiues as the destroyers of their nature;
and as all kingdoms rize up in defense of their kings, parents, and fortunes
against murderers, robbers, and thieves, to exterminate them from the face of
the earth; so have all nations at all times combined together against atheists
to maintain the divine power, and to acknowledge God as their supreme king and
parent and to defend him as their own lives honors, and fortunes, which by
reason they see cannot be maintained without order, and cannot be ordered but
by the power of God. In so much that all nations of men, and the most
peruersed and obstinate of the Angels, have allwais acknowledged his divine
power.

If the writings of our ancestors shall have any place with us, (as by reason
they must except we will live life beasts, without any correspondence of
times,) we have that the prowdest of the rebellious spirits, as he kept allwais
his natural reason, so did he allwais keep his natural knowledge, and
acknowledgment of God, and never sinned so as to deny his divine power, or to
think to be equal with him; for that he knew could never be: and even then
when he sinned, he employed as much in words, calling God The most high, as
having all inferior to him: he sinned in desiring of a higher glory then God
had ordained for him, and repining at it, he drew others to be his accomplices,
and to desire the same and to repine with him; and for this he was cast down
with them into hell. This if we will give but humane credit to the best
antiquity we must so understand, as that Lucifer refuted atheism even then
when he sinned, and that God by that first sin would show himself to the
world.

And as amongst Angels so amongst men the prowdest of all men and most
profane were certainly those, who would be worshipped for Gods even whilst
they lived: yet these men never fell directly into atheism; but rather even in
that hight of pride they employed an acknowledgment of the divine power: for
they having gotten the superiority over others, to preserve it the better, and
to begette in their people a greater reverence unto them, assumed to themselves
high titles; and because the title of God is the highest of all titles, they
would be called so: and that it might not seem vain, in word and name only,
without substance, they would be thought to have something more then humane in
them, and required of their inferiors some worship more then the ordinary,
which was given to men: and so it seems that Aman would have had Mardochaeus
to have worshipped him. Yet in this they acknowledged a divine power; and even
then they worshipped their false Gods, as also Aman even then acknowledged a
higher power then his own in the king, whom he worshipped upon earth.

The greatest libertines that ever were in the doctrine which they taught, was
Epicure and his followers; yet neither he nor they ever came to that
profaneness as directly to deny God; but only indirectly and by consequence,
as all wicked men do in their works, and those that teach false doctrines of
God do in words. He and his company persuaded themselves that after this life
there was noe further felicity for men; but he denied not but that some higher
power ordained this present felicity of life which we enjoy. Verbo, Athaus.
They professed (says Prateolus) that there was a divine power, but they
pretended that as God troubled not himself about us, so he would not have us
to trouble ourselves about worshipping of him, but to follow the pleasures of
this world which he had made for us Cicero says of this libertine that his
doctrine was to persuade men to follow their pleasures in all things, and to
trouble themselves with nothing, Tuscul l. 3.
nor ever to think of death, or of any change, or loss of those pleasures;
but to think that they should enjoy them all, or the greatest part of their
lives without pain, or sorrow, or fear of offending the Gods. By which it is
manifest that these men were not atheists, but that they acknowledged a divine
power all though they would not trouble themselves to worship it: which gave
occasion to the rest of Philosophers to call them atheists, and to set upon
them with arguments as such; because atheism was the consequence of their
absurdity, although they professed it not. That which they professed was the
hight of libertinisme in the pursuit of pleasures; but it was inferior to
atheism which takes away the first principle of reason and of all effects.

Amongst all the false doctrines which at several times have sprung up in the
world, and have been entertained by some nations, or peoples for their own
ends and ease, there never was any any nation or people that in their highest
prosperity, or lowest adversity for any ends whatsoever, but still they
acknowledged a divinity In the first beginning of idolatry when the world was
distracted into so many errors; that every country, city, and family might
set up private and particular idols to themselves, as they liked, we do not
read of any that would deny God and profess atheism. They persecuted those
of the true religion who retained the worship of one eternal, and omnipotent
God, and would not follow their new idolatry, and worship of many Gods; but
still they acknowledged some divine power. And if you descend from that first
separation of men from the divine worship you shall not find that in all the
time past any one nation, province or city in all the world did ever resolve
to profess atheism, or did but allow or countenance it. Some few private men
there have been whom ancient authors have branded with this infamy, as
Diagoras, Protagoras, and Theodorus. Yet these men if they fell to atheism
(which also may be doubted) could never get any footing in the world, but were
presently detested for their singular profaneness. Yet I do not deny but that
there have been some atheists in the world, as there is noe wickedness but
some have committed it. That which I say is that as by natural reason we must
hate vice and by nature abhor to murder ourselves; so do we by nature
abhor the sin of atheism: and that all nations have punished it as they
do other vices which are against nature. It is noe marvel that some men have
run wilfully into this sin, as they have done into murder and even to
murder themselves: which notwithstanding by nature they abhor, and can expect
noe pleasure, but utmost pain in it. It is indeed a marvel and most
admirable, that atheism giving so great liberty to all sin, there have been
in the world so few that have fallen into it: and by this it is manifest that
God fights particularly against it, and has given by nature to reasonable
creatures to defend his power and goodness.

And perhaps neither those above mentioned were guilty of this sin. First for
that it is not likely that those men were so much perverted in their minds
and wills as Epicure was in the desire of liberty, who notwithstanding as you
have seen came short of atheism. Secondly I find by chance in S. John
Chrysostom where he puts them by name and Socrates together for defending
of the same doctrine and mainteining of this proposition Ignoro 'Deos I know
not Gods meaning I know not many Gods in the plural number, Chrysos^o 4. in
primam ad Cor. l. 14.
but one only God: and he says that they vltimum subierunt periculum, that
is either lost their lives, or were in danger of their lives, for defending of
that proposition. Now it is well known that Socrates lost his life for
defending of that proposition in the sense above mentioned of one only God;
and for this they might well be then in danger of their lives.

Atheism then is a sin which cannot be incurred, but by a general
contradiction to the whole world, and by a violent forcing of nature and
conscience to admit of all sins, and which has in it self the malice of
all sins, as allowing of all wickedness whatsoever. How great then are the
punishments of this grievous sin so much abhorred by the world and
containing after a sort the guilt of all sins? Socrates drank poison, forced
unto it by Infidels for defending of one God; yet this was never a singularity
in the world, and even then was professed by the whole nation of the Jews,
famous in the world: what shall the atheist deserve for professing of that,
which all nations of the world have ever abhorred, and for contradicting of
that which all nations have ever professed, and was before men professed by
Angels, and even by Lucifer the worst of devils? the atheist in this goes
beyond Lucifer, and as for the hight of his profaneness, he deserves in a
higher nature the damnation of his soul, then Lucifer deserved hell; because
he denies the first principle of nature, and all nations having by instinct of
nature some religion he will have none. De leg.
Cicero, There is noe nation so barbarous, but although it know not what God
it should have; yet it knows it should have a God.

Now if the atheist shall set himself to exclaim against all nations, and
shall say that they have all done this for some temporal respect, it shall
avail him noe more, then if some heinous malefactor or very vicious man
should exclaim against his superiors, and against all nations for punishing of
him, and for hindering the mischeifs which he would otherwise perpetrate. And
by this saying atheists condemn themselves; the same natural reason that
condemns sin and vice condemning them in the opinion of all nations, as
more destroying of nature and order then any vicious men whatsoever. And
therefore as it were a vain thing in public malefactors, and should avail
them nothing to condemn the laws of nations that condemn them: so were it
in atheists to exclaim against all nations, and should avail them nothing
when all the world shall condemn them before God.

OF THE NATVRALL, AND experimental feeling which we have of God.
MEn use rather to dissuade from vices then to disprooue them; because nature
of it self without discourse of arguments at the first apprehension abhors
vice; and therefore there needs noe disproofe of it. The same may be said of
atheism, that as naturally we love virtue and hate vice for the beauty and
goodness which appears in the one, and for the deformity and evil which we
perceive in the other; so the divine beauty and goodness draws us to it, and
by nature we are converted to God, and auersed from atheism even at the first
apprehension, as the greatest of all evils: and our consciences tell us that
after the very salfe same manner that we feel ourselves auersed from vice, so
do we also find ourselves from atheism; but only that we behold atheism as
more deformed, and monstrous then any vice is. And as we love and cannot but
love virtue, so we cannot but love God in himself, and naturally we love
those whom we see to love and serve him. Because we cannot but see and feel
the goodness of God toward us, and his power over us, working in us and
disposing of us, and dispensing unto us such perfections, as he would give, and
not we would choose, and laying upon us such imperfections of greifs, sickness,
soars, Passions of mind as he would, and that which to nature is most
terrible, to wit death. By all which we see a supernatural power-aboue our
nature which ordained these things. And that power as by nature we see and
feel it, so also by nature wefeare it, naturally abhorring sin by which we
displease him.

It is true great sinners have many times sensibly but little of this fear
left, and may perhaps come to that hardness of heart, as to have noe feeling at
all of the fear of God when they sin, according to the holy Proverb, The
impious when he shall come into the depth of sins contemns. Prou. 18.
But this proves not, but that by nature he fears God: it proves indeed
the great mercy of God to suffer those vessels of wrath to continue so long
without their due punishment, that they fear him not, and the great
inclination which our corrupted nature has to corrupt still more and more, and
to fall deeper and deeper into sin, and shows how good a thing it is after
any sin presently to repent for it, and as soon as we can to use those
means which we have in the Catholic Church for the clearing of our
consciences again; least that by continuance in one sin, we fall into
another, and harden our hearts by little and little to all sins. Although I say
such men when they sin have noe sensible feeling of God or fear of his
justice; yet by nature they have that fear when they feel it no^. Hawks by
long custom to their keepers loose the feeling of that natural fear which
they have of them, and will sport with them and bite at them without any fear
at all; yet naturally they have allwais the same fear of them; and their
keepers permitting this have still the same power over them, which they had
before. So many sinners by much sinning, and long continuance in sin may
perhaps (I say perhaps, for perhaps they cannot) quite loose their sensible
fear of God when they offend him; yet naturally they have still the same
fear of him, and he allwais the same power over them. And if any man come to
that hardness of heart, as to have noe feeling of the divine power when he
sins, it is by long continuance and custom of sin that he loses that
actual feeling and fear of God; yet naturally and radically he allwais has
it, and can loose it noe more then birds, and beasts can ever leave to have a
natural fear of man.

Tertullian and Seneca have observed that atheists when they fall into any
great misery, Ter. Apoll. Senec. l. 1. de^rn.
and especially when they come to die, of all men are most dejected to think of
the justice of God, and the punishments that abide them; and are more vexed in
conscience then any, detesting then their former wickedness and the pleasures of
their life, for which they denied God. And Zeno the Philosopher was so well
satisfied with this experience, that he used to say that to him it a was a
better proof of the divine power, to hear the atheist who blinded with
sensuality had denied God, to confess him again when he was freed from that
passionate desire, then it was to hear it proved by the best arguments of
Philosophy. This may be deduced out of S. Paul's argument to the Philosophers of
Athens, when preaching to them he said God is not far from every one of us.
Act. 17.
For in him we live and move and be. That is that we have within us a feeling
of God, that gave us the perfections which we could not have of ourselves, and
that we have noe such feeling of stocks or stones of which their idols were
made, as not having power by nature to give being, life, and motion.

And this natural feeling and fear of God, as it pleased him to imprint it in
our hearts, so he has a care to preserve it in us, and has therefore showed
sometimes his exemplat judgments upon men of such atheistical spirits as have
striuen to pull down sanctity of life and to destroy virtue. Cantip. l. 2.
apum a. 48.
Cantipratensis relates of one Simon a libertin of Paris, that railing against
Christ for teaching holiness of life, he fell down to the ground giving a
great roar like a beast, his eyes rolling after a ghastly manner and making a
terrible noise with his tongue, but could not utter a word, but Alis, Alis,
which was the name of his concubine. And it is reported of Machiauel that
profane Politician that when he dyed, being stricken with despair, he uttered
certain words wnworthy to be rehearsed.

If then by nature we have a feeling of God, and for that feeling we naturally
fear, and abhor to offend him, and if wisemen have observed in atheists
that when calamitys befall them, and especially at their deaths they are glad
to retract their error, and repenting for it to humble themselves to God, or
else to die after a most miserable and horrible manner; how great then and
enormous is their wickedness? and how desperately senseless is he of his own
good, who for that delight which is common to other sinners, will surmount them
all in a higher degree of malice, and by a singular profaneness put himself
upon the rack of his own conscience so grievous, that for fear of worse
torments he shall be forced, either to confess that which before he denied; or
else, which is worse, to die a miserable death, and perhaps in that desperate
manner, as to be made an example to the world of the divine justice? Let us now
show in a word or two how

NATVRALL REASON DOES demonstrate the power of God.
FAith is the first foundation of religion, and the first foundation of faith
is to believe that there is a God, who will reward those that worship him. He
that will come unto God must first believe that he is and is a rewarder of
those that seek him. Heb 11.
Says S. Paul; and therefore the first thing which the Apostles would propose
to be professed in the Creed was I believe in God, and the last thing which
they would conclude it with was life everlasting: a necessary beginning to
bring us to that happy end. The first words of the Creed being then the
foundation of faith; and he having given us natural reason, as a guide to the
higher light of faith; it was necessary that this first article and foundation
of faith should be ^ithin the limits of natural reason so far, as that
discerning by nature that there was a superior of nature, we might have
recourse unto him, as to our superior, and receive from his authority the
articles of faith, which he will have us to believe with subordination to that
government, which he has instituted in the Church.

And that we might see this first verity, the Apostle says that God left not
himself without testimony being beneficial from heaven giving raines and
f^^tefull seasons, Act. 14.
filling our hearts with f^ode and gladness. He has indeed left as many
testimonys of himself, as there are creatures of his making: the least of
which is sufficient to prove him as the cause from whence they proceed, and
the power of which they depend. But the more eminent creatures of God declare
his perfections after a more eminent manner; and they altogether manifest his
power so, that we are forced to confesle it to be infinite, and that he is
incomprehensible in goodness, and without number of greatness: because he
eminently must contain in himself the perfections of all that are, and of all
that are possible, and those are without end; and therefore he is infinitely
greater then any limited reason can comprehend.

But let us see the testimonys which God has left of himself. I will now
dilate my speech a little upon the creatures of God, that we may see and honor
him in them. Truly if we will consider the admirable composition which we see
in this world, and will hearken to the harmony which it makes, we cannot but
come in mind of the maker of it, and admire and bless him. Reg. 3.10.
And as the queen of Saba when she saw the great works which Solomon had done,
and the excellent fine order of his house, and servants, admiring at it was so
ravished with astonishment, that she had noe longer spirit with admiring him;
so the soul of man may well be ravished with admiration to consider the power
and wisdom of that workman, who has builded the heavens as a house, but much
more admirable, and in a higher nature of workmanship then Salomons was, and
with a household of servants in better order then Solomon could devise for his.
We shall see contained in this house a number of creatures astonishing us with
strange and unspeakable varietys; some with being only, some with life, some
with sense, and some with reason: every one it is propper kind, and in its
propper office, with such parts and abilitys, as are necessary for the dew
performance of it: some of them incorruptible, others corrupting; and those
after a strange manner concealed from our understandings, when they are dead to
revive again to life, by the corruption of their seed. So from bodies we come
to spirits that govern them: and amongst spirits to some supreme cause, and
governor of them. All which if we will attend unto, we cannot but reflect
upon the workman that made it, and admire at his power and greatness. That
marvelous mother worthy of good men's memory, seeing all her sons but one to
have passed through cruel torments to the crown of martyrdom, and the
youngest of seven to be brought to execution with a manly courageexhorted him,
Match. 2.7.
saying I beseech thee my son that thou look up to heaven and earth and to
all things that are in them: and understand that God of nothing made them and
mankind. And Cicero says that there is nothing so manifest when we look up
to the heavens, Gi^ l. 2. de ^at. deer.
as that there is a divine power that made and governs them. Behold then
amongst visible creatures first the heavens, see their huge greatness and
capacity, containing not only a thousand and twenty two stars, which
astronomers have mentioned, but an innumerable number which they cannot
discern to reckon, and some of them may be thought to be a thousand times
bigger, then the whole globe of the earth: how exceeding great then must the
capacity of the heavens be to contain them all? Behold them of a nature
incorruptible, so solid and strong, that with that mighty violent motion,
which some of them have, they never break, nor corrupt nor wear away the
least hair breadth. See their great brightness, calmenes, and quietness, without
any noise at all in that violence of motion. Look upon the elements, the fire
next unto the starry heavens, under that the air, and then the waters, and the
earth: all of them of contrary natures; yet agreeing together in those
admirable effects, which we see to result of their concord, that all sublunary
productions depend not only of some one of them, but of them all.

Look now down unto the earth, and behold there the many kinds of living and
sensible creatures, and amongst them all one only endowed with reason, as the
Prince of the rest to order them, and he invested with such power and command,
that by nature they fear, and tremble at his voice. Behold them more in
particular, and first thy own soul a spiritual creature, which can move in
an instant to the furthest part of the earth, or of the heavens; and yet for
the present is bound to an earthly body whether it will or not. Consider then
the disposition of thy body, prepared as a seat sit to receive it, and with
parts convenient for its operations: and this not by its own reason, for that
it has none. Behold the many diverse natures of sensible creatures that move
themselves; some flying, some walking, some creeping, some swimming, all living
by the air, some on the earth, some within the earth, some in the fire, some
in the waters: all of them directed by some reason to love that which is good
for them, and congruous to their nature. Behold those creatures that live
without sense; trees, plants, flowers, and herbs, producing fruits with
admirable variety of tastes, smells, pleasant colors, and profitable effects,
to delight the senses of higher creatures which are sensible, and to serve
them. And lastly behold the earth with being only; yet susteining all living
things in the life which they have. All these have their limits set, their
perfections and operations, and are bound within them whether they will or not, and did not choose for themselves, but have only that which another would
give them. These are the testimonys which God has left of himself, and by
these testimonys we must confess the supreme power that caused all this, and
set it in that order which we see it to have. And therefore it is natural to
man when he looks up to the heavens, with gladness of heart to bless God: and
if we have a little bird, fly, flower, or any creature though never so
imperfect in our hands, and consider attentively the parts and composition of
it, reason presently tells us, that it could not make it self, and by nature
we bless God that made it.

Say now according to reason, and tell us who it was that made the heavens, and
gave them that huge vastness and capacity, more then we can think? that
brightness, calmenes, solidity, and incorruptibility? who gave to the elements
their mighty power by concord to produce those great effects? who gave to man
the principality over other creatures, and made them by nature to fear and
obey him? and who was that superior of mankind, that commanded his spiritual
and incorruptible soul to his corporal and corruptible body? what reason was
it that directed unreasonable things to that which is good for them? and made
those which are insensible to yield such pleasure, and profit to the senses?
and who gave to the earth, that has not life, power to conserve the lives of
other things? He that had power to do all this, we will confess him to be
God, and we will praise and bless him. For of themselves they could not be at
all, nor would have been with the imperfections which they have.

Here now reason is sufficiently satisfied, and the malice of man convinced,
that shall deny God. For the reason of every man of it self presently consents
(if by malice and liberty it be not forced to the contrary) unto some superior
power, that caused these things. And that power all though we cannot
comprehend it, because it is above us, and must needs be infinite in
perfection: but of what nature soever that supreme power be, meaning the
supreme we say God, and bless him.

All this is briefly formed out of S. Thomas and Aristotle after this manner.
Wheresoever we see motion and alteration in any thing, there we must grant a
cause of that motion and alteration: but we see motion and alteration in the
productions of creatures, which begin to be, and before were not; therefore we
must grant some cause of that motion, and alteration by which they are produced
and come to be. This does S. Thomas call a demonstration, and Aristotle with
the rest of Philosophers call it a Metaphysicall Evidence: that is to say an
evidence, which is not only deduced by Physical principles of nature; but that
the contrary contains repugnance in it self: and that it is the first
evident certainty, from which all natural evidences are deduced. And to
contradict it is either to say that all the world came by chance; or else to
run from cause to cause without end into insinites, which in substance
comes to be the same, noe cause at all being assigned. First the alterations
which we see can not come by chance: for there can be noe alteration without a
cause. Neither are the alterations which we call chances so called, because
they are without a cause, but because they are uncertain in their causes, as
might be manifested by examples, which were too long for this place. But this
answer is not to the purpose: for reason is now required, and reason requires
reason, and is not satisfied with chance; for that is to give noe reason at
all. To say that the productions of creatures proceed from infinite causes is a
greater absurdity, and indeed in terms an infinite ansurdity, as making an
infinite collection of men, and so of other creatures, succeeding one another
without beginning, yet euety man of this infinite collection to have had a
beginning and time to be conceived and disposed in.

But because I would keep within the capacitys of all, I will omit much
which might here be said, and say noe more but this, that if we should set up
such a succession of infinite effects from infinite causes, for ever producing
one another we should never come to the knowledge of any thing, nor assign
the cause of any thing, but still run into infinites. And by this very
reason did Aristotle although a Pagan acknowledge one supreme, omnipotent, and
eternal cause of all things, and all to have proceeded from him, to avoid
the absurdity, and repugnance of infinite causes, which otherwise he saw would
follow. Neither can there be any satisfaction to reason for this admirable
order and harmony which creatures make, but to come to one supreme power, and
highest reason which gave unto creatures their power and perfections in those
limits, and order, which we see them to have, that Astronomers can fore tell to
an instant the courses of the sun, moon, and other planets, and their
certain ecclypses many days before they come to pass; and that priests and
exorcists have power over the devils to command them in possessed persons to
those strange effects, which we see. None of which passages would profane men
believe, if they were not seen. Therefore we seeing such an order in natural
things, and also supernatural effects above nature we must of necessity grant
a supreme cause of nature, and supernatural power that dispenses with it,
when and as it pleases him: and that this power being that it limited all is
limited by none; but is without limits, one eternal and omnipotent God, in whom
and of whom all things are. And so the question is answered, and reason is
satisfied, having all that it desires, which is the rest of that motion, and
cause of that alteration which we see in creatures.

Thus by the light of reason God shows himself to us and calls us to serve
him: and if any man shall for harden his heart by sin, and the love of
liberty, as not to be moved with the general consent of all nations, with that
fear and feeling which he has of God, and with these plane and easy reasons,
he were rather to be looked upon as a monster sw^ruing from the nature of all
men, then to be esteemed as of the same nature and reason with them: and if he
have any sense of man lef^, is rather to be diswaded from vice by the reason
and natural auersion which he has from it, then to be dealt with by arguments.
And therefore I say noe more to such a man but this only word; let him fly vice
and follow a virtuous, and orderly life, as reason dictateth that he should;
and then noe doubt but within a while he shall both see the power of God in all
creatures, and also shall observe his divine providence, and goodness by many
occasions in particular to himself. For there is nothing that dulleth reason
and confounds it so much in us, as the much following of our own wills, and
long continuance in sin without repentance; nor is there any thing which
opens our understandings so much to reason, as the following of reason in
order, and goodness of life.

You shall see now in a word or two how the master of Philosophers has
discoursed of God by natural reason only. He seeing that some cause by reason
should be assigned of creatures, and not to leave them to chance, and
perceiving the absurdity and contradiction of running into infinite causes,
came to setle himself in one eternal and omnipotent God, as the first and
supreme cause of all things, and spoke very honorably and with great reverence
of him, giving him such titles as might declare his sovereign power and
eminent perfections above all, as having all things depending of him.
Sometimes he calls him ens entium the Being of beings some times Primum
Principium rerum omnium, Lib. demundo ad Alex.
The First Principle or Beginning of all things. Metaph. l. 12.
And speaking of the Intelligences, that move and guide the heavens, he
assirmeth one to be the head and Prince of all, whom he calls Deum, God, The
Supreme Governor of the world, and of all things. And in his books of
physics rebuking the dullnes of some in this point, he has these admirable
words. L. 2. Phys. c. 4.
Some there a^e who have referred the cause of all things to chance, which is
to be admired at in them; because affirming of sensible things and plants that
they are not by fortune; but that they come of some nature, or reason, or such
like cause: for that we have not any thing of every seed; but of such an one
an olive, and of such a man, and yet the heavens, and those which amongst
sensible things are more divine they will have to be by chance, and to have
noe cause. Thus did he discourse of God, acknowledging him to be the cause of
all, and the source and fountain of all perfections, from whence all goodness
sprang. He gave unto him the nature of a spirit, as more perfect, and free from
the imperfections of corporal substances, and confessed him to be infinite and
incomprehensible Neither does his doctrine of the worlds eternity disprooue his
authority for this. For as light is caused by the sun, and heat by fire, and
yet are allwais coexistent with their causes; so might he acknowledge God the
author and cause of the world, and for want of faith imagine that it was
eternally coexistent with him.

But if Aristotle discovered thus much of God and spoke so honorably of him
not having the light of faith, but only of natural reason. How much ought we
to love and serve him in the Catholic faith? Hier. 32.
O most strong, great, and mighty, the Lord of hosts is his name (says the
Prophet) great in council, and incomprehensible in cogitation: whose eyes are
open upon all the ways of the children of Adam, to render unto every one
according to his ways, and according to the fruit of his inventions. Let us
then that believe these words by faith, praise that blessed and powerful name,
that we may have in the end that reward which his goodness has prepared for
us. But we will speak a word or two

OF THE UNITY OF GOD.
IN the first article of the Creed we profess two things: One God.
to wit that we believe in almighty God, and secondly that we believe in one
God the maker of heaven and earth: for we do not say makers but the maker, to
signify unity. By the first atheism, and by the second paganism is rejected.
And the first being already so fully declared, it will not be needful to
insist much upon the second point, it being a verity which the wisest of pagane
Philosophers have by reason discovered, who have confessed one supreme and
first cause of all effects. And therefore S. Augustine reports of Seneca the
Philosopher, Aug de ciu. Decl 60.10.
that speaking of idols he used to say, that of custom they were adored, but
not of verity. Hear the words of S. Paul disputing with the learnedest pagans
of the world, the Philosophers of Athens, upon this point. Act. 17.
The God that made the world and all things that are in it, he being Lord of
heaven and earth dwells not in temples made with hand needing any thing:
where as himself gives life unto all, and breathing, and all things. If God
made the world and all things that are in it, he must then have all within his
power, all must depend, and stand need of him, and he himself must stand
need of nothing. He is not then a granen idol that stood need of men to
carue it, nor any living creature, as the dragon of Babylon, that stood need
of some to serve it with food; neither is he the Sun or moon that stood
need of some power to give it the limited perfections, which it has, as all
other creatures. God needs noe other God, for then he were not the first
beginning of all perfections, including all perfections within himself.

This is sufficient by natural reason of this verity. That which we believe in
the Catholic faith is, in one God the maker of heaven and earth, that is of
all creatures heavenly and earthly, and the consetuer of them: a spiritual
substance infinite in power, infinite in wisdom, infinite in goodness, infinite
in duration, immense in infinite places possible, and in all perfections
infinite. This we see by reason, and believe by faith. Deuteronomy. 6.
Hear Israel the Lord our God is one Lord which words, beside their divine
authority, have the highest degree of humane credit, as the most ancient and
authentical writings by consent of the greatest part of the world. Esa. 44.
Ephesians. 4.
I am the first and I the last, and beside me there is noe God. One Lord, one
faith, one baptism.

Men of more eminent dignity and authority as Priests, Men called Gods.
Prophets, Judges etc. are sometimes in holy scriptures called Gods, in respect
of their preeminency and authority over others, by which they represent the
divine power.

THE SECOND ARTICLE. And in Jesus Christ his only son our Lord.
Quest. Who is Christ? Answ. Christ is the son of God incarnated: true God,
and true man: our Redeemer, Judge, and Glorifyer.

ALL this we say in the Creed, when we profess our belief in lesus Christ
the only son of God, borne of the Virgin Mary Crucified for our Redemption,
that he shall come to judge us all, and that there is life everlasting, to wit
to those that are just through the merits of Jesus Christ. Thus this answer is
contained in the Creed. In the which we having first professed our faith in
God, as he created us, we profess him now in another mystery, to wit as he was
incarnated to redeem us: a mystery which we can never acknowledge with
sufficient gratitude. For the understanding of which we may reflect upon our
former condition and the misery out of which we are freed by it. Man was in
paradise in a happy state of spiritual and corporal delights, his soul was
in grace and favor with God, and his body had then the gift of immortality,
that without dying it should enjoy those pleasures for a time, and afterward
the glory of heaven for ever. He was warned only of one thing, and that was
to forbear one fruit of Paradise; which God to keep him in obedience, and due
subjection, had forbidden him to eat of. Genesis 2.
Of every tree of Paradise eat thou: but of the tree of knowledge of good, and
evil eat thou not. For in what day soever thou shall eat of it, thou shall
die the death. To wit the death of body and soul. Man forbore not, but eat of
that forbidden tree, and as soon as he eat of it his soul died instantly,
and his body from that time began to die. But the death of our souls being
indeed our true and greatest misery, God was moved with pity toward them,
and of his infinite mercy he decreed to revive them again to his divine grace
and favor. For this he sent his only son to be incarnated, that is to take
the flesh, and nature of man upon him; that in that nature he might make
satisfaction for the first sin which man had committed, and for the sins of
all men occasioned by it. And satisfaction being made by him, the wrath of God
might then cease against us, and we becoming his beloved children, and
friends, might serve him worthily, and obtain the bliss of heaven, which
before we had lost.

All the Persons of the Blessed Trinity, the Father, the Son, and the Holy
Ghost concurred equally to the effecting of this mystery, as having all one and
the same undivided power; but the work was effected in the Son only, the
second Person who was incarnated. Authors commonly declare this by the
similitude of two helping another to put on a garment. They all three concur
to the vesting of one of them, and one of them only is vested with the
garment. The garment in this mystery is the nature of man, with which the Son
of God only was vested; but the Father and Holy Ghost both concurred with him
to the putting on of that garment. And the Son of God being so vested, that
in Christ our nature was really united to him, we say truly that Christ our
Savior is true man, as consisting of two destinct natures, divine and humane.
According to his divine nature he proceeded eternally from God the Father;
according to his humane nature he proceeded in time from the blessed Virgin his
mother; and according to that nature he made satisfaction sufficient in it
self for the sins of all men that ever were, or shall be; and therefore we
call him out Savior and Redeemer; because all whosoever have been, or can be
saved, are saved by the merits of his Passion. He is our Judge, and in the
latter day shall judge us. He is our Glorifyer, for that by his merits our good
works become meritorious, and purchasing of glory. He is called Jesus (that is
to say Savior) not only because he is our Savior indeed, Jesus.
but also because it was his propper name, imposed not by chance, but by the
will and express commandde of his father; the Angel forespeaking it to the
blessed Virgin, when he said Behold thou shall conceive in thy womb, and s^alt
bear a son: Luc. 1.
and thou shall call his name Jesus. He is called Christ to signify his
dignity, and special functions according to his humanity: Christ.
for Christ is as much as to say, The Messiah or Anointed; and he was
annoinsed in diverse respects. Priests and kings are anointed, because they
have authority from God to represent his majesty. Prophets aunciently were
anointed, because they were the interpreters of God, and dispensers of divine
mysterys, as Priests and kings are also in their kind. Christ had all these
offices, and according to his humane nature he was Prophet, Priest, and king
after an eminent manner; and therefore he was eminently and singularly
anointed, not by the hands of Prophets, or Priests, but spiritually by God
himself. Ps 44.
Thou have loved justice and have hated iniquity: therefore God thy God has
anointed thee with the oil of gladness above thy fellows. God anointed
Christ; and Prophets, Priests, and kings are anointed as lesser Christ's that
have power under him. Christ showed himself a Prophet, actually prophesying
many things; and in particular the most remarkable passages of his own death
and resurrection. As priest he offered the most holy Sacrifice of his body at
the last supper and afterward again, he offered the same sacrifice of his
body upon the Cross. He also showed himself to be a king, and to have regal
power, that could bring kings to adore him, and that he could have brought
other kings, and all the kings of the world as well as them to his feet, if it
had pleased him. Besides, the Catholic Church is his kingdom, he is the head
and king of it, allwais with it unto the consummation of the world.

His only Son our Lord. The Apostles in the former article having professed
the Father, who is the first Person of the Blessed Trinity; now they profess
the second Person in Jesus Christ the Son of God. S. John testifying that
which is here professed, says, Io. 1.4.
We have scene and do testify that the Father has sent the Son, the Savior
of the world. And then presently he adds whosoever shall confess that Jesus
Christ is the Son of God, God abides in him and he in God. This all good
christians do testify, and confess: and for that end the Apostles made this
article, that we might allwais profess it. We will see here

CHRISTIANITY DEMONSTRATED.
THat which we believe and profess in this article, was allwais believed by
all true believers ever from the beginning of the world. All the quires of
Angels in their first creation foresaw, that the Son of God was to be
incarnated in lesus Christour Lord: and the good Angels willingly submitting to
him, and believing in him were saved by his precious blood. But Lucifer and the
wicked Angels could not endure to see the nature of man exalted to that high
dignity above Angels, that our nature should be assumed of God and not theirs;
which he could but would not assume: nowhere does he take Angels: (says S.
Heb. 2.
Paul) but the seed of Abraham he takes. This was the sin of Lucifer, that
ennuying and repining at the glory of humane nature in Jesus Christ, he drew
others into the same sin with him, and for aspiring to be above him in glory,
he was cast down into the depth of the lake, and lost that glory which he
might, and should have had, and which the good Angels have by submitting to the
divine ordination in it. This was believed by our first parents in paradise,
and ever since as I shall presently show. Christ was promised to them, and
after them to the following patriarks, and after the Patriarks to Prophets:
they delivered that faith to posterity until his coming, he when he came
delivered it to the Apostles, they to the Church, the Church by a continual
succession of Pastors has delivered it until our times, as it does now to us,
saying, I believe in God the Father almighty maker of heaven and earth, and in
Jesus Christ his only Son, our Lord. In this faith all miracles have been
wrought that ever were wrought in testimony of faith. This was confessed by
heaven, earth, seas, by living trees, and sensible beasts, and not only by
holy men, but even by the powers of hell; all the creatures of God obeying
Christ at his coming. This the Apostles saw, and were commanded by him to
speak it, and when they were forbidden by his enemies, Act. 4.
they answered we can not but speak the things which we have seen, and
heard; and would loose their lives, rather then they would cease from publicly
professing it. S. Paul who saw not the miraculous life of Christ with his
Disciples, nor heard his preaching; but was afterward called and enlightened
by him, became notwithstanding so assured of this verity, and by true charity
so united unto him, that he thought it was impossible for any torments to
separate him from him; Romans 8.
^ho then shall separate us from the charity of Christ? tribulation? or
distress? or famine? or nakedness? or danger? or persecution? or the sword?
(as it is written: for we are killed for thy sake all the day: we are esteemed
as sheep of slaughter) But in all these things we onercome because of him
that has loved us. For I am sure that neither death, nor life, nor Angels, nor
principalitys, nor powers, neither things present, nor things to come,
neither might, nor hight, nor depth, nor other creature, shall be able to
separate us from the charity of God, which is in Christ Jesus our Lord. S. Paul
was ravished and enamoured with the beauty of Christ's divinity, and was
transformed as it were by love into him, confessing him to be the image of the
visible Go^. Colos. 1. Heb. 1.
The first borne of all creature by whom he made the worlds, being the
brightness of his glory and the sigure of his substance. Whom the Angels adore
so much more excellent then themselves, as he has inherited a more excellent
name above them. For to which of the Angels (says this holy Apostle) did he
say at any time Thou art my Son to day have I begotten thee? Colos 2.
in wh^m dwells all the fulness of the Godhead corporally. All this did S.
Paul say and profess of Christ. It was then noe marvel that with Gods grace
he would defend him till death. Thus did the Apostles profess of him; and
this profession they made good by many miracles, which the enemies of
christianity have written of and confessed. This the posterity of the Apostles
have allwais professed in former ages and have stretched forth their hands and
feet upon racks, and with cheerful minds have yielded their bodies into the
hands of torturers, to use their own wills, and to fulfill their desires upon
them by what torments they would; rather then to forsake the faith of Jesus
Christ: and thousands of thousands of faithful christians, gathered together
in the Catholic Church, are now ready with them in the same manner to profess
it. But we will honor Christ, and comfort good christians, by declaring the
testimonys which God has given of him.

We have of Christ two kinds of divine testimonys. First by divine scriptures,
and secondly by his miraculous works. We will hear first what the scriptures
testify of him. When the mystery of the Incarnation was fullfilled, and Christ
came into the world, there were then in all the world but two only religions,
or divine worships professed: to wit the religion of the Jews, who worshipped
one eternal, and omnipotent God: and the religion of the Gentiles or Pagans
adoring many Gods. And the worship of one God being in the first article settled
for true, and the worship of many Gods rejected by the Apostles for false, it
follows that the people of the Jews were then the people of God, whom he had
chosen to be truly honored amongst. Secondly it follows that the Jews
having then the true faith and divine worship, whatsoever they then believed
was true, and that they then believing in Christ as to come he was then indeed
to come; and whatsoever they believed of him then as future, the same we are to
believe of him as past; and whatsoever the scriptures received by them (which
are the old Testament (have declared of him, that is allwais to be believed as
of divine authority, and as spoken by the word of God, who dictated those
scriptures, for the government of the world in the true worship of him.

Now the holy scriptures of the old testament deliver so planely the coming
of a Messiah, or (which is all one) a Christ to redeem the world, that all
whosoever receive those scriptures do still confess it. For it is the maine
butte, and prime scope of the old Testament, to show that Christ was promised
from the beginning to the Patriarks, and revealed from time to time to the
Prophets, that the world might expect him then to come; as it is the butte and
scope of the new Testament to declare him to the world to be already come. And
as the new Testament describes all over the joy of the faithful in enjoying
him; so did the old testament comfort the faithful then with the expectation
and hopes of him. First his coming was signified even at first in paradise in
terror to the serpent who had caused our sin, when our Lord threatening him
with an enemy that should come against him said, I will put enmitys bet^ixt
thee and the woman, Genesis 3.
and thy seed and the seed of her: she shall bruize thy head in pieces, and
thou shall ly in wait of her heel. Christ was by this mysteriously denoted,
God then declaring that the enmity of mankind with the serpent was to be
especially betwixt him and the seed of a woman: by which it is signified that
Christ the Redeemer of the world and the serpents greatest enemy should be
particularly the seed of a woman; and is not there said to be of the seed of
a man; because he was to be conceived and borne of a Virgin mother, without the
help of man. And this was the prerogative of the Savior of the world that the
sin of mankind being first occasioned by a woman; he that was to be the death
and destruction of sin should be by the power of God of woman's seed only,
without man. The same was delivered by revelation to the Patriarks, and
Prophets afterward; and they did not only declare it to posterity; but also
described the manner of the accomplishment of it. Esa. 9.
A little child is borne to us and a son is given to us and principality is
made upon his shoulder: and his name shall be called Marvelous, Counselor,
God, Strong, Father of the world to come, The Prince of peace And in another
place the same Prophet describes the circumstances of his coming among the
Jews Arize be illuminated Jerusalem: Esa. 60.
because thy light is come etc. upon thee shall our Lord arize, and his glory
shall be seen upon thee. And the Gentiles shall walk in thy light, and kings
in the brightness of thy rizing. Lift up thine eyes round about and see, all
these are gathered together to thee. Thy sons shall come from a far, and
thy daughters shall rize from the side. Then shall thou see, and abound, and
thy heart shall marvel and shall be enlarged, when the multitude of the sea
shall be converted to thee the strength of Gentiles shall come to thee. Here it
is foretold that the Messiah should come amongst the Jews, under the dominion
and command of Jerusalem; the coming of kings to acknowledge his power, and
the conversion of the Gentiles, who by multitudes far and near, should
receive the light of his doctrine, and obey him our Lord. But I need not
stand to allege scriptures for the coming of the Messiah, for it is inferred
by that which I have said already, that the Jews who had then the true
worship of God believed it, and it shall appear by many places of the
scriptures, which I shall afterward allege. Neither is there any difference
betwixt that which the people of God believed of him by those scriptures before
his coming, and that which the faithful now believe of him since his coming,
but only in the diversity of times; they being before and we after him, they
believing in him as to come and expecting of him, we having received the joy of
his coming. They were not then called Christians although they believed in
Christ; because they were but one nation, and people of the Israelits
consisting of diverse tribes, and took their denomination of Ie^^es from the
^ribe of Judah, which was the chief tribe, and of which it was foretold that
the Messiah should come. But after his coming when the true faith and divine
worship was not confined to one only nation; but was enlarged unto other
nations and made common to all, then all tru^ believers began to be called by
the Apostles Christians, Act. 11.
as by a name which abstracted from all nations to those who believed in Jesus
Christ, the true Messiah, and Redeemer of the w^rld. So th^^ all true
believers have allw^is believed in Christ, as the Israelits or People of the
Jews did immediately before his coming, and as now we do.

But when Jesus Christ our Savior came into the world, and preached his
heavenly doctrine amongst the sewes, a People wholly drowned in sin, and given
to pride, and desires of this world; he abstaining from their evil ways,
rebuking their vices, and exhorting them to virtue, and contempt of the world,
without giving any hopes of temporal riches and glory; but only of spiritual
blessings, and such felicitys as were to be expected in the world to come; they
despised him, and easily finding out ways to delude their scriptures, and
hardening their hearts against his powerful miracles, by which he proved
himself to be the Son of God, and the Savior of the world, they made it a
blasphemy in him to say so, and sought in private to have killed him; but that
not prevailing, for that the scriptures had otherwise foretold his death; they
publicly apprehended him, and delivered him to the Gentiles accusing him, and
procuring sentence of death to pass against him, and to be openly executed in
the sight of the world: and so the scriptures were fullfilled in that which
they had foretold of him, and which he also had foretold of himself. And
although they knew also of his resurrection again, and that testified even by
their own witnesses; yet they continued obstinate in malice against him, and
contradicting the doctrine which he taught, have ever since for these sixteen
hundred of years in vain expected, and still expect another Christ to come to
redeem them.

Here we have two things to declare. First that Christ the Messiah foretold
and promised by the scriptures was to be true God: and secondly that Jesus
Christ our Savior was indeed the true Messiah, whom the scriptures foretold
and promised. And although the mir^^es which our blessed Savior wrought were
sufficient to prove this doctrine to be true, he declaring himself both to be
the Son of God, and the promised Messiah; yet I will briefly allege some
places of scriptures to show that the promised Messiah was to be true God. Say
to the faint hearted: Esa. 35.
take courage, and fear not: (says the Prophet Esaias) behold your God shall
bring revenge of retribution: God himself will come and will save you. Then
shall the eyes of the blind be opened, and the ears of the deaf shall be
open. Then shall the lame leap as a heart, and the tongue of the dumb shall be
opened. Here the Prophet says planely that God himself should come to save
us, and foretells the miracles which were to be wrought at his coming, and
by which he was to prove himself, as Jesus Christ our Savior did.

The Prophet Hieremy has declared this most conuincingly against the enemies of
Christ. Behold the days come, says our Lord: Hier. 23.
and I willraise up to David a just branch: and he shall reign a king etc. And
this is the name that they shall call him: THE LORD OUR JUST ONE. Here the very
Jews confess that the Prophet speaks of the Messiah, who was to come of
David's race as of the most eminent man, by which the tribe of Judah (of which
Christ was to be borne) was advanced to regal dignity, and of which many kings
after David did succeed. And by these words he is manifestly declared to be
true God: for where the Prophet says, that he should be called our Lord the
just one the hebrew text has the word, terragrammaton, by which God named
himself to Moses, and which is understood by all, as the most proper name of
God, never used to signify any other but the true, eternal, and omnipotent
God. And the people of the Jews have that word in such reverence that as
unutterable they will not name it, nor read it in the scriptures, but read
Adonai insteede of it, which the Septuagint interpreters expound Lord.

The Prophet Michaeas declares in particular his proper procession by which he
proceede^h eternally, as the Son of God from his eternal Father. Mi^h. 5.
And thou Bethleem, Eprata, art a live one in the thousands of Judah: out of
thee shall come forth unto me he that shall be the dominatour in Israel: and
his coming forth from the beginning, from the days of eternity. Where we have
two processions in the Messiah: the one eternal, as he was the Son of God
proceeding from the Father; the other temporal; as he proceeded man of the
Virgin M^^y and was borne in Bethleem called Ephrata to destinguish it from
another Bethleem in the tribe of Zahulon. Thus would God ordain that the holy
scriptures of the old Testament should foreshew, and declare the divinity of
Christ, which the Apostles profess in this article.

Now we show how that Jesus Christ our Savior was the true Messiah of whom the
scriptures foretold, and whose divinity they declared. Christ proo^ed by
scriptures.
It was necessary that holy scripture should so far declare the
circumstances of the Messiah his coming as that the world might have
sufficient signs and tokens to know him by when he came, and that the Jews
amongst whom he was to come, receiving those scriptures, might by the same
scriptures receive him, or be inexcusable if they received him not; and
therefore our Savior admonished them saying search the scriptures. Io. 5.
For you think in them to have life everlasting; and the same are ^^ey that
gine testimony of me. The testimonys of the scriptures, by which they testify
the circumstances of the Messiah his coming to agree to our Savior Jesus
Christ, are so many, that I once thought to have mentioned none of them; but
only to have showed the divine testimony of his doctrine by the miracles which
he wrought; yet I will take something out of authors for this also, and
especially out of Lyra commented upon by Burgensis: and note by the way that
this Burgensis had been himself a learned Jew, borne of the tribe of Leui and
brought up in the study of that sect; but discovering the many sleights, and
impostures which are used by them, after a long conflict with himself,
resolved in the end to become a christian, and accordingly with his whole
family he received in baptism the faith of Christ. After some years he was
made bishop of Burgos in Spain, and became an eminent prelate in the Church of
God, and wrote his commentarys upon Lyra, in which he has well testified his
zeal of the Catholic faith.

First by the circumstances which the scriptures deliver as tokens of Christ
the Messiah, it appears that he is already come. The Prophet Esaias speaking
of the land of Jury which was to bring him forth, Esa. 66.
says, that before she traueled she brought forth, before her time came to be
delivered she brought forth a man child. In all that Chapter he speaks of the
Messiah his coming; and according to the Chaldaike traslation those words are
to be understood of his coming before the destruction of Jerusalem, when the
land of Jury felt as it were, the pangues of a woman in child birth in that
desolation, and deluge of sorrows, which then came upon her: and it is as much
as to say that the land of Jury should bring forth the Messiah after a strange
manner, not after the ordinary course of women, who have joy after their
delivery; but on the contrary the pains of delivery after her bringing forth
of him: and so it happened with them in the coming of Christ: for after his
coming when they should have received him and rejoiced in his birth, then came
their sorrows for rejecting and denying him, to the extreme misery of Jury and
Jerusalem, and utter dispersion of that people. And it is to be observed that
this Chaldaike translation is esteemed of by the Jews for the most
authentical translation which they have; in so much that they place it with
their scriptures in another column over against the text, that they may have
it ready at hand for the understanding of the scriptures. So that the pains
of the land of lury being already past in the destruction of Jerusalem, about
sixteen hundred years since, and Christ the Messiah being brought forth
before it; it follows that he must then have been come; and therefore it is a
most extreme obstinacy in the Jews, and those that receive those scriptures,
that seeing these things to have come to pass they do not seek after
Christ, who came in those times, and with so many miracles and mysterys
preached his gospel.

But the Prophet Daniel foretells the time of his coming. He setting
himself to pray carnestly to God in fasting, sackcloth, and ashes, for the
redemption of the Israelits out of the captivity of their enemies in which then
they were, obtained not only his desire; but also more then he prayed for: and
that was that an Angel of God should appear unto him, and reveal both the
redemption of the Israelits, out of that particular captivity of the
Babylonians; and also the time when the general Redeemer of the world should
come. Dan. 9.
Seauenty weeks are abbridged upon thy people, and upon thy holy city that
preuarication may be consummate, and sin take an end, and iniquity be
abolished: and everlasting justice be brought, and vision be accomplished, and
prophecy: and the Holy one of Holys be anointed. Know therefore and mark: from
the going forth of the word, that Jerusalem be built again unto Christ the
Prince, there shall be seven weeks, and sixty two weeks, and the street
shall be built again, and the walls in straitness of the times. And after
sixty two weeks Christ shall be flaine: and it shall not be his people, that
shall deny him. These weeks of years which the Angel here assigns for the
coming of Christ the Messiah, make in all four hundred and ninety years:
about which very time our blessed Savior came, preached his gospel, and
suffered death; and there was none else that came about that time, that can be
thought to be the promised Messiah, the Holy of Holys that was slain, and whom
noe people should deny. And after whatsoever manner these weeks of years be
understood, they must long since hane expired

The Prophet Aggaeus describes these circumstances of the Messiah his coming.
Agg. 2.
As yet there is one little while and I will move the heaven, and the earth, and
the sea, and the dry Land. And I will move all nations: and the desired of all
nations shall come: and I will fill this house with glory etc. Great shall he
the glory of this last house, more then of the first. By which it appears
that Christ the Messiah was to come in the time of the second Temple, which is
now long since destroyed; to wit a few years after the Passion of our blessed
Savior: and therefore he, or else some other of those times was Christ the
desired of all nations, and promised by these scriptures; but there is none else
that is or can be pretended to be he: for although S. John Baptist was taken by
the Jews to be he; yet they presently left that conceit, when they saw him to
submit unto Christ, as his inferior, and to acknowledge him whom they would
not receive. Therefore Christ our Savior was Christ ^he Messiah, of whom this
Prophet was inspired here to speak. Furthermore the other tokens by which the
Prophet here foresheweth the coming of Christ the Messiah, agree punctually to
our blessed Savior. First the heavens were moved by diverse strange
apparitions which authors mention to have been seen against his coming: as by
the miraculous star which appeared to the wisemen, and conducted them to the
astonishment of Herod, and all Jerusalem. The sea and the earth were then
moved, when all the subjects of the Roman Empire repaired to their native
places, to have their names enrolled; as though of purpose that the B. Virgin
Mary might go from Nazareth to Bethleem, the place where the Savior of the
world, according to the Prophets, was to be borne. Which motion being general
in all the vast dominions of the Romans, was most remarkable and so great
and strange a motion both by scaand land, as until then the world had never
seen nor could see; and therefore most worthy to be noted. But it was a more
fearful motion of the earth, that, which Josephus relareth to have happened
against the coming of Christ. Ios l. 1. de bell Iud.
He says that there was then in Jury such a terrible carthquake, that the
neighboring countries thought that all the inhabitants of it had been utterly
destroyed and not one man of them left alive. As for that which the Prophet
says of the last house, that is to say thesecond Temple, which was then
inbuilding, that it should be greater in glory then the first, which Solomon
builded, it declares and confirms all the rest: for it can not be
understood that the second Temple should excel the first in external glory;
because in that it was far inf^^riour unto it; as appeared by the ancients of
Isra^^, who remembering the first, wept to see the second in its beginnings so
far short of it: it was but half as high and in workmanship, riches, and
external beauty not comparable to it. It was indeed more glorious in this,
and more to be honored, that the Savior of the world honored it with his
personal and corporal presence, coming in the time of the second, and being by
our blessed lady presented in it, and having preached, and wrought miracles at
it, and kept the obseruances of it. Thus did the son of God and eternal
wisdom, of whom Solomon was but a figure, hon^^ it and render it more glorious
then Solomon could do the former. Deny this to the second Temple, and you make
it in all things inferior to the first.

He now that should think to satisfy all these scriptures concerning the time,
circumstances, and signs, by which they have foreshewed the coming of the
Messiah, by saying that he is all-ready come, and came about that time in which
our B. Savior came, but does not yet manifest himself to the world, but lies
hidden, and unknown, retired up in the Caspian mountains, or that he lives
privately at Rome, as a lepar, or that he wandereth about the world from
country to country (as the commune saying is of the wandering Jew, and perhaps
from hence derived that some Jews have affirmed this of their Christ his
wandering until the time of his manifestation come,) he that shall say this
may feign what he will, and shows planely thathe seeks but todelude the
divine scriptures, and regards but little the good of his soul, which he will
hazard by such vain fictions which neither he, nor any other knows of,
obstinatly invented against the light of his own scriptures, and against the
gospel of Jesus Christ, planely fullfilling them in the sight, and to the
notice of the whole world. But this siction of some Jews was forbidden and
suppressed presently by the rest.

Many other testimonys have the scriptures given of our Savior Jesus Christ.
First they often declare that Christ the Messiah, and Redeemer of the world
should come of the tribe of Judah, and of the house of David: Dan. 7.
which is so certainly verifyed in our blessed Savior, that his enemies as
yet could never question it. Esa. 7.
They declare that he should be borne of a Virgin: that he should come forth of
Bethleem: Mich 5.
that kings should present him with gifts: Ps. 71.
that a messenger should go before him to prepare his ways; the voice of one
crying in the desert prepare the way of our Lord: that he should cure, blind,
deaf, Mal. 2. and ^sa. 4. ^sa. 35.
dumb, and lame: that he should come meek poor, and more particularly riding
on an ass. Zach. 9. Ps 40. Zach. 11.
That he should be despised by his own servant, and that his price should be
thirty pieces of syluar: Esa. 35. Esa. 53.
that he should be reputed amongst the wicked: that he should become the most
abject of men, a man of sorrows: that he should be carried as a lamb to the
slaughter, Ps. 21.
without opening of his mouth: Ps. 68.
that his garments should be divided by lot: that gall and vinagre should be
given him to drink. These and many more things would God have to be foretold
in the divine scriptures of Christ the Messiah to come. All which agree so
planely to our Savior Jesus Christ that they need noe application.

He that would see what the Sybills have prophesied, and what other authors of
the Gentiles have written of him, may reed the Spiritual Directory, Broughtons
Ecclesiastical History or the Holy Court; but I have showed it already by a
better testimony of the divine word, and will therefore omit those inferior
authoritys.

Now we will declare the faith of Christ by his works, and show by them that
his words were true when he said, Io. 5.
the very works which I do give testimony of me. First the manner of calling
his Apostles, in the beginning of his gospel, and miracles, and their st^ange
readiness in following, and obeying of him, show that the power of God was
planely with him: and that he had power over their hearts. They knew him not
when he called of them; and some of them before then had never seen him. He
was to the eye a poor man, that had nothing to give them, nor any means of
preferment for them; nor yet what with all to maintain them; and nevertheless
he only calling of them, without any delay or demurr^ at all, or without
obiecting, or questioning of any thing, they left all they had, and presently
followed him. He showed in this his power over them, and that he had the hearts
of men in his hands, to draw them unto him. He was of that sanctity of life,
that his enemies have confessed and admired it. He was full of charity to all,
and of humility, patience, mildness, and other virtues; so^ meek and truly
loving to his enemies, that in the midst of all those great ignominys, false
accusations, grievous and unspeakable pains which they put him unto, he
uttered not the least word of disdain against them; but even then in his heart
he waspittying of them and fell to his prayers, praying earnestly to his Father
for them, and cordially excused them in what he could. Nor did he offer to
resist or let others to do it for him; allthough he showed planely that by
many means he could have defended himself. With these and the like virtues he
planted first his gospel. He confirmed it also with many miracles which he
wrought, giving health to the sick, sight to the blind, hearing to the deaf,
speech to the dumb, and restoring the dead to life again. And he confirmed
the miracles of his life by his glorious resurrection when he was dead? Who
ever heard the like to this? Christ confirmed his doctrine with a most eminent
sanctity of life; he confirmed again the verity of his doctrine, and fanctity
of life by as plane miracles as any can be; and to confirm all this, he
promised that within three days after his death, he would raise himself
again to life, and he performed it All this our blessed Savior did, to draw
us to him, and especially to the jews to bring them to receive his doctrine,
and to believe in him; or else that they might be inexcusable, if they believed
not. We read of diverse wicked men, who by false delusions have gone about to
prove their errors; but the holiest of men that ever were never showed the
like sanctity, nor wrought such miracles as our Savior wrought, nor concluded
them with their resurrection from the dead. This would the Son of God
particularly reserve to himself to confirm that gospel which he was to
preach, and to make manifest his divine, and sovereign power, that he was the
author of life and death. Mahomet indeed had many ways by false impostures
to delude his soldiers; but being once dead his power was at an end. In his
life time he showed himself an Anti Christ to Christ, prowdly extolling
himself above the Son of God, and promised to his followers that he would
rize again from the dead; but as I say he being once dead, his power was at an
end, and his promise vanished away with him. His promise was to rize again to
the world eight hundred years after his death; and although he took so long
a space for it; yet now that space is run, and eight hundred years being
past long since, Mahomet is still as dead as he was, and we have noe newse of
his rising again. The whole world was witness of our Savior Christ his
death, thousands of people saw what he suffered, and beheld his death upon the
Cross; and the third day after he roze again to life, and made his enemies the
witnesses of his resurrection.

But we will insist a little longer upon this point of our blessed Saviors
resurrection: for it is a most material, and maine ground of the Apostles in
their preaching, for the foundation of the christian faith and conversion of
Insidels; as may be seen all over in their acts and Epistles. S. Act. 13.
Paul preaching Christ to the Synagogues when he had showed his descent
according (to the divine promise) from the Patriarks, he concludes all with
the testimony of his resurrection, and repeateth it over again, Urging it as
by reason a most efficacious motive and conuincing argument fully to satisfy
their understandings, and to draw them to believe in him. First Christ would
so notify the mystery of his resurrection in his life time, as that his very
enemies might stand in expectation afterward to see the performance of it; and
that by it he might not only encourage his disciples and reinforce, them who
as faint hearted soldiers had forsaken him in his Passion; but also that it
might serve as a testimony to the world of the verity of his doctrine, and that
his sufferings were voluntarily undergone, and of his own good will; that so
the scandal of the Cross might be taken away, and all seeing his power might
believe in him. And therefore he spoke of it, and promised it first whilst he
lived, and would in his Passion be publicly accused of it, until he had made
it so known, that the Priests of the Jews and Pharisees hearing ofit, might
labor all they could to hinder it, and that all their labor might appear to
be in vain. When therefore they had gotten their malice fullfilled and
according to their desire had procured his death, they came together to Pilate,
and said Sir, Mat. 27.
we have remembered, that the seducer said yet living, after three days I will
rize again. Command therefore the sepulcher to be kept until the third day:
least perhaps his disciples come, and steal him away, and say to the people,
he is rizen from the dead etc. And Pilate said you have a guard: g^e, guard him
as you know. And they departing, made the sepulcher sure; sealing up the stone,
with watchmen. Thus would Christ have his resurrection to be taken notice of,
and to be opposed before it came to pass, and would permit his enemies to use
what means they could to prevent and hinder it, or to conceal it. But what is
man to compare with God? or who can hinder the divine ordinance? by these
means the resurrection of Christ became better testified, and was made more
apparent afterward when he made good his word and performed it. On the third
day early in the morning the devout women being come to the monument, Mat. 28.
Behold there was made a great earth quake. For an Angel of our Lord descended
from heaven: and coming rolled back the stone and sat upon it: and his
countenace was as lightening: and his garment white as snowand for fear of him
the watchmen were affrighted and became as dead. And the Angel answering said
to the women fear not you. For I know that you seek Jesus that was Crucified.
He is not here for he is rizen as he said. Come and see the place where our
Lord was laid. All these things the watchmen were made witnesses of, and
testified them to the chief Priests; who consulting together gave them a great
sum of money, to say that his disciples had come by night, and had stolen him
away when they were a sleep: and promised to them that if the President should
come to hear of it, they would persuade him and secure them. Who
notwithstanding would not be persuaded by them; but taking the particular
examination of it from the watchmen themselves, informed Caesar of the truth of
it; and by his information, and other motives the Emperor was so moved in
affection toward Christ that he proposed in the senate for divine honor to be
given to him by the Romans: and being offended that he obtained it not, he
protected those that were devoted unto him, and commanded under pain of death
that none should hinder their devotion.

But Christ would not leave his resurrection with these only, although
sufficient testimonys of the good women, and evil watchmen; but would appear
alive unto many more, and remained forty days after it upon earth, that by
many apparitions, in which he often showed himself, he might give sufficient
proof of it. Mar. 16.
We have how that first he appeared to Mary Magdalene, after that to two
disciples going to Emaus, after that to all the disciples together, except
Thomas, who then was not with them, after that to them all again when Thomas
was with them, and permitted him to be incredulous of his resurrection, and not
to believe the rest of the Apostles affirming it, that he might both see him
and feel him to be rizen again, and should confess him in those
circumstances to be his Lord and his God. Cor. 1.15.
And S. Paul mentions to the Corinthians how that he appeared to more then
five hundred brethren together. Thus would our Savior take still more and more
witnesses of his resurrection before that he would ascend into heaven, Act. 1.
s^ewing himself alive after his Passion by many arguments. For he was seen,
heard, felt, and did eat with the living. And the mystery of his resurrection
was so manifest, and certain, that all our Evangelists in their ghospels
would record it, without fear of either Jew or Gentil disproouing them in it;
and so certain that Josephus the best historiographer of those times, and who
flouri^hed immediately after them could not with his honor (although a Jew)
question the truth of it or omit to speak of it; but has recorded it for
true amongst the public and remarkable things that then happened, commonly
known, and unquestioned; and has left in his history this worthy saying of
Christ. There was in these times Jesus a wise man if it be lawful to call him
a man; Iosl 18. antiquit. c. 6.
for he was a worker of miraculous things, and a teacher of those that desired
the truth, and adjoined unto himself many both of the Jews and Gentiles. This
was Christ: him did Pilate crucify at the accusation of the chief of our
nation. But those that lou^d him yet forsook him not: for ^e appeared again
unto them the third day alive. Because the Prophets by the inspiration of God
foretold these and other innumerable miracles of him. In which words of this
author is contained the sum of all that which I have said of the miracles of
Christ: to wit that he confirmed his doctrine with miracles, and his miraculous
life by his resurrection from the dead: the Prophets being inspired to foretell
these things of him.

And as Christ himself first founded the gospel of our belief in the
fanctity of his own life and miracles; The Apostles preaching.
so also would he have the same faith to be propagated afterward by the
sanctity and miracles of his Apostles. First their holiness of life was
admitable even to their enemies. They were contented with shame, poverty,
hungar, cold, heat, imprisonment, banishment, whipps, and all kind of
disgraces, and crueltys, that they might honor Christ and enjoy him. And so
willingly did they suffer without ever repenting them of that which they had
done for Christ's sake; that after persecution they still began again to
preach him; carrying his gospel from place to place, and proclaiming it
amongst all sorts of people, not fearing the barbarousnesse of any, but
condemning all danger and laboring incessantly, reiovced to suffer for him.
They maintained the gospel of Lesus Christ with such reasons, force of
spirit, and miracles, that being themselves unlearned, they confounded the
learnedest of the world. All were astonished at the hearing of them, the fame
of their preaching ringing in all places. They confounded the Jews, silenced
the oracles of the idols; and with in a few years they filled the world with a
numberless number of constant christians. And this they did not by force of
arms, making of seditions, or raising of partys to defend their cause, or to
increase their number; but with humility and patience. Thus did the faith of
Christ begin in the virtue and power of God; and not as idolatry and
Turcisme, by the power and command of the sword, forcing of people to their
obedience. It began in litlenes, poverty, humility and patience, and
increased as a grane of mustarde seed into a goodly tree: having noe Princes
or potentates of the earth to protect or to countenance it, noe men of
learning, eloquence or humane policy, to draw others unto it; but of such
learning and eloquence as God infused into them. God spoke in their mouths, and
with their hands: and God so speaking the proud of the world came down to
their doctrine and became humble christians, the rich of the world contemned
riches, the followers of vice began to love virtue, and a happy change was
seen in the world by them. They had to contest with Princes, Judges, Priests,
Magistrates, Philosophers, artificers, and all sorts of people, who as their
enemies maintained their ancient rites and Privileges against them Yet these
poor and ignorant men kept still the christian faith on foot, and maugre all
the power which their enemies had, the more they opposed it, the more God
increased it, and the number of the faithful was daily augmented: that their
enemies of all ranks and manner of callings in the end were contented to join
with them, and to hazard their titles, dignitys and profits, and to forsake
their own wills, and lives to obey Christ. This was most miraculous; even as
much as the miracles which they wrought, and as planely testifyeth the power of
God to have brought these things to pass.

After the Apostles the same faith of Christ was still continued by others,
whom God raised as Apostles to succeed them; and to whom he gave the same
spirit with sanctity of life, and power of miracles to defend it. And is at
this day professed and defended by missions of Priests and religious men, who
go as Apostles to preach the faith of Christ (as I have seen in Spain every
year) for the most part to be sent unto the strange and rude people of the
Indias for their conversion) and by so many miracles make good that which they
preach, that it were a madness to question all those things which God has
wrought by them.

And even here amongst us unworthy we see by continual experiences the power
which Christ promised to his Apostles of casting forth devils, Exorcismes.
to be practisedby christian Priests with good success; the powers of hell
tre^bling at the name of Christ, are forced whether they will or not to yield
possession when they areco^manded by it. And to attribute this unto art magic
by the co^mande of greater devils over the less, is that desperate refuge
which the Jews used against Christ himself, Mat. 12.
saying that in Beelzebub Prince of the devils he did cast forth devils; and
which was commonly objected against the Apostles by their enemies, and can not
be true. First for that the exorcismes of the Church are not done against the
lesser devils only, but with the greatest opposition, hatred, and despite that
possible may be against the greatest and all the devils of hell; over whom
there is none but God, that has supernatural power. Secondly the kingdom of
the devils is not so divided, as that any of them should do good or hinder
evil except they be forced unto it by the power of God; yet by christian
exorcists they are often forced to many things amongst Infidels to the
destruction of infidelity and heresy, and amongst christians of evil life to
the hinderance and confusion of sin: which the devils with all their power
would maintain. Thirdly if we might attribute that which is done to the
extirpation of infidelity, heresy, and confusion of sin, or for some good
end, to any other but the power of God; we should never acknowledge, nor could
ever destinguish the power of God at any time to be exercized over the devils;
although we saw them never so much forced, and never so good effects to
proceed of it; but might attribute goodness to the author of evil. And this
was that manifest conuincing argument with which our Savior answered to the
Pharisys, when they made this very objection against him If I in Beelzebub cast
forth devils, Mat. 12.
your children in whom do they cast out?

We have then for the comfort of christians christianity demonstrated by the
holy scriptures of the old testament and the miracles of Christ, and of the
Apostles, and of the continually succeeding and now being Church of Christ.

That which he taught and confirmed by miracles was, that he was the Son of
God, the author of life, the promised Messiah and Savior of the world. This
the Apostles preached after him: and this we now preach in the Catholic
Church, Act. 4.
and say with S. Peter neither is there any other name under heaven given to
men, where in we must be saved but in the ever blessed name of Jesus: in him we
bless and honor God, professing him in the Creed to be his only Son our
Lord. As the Son of God he is true God, infinite in all perfections, equal
with the Father, and the Holy Ghost, and the very same in nature and essence
with them: according to which nature the Apostles in this article profess him
our Lord. According to his humane nature he is also our Lord; for that his
humane nature being united to the divine, was exalted in dignity, and made
superior unto all creatures, and had power above all men and Angels. Mat. 28.
All power (says he) is given to me in heaven and earth. Christians that
believe in Jesus Christ, and carry in their name the name of him ought very
much to honor themselves in it, and to imitate him. In baptism they have
renounced the works of Satan to put on the armor and follow the warrfarre of
Christians: and then they received, as also in the other Sacraments, the
soldiers garment of divine grace, their sins being forgiven them by the
merits of Christ. Let us then as his soldiers, and servants serve him, and
resist his enemies. Let all the world open their eyes and hearts to his divine
power, and if they have any feeling of God, or desire to have it, and will
consider the works which he has done, and suffered, noe doubt but they shall
see and confess that which his very enemies confessed; who having seen the
passages of his death went away, Mat. 27.
saying, Indeed this was the Son of God. Let them believe and profess this
in the true Church of Christ, and let neither life nor death, nor the love of
any creature ever be able to separate them from it. But there remains yet to
show which of all christian Churches is the true Church of Christ. This by Gods
grace I shall show in the exposition of the ninth article; where I shall
destinguish the Catholic Church from all false Churches. Now we will go on to

THE THIRD ARTICLE.
WHO was conceived by the Holy Ghost, The attributes of the B. Trinity.
borne of the Virgin Mary. Although the mystery of the Incarnation be
attributed here only to the Holy Ghost, as though Christ were conceived by his
only power; yet we are not to think that it was done by him only without the
Father, and the Son. For this is a rule without exception in the mystery of
the blessed Trinity, that all the external works of God, to wit those which he
does in respect of creatures, are done indiuisibly by all the Persons of the B.
Trinity; because their power is all one indivisible power in them: and so the
Conception of our Savior was done by the same power of the Father and of the
Son, and of the Holy Ghost. And to say here that Christ was conceived by the
Holy Ghost is the same as to say, that his conception was by the power, and
special gift of God, after a supernatural and not after a natural manner. It
is here attributed particularly to the holy ghost by reason of the great love
and bounty of God which he showed in it. For although all the divine
perfections be equally commune to all the Persons of the B. Trinity; yet some
certain titles or attributes there are, which are used as propper and
particular to them severally. So we attribute power to God the Father; because
the Son, and the Holy Ghost proceed from him. We attribute wisdom to the
Son; because he proceeds from the Father by way of understanding. We
attribute goodness, love, bounty, and the like to the Holy Ghost; because the
Holy Ghost proceeds from the Father and the Son by the operation of the
will, which loves nothing but that which either is good, or at least is
apprehended then as good. And so those works of God in which his power is most
manifested are attributed to the Father: those which declare most his wisdom
are attributed to the Son: and those which show most his goodness, love,
bounty, and the like, are attributed to the Holy Ghost. Neither was it an
invention of men by these terms and attributes to destinguish the divine
Persons; but it was an invention of God himself. The Apostles were inspired to
attribute power particularly to the Father; saying I believe in God the Father
Almighty. S. John was inspired to attribute wisdom to the Son calling him
the Word of God which was from the beginning. And Christ himself attributed
goodness in particular to the Holy Ghost, Luc. 11.
saying your father from heaven will give the Good Spirit to those that ask
him. So although all the divine persons be equal in power, wisdom, goodness,
and in all perfections the same, according to S. John These three be one, and
so all of them concur equally to the Conception of Christ; yet here it is
attributed particularly to the Holy Ghost; because the love of God is so
eminently manifested in it. For the same reason we paint the Father as an
ancient man; because the Son and the Holy Ghost proceed from him: we paint
the Son in humane nature, an intellectual creature, because his procession
is by way of understanding: we paint the Holy Ghost as a done; because the done
is a bird that shows most love; and love (as I have said) is the property of
the Holy Ghost. Neither can it be displeasing to God that we express him by
these corporal shapes and species of visible things, which are natural and
necessary for our understandings. And to show this he would express himself
so, appearing in those very shapes by which we express him. He appeared unto
Daniel like an old man. Dan. 7.
I beheld (says he) till the thrones were set and the ancient of days sat
his vesture white as now, and the hair of his head life clean wool. The
Second Person was not only made into the similitude of men but appeared in the
true nature of man in Jesus Christ our Savior. Phil. 2.
The Holy Ghost at the baptism of Christ was seen as a done over him, S. John
testifying I saw the Spirit descending as a done from heaven, Io. 1.
and he remained upon him. Thus would God represent himself to us, and we can
not represent him better then as he has represented himself.

Borne of the Virgin Mary. By this article the Apostles profess the procession
of Christ according to his humane nature. For having in the first article
professed the Father who is the first Person, and in the second the Second
Person, in Jesus Christ his only Son; now they go on to speak of him as
man, according to the nature which he assumed of the Virgin Mary his mother.
For where as other children proceed both of father and mother, he by the
operation of the Holy Ghost was conceived of his mothers nature only, she
remaining allwais a Virgin. S. Joseph, as the husband of our blessed lady, was
taken for the father of Christ. And when they heard him with that knowledge and
wisdom disputing in the temple, Mat. 13.
admiring they said is not this the carpenters son? noe! he was the son of
the blessed Virgin, and assumed humane nature of her nature, and of her
Virginal body; but of noe man. And this was a mystery which God would reveal
and foretell by his Prophet long before, Esa. 7.
saying behold a Virgin shall conceive and bear a son. For as soon as the
Angel had delivered his message to her, and she had answered, Behold the
handmaid of our Lord, Luc. 1.
be it done to me according to thy word, consenting to the mystery propounded
by him, the sacred body of our Lord was of the Virgins body presently formed
and his soul was infused into it, and they being united to the divine Person;
there was then in one person the union of two natures, and Christ who was the
eternal son of God, was also the son of man, as he proceeded of the Virgin
Mary: both natures in that admirable conjunction keeping their perfections,
that as S. Leo says the glorification neither consuming the inferior, nor the
assumption deminishing from the superior. This is a mystery incomprehensible
by us; and therefore the omnipotency of God was propounded by the Angel to our
blessed lady as to be considered particularly in this work, Luc. 1.
when he said the Holy Ghost shall come upon thee, and the power of the most
high shall over shadow thee. For as the love and goodness of God toward us
appears here most illustrious; so was it most congruous, that his power
should appear above our understandings, most miraculous.

The conception of Christ surpassed all ordinary conceptions not only in that
he was conceived of a Virgin mother; but also in the circumstances of it. For
where as the space of some days is required for the framing of our bodies, and
to dispose them for our souls; the sacred body and soul of our Lord were both
united together in the first instant of his conception, and the divine nature
unto them: by which his humanity was enriched with divine gifts, and was in
eminency of dignity and sanctity above all: all others being by adoption only,
and Christ by nature the son of God. This is not understood by us, but
believed; yet it was as easy to God that by his high power a Virgin should
conceive, and bring forth without the concurse of man; as it was for the rodd
of Aaron to conceive nourishing moisture, and to putt forth budds, leaves,
flowers, Nu. 17.
and almonds by the same power of God, without the natural concourse of the
earth. And it is indeed as easy to God to make a Virgin to conceive as the
blessed Virgin did of her own nature only with out the help of man, and to
frame a body in an instant, as our blessed Saviors was, as it was for him to
make all other women to conceive with the help of man, and to frame the body
by little and little with fit dispositions for the soul: which he could have
ordained otherwise, but would not; because he would have the conception of
Christ to be above all most pure and miraculous.

And as the conception of Christ was most misterious; so was it fitting that
his birth also should be: that she who had conceived with the privilege of her
Virginity free from corruption, should bring him forth in her delivery free
from pain, and other myserys which other women are then subject unto. And that
as the joy with which she conceived him was not corporal, but heavenly and
spiritual; so that his birth should be also full of joy and heavenly
consolation to her. For if God would send his Angel to the shepherds to
comfort their hearts and to fill them with joy for the birth of our Savior; how
great may we think the joy of the B. Virgin then to have been, who was so
singularly chosen of God to be his mother? We can not but with reverence think
of those consolations, which she had in his birth. He came from her sacred
womb as the beams of the sun pierce through clear crystal, without hurting
it; and as the same sacred body of our Lord passed through the sepulcher in his
resurrection without breaking it, so did he pass out of his mothers womb
without any violence done to her.

We ought very much to rejoice in the birth of Christ for the reason which the
Angel gius, because this day is borne to you a Savior. What greater joy can
prisoners, and condemned persons have, then in one that will save them. We have
then great reason to rejoice in that joy which the Angel brought, and to
celebrate every year that sacred day. And yet so great is the malice of
heresy, so dishonorable to God, and perverting the minds of men, that some in
this kingdom, who call themselves christians, dare venture to work on
Christmas day, refusing to give that honor, which all christians have so long
given to the birth day of Christ. We read in holy scriptures that kings in
ancient times kept festival the yearly day of their birthes: so Pharao Genesis
40. Antiochus. Match. 2.6. and Herod Mat. 14. and can the birth day of any king
with justice be observed, and not the birth day of Christ the king and Savior
of the world? If some courtyer of Pharao had refused to keep the feast of his
birth day, opposing the solemnity which the rest did observe; would not he with
reason have judged it as an affront, and punished it as a dishonor done to
him? How dare then any christian be so bold, and profane, as not to keep the
solemnity of Christ's birth, knowing that one day he shall judge him for it? It
is true authors differ in assigning the day on which he was borne. But what
then? shall we therefore keep noe day at all in honor of it? or shall any one
show himself so singular and proud, as upon his own sense and authority to
disobey the whole Church of Christ? We know not for certain the time in which
the scriptures were written, nor the authors that wrote them all; shall we
therefore reject them as some haeretiks have done, and have noe scriptures at
all? we know not just the time in which the Sundays Sabbath was first begun
to be kept; shall any one therefore refuse to observe it? but if the Church
could change the Sabbath from the seventh day, on which God had instituted it,
to the eight day; and could bind all so to observe it, although it were not
the day on which God rested from the creation of the world; shall not the
Church bind all to observe a day which she determines in honor of Christ's
birth? although perhaps he was not borne just on that day? Luc. 2.
we rejoice in that message which the Angel brought, when he said behold I
Euangelize to you great joy, which shall be to all the people, for to day is
borne to you a Savior. It is fitting that the Church should institute a
yearly solemnity of that joyful day, and it is fitting that we should obey
the Church. The day which the Church instituteth is Christmas day, and therefore
we keep it. Besides this is most likely to be the true day of his birth;
which, Aug. l. 1. de Trin. c. 5.
according to S. Augustine, was on the eight of the Calends of January. Ever
blessed and most solemn may that day be in which our Savior was borne, in
which the son of God first appeared in the nature of man, in which our nature
first appeared united to God, and in which both natures being married together,
came forth of the Virgins womb as out of their bride chamber, the Angels
rejoicing and bidding joy unto men. Luc. 2.
Then it was when they were heard to sing, Glory in the highest to God: and in
earth peace to men of good will. Let us with the Angels say those words, and
do as we say in all our actions. The mystery of the Incarnation often
represented.


This the Catholic Church laboreth to do in this mystery of the son of Gods
incarnation, representing it unto her people, and stirring them up to a
grateful remembrance, and thanksgiving for it by many devour prayers, and
caeremonys, which they often repeat in honor of it: as by the sign of the
Cross, the mass, the Creed, the Hail Mary, and the like, in which it is still
commemorated; that we behold in them the fullfilling of that great vision,
which Moses had, Exo. 3.
when our Lord appeared to him in a flame of fire out of the mids of a bush:
and the bush was on fire, and was not burnt. By which the Conception of Christ
was fignifyed to be of the blessed Virgin, without detriment of her Virginity,
and that he was to be borne without pain to her. And this vision, as it
signified the Son of God vested with our nature, was so high and glorious,
that Moses was commanded to bare his feet for the holiness of the very
ground on which it appeared. Job. 16.
He at whose beck the pillars of heaven tremble and dread is inuolued in the
myserys of our nature to draw us to virtue and to save us by his merits.

THE FOVRTH ARTICLE.
SVffered under Pontius Pilate was Crucified dead and buried. The Apostles
having professed Christ in the glory of his divinity, as the only Son of
God, and in the mystery of his conception and joy of his birth, set him now
before our eyes in his passion and death. That sacred body which was conceived
by the Holy Ghost, and was united to the divine word, in the womb of a Virgin,
we behold it now in the hands of cruel executioners, who have free power to
torment and to kill it; see now that body nailed upon a Cross and so exposed to
the scorn of the world. That face of life whose beauty the Angels desire to
behold, is left pale and dead without comeliness and beauty. The horrible pain
which Christ suffered in his Passion is not to be apprehended by us; but was
without doubt so great in it self, that the apprehension of it in him had
been sufficient to have bereaved him of life, if he had not supported nature by
supernatural means; as he did in that agony which he suffered in the garden
by the apprehension only of his future Passion, Mat. 26.
when he said my soul is sorrowful even unto death. For his body as it was
conceived and framed only of the Virgins blood, was of a more tender
complexion, and more sensible of pain then others are, and so he had a more
lively apprehension, greater horror, and more repugnance from the torments of
his Passion, which he foresaw, and according to the inferior part of his
soul, he desired and prayed to be freed from, although they were woluntary to
him.

For the understanding of which we are to understand two powers in the soul
of man commonly called the Superior, and Inferior part, or portion of the
soul. The superior power is in respect of its higher operations of reason and
will, which it has equal with the Angels. The inferior part or portion of
the soul is the inseriour powerwhich it has, as it is sensitive, causing us
to feel by our senses, as inferior creatures do. According to the superior
of the soul, the Passion of Christ was nothing sorrowful to him, as not being
contrary to his reason and will; but it was most voluntary nay joyful to him:
he went as a giant to run that race, and was straightened until he had
perfected the baptism of his Passion. According to the inferior power of the
soul, as it is sensible, he could not but feel pain, and his senses did
abhor the torments of his Passion; for otherwise they had been noe torments
unto him: and as the complexion and constitution of his body was more perfect,
so was he more sensible of pain; and therefore the very apprehension of his
Passion had a more violent effect in him, then the pains of death is ever read
to have had in any other; causing a sweat of blood to run down to the earth
from him. This would he suffer before his Passion, to show that his sorrows
were above all sorrows and most horrible to him. Yet he would preserve his life
until he had suffered those things, and fullfilled that which the scriptures
had foretold of him.

For two reasons the Apostles would specify, that Christ suffered under Pontius
Pilate. First for the more particular and exact relation of his Passion; to
show that the Prophecys were fullfilled that had signified the time about which
it should be. And secondly for the performance of his own words, to show the
accomplishing of that which himself had foretold, when speaking of his
Passion, he said, Mat 20.
they shall deliver him to the Gentiles to be mocked, and scourged, and
crucified. Which was fullfilled when the Jews apprehending him, delivered him
to Pilate, and his soldiers, who were Gentiles, and scourged, and crucified him
For the chief of the Jews seeing that they could not resist the doctrine
which he preached, nor the power of his miracles, caused him to be apprehended,
and to be sent as a malefactor to Pontius Pilate, who was then the Roman
President of Jury, Crucified.
and who by the instigation of the Jews adjudged him as they desired to the
death of the Cross: which was held in that place the most disgraceful kind of
death, that malefactors could suffer; and was so much abhorred by the law,
that we read in deuteronomy he is accursed of God that hangs on a tree.
Deuteronomy. 21.
Yet this the most reproachful of all deaths was Christ contented to undergo
for us: and that in a most ignominious manner betwixt two the eues.

We have in the scriptures many mysterious types, and honorable figures, by
which God would foreshew the death of his son. Innocent Abel murdered by his
brother was a figure of Jesus Christ killed by the Jews. Genesis 4. Genesis 22.
The Sacrifice, which Abraham was commanded to offer in his only son, was a
type of Christ offered for us on the Cross. Exo. 12.
The unspotted lamb which the Israelits were commanded to offer when they came
out of Egypt represented also our Savior offered for our redemption: of whom
the Prophet says, Hier. 11.
and I as a mild lamb that is carried to a victime. The brazen serpent which
God commanded to be erected, that the people beholding it might be cured from
the stings of the fiery serpents was, as it were, the shadow of Christ nailed
on the Cross. For as those that were wounded by serpents were cured by that; and
as of vipers and scorpions a medicine is made against their poison and stings;
so the malice of sin committed by man was cured by man again in Jesus
Christ contrary to him. By a man death, (says the Apostle) and by a man the
resurrection of the dead. Cor. 1.15.
And as the brazen serpent was in show a serpent; but had noe sting nor poison
to hurt, but virtue to cure the stings of other serpents; so Christ in the
similitude of the slesh of sin had noe sin, Romans 8.
but took away the sins of the world; and therefore himself signifying his
death on the Cross, Io. 3.
said, as Moses exalted the serpent in the desert, so must the son of man
be exalted.

Christ suffered voluntarily of his own freewill; Christ suffered voluntarily.
and could if it had peased him have escaped all, or any part of his Passion,
and death. This he often showed in his life time. Sometimes when they would
have killed him, he became presently invisible to their sight, and walked
through the midst of them without being seen. Sometimes he prevented them,
absenting himself, seeing their inward thoughts and hearts to be bent against
him. Sometimes he showed that he had power over their minds, moving them as he
would, and asswaging the malice which was in them, until the hour of his
suffering came: and when his hour was come, he came forth amongst his enemies,
and even then he moved multitudes of people to follow, and to glorify him; but
a few days after when they came to apprehende him he would then be taken, and
would not defend himself, or be defended by others. He would with a word of
his mouth strike them down to the ground, to show that he had them in his
power, and could have freed himself; but he would let them rize again, and
would go away prisoner with them, to fulfill the will of his father by
suffering, and dying for us.

Christ suffered for the redemption of all, and redeemed all: that is by his
Passion he purchased means for the salvation of all. These means are the
Sacraments of the Catholic Church. Those that are baptized and receive
worthily the rest of the Sacraments, as they are necessary for them, are saved
by the merits of Christ in them. Those that are not baptized, or receive not
the Sacraments as they are necessary for them perish not through any defect in
the Passion of Christ, by which they had sufficient means to be saved; but
through their own sin; because they will not apply those means to
themselves, which Christ by his Passion procured for their salvation.

The least pain of our Saviors Passion, or the least action which he did in
his life time had been sufficient to have redeemed the whole world, and a
thousand worlds, if it had been offered to that end by him, as the full price
of our redemption; because it proceeded from the divine Person which was of
infinite dignity; but it was not intended so by him. He ouervalued the
purchase of our souls; and by a superabundant grace would give more then he
needed when he gave his life for them, and would have nothing to stand for the
price of our redemption without his death. This he would do to testify his
love toward us, and to give us an example of many virtues.

Quest. What do we get by Christ redeeming us? Answ. We get the forgiunesse
of our sins, and the acceptance of our good works by the merits of Christ's
Passion, applied unto us in the Catholic Church.

The Sacraments of the Catholic Church have their virtue, and effect by the
Passion of Christ. Those that worthily receive them are sanctified, and have
the remission of their sins: and being then in the state of grace, the good
works, which in that state are done by them are acceptable to God, and have
proportion to supernatural glory. The Sacraments therefore having by the merits
of Christ's Passion power, and virtue to sanctify us, we have by his merits the
forgiunesse of our sins, and the acceptance of our good works.

Man had committed sin in paradise, and all mankind was infected with that
sin: and our nature being once tainted, it corrupted still more and more and
we fall in our life times into many actual sins. All the good works which we
could do were of noe value, nor could we by any means make satisfaction for
any sin either original or actual; because there is noe condignity in
person and works betwixt us and God that was offended. The Son of God was
therefore incarnated in Christ, that the divine nature uniting to it self the
nature of man, might so dignify it by that union in him, that he could make
satisfaction for our sins, and obtain for us the remission of them, and that
our good works being then done in the state of grace might become acceptable to
God and proportionable to glory, which of themselves they could not be. We
could have sinned still more and more, heaping sin upon sin, and increasing
our damnation; but we could have done nothing in that state by which we could
rise from any sin. So that the remission of our sins, and the acceptance
of our good works to the obtaining of everlasting glory, is to be attributed to
the merits, and power of Christ's Passion, which is actually applied unto us by
the Sacraments of the Catholic Church.

The Apostles would particularly profess in the Creed the Passion of Christ,
and that he dyed, to confound those haeretiks that should deny his death, as
some have done. These are sufficiently refuted by this article, and by all the
Evangelists affirming that he gave up the ghost. That is is to say that his
ghost, spirit, or soul (which is all one) departed, and was separated from his
body; death being nohting else but the departure or separation of the soul from
the body. For this reason also the Apostles would declare, that Christ was
buried, to confirm his being dead. But although he would have his body to be
buried, as the bodies of other men; yet he would preserve it from corruption in
the earth; because it was most decent that that sacred body, which was so
miraculously framed by the Holy Ghost without corrupting the Virginity of his
mother, should after death be free from all corruption: according to that which
the holy king had prophesied thou shall not give thy holy one to see
corruption. Ps. 15.


To conceive something of the greatness of this mystery we may consider who
it was that suffered these things: that it was one whose person infinitely
surpassed in power, wisdom, beauty, riches, and all kind of dignity, and
goodness, the most renowned Prince that ever was in the world. And if it be a
horrible thing to think of the murdering of any man, and much more of some
great and gracious Prince, and a cruel spectacle to behold it: what feeling
ought christiins to have of the Passion of Christ, when they consider it? But
it is but a weak comparison to compare Christ to any earthly Prince. Io. 1.
S. John says that he was the Word which was with God, and that this Word was
God. O almighty God what then shall we say or think of this mystery? thy power
and majesty seems here to be lessened, thy wisdom is despised, thy goodness
questioned, brought to trial, and condemned. O blessed Savior whom S. Paul
describes to be he, whom God has made the heir of all, Heb. 1.
the brightness of his glory, and the figure of his substance, how comes thy
brightness to be so obscured, and thy sacred and life giving face to become
pale, and void of life? as a root from a thirsty ground, that there is noe
beauty nor comeliness in it? It was by us that thou came into this plight:
thou did bear our sins, and they put thee to pain, and disfigured thee.
Think now O Christians of that which you believe, and confider who he was, and
what he suffered for you. Jesus Christ the only son of God suffers for
man, the master for the servant, the Creator for his creature, he that made
Angels and men, heaven and earth, he of whom, and by whom and in whom, are all
things he bore our infirmitys our sorrows he carried, Romans 11.
and became as a lepar stricken of God, and humbled. Esa. 53.
He was wounded for our iniquitys, and with the wail of his stripe we are
healed: our sins drew blood of his sacred body, and crucified, and killed
him. Heaven stood astonished the sun was ecclypsed, a terrible darkness was
spread over the earth, the earth was shaken, graves opened, and the bodies of the
dead roze up to life again, at this mystery; and shall it make noe impression
in us? Behold o Christians Christ expired on the Cross and say often with your
selves who is this that is Crucified and dead? who is this that is crucified
and dead? It is the only son of God, whom the Angles adore, the latchet of
whose shoe S. John Baptist was not worthy to loose. Think then again what he
was crucified for? It was to take, away our sins, and to bless us with
everlasting glory. O blessed Lord, O God our Savior how great was thy love to
us, and thy hatred to sin, that could cause the miracle of thy incarnation,
and death for our redemption? I rejoice in thy merits by which I am redeemed:
and being now at liberty, I dedicate my self for ever to thy service. Keep
thou my soul, and let it never forsake thee The benefit which we have by the
death of Christ was praefigured unto us in the law of Moses, where guilty
persons, that had sled to the cittys of sanctuary, were set at liberty, and
went home pardoned at the death of the high Priest. Our high Priest was Jesus
Christ, heaven is our blessed home, sin banished us from thence, but thither
we return again by the death of Christ. Heb. 10.
having considence (says the Apostle) in the entering of the holys in the blood
of Christ. Let us serve him as we ought, and then indeed we may have
confidence in him.

THE FIFTH ARTICLE.
HE descended into hell, the third day he arose again from death. The Apostles
having in the former article professed the Passion and death of Christ, declare
now his victory, and triumph over it. That which by this article is proposed to
be believed is, that the soul of Christ departing in death from his body,
descended truly into hell. For as long as his body remained in the sepulcher,
his soul was separated from it, and all that while was descended into hell.

Some haeretiks have wickedly denied this article of Christ his descension into
hell, ignorantly understanding by hell his sepulcher Not considering that his
descending into the sepulcher was professed before in the former article; and
therefore there needed not another article to repeat it over again, and to say
that he descended into the sepulcher. Neither is it a propper manner of speech
in that sense: for the body of our Lord was then dead, and descended not, but
was laid by others in the sepulcher. This therefore can not be understood of
his body descending into the sepulcher; but of his soul descending into hell.

Aunciently by hell some place in general was understood, where the souls of
men resided after death; and it was not only taken for the place of the
damned, but also for the residence of the just. As when the holy Patria^ke
Jacob mourning for the death of his son Joseph, said, Genesis 37.
I will descend unto my son into hell and when the Apostle says, Phil. 2.
In the name of Jesus every knee bow of the caelestials, terrestrials, and
insernals. For hell in Latin is as much as to say a place inferior unto us,
or below us, which is therefore in the earth. For the understanding of which we
may destinguish four places in the earth, the receptacles of souls departed.
Four kinds of hell.
First there is the lowest hell of everlasting damnation: which is the furthest
place from heaven, as most suetable to those whose lives, and actions were
furthest of, and most opposite to God; and therefore in respect of punishment it
is the deepest hell. Secondly the next above that in pain, is Purgatory.
Thirdly above purgatory is the place where the souls of those are detained,
who die only in original sin. Fourthly above that there was a place for the
souls of the just, that dyed before Christ, not having the guilt of any sin,
or satisfaction to make for it. For it was not convenient that any should enter
into heaven before Christ who purchased it for all, and therefore those souls
remained in an inferior place until the death of Christ; and then he
descending to them freed them from that place. This was some times called the
bosom of Abraham; because Abraham was the father of the elect, and comprised
as it were in him all the just as Christ came of his seed who was the head of
all the just. Thither therefore did our blessed Savior descend, to bless and
to free those holy souls. And perhaps he would also show himself to the
souls of purgatory, for their comfort; as also to the damned souls, for their
terror and rebuke.

Christ was buried on the friday on which he suffered. (For the death of the
Cross was held in that ignominy, that the law commanded, those that were
Crucified to be taken from the Cross on the same day.) After his burial he
remained in the sepulcher all that day, and all Saturday, and part of Sunday
until about break of day: all which time his soul was descended into hell.
Then he released the just out of that place in which they were detained, and
brought them with him to the sepulcher: where uniting his soul and body
together again, the third day he arose from the dead; not as those who have
been revived by the power of others to a second life, and to die a second death;
but by his own power he aroze again to die noe more. For the divine nature
being allwais present with his body and soul, as united with them in the unity
of person, he had power to raise himself, and by his own power he took life
again, and aroze glorious; and therefore he said of himself. Io. 10.
I yield my life etc. I yield it of my self and I have power to yield it: and
I have power to take it again.

We read of diverse who have been raised from death to life both before, and
since the resurrection of Christ; but his resurrection excels theirs in many
respects. First for that he raised himself (as I have said) by his own power;
and all others were raised by his power. Secondly he was the first that ever
aroze glorious. Thirdly others aroze to death, as well as to life. Fourthly his
resurrection was the cause and means of all our glorious resurrections. In
these respects S. Paul calls him the first fruits of those that rize to life.
Cor. 15.
Christ (says he) is rizen from the dead, the first fruits of them that
sleep: In Christ all shall be made alive. But every one in his own order: the
first fruits Christ then those that are of Christ.

The resurrection of Christ ought to be a great comfort and encouragement to
the good. For his rizing to glory has given us hopes of a glorious
resurrection. Blessed be God (says S. Pet. 1.1.
Peter) and the father of our Lord Jesus Christ, who has regenerated us unto a
lively hope, by the resurrection of Jesus Christ from the dead unto an
inheritance incorruptible. We are encouraged to bear with patience all
afflictions, and all kind of persecutions in this world, in hopes to rize
glorious with him. Christ is our head and we are the members of his body, and
he having made way through persecutions for us, we ought courageously to follow
him.

THE SIXTH ARTICLE.
HE ascended into heaven sits at the right hand of God. Christ having
consummated the work of our redemption by his death on the Cross, and after his
death performed his resurrection, and having after his resurrection remained
forty days on earth, to teach his disciples, speaking of the kingdom of God;
(that is to say instructing them concerning the government of the Catholic
Church, which is the kingdom of God upon earth) he had done now all for which
his father sent him, and was to ascend into heaven, and to carry mankind unto
that blessed place of glory, which he had purchased for them. He took therefore
his disciples unto mount Oliuet to be the witnesses of his ascension: and
lifting up his eyes, and blessing them, he was gloriously el^uated in their
sight: and they being ^auished with joy, and spiritual consolation at it;
behold two Angels (whom the Evangelist calls men) stood beside them in white
garments, and said to them, Act. 1.
Ye men of Galily why stand you looking into heaven? This Jesus which is
assumpted from you into heaven shall so come, as you have seen him going into
heaven. Thus would our Savior ascend, that he might give unto the world a
taste, and scantling of the future glory, and a memorial of his second coming.

This was the most glorious day that ever was to mankind. For this is the day
of our first entering into heaven. The holy Prophet, king Danid inuiteth all the
world to the joy of this day, saying, All ye nations clappe hands: Ps. 46.
make iubilation to God in the voice of exultation. God is ascended in
iubilation. To day man's nature triumphed in the heavens, and that so glorious,
that it was exalted above all the celestial powers of Angels, to the very
right hand of God. Ser. 3. de Ascen.
See o man (says S. John Chrysostom) how high thy nature is exalted. Consider
the distance of heaven, and earth, and of the lower to the higher heavens, and
from those higher heavens to the Angels, and from them to the higher powers,
and from those to the seat where our Lord sits. Humane nature is exalted
thus high above all: that nature which was of it self so low, that it could
be noe lower, became now so high, that it could be raised noe higher. And the
Holy Ghost to show how high that glory was which mankind then received, would
inspire the Apostles to make such a remarkable expression of it, as to say
that it was set at the right hand of God. That as great Princes and eminent
personages, when they will show a more then ordinary respect to some other
Prince their friend, they set him on their right hand; so the nature of man in
Jesus Christ, who was the Prince of mankind, ascending into heaven, the king of
heaven, and of the whole world would be said to set him on his right hand. A
greater expression of his love could not be made then this; yet thus would he
have his Apostles to express it.

Christ ascended both in body and soul: for they being once united together in
his resurrection, were never more to be separated again. He ascended by his
own power, and not as Elias, Abacuc. S. Phillip, or others, who were elevated
into the air, carried by Angels: for their souls and bodies, being then
vnglorifyed, could not by their own power ascend. But Christ (besides that he
ascended by the power of his divinity) being in the state of glory, his body
was perfectly subjected to his soul, and was therefore elevated by it: and
stood noe need of the external help of Angels. In that he is said to sit
at the right hand of God, we are to understand a siguratiue manner of speech,
which God would have to be used, to accommodate himself to our weak
understandings, which can have nothing represented to them, but by the species
of corporal things: and so Christ is said to sit at the right hand of God,
to show how highly our nature was exalted in him; although God have noe hands,
nor corporal parts; as being a spiritual substance that needs not them.
Neither ought we to think by this, that there is any precedence of place, or
degrees of dignity in the Persons of the B. Trinity; but that the Father, the
Son and the Holy Ghost are all of equal and infinite dignity. Christ
according to his humanity is said to sit at the right hand of God, in respect
of creatures, in that he is superior to them in dignity and glory. And
according to his divine nature he may be said to sit at the right hand of God
in this sense, and to this end, that we might not understand as Arius did,
that the Son of God was inferior to the Father. For which reason the holy
Psalmist also places the Son at the right hand of the Father, Ps. 109.
and then presently in the same psalm, the Father on the right hand of the
Son, to signify equallity betwixt them.

Let us now apply this mystery to the profit of our souls, that they may have
the benefit of it, and receive the gifts which were then given; Ps. 67.
for it is written ascending on high he ledd captivity captive, he gave gifts
to men. Iph. 4.
These gifts are too great to be spoken: for unto some he gave then the gift of
heavenly bless. Towit to the souls of those in limbus whom he freed out of
captivity, and carried with him. And to those, whom he left behind him on
earth, he gave the promise of the Holy Ghost, and performed that promise within
a while sending him to comfort, and encourage them. If we will have these
gifts, and will ascend with Christ, we must forsake sin that hinders us of
him. Ser. 2. de Ascen.
Our sins (says S. Augustine) as netts entangle us, and as chains ty us
down to the earth, that we cannot ascend; and therefore as the psalmist has
said, let us break their fetters. Let us leave of our pride, our
covetousness, our carnal sins; that being cured from them, we may ascend
with our physician. Thus S. Augustine, and I will add thus much to him, that
as every one is inclined to some particular sins, or sin, by which as by a
greater chain, and maine root, he sticks fast in the earth, and is hindered
from ascending to Christ; so ought we to labor more earnestly to root out
that sin out of our hearts, which is more particular and propper to us, and
which we are most guilty of, that we may sing with joy unto God, thou have
broken my bonds I will sacrifice to thee the have of praise. Ps. 115.
Let us keep in our minds the Ascension of Christ, and have considence in him
who sits at the right hand of God, allwais ready to pray for us. Io. 1.2.
We have (says S. John) anaduocate with the Father, Jesus Christ. If Christ
after his resurrection had assumed to himself the glory of this world, and
lived as a Prince upon earth, having the whole world for his dominion, as
subject to him, he would have had followers enough, we should all have flocked
unto his court: but that would have been of curiosity in many, and of an
imperfect love; such as the Apostles sometimes bore to him, when he was visibly
with them; but how much more ought we to desire to be with him in heaven, and
to aspire unto that blessed court? he would ascend thither, that we might
follow him thither; for this is all that he desires Fa^h^r whom thou have
given me, Io. 17.
I will that where I am, they also be with me. Christ is indeed our beloved
spouse, and the only treasure of a christians soul, we ought to love him
above all, and to seek in all things to please him, and to remain with him:
and therefore he would ascend into heaven to draw us after him; and that our
hearts might be where our treasure is, and our conversation in heaven. Let then
every one now resolve to leave of all sin, and begin to set forward in his
Ascension with Christ, and let us think that being now in our journey to
heaven wards, every day, and every hour we are drawing nearer, and nearer to
him.

THE SEVENTH ARTICLE.
FRom thence he shall come to judge us all both the quick and the dead. Christ
has many honorable, and worthy titles. He is our Savior, or Redeemer: he is
our Advocates and he is our Judge. In the former articles the Apostles have
delivered his two first titles; now they propose him as our Judge. Cor. 2.5.
We must all be manifested before the judgment seat of Christ, (says S.
Paul) that every one may receive the propper things of the body, according as
he has done, either good or evil.

There are two judgments in which Christ sits as judge over us. First there
is the private, and particular judgment of every one at his death. Secondly
there is a general day of judgment for all. Our souls departing in death from
our bodies, are presently set before the judgment seat of Christ, who as judge
shall call them to an account of all whatsoever they have thought, said, or
done; and weighing all with an exact, and just balance, he shall give sentence
justly according to our works. Besides this, God would for many reasons ordain
one solemn day for the general judgment of all. First for the greater honor
of Christ our judge, that as he was publicly in the sight of the world
condemned by the wicked; so he might publikly, and in the sight of the world,
show his power and innocence, and condemn them. Secondly for the greater
honor of the just. Thirdly for the greater confusion of the devils, and of the
damned souls; God then making a public manifestation of his love of goodness,
and of the hatred which he bears to sin: with infinite liberality rewarding
the one, and with extreme and utmost severity punishing the other. Fourthly,
being that we see posterity, for the most part, to imitate their praedecessors,
and to follow the ways which they have trodden out to them: and this imitation
of good or evil praedecessors to last sometimes for many years, and ages, and
may last we know not how long: it is convenient that there should be in the end
one general day of judgment, in which it might appear how much every one has
contributed to the good, or evil of others after them, even to the end of the
world Lastly that the body and soul which have accompanied together in this
life, and both of them concurred jointly in their works, may meet and be
united again, and remain together in pleasure, or in pain for ever.

Christ shall perform this office of judge even as he is man. For as kings
delegate their authority to those whom they make judges, to judge and to give
sentence in person of the king; so would God honor the humanity of Christ,
giving him authority as judge in his place, according to S. John, Io. 5.
He has given him power to do judgment also because he is the son of man.
S. Peter preaching in Cornelius his house the mysterys of the life and death of
Christ, after that he had spoken of his Passion and resurrection, he draws to
an end in these words. Act. 10.
He commanded us to preach to the people, and to testify, that it is he that of
God was appointed judge of the living, and of the dead. It is then Jesus Christ
that shall call upon the blessed, and from his glorious judgment feate, shall
say to them, Come ye blessed of my father possess the kingdom prepared for
you from the foundation of the wo^ld. And it is he, who from a terrible
tribunal, shall pronounce to the wicked. Mat. 25.
Get ye away from me you cursed into fire everlasting, which was prepared for
the denill and his Angels. In this sentence of the damned there is a double
punishment included. The one is the great loss which they incur, and for
ever must sustain of the sight of God, and fruition of him in glory; the other
is of an unspeakable ragious pain, which besides their loss they must for
ever endure. The first is intimated by get ye away from me. The second by
that which follows of everlasting fire. Which two punishments of loss, and
pain, joined with eternity, cause in the damned an utter desperation and rage;
and those also eternal. Even as slaves when they are condemned to the gallyes,
or to grind in mills, or the like slauerys all their life time, are settled and
established in that state of misery as long as they live; so the damned are
settled in that state of desperation, rage, and horrible torment, to endure it,
and to endure it still, and can never change or alter from it. In all thy works
remember thy latter ends, Eccli. 7.
and thou will not sin for ever. This is the last thing which the Apostles
would mention of Christ in the Creed, and which ought to leave a great fear,
and vehement horror in the minds of the wicked, to whom he shall come as to
his enemies, that can expect noe favor from him. And therefore this day is called
the day of our Lord. Because Christ shall come as a terrible Lord to them; and
shall call them to a strict account for the neglect of their service to him;
and they having received good things in this life, but wickedly employed them,
have then evil to receive: but the just who have served God duly, and have
not sought after the pleasures, and goods of this world; but have then good
things to receive, have reason to rejoice, and to be comforted at the thought
of this day: and therefore at the departure of Christ in his Ascension from the
Apostles, the Angels were sent to comfort them with the remembrace of his
second coming, saying, Ye men of Galilee, why do you stand looking into
heaven? Act. 1.
this Jesus which is assumpted from you into heaven, shall so come as you have
seen him going into heaven. He comes as a spouse full of joy to the just,
and blesses them with everlasting blessings; because they have provided the
light of good works. Let us do so, and we shall be admitted into his joyful
nuptials, and receive blessings of him.

Thus you understand what is meant by the quick and the dead, to wit the
state of the good, and of the evil: the one of them living spiritually with
the life of grace; the other being dead in sin But perhaps it may be
understood also of corporal life with which some shall be then living on
earth, when Christ shall come, and shall be judged with those that were dead
before that day. And who knows but he himself may live to see the terrible
appearence of Christ coming to judge him, and that presently dying, he shall
rize again, to receive the sentence of his judgment? for Christ himself has
said, that of that day or hour noe man knows, Mar. 13.
neither the Angels in heaven. How much then ought we to fear, and prevent it,
and not to remain one day, noe nor one hour, in mortal sin?

THE EIGHT ARTICLE.
I Believe in the Holy Ghost. Hitherto the Apostles in all the former articles
have delivered those things, which concern the first and second person of the
B. Trinity, the Father, and the Son; now they profess the third Person in
the Holy Ghost. S. Act. 19.
Paul coming to Ephesus found certain disciples so ignorant, that asking
them if they had received the Holy Ghost, they answered that they had not so
much as heard, that there was a Holy Ghost. This had been indeed a very great
ignorance in them, if they had been Christians, which they were not: (and the
mystery of the blessed Trinity) was to be but obscurely delivered to the Jews
(as I have showed in another place treating of it.) They were the Disciples of
S. John Baptist, baptized by his baptism, which could not give the Holy Ghost,
and were not as yet baptized with christian baptism, in which the Holy Ghost
is given; and therefore it was a less ignorance in them But for any of us not to
know what the Holy Ghost is, were an extreme ignorance. And therefore we will
first declare who the Holy Ghost is, and why he is so called.

The Holy Ghost is the third Person of the B. Trinity: and is as much as to
say. The holy spirit. And although the Father, and the Son, and the holy
Angels, are holy spirits; yet they are not The Holy Ghost of whom we are
speaking. When therefore we say the Holy Ghost we mean the divine Person of the
Holy Ghost; as when Christ commanded baptism in the name of the Father and of
the Son, and of the Holy Ghost. The first Person of the blessed Trinity is
called The Father because the Son, and the Holy Ghost proceed from him. The
second Person is called The Son, because he proceeds as son from the
Father. The third Person is called the Holy Ghost, or holy spirit, because he
proceeds from the Father and the Son, by way of mutual inspiration.

The Holy Ghost is true God, omnipotent, eternal, and infinite in all
perfections: the very same in essence, and nature with the Father, and the
Son. And therefore S. Peter threatening Ananias for his deceit, and ly, which
he had told, said, Ananias, why has Satan tempted thy heart, Act. 5.
that thou should ly to the Holy Ghost? t^ou have lied to God. And therefore
in the words of baptism he is commanded to be named, as the same in Godhead,
with the Father, and the Son: and S. John says There be three which give
testimony in heaven, the Father, the Word, Io. 1.5.
and the Holy Ghost. And these three be one. Three in destinction of Persons,
one in the unity of nature, and essence. And because the Holy Ghost proceeds
both from the Father and the Son, therefore he is sometimes said in the
Scriptures to be the spirit of the Father, and sometimes the spirit of the
Son.

THE NINTH ARTICLE.
THe holy Catholic Church, the Communion of Saints. The Apostles having
professed their belief in God the Father almighty, maker of heaven and earth,
and in Jesus Christ his only Son, our Lord, borne, and crucified in the
nature of man, and their belief in the Holy Ghost, they had given us in breife
the mysterys of the B. Trinity, and of the Incarnation. The next thing which
they minded was to make an article of believing the Catholic Church. Which
article was noe less necessary then any of the former: nay in this it was the
most necessary of all, that by believing the Church we come to have the truth
of the former, and to understand rightly all the articles of the christian
faith. And therefore (as S. Augustine has observed) the Prophets have spoken
planelyer of the Church then they have done of Christ himself; Aug. in Is. 30.
because the authority of the Church is the rule and guide, by which we are to
be directed in all things, which we believe of him: and all true believers are
kept in the unity of true faith, and that faith which was founded by him
continues allwais inuiolated, by continual obedience to the Church. This then
being the end, and intention of this article, let us now come to the
declaration of it.

Quest. What is the Catholic Church? Answ. The Catholic Church is the
congregation of all faithful Pastors, and people, united together, as a body
with its head.

S. Augustine defines the Church to be the congregation of all the faithful
dispersed over the world. Which is in substance the same that is here answered:
for every one that has the true faith, and is in union with the head, and
Pastors of the Church, by obeying them, is a member of the true Ch^^ch; and all
these put together make the whole Church. But because Schismatiks although they
believe in all points; yet are out of the Church, as dividing themselves from
it by disobedience to the head and Pastors theirof, therefore to be a member of
the Church we require union with the rest of the members under one head, to wit
the Pope, who is for the time the successor of S. Peter, the Vicar of Christ,
and the Head of the Church. Now for the explication of this article.

In the first place the Church is said to be holy. Holy.
It is holy in diverse respects First in respect of the eminent holiness of
Jesus Christ, the chief head of it. Secondly for the holy government which
Christ instituted, and allwais conserueth in it. Thirdly it is holy in respect
of the holy sacrifice, which it has of his most sacred body, and in respect of
the holy Sacraments and obseruances that are in it. Fourthly in respect of the
Vicarhead Pastors, and people, whose holiness it includes. Christ ascending
into heaven made S. Peter the head of all the Apostles, and of the whole Church
to remain as Vicar to himself upon earth, commending particularly to him the
charge of his sheep; that is of all faithful christians that are in the
Church, as in his sheepfold. This charge was performed by him whilst he lived;
and after his death by men of great holiness, who succeeded him; joining their
blood unto his, as it were in a continual stream of martyrdom, for almost
three hundred years after the Ascension of Christ. After them those who have
succeeded in that chair and office, have been for the most part men of great
holiness; as they have great means to be, and as it is fitting they should be
in that holy office. The Church is also holy in many other inferior Pastors,
and people of all sorts, and callings; of Martyrs, Confessors, and Virgins, who
have illustrated it with their holy lives, and have rendered it a dear, and
amiable spouse to Christ. Lastly the Church is holy as being by its authority
the ground of all holiness, there being none at all but in it For there can be
noe holiness in this world if not grounded upon true faith, Heb. 11.
without which it is impossible to please God. And being there can be noe faith
that can please God but in the Catholic Church, all holiness that is amongst
men is in the holy Catholic Church.

The Church is called by the Apostles Catholic, Catholic.
which is as much as to say, universal, to destinguish the true Church of
Christ from all false Churches of christians, which they saw might rize up in
following times, and did even then begin to rize in their times. None of
which can be said to be Catholic or universal; but private and particular
Churches, which begin by opposing of the Catholic and universal Church, then
extant when those new sects begin. First the Church is universal in doctrine,
for that it teaches all over the same doctrine, and yields obedience to the
same government, under one head: and so the Church of Rome is Catholic, and
the Church of Protestants is not Catholic for that protestants agree in name
only, and nor in doctrine: and also because some of them acknowledging a head
upon earth; (as the English Protestants did) and some of them acknowledging noe
head upon earth, they have not all obedience to the same authority; which
obedience must necessarily be had to be the same Church, and to be the true
Catholic Church. For the Apostles made this article to keep us allwais in the
odedience of the true Church, and that those might be known to have the true
faith of Christ, who retaining the doctrine which is professed by the whole
Church, which then is, and obeying the authority of it, submit in all
controuersys to that which it teaches, and say with the Apostles I believe the
Catholic Church; and therefore two Churches, that obey two different
authoritys, can not both of them be universal and Catholic. Secondly the true
Church is universal in times: for that it must be at all times, and never so
vanished out of the world, that there should need any to restore it again:
for God does not so unequally destribute his graces as to leave the the world
at any time without means of salvation; which cannot be without a true, and
lawful Church. Besides the Apostles Creed is to be said at all times; and so
we are allwais to say I believe the Catholic Church: which we could not
allwais say, if at some time there were noe true Catholic Church in the world.
Thirdly the Church is universal in place: for if S. Paul could with truth apply
those words of the psalm their sound has gone forth unto all the earth; Ps.
18.
and unto the ends of the ^ound world the words of them, to the Church of
Christ in the Apostles times, when it was nothing so much dilated, as now God
be thanked it is; we may now with good reason call it Catholic in respect of
all places, when the sound of the Apostles doctrine is so much enlarged, that
there is hardly any place of the world, whither the Catholic Church does not
send her subjects to preach.

Out of this universality of the Church it follows, One.
that there is but one true Church in which salvation may be had: for
universality imports unity: and if there be unity in the Church, and that
this unity be necessarily required, and included in the word Catholic or
universal; which signifye h^ many agreeing in the same thing; then two
Churches which are not united in the same Communion, and obedience to the same
authority, can not both of them have means of salvation: for if they could
both have means of salvation, and yet might lawfully disobey each others
authority; then we should not be bound to obey it nor could it lawfully
require obedience to it: which is contrary to the words of Christ binding us to
the obedience of the Church, and contrary to this article, and to all reason
and government. S. Augustine There is nothing which a christian ought so much
to fear as to be separated from the body of Christ, Aug. tract. 27.
which is for certain the one Catholic Church. For if he be separated from
the body of Christ, he is not a member of him. If he be not a member of him, he
is not nourished with his spirit. By which it is plane in the doctrine of this
saint, that it can not be a true Church which is separated from the true
Church; and by consequence two Churches, which separate from each other can not
both be true. Therefore let those take head that hearken to that bold persuasion
of some, who persuade themselves, that salvation may be had in any religion, or
in either of some two religions, or in any faith so that they believe in
Christ; for they shall find one day, that disobedience to the true Church is a
sin which deserves damnation. S. Augustine again in another place. Epist.
104.
Being out of the Church and divided from the heap of unity, and the bond of
charity, thou should be punished with eternal fire, although thou should be
burned alive for the name of Christ.

The Church is honored in the scriptures with many noble, and glorious titles.
The titles of Church.
It is called the kingdom of God, the house of God, his spouse, his fair one,
his only one, and the very body of Christ. He governs it as his kingdom, he
provides for it as his household, and loves it as his dear spouse, and as
his own body; pleasing and delighting himself in the souls of good
Catholics that serve him. It is compared to the holy city of Jerusalem, in
which the true worship of God flourished, and in which divine sacrifice was
duly offered. It is compared to the ark of Noah out of which there was noe
salvation; but a general death and destruction.

Infidels that have not the faith of Christ are out of the Church. Haeretiks,
Schismatiks and excommunicated persons although they believe in Christ; yet
because they hear not the Church, that is obey it not, they are also our of
it, as heathens that participate not the benefits of it.

The Catholic Church has two parts, The triumphans and militant Church.
the one Triumphant, the other Militant. The Triumphant Church is the company
of blessed souls in heaven: who having gotten victory over their spiritual
enemies in this life, are now triumphing in everlasting glory. The Militant
Church is the company of the faithful upon earth, living as it were in a
warrfare, where we are allwais fighting with the enemies of our souls, and by
perseuering unto the end in the service of God, we shall be crowned like good
and faithful soldiers. The Militant Church contains both good and evil
livers, Mat. 3.
and therefore it is compared to a field that bears both good corn, and
cockle; to a net that gathers together both good, and evil fish. The good
are kept, Mat. 13.
but the bad are thrown away. It is compared to ten virgins, five of which
were wise, and had prepared the light of good works against the coming of
Christ to reward them; Mat. 25.
and therefore they were admitted into his heavenly nuptials; but the other five
came like fools, and although they had the faith of Christ, and were
christians; yet wanting the oil of the love of God, and the light of good
works, they were excluded from his blessed joys. By these and the like places
we are given to understand, that it is not enough to have the true faith, and
to be Catholics, if our lives be dissonant from our profession, that we live
not like good Catholics: for there are many evil livers in the Catholic
Church, who as bundles of cockle shall be thrown into the fire.

The Communion of Saints. Communion of Saints.
S. John Evangelist writing to the faithful gives them as the cause of his
writing, that you also may have society with us, Io. 1.1.
and our society may be with the father and with his son Jesus Christ. That
is that you may keep in the society and Communion of the Church, and be
partakers of those good works, and means of salvation, which are to be had in
it. For there in is the Catholic Church such a participation of good works,
that all Catholics that are in the state of grace participate with one another
in them, and receive benefit by the good works of others. The reason is because
the Catholic Church is as it were one body, and all the members of it live by
the same spirit of the Holy Ghost, and of Jesus Christ, who keep them in that
holy union, and Communion together. And as all the members of the body concur
and help to the good of each other; so every member of the Catholic Church
helps to the good of the rest, and receives good by the rest, participating
of their good works. Ps. 118.
^am partaker of all that sear thee. Says he holy psalm. And in the P^ter
nester our Savior has taught us so to pray, that every one should ask in
the name of all, saying give us, forgive us etc.

Those who are guilty of mortal sin, as they have noe reward of grace for
any work of their own, which is done in that state, so they loose the
benefit which they should receive by the good works of others. For although
they be members of the Catholic Church; yet wanting the life of grace they are
as dead and rotten members, into which the rest have noe spiritual influence.

The benefit which is reaped by the good works of others is participated by
every one in measure, and proportion to the disposition which he has for it,
and according to the intention of him that performs the work: for as we are
more or less in his intention; so do we participate more or less benefit by
the work which he does. For this it is enough to say that our good works are
offerings which we make to God; and are therefore received and applied by him
according to the offerers intention. By all which we may see what a happiness
it is to be in the Catholic Church, Ps. 83.
and in the state of grace Blessed are they who dwell in thy house o Lord. Now
let us speak

OF THE AVTHORITY of the Church.
BY these words of the Creed it appears that the Catholic Church is of
divine authority: for every article of the Creed being of divine authority;
and we being by this article bound to believe the Church; it follows that the
Church has divine authority, and that we are bound to believe, and to obey
it, as having the authority of God. And therefore this article was most
profitably, and necessarily made by the Apostles, as the ground and foundation
of divine faith and worship. For although in the scriptures it be plane, and by
reason must needs be true, that we are allwais to be governed by the authority
of the Church; yet this article being so commonly and often professed, it is
agreat curb to the rizing of new sects and haeresys, all which begin in the
disobedience of some private men to the authority of the whole Church: and it
can not but be a horror to their minds, and a grievous wound to their own
consciences, to see how they contradict the common Creed of the Apostles. And
therefore S. Paul might well say that a man that is an haeretike is subverted
and sins; Tit. 3.
being condemned by his own judgment.

The authority of the Church is divine in that it is declared also by the
scriptures: and that in innumerable places, which for breuity I omit, and
will mention only the words of our Savior, which he spoke to his disciples at
his last farewell from them. Christ in his Ascension being to leave his
Apostles with a hard task, and difficult work which they were to perform in
founding of the Catholic Church amongst so many enemies, he told them for
their comfort, Mat. 2^.
Behold I am with you a^l days even to the consummation of the world. He spoke
then to the Apostles, and would not only comfort them, but all others who were
to have the government of the Church for ever after, promising to be with them,
as long as the world should endure. As long then as Christ was to be with them
their doctrine was for ever to be true and their authority divine; and he being
to be with them unto the consummation of the world, their doctrine was to be
true and their authority divine unto the consummation of the world, as the
doctrine and authority of Christ, who promised allwais to assist them in their
work: and so their work was his work, and their doctrine and authority were
his. Christ therefore is allwais with the Pastors of the Church when they
represent, and have the authority of the whole Church; not with every one of
them particularly, but with all of them together; and therefore although any one
particular bishop, as he is only a particular member of the Church may err;
yet all bishops cannot possibly err at any time; because Christ has promised
to be with them all days.

It is not needful to produce the sentences of fathers for the divine
authority of the Church; both because these words of the Creed made by the
Apostles, and at all times consented unto by the fathers I believe the
Catholic Church may stand for their sentences; and also because their
sentences to this purpose will frequently occur in that, which I have to say
of the Church. Scriptures and fathers are easily misconstrued by haeretiks, who
make them to speak as they will understand them: or if they be too plane
against them, they discarde the sentence, or the whole book. For those that
are so bold as to contradict the whole Church have lost their shame, and need
regard noe authority at all But because they pretend reason, as building all
their doctrines upon their own wits; and because this point is so necessary
for the deciding of all controuersys, and to the true and lawful condemnation
of all haeresys; we will make it evident by plane and easy reasons, which all
may understand.

To think to have religion without the divine authority of an infallible
Church, is to think to build without a foundation, or as we commonly say to
build castles in the air; the foundation of all true religion being the
authority of the Church which professes it. Grant once that a Church may err
(as it may if it be not supported by the divine authority) and we can not be
certain of any doctrine which it teaches; and being uncertain of the truth
of its doctrine, we are not bound to believe vncertaintys, and it can not be
the true religion, if it be professed by a Church which we are not bound to
believe. And therefore the first thing, which is to be established as the
foundation of true religion, is the infallible and consequently divine
authority of the Church that professes it. Take once away the authority of the
Church, and absolve men from the obedience of it, and you make every man his
own master, and leaving him to himself to believe what he lists, all is
brought into uncertainty and confusion: for there is noe point of faith so
certain, nor any thing so clear, but by proud and contentious men it might
be brought into question.

This is declared by particular instances. If the Church of Christ were not of
divine authority, and infallible certainty in all which it teaches, we could
not be certain either of the Creed, or of the scriptures, or of the sense of
either of them, or of any article of faith whatsoever; nay the very foundation
of all religion would be destroyed, the divine existence becoming also
uncertain to us; and insteede of government, union, and order in the worship
of God, we should have noe divine worship, nor God, at all; but a horrible
confusion, and more then hellish disorder would dwell upon earth.

First the Creed is not received but for the authority of the Church* We
believe that every article of the Creed was made by divine inspiration and
authority, and as such we will defend them with our lives; yet this we know
not but by the Church: for of our selves we could not certainly know it, nor
should we believe it of the Creed more then of other writings, which we
receive not as of faith, but that the Church commands us so to believe of
it, and not of them. Again we do not know the sense of any article of the
Creed, but by the authority of the Church: take away this and we had the sense
of them to seek we knew not where: every one might follow his own sense, and
we should be certain of nothing, but of uncertainty and confusion. Take away
the divine and infallible authority of the Church in the Apostles times, and
you bring all into uncertainty whatsoever they taught, and ruin the foundation
of the whole christian faith, and it had been noe matter what they had
delivered in the Creed, or whether they had made any Creed at all. Take away
that authority from the Church of Christ that is at all times; and it is noe
matter what Creed it deliver, or what sense of the Creed; seeing it may err
in that which it says, and those things may be false which it delivers for
true.

The same appears in the scriptures. We believe that such and such scriptures
were written by some that had the spirit of God to write nothing but truth in
them; that all those books which we receive were written with that spirit; and
that all those books passing through so many hands, and handwritings, as must
necessarily have been before printing was invented, have remained uncorrupted
until our times. How do we know all this to be so, but by the authority of
the Church? deny this, as all haeretiks do to follow their own phansys, and
you may admit of what Scriptures you will, or if you will, you may deny all
scriptures. And this we see by experience to be true, that haeretiks rejecting
the authority of the Church, and disobeying it, reject also the scriptures, and
receive but what they will. The Carpocratites, Seuerians and Manichees rejected
all the old Testament, and all the four ghospels of the new, except that of S.
Luke. Cerdon and Cerinthus rejected S. Luke. The Seuerians rejected the acts of
the Apostles, and all the Epistles of S. Paul. Luther and some Protestants
reject the Epistle of S. James. The Alogians and some Protestants reject the
Apocalypse. And Suencfeldius seeing such a strife about the scriptures, cleared
himself readily, in a word rejecting all. So that if we might contradict the
Church, and follow either our own, or the conceits of any private men, we
might reject the true scriptures, as these have done, and receive false
scriptures, as the Apocryphi did, or deny all scriptures as Suencfeldius,
Quintinus, the Libertines and other haeretiks have done. The authority of the
Church binds us to receive scriptures, and appoints what scriptures we
should receive: and for that authority we receive the gospel, which S. Mark
wrote who was noe Apostle, and not that of S. Thomas who was an Apostle, and we
reject the gospel of Nicodemus, who had seen Christ, and receive the
gospel of S. Luke who never saw him. Therefore we must ground our selves upon
the authority of the Church, and obey it, or else we should not know what
scriptures to receive. S. Augustine has said this in plane terms, Epis. fund.
c. 5.
when he said that he would not believe the gospel but for the authority of
the Church. And adds that for the same authority he would not believe
Manichaeus the haereticke.

Further more the word of the scriptures is not profitable to us, but in its
true sense; and that true sense can not be known but by a true interpretour;
which every private man, as we see, is not: for although there be a great
disparity in the abilitys of men excelling one another; yet noe man of himself
is free from error, and can but by his own reason probably affirm that,
which another may probably deny; and therefore all private opinions must be
referred unto some certain authority, which must decide all controuersys in
the sense of the scriptures. Besides the scriptures in themselves are so hard
to be understood and full of difficultys; that it were against reason to leave
every man to his own sense and construction of them. They have beside the
litteral sense many kinds of allegorys, in which if we should follow the
letter, it would kill us. The devil alleged the letter and word of holy
scriptures; but in a false sense to tempt Christ; and Christ refuted him by the
words of scripture in their true sense: but if we had not at all times the like
authority of Christ in the Church, the devil would easily pervert the
scriptures to us, and we should be subject to continual errors. S. Peter says
that in the Epistles of S. Paul there are certain things hard to be
understood which the unlearned and unstable deprave as also the rest of the
scriptures to their own perdition: and S. Augustine, Pet. 2.3.
Epis. 119.
who was one of the learnedest sort of men, confesses that there were more
places of the scriptures, which he understood not, then that he vnde stood.
The sense of the scriptures is so depraved by haeretiks, that Luther called
the scriptures the book of haeretiks; every haeretike alle^dging scriptures,
and all of them deprauing them to their own perdition; and in this they are
known to deprave them, that they follow their own interpretations, and
private conceits against the whole Church. Simon Magus would give so much
honor to the Angels, that he would have them our mediators above Christ, and
he alleged scriptures and reason for this doctrine: Protestants honor them
so little, that they will not grant them any mediation at all, neither v^der
Christ; and they also allege scriptures and reasons for their doctrine. The
Manichees forbadde some meats as in themselves unlawful to be eaten, and
alleged scriptures and reason for this doctrine: Protestants allow of all
meats to be eaten at all times, (although it be against the praecep^ of the
Church) and allege also scriptures and reason for their doctrine The
Marcionists Encratites, and other haeretiks forbadde marriage as unlawful, and
alleged scriptures and reasons for this doctrine: Protestants esteem so
highly of marriage that they make it lawful for virgins and religious persons
that have dedicated and vowed their chastity to God, and allege also
scriptures, and reasons for it. Pelagius attributes our good works to our own
natural forces, and to freewill more then to grace; and has more show of
scriptures, then most haeretiks have for their doctrines: Protestants on the
contrary grant noe freewill at all, and will not want scriptures nor reasons
for themselves. Thus you have two contrary doctrines both of them alleging
scriptures, and both of them in a false sense, the truth being betwixt them
both (says a learned author) as Christ was betwixt two thieves. Mald in Io. 6.
But how do we know that neither of them has the true sense of the
scriptures? We know it by the authority of the whole Church, which at first
declared against those doctrines: and therefore whosoever shall obstinatly
maintain them are haeretiks; because they deny the ninth article of the
Creed, not believing the Catholic Church; but standing obstinate against all
authority that was then in the world. Which if at any time it were lawful to
do; then were there none to interpret the scriptures, and to destinguish
betwixt sense and sense, and reason and reason; and we might as well have noe
scriptures at all, as have noe means to know the true sense of them.

Lastly if there were not at all times some authority amongst men infallibly
assisted of God to govern, and direct in his worship, and to determine the
verity of all propositions, that were to be believed with divine faith; then
might every man believe and say what he liked, and all order and government
were taken away, and utmost disorder would reign amongst us, even to the
denying of God. For although natural reason does declare the divine existence,
and a demonstration may be made by a good Philosopher to prove it; yet liberty
would induce to that which is against reason, and would draw into atheism as
it does to other vices which by the reason, and nature of all men are abhorred.
Besides not one man among a thousand can make that demonstration; and what then
should become of those that can not, if they were to forsake the authority of
the Church, and follow only their own reasons? should he only be saved that
can make it? noe nor he neither by that, which were but a natural knowledge,
and humane faith in him.

Out of all which it follows, that the Catholic Church has divine authority
to determine all veritys, and to decide all controuersys of faith, and to
direct us infallibly in that which we are to believe, and to do in relation to
the honor of God: or else the Creed had been in vain, as also the scriptures;
all proof of reason had been uncertain, all union and orderly government, and
the very foundation of all religion were utterly destroyed; and therefore one may
as well say I will have noe Creed, nor religion at all, as to say I will have
or believe noe Church: and those only remain sure and secute from error that
at all times, in all controuersys follow the sentence of the Church, and
adhaere to it. And therefore the Apostles by the inspiration of the Holy Ghost
made this important article, that we might never forgett our obedience to the
Church, but that in all doubts and difficultys we might have recourse to it,
and say I believe the Catholic Church. And that those who will stand against
it may be known to be infringers of the law, and Creed of the Apostles.

From hence is the beginning of all heresys, that some private men will
contradict the authority of the whole Church, and obiecting against some
particular point, or points of faith, they make themselves the judges, and
determine as they will themselves. They contend allwais about some particular
point, or points of faith, and wrangle about them* but if you ask them upon
what authority they contradict the Catholic Church, and all the Churches in
the world, separating from them? they are then out of their wits, and know not
what to say; knowing that if they pretend the word of God, the same question
confounds them again, demanding upon what authority they dare interpret the
word of God against the Catholic Church, and against all the Churches in the
world? besides that the word of God is against them, commanding both in the
Creed, and scriptures to believe the Church. If we will give them satisfaction
in those particular points, and difficultys, it is but of curtesy; for we
confess that there are many points of faith, which by our own reason we
cannot comprehend: the most reasonable, and best satisfaction is because the
Catholic Church so teaches: otherwise as I have showed we should neither
have Creed, nor scriptures, nor God. Contend not then with haeretiks about
particular points; but ask them upon what authority they dare question them?
what Church will they follow? If they will fall from the Catholic Church to
some company of haeretiks, that began at some time against all Churches, or
if themselves will begin such a company, they are here condemned in this
article. The authority of the Church is the rule, the guide, the sure anchor, to
which we must all wais hold. It is a rock which dasheth in pieces all
temptations of faith, and objections of haeretiks, and keeps us free from
doubts and fears, as in a quiet, and safe harbor. Let us now speak

OF THE GOVERNMENT of the Church.
THe Church in holy scriptures is compared to a well ordered city, such an one
as Jerusalem was, when the service of God slourished in it. But the government
of the Church of Christ does far excel that. For it is a government which
God has taken a nearer charge of, as having in his own person instituted it
first, and engaged himself by promise allwais to protect, and defend it: and
therefore he must at all times provide such governors for it, as shall carefully
maintain his divine service in it. Esa. 62.
Upon thy walls, Jerusalem, I have appointed watchmen, all the night, for ever
they shall not hold their peace. It is compared to the army of a camp set in
array, Cant. 6.
glorious in it self, and terrible to its enemies for the order which it has.

The order and good government of the Church consists in the dew
subordination of subjects to their superiors. As in our bodies several offices
are given to several parts, and all of them constituted under one head. And as
in a common wealth some bear offices, and others without offices obey them,
and all are finally reduced unto some head, and supreme power, and that supreme
power subordinate lastly to God that empowered it; so in the government of the
Church, some have authority over others, and one head is placed over all. These
are the pastors whom God has appointed, and disposed into that order. Romans 13.
Those things that are of God are ordained. Says the Apostle; that is to say,
they are with order; and to be with order is to be not all alike; but with
subordination of inferiors to superior powers; and so the order of the Church
consists in people subordinate to their pastors, and of pastors subordinate
unto one supreme head upon earth. And the head and pastors of the Church
exercizing their power most fully in a General Council; it will be sufficient
for the government of the Church, to speak of the head, and of General
Councels.

Christ chose out of all the world some to be his disciples; Of the head of the
Church.
out of his disciples he took some to be Apostles, and out of his Apostles he
chose one to be the head, and to have authority over his whole Church. These
(understanding by the disciples all those that were under the Apostles) were
then the whole Church of Christ. S. Peter was chosen by him, as the head and
supreme pastor over all, both pastors, and people. Him and his successors we
call the vicars of Christ, that is to say, he that bears upon earth the
person and place of Christ, who is in heaven the chief head of the Church.
Neither can it in reason offend any, that we call S. Peter, and his successors
in that office the Vicars of Christ. For if S. Paul might authorize what he did
in punishing, and pardoning of the Corinthian with the authority of Christ, and
could lawfully say, that he did it in the name, virtue, Cor. 1.5. Cor. 2.2.
and person of Christ, he being but a subject of the head pastor of the
Church; with much more reason the chief pastor, and head of the Church may be
called the Vicat of Christ, he performing, and executing that office after a
more eminent manner in the name, virtue, and person of Christ.

Christ first promised this authority when asking his disciples, whom they
thought him to be, Peter answered, Thou art Christ the Son of the living God.
Then jesus answering said to him. Mat. 16.
Blessed art thou Simon (...) I say to thee thou art Peter; (that is to say a
rock) and upon this rock I will build my Church, and the ga^es of hell shall
not prevail against it. And I will give to thee the keys of the kingdom of
heaven. And whatsoever thou shall bind upon earth, shall be bound also in the
heavens: and what soever thou shall loose in earth, it shall be loosed also in
the heavens. By which it is most evident, that some greater dignity, and
preeminonce was intended to Peter, then to the rest of the Apostles. First it
was a most singular high mystery that which Christ asked, and Peter then
professed; and which before then perhaps was never revealed to any of the
Apostles, and which flesh and blood could not reveal; that is by humane means
could not be understood. Moreover Christ then blessed him, and spoke unto him
after a most particular, and energious manner of speech, calling him a rock:
which was not his name, nor had ary relation to him, more then to the rest of
his Apostles, but in respect of some mystery, to wit as he was to be the prime
foundation of the Church amongst them. Then the keys of the kingdom of heaven
were particularly promised to him, having first called him a rock, and
promised to build his Church upon that rock. Which can not be understood of
Christ; for Christ spoke not then to himself; but to Simon: besides the Church
was then all ready builded upon Christ; but here he speaks for the future,
and promises that it should be builded upon Simon, whom he called Peter: and
said thou art a rock, and upon this rock I will build my Church; and therefore
he must not be understood then to say, that he would build it upon another
rock, and not upon that. For although the Church were builded chiefly upon
Christ; yet then he spoke of Simon, and therefore it must be builded upon him
also: to whom he then also said I will give to thee. By all which it is
manifest to any that has not the spirit of contradiction, and wrangling about
any thing, that Christ did not say here that he would build his Church upon
himself; but upon Simon, whom therefore he called a rock. And unto this all
the holy fathers agree, that he founded his Church upon S. Peter; although they
grant also that which is true, to wit that the Church was founded upon Christ;
and also upon Peter's Confession, as a means and preparation for the building
of it upon his person.

That which Christ here promised, he afterward performed, when before his
Ascension he spoke to Peter, and gave unto him the care of his flock, asking
him first, Io. 21.
Simon of John love thou me more then these? and Peter answered yea Lord
thou know that I love thee. Then he bad him feed his lambs. And again he
asked him Simon of John love thou me? and Peter answered again Yea Lord,
thou know that I love thee. Christ not contented with all this, asked him
again the third time, love thou me? and Peter answering Lord thou know
all things: thou know that I love thee. Then he badde him feed his sheep.
Now what could all this signify, that Christ should so often ask of Peter if
he loved him, and if he loved him more then the rest, and that Peter should
again, and again profess his love to him, and that he should have the care
of Christ's lambs and sheep; but that as Peter had professed, before the rest,
his faith in him when he promised the supreme authority to him, so he should
profess his love especially above the rest, when he gave him that authority.
And this authority being over the lambs and sheep, it is general over all the
whole flock, great and little, pastors and people; all being contained in the
denomination of lambs and sheep. Eusebius Emissenus, Ser. de net. Io. Enang.
he first committed his lambs and then his sheep to him; because he made him
not only a pastor; but the pastor of pastors. He is therefore the pastor of
all for beside lambs and sheep there is nothing in the Church. And S. Bernard
If thou love me Peter seed my sheep What sheep the people of this or that
city, Ber. l. 2. de consid ad Eugen. c. 8.
country or kingdom? to whom is it not plane that he assigned in particular
none, but all? T^ere is nothing excepted where noe destinction is made. S.
Gregory, It is plane to all those that read the gh^spell that from our Lords
mouth the charge of the whole Church was delivered to Peter Prince of the
Apostles. Greg l. 4. Ep. 76.
It is indeed so plane in the gospel, that for all the senses which most
places of the scriptures admit, and in which the holy fathers have diuersely
understood them; yet as Maldonat has observed upon this place of S John 21.
there was never any father, either of the Latin or Greek Church, that
understood this place contrary to that sense; yet Luther and Calvin are so
bold, as not only to question it; but also to contradict it, and to stand in
this contradiction against them all, and against the whole Church. S. Denis
calls S. Peter the supreme glory and most ancient tuteur and safeguard of
dinines. De din. nem. c 3.
And having been present when he and S. Paul were martyred at Rome, he writes
to Timothee (who was his fellow disciple to S. Paul) the manner how they
saluted one another before martyrdom. ad Tim.
When (says he) the two pillars of the world were separated, Paul said to
Peter, Peace be with thee foundation of Churches, shepherd of the ewes and
lambs of Christ. Peter said to Paul, Go in peace preacher of the good,
mediator and captain of the health of the just. Thus did S. Paul salute S.
Peter with that which was his prime and propper title of the shepherd of
Christ's flock. The holy fathers also speak in such terms of S. Peter, and
give him such titles, as planely express an eminency of power and authority
over the rest of the Apostles. Hyp. deconsamma. mund^. Tert. prascrip. c. 22.
Cyp. ep. 40. ali^s lib. 1. ep ^. Pet. Alex ser. de poenit. Amb. in c. 2. ad
Gal. Opt l 2. cont. Donat. Cyr. Catech. 2. and 1. and 17. Greg N.Z. or 7 ^piph.
haer. 51. Chrysos^ora. 5. in Iudaos. Damesus. ep. 2. Hiero. in psalm. 13.
Hyppolitus Peter the Prince of the Apostles. Tertul. The Rock of the Church.
Cyprian. One God, one Christ, one Church one chair founded upon Peter by our
Lords voice. Pet. Alex. Peter the Prince of the Apostles. S. Ambrose To Peter
alone the grace of the primateship amongst the Apostles was given. S. Optatus
In the city of Rome the Episc^pal chair was first given to Peter, in which
Peter the head of all the Apostles satte. S. Cyril, Hieros. calls him the
Prince of the Apostles. S. Greg. Naz. The safety of the Church. S. Epiphan. The
captain of the disciples. S. Chrysos. The Prince of the Apostles. S. Damasus.
The only Prince of the Apostles S. Hierome Peter the head of the Church. S.
August. Who knows not most blessed Peter to be the Prince of the Apostles.
The primacy amongst the Apostles by special grace is praeeminent in Peter S.
Leo Peter alone is chosen of all the world to be set over the vocation of all
nations, Aug. tract. 56. in lo. and l. 2. d^ bap. cont. Donat. c. 1. Lee ser.
3. de anniuers. Assumpt.
and all the Apostles, and all the fathers of the Church.

Neither does the supremacy of Christ over the Church hinder the supremacy of S
Peter in spiritual affairs, any more then his supremacy in temporal power
hinders the supreme authority of temporal Princes in temporal affairs.
Christ of himself was the head of all authority, both spiritual and temporal;
but after his ascension into heaven, he being visibly absent from us, as he
left kings with supreme authority in the temporal government of their
kingdoms; so also he left one head to have supreme authority under him in the
government of the Church, which is his chief kingdom containing all the
kingdoms of the world; and therefore stood much more need of a head to
govern and keep unity in it. This as I have showed could be none but S. Peter
whilst he lived, for that Christ founded the Church on him, gave unto him the
keys of heaven, and made him the pastor of all his sheep in such
circumstances, as are most evident for it. Moreover he is first named in the
catalogue of the Apostles, Mat 10.
and said to be the first; not for that he first followed Christ: Amb. in Co.
2.12.
for as S. Ambrose says, Andrew first followed Christ before Peter; and yet
the primacy Andrew received not. To him the Apostles had recourse, as to their
superior: he took upon him chiefly to decide controuersys in General
Counsels, to speak before the rest, to work miracles before the rest: and
was never murmured at by any of the Apostles, as taking upon him more then his
due. The ancient and holy fathers of the Church acknowledge, as you have seen
his supreme authority. And if all this be not sufficient; let it suffize that
it is the doctrine of the Catholic Church: what vpstart teacher will begin
to contradict it? or who will believe and follow him?

It was very necessary that Christ should ordain one head, and supreme power
in the Church, for the keeping of unity and concord in it; and that in all
difficultys which should arize the Pastors of the Church might be called
together by the chief head, the place of their meeting might be assigned by
him, and they be kept in unity by obeying his authority. S. Cyprian considered
this as the only means for the suppression of haeresys, Cyp. defimpl^^t
praeatorum siu^ de unit. Eccles.
which the enemy of God laboreth so much to raise, and delivers it as the
means instituted of Christ to keep unity in the Church The enemy (says this
saint) perceiving his idols to be forsak^n, and his temples to be deserted by
the multitude of believers, invented a new deceit to deceive the unwary by the
name of a Christian, raizing heresys and schisms to corrupt verity, and to
subvert faith. This is o brethren because we have not recourse unto the origin,
nor seek to the head. Which if we would examine and consider, there would
need noe long treatise nor many arguments to find out the truth. Our Lord
said to Peter, Thou art Peter, and upon this rock I will build my Church etc.
and again after his resurrection Feed my sheep. Upon him alone he builds
the Church, and commends to him the feeding of his sheep. And although he
gave equal authority to all the Apostles after his resurrection, saying as my
father sent me, All the Apostles equal in Apostle ship. Yet Veteronely had the
primacy. Hiero. l. 1. aduers. Iouin. c. 14.
so I send you, receive the Holy Ghost whose sins etc. Yet to manifest unity
be constituteth one chair and by his authority he disposed the origin of that
unity to begin from one. The rest of the Apostles were that which Peter was.
The primacy was given to Peter, that the Church of Christ might appear to be
one, and one chair. S. Hierome Although all the Apostles in Apostleship were
alike; yet Christ for the better keeping of unity, and truth, would have one to
be the head of them all; that a head being once constituted, occasion of
schism might be taken away. By which we see how necessary it was, in the
opinion of these saints, that one should be established, as the supreme pastor
and head of the Church, and that although all the Apostles had the same power
as bishops, and had their authority immediately from Christ himself; and so
the Church was also founded upon them, that is upon their necessary functions;
yet it was chiefly founded upon S. Peter, as the Primate and supreme pastor
over all, who had also from Christ himself the lawful execution of that
authority.

Now if one supreme head was constituted of Christ as necessary to keep unity
and prevent schisms in the Church of God; the government of the Church
required ever after, that supreme power to remain in successors to him; and it
was not to continue only for thirty six, or thirty seven years, as long as
S. Peter lived; there being afterward as much, if not more need of it;
schisms and heresys being as likely to rize in the Church after the Apostles
days, when it was destitute of their presence, as when it had their help and
assistance; and S. Cyprian as you see makes this to be the origin of all
schisms and heresys, because they seek not to the head. And therefore, as I
shall show in the next title, it is a sufficient destinction to discern all
false Churches by, that they begin allwais in disobedience to the head of the
Church, and the Pastors of his Communion. But having spoken of the head of the
Church, in the next place we will speak of General Councels.

Christ having chosen Apostles to govern the Church, General Counsels.
and amongst the Apostles one to be the head; these then had the authority of
the whole Church, and all were bound to obey them. When therefore the general
necessity of the Church requires, for the preventing of schisms or heresys,
or the deciding of any controuersys that a General Council should be called,
the head of the Church exercizeth his supreme authority, summoning the Pastors
together, and appointing a place of meeting for them: who consulting and
resolving upon those questions; their resolutions are to be embraced by all, as
having authority from Christ himself, who made him the lawful head, and them
the lawful Pastors of his Communion, in place of S. Peter and the Apostles; to
whom the Holy Ghost was sent for their assistance, and whom Christ promised to
be with unto the consummation of the world. Thus did S. Peter with some other
pastors of the Church, that could conveniently be present, meet at Jerusalem:
and having ended their consultation they rehearsed their decrees, and doubted
not to call them the decrees of the Holy Ghost, Act. 15.
saying, It has seemed good to the Holy Ghost and to us. Such decrees as these
are received by all, as having indeed the authority, voice, and consent of all
true believers that are in the world. For every true and faithful christian
giving his voice, as he ought, to that assembly, it has the authority of the
whole Catholic Church, and of all the faithful in the world. So S. Athasius
calls the Council of Nyce, Ath. de gest. Conc. Arim.
an assembly of the whole world. S. Leo calls also the decrees of that
Council the de^rees of the whole world. S. Augustine The sentence of a
plenary, Aug. l. de b^p cont. Donat. l. 2. c. 4.
or General Council is the sentence of the whole Church. And speaking of the
validity of baptism done by haeretiks, (which validity S. Cyprian and some
others of that time denied) he has these words. Neither durst we affirm any
such thing (to wit as that the baptism of haeretiks is valid) were we not
well grounded upon the most uniform authority of the whole Church: unto which
undoubtedly S. Cyprian would have yielded, if in his time the truth of this
question had been cleared, and by a General Council established. Greg in
registro. l. 1. c. 24.
S. Gregory that he esteemed of the four General Counsels of Nyce,
Constantinople, Ephesus and Chalcedon, as of the four ghospels of Matthew
Mark, Luke and John. Blessed Theodosius before S. Gregorys time went up into
the pulpit, as Metaphrastes declares in his life, and pronounced publikly Let
him be accursed that esteems not the four holy Councels equal with the four
ghospells. An edict was setforth by the Emperor Valentinian and Martian his
colleague in which the decrees of the Council of Chalcedon are commanded to be
observed in these words. Let now all profane strife be laid aside: for verily
he is impious and sacrilegious, that after the sentences of so many Priests,
shall think that there remains any thing by his opinion to be handled.
Another decree is extant of the Emperor Martian to the people of
Constantinople, in which he says, We have forbidden all to dispute of
religion; for one or two can not find out those secrets: especially when so
many venerable Priests, with extreme labor, and much prayer, could not
discover the truth, but by the divine authority. It is indeed a most vain
thing to dispute of the truth of those things which a General Council has
declared to be true; because all such things have been already sufficiently
disputed by the best authority of the world.

That therefore, which by a General Council is established as of faith,
remains allwais firm and certain in its truth; for God is not changed, nor
can his words ever be but true: and the words of a General Council are the
words of God; Christ and the Holy Ghost teaching them all truth. Mat. 28. Io.
14 and 16.
That which by some former Council has been but obuiously, and slightly
handled, as being then out of question, may be more illustrated by a following
Council: and such orders and constitutions as are agreeable to some times, may
be repealed, as not convenient for other times: and so S. Augustine says that
the former are sometimes amended by the following; but noe General Council,
signed unto by the head and Pastors of the Church, can ever be declared for
false, nor any thing which is declared by such a Council. Some conuenticles
of haeretiks as that of the Arians at Ariminum, and of Nestorians at Ephesus,
have been declared for false; because they were not general of the whole world,
nor called and ratifyed by the bishop of Rome; as all General Councels used and
ought to be. But those, which were true Councels, and were truly authorized by
him, were never questioned afterward, nor any, thing in them.

But although a General Council includes the authority of the whole Church;
yet it is not necessary, that every member of the Church be present at it: it
is sufficient that the voice and assent of every member of the Church be with
the Pastors of the Church: for as it is not required that every member of a
kingdom be personally present at the Council table of the king; but only the
king, and Peers of the realm, who have authority over all: and as the
superiors only and magistrates of the Commune Wealth, which are present in
consultation make laws for the good of all, and all are bound to obey them,
as the laws of that nation and commune wealth, which they defend with their
lives, and are guilty of death, if they break them; because they proceed from
the general and lawful authority: so the head of the Church, and pastors that
are in Communion with him, being placed by Christ and the Holy Ghost, to
govern the Church, have lawful authority to determine for all, and all are
bound to obey their decrees: for that they are the decrees of all, and that
assembly is the whole Church in authority. Thus an assembly of the chief of
the ^raelits is called in holy scripture all Israel, Reg. 3.^.
and as I have showed the holy fathers have called General Councels assemblys
of the whole Church, and of the whole world. Neither is it necessary that all
the bishops of the Church be personally present at them. For that is morally
impossible, and very inconvenient; some being necessary to remain for the
performing of Episcopal functions. All the Apostles were not present with S.
Peter at the Council of Jerusalem; but only those which could be spared from
their places: which all at once can not be.

General Councels consist only of bishops. Neither can, Councels enely of
bishops.
or ever did any other but bishops take place by their own authority in them.
And therefore S. Leo in his Epistles, and S. Augustine commonly call them Councels
of bishops. In the acts of the Council of Chalcedon these words are some times
repeated Synodus Episcoporum est non Clericorum. Superfluos mitte for as. The
Council is of bishops not of Clerks. Those that are supersluous let them be
put forth. The Abbot Auxentius being invited to the Council answered, It is
not for Monks to teach others but to be taught. This is due only to the
dignity of bishops. As for temporal Princes, as such they never had any
spiritual jurisdiction in the Church of Christ; for that was given to Peter and
the Apostles. The Emperor Theodosius writing to the Council of Ephesus
says, It is not lawful for me, that am noe bishop to intermedle in
Ecclesiastical affairs. The Emperor Valentinian being solicited by some
bishops to cause a Council to be called for the deciding of certain questions
then in controversy, answered It is not for me that am but in the rank of the
people to meddle with those things. Let the Priests to whom they belong agree
among themselves to meet where they like. These Emperors spoke like wise men
and good Christians. Cor. 1.7.
Every one in the vocation that he was called, in it ^et him abide, says the
Apostle. Bishops are called to govern in spiritual, temporal Princes in
temporal things; and they must not go forth of their propper callings.
Bishops made not themselves bishops: God gave that authority to them; and
whosoever have it, must have it of God I will give Pastors (says God by his
Prophet) and they shall feed you with knowledge and doctrine. Hier. 3.
And S. Heb 5. Par. 2.26.
Paul speaking of priesthood says neither does any man take the honor to
himself, but he that is called of God as Aaron. Ozias king of Judah resisting
the Priests, and coming boldly to the altar to usurp without calling their
authority and office, was stricken of God with a sudden leprosy which then in
the sight of all broke forth of his forhead; so that for his proud aspiring
to the dignity and office of Priests, he was then for his leprosy to be
excluded even from the people. And Saul for offering of holocaust being a king
only, and noe Priest, (although compelled as he thought by necessity unto it)
lost notwithstanding his kingdom from himself and from his posterity for
ever. Some times Emperors and Prince, are present at General Counsels to
grace, and protect them from turbulent men; but they give not their voices in
any thing. So Constantine the first christian Emperor was present in the
first General Council of Nyce, but how? he came in the last of all, and having
a little low seat set for him, he satte not down until the bishops made him
a sign to sit down. And as for the decrees of the Council we read that
three hundred, and eightteene bishops subscribed to them; but not that
Constantine ever subscribed. So also men of more sanctity of life and eminent
in abilitys, although not bishops are sometimes called to assist in General
Councels; but not to give sentence, or to subscribe to the decrees by their
own authority.

The government therefore which Christ ordained in his Church was by S. Peter,
and the Apostles; that is to say by one head, or chief bishop, and by
inferior bishops under him. And their authority is most full, and obliging
when it speaks by a General Council. Then the head of the Church exercizeth
more fully his supreme authority, calling together the pastors of the world,
and assigning to them the place of their meeting. The bishops and others, who
for sanctity, wisdom, and learning are in reason to be thought the best
deserving of the whole world, are present at them. Being come together solemn
days of prayer are instituted for the invocation of the Holy Ghost. Every one
of this absolute company has then liberty to speak his mind freely, and by
the grounds of his own religion, is bound not to dissemble, but to speak the
truth according to his conscience; they being for the most part mere strangers
to one another. All things being well examined they subscribe in order, first
the head bishop, and then the rest after him, according to their dignity. This
is the harmony which Christ has composed in his Church, of people concording
with their pastors, and of pastors with their supreme head. Now what more
satisfaction can our souls desire, then from such an assembly of so many holy
and learned men, who have the voice of the whole Catholic Church, and the
assistance of Christ, and of the Holy Ghost? Let any christian speak truly,
and he must needs confess that it would be a horror to his conscience, and
that his own thoughts would condemn him of error, if he were condemned by
such an authority. And therefore S. Paul might well say, that the haretical man
is condemned by his own judgment. Tit. 3.
Because he seeing his doctrine to be publicly condemned by the general
sentence of the whole Catholic Church, that then is in the world, can not but
see his own peruersed obstinacy in still mainteining it, and that he breaks
the concord of people with their pastors, confounds all order of government
in the Church, destroys the certain ground of all divine veritys, and makes
the Creed, scriptures, and all principles of faith to become subject to the
censure of every private man. Wherefor the Apostle bids us to take heed of
such men, and our blessed Savior himself has commanded us to regard them noe
otherwise, then as Heathens and Publicans.

Victor an ancient and grave author, Vis l. 2. de p^rses. Vandal.
who lived in the age of S. Augustine about twelve hundred years since
relates a passage worthy to be remembered to show the comfort and confidence,
which Catholics have in General Counsels, and how that haeretiks are
affrayed, and dare not stand to them. Hunnericus king of the Vandals
persecuting the Church, summoned the Catholics of his dominions to come to
Carthage to a public disputation with his Arian bishops. Bishop Eugenius in
the name of the Catholics answered in this manner. Let the kingknow that
trusting in God we are ready, and very glad to have a public trial of our
cause, but we desire that all the world may be present at it: for we will not
take upon us to decide the general cause by our particular votes. Let therefore
all those beyond the seas know that the universal cause is here to be treated,
and not only the cause of the Affrican Provinces; for we will be tried by the
universal authority, and consent of all. And when the king returned answer by
his Prefident, that he would grant him his desire, if he would bring all the
world under his power, Eugenius replied again. Thou should not desire that
request of me, which is not in my power to perform. That which I say to the
king is, that if his majesty desire indeed to be sdtisfyed in our religion,
(which only has the true faith) let him send unto his friends, and I will
send unto my fellow bishops, and especially to the Roman Church which is the
head of all Churches. The bishop suspecting the intention of the king denied to
come to his city, and wisely appealed to the general authority, and especially
to the bishop of Rome; but noe haeretike will every yield to that appeal,
where the question is to be tried by the universal authority of the whole
Church: but as owls and battes fly from the sunshine, so do they from such a
glorious trial: and as they began in the disobedience of a few obstinate
persons, or of some one silly man; so they are affrayed to be tried by the
universal Church, which is at all times, and was then when their disobedience
began. Disp. Lyps.
Luther was contented to have a trial of his doctrine by single disputation;
and when that worthy man D^ Eckius, the glory of Swedland, publicly confuted,
and shamed him, he broke forth into blasphemous words, unworthy to be repeated.
But he durst not come to the Council of Trent; which he needed not to have
feared, if he would have submitted to the authority of the universal Church,
as all good Christians ought to do. Now let us see,

WHICH IS THE CATHOLIC Church.
Quest. Give me a difference betwixt the true, and all salse Churches? Ans.
The true Charch continues allwais in union, and obedience to its head pastors:
all false Churches begin in dissentions, and disobedience to the head and
pastors of the Church.

Thus S. Cyprian S. Hierome and others alleged. S. Peter being constituted of
Christ as the head, and supreme pastor of the Church (as I have showed, and is
confirmed by all that which I have to say of his successor the Bishop of
Rome,) and that authority being necessary to remain allwais after him; we must
see at all times, and in all controne^sys what the successor of S. Peter, and
the pastors that join with him determine and we must adhaere to them, as to
the true and lawful authority of the Church. This (as I shall show) is the
bishop of Rome and the pastors of his Communion; and therefore those, that obey
him and them obey the lawful authority, and are the true Church, and they are
all false Churches that disobey them. Because the authority of the whole Church
residing in the head and Pastors of it, disobedience to them is disobedience to
the whole Church: and all false Churches of christians being either of
Schismatiks or haeretiks, and they beginning allwais in disobedience to the
Church; it follows that those who continue allwais obedient to him, that is
then the head of the Church and to the pastors of his Communion, are the true
Church, and the company of them altogether is the whole Catholic Church: and
those that refuse to obey their authority are false Churches of Scismatiks or
haeretiks.

And this disobedience is not only the original cause of all false Churches,
and a destinctiue sign to discern them by; but it is the very essential form
which constituteth them in the nature of false Churches, and makes them to be
such. For noe man can be a member of a false Church for false doctrine only;
except it be joined with obstinacy, and disobedience to the Church. A good
Catholic may hold, or reach false doctrine of ignorance, or mindelesnesse; but
he is not a Catholic if he maintain any thing obstinatly against the
authority of the Church. In points which are disputed by Philosophers, and
Catholic divines, affirmed by some, and denied by others, a falsehood is
taught on one side; but noe error in faith, is committed, nor the sin of
schism, or haeresy is incurred; because the head and pastors of the Church
having declared nothing in those points, there is noe disobedience to the
Church by them. S. Cyprian and the bishops of Africa erred in doctrine and
opinion, when they thought that the baptism of haeretiks was not valid; but
they erred not in faith; because the Church had then declared nothing of it;
and therefore it was noe formal error, or heresy, because there was noe
disobedience to the Church. I may err say the fathers commonly alleged but I
will never be an haeretike. Error is of the mind and understanding, but
heresy is the defect of the will: to be allwais free from error we can not,
but from schism, and heresy, we may if we will. It is then wilful
disobedience to the head and pastors of the Church that constituteth all false
Churches: and it is obedience to the head and pastors of the Church, that
conserueth us in the true Church. The true Church is a congregation of people
united together with his l^wfull head and pastors: all false Churches are
congregations of people divided from, and disobedient to the head and pastors
of the Church. S. Paul warns the Romans to remember this mark, saying. Romans
16.
I desire you brethren to mark them that make dissentions and scandals
contrary to the doctrine which you have learned and anoide them. If all
christians had remembered these words, and at all times had observed them, there
had never been any false Church of christians. And if all would here after
observe them in the beginning of heresys, the arch haeretike might despair of
his work, and would not get so much as one follower after him: he would
discover himself by the propper mark of an haeretike: which is not only to
hold false doctrines, but also to make dissension in the Church, by teaching
new doctrines, and by standing obstinate in them. If therefore you see any one
to begin some singularity of doctrine contrary to that which is taught in the
Church, suspect presently such a man, as tainted at least with a dangerous
humor of pride, if not with inward heresy: but judge him not an haeretike
until his error be made manifest by the authority of the Church, and he
stand ob^^inate against that authority. Which if he do, then he makes
dissension and scandal, and we may then, and must judge him to be an
haeretike, and avoid him. We should pity such a man with all our hearts, and
pray for him, as for our brother, but we ought to avoid his conversation, as
the breath of one infected with the plague. But if you see that he get
followers to join with him, and to maintain his disobedience to the head and
pastors of the Church; you have then in them a false Church, and those that
maintain their disobedience, though never so long after, are all members of
the same false Church: and those that keep in union and obedience to their
head and pastors, are the true Catholic Church.

Now christians you have for ener a prevention against all schisms and heresys
that may hereafter arize: you shall presently destinguish the true Church from
the false by this noble cognizant, to wit obedience to the head and pastors of
the Church: and the false you shall discern it, by the infamous brand of
pride, and disobedience to them. Keep your selves in union and obedience to
that authority, which is, and allwais must be in the Church of God, and you are
grounded upon a sure rock. I would that these words were written in the doors
of every Church, and engraven in the walls in stones of flint. THE TRVE CHVRCH
CONTINVETH ALLWAIS IN UNION AND OBEDIENCE TO ITS HEAD AND PASTORS: ALL FALSE
CHVRCHES BEGIN BY DISOB^ DIENCE TO THE HEAD AND PASTORS OF THE CHVRCH; that
all by often beholding them might remember their due obedience to the Catholic
Church.

And this mark is not only sufficient to discover for the future, and to
prevent the rizing of false Churches here after; but also to show which of all
christian Churches, that are now extant in the world, is the true Catholic
Church for Christ having instituted the government of his Church to be by one
head, and supreme pastor, and by other bishops, as inferior pastors in
Communion with him: and the government which Christ instituted being allwais to
be observed and obeyed by us; there needs noe more to show which is the true
Church; but to show who is the true head of the Church by succession from S.
Peter, and by the lawful possession of his chair and power. For he and the
pastors of his Communion are to be obeyed, as deriuing their authority from
Christ himself, and as having from him the authority of the whole Church. This
argument is often used by S. Cyprian, who bids us in the beginning of all
heresys, and for the deciding of all controuersys, allwais to look up to the
head of the Church, and to seek to him: and tractatu de simplicitate
praelatorum sieve de unit. Eccles. he makes this the cause of all heresys as
you have heard. Because (says he) we have not recourse unto the ormen, nor
seek unto the head: and then he begins to derive that authority from
Christ, unto S. Peter, that by one head and supreme pastor unity might be
preserved in the Church. And says again that Heresys have sprung and Schisms
have been bred by noe other cause; Cyp. l. 1. ep. 13. and 55.
but for that the Priest of God is not obeyed, nor one judge considered to be
for the time in the Church of God. So that to show who is the true head of the
Church will sufficiently destinguish the true Church: for the pastors that
communicate with him are the true pastors, and the people of that Communion are
the true people of God, and that whole congregation of pastors and people being
taken altogether, is the whole Catholic Church.

Now to show who is the true head of the Church we must secke into antiquity,
and see what bishop did aunciently in the first Church of the Apostles, and in
the primitive times after them bear that authority, and was then acknowledged
for the head, and supreme pastor of the Church. For as truth which was
eternally in God was before falsehood which came afterward by creatures; and
as true and lawful power was first in the true Church of Christ, and false
usurped power was afterward begun by disobeving it; so he that was first
acknowledged in the primitive times of the Church, as the head and supreme
pastor, he and his successors are all wais to be acknowledged after him: and
they are false Churches, that have begun at any time in disobedience to him,
and to the pastors of his Communion.

Now let us see what bishop was acknowledged in the primitive times, and was
first obeyed, as the head and supreme pastor, and which of all Churches that
how are retain still their obedience to him. These are either all or the
chief christian Churches that are now in the world. The Roman Church which is
truly Catholic, and Universal over the whole world: the Greek Churches which
are not Catholic nor universal in the world (although some of them be much
spread:) The Church of the Georgians, of the Armenians, of the Aethiopians, of
the Arians, of the Nestorians, of the Waldenses, of the Lutherans, of the
Zuinglians (if any of them be yet extant destinct from the Caluinists) the
Church of the Caluinists, and the Church of England, which is the latest, and
newest of them all. If there be any more besides these (as we see petty sects
daily to arize out of the later and to begin in disobedience to them, as all
of them once did to the Roman Church) both they and all the rest, beside the
Roman Church, shall appear to be false Churches, and it only to be the true
Catholic Church; for that it only is in union and holds obedience to the
true and lawful head of the universal Church, and to the pastors of his
Communion; all the rest disobeying that authority.

But first it is to be observed that the word Church, being a word of
Communion, siguifying a company of people communicating together in the same
faith, and under the same authority; it can not be the same Church, and a
lawful Church, if it have not the same, and that a lawful authority.
Secondly; some of these acknowledge a head, and supreme pastor of the Church
upon earth, and others of them will acknowledge none The Roman Church all over
the world acknowledges the bishop of Rome to be upon earth the head and
supreme pastor of the Church. The Graecians, Armenians. Georgians, Aethiopians
and Churches of the east have some of them the Parriarke of Constan^inople,
others the Patriarch of Alexandria or a parricular and propper pastor to
themselves whom they acknowledge for the supreme head of their Church, and the
Church of England until within these ten or dozen years acknowledged their
temporal prince, man, woman, or child that was for the time, to be the head of
that Church. Others there are who are headless, acknowledging noe supreme head
upon earth in any spiritual power; as the Lutherans, Caluinists etc. these are
but few, and inconsiderable in comparison of those that submit unto a head,
and supreme authority. And I shall show that both they and all others beside
the Roman Church are false Churches, for that they stand disobedient to him,
and to the pastors of his Communion, who is indeed the true head of the Church.

I have showed before that the government which Christ instituted in his Church
was by S. Peter as the head, and chief pastor of it. Now I show that that
supreme authority of S. Peter was acknowledged by the primitive Church, to
descend upon the bishop of Rome as successor to him; and that there is none
but he, that can with reason pretend to have had that authority. This is
proved first by the manifest testimonys of those ancient writers that then
lived. Secondly by the practice of those times; for that the bishop of Rome
exercized in fact that supreme authority, and the faithful of those times
obeyed it. Thirdly for that there is none else, that can pretend to have been
at any time above all other bishops, as the chief pastor and governor of the
Church.

First then I produce so many, The Bishop of Rome is acknowledged by the
primitive fathers to be the head of the Church.
and such testimonys of ancient writers, as shall be sufficient to satisfy him
that regards the safety of his soul. And to begin even from the Apostles
times; the scriptures which they wrote declare so far for the supremacy of
the bishops of Rome that they are alleged to that purpose by holy and
ancient authors, as will appear by their following citations; who seeing the
supreme pastorship to have been promised by Christ unto S. Peter Mat. 16. and
to have been given him Io. 21. when he commended so particularly the feeding
of his sheep to him: and considering him to have died at Rome bishop of that
place, and a successor in his authority to be allwais necessary for the
government of the Church; without any more argument they grounded themselves
upon these scriptures and commonly alleged them for the supremacy, not only
of S. Peter, but also of the bishop of Rome. The same they infer out of S.
Paul to the Romans where he says your faith is renowned in the whole world;
Romans 1.
gathering by these words the supremacy of the Roman chair. S. Epis 55.
Cyprian speaking against some of those times says, They are so bold as to
carry letters from profane schismatiks to the Chair of Peter; Nu. 6.
and the principal Church whence priestly unity arose, not considering the
Romans to be them, whose faith (the Apostle being the commender) was praised,
to whom misbelcefe can not have access. And S. Hierome know ye that the faith
of the Romans will receive noe such deceits, Adner. Ruffin. l. 3. c. 4. to. 2.
nor can possibly be changed, though an Angel taught otherwise, being fensed
by S. Cyp. ep. 52. and Anronian. Amb de obitu fratris.
Paul's authority. And S. Cyprian and S. Ambrose signify that it is all one to
say the Roman faith, and the Catholic faith. All which they would never have
said, if they had not thought the Roman chair to have had preeminence and
authority above all, and understood the words of S. Paul in that sense that
the faith of the Romans was renowned in the supreme authority of that sea; and
therefore we may rightly allege those scriptures according to the ancient
fathers interpretations for the supremacy of the bishop of Rome. But we will
produce their plane testimonys immediately from the Apostles times. Anacletus
who lived with the Apostles has these words. Ep. 3. ad omnes Epis.
This holy and Apostolical Roman Church, not only from the Apostles but even
from our Lord and Savior himself, has obtained the principality and eminency
of power over all Churches, and over the whole flock of the people of Christ;
he himself saying to S. Peter Mat. 16. Thou art Peter etc. And they also
themselves consented unto it, that he should be above all the rest of the
Apostles, and should be Cephas that is to say the head, and beginning of the
Apostle ship: who delivered the same form to his successors and the rest of
the Apostles to bishops, to be held by them. If any difficult causes arize
amongst you, refer them to this head, that by the apostolical judgment they
may be ended: for such is the will of our Lord who has so determined, as by
the foresaid places is declared. Therefore this Apostolical seat is constituted
of none other but of our Lord himself to be the hinge (and the head) as is
said before of all Churches. That as the door is guided by the hinges; so by
the disposition of our Lord all Churches should be governed by this holy seat.
S. L. 3. c. 3.
Irenaeus, who lived in the next age after the Apostles, reckons up all the
bishops of Rome unto Eleutherius, who then governed, to show the succession of
that supreme authority from S. Peter: and says, that in all cases of
controversy we should have recourse unto the Apostolical traditions, and try
them by the Church of Rome. Tertullian, L. depudicitia.
who lived in the same age with him calls the bishop of Rome Pontificem
Maximum, Episcopum Episcoporum. The highest Priest, the Bishop of bishops. S.
Cyprian, De vnitate Eccles.
who lived in the next age after them, speaking of the beginning of heresys
says in substance all which I am saying; to wit that all schisms and heresys
have begun by disobedience to the head of the Church, and particularly
specifyeth to what head to wit to the successor of S. Peter that is for the
time: and says that if we would seek to that judge all controuersys would
soon be at an end. And speaking of the bishops of Rome, L. 4. ep. 9.
from hence (says he) all heresys have rizen and still arize because that
bishop, who is but one and presideth over the Whole Church, is despised by the
proud presumption of certain men, and he whom God has dignifyed is judged by
men, as unworthy of dignity. In the next age lived S. Athanasius, a glorious
Confessor, and for forty years and more in which he was bishop, the prime
pillar of the Catholic Church in the eastern parts against the Arian
haeretiks. Apud Theo^^et. ^. 4. c. 3.
He reckons up the Churches of the several parts of the world, and says that
they and the whole world consented to the Council of Nyce, in which the
primacy of S. Syluester then bishop of Rome, was acknowledged and declared. And
it is here to be observed that the Arians, who are the auncientest of all sects
now extant out of the Catholic Church, began but in these times when the
Roman bishop had been honored for about three hundred years as the Vicar of
Christ upon earth. And the same saint together with the fathers of the Council
of Alexandria wrote unto Felix. 2. then bishop of Rome after this manner. To
the honorable holy father Felix Pope of the Apostolical seat of the city of
Rome Athanasius, and all the bishops of the Egyptians, Thebaians and Lybians
by the grace of God assembled in the holy Council of Alexandria. We suggest
unto your holy Apostleship that you would vouchsafe to us of your wounted care
over us etc. Because most holy father our praedecessors, and we have received
help of your Apostolical scate. We implore that Apostolical and according to
the canons the chief seat, that we may have help from thence, from whence
our ancestors have had their doctrines, orders, and relcefe. Unto that we have
recourse as to our mother, that we may be nourished at her breasts. And as the
mother own not forgett her child; so do not you forgette us committed to your
charge. For our enemies have inuolued us in noe small troubles apprehending and
threatening us with irons, unless we will yield to their errors. Which without
your knowledge we will not presume upon; the canons having decreed that in
cases of moment nothing should be done without the Roman bishop. Therefore God
has placed you and your praedecessors the bishops of Rome in the top of all,
that you might have a care of all Churches, having the judgment of all bishops
committed to you. For we know that in the great Council of Nyce, of three
hundred and eighteen bishops it was established by all, that without the
sentence of the Roman bishop, noe Council should be called, nor any bishops
condemned: although these and many other necessary things be taken away from
us, and burnt by turbulent haeretiks etc. Likewise it was agreeably defined by
the foresaid fathers; that if any of the bishops shall have in suspicion the
Metropolitan, Comprouinciales, or Judges let him appeal to your holy seat of
Rome, to whom the power of binding, and loosing was given, by special
privilege, by our Lord himself etc. Thou art the deposer of profane haeresys,
inuaders, and infesters as the Head and Doctor, and Prince of orthodoxe
doctrine, and unspotted faith. After S. Athanasius in the next age lived S.
Optatus bishop of Mileuetum in Affricke, who made a catalogue of all the Popes
from S. Peter, to Siricius, who then governed: and writing against the
haeretike Parmention, he tells him that in setting up a chair contrary to
the Chair of Rome, he could not plead ignorance, knowing that the first was
given to S. Peter to be at Rome and particular chaires to the other Apostles,
L. 1. conc. Parm.
that he might be known for a schismatike and praeuaricatour, that should set
up a chair in opposition to it. Amb. in 3. ad Tim.
S. Ambrose speaking of Damasus then bishop of Rome, says that all the world
being Gods; yet the Church only is hit house, whose Rectour or Ruler at this
time is Dumasus. S. Hierome also lived in the time of this Pope, and there
being then in Antioch three several factions, all of them pretending to have
the Pope on their side, he thus declares himself writing to Damasus. ad Damas.
I cry for him that ioynes with Peter's chair. Meletius, Vitalis and Paulinus
say they adhaere to thee. I could believe it, if only one of them affirmed it,
but now either two of them ly, or they all three ly. I know not Vitalis,
Meletius nor Paulinus, he that gathers not with thee scatters, he that is
not of Christ is of Antichrist. I join my self unto thy holiness. That is
the chair of S. Peter. Upon that rock I know the Church was built. S.
Augustine made a catalogue of all the Bishops of Rome from S. Peter to
Anastasius, who then lived, and says, that the succession of those bishops
kept him in the Catholic Church, Ep. 165.
and that the principality of the Apostolical chair allwais flourished in the
Church of Rome. S. Leo Pope writing to the Emperor styles himself Bishop of
the Universal Church although he refused the title of Universal Patria^ke or
Bishop of the Church when the Council of Chalcedon gave it to him; L^^. ep. 52.
because it was a title more subject to misconstruction. Theodoret writing to
this Pope says your sea praesideth over the whole world, that holy sea holds
the stern of government over all the Churches in the world. S. Gregory the
great who for the aforesaid reason refused the title of Universal Patriarch,
often calls the Church of Rome Caput omnium Ecclesiarum. L. 7. c. 26.
The head of all Churches. And says that if a falt be committed by a bishop,
he knows none, but he is subject to the Apostolical seat. And again who
doubts but the bishop of Constantinople is subject to the Apostolical seat?
which also the most pious Emperor, and Eutichius our brother, the bishop of
that city do allwais confess: and yet the bishop of Constantinople then took
place of all other bishops, but the Bishop of Rome. Thus you see by evident
testimonys of ancient writers, that in the primitive times of the faith of
Christ the Bishop of Rome was acknowledged, as the prime pastor and head of
the Church.

The same I show also by the practice of those times: The B. of Rome aunciently
exercized in fact the supreme authority.
for that the Bishop of Rome then exercized in fact the supreme authority,
deporting himself in all things, as the head of the Church. He, or his
legates for him, praesided allwais in General Counsels, confirmed them, and
was obeyed by them, as the superior over all bishops, and all people; as
giving bishoppricks to the worthy, as depriving the unworthy, as giving laws
unto all, and hearing the causes of all of whatsoever Diocese, and of the
chief bishops, and chief princes of the world in spiritual affairs. All
which will appear by that which follows As soon as the Church of God had
gotten a Christian Emperor, that bishops from all places could safely meet
together, a General Council of the whole world was assembled at Nyce, to
decide the controuersys of those times. Hosius, Vitus, and Vincentius presided
in that first General Council of the whole world, as the legates of S.
Syluester then Pope, and subscribed in the first place. And the primacy of the
Roman Bishop was in that Council expressly and of purpose declared: as you
have seen in the words of S. Athanasius and the bishops of Egypt, Thebais and
Libya written to Pope Felix. The second General Concell was held at
Constantinople; and the fathers of that Council wrote unto Damasus Pope,
confessing themselves to be members of him. In the third General Council,
which was held at Ephesus, S. Cyril Patriarch of Alexandria praesided in place
of Pope Celestine, and in condemning of Nestorius the Council uses this form
that they were forced by the Canons and by the authority of bishop Celestine to
proceed with weeping tears to that heavy sentence against him. The fourth
General Council was ^eld at Chalcedon, where Paschasius, Lucentius, and
Bonifacius praesided in place of S. Leo Pope, and subscribed first. And the
fathers of this Council wrote unto Leo to desire his immediate approbation of
their canons, stiling him, The Head and universal Patriarch of the Church. And
his approbation being sent and read in the Council, the fathers cried out, So
do we all believe. Pope Leo so believes, let him be accursed that does
separate and divide. This is the faith of Leo chief bishop. Peter has spoken
by Leo's mouth, and the Apostles have taught so. Leo has taught truly we all
believe as Leo believes. In the fifth General Council, which was held at
Constantinople, Menas praesided, who had been thrusten out of that seat; but
was restored to it again by the authority of Pope Agapetus. In the sixth
General Council, which was held also at Constantinople Theodore, George and
John praesided, as the legates of Pope Agatho, whose letters being read, the
fathers of the Council cried out, as those of Chalcedon had done almost three
hundred yea^es before to Pope Leo, that Peter spoke by Agathos mouth etc In the
seventh General Council, which was held at Nyce, two Peter's were the legates
of Pope Adrian, and had the first place and when his letters were read the
fathers answered, The whole Synod does so believe and teach. The eight
General Council was held at Constantinople, where Donatus and Stephanus
Praesided as the legates of Pope Adrian and subscribed in this form; I Donatus
by the grace of God bishop of Ostia, having the place of my Lord Adrian, high
Priest, and universal Pope, and praesiding over this General Council,
according to his will have promulged all that is here read, and have subscribed
with mine own hand.

I add here that the very word, and title of POPE is so holy, honorable, and
authentical, that it is a sufficient proof of his primacy, and eminent
authority above all. For where as it signifies in it self a Great or Grane
Father, and was first of all given to Patriarks and more venerable pastors, and
higher dignitys; it was decreed by an assembly of more then sifty bithops,
above a thousand years sin, that it should be given to none, but to the
bishop of Rome, as to the Universal Father of all faithful christians.
Bishops, Emperors, Princes have obeyed this decree, the custom of nations
has consented unto it: and the very enemies of the Catholic Church, now after
the praescription of a thousand years, giving him that honorable title,
vertually confess the supreme authority which then he had. The bishops of Rome
exercised authority over other dioceses, and over the chief persons of the
world both of the Clergy and Laity S. Athanasius Patriarch of Alexandria, (who
then took place of all but the bishop of Rome) Asclepas of Gaza, Marcellus of
Ancyra, and Lucius of Adrianopolis being expelled out of their bishoppricks by
those of the Arian faction, repairing to Pope Julius, were by his authority
restored to their seats again: Theod. l. 2. c. 4.
and the Arians having by letters misinformed the Pope against Athanasius, he
commanded both him and them to come to Rome to answer for themselves. S John
Chrysostom fled unto Pope Innocentius, who restored him to his sea again: and
the Emperors Arcadius, and Honorius, for that they were slow in effecting his
restitution, and Arsatius and Atticus for intruding into his place, and
Theophilus Patriarch of Alexandria for deposing of him, although the prime men
of the world, both of the Ecclessiasticall, and Laity, were all excommunicated
by the Pope. Menas Patriarch of Constantinople being thrust out of his seat by
Anthimus an haeretike, (the Emperor favoring him) appealed to S. Agapetus
Pope, who not dreading the Emperors power opposed himself, as a good and
valiant Pastor in defense of the people of Constantinople as under his
general charge, against Anthimus the wolf, that was comed amongst them. And
when the Emperor with terrible threatenings menaced him, the blessed Pope
bared presently his neck before him, and told him that he was ready to loose
his head for that cause, which he must, and would defend as long as he lived.
And Vigilius, who succeeded in the Popedom next but one to him, being
earnestly solicited to restore Anthimus, would never yield to it; although he
were apprehended, and suffered much for that cause; but stood still constant
to his charge, and excommunicated Theodora the Empress, as the chief
instigatour of those cuills.

Thirdly the same is proved for that there is none other but the bishop of
Rome, None other but the Roman^ Bishop cantustly pretend to supremacy in the
Church.
that can pretend ever to have had that supreme authority in the primitive
Church: for if any other could have any just pretense to it, it should be the
Patriarch of Antioch: for that was the first Episcopal seat of S. Peter; but
he can not pretend ever to have had that supreme authority after S. Peter, for
the Patriarch of Alexandria was above him, although under the bishop of Rome.
Antioch was indeed the first seat of S. Peter, the chair of Alexandria was
founded by S. Mark, in S. Peter's name, and S. Peter lived at Rome most part of
the time of his primacy, and dyed there bishop of that place: His successor
must be understood of his last seat which he died possessed of, as all
antiquity with good reason understood it: and therefore although all these
three in reverence to S. Peter, were made Patriarchical seats; yet Rome was
esteemed allwais as the chief: it had the first place, Alexandria the second,
and Antioch but the third. The Patriarch of Constantinople cannot pretend to
the primacy; for that he was not so much as a Patriarch long after the former,
nor for some hundreds of years after Christ; there being noe Constantinople
before Constantine; but an obscure Bythinium of noe such name or note. The
Patriarch of Jerusalem cannot pretend unto it; for he was under the bishop of
Caesarea, as his Metropolitan, and gave place to all the former. These were the
prime of the world in Ecclesiastical dignity; and the bishop of Rome was the
prime of them, and exercized authority as you have seen over them; therefore
there is none, but he that can pretend to have been the head, and supreme
pastor in the Church of Christ. To talk of any saecular Prince being the head
of the Church is not worth mentioning; for he as such has noe calling to that
office. The head of the Church, is the successor of S. Peter, who governed the
Church, as his successors also did, many years after him, under heathen
Princes, who could not be the head of the Church of Christ. Neither was any
Christian Emperor ever permitted so much as to have a voice in General
Councels. Out of all which has here been said it does appear so manifestly,
that at first the supreme authority over the Church of Christ was acknowledged
to reside in the Bishops of Rome, as the successors of S. Peter, that to deny
it is to deny any thing of antiquity, and to confound all traditions of
writings and of things past. And hence it follows that the primitive Church
acknowledging the supreme authority over the Church to descend, by the
institution of Christ, upon the bishops of Rome, as upon the successors of S.
Peter, we ought to acknowledge the same, and that that bishop has the prime
authority, and that he, and the pastors that join with him have the whole
lawful authority of the true Church. And therefore all those Churches that have
begun at any time in disobedience to that authority, and continue still
disobedient to it were then, and are still false Churches; for that they have
the Mark which we have assigned of disobedience to the head, and pastors of
the Church, and which S. Cyprian has given of despising that one judge, and
priest, that is for the time the Vicar of Christ.

It is not now much needful to examine the beginnings of other Churches and to
show them to have begun in disobedience to the bishop of Rome and his
pastors; because that having been the government of the primitive Church, the
rest must at some time have gone forth of it. Yet for more cleernesse and
satisfaction of all, I will say something of the particular beginnings either
of all or of the more notable sects that are now extant; to show how and when
they went out of the Roman Church. First the Arians, who are the auncientest
of all those that are now extant, began in the disobedience of Arius a Priest
of Alexandria about three hundred years after the first establishing of the
faith of Christ: who separating himself from the head and pastors that then
were (to wit of S. Syluester Pope, and the fathers of the Council of Nyce who
were joined in Communion with him) began a new Church without succession of
head and pastors from Christ. The Nestorian Church began in the disobedience
of Nestorius bishop of Constantinople, above four hundred years after the
first establishing of the Church of Christ, who separating himself from the
head, and pastors that then were (to wit from S. Celestine Pope and the fathers
of the Ephesin Council in Communion with him) began a new Church which had
noe succession of head and pastors from Christ. The several Churches of the
Graecians and eastern people began first in the disobedience of Photius
above eight hundreds years after that the faith of Christ was received by the
world: who having invaded and usurped the chair of Constantinople, was by the
authority of Pope Adrian, and of the Council of Constantinople deposed, and
Ignatius whom he had thrust out was again restored. But Photius raising new
dissentions, and seditions in the Church of God, drew the Graecians from their
dew obedience to the head and pastors of the Church; and so began diverse
schismatic Churches; several bishops assuming to themselves absolute
authority and submitting to none, maintained in schism their own Churches,
which had noe succession of head and pastors from Christ, except they were as
all false Churches are of a succession invisible. The Waldenses began in the
disobedience of John Waldo, an ignorant lay man in the city of Lions, above
eleauen hundred years after that the faith of Christ had flourished in the
world: who disobeying the authority of Alexander 3. Pope and of the fathers of
a General Council held at Rome, began a new Church against all, saying we
must obey God rather then men. And John Hus was proceeded against as an
haeretike for mainteining with obstinacy his doctrine. The Church of the
Lutherans began in the disobedience of Martin Luther, a Friar of the holy
order of S. Augustine, about fifteen hundred years after the first
establishing of the Church of Christ: who disobeying the authority of the head
and pastors of the Church that then were, to wit of Pope Leo, and the pastors
of his Communion, broke his vows of poverty, chastity, and obedience; and
having gotten some to follow him, he began with them a new Church, which had
noe succession of head and pastors from Christ, nor from any Church; except it
were a succession invisible. The Zinglians began in the disobedience of
Vlricus Zuinglius a Canon of Constance: who seeing the people of Germany so
greedily to swallow down the liberty of Luthers doctrine and noueltys,
disobeying the authority of Pope Clement, and of the pastors of his Communion,
would begin also a new Church contrary both to the Church of Rome, and of
Luther; denying the real presence of the body of our Lord in the holy
Eucharist. The Church of the Caluinists began in the disobedience of John
Calvin Priest of Noyon: who following the example of Luther and Zuinglius,
brokeforth after them out of the sheepefold of Christ, and disobeying the
authority of Paulus 3. then Bishop of Rome, and of the pastors of his
Communion, began a new Church according to his own words separating
themselves from the whole world. Resp. ad versip.
The Church of England which is the newest of them all, began in the
disobedience of king Henry the eight; who having first obtained of Pope Leo the
glorious title of Defendour of the faith for his good service done to the
Church of God, especially in oppugning of Luthers heresy, became afterward so
blinded with carnality, that desiring of Pope Clement a diuorcement from his
lawful wife, and not obtaining it, he denied his authority, forbadde in his
dominions all commerce with the court of Rome, and caused himself to be
proclaimed The supreme head of the English Church upon earth; putting to death
Bishop Fisher, Sr Thomas Moore and others, for denying his supremacy. By all
which it appears that the words of S. John may well be applied to all these
sects when to discover the false Churches of schismatiks and heretics, which he
speaks of by the name of Antichrist, he gives them this mark, They went out
from us. Io. 1.2.
So may we say of all the sects of schisms, and haeretiks that are in the
world, they began at some time in disobedience to the Roman Church: the
beginners of them were once Roman Catholics, but they were the chafe of the
Catholic Church, which being puffed up with pride and obstinacy, went out from
us, and began new Churches, which were not then at all in the world.

You have seen now the supreme authority of the Bishop of Rome to have been
first acknowledged, and obeyed by the primitive Church; and consequently all
other Churches of christians whatsoever, without naming of any, have at some
time goneforth of that Church, and begun in disobedience to that Bishop, and
to the pastors of his Communion: and you have seen also in particular the
chief, and most notable (and one may say all other Churches: for that the rest
of the petty sects have begun indisobedience to some of these and goneforth
of them) you have seen I say in particular the rest of the Churches that now
are to have begun in disobedience to that authority, which was first obeyed
by the primitive Church of Christ, and was then obeyed in the world, and even
by themselves until they took upon them to disobey it. Wherefor I conclude
with this, that the true Church is that which continues allwais obedient to
the true head of the Church, and pastors of his Communion, and they are all
false Churches that have begun in disobedience to the true head of the Church
and pastors of his Communion: but there is none but the bishop of Rome that can
with any reason pretend to be the true head of the Church, nor any pastors
that can pretend to be in Communion with the true head of the Church, but
those that are in Communion with him; therefore that is the true Church which
has continued all wais in obedience to the Bishop of Rome and his pastors, and
they are all false Churches, that have begun at any time, and continue still
in disobedience to him and them. There remains now only to see what they can
say for themselves, and to show the vanity of their pretenses.

First if they deny that the Roman Bishop had supreme authority in the
primitive Church, it is to confound, as I have said, the knowledge of all
things past. I have showed that the holy fathers of those times have
interpreted the scriptures for the Bishop of Rome his supremacy, and I have
showed by their plane sentences, and express words, that the Roman Church
has obtained from our Lord and Savior himself, the principality and eminency
of power over all Churches; that holy seat being the hinge and head of all
Churches, that in all controuersys we ought to have recourse unto it, that the
Bishop of Rome is the highest Priest, and Bishop of bishops, that all schisms
and heresys have sprung from the disobedience to that chair, that they are
Schismatiks and Praeuaricators that set up another chair contrary to it, that
they belong to Antichrist that are not of that Communion. I have showed also
that the Bishop of Rome his supremacy was acknowledged by General Councels,
that his legates praesided in them, that he protected the good, and corrected
the ^ad, both of the Clergy, and of the Laity of other Dioceses, even the
chief persons of the world, as under his charge, and that there is noe other
bishop, that by any title can justly pretend to have had that authority in the
primitive times. And therefore it is most senseless to deny his supremacy which
the world has so long confessed. And if they shall still oppose it, Sap. 5.
the round world shall fight with him against the senseless, who are so bold,
as to hazard their souls against the whole world, and against so many worlds,
as I have showed gathered together in General Councels, who have submitted to
the Bishop of Rome, as to their supreme pastor.

They will grant then perhaps that the Bishop of Rome was once the head of the
Church, and that he and his pastors had the authority of the whole Church; but
will say, that he and they were fallen into errors; and therefore they were
bound to disobey them. But this is not a good answer: for it is authority
which now we inquire after, and which we require obedience unto. All doctrines
must be tried by lawful authority; but lawful authority must not be
questioned in doctrine; for that there is none to question it* For subjects to
examine the authority of the Church, and the doctrine which it teaches is to
set the feet above the head, and to subvert all order, and government in the
Church of God. Christ has given Apostles, Pastors, Ephesians. 4.
and Doctors unto the edifying of his body, that is to the building up, and
preserving of his Church: and these must either be obeyed, or else they were in
vain, and to noe purpose. It is therefore preposterous, and haereticall to
disobey the authority of the Church under pretense of errors. Neither is there
any thing by which haeretiks discover, and condemn themselves more, then by
talking of errors in the Church; for by that one shows, that he has
something to say against the doctrine of the Church; which is to be an
haeretike. The head of the Church and pastors of his Communion have the
authority of the whole Church, and can not teach false doctrine: for if they
could we should have noe certainty of the scriptures, or of the sense of them,
or of the Creed, or of any point of faith, and this article were in vain when
we say I believe the Catholic Church. Which being made by the Apostles, to be
said at all times; the Church can never teach false doctrine; but in all
doctrines whatsoever, and in all controuersys we must cleave to the authority
of the Church, as to a firm, and sure rock, and allwais say I believe the
Catholic Church. Ep. 48.
S. Augustine it is impossible that we should have just cause to depart from,
and to impugn the whole Church. They must first show that the government of
the Church was taken from the bishop of Rome, and his pastors, and was given to
some others, whom they obeyed; or else they could not lawfully disobey them
under any pretense whatsoever. Authority must govern the Church: we show our
authority to be the same which the primitive Church obeyed, and we ask them
upon what authority they disobeyed it? what head and what pastors delivered
their doctrine to them by continual succession from Christ, and from S. Peter?
This they must show, or else they open a gappe to all haeretiks, to disobey the
Church when they will themselves, under pretense of false doctrine.

If they say they have authority from an invisible head, and invisible pastors,
it is a ridiculous saying. As though a company of soldiers who were brought
before a Council of war for deserting their colors should pretend license
from invisible officers: or as rebels, who being accused for resisting of
lawful authority, should pretend a commission for what they did; and being
required to show it, should say that it were invisible; so we ask them upon
what authority they disobeyed, that authority which the primitive Church
obeyed? and they say by the authority of a Church invisible. We bid them show
their commission; they say it is invisible. Is not this Ridiculous? for this it
is enough to say that men are men, that is to say a corporal, and visible
creature; and therefore if the Church which gave them authority were a
congregation of men, it was visible: and if it were the true Church it was most
eminently visible; as a candle not hidden, but set in a glorious candlestick
that all might see it, and see by it, what they were to believe for true: and
as a city on a hill conspicuous to all, teaching, preaching, administering
sacraments, and governing of people after a glorious, and eminent manner, that
all might have recourse unto it. To allege only an invisible authority is to
show noe authority; and showing noe authority they are noe true Church.

If they say that they disobeyed not, and went not out from the Communion of
the Bishop of Rome and his pastors; but were thrusten out of it whether they
would or not, (as a later author who would seem wiser then the rest has
urged) it is the weakest of all answers. For if they had kept themselves in
obedience to their lawful governors, as they ought they could never have been
out of the Communion of the Church. They were thrusten out of the Church of
Rome, as Ozias king of Judah was thrusten out of the holy temple of Jerusalem,
a plague of leprosy appearing suddenly in his forehead in punishment of his
pride and disobedience to the high Priest and priests that were with him; so
they obstinatly disobeying the head and pastors of the Church that then were,
departed of their own accord from the inward Communion of the Church, and were
thrusten out only from external Communion with it, least they should infect
others with the plague of heresy, or schism which appeared in them.

Seeing therefore all these answers to be vain and groundless, and that they
can show noe head; and pastors in all the world, that gave them authority to
teach their doctrine in disobedience to those, whom the primitive Church
obeyed; they will pretend authority not by succession of pastors from pastors
which is the ordinary way; but after an extraordinary manner, immediately from
God himself, to disobey the first, and to begin a new government contrary to
it; and having for this an extraordinary calling and commission immediately from
God, they needed noe authority from any pastors upon earth; and therefore they
will act according to their commission, and will be tried by none, nor be
subject to any but God. This is the only answer which an haeretike can make;
who rejecting indeed the authority of all men that then are, must of necessity
pretend a particular, and extraordinary commission immediately from God. But
neither is this a good answer. First for that there can be noe such
extraordinary commission, as to disobey the lawful authority of the Church of
Christ; it being builded upon sure promises of his perpetual assistance, that
it can not fail in doctrine; but having ordained pastors for the government of
it, he will have them allwais to be obeyed; and therefore that Church that has
not allwais a continual succession of lawful pastors, is not the Church of
Christ. Secondly if they have any such commission from God, they must show it;
or else they open a gappe for all disobedient persons to run out of the Church
disobeying their lawful pastors when they list themselves, under pretense of
commission from God. And this commission not coming to them after the ordinary
manner from pastors to pastors, but after an extraordinary sort, immediately, as
they pretend, from God himself; they have noe ordinary means to show it, but
must prove it by extraordinary fignes, and miracles, such as are propper to
God only, and proportionable to that kind of commission. So did Moses prove
by miracles that he was sent of God: so did Christ prove his authority by
miracles. But if they have neither miracles to prove extraordinary, nor
succession of lawful pastors for ordinary commission; but upon their own bare
word only will draw men from obedience to their lawful pastors, we must take
them for such as Core, Dathan, and Abiron were; who disobeying their pastors,
and having noe commission from God to show for it, they and their followers
sunk down visibly into hell. Now for miracles to justify their disobedience
to the Church, they neither have, nor can possibly have; for that God will not
approve of any such disobedience; but having ordained the government of the
Church to be by S. Peter as supreme head, and by (...) Apostles as pastors
under him; and Christ ^auing promised to be with them all days to the
consummation of the world: we must at all times look unto the successors of S.
Peter and his pastors, as to the lawful authority of the Church of Christ, and
allwais obey them: and we must take those for false Churches that disobey their
authority. And therefore S. Cyprian solidly rebukes Nouatus the ^aeretike for
separating himself from the Communion of Cornelius then Bishop of Rome, and
concludes that the Church of Christ being but one, and not containing both
those that are with in, and those that are out of it, those only (says he)
are in the Church, Cyp. l. 4. op. c.
who are in the COmmunion of Cornelius successor to Fabianus.

But that they may not think to excuse their disobedience by any pretenses, I
stop all pretenses whatsoever, and prevent all answers that can possibly be
devised, by that which follows. They can not deny but there have been, and
are false Churches of christians in the world: but there never was, nor now is,
any false Church of christians, but it might have, if it would, the same
pretenses, and have the same ground for them that any of these have; they being
commune to all disobedient and obstinate persons that will stand out against
the Church; therefore all which any of them can pretend for themselves are but
vain pretenses, and if ever there were any false Church of christians in the
world, they are all false Churches. As for the first S. Paul says that there
must be heresys. Cor. 1.11.
Which being held by a Communion of many, there is then a false Church. He that
reads D Prateolus of the beginnings of heresys, and seeeth the absurditys
which they have obstinatly maintained, will easily grant that there have been
false Churches of Christians in the world. He shall find some against the
whole B. Trinity, some against one of the Persons, some against another, some
against the divinity, some against the humanity of Jesus Christ, some against
the blessed Virgin; some against the Angels, some against the Saints, one says
that Christ is the sun which we see to shine, another says that himself is
Christ, another makes himself to be the Holy Ghost, some will have all to
marry, some will have none to marry, some so affected to sobriety that they
held wine unlawful to be drunk, even to the consecrating of water insteede of
it, some are running naked, others are foming, quaking and changing ghastly
countenances as a sign and point of perfection, another cries down learning,
and will have noe trial of the truth but by force of arms, commanding for
that purpose his disciples at his death to make a drum of his skin. All
which I mention in relation to the Apostles words; and to my first proposition
that there have been false Churches in the world: and withal to observe what
absurd errors men would run into, if there were not at all times an
authority of visible pastors guided by the Holy Ghost to govern the Church,
and all were bound to be governed by them. Now if any of these were a false
Church it was for their obstinacy in those errors, and for their disobedience
to those pastors which the primitive Church acknowledged to have by succession
from S. Peter the supreme authority, and to the pastors of their Communion, as
having at all times the lawful authority of the whole Church. And these were
as I have showed the Bishops of Rome, and the pastors that were in Communion
with them: none else having any pretense unto that succession. Then for the
second proposition, I ask any one of those sects that are now out of the
Catholic Roman Church, what pretense can they have which is not common to all
the rest, and which all the false Churches that are or ever were, and which
they confess to be false Churches might not, if they would, have alleged for
themselves as well as they, to excuse there disobedience? If they pretend
errors in the doctrine of their pastors, or if they allege private spirit, or
if they pretend authority from the true Church but invisible, or if they say
that they were thrusten out of the Church against their wills, or if they
pretend immediate commission from God to disobey all authority upon earth in
religion; who does not see that all these are but vain pretenses common to all
that will use them, and which if they were to be allowed of, a gappe were
opened for all turbulent, and disobedient persons, to run out of the Church
under some of these pretenses at any time when they would themselves. Neither
is there any thing which any of them can pretend; but that which all the rest
may as well take for pretense, and all the false Churches that ever were whom
they confess to be false Churches may as well pretend as they. And if this be
not so, I desire, and challenge any wise and learned man, of whatsoever sect
out of the Roman Church, to study and to think with himself of any lawful
pretense, and excuse for their disobedience to the Roman Church, and then to
take some other which he holds to be a false Church, and conferring them
together, to propose to his own conscience, whether that pretense agree not as
well to the other, as to his own. And if he can devise none which is propper
to his own Church more then to false Churches, then I warn and charge him to
return again to the obedience of that authority which the primitive Church
first obeyed, and which the Roman Church has allwais obeyed, and which his
Church and all others have at some time goneforth of and disobeyed: and this
was as I have showed the authority of the bishop of Rome and his pastors. All
those Churches that are now extant out of the Roman Church went first out of
it by disobedience to the head and pastors of the Roman Church (and as for
Protestants they confess that they went forth and separated themselves from
it, Aug. l. 2. cont. Crescon. c. 33. l. 3. c. 43.44. l 2. cont Gauden. c. 3 l.
de vntco bap ^^s. c 15. ep 48. L. 2. cont. Pet^l^. c. 19.
as may be seen in The Author of the Protestant Religion l. 2. c. 11.) They
must therefore show some just cause why they went forth and separated
themselves. For as S. Augustine, alluding to the holy Proverb c. 30. often
obiecteth against the Donatists, The evil child calls himself just, but he
can not excuse his going forth. And in another place, You must come and give an
account of your separation. But none of them have a iuster cause, nor can give
a better account of their separation, then those whom they confess to be false
Churches; therefore they are all false Churches.

I have now sufficiently performed one thing which I promised in the title of
this book; The verity of the Roma ^e Cathelike faith is demonstrated by
industion from a^l other religions.
to wit to demonstrate by induction, from all the religions that are in the
world the verity of the Roman Catholic faith. As for the atheist he ought
indeed to be excluded from all speech of religion, for that he has none; yet
his profaneness is disprooued in the first article of the Creed, in which the
Apostles laid the foundation of religion, saying, I believe in God. The Pagans
religion is disprooued in the same article, in that he believes not in one
God, the maker of heaven and earth. The Jewish and Turkish sects are disprooued
in the second article, for that they believe not in Jesus Christ the only
Son of God. All sects of Christians that are out of the Roman Church are
disprooued, in that they have broken this ninth article of the Creed I believe
the Cath^like Church, disobeying its authority in the lawful head and pastors
of it. Let them harken to the words of the Holy Ghost. Deuteronomy 17.
If thou perceive that the judgment with thee be hard and doubtful etc. Thou
shall come to the Priests of the Leuitical stock, and to the judge that shall
be at that time, and thou shall do whatsoever they that are presidents of the
place which our Lord shall choose shall say, and teach thee, according to his
law; and thou shall follow their sentence: neither shall thou decline to the
right hand nor to the left hand. But he that shall be proud, refusing to obey
the commandment of the priest, which at that time ministers to our Lord thy
God, and the decree of the judge, that man shall die. Here now I cry to all
those christians that are out of the Roman Church, Graecians, Arians etc. and
to all the several Churches of Protestants, and especially to you my very dear
Countrymen, for whose souls I have long hazarded my corporal life. You have
contemned this great authority, or rather a greater then it was. You have
refused to obey the commandment of the priest and priests not of the Leuitical
stock; but of the institution of Christ, to wit the Successor of S. Peter,
and his pastors: that is to say the Bishop of Rome and his pastors, who
governed the primitive Church of Christ, and were then actually governing it
when your Churches began. These you know you have disobeyed, and stand still
disobedient unto. General Councels have declared against you all, and
especially against the several sects of Protestants the Council of Trent,
consisting of two hundred and fifty five fathers, besides the most eminent
doctors of the Catholic Church. All Roman Catholics obey this Council in all
points of faith, and you disobey it. Disobedience to the Leuitical priest and
priests, by the law of Moses, was punished with death: and your disobedience
(I am sorry with all my heart; but I have noe scruple to speak it) shall
without doubt, if you repent not, be punished with eternal death. Therefore I
conjure you by the sweet merits of Jesus Christ, in whom you believe, and whom
you expect to be your judge, to reflect ypon your souls, and upon true
religion. Call to mind how your Churches began, and how schisms and heresys
begin; and if you find (as you shall easily find) that you have begun
after the very same manner as they, in disobedience to the head and pastors of
the Church, and to all but your own wills; your beginners were as Core, Nu. 16.
Dathan, and Abiron, that began divisions in the Church of God: their
followers that lived with them were as the followers of the former, whom God
destroyed also with them; and you rising up to maintain their disobedience
when they are dead and gone, are like to those who after their deaths rose up
to justify their cause, and were therefore by the judgment of God consumed with
fire. Forsake their company, desert that unlawful cause and return again
into the sheepfold of Christ, if you desire to be saved.

THE TENTH ARTICLE.
Forgiveness of sins. None can rightly consider these words as made by the
Apostles to be an article of the Creed; but he must needs conceive some
greater mystery to be contained in them, them only to profess that God can,
or does forgive sins. Neither can he in reason understand any other thing,
then that there is power of forgiving sins in that Church, which they had
newly professed. This was indeed a gift, and privilege worthy to be mentioned
in the public Creed.

Christ after his resurrection, before he ascended into heaven, appeared to his
Apostles, and breathing upon them said, Io. 20.
Receive ye the Holy Ghost whose sins you shall forgive, they are forgiven:
and whose you shall retain they are retained. This was a mystery which the
Church of God had great reason to remember, and often to inculcate unto her
people; and therefore the Apostles having professed their belief in the
Catholic Church, in the next place would commemorate this gift, and power,
which the Catholic Church has of the forgiveness of sins; that with
gratitude we might remember it and make good use of it.

It is a greater work (says S. Aug. tract. 52.
Augustine) to make an evil man good, then to make the world of nothing. Yet
it is given unto man to do this great work. It is given I say unto man: for
it is not of his own power; but of the gift of God. God only of his own
natural power can forgive sins, Esa 43.
I am he that takes clean away thine iniquitys; but he can, if he will, give
that power unto men. The Apostles had that power by the gift of God, as they
had of him to work many miracles, which were as hard and impossible to nature,
as to forgive sins. Judges of themselves have not power to judge; but when
the king makes them judges, and gives them power, then they have power, and
may exercize it; and the exercize of it is good and valid; because the king who
gave them that power sets them in his own place, gives them to represent
his own person, and ratifyeth the sentence which they give; so priests are
made of God the judges over souls, they bear his person, they forgive sins,
and whose sins they forgive upon earth, those are forgiven by him in heaven.
By sin we become debtours to God: he is the creditour, who only of himself
can forgive; but he substituting others to forgive in his name, his substitutes
can validly forgive: and the substitutes of God are his priests To say that men
can not have power to forgive sins is that which the Jews objected against
Christ, and which he answered and disprooued by a miracle, showing by it that
himself not only as he was God, but also according to his humanity could
forgive sins. A lame and impotent man being brought unto him he said, Mat. 9.
Thy sins are forgiven thee. And when the Jews heard those words, presently
they said that he blasphemed, as though the power of forgiving sins had been
so propper to God, that he could not have imparted it to man. But they shall
see the contrary, and that there was noe blasphemy in his words. Wherefore think
you evil in you hearts? (says Christ) whether is easier to say thy sins are
forgiven thee? or to say arize and walk? but that you may know that the Son
of man has power on earth to forgive sins, Arize take up thy bed and go
into thy house. And he aroze and went into his house. And the multitudes seeing
it glorified God that had given such power to men. Now let none ever say that
men cannot have power to forgive sins.

It is so far from being a blasphemy or injury to God to say that he gives
power to men to forgive sins, that to say the contrary is a blasphemy and
injury to him; to wit that he can not, or does not give that power to men. For
as the honor and power of the king is not diminished, but rather his love and
care over his subjects is demonstrated, in making judges to conserve justice
and order amongst them, and especially in giving power to his judges to pardon
offenses done against him; so is it a special demonstration of the love of God
unto men, to give power to priests to forgive sins which are committed
against him. And this is that which the Apostles would have us here to
profess, to wit the forgiveness of sins by power given to the Catholic
Church. He that considers the evil of mortal sin, how that it wounds,
and quite kills our souls, leaving them deprived of the grace of God, and
guilty of the pains of hell, will esteem greatly of this power; and will
think that there is nothing in the world, which so much behooves a sinner, as
the right application of that power to himself. Esa. 27.
This is the end and fruit of all that sin be taken away. Says the Prophet.
By this our souls when they are as a dead and filthy carrion in the sight of
God are restored to the life of grace made clean, and beautiful, and all the
happiness of future life also becomes then due to them. This we shall learn
how it is to be applied in the Sacrament of Penance, where the benefit of it
is obtained.

THE ELEAVENTH ARTICLE.
THe Resurrection of the flesh. How necessary this article was to the
establishing of the christian doctrine, it appears in this, that the holy
scriptures do not only profess it, but also prove it. S. Paul proves the
resurrection of our bodies by the resurrection of Christ. If (says he) there be
noe resurrection of the dead neither is Christ rizen again. Cor. 1 15.
And if Christ be not rizen again, then vain is our preaching vain also is
your faith. And he declares and confirms it by the similitude of corn,
which corrupting in the seed, rizeth up fresh, and fair corn again. With
these and the like arguments he disputes against certain men, that denied the
resurrection: Tim. 2.2.
as Hymenaeus and Philetus who interpreted the scriptures to be understood of
the resurreation of the soul to the state of grace. Christ also himself
disputed with the Saducaeans about this point, and confirmed in fact the truth
of it, when he raized Lazarus to life: who although he had been four days
dead, and laid then stinking in the monument; yet when Christ called, he heard,
Io. 11.
and obeyed, coming forth fresh and lively. Holy Job in the midst of all his
assictions comforted himself with these words. Job 19.
I know that my redeemer lives, and in the last day I shall rize out of the
earth. And I shall be compassed again with my skin, and in my flesh I shall
see God. Thus did this holy man solace himself with the thought of the
resurrection, which he says he had laid up in his bosom, using it as a
cordial, and antidore against his great miserys.

Our souls and bodies desiring by nature to be united together for the complete
and entire constituting of man, it stands with reason that they should once
come together again, that the souls of the blessed may enjoy their desire and
be satiated in the natural appetite which they have unto their bodies. And for
this reason the immortality of the soul, and the resurrection of the body is
mentioned in the scriptures, and was taken by the ancient Philosophers, as it
were for the same: because such is the connection betwixt them, that by the
immortality of the soul the resurrection of the body is inserred; for if the
soul be immortal, and have a natural appetite to the body, as being ereated to
constitute man consisting of both soul and body; then that appetite must once
be satiated by the resurrection of the body after death, and reunion of the
soul to it again: and so take away the resurrection of the body, and you
take away the immortality of the soul, and then all grounds of faith and the
hopes of future life are taken away with it; our souls being mortal with our
bodies: and therefore S. Paul, If I fought with beasts at Ephesus what does it
profit me, Cor. 1.15.
if the dead rize not again? let us eat and drink for to morrow we shall die.
And therefore S. Chrysostom calls the Saducaeans, who denied the
resurrection, the most pernicious haeretiks that ever were. S. Ambrose having
proved it by scriptures and by the examples of those, who have rizen from the
dead, and by reasons which he calls evident, concludes all in this plane and
certain truth, that the corruptions of seeds and productions, which we see of
new things, are unto God the resurrection of the old.

That which we believe by this article is, that the very same bodies which lived
before, although never so much corrupted shall be united to their souls
again, and remain for ever with them, (for if it were not the same body which
was before, it were not a resurrection, but a production of a new thing) and
that this resurrection is general to all, Cor. 1.15.
according to the Apostle, As in Adam all die so in Christ all shall be made
alive. Neither do his words to the Thessalonians make against this, These. 1.4.
where he says The dead that are in Christ shall rize again first. Then we
that live that are left with all, shall be taken up with them in the clouds to
meet Christ. For those that be living on the earth, when Christ shall come to
judgment, shall die and rize again to receive their sentence. And of this there
can be noe doubt, if we consider the cause of the resurrection which is
general to all, Cor. 2.5.
that every one may receive the propper things of the body according as he has
done either good or evil. All men being constituted of body, and either
serving or not serving God by it, must rize again, that they may receive in
their bodies according to the works, which they did in them.

S. De ciu. D^^ l. 22. c. 19.
Augustine has declared with what beauty and ornaments the bodies of the just
shall rize again, free from the deformitys and imperfections which before they
had. They shall have noe defects of litlenes, weakness, crookednes etc. There
shall be noe excess in bigness; the fatt and corpulent shall deminish of
their bulk, and those that want of their natural pitch shall come to their
perfect syze and stature. There shall be then noe tenderness of infants, noe
feeblenes of old age, noe sickness, lamenesse or infirmity in any part. They
shall rize all full of joy and content, neither as young, nor as old; but in a
middle perfect age. The hair and other ornaments of the body neither too much,
nor too little, all indecency being changed into comlines and decency: that the
body and soul may both together praise their creator, as well in corporal,
as in spiritual glory.

THE TWELFTH ARTICLE.
LIfe everlasting. Because life is the most precious of all things to us; all
the happiness which we enjoy in this world being enjoyed by life, and lost by
death, therefore the everlasting felicity of heaven is called everlasting life:
and the loss of it may very well be termed an everlasting death: the eternal
separation of our souls from God being infinitely more miserable to them then
their separation from their miserable bodies; and therefore as dying creatures
carne and anhele for life, so ought we to earne and anhele after that blessed
life. Some times that happy state is called the kingdom of God, the house of
God, paradise, the holy city: thus in the scriptures; and all to enamour us
with it.

The chief felicity of the blessed, which is called their Essential bless,
consists in the clear vision, that is to say the perfect knowledge which
they have of God; that they know him with full content, as one does his friend,
when he is present with him, Cor 1.13. Io. 17.
and beholds him face to face. We see now by a glass in a dark sort. But
then face to face says the Apostle; and Christ says, This is life everlasting
that they know thee the only true God.

The glory of the Saints is given to them according to the measure of their
grace; for as they die in a higher state of grace, so shall they receive a
higher reward of glory; the scriptures frequently declaring that the reward is
to be given according to our works. Cor 1.3.
Every one (says the Apostle) shall receive his reward according to his
labor. Luth in Natiuit Maria Virgni.
By which we may see how false that inference of Luther was. Christ's justice is
imputed unto every one alike; therefore every one is as holy as our blessed
lady. For Christ's justice is imputed unto every one in that degree in which
every one applies it to himself, and unto all the saints alike so far, as
to obtain glory, S. Aug tract. 67. in Io.
but not in the same degree. S. Augustine shall answer him. The penny indeed
is given unto every one alike; but the many mansions signify the diverse
dignitys of merits in that one eternal life. And presently after he cites the
Apostle Cor. 1.15. where speaking of the resurrection of the body, he says one
glory of the sun, another glory of the moon, and another of the stars: for
star differs from star in glory. So (says he) is the resurrection of
the dead: the Saints as stars have different mansions, Greg. mor. l. 1. c.
vltime
and different claritys in the kingdom of heaven. S. Gregory confirms S.
Augustins words, as it were repeating the very same over again. Because the
elect of God have different works in this life, in the next without doubt there
shall be a difference of dignitys; and therefore in my fathers house there be
many mansions.

Now to speak of the greatness of this glory I know not how to begin: for it
is neither in the tongue of man to speak, nor in his heart to think the
liberality of God in rewarding of his friends. The Saints are then united in
perfect friendshipp with him, and are received into his innermost tabernacles,
where they shall never fear to loose his grace, nor their place of glory. And
by that near and intimate union with God, the divine power, wisdom, and
goodness appears so resplendently in them: that even as iron when it is redd
hott seems to be all fire, by the fire which it contains; so the saints by
that bright glory and sublime light, by which God dwells in them, and joins
himself to them, seem to have put on the very nature of God. It ought to be a
great comfort in the way of virtue, and an encouragement to undergo labors for
Gods sake, to think of the reward which we shall have in the end. David a young
man coming into king Saul's camp, to visit his brethren that were soldiers in
it, saw the huge army of their enemies over against them, and a mighty giant
standing in the midst of both, formidably armed, challenging all Israel to a
single duel with him; and although he saw all the Israelits to fly from his
face forvery fear, yet hearing by chance of a great reward which was promised
to any that should kill him; to wit that he should have the Kings daughter to
wife, and other things. He hearkened after it, and when he had informed
himself well, and understood that such was indeed the kings promise, his
spirits were raised with the hopes of reward, and his heart was on fire to be in
hand with the giant: and allthough he knew neither how to wear armor, nor
manage arms, but without either sword, or spear, or any defense for himself,
was to venture his life with an old tried soldier, he feared nothing but went
down unto him as though it had been to beat a dog, and seeing his enemy to
approach he ran toward him threw a stone only in his face, and closing
presently with him, with his own sword he cut of his head. So in our
spiritual combats the reward which we shall have after victory ought to be a
great encouragement unto us. We shall have the grace of God which is the kings
eldest daughter, and by it everlasting glory in the kingdom of heaven.
Remember then that thou art the soldier of God, and in all temptations think
that he then calls thee forth to fight for him in his own presence and
before the host of his Angels and Saints; and that in the sight of them all
and in their hearing, he had made the promise of thy reward: and besides that
he will so help thee that thou art sure of victory if thou will. Who in this
case would not run unto the batle? This is the case of every one of us. Apos.
2.
God has promised, to him that overcomes I will give to eat of the tree of
life: to wit everlasting, and he gives unto every one sufficient means to
overcome. Is he not a coward in the sight of God, and before the whole court of
heaven that shall refuse to fight upon these terms? Think what this reward
is: an eternity of happiness. And when thou have thought for a good space say to
thy self I can not comprehend that eternal happiness. Ep. 205. ad Cyr
Hicros. Ps. 83.
In the Epistles which are commonly said to be S. Augustins he describes a
vision which himself had to his purpose, and I will give it you, as near as I
can in the same words and style. I was (says he) in my cell at Hippo resting
and greedily thinking of the glory of the blessed, and of the greatness of their
joy: and being compelled by the entreaty of my dear Seuerus once the disciple
of venerable Martin bishop of Turon, I desired to setforth a short treatise of
this matter; but having pen, in my hand to write to most holy Hierome for his
opinion in it, when I had begun the exordium of my salutation, behold a
sudden light, such as our times has not seen, nor can be spoken with our
tongues, entered into my cell, and filled it with an unspeakable sweetness of
all odours. Which when I saw, I was so astonished, that the powers of my mind
and body were quite taken from me. For J knew not then that the right hand of
God had exalted his servant. (Because at that very hour did S. Hierome depart
this world) And therefore because mine eyes had never seen the like brightness
nor ever had I felt such sweetness, I wondered and was quite ravished with it.
And being in this sort I heard a voice coming forth of that light saying to
me, Augustine what do thou mean? do thou think to put the sea into a
little dish? to hold all the earth in the compass of thy hand? to detain the
heavens from their natural course? shall thy eye see that which none could
see? shall thy ears hear more then the ears of any? and those things which
have not entered into any heart do thou think to conceive them? where is the
end of that which is endless? how will thou measure that which is immense? The
sea shall be put into a little dish, the earth shall become a handful, and the
heavens shall sooner stay their course, then thou shall understand the least
part of that joy and glory, which the blessed enjoy. But that thou should
understand that which I know now by experience not to undertake impossible
things. Seek not to understand, but labor to get that glory which thou
would conceive. Thus S. Hierome would prevent his letter, and satisfy him by
experience in that which he desired to understand; to wit that the glory of
the Saints is above humane understanding. It is enough for us to think that it
is a life in which God is enjoyed for ever; but here we can not comprehend
what God is, what ever is, or what that life is in which God is enjoyed, and
which they lead in heaven. O the infinite goodness of God! O eternity! O sweet
life in which that infinite good is eternally enjoyed! That which is good and
the best in every thing that is contained in God, the sum and hight of
perfection. I say all in this word Perfection. And this perfection thou shall
allwais desire, Ps. 23.
and have it allwais there as thou defirest in God. How beloved are thy
tabernacles O Lord of hosts? my soul coueteth and faints unto the courts of
our Lord. My heart and my flesh have rejoiced toward the living God. This is
the end of the Creed and of true faith that we gain everlasting life. This is
the final but infinite reward which Catholics only, and none but good
Catholics come to receive: that our souls shall be placed in perfect
spiritual pleasures, and our bodies in corporal, and shall still aim at that
which is most perfect, and enjoy that perfection which they aim at, to wit God
in his glory.

THE FIFTH DISCOVRSE. OF THE SACRAMENTS.
I INTEND to declare the Sacraments unto you: which as they are the most
estimable jewels and precious ornaments by which the merits of Christ's Passion
are applied for the sanctification of our souls; so it is very necessary for
all to be well instructed in them; that those holy mysterys being received with
due reverence, may bless and effectually sanctify the receivers of them. Mat.
7.
Give not that which is holy to dogs: neither cast you your pearls before
swine. Says our blessed Savior. That is, that holy things are not to be given
to the unworthy, and as S. Augustine has noted, especially the Sacraments
which are understood by pearls, as the most precious of holy things. That I
may speak worthily of them, and you receive benefit by my speech, we will say
the Hail Mary for our Blessed Ladys intercession Hail Mary etc.

Quest. What is a Sacrament? Answ. A Sacrament. is an outward sign which
causes grace in us.

To be a Sacrament is to be an outward sign, and to be an outward sign, is to
be something that may be perceived outwardly by the senses. By the sense of
seeing we perceive in the Sacraments the thing which is done, as the ablution
in baptism: and by the sense of hearing the words that are said: and in that
which is done and said consists the nature, and essence of every Sacrament,
as it is an outward sign to our senses. S. Augustine, The word is joined to
the element and there is a Sacrament. The Sacraments cause grace in us; Tract.
80. in Io.
because they are the means which Christ has instituted to sanctify us by;
and we can not be sanctified, but by the divine grace being caused in us.

OF THE EFFECTS OF THE Sacraments.
THE prime and propper effect of every Sacrament is to cause grace: for they
are not only signs to signify that God then gives grace; but they have power
given them of God to cause grace in the souls of those that worthily receive
them: that as a Cherry tree produces a cherry, and a Plumtree a plumme; so
the Sacraments of Christ produce grace, as their propper fruit, in the souls
of the worthy receivers of them, God using them as instruments to our
sanctification.

This is the difference betwixt the Sacraments which were before Christ both in
the law of nature and of Moses, and the Sacraments which now we have in the
law of grace, that the Sacraments which were before the coming af Christ could
not give grace to salvation, but only fignifyed the grace, which was to be
given by our Sacraments; because they signified him only who as then was to
come and had not purchased grace by his passion, as yet suffered: and so they
only signified that grace which he was to purchase, and which was to be given
by the Sacraments of Christ: by the merits of whose passion God then gave grace
to those that received the former Sacraments; but the Sacraments themselves as
they were of those laws and times, had not that power; and therefore the Apostle
calls them weak and poor elements: that is in comparison of the virtue and
efficacy of our Sacraments; Gal. 4.
which as they are the Sacraments of the law of Christ have this preeminence
above them, that they can cause grace in us.

Quest. What is grace? Answ. Grace is a supernatural gift, which makes us
gratfull, and acceptable to God.

Grace is a certain supernatural quality which God infuseth into our souls,
by which they are sanctified, and so adorned and beautifyed in his sight that
he cannot but love those that have it, and can love none that have it not. It
is as though a king should bestow some gift upon every one of his friends in
token of friendship; which gift should so endeere them unto him, that they
were sure of his favor as long as they kept it, and to loose his favor if
they lost it: so that this token should both destinguish them from his enemies,
and also cause them to be his friends. Such a gift is the grace of the
Sacraments; it formally causes us to be the friends of God, and destinguisheth
us from his enemies.

All the gifts of God may be called graces in a large sense, as they are gifts
which of mere grace, and benevolence he bestows on his creatures: and so
the gift of tongues, of prophecy, of miraculous cures, and the like are
commonly called graces: but they are not the grace of the Sacraments, which
makes us gratfull to God. For although those gifts or graces for the most part
be given to the good; yet sometimes they are given to evil men; as the gift of
prophecy was given to Balaam an idolatour, and to Caiphas, even then to
prophecy, when he was sitting in judgment against Christ: but none but the just
have Sacramental grace; because it sanctifyeth all those that have it. Secondly
the good motions and holy inspirations, by which God moves us to good works
are called grace; but they are not the grace of the Sacraments, which
sanctifyeth us; they being often and for the most part (God knows) rejected by
many, that answer not to them. Thirdly the general concourse of God, by which
he preserves all creatures in their being, and concurreth with them in their
works, is called grace, as when we say by the grace of God I will do this or
that: that is to say with the divine help and concurrence. And in fine all the
good which we have may be called grace, as it proceeds of the gracious
goodness of God toward us. But the grace which is caused by the Sacraments
sanctifyeth our souls, and makes them gratfull to God, which the others do
not.

This effect which the Sacraments have of causing grace in us, although it be
supernatural to them, as they are only corporal signs; yet unto God that
gives them that power it is natural; and as easy is it to him to give to his
creatures power of sanctifying, and of giving grace, as it is to give them
power to any other miraculous effects: all which although they be in some sort
supernatural; yet by the will of God they are made subject to natural, and
secondary causes. And God to show this power and dignity of out Sacraments,
would have all that solemnity in the baptism of Christ, that the heavens
should open, and the whole B. Trinity should sensibly appear. The Father in
the voice, saying, this is my belooued son in whom I am well pleased, The
Son in humane nature submitting himself to be baptized, Mar. 3.
and the Holy Ghost in the likeness of a dove. It was also for the greater
reverence of our Sacraments that great solemnity, with which the Confirmation
of the Apostles was celebrated on Whitsunday, when the Holy Ghost came with
astonishing glory, and great signs to confirm them: God honoring the rest of
the Sacraments by these two first, to show the power which they all have.

OF THE NECESSITY OF Sacraments.
GOD having ordained man for a glorious future life, by duly worshipping him
in this; and directing him in his worship, not by leaving every man to
himself, independent of all authority, and subject to none; but by subiecting
him to the obedience of a continual Church, and of spiritual pastors in
spiritual things; it was necessary that he should ordain some external and
corporal means of sanctification in the Church, that all might unite and
combine together in the true worship of God by them; which by only internal
and spiritual acts could not be; because we understand not but by outward
words and signs. S. L. 19. cont. Faust. c. 11.
Augustine Men can not agree in the profession of any religion, either true or
false, except they be united by some visibles signs or Sacraments. Because as
long as we live in this life, our souls in their operations depending of our
bodies, can conceive nothing but by outward species received in our senses. Romans
1.
The invisible things of God are understood by those things that are made.
And therefore the manner of our sanctification, and of receiving grace, which is
spiritual and invisible, must be by corporal and visible Sacraments, that the
Church may combine together in the worship of God by them. To be admitted then
into the Church some visible sign was necessary: and for this is Baptism; for
by it we are made members of the Church of Christ. After that the other
Sacraments are necessary for the ordering, and governing us in the progress of
our spiritual life which is then begun. In breife corporal Sacraments were
necessary to admit us into the Church, and then for the Church to govern us
by them. Who instituted the Sacraments.
And being that they give grace for our sanctification; it follows that they
must be of divine institution; none but God being able to give them that power;
because none but he had that power to give them, and to determine and appoint
them as the means of our sanctification; and therefore the Sacraments could not
be instituted by the Apostles, or by the Church after them; but by Christ
himself.

OF THE MATTER AND FORM of the Sacraments, and of the intention of him that
administreth them.
BY that which hitherto has been said of the Sacraments it appears, that
they are the medicines of our souls, which through the merits of Christ's
Passion give health unto sinners. Now medicines as such include and require
three things. First the thing it self which is to be applied. Secondly the
application of it, that it be applied. Thirdly that it be rightly applied. That
which in the Sacraments is as the medicine it self is the matter of the
Sacraments; that is so methinge which in every Sacrament is applied: as water
in baptism, oil in Confirmation etc. That which in the Sacraments is as the
application of a medicine, is the form of the Sacraments; as the words in
Baptism, Confirmation etc. Because by them the matter or medicine it self is
applied to the patient. That which is required as necessary to the due and
right application of it, is the intention of him that administreth it: to wit
that he intend to apply it as a Sacrament and remedy for sin. And if any of
these three things be wanting, either the matter, the form, or the right
intention of the minister, it is noe Sacrament. The matter and form are
required as the essential parts, which Christ ordained for every Sacrament to
consist of: the intention of the minister is noe part of the Sacrament; yet it
is a condition and circumstance necessary to it: because those things which are
indifferent unto several ends must be determined by the intention to the end
which they are intended for. A charitable and liberal gentleman, seeing a
company of poor folks at his doors, throws them his purse, and bids
them take it: they go away giving many thanks; and blessing God and him, they
take it as an alms to use as their own. The same gentleman throws his purse
to his steward and bids him take it, meaning to lay up: he takes it without
thanks giving: because it was not meant him as his own, nor given him as a
gift. Now what makes the first to be a gift, and not the second, but the
intention of the giver? who though he did the same thing, and said the same
words to both; yet the purse in one case only was bestowed, because so
intended. So in the Sacraments, the matter and form may be applied to diverse
ends. One may do all that is to be done, and say the words of baptism to show
another how to baptize, or over an Infidel in jest only and profane mirth;
and then there is noe baptism; because his intention was then to teach
another, or to be merry, but not to baptize. It is recorded of S. Athanasius
that being a child as he was playing amongst the children of Infidels he
baptized them as he had seen amongst christians. And it was found to be true
baptism; because upon due examination afterward it appeared, that he then
intended to give true christian baptism: but if Athanasius had baptized in
sport only, it had been noe baptism; because he had not had that intention
which God then inspired him to have, and which was necessary for the Sacrament.

The effect of the Sacraments depends not upon the holiness and goodness of the
minister, nor requires any more goodness in him, then the goodness, that is the
trueness, of his intention: but as a lame and diseased physician may
administer good physic to his patient, and to good effect; so an evil
minister may ministrate good Sacraments and to good effect, if the receiver be
rightly disposed for it. Aug tract. 2. in lo.
Judas (says S. Augustine) as an Apostle baptized amongst the Apostles, and we
do not read that Christ commanded those, whom Judas had once baptized, to be
again rebaptized. The reason is because he that administreth the Sacraments is
but the instrument of Christ, who instituted them and gave them their power,
himself being the principal cause of their effect; and the instrument works
not by it self, but by the virtue and power of the principal agent that
imployeth it. For as wine or beer is noe better, nor worse for being drunk
out of a syluar bowl then out of an earthen pott, and as the physician gives
noe power to his medicines, but only applies them with that power which they
have of God; and therefore the moral goodness of the physician avails nothing
to the effect of the medicine; so the effect of the Sacraments depends not
on the goodness of the minister; because he is but the instrument of Christ, who
acts by him. Yet thus much may be said, that as wise patients would rather
choose physicians of good health, then those that are sick and can not cure
themselves; so it is wisdom rather to receive the Sacraments at the hands of
good, then of evil ministers to whom we might say physician cure thy self.
Luc. 45
Besides it is more reverence to the Sacraments.

OF THE CHARACTER OF THE Sacraments.
THE Council of Trent has declared, that besides the effect of grace which all
the Sacraments give, some of them imprint a certain character, or mark upon
the souls of those that receive them. These are Baptism, Confirmation, and
Orders; because by these Sacraments men are chosen, and deputed to some offices
more then by the rest. By baptism we are first deputed and enter into the
office of chriftians, and service of Christ. By Confirmation we are chosen and
deputed as his soldiers, to fight for him with fortitude in time of
persecution. By Orders men are deputed to certain spiritual offices in the
Church. Aug. l. 2. e. 23. cont. ep. parm.
S. Augustine calls the character of the Sacraments a badge or cognizant of
some spiritual power; and compares it to the sign and token of honor which
soldiers used to wear in his time. It is not (says he) to be thought that
the soldiers of Christ should want that honor, which the soldiers of this
world have.

The effect of the character is not to give grace, but only to destinguish
those that are deputed to those offices as I have said. This character is so
firmly sealed upon the souls of those that receive those Sacraments, that it
can never be blotted forth, nor taken from them: and therefore those three
Sacraments are but once received, and can not be reiterated again, as the
other Sacraments may, and must be when need requires; because the other
Sacraments have not this effect, when they give grace: and therefore nothing of
them remaining, when the divine grace is lost by mortal sin, they must be
renewed again in us; but these three need not to be received again; because
they leave their character, seal, and pledge allwais in us. And in this sense
the words of the Apostle are literally understood. Cor. ^,1.
He that has anointed us God: who also has sealed us, and given the pledge
of the spirit in our hearts.

OF THE REVERENCE WITH which we ought to receive the Sacraments.
AMongst all the points of christian doctrine there is none more necessary to
be perfectly learned, then the doctrine of the Sacraments. The other mysterys
of faith we are bound to know them speculatiuely, so as to believe them; but
of the Sacraments we are bound to have a practical knowledge, to receive them
worthily and with fruit. By this we may conceive some thing of the reverence
which we owe to them: that as precious as the blood of Christ is, and as
auailable as the merits of his Passion are to us, they avail us nothing at
all, nor can we by any other possible means receive the benefit of them, but
by the Sacraments. They are the cundits by which his precious blood is
conveyed, and conducted to our souls: and he that receives any Sacrament in
mortal sin stops those cundits with beastly silth profaneth them, and
poysoneth his soul. The Holy Ghost in the book of wisdom describing the
impietys of wicked men says, Sap. 2.
they have not known the Sacraments of God. That is to say the chief mysterys
of God. Now amongst all the mysterys of God, the seven Sacraments are so high
and eminent, that above all others they have purchased to themselves the name
and title of Sacraments. That which follows of this is, that it is a most
grievous ignorance not to understand them; and that there is noe irreuerence
in the worldsoe great, as is the unworthy receiving of any Sacrament. Christ
stands with the chalice of his Passion ready to power it on thy soul, to
wash away thy sins; and thou profanest that chalice when thou profanest any
Sacrament by receiving it unworthily. Thou spillest on the ground, and
wilfully treadest under thy feet the blood of thy Savior. The son of God
has provided in the Sacraments a remedy for thy weak and dying soul, and in
steed of applying it thou abusest it. If a wise and careful physician should
send unto his patient in peril of death some very precious and costly medicine,
and should assure him to save his life and restore him his health by it; how
joyful should he be at the coming of it? but if this patient should refuse to
take it, and insteede of taking it, should tread it under his feet or throw
it to the dogs, how great were the contempt which he showed of his physician
and of his own life? Mortal sin is a deadly sickness, Christ is our
physician he sends us the Sacraments a costly remedy to him, and the only
remedy that can, and is sure to cure us. He that neglects to receive the
Sacraments neglects his own life; he that receives them unworthily,
receives them as a dog that had noe soul to be saved, and has noe benefit,
but wounds and poysoneth his soul by the sacrilege which he commits. A
man (says the Apostle) making the law of Moses frustrate, Heb. 10.
without any mercy dies under two or three witnesses. How much more think you
does he deserve worse punishments which has trodden the son of God under
foot, and esteemed the blood of the testament polluted where in he is
sanctified, and has done contumely to the spirit of grace?

This is a sin which seareth up the conscience and obdurateth the heart
against God: and for those that are guilty of this sin, if they continue any
time in it, it is very hard, and must be by a very special grace of God, if
ever they come to true repentance. I shall speak more of this in the
Sacraments of Eucharist and Penance, which very wicked christians some times
abuse to their damnation.

That we may not loose the benefit of the Sacraments, it will help us very
much before the receiving of any of them to consider well, what it is that we
are then going to, and to think of the great love that Christ bore to our
souls, when he was nailed to the Cross, and by the price of his life purchased
for us, that the Sacraments should sanctify and save us. He loved us to the
end, and even after his death he would show by a mystery how much he loved us,
and how dear the Sacraments were to him, permitting his blessed side to be
opened, that blood and water might issue out, to signify Baptism and the
Eucharist, and by them all the other Sacraments, as receiving then their power
from him. Imagine then o Christian when thou go to any Sacrament, that thou
did see thy Savior hanging on the Cross, and his side running down with
blood and water; and that he called thee unto him, to let it fall upon thy
soul: with what reverence would thou come to him, and bring thy soul to
that fountain? Think with thy self that thou will prepare the like reverence
when thou receiuest any Sacrament.

OF THE NVMBER OF THE Sacraments.
Quest. Say the seven Sacraments Answ. Baptism, Confirmation, Eucharist,
Penance, Extreme Unction, Holy Orders, Matrimony.

SOme Protestants allow of two only, Kellisin 3. part. to. 2. q. 65. ar. 1.
some of three, some of four, and Luther allows somerimes of one only, and
some Lutherans have allowed of seven Sacraments. Thus they are divided in a
point which must needs be one of the most fundamental points of faith. All
Catholics that are in the world unanimously agree that there are neither more
nor fewer but just seven Sacraments; and those as above said. S. Thomas
declares the nature and necessity of seven Sacraments for our spiritual life
by seven things included necessarily in our corporal life. First our corporal
life supposes generation: and to this baptism is answerable; for by it we are
generated and have our first spiritual being and birth: and therefore S. Paul
tells the Corinthians, Cor. 1.4.
whom he had christened, or caused to be christened, that he begott them to
Christ: and in the same sense he calls Onesimus the child which he begotte in
prison. Phile.
Secondly our corporal life includes growth and increase of strength: to this
Confirmation is answerable in our spiritual life; for by it we are
strengthened in the true faith of Christ. Thirdly our corporal life requires
food for nutriment, and especially bread: to this the Sacrament of Eucharist
is answerable; for by it our souls are nourished with spiritual vigor and
nutriment, even in the similitude of bread; when we receive him who is the
bread of Angels, as he feeds them with his glorious sight and presence.
Fourthly our corparal life requires medicines for the diseases, and hurts,
which we are subject unto: this is supplied by the Sacrament of Penance:
Christ having instituted it as a remedy for all the spiritual hurts and
diseases which we incur after baptism. Fifthly our corporal life requires
arms of defense against our corporal enemies; and so do our souls,
especially at the hour of our death when our enemies rage most against us; and
for this we have the Sacrament of Extreme unction, by which our weak senses
are armed against the devils power. Sixthly the corporal life of man, as he is
ordained to the society of other men, requires a superior authority to be in
some, for the governing of others; and so an orderly government is necessary
for us in the Church of God; and for this we have the Sacrament of orders in
which power is given to some in spiritual things Seauenthly, for the
continuance and conservation of humane nature, a continual succession, and
propagation of mankind is necessary in the world; and for this the spiritual
life of man requires, that it be done by a Sacrament for the orderly
propagation of men, and the increase of souls to the worship of God. This is
by the Sacrament of Matrimony: which as it is a duty of nature is only for
corporal generation; but as it is a Sacrament it gives grace, for the increase
of souls in the divine worship.

The number of the Sacraments shall appear furthermore out of the scriptures
in that which I have to say of every Sacrament in particular. The same is
declared by diverse Councels. And although the fathers have had noe occasion in
their writings to name them altogether; yet they have made mention of them
all, as occasion served. Neither is it necessary that we should assign the
time when every Sacrament in particular was instituted of Christ. We know the
times of the institution of some of them; and we know that for forcy days,
betwixt his resurrection and his Ascension, he frequently appeared unto his
Apostles, and taught them many things, which they were to observe in the
Church, which are not mentioned in the scriptures; and we know that the
Sacraments of the Church must be of Christ's teaching, and ordaining. We have
for the number of the Sacraments the same authority, that we have for any of
the scriptures, to wit the authority of the Church: which although it declare
not the time when the scriptures were written; yet it assures us of all their
verity; and so it does of the number of the Sacraments. ad Casulan.
S. Augustine gives us this rule, that for those things which are generally
received by the Church, if their beginnings be not known, they are to be taken
for Apostolical traditions: but such is the number of seven Sacraments;
therefore they are of Apostolical tradition. Thus much of the Sacraments in
general; let us now come to their particular declarations.

OF BAPTISM. OF THE NECESSITY OF baptism.
Baptism is commonly called the door of the Sacraments; because it is the
entrance to the rest, necessary to be had before them. For until we be
christened we are not christians; and until we be made christians we can not
receive the Sacraments of the people of Christ. Baptism is our first spiritual
generation, and before generation we have noe operation; because we are not;
so before baptism we have noe spiritual being in grace; and therefore it is to
be supposed before the rest of the Sacraments be received; the words of S. John
being then verifyed he gave them power to be made the sons of God. Io. 1.
For as we are borne the children of Adam, and of wrath in our corporal births;
so in baptism we are borne the sons of God, by grace through the merits of
Jesus Christ. As necessary then as generation is to the corporal being of all
men, so necessary is baptism to the being of all souls in the divine grace
and favor: and as necessary as birth is to the perfection of man in this
world, so necessary is baptism to come to the perfect state of glory. Unless a
man be borne again of water and the spirit he can not enter into the kingdom
of God. I^. 3.
By which words it appears that Baptism is a Sacrament that is to say an
outward rite or sign that causes grace in us. Baptism a Sacrament.
We have a rite and outward sign in the water; and we have the effect of grace
in that the kingdom of heaven is obtained by it.

Heretics (that would confound all things in the Church of God) have gone
about to take away our christendom from us, affirming quite contrary to the
words of Christ, that a man not borne of water may enter into the kindome of
heaven, pretending that children are sanctified by their parents faith, and
therefore will not baptize them. But this as I have said is directly contrary to
the words alleged, and in it self most absurd, in that it makes the
kingdom of heaven to come to children, not by grace, but by inheritance from
faithful parents; and supernatural glory to be obtained by natural and
corporal means. Children are not absolutely holy, in that they come of holy
parents: good parents are indeed a means to thee sanctification of their
children by procuring for them that which God has ordained for their
sanctification; but the goodness of the parent can not merit grace for the
child, nor sanctify him. This must be done by applying the merits of Christ's
passion to children in some Sacrament. And so the children of the Jews in the
law of Moses were saved by the faith of their parents in this sense, that they
having the true faith, applied unto their children those means of
sanctification, which God then ordained for them: but neither in the law of
Moses, nor of nature were children ever sanctified by only being borne of
good parents; but something was allwais done to them, as Circumcision, or some
other outward sign for their sanctification: which although it were far
inferior to our baptism; yet it was necessarily required: there being noe
proportion betwixt kindred in blood, and the divine grace and glory. S. Augustine
Do not believe, Aug. l. 3. de anima and e^^s origine^. 9.
do not say that children before baptism can have their original sin
forgiven them, if thou will be a Catholic.

OF THE EFFECT OF BAPTISM.
THE propper and particular effect of Baptism is to make him that receives
it, to become a member of the body of Christ, as being admitted into his Church
by it; and to dispose and prepare him for the rest of the Sacraments after it.
The general effect of Baptism, which it has commune with all the Sacraments,
is to give grace to the sanctification of souls: and this it does after so
full and plentiful a manner, that it remitteth all sin whatsoever, original
and actual, great and little, and forgiueth all punishment due to it in the next
world. Romans 6.
We are buried (says the Apostle) together with him by Baptism unto death.
That is to the death and destruction of sin, and of all punishment after it.
We have a figure of this in Naaman the leptose Prince of Syria, who washing
himself in the waters of Jordan, Reg. 4 5.
as the Prophet had praescribed to him, he came forth so clean and perfectly
cured, that the Holy Ghost says his flesh was restored as the flesh of a little
child. Ezechiel prophesied of this, saying, I will power out upon you clean
water and you shall be cleansed from all your contaminations. Ezech c. 36.
The Baptism of S. John had not this effect; but was a Sacrament, that is to
say a holy mystery betwixt the law of Moses, and Christ; not remitting of
sins, but ordained of God as an honorable preparation for christian Baptism:
and for this reason Christ himself would be baptized by it, not to be purifyed
(says S. Augustine) by the waters, but to purify them by touching his most
pure flesh. And as it were to prepare them for that more honorable Baptism,
which he was to command.

The Apostles have declared the effect of our Baptism by some typical figures
of the old Testament. S. Peter applies the miraculous Salvation of mankind by
water, Pet. 1.3.
in the days of Noe, as a figure of our salvation by the water of Baptism. S.
Paul delivers the passage of the Israelits through the sea to the land of
promise, as a figure of our passing the waters of Baptism to our desired rest
in glory. Thus would God honor our Baptism with these honorable figures, and
inspire the Apostles to take notice of them. We ought therefore with great
reverence, humility and devotion to be present at the administering of this
great, and powerful mystery.

OF THE CAEREMONYS OF Baptism.
THE dignity of the Sacraments of Christ requires that they be delivered with
devout, and reverent caeremonys; such as may both express the nature of them,
and move us to devotion in those holy mysterys. Haeretiks when we speak of
caeremonys presently begin to laugh, and as those that are possessed with
evil spirits deride holy things; so do they the caeremonys of the Catholic
Church. But this is the spirit of haeretical pride which is in them, proceeding
from their own wilful ignorance, because they will not consider and
understand truly the nature of caeremonys; The original cause and ground of
caeremonys.
which is to be a corporal worship of God according to our nature, and an
humble acknowledgment of our weak and corporal nature; who are indeed
spiritual creatures in our souls, but tied unto and clogged with a body which
is earthly; and therefore we must honor. God both with our souls and bodies:
with our inward affections, as the operations of the soul, and with corporal
caeremonys as the duty of our bodies; every creature being to honor him after
that manner which is natural to it. Angels honor God only by affections,
which are spiritual; because they are only spirits: but man that consists
both of soul and of body, must worship him both with spiritual affections of
the soul, and with corporal reverence. It is true, God respects most the
inward of our hearts, and without that nothing is acceptable to him; but he will
accept of corporal works together with our hearts: he will have us to pray in
spirit inwardly, yet he refuses not our vocal prayers, which are corporal
expressions of our inward reverence to him. Nay he is so far from refusing
them, that Christ would both practice them himself, and commend them to his
Disciples; giving them a form of vocal prayer. And as God, who respects most
the inward of our hearts, would nevertheless allow of and commend vocal
prayer; that we might use it as an expression natural to us, to humble our
selves in the consideration of our weak nature; so will he have us to
express our inward submission of heart by corporal caeremonys, and humble
ourselves by them unto him.

This is the original cause of vocal prayer and of caeremonys, as kneeling,
holding up our hands and the like at our prayers: and for this cause God would
have caeremonys to be used in his service, both in the law of nature and of
Moses; and Christ would initiate the law of grace with many caeremonys, which
himself used. Read the fifteenth of Genesis, Genesis 15.
and you shall find that God commanded to take for sacrifices such and such
creatures, of such an age, to be divided after such a manner, and to be laid in
such a posture: all which an haeretike may laugh at, if he will. Afterward in
the law of Moses; he that should read, with the spirit of an haeretike, all
those very many and strange caeremonys, which were then used, Exodus 29.
and should see in the ordaining of Aaron the blood of a ram put upon the
tippe of his right ear right thumb, and right great toe, would perhaps laugh
them to scorn, although they were ordained of God, as this whole law was;
which was so full of caeremonys, that it may well be divided into the
Caeremonial law. He that in the spirit of an haeretike should read the
seventh of S. Mark, Mark. 7.
and should see Christ take the deaf and dumb man out of the multitude, might
ask to what purpose did he so? could he not as well have cured him amongst
the people? he putt his singars into his ears: to what purpose, would this
haeretike say, could he not have cured him as well without that caeremony? he
spitted, touched his tongue, looked up to heaven, groaned, said Epheta. To what
purpose, might he say, was all this? could not he have done the miracle as well
without it? Yes! Luc. 18.
Christ could have cured him without these caeremonys, with a word only, as he
did the blind man with only Respice: or without any word at all; but only the
word of his will, as he did the Centurions boy, neither speaking, nor touching,
nor so much as seeing him, but with his eyes of pity; being then in body
absent from him. But although then he would use noe caeremonys; yet at other
times, as you have seen, he did; and for the most part he cured by imposition
of hand; and that to very good purpose: and if the haeretike will know to what
purpose it was; it was to teach him, and all men to worship God according to
their nature, and to humble themselves in the consideration of their corporal
nature. Holy David, seeing the arc of our Lord coming forth of Obededoms
house, moved with the zeal of divine worship, deuested himself of his
princely majesty, and being a king, he thought it noe disparishment to gird
himself with a linen Ephod, and to leap and dance before the arc of our
Lord: Michol his foolish wife looking through a window and seeing it, despised
him in her heart for that caeremony of devotion; and when the king came to his
house she met him, and vpbraided him with it, as a scornful caeremony. But
what was his answer to her? Reg. 2.6.
Before our Lord will I play and will become more vile then J have been and I
will be humble in mine eyes. This is the effect of the caeremonys of the
Church, to humble us to God whilst we reverence him both in body and soul.
David was an humble man, and the type of a good Catholic, Michol was a proud
woman, and may signify haeretiks; for as she derided David's devotion, so do
haeretiks deride the caeremonys of the Church: but we have an answer for them
in David's words. I will humble my self both in soul and body to God, and will
serve him with all my might, spiritually and corporally. This is a sufficient
answer to all objections against caeremonys.

There are two kinds of caeremonys: Two kinds of caeremonys
the one has a direct and immediate relation to God, without representing any
particular mystery, as kneeling at our prayers or to the B. Sacrament, holding
up our hands, adorning of Churches, and the like. The other is of caeremonys
which represent some particular mystery as the sign of the Cross, in relation
to the Passion of Christ, and the caeremonys of the mass, and of the
Sacraments, which for the most part signify something of his life or death. By
the first we humble our selves to God in the condition of our nature: the same
we do also by the second, and furthermore by them we remember, and honor the
mysterys which they represent. All the caeremonys of the Church are in the same
nature as corporal sacrifices, Sacraments, and vocal prayers; outward
expressions of our inward affection. Neither can there be any thing objected
against the nature of caeremonys, but it has the same force against them.

This is sufficient for caeremonys in general. Now for the particular
caeremonys of baptism, we need but to show that they have holy
significations. The font consecrated.
First then the font is consecrated with holy oil, to signify the inward
unction of the Holy Ghost by the grace of baptism. Oil is a liquor which
spreads it self, mollifyeth that which is hard, and cures wounds. And
therefore may well signify grace, which diffused in our hearts, dilateth it self
by good works, softeneth, and tendereth them to the love of God, and cures us
from deadly sin; and therefore oil is often used in the Sacraments, and
caeremonys of the Church; and was used in the law of Moses, Exodus 29. Exodus 40.
by the express command of God, in the consecration of Priests, and of things
that belonged to the Church. The tabernacle and vessel theirof: the altar of
holocaust and the vessel theirof: the lauer with the f^ote their of: all shall
thou consecrate with the oil of unction that it may be most holy. The font
being consecrated the child is brought to the door, and stays there, to
signify that we must first lay down our burden of sin, and ease ourselves of
it, if we will enter into the house of our Lord. He is instructed in the
christian doctrine, by the Pater Noster, and Creed etc. Those that are
baptized at years of discretion answer for themselves those that can not
answer for themselves have their God fathers to see them instructed in the
duetys of a christian. God fathers.
It was the Apostles care as they were pastors over all, to provide spiritual
food of instruction, both for great and little; and therefore they instituted
Godfathers in Baptism, who as nurses might feed young christians, and
strengthen them in the doctrine of the Catholic Church. That great Philosopher
of Athens who lived in Christ's time, and was converted by the preaching of S.
Paul, was chosen of God, for the recorder of the Church in those times; and he
as an eye witness has declared the use of Godfathers in these words. Dionys
part. 3. c. 3. Ecclefiashier.
It has seemed good to our captains, to receive infants after that manner,
that the natural parents of the child should deliver him to some man learned in
divine things, whom as under a master or divine father, he leads the rest of
his life. Him whom S. Denis calls there Divine father, we keeping the very
same term, call him Godfather: and this office was, as you see, by institution
of the Apostles, who were our captains, or else of Christ himself. He further
declares in what words the Godfather used to undertake his charge, saying,
Ipromise to bring this child to the knowledge of holy things, that by my
serious admonitions, he renounce the contrary, and perform what he has
promised. S. Augustine in a Sermon of Baptism, which he made after easter,
when it used to be more solemnly administered, declares in what things they
ought to instruct their Godchildren. Teach them (says he) to observe chastity,
to love justice, to conserve charity, and above all, teach them the Pater
Noster, Creed, and ten Commandments, and the first rudiments of the christian
religion.

This institution of Godfathers was very much to the advancement of christian
piety in all those that were to be baptized, who although they were at years
of discretion, yet as young christians were to be instructed in religion, and
devotion. Prou. 22.
A young man according to his way when he is old will not depart from it. I
have something of this disc. 1. treating of instruction. The Council of
Trent, to avoid confusion in the office of Godfathers, has commanded that
there shall be but one, either a Godfather or a Godmother, or at most both a
Godfather, and a Godmother.

Exorcismes are used to expel the devils if they have gotten any power over,
or about the party, and that they may not hinder the due administering of the
Sacrament. In these exorcismes that power is exercized, which Christ promised,
and gave to his Apostles over unclean spirits, that they should cast them out.
Mat. 10.
The sign of the Cross is often made in remembrance of Christ's Passion, and to
signify that this (as all other Sacraments) has its power, and virtue from it.
Imposition of hands is used to signify the spiritual cure, which is then done;
Christ declaring to his Apostles that they should cure by imposition of hands.
Spitle.
Spitle is put upon the ears, nose and mouth, and the word Epheta is said, in
imitation of the same caeremonys of our Savior, when he restored the impotent
man of the ghospel^, and to show the custody, Salt.
which we ought to have of our senses against temptations. Salt is put into the
mouth to commend unto us wisdom in speech, and actions: salt signifying
wisdom: for as it is the seasoning of meats, Col. 4.
so is wisdom and discretion the seasoning of our words, and deeds. Your
talk allwais with grace let it be seasoned with salt; says the Apostle. (And
because it is hard to speak much with discretion and without sin; therefore
silence is often seasonable, and much talk unseasonable.) The Creed is said
to profess the faith of Christ, and the Pater Noster to signify our hopes in
his merits, which are then applied. The anointing signifies our spiritual
warrfarre, that as wrestlers aunciantly anointed themselves to become more
active against their enemies; so we against the spirituals of wickedness.
Godfathers in behalf of their children, renounce the devils power, and ask
baptism in their name, that they may come as volunteers, and not forced
soldiers into the wartfare of Christ. Baptism is then given, and in that
form of words, Mat. 28.
which Christ commanded, saying, teach ye all nations: baptizing them in the
name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost.

After baptism a Cross with holy Chrisme is made upon the top of the head, to
show the grace which then he has received: and that ever after he is to fight
under the banner of the Cross. This unction after baptism is a kind of lesser
Confirmation: for although it have not the force and virtue of a Sacrament; yet
it helps to strengthen the soul in the grace of Baptism, and faith of
Christ, as a devout caeremony particularly instituted for that end. The linen,
Apoc. 7.
cloth or Chrysome, which is put over them, signifies the white garment of
glory, which the elect have in company of the lamb and which is purchased, by
Baptism. The wax light which is put into his hand, signifies the light of
good example which he is to carry in his works. These are the chief caeremonys
of Baptism which the Church uses: and to question the caeremonys of the
universal Church (says S. Ep. 118.
Augustine) or to dispute of them as though they were not to be done, is most
insolent madness.

As for the name of the child the best is to follow the general custom of the
Church, which is also commended in the Roman Catechism: and that is to impose
allwais the name of some saint; in whom he may have both a pattern to imitate,
and a patron to help him. Die 20. August.
Surius relates how that S. Steuan imposed his own name upon the Prince of
Hungary, assigning it to him even before he was borne. It is a thing much
reprehended by the Council of Trent to give such strange and exoticall names,
as some do to their children. And it is not only a vain and profane thing
outwardly, but also injurious to the children themselves. The poor infant must
take that name whether it will or not for all the life time, and perhaps when
it is dead shall then curse the parent that imposed it, when it shall go to
hell for want of a patron, by whose assistance it might have lived, and dyed
in better estate. Besides a fantastical name being once begun, is occasioned
to remain still in that kindred, if the children be not wiser then their father
was.

Baptism being a Sacrament of absolute necessity, when present danger of death
urges, and noe Priest is at hand, it may and must be given by any of the
Clergy, and in absence of all the clergy by a lay man; and in absence of a man
by a woman. They may give the essence of Baptism; but the caeremonys are not
to be attempted upon by any but by Priests. It is good therefore for all, but
especially for Midwiues, to know how to baptize in time of necessity. They are
to power water upon the head, or upon some other part of the child, or to dippe
some part of it into water, and to say I Baptize thee. N. in the name of the
Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost. And this is a sufficient
Baptism.

OF CONFIRMATION.
COnfirmation is a Sacrament for it has all which is included in a Sacrament:
to wit to be an outward sign by which grace is caused in the soul. That it
causes grace, it appears in that the Holy Ghost was received by it. S.
Cyprian then they are sanctified and the sons of God, Act. 2. Ep. 70.
when they are borne of both Sacraments, speaking of Baptism and of
Confirmation^ Melchiades Pope, who lived a thousand and three hundred years
since, writing to the bishops of Spain says, I sought whether Baptism, or
imposition of hands was the greater Sacrament. Know that they are both great
Sacraments. He speaks there of Baptism and Confirmation: so that comparing
them together, he durst prefer neither of them; they being both great
Sacraments. And indeed if Confirmation be to be compared with Baptism it must
needs be a great Sacrament. The caerem^nys of Confirmation.
The oil of Confirmation is the sacred Chrisme, made of the oil of olives; a
fluid and softening liquor (of which I have spoken in Baptism) and of balsome
which preserves from corruption. Both very propper to this Sacrament.
Godfathers are used also here as in Baptism, for suretys A Cross with holy oil
is made in the forhead, to show our confidence in the Cross of Christ, and that
we must never be ashamed to follow him with our Crosses. A little stroke on the
cheek is given by the bishop, saying, Pax tecum, Peace be with thee, to show
that by patience in persecution we receive everlasting peace.

The propper effect of this Sacrament is to give strength and fortitude, to
maintain constantly the faith of Christ in persecution. This effect appeared
presently in the Apostles, when having on Whitsunday received this Sacrament by
the Holy Ghost descending so gloriously upon them; they became then so
changed, that they who in the Passion of Christ had showed such weakness, as
all of them to forsake him, and Peter the chief of them to deny him thrice
over, for the words of a silly girl, were now so encouraged and confirmed,
that they cameforth of that place like lions, not fearing all Jerusalem, nor
all the world: but Peter and the eleauen that were with him coming openly into
the streets, and a great multitude gathering about him, he began to preach
Christ, Act. 2.
and said, Ye men bret^ren let me boldly speak unto you. And he spoke so
boldly and with such spirit unto them; that on that day there were converted
about three thousand souls. And when they were apprehended afterward and and
brought before the Council, Act. 5.
they went from the sight of the Council rejoicing, because they were
accounted worthy to suffer reproach for the name of Jesus. such was the grace of
Confirmation in them.

OF THE EVCHARIST.
Quest. What is the Blessed Sacrament of Eucharist? Ans. The Blessed Sacrament
of Eucharist is the very true body, and blood of our Lord, under the signs of
bread or wine.

TO be the Eucharist two things are required. The inward substance, and outward
signs or species. The inward substance is the body and blood of our Lord; the
outward signs or species is the appearence which it has of bread or wine. The
same substance of Christ which is in the Eucharist is also in heaven; but the
Eucharist is not in heaven, because he is not there under the signs of bread
or wine. The same signs of bread and wine are upon the altar before, as after
the consecration, but the Eucharist is not there before consecration; because
then the substance of Christ is not under those signs; but the bread and wine
being consecrated into the body of our Lord, by the infinite power of God
Christ is under those species and it is then the B. Sacrament of Eucharist.

This is commonly called the Blessed Sacrament; for that it is eminently
blessed above the rest of the Sacraments, and infinitely blessed in that it
contains the author of all bless. These are the words of S. Denis the
disciple of S. Eccl hier. c. 3.
Paul concerning it, for it is (says he) according to our renewmed master the
Consummation of the Sacraments. Neither is it almost lawful for any of the
priestly functions to be exercized, but this divine and high Sacrament of
Eucharist must be performed. It is the highest indeed and most divine of all
the Sacraments; because the rest containing only the virtue and power of
Christ; this truly and really contains Christ himself. And therefore the
Apostles called it the Eucharist, that is to say, a high and blessed grace or
gift. By it the Church of Christ is placed in a middle rank of honor, above
the synagogue of the Jews, and under the citizens of heaven; we being but a
little less exalted then they. The Synagogue of the Jews in the law of Moses
had Christ in sigure only, we in the Eucharist have him as really as the
citizens of heaven, but they have him in glory.

In the Eucharist all Christ is contained, for although by virtue of the words,
This is my body etc. his body only be really present in it; yet because all
his perfections are allwais accompanying his sacred body, and wheresoever it
is, there is all Christ; hence it follows that both his body and soul, and
all the perfections of his divine and humane nature, and all whatsoever is in
Christ, is really in the Eucharist in company of his body. If his body were
without his soul then it were dead, Rom 6.
as it was in the sepulcher: but Christ rising again from the dead now dies
noe more. Says the Apostle. Christ therefore being now not dead, wheresoever his
body is, there his soul is all over united to it. There is then his entire
humane nature of body and soul; and being that his divine and humane nature
are allwais united together, there is also the divine word and nature of God.
All Christ is entirely in the host, and all Christ is entirely in the chalice,
although under different signs and species. And Christ is not only all in all
the host, and chalice; but all Christ is in every part of them: so that he
that receives only the host, receives as much as he that receives both host
and chalice; and he that receives the chalice only, receives as much as both
chalice and host, and the least particle of either of them is as much as all.
The reason of this, supposing the truth of Christ's words, may easily be
understood; for that he did not determine any particular quantity to be
consecrated: which if he had done, then a lesser quantity had not been
consecrated: but leaving the quantity indifferent, and the least part of it
being consecrated as well as the whole, it is the perfect Eucharist, and
perfect Christ, as well as the whole.

Christ being shortly to depart this world, would leave unto us a great
testimony of his love; and although his passion and death were sufficient to
testify it; yet besides them he would bestow a gift, token, and pledge upon us;
which might allwais remain with us as a memorial of him. He called therefore his
disciples to supper: and being there all together, he made his will and last
testament amongst them; bequething unto them the most precious, gift, that was
in his hands to give, and in his blessed hands were all things. It was his
own precious body which then he bequeathed and gave to them, and with it all
the perfections of his divine, and humane nature, and he gave it not in promise
only, and for the future: but he delivered it then to them for themselves, and
for all good christians for ever. And that noe haeretike might misconstrue his
will, and defraude the world of this precious Isgacy, he declared his mind so
planely and in such terms, as could not well be misinterpreted; telling them
that it was the very body which Was to be delivered and that blood which was to
be shedd. G^r. 1.11.
For the Apostle says that whilst they were at supper Jesus took bread and
blessed and brake: and he gave to his disciples and said take ye and eat THIS
IS MY BODY which shall be delivered for you, and taking the chalice he gave
thanks and gave to them saying: drink ye all of this. For this is my blood of
the new testament which shall be shed for many unto remission of sins.
Commanding them to do the same in commemoration of him. If then his true body
and blood was delivered and shedd, it was his true body and blood which then he
gave to them. And although (as there is noe absurdity so great but haeretiks
will find out how to maintain it) the Manichees have conceited, that an
apparent body only, and not the true body of Christ was delivered on the Cross
for us: yet now, that I hear of, there are noe such haeretiks in the world.
All christians then believing that his true body was delivered on the Cross; why
shall not all as well believe, that his true body is contained, in the
Eucharist, seeing that we have the same authority for it?

After this the Apostles undertook to consecrate the Eucharist, and honored it
as the very true body and blood of our lord. Cor. 1.11. Mat. 26.
S. Paul whosoever shall eat this bread or drink the chalice of our Lord
unworthily he shall be guilty of the body and blood of our Lord. and that he
eats and drinks judgment to him self, not discerning the body of our Lord.
Thus did the Apostles receive the Eucharist from Christ, and honored it, as his
true body. And the primitive Church that received it from them gave it the same
honor as they did, and as the Roman Church now does. That the Romans Church
does now give it that honor, it is well known, and that the primitive Church
honored it as much it shall appear by the sentences of those fathers and first
by the honorable names which they give it. Hier. Eccl. c. 3. Ignat. ad Ephesians.
Justin. Apoll. Cyp. de lapsis.
S. Denis terms it hostia saluta ris the saving host. S. Ignatius calls it
medicamentum immortalitatis, antidotum non moriendi, the medicine of
immortality, the antidote against death. Justinius Caro and sanguis incarnati
Jesus, the flesh and blood of Jesus incarnated. Cyprian de laps. Sanctum Domini,
gratia salutaris, sacrificium perpes holecaustum permanens, the holy one of our
Lord, the saving grace, the continual sac^ifice, an offering allwais remaining.
Concilium Nicaen. Agnus Dei qui tollit peccata mundi, the lamb of God that
takes away the sins of the world. S. Cyr mystag. 4.
Cyril. has these words of it, Under the show of bread the body is given to
thee and the blood is given under the show of wine. Do not consider it as
naked bread and wine: For it is the body and blood of Christ, according to the
words of our Lord. and although thy sense does suggest this, faith does
confirm thee. Judge not by taste, but believe by faith for most certain
without doubt, Hill. l. 8. de Trin.
that the body and blood is then given to thee. S. Hilarious. Of the verity of
flesh and blood there is noe place of doubt left. By the profession of our Lord
himself and by our faith, it is flesh and blood indeed. Amb. l. 4. c. 4.
Is nothis the truth? let it be untrue to them, who deny Jesus Christ to be
true God. S. Ambrose. This is bread before the sacramental, words, but the
consecration being done of bread it is made the flesh of Christ. S.
Chrysostom. Chrysos. ho. 24. in cor. 1. and l. 3. de Sacerd ho. 2. ad pop.
Antioch.
We adore him on the altar as the sages did in the manger. and again: O
miracle he that sits with the father in heaven, at the very same time is
handled of men beneath. Christ ascending to heaven both has his flesh with him
and left it beneath Elias left his cloak to his disciple; Aug. inps. 33.
but the son of man ascending left his own flesh. S. Augustine upon the 33.
Psalm admiring how David could carry himself in his own hands, concludes
that it is to be understood of Christ when at the last supper he took
himself literally into his own hands. Thus did the fathers of the primitive
Church believe of the Eucharist, acknowledging allwais the omnipotent power of
God to be miraculous in it. This belief continued in the world for a thousand
years, or there abouts, before any haeretike opposed it; and when it began
to be opposed, the Church in several general Councels declared the truth of it,
and condemned the contrary as heresy Conc. Lateran. sub Innocen. 5. Conc. Romans
ex Cocleo l. 1. hist. Hussit. Conc. Constantien. sess. 8. Conc. Trid. sess. 13.
cap. 1. can. 1.

Berengarius was the first that publikly denied the real presence of our Lord
in the Eucharist; who rejecting the commune and received doctrine of the
Church, denied that to be the body of Christ which Christ affirmed to be his
body, interpreting his words as he liked himself, contrary to all authority,
in an illiteral and vnpropper sense. That which he got for his pains was to
have his doctrine condemned in several Councels. But at last being touched
inwardly with remorse of conscience he recanted. And although he fell into
heresys again: yet he had so much feeling of the auctority of the Church, and
of a General Council, as that he recanted again, and (which is very rare in
such men) he remained repentant unto his death; and being then affrighted at
the thought of his former errors he is recorded to have confessed the horror
of his conscience saying, for my repentance I hope for glory but because I have
seduced others, I fear torments. Zuinglius and Calvin have lately renewed his
doctrine again. but we have for the Catholic faith the words of Christ in the
Scriptures, the scriptures interpreted by the holy fathers, and their
interpretations approved of by the authority of the whole Church in general
Councels.

Now that the Eucharist is a Sacrament I do not perceive that any haeretike
does deny it who allows of Sacraments; Io. 6.
for those that hold but two or three Sacraments have the Eucharist for one of
them. And it appears to be an outward sign which causes grace in us, in
that Christ promised if anyman eat of this bread he shall live for ever.

OF TRANSVBSTANTIATION,
Quaest. Is there any bread or wine in the Eucharist? ANS. Noe it seems but
so. The bread and wine are converted by the words of consecration in to the
true body and blood of our Lord.

AFTER that Berengarius had recanted his first error in which he denied the
true and real presence of Christ in the Eucharist, he fell into a second, in
which he affirmed that the substance of bread and wine still remain after
consecration; so that there was noe transubstantiation, that is to say
conversion or change of one substance into another: but this was also condemned
as an heresy, and he in the end abiured it. We believe then that in the
consecration the substance of bread and wine are destroyed, and changed by the
power of God into another substance. The holy fathers have allwais acknowledged
this conversion of substance to be in the Eucharist, and have applied diverse
figures out of the old testament, and other similitudes to declare the
Catholic doctrine in this. The rodd of Moses was transubstantiated, that is
converted into the substance of a Serpent. The waters of Egypt were turned
into blood. Water at the feast of Cana was changed by our savior into very
good wine. So by the omnipotency of God, the substance of bread and wine is
converted into the body of our Lord. And these very similitudes are used by the
fathers to this purpose. Iren. l 3. cont. haereses. c. 2. Amb. l. 4. de Sacram.
c. 4. and lib. de his qui initiantur. mist.
S. Irenaeus declares it by the water turned into wine. S. Ambrose by the rod
of Moses and the waters of Egypt. Moses his rod (says he) was turned into a
serpent and from a serpent into a rod again. The rivers of Egypt were running
with water and their fountains on a sudden brokeforth with blood, and at the
prayers of the Prophet the blood is turned into water again. If humane
blessing have such power, what shall we say of the divine consecration, where
the words of our Lord and Savior do operate? If at the words of Elias fire
descended from heaven, shall not the words of Christ have power to change the
kinds of elements? Thou have read of the creation of the world, he said and it
was done. And could the word of Christ create of nothing that which before was
not, and could he not change that which was into another thing which was also.
What more could we have desired S. Ambrose to say? All things are possible and
easy to God, and nothing more easy then another to him. Yet to our
understandings it is easier to convert something that is all ready, into some
other thing that is also, then to create some thing of just nothing. What
difficulty is there then, that God who with a word of his power created heaven
and earth, and made all things of nothing, should change the substances of
bread and wine into the substance of his sacred body, which he would leave with
us It is a miracle which God would work; and the fathers of the Catholic
Church have allwaies acknowledged it so: and that there is here a change of
natures: but if there were only a change in the signification, as the
Zuinglians and Caluinists say; or only in the real presence as the Lutherans
say, then there were noe miraculous change of that which were before; it
remaining still there according to them. Neither are those similitudes
alleged to any purpose by the fathers, unless we understand a change of the
former into a new substance, as there was in them. The Iuy bush before it be
hung up is noe sign of wine, and when it is hung up it becomes a sign; but
there is nothing above nature in that conversion; because there is a change
only in the signification, which then it has, but not in a new substance or
nature. But the holy fathers acknowledge some thing supernatural in this
conversion, and compare it with conuersions of substances which were
miraculous; therefore there is here a transubstantiation or conversion in the
substance. Otherwise there were noe parity in their comparisons nor connection
in their speech.

WITH WHAT DEVOTION we ought to receive the Eucharist.
BY that which has been said of this Sacrament we may understand something
of the devotion which is due to it, and think that so great a miracle which
God works continually in his Church to show his love to us, and to enrich our
souls, obliges us to a high and eminent degree of gratitude to him, and that
all the devotion that we can possibly stir up in our selves, is too little for
it. The Apostle admonishes us to try and to prove ourselves before we come to
this mystery, least insteede of life and happiness, which we should obtain by
worthily receiving it, we incur judgment and death by an unworthy communion
in mortal sin. O how damnable is the malice of that man that comes with
such a sin to, this communion, to unite goodness to malice, purity to
impurity, Christ to his filthy soul? Thou stoppest thy nose at noisome
carrions and loathsome stenches; yet thou will force thy savior into thy
stinking breast which is most horrible and loathsome to him, until thou have
proved and purged it. What punishment may thou expect? The arc of our Lord
was but a weak figure of Christ, yet entering into the cittys of the
Philistiims, the enemies of God, they were punised with grievous plagues; and
being set in their t^mple it struck down their Dagon, and broke it in pieces
for only standing beside it. then how dare thou, that art in mortal sin,
come so boldly unto Christ, as to take him in to thee? Reg. 1.5.
The Philistiims used outwardly great reverence to the arc, carrying it from
city to city, and setting it in their temple beside their God; yet touching it
as idolatours with impure hands, Reg. 1.5.
they were punished with such sores, and diseases, that as the holy Ghost
says, the howling of every city went up into heaven. And when it came from
amongst them, and stood in the confines of Bethsames although the Bethsamits
beheld it with joy and received it: with Holocausts and victimes: yet seauenty
men of the people, and fifty thousand of the common people were stricken of our
Lord for beholding it; that lamenting they cried out, Reg. 1.17. Who can stand
in the sight of this holy Lord God Oza was punished an Israelite also, and
servant of God fortouching it suddenly, and as he thought upon necessity, to
hold it up from falling: yet because hedid it not with sufficient wariues, it
cost him his life, being presently struck dead in the place. And dare thou
come so boldly not to touch the Arc but to receive the B. Sacrament in mortal
sin? how know thou that God will spare thee more then he did them, thy
irreuerence being infinitely greater then theirs was? Thou art baptized in the
blood of this Sacrament, and when thou prophanest it, thou abusest as much as
ever thou can that sacred blood. Thou apprehendest and imprisonest thy
savior within thee, with the Jews thou persecutest his honor and life. And
this being a christian to Christ thy master, and who must one day be thy judge.
If thou were guilty of some heinous crime, and should entertain in thy house
him who were shortly to call thee to his tribunal, and to judge thee, would
thou not seek to please him in his entertainment? do so then to Christ: give
him entertainment as he desires that he may prove afterward a favorable
judge to thee.

This sacrament is the miracle of miracles, the memorial of the marvelous
things, by which God would show his love to us, Zach. 2.
and to abuse him in it is to touch him in the aple of his eye, and to wound
him at the heart. For every thing as it is higher in perfection, so the
contempt of it is of a higher malice; and this being the most perfect of all
the Sacraments, infinite in perfection, the irreuerence done to it is of the
highest, and of infinite malice. And therefore it deserves greater punishments.

S. Paul threatening judgment to those that receive unworthily as not
discerning the body of our Lord. Therefore, says he, are there among you many
weak, Cor. 1.11.
and feeble, and many sleep, that is to say many are sick and by. But if the
diseases and deaths of those days proceeded from thence that the B. Sacrament
was not received with sufficient reverence; what shall we think of these
deadly times in which now we live, but that they have proceeded from the same
cause; the B. Sacrament having been of later years so extremely profaned.
The beginners of these heres^s, who so often consecrate the sacred host, and
sacrilegiously received it, brought into the christian world these floods of
bloodshed, which still continue, to the massacre of many thousands of
christians all ready past; and now without doubt it is a greater cause of
deaths and miserys to us then it was in S. Paul's days to christians,

Consider therefore when thou go to receive what it is that then thou
receiuest, and prepare in thy self love and reverence toward it. It is Christ
thy redeemer, thy Judge, and thy omninipotent God. If thou receiuest him in
mortal sin thou damnest thy soul by a sin above mortal sins which are of
frailty, it being of malice without either profit or pleasure to thy self; but
only for the devils pleasure that tempted thee to that sacrilege. Humble thy
self unto God and prepare thy self with a clean conscience to receive into
thee that sovereign guest, which the Angels of heaven desire to behold, and
with trembling reverence adore his glory, dispose thou thy self with Angelical
reverence and purity to receive him.

The first thing which thou must do is to make a good and entire confession
of rhy sins: (as I shall show in the next Sacrament) and not only to cleanse
they soul from mortal, but as much as thou can also from venial sins.
After confession give not thy self to unnecessary imployements or
conversation; which may cool and hinder thy devotion, but keep thy self more
retired in thy mind, praying until mass begin: and if it begin not
presently thou may read in some treatise of the B. Sacrament, if thou have
it, or walk quietly until mass. At massetime attend devoutly to the
mysterys of it; which thou must have learned to understand. At communion time
rise up from thy place, and come before the altar with profounde reverence,
stirring up in thy self many feruerous acts of the love of God, and
detestation of sin. Say then from thy heart the words which S. Peter, who with
great faith, and ardent affection received the words of Christ and professed
them to be the words of life when some of his disciples went away for the
hardness of this mystery. Christ preaching to the people that he would give
them a more precious bread then the Manna of their forefathers, and that this
bread was to be his own flesh; the Jews began to murmr saying, Io. 6.
how can this man give us his flesh to eat? he then confirmed his words again
in plane terms, Saying, Amen, Amen. I Say to you unless you eat the flesh of
the son of man and drink his blood you shall not have life in you ^he that
eats my flesh and drinks my blood has life everlasting: and I will raise
him up in the last day. Formy flesh is meat indeed, and my blood is drink
indeed. They seeing him thus to confirm what he had said before, that he
would give them his own flesh to eat; and not understanding how it could be:
many even of his disciples said that it was a hard speech, and went back and
walked not with him. But Christ turning to the twelve and asking them, what
will you also depart? Then S. Peter with a constant and ready faith answered
for himself, and for them. Lord to whom shall we go? Thou have the words of
eternal life. And we believe and have known that thou art Christ the son of
God. This was an answer worthy of S. Peter: and Christ had so disposed of his
speech, as though of purpose he had intended to draw this answer from him. It
was for our instruction in this point: that we might say as S. Peter said,
especially then when we are going to receive. Lord wither shall I go but unto
thee? I believe thy words for that they, are thine: thou have the words of
eternal life (and looking toward the B. Sacrament) I believe and know that
thou art Christ the son of God. L. 6. de Saccrd.
And think with what respect the Angels attend on thy communion. S.
Chrysostom says, that there is not doubt but the priest is guarded by Angels
whilst he is in hand with the blessed Sacrament; and that a venerable and grave
person had informed him, that himself had seen the Angels enuironing it
bending, their heads in homage, as soldiers (says he) do to their captain,
and courtiers to their king. See then that thou remember the Angels reverence.
And when the priest presents the sacred host to then, and says Domine non
sum dignus, etc. Say thou with him Lord I am not worthy that thou should
enter under my roof; but only say the word and my soul shall be saved. And
repeat them thrice over with him. The humble Centurion thought it too great an
honor for him to have Christ to come into his house to cure his servant; but
he enters into thy body, to cure thy soul. Thou had need to be more
humble, and better disposed then he was, although worthy to be commended of
Christ. When the priest de liuereth the blessed Sacrament to thee, lift up thy
head that he may see what he does, and hold the towel under thy chinn to kepp
any particle that might chance to fall: open thy mouth decently, and putting
thy tongue to thy lips, receive that sacred host, as a pledge of thy redeemers
love: who as he came into this world and refused neither shame nor pain to
make thee his friend, so whould he still humble himself in remaining with
thee to keep thee in his freindship.

As soon as thou have received, and washed thy mouth, if need be, with some
drink; gather together all the powers of thy soul to give thanks unto God,
do homage to him with them, and offer them to him to be employed in his
service all thy life time: love him with all thy heart, and detest all that
which is displeasing to him, and never fail as often as thou receiuest to make
a vehement detestation of that sin, which thou art most inclined unto,
purposing and thinking how to amend it. Until thou have the benediction of
the priest, sit still on thy knees, burning with love and reverence to thy
sovereign. Thenn rize up, and returning to thy place again, take thy book,
and say the prayers of thanksgiving: and departing out of the Church or
oratory. have a care for that day to keep thy senses more retired, and as it
were at home with thy guest. If some great personage or prince were come to thy
house, thou would not stir abroad as long as he stayed; but would with
good reason stay at home, and attend upon his pleasure. The king of kings
infinitely more worthy then all the princes of the world put together, comes
to thee in the Eucharist, have therefore a care to please him, and let noe
occasions draw thee away from him. Frequent Communion


Concerning the frequenting of the blessed Sacrament these are the words of S.
Augustine. Sermon. 21. de verbis Domini.
To receive the communion of the Eucharist every day I neither commend nor
discommende it; but to communicate every Sunday, I would wish and exhort every
one so to do, if his soul be without affection to sin. And he exhorts
all, so to order their lives, Part. 1. ^h. 20.
that they may be worthy to receive often. B. Bishop Sales in his Introduction
to a devout life advises every one to receive at least once a month. That
which may be gathered out of them both, is in breife, that some may receive
eueryday, many may receive every week, all may receive every month. Those that
receive every day had need to be of great sanctity, and above others in their
good example and conversation. Those that receive once a week, must be free
from affection even to venial sins, not that they never commit any, but
that they be not affected to any. To receive once a month requires only a
clear conscience, that they prove and purge themselves first by a Good
confession, of their mortal sins: which if they do they shall find great
benefit in often receiving. S. Ambrose, when thy adversary shall see thy
lodging taken up with the brightness of the heauently presence, perceiving all
place for his temptations to be prevented by Christ, he will depart and run
away.

S. Bonauenture of reverence to the B. Sacrament abstained for some days from
saying of mass, L. 2. deprofec. relig. c. 27.
and being present at the mass of another priest, at communion time he felt a
particle of the sacred host to come from the altar into his mouth. By which he
understood, as himself says, relating this passage, that it was better for
the love of God to receive often, then to abstain for fear. There remains
yet to speak

OF COMMUNION UNDER one kind.
IT is necessary that we declare why the people receive only under one kind,
seeing that Christ instituted it under both, gave it to his disciples under
both, and commanded them to consecrate it as he had done; and seeing also that
the people in the primitive Church received under both kinds. There are many
good reasons for it, as you shall presently see; but first we will examine what
it was that Christ commanded at the last supper for if he commanded that all
should receive under both kinden, then all were bound so to receive; but if
he did not command it, then it is indifferent to receive under both, or one
kind only.

Christ at the last supper commanded his Apostles saying, Luc. 22.
do this for a commemoration of me. But it is to be observed that he said
this after the consecration of the bread, before he had begun with the
chalice, as both S. Luke, and S. Paul declare; and therefore if he commanded any
thing concerning the kinds of species in which we were to receive, it was of
the species of bread that we should receive in it; and not of the chalice,
which as yet he had not begun with. But the truth is that he commanded
nothing concerning the receiving under one or both kinds; but he left it
indifferent according to conuenience of circumstances, which might occur in
the Church, and so the primitive Church allwais understood it. That which
Christ commanded his Apostles was to consecrate as he had done, and that they
should give in substance that which he gave, but not that they should give it
with all the same circumstances with which he gave it to them, as is manifest.
For he gave it at supper, to twelve only not the first: but the last meat of
that day. The primitive Church gave it not after supper nor only to Bishops or
priests, who are as the Apostles, but to the Clergy and Laity, of men, women,
and children; and that the first meat of the day. So that the substance only
of that which Christ then did was commanded by him to be done afterward; but
for all to receive under both kinds belongs only to the circumstances of
receiving it; and therefore it is indifferent. And although the Eucharist being
consecrated under both kinds, it be then necessary that in both kinds it
should be received; yet it is not necessary that all should so receive it. For
when Christ said, drink ye all of this, Mat. 26.
he said so only to the Apostles, intending to debar none of them from it.
And so if we will understand his words, do this in commemoration of me as a
command, for receiving under both kinds; it must be as a command to some
distributiuely, but not unto all the collection or congregation of the Church,
taking every one in particular. As when God commanded increase and multiply,
Genesis 1.
he commanded not all to marry, but only so many as were necessary to
fulfill the intent, and end of marriage with conuenience. And therefore the
Church has allwais observed that at mass which is the public service of God,
and most special representation of the last supper, the blessed Sacrament
should be received under both kinds, in imitation of Christ's action, and
performance of his will; but that out of mass both Priests and people should
receive under one, or both kinds, according to conuenience of times and
circumstances. Thus it was received in the primitive Church sometimes under one
kind only, sometimes under both by the people. Cyp d^lapsis nu. 10.
S. Cyprian declares that the chalice only was given to children. Eusebius. l.
6. c. 36. Besad Casars Patr^.
Eusebius and S. Basil that ermits kept thee host in their cells, to receive
it; because the species of wine could not so well be kept by them. And S.
Augustine S. Bid, Theophilact and others understand out of S. Luc. 24.
Luke, that the two disciples at Emaus received under one kind only (to wit in
the species of bread) from our Savior himself. For the text says, that he
having broken bread, and reached to them their eyes were opened, and that they
knowing him in the breaking of bread he banished out of their sight; so that
as soon as they knew him he vanished away; and stayed not to consecrate the
chalice. By that which has been said it does appear that it is not of
obligation, nor was held so by the primitive Church for all to receive under
both kinds. Which is enough for our purpose, the Church then being to judge of
the reasons, and circumstances, when it shall be received under one, or both
kinds.

Now for the reasons why all should not be bound to receive under both, and why
the people now receive it not under both, there are many First for that the
species of wine could not well be kept, as it were necessary that they should
all wais be, if all were bound to receive under that species. Secondly many
irreuerences would be endangered of spilling the chalice, if all both old and
young, sick and lame persons were bound to receive it. Thirdly many have an
auersion from wine that they can not drink it. Fourthly sufficient wine could
hardly be gotten for so many and frequent Communions as Catholics (God be
thanked) now use. For these and the like reasons Christ would not bind all to
receive under the species of wine; but would leave the manner of receiving to
the determination of the Church, according to diversity of times and
circumstances. In the primitive Church the people for the most part received
under both forms, it being then necessary for the settling of the faith of
Christ that his actions should be more strictly observed, allthough it were in
things indifferent and with some inconvenience. But now that the faith of
Christ is settled in the world, those things which are indifferent; and were
with some inconvenience at first permitted, are now to be remedied; especially
then when the inconveniences grew so great that haeretical spirits took
occasion to imagine false doctrines by them: as it happened in this very case,
when Iacobellus of Prague being offended to see some of the people to receive
under one kind only, and some under both; to remedy it would needs hold all to
be bound to receive under both kinds: which was contrary to the continual
doctrine, and practice of the Church, and to the reasons alleged. To reform
this error the Council of Constance proceeded against it: in which Iacobellus
his doctrine was condemned, and for the future it was ordained, that at mass
as the special representation of the last supper and commemoration of it, the
Priest should receive under both kinds, both the host and the chalice, and
that out of mass all should receive only the host. So all inconveniences
were taken away, a decent uniformity was procured in the Church, and the
ancient and true doctrine was better understood; that it was not of
obligation for all to receive under both kinds. For as the Council of Trent
has observed when Christ said unless you eat the flesh of the son of man and
drink his blood you shall not have life in you. Io. 6.
He added also he that eats this bread shall live for ever. By which he
declared that the benefit of the Eucharist is received as much in the host
only, as in both the host and the chalice; everlasting life being promised to
those that eat that sacred bread.

OF THE EFFECTS OF THE Eucharist.
THE effect of the Eucharist is to give grace, by which we become the adopted
children of God, nourished and fedd as it were at his own table, our souls
having satiety in him, and obtaining by it the fullnes of his glory. That where
as according to S. Tract. 26. in Io.
Augustine by other meat and drink we seek to be satiated, there is noe true
satiety but in this, by which we gain heaven. And it is especially gained by
this Sacrament, both by reason of the more special union which we baue with
Christ in it; and also for that the gift of perseverance is especially here
obtained as by a strong and nourishing bread. It remitteth sin and preserves
from future sin, according to the disposition of the receiver; according to
which also it blotteth out the punishment due to it. It has for its propper
effect to feed and to strengthen the soul, to keep it in spiritual health
and vigor. And because for the most part it is received with more fervor and
sweetness of devotion, and outwardly in the similitude of bread; therefore it is
compared to the Manna of the Israelits, which is thought by some to have had
the sweetness of all tastes. S. L. 8. ep. 62.
Ambrose We have the Manna every day rayning down upon us; that body which
came from the virgin: and S. John Chrysostom therefore calls it the fountain
of paradise, from whence sensible rivers flow. Ho. 45 to. 1.


The Saints of God have been so transported with spiritual consolations in the
receiving of the Eucharist, that good and authentical writers have recorded of
some, who have lived for diverse months, and of others who for some years
together have been sustained without any other food. S. Katherine of Siena was
singularly devoted to the blessed Sacrament. She received it every day (except
her Confessor commanded the contrary, (whom she obeyed in all things) and noe
doubt but that for a long time she was sustained only by it. In her life it is
said that as children earne unto their mothers breasts, so did she to the
blessed Sacrament, and that it often happening that she being in an ecstasy all
the time of mass until Communion, and then coming to her self, would say O
my Lord although I were dead I should revive again to enjoy thee.

THE SACRAMENT OF Penance.
Quest. What is the Sacrament of Penance?

Answ. Penance is a Sacrament by which we have the forgiunesse of sins in
Confession.

FIRST we will show that this is a Sacrament in the forgiveness of sins, and
then we will declare the parts of it, and benefits which are received by it.
Although Luther for the most part denies this to be a Sacrament, and labors
with other Protestants, to robb the world of the benefit of it; yet l. de capt.
bab. he says that it is a Sacrament. There he says truly, for it is so
indeed, and has all that is included even in the Protestants definition of a
Sacrament Apol. Confess. art. 13. which is to be an outward sign instituted of
Christ, by which grace is promised. And this it shall appear to be.

Amongst the many apparitions which Christ made betwixt his Resurrection and
Ascension to his disciples, S. John has recorded that once he came and stood
in the midst of them, and said Peace be to you. Io. 20.
And when he had said this he showed them his hands, and side, and said again
Peace be to you. As my father has sent me, I also do send you. And he
breathed upon them and said: Receive ye the Holy Ghost: whose sins you shall
forgive they are forgiven them: and whose you shall retain, they are retained.
This is all which the Evangelist mentions to have passed in that solemn
apparition which must therefore include some great mystery. Hence it appears
that this is a Sacrament: for where forgiunes of sins is promised, there
grace is promised. And this forgiving and retaining of sins being given to
the Apostles, and their successors to be practiced by them, who understand not
the inward of men's minds and consciences; the poenitent must declare his sins
to them, that they may know what, and how to forgive, or to retain them. And
so there is all that is included in the nature of a Sacrament, to wit an
outward sign both in the poenitent confessing, and in the Priest absoluing,
and that outward sign instituted, of Christ to give grace unto sanctification.
By which the Catholic doctrine is made manifest, that power is given to the
Church to forgive sins. For is it likely that Christ would appear in all
those circumstances, and mysterious caeremonys giving them the Holy Ghost for
nothing but only, to let them know, that God can and does forgive sins. The
Apostles esteemed so highly of this grace; that they made the forgiveness of
sins an article of the Creed: to wit by the power of the Catholic Church,
which they had professed in the article before. Is it likely that they meant to
make it an article of the Creed, that God can and does forgive sins? After
that, they understood that themselves had power to forgive sins, they being
sent as Christ was sent, and the Holy Ghost being given so particularly then
to them; and therefore they feared not to practice the forgiving of sins.

Priests of themselves have not power to forgive sins; for noe man of
himself has that power. They have it of God, as the vicars and substitutes of
him who gave it them. God giu's power to priests as kings do to judges: Judges
represent the person of the king; and Priests represent the divine majesty:
Judges must be informed, and so must priests: judges give sentence, and their
sentences are ratifyed by the king, God gives authority to priests and their
sentences are ratifyed by him: he that contemns the authority of the judge
contemns the authority of the king, and he that contemns the priests
authority contemns the divine majesty; Christ having made them his judges,
and set them in his own place, with power to bind and to loose, promising
that what they did upon earth should be ratifyed in heaven.

That Christ did truly give this power to the Church, his words are as plane
as words use to be: and that plane words might not be misconstrued, he
delivered them in such circumstances, as might bind them, as it were, to that
sense. First he told them that he sent them, as his father had sent him, who
forgave sins. Then he breathed upon them, and badd them receive the Holy
Ghost: what for? it must needs be for some great work, and eminent power. Then
he told them what it was for; to wit to forgive sins. Is not this as plane as
can be? Besides we destroy all connection, and sense in the words of Christ, if
we will have him to say whose sins you shall forgive, when they could forgive
none at all. He that shall call this power of forgiving sins, power only to
declare, that God then forgiueth the poenitent his sins, and shall say that
priests do not forgive, but only declare that God then forgiueth, shall say
nothing to the purpose. For although it be true, that priests do not forgive
sins by their own natural power; but do declare that God then forgiueth
with them; yet they do properly forgive, and as properly as judges do, who
having commission from the king to punish, or to pardon, are properly said to
pardon that crime which the king pardons by them. So priests pardon and
forgive sins by commission and power from God. And he that calls it power
to forgive calls it as Christ did, and he that will call it only power to
declare, miscalleth it, and shows in himself a contentious and contradicting
mind, in rejecting of those terms which Christ and his Church does use.

To say that God can not give that power to men, for that it were to deuest
himself of his own power is disprooued in fact; for that Christ even
according to his humanity had, and exercized that power: and when the Jews
murmured at him for it (as haeretiks do against priests) he proved it by a
miracle: as is declared in the tenth article of the Creed. Besides! what is
there that God can not do? or what impossibility is there in the giving of
that power to men? It is a supernatural power, noe harder to be given then
supernatural power is for the working of miracles, as for casting out of
devils, who by nature are far superior to us: yet that power was given to
the Apostles, and they practiced it, as their successors also do to good
effect. And for God to give the power of forgiving sins to men, is not to
deuest himself of it; but it is rather to vest himself with mercy and justice
as becomes him: mercy in accepting of so small a work, justice in requiring
that work of us.

We will see what the fathers of the primitive Church have said of this power,
and that in their times Confession was practiced for the remission of sins.
Dion. ep. 8. ad De^ophi.
S Denis, the disciple of S. Paul, declares that it was then the order of
discipline for sinners to come prostrate to priests for the forgiveness of
sins. Tert l. do ^anit.
Tertullian has much of prostrating to the priest in Confession saying, that
when they come to his feet they touch Christ and beseech Christ: And that it
is a happy and profitable shame: and to animate all to good and clear
Confessions, he says if thou do repugne from Confession, think that thou
have hell in thy heart, and thou driuest it out by Confession. Imagine the
greatness of that punishment, and fear not that which does remedy it. S.
Cyprian de laps. Brethren. I entreat every one to Confess his sins in this
world whilst his Confession and remission which is by priests is acceptable.
Paulinus in vita Ambrosij: that S. Ambrose, by shedding tears in the
Confession of his poenitents, drew tears from them also. S. Augustine. Ho. 49.
ex 50. homilijs.
Let noe man say, I do penance privately with God who knows my sins: for
then in vain as it said whose sins you forgive etc. were then the keys
given in vain to the Church of God? we frustrate the gospel and the words of
Christ, and promise to our selves that which he denies. L. 2. de vifie. infir.
c. 4.
And in another place, There are some that think it sufficient to Confess
t^eir sins to God. For they will not, or are ashamed to show themselves to
the priests, whom God has appointed to discern of leprosy; ^eu. 13. and 14.
deceive not thy self, be not ashamed to Confess to the Vicar of Christ. For
his judgment also thou must undergo. And he bids us a little after to
consider ourselves then, as having the Angel of God before us, and with
confidence and reverence to lay open to him the state of our conscience, and
all our secret sins, with the circumstances that aggrauate them; and
declaring in particular some circumstances necessary to be confessed, he says
it is better to be ashamed here before one judge, then at the day of judgment
to be repulsed in the sight of all the world. Thus much for the institution of
this Sacrament, and the practice of the primitive Church.

The essential parts of it consist in something which is done by the poenitent
and something by the priest. That which is required of the poenitent is
Contrition, Confession, and Satisfaction: which are the matter of the
Sacrament, as the acts of him that seeks to be reconeiled to God. For as
reco^ciliation unto human freindship requires those three things in the
offender; to wit sorrow for his falt, acknowledgment of it, and satisfaction
for it; so does also our reconcilement with God. That which is required on the
priests part, is to give absolution as the form of the Sacrament: God using
humane means, when he pardons by men.

This Sacrament does not allwais take away all punishment due to the sins
which were forgiven. For our souls having been purged before, and made the
temples of God in baptism, and we having polluted them again with new sins,
we can not in reason expect to have all due punishment to be taken away by
this, as we had by baptism. God was espoused to us in the holy font, and when
after it we fell into sin we basely adulterated and broke our fidelity with
him: it is well that he will receive us to his favor again; we must not
think to have as much in this Sacrament, as we had at first in baptism:
according to the devotion and disposition which we have; so is our punishment
more or less forgiven. He that loves much shall have much for given him. Now
let us see how to dispose ourselves for it. Three things as I have said are
required on the poenitents part. Contrition, Confession and Satisfaction. First,

OF CONTRITION.
BY Contrition we may understand all that which the poenitent is to do before
Confession, as a preparation to it. He is to examine his conscience, to be
sorty for his sins, and to purpose to amend them: and if any of these three
things be wanting, the Sacrament is not only without fruit, but a mortal sin
is committed. As for examen of conscience, those that have abstained long from
confession and have their souls ouergrowne with much filth of sin, must take
more time for it; that through negligence they omit nothing which is
necessary to be confessed. Those also that come oftener to confession, and have
only venial sins to confess ought to be careful in the examining of their
consciences, the better to dispose themselves for confession, and to prevent
evil customs, and also the better to discern the greeuousnes of some which
see me perhaps but little sins to them, but are indeed greater then they
seem to be.

For this it will help much, that we get a custom of examining our
consciences every night before we go to bed, calling to mind the sins
which we have committed that day, and noting them down in our memory, as it
were in a table book against we go to confession The first thing which we
are to do in this nightly examen is to give thanks unto God for the benefits
of that day. Secondly to desire grace and light of him to see our falts.
Thirdly to examine ourselves what we have offended in. Lastly to make a breife
act of Contrition, that is of sorrow for our sins, and purpose to amend them
for the love of God (as I shall show within a leaf or two.) Besides this we
ought allwais to have an eye over our own behavior, and when we have offended
God any way, presently to think with ourselves, this was a sin, I will
remember it when I go to Confession. The examine before Confession may be made
by thought, word, and deed: and whether the sins which he committed by
thought, he did not also commit them by word, and if he committed them by
word, whether he did not also in deed As for example BY THOUGHT: if he
offended inwardly by anger in his heart, whether he did not also utter some
angry words, and whether he proceeded not to some actions to hurt his
neighbor, or something that belonged to him. And if he have, let him Confess
it. I Confess I was angry at my neighbor, and proceeded to such and such
words and did such and such things against him, or intended to do them. And
so in other sins; as in carnal sins, if he sinned by thought, if he
proceeded to unchaste words, and if to unchaste actions; for it is a greater
sin to sin by word, then by thought only, and by work then by word only.
In the examining of his thoughts, he may think whether he have given way to
any irreuerent thoughts against God, or his Saints, or to any dreams, or
superstitious thoughts. If he has thought evil of others, judged rashly,
borne hatred and ill will to any, been sorry at their welfare or rejoiced at
their evil, desired their death, or some hurt or loss to them. Thoughts of
pride and vain glory in our actions, desire of praise, honors and preferments,
too much application to worldly riches, unchaste thoughts. BY WORD. If he has
been negligent in prayer, if he has sworn, and if it were upon an untruth, if
he has cursed his neighbor, or any other creature; and whether it were with a
desire of that evil toward them* or rashly only, without any such desire; if
he has made any unlawful vow; if he has murmured at his superiors, if he
has dispraised and detracted from any; if he has not reprehended those under
his charge; if he has told untruths wittingly, if he has mocked or scoffed at
any, councelled any to sin, or hindered the good which they intended; if he
has spoken unchaste words, or sung unchaste songs. BY DEEDS. If he has used
any superstitious actions, or omitted to do any thing for some superstitious
cause, and conceit; if he has wrought upon holy days, or permitted others
under his charge to work, or if he has omitted himself, or hindered others
to hear mass on holy days; if he has not obeyed his parents, or superiors,
and if it were in any matter of moment, to tell what and how it was; if he has
broken his fast; if he has stricken, beaten or wilfully hurt any body, or
their goods; if he has taken any thing from any body publicly, or privately,
and to think of what value it was, or has trespassed his neighbor any way;
if he has used deceit in buying or selling, as tradesmen in their weights, and
commoditys which they sell; if being hired by daytale he work not sufficient
for the wages which he takes; if he has used unchaste looks, books, or
actions; too much curiosity in dressing and adorning; if he has exceeded in
too much eating, drinking, or sleeping; if he has offended in gaming, spending
his means, or more time in it, then was sufficient for recreation, used
sleights, and cousenage in it. Thus we may examine ourselves by thought, word,
and deed, remembering especially the occasions which he is employed in, and the
course of life and calling, which he professes, what sins he commits in
it, and the circumstances in which they were committed, whether there were not
something which might aggrauate the sin.

It is an error in some that if they get their wonted number of prayers said
they think themselves well prepared to confession and come with little or not
examining of conscience at all. These must understand that prayer is not the
propper preparation for confession, and that it is not a time then to say many
prayers; but to stir up in themselves a true repentance for their sins, by
remembering them, sorrowing for them, and purposing to amend them. This is then
necessary; but prayers are not necessarily required. And therefore we must be
sure to examine well, our consciences before confession, that we come not of
custom, without devotion, and due preparation to it. And when we have done all
that belongs to the Sacram^nt, then we may take time to pray.

Having examined thy conscience and witnessed against it the sins which thou
know, stir up in thy self a vehement sorrow for them; and be indeed in
thy heart confounded to think that thou have sinned again, and again, without
amending those things which thou have so often repented for. By which thou
mast think that there is but little fervor of devotion in thee; and that thou
have great reason to fear that thou art of the number of the lukewarm, an
therefore in great danger. Inflame in thy self an ardent love of God, be sorry
that thou have so little feeling of sorrow, and purpose firmly that now at last
thou will begin to amend, and wilt fly the occasions by which thou art
tempted, begging of God that he will see this amendment in thee, and give thee
efficacious grace for the performing of it. Endeavor then to make a perfect
act of contrition, which is very necessary for all to understand and to learn.

A perfect act of contrition is a perfect act of love, that for the love of God
we are sorry to have offended him, and not for the shame of sin, fear of
punishment, or loss of reward, which proceeds from the love of concupiscence
which is in us, by which we regard our own interest. And therefore such shame
or fear is not sufficient for an ^act of true contrition, which includes the
the love of God above all things. This is an act of contrition, I love thee o
God above all things in the world, and for thy own sake I am sorry to have
offended thee. And this act if it be truly conceived, and made in our hearts is
the most grateful act to God that we can possibly make; for by it we offer up
our selves, all our actions, and all creatures to God as his own, and as it
were one sacrifice due to him. And so a purpose of amending, and of confessing
our sins, and of keeping all the commandments of God is included in this
act: and it is so perfect, and pleasing to him, that he that should have it,
and should die before he could come to confession should have his mortal sins
forgiven him, and be saved by virtue of it. For if Martyrs have all their
sins forgiven them by Martyrdom: because they love God more then their
lives, and more then the whole world; so shall he that has a Martyrs charity,
and is in the preparation of his mind a Martyr, in that he loves God more
then his own life, and above all things in the world, and fears more to
offend him then he does the pains of death or torments of hell. Therefore it
is good for all to make such acts of inward contrition, especially before
confession; and to accustom themselves often to make such acts; that in all
dangers when they have not the opportunity of a priest for confession, thy may
fly unto an act of contrition, as to a sanctuary which in time of need shall
save them.

He that has not so perfect a love of God, as true contrition requires must
have at least attrition for his sins which is a more imperfect love mixed
with fear of punishment, of loss of reward, or the like: which being joined
to confession, is perfected by it, and becomes contrition in effect, giving
grace and forgiveness of sins. For it can not be thought but that the
Sacrament being added to an act of attrition, more perfection must be added to
it; and that is to give grace. For as the Council of Trent has declared, the
Sacrament of penance is the Sacrament of the dead, because it reuiueth to the
state of grace those who were in the state of sin, which they could not be
with true contrition.

The third thing which the poenitent must have before confession is a firm
purpose of amendment: which purpose although it be included in an act of
contrition; yet it is good to make it alwais expressly by it self; because we
know not when we have true contrition. And it is good allwais to make a purpose
to amend, and to fly the occasions of that sin in particular which we
offend most in. Neither is this purpose ever to be omitted, because it is
often broken; for if we should run on still in sin, and never purpose to
amend, we should never amend: and if for all the good purposes which we make,
we still fall into sin, what would become of us, if we made not those
purposes, and contrary acts to it The purposes which we make and the
detestations of sin are a great means to hinder it; and a most sovereign
remedy it is against all sin, and especially against evil customs,
presently to make a contrary act in detestation of them, and to get to
confession as soon as we can.

OF CONFESSION.
HAVING prepared our selves with due examine of conscience, sorrow for our
sins, and purpose of amendment, the next part of this Sacrament is
confession. We come then to the priest, and with reverence to the Sacrament we
kneel down at his feet full of sorrow and confusion. We may think then of
the Magdalene how she came to the feet of Christ confessing her sins; not in
particular, for that she needed not to him who knew them already, and saw the
secrets of her heart; yet she confessed them in general; if not by word of
mouth, yet by many expressions of sorrow for them, and of much love of God.
Luc. 7.
And therefore she deserved to hear thy sins are forgiven thee. Think thou I
say of her example, and prepare the like sorrow and love in thy self, when
thou come to clear thy conscience in confession.

The poenitent kneeling down says Benedicite: that is to desire the blessing
of God, and of the priest for the worthy performing of that action. The priest
then prays for him: then he says I confess me to almighty God, to the
blessed Virgin Mary, to S. Michael the Archangell, to S. John Baptist, to S.
Peter, and to S. Paul, and to all the Saints in heaven, that I have offended by
thought, word, and work, through my fait, through my falt, through my most
grievous falt. The meaning of which is to prostrate himself before God, and
the whole court of heaven, and before the priest, as the Vicar of God upon
earth; to acknowledge, and confess his falts. Then he begins to declare in
particular what he has offended in. For the rightly performing of which, he
may understand three conditions to be principally necessary for a good
confession: to wit that it be entire, clear, and obedient.

For the first condition of integrity, it is necessary that we confess all the
mortal sins which we know ourselves to be guilty of, expressing every one of
them in particular, the number and the circumstances aggravating them. Venial
sins are not absolutely necessary to be confessed; because they are not quite
opposite to the effect of the Sacrament; but may stand with grace; yet of
devotion we confess them, for many reasons above mentioned. Children and some
very wicked persons break sometimes this condition of integrity, and either
because they understand not, or consider not the work which they have in
hand, they conceal sometimes their sins from the priest: but this is indeed
either very childish, or very impious, and shows that they have not a true
apprehension of the dignity of a Sacrament, nor of the state of their souls,
who only receive good or evil by that which they then do; it importing
nothing to any other whether they confess well or ill. Let these therefore
understand, and consider that this is the profanation of a Sacrament, a
heinous mortal sin; not as other mortal sins of frailty, but of malice,
against the first commandment, directly opposite to divine worship. He that
hides his wicked deeds (says the holy Proverb) shall not be directed: Prou.
28.
but he that shall forsake them shall obtain mercy. He brings upon himself
not one but many evils. First not confessing any mortal sin, he commits
a new mortal sin, and that of a higher nature. Secondly the sins which he
does Confess are not forgiven. Thirdly all the sins which he has committed
ever since he first began to conceal, although he had Confessed them, he
must Confess them all over again, with those which he concealed: for although
they were Confessed they were not forgiven.

The devil noe doubt but labors all he can to hinder the fruit of this
Sacrament, by which he loses so many souls: and because he prevails
sometimes with such as I have mentioned, I will speak a word or two for their
good, that they may abhor this sin. First I tell them that this Sacrament
is the only remedy which God has ordained for actual sin. Our souls were
first lost by original sin, and by Baptism they were saved from that
shipwreck; but falling after Baptism into actual sin, there is noe hopes to
be saved, but by duly receiving the Sacrament of penance: Hiero. ep. 8. ad
Domerriad Amb. ad virg. laps c. 8.
and therefore Saints and spiritual men commonly call it the second planke of
salvation in the shipwreck of our souls. Tell me then O faintharted
Catholic, that art affraide to Confess thy sins: if that thou were floating
on the waves of the sea upon a good and sure planke, would thou be overcome
with fear to forsake it? why then art thou overcome with fear to conceal thy
sins in that pitiful state of damnation: seeing that by concealing them
thou do let go the planke in which is all thy hope, and without which thou
sinkest down, and art sure to perish. Thou have suffered shipwreck by mortal
sin, will thou let go thy saving planke, and perish in the waves? Thou art
wounded mortally and art sick unto death; if thou discover not thy wounds,
thou dyest with out remedy: will thou languish unto death and wilfully refuse
all help? Thou have a physician that can cure thee, and that as privately as
thou can desire, and with as little shame to thee; but thou must either tell
thy disease, and show thy wounds or die. Thus do the holy fathers declare the
necessity of entire Confessions. Further if thou dissemblest with the priest
thou dissemblest with God, and adding sin unto sin thou woundest thy soul
with a new and deeper wound, and with a sin which is most opposite to grace,
and to the forgiveness of any sin: and that very sin which now thou will
not Confess privately, thou shall be forced to Confess it one day, in the
sight and hearing of all the world, when the devil shall accuse thee
publicly, saying I got him to commit such a sin, and to conceal it in
Confession: I accuse him of the sin, and of a sacrilegious Confession. And
Christ will then be ashamed of thee before his Angels, that were ashamed of him
before thy ghostly father; and thou shall be condemned as guilty of both
sins; and shall go amongst the damned. This is all that thou shall get by
thy shame; for in this world thou did get nothing at all. Other sins when
they are committed bring either some profit or pleasure with them; but this
has neither profit nor pleasure in it, but even then when thou committest it,
thou have an inward horurour and pain, to think of the loss which the^ tho
susteinest and of the comfort of a good Confession, and how grievously thou
woundest thy soul, with a new and more grievous wound. If thou did see thy
utter enemy laid pitifully wounded in danger of death, and the surgeon
dressing him and binding up his wounds; could thou find in thy heart to come
to him, and tearing of his plaster, to wound him again with a new and worse
wound? Such an enemy thou art unto thy self, when being at Confession under
the hands of the priest, thou hidest any mortal sin. Thou abusest the only
remedy of thy soul, and being wounded and then in cure, thou tearest of the
plaster, and woundest thy self again with a new and more grievous mortal
sin, and such an one as in it self is contrary to all remedy.

It was very remarkable to this purpose that which happened not long since in a
city of Spain. A notorious malefactor being sentenced to die, was put into
the place of retirement which they have in the prison for condemned persons to
prepare themselves in for their death. And coming to Confession he began to
be troubled and could not go on; but made strange gestures and shows of
affrightment when he would have Confessed some sins. The Priest, who was my
very charitable good friend, and who told me himself all that I am now
relating perceiving it, and asking the cause of it; with much difficulty at
last he answered, and told him planely that the devil was there, and
threatened him that he durst not Confess. At which the priest roze up and with
the sign the Cross vanquished him. But the devil (who uses not to yield at
the first repulse) returned again, and at the Confessing of some sins
troubled him as before; and the priest again vanquished him. And thus
returning several times he put the poor man into such an amaze and fear,
that he durst not Confess but made an end concealing some of his sins. The
priest gave sentence of absolution, but it was in vain and of noe value, as a
judge misinformed; the party remaining guilty of all his former sins, and of
one more, and that perhaps greater then any which he had to Confess. That
night the devil appeared unto him all in flames, threatening him ^ot to
Confess such and such sins, which he had concealed: and with all he
commanded him to throw away that which he had about his neck (which was a
little Cross and image of our blessed lady, which the priest sent to a brother of
his own, living then above a thousand miles from him; who wore them and after
some years showed them to me.) In what a terror may we imagine that man then
to have been and fearful perplexity, to obey or to disobey the devils
command? he thought them then to be his only arms, and saw that if he threw
them away he disarmed himself: and on the otherside he feared his threatening,
if he obeyed not. But he chose for better to disobey him, and it was a happy
disobedience: for his proud enemy confounded with it, vanished away presently
with out hurting him. The man expected until morning, longing to see the
priests return; whom as soon as he saw, he ran presently to him, and
glasping him in his arms, he besought him to hear his Confession again, and
then he made a better Confession, declaring entirely the sins which he had
concealed, and the sacrilege which he had committed in concealing them. And
relating all that had passed with him, he desired at his death the priest to
tell it unto others, that they might learn by him to make good Confessions.
Who related it accordingly in his sermon to all that were present at the
malefactors execution. This happened in a place of Spain which I know very
well; and there can be noe question of the truth of it. Those who in Confession
conceal any mortal sin, are as this man was in the devils power, and to get
out of it must do that which he did; and that was to clear himself by a
better Confession: but this is a greater mercy then they deserve.

Those that begin once to dissemble in Confession put themselves in the worst
state and greatest danger that a sinner can be in this world: for they make
themselves incapable of remedy; and can never be rightly dealt with by the
priest: who not knowing the state of their conscience, loses his labor by
all which he says to them. Nay sometimes it may chance that he may consaile
them to that which is a sin. For example one of these men being slack in
coming to Confession, if the priest call upon him, he calls him to a mortal
sin: and again if he come not to annual Confession, he commits a mortal
sin. What consaile can be given them in this case? if we counsel them
either to a badde Confession, or to noe Confession, we counsel them to their
damnation: and one of these we must do, if they will not Confess entirely.
Yet I will venture to counsel them rather to abstain from Confession, and
so from Communion also at Easter time; then to dissemble in Confession. This I
do not absolutely counsel; for this is also to damn themselves; but seeing
that they are otherwise resolved upon a greater dishonor to God, and greater
damnation, I persuade them to the less. That which I absolutely persuade them
is to be converted in their hearts, and by a good Confession to give glory to
God, joy to the Angels, and satisfaction to their own consciences. O christian
if thou did but consider the value of a Sacrament, and how dearly the Son
of God bought it for thee, thou would be affraide to tread it under thy
feet, as thou do when thou profanest it. If therefore thou art resolved to
be a christian, and a Catholic, abuse not Christ in a Sacrament of the
Catholic Church. Be not so wicked or so childish, as for a little shame to
commit that sin which thou have neither profit nor pleasure in, but loosest
that which in the end must be thy only remedy. Overcome thy self in this, as
thou do in the other austeritys of the Catholic profession: speak freely
thy sins, or else thou had better be noe Catholic nor christian.

The next condition is that it be plane and clear. This must proceed from an
earnest desire of being rightly understood by the priest. And for this a
convenient breuity is best: not to be tedious in rehearsing that, which is not
necessary; and yet so, as the nature of the sin and the circumstances
aggravating it be rightly understood. Regard not then any fine words or
curious style, but speak simply, and familiarly, as to an intimate friend of
thine, whom God has sent to sit in his tribunal. wha will the eloquence of
orators or the tongue of a lawyer avail thee at the day of judgment? It shall
not then be asked how eloquently thou have Confessed, but how humbly and
truly. If we fear that the priest hear us not or understand not right, we
may ask him. Father do you hear me? or do you understand me? And when we
have confessed all we make an end saying, therefore I beseech the blessed Virgin
Mary, S. Michael the Archangell, S. John Baptist S Peter and S. Paul, and all
the Saints in heaven, and you my ghostly father to pray for me. Having said
this he attends quietly to the priest to be directed by him. If he had
forgotten any thing in Confession, or not understood the priest, he may say
Father I had forgotten such a thing, I understand you not etc. And having
rightly understood his penance, and the aduises which are given him, he must
fix his mind earnestly upon God at the time of absolution, and take heed then
of distractions; for so (...) might come to loose the benefit of the Sacrament
for that time: and therefore it is good then to be making acts of the love of God
and of sorrow, and to use some good words; as those of the humble Publican who
knocking his breast and saying God be merciful to me a sinner, Luc. 18.
he went away justified. These or the like words may be repeated often over
with much repentance, whilst the priest is giving absolution.

The third condition of a good Confession is to be obedient; that is that the
poenitent accept of those remedys which are praescribed him: that he avoid the
occasions of sin, make restitution if it be needful, and perform carefully
the penance which is enjoined him. Of which we shall speak in satisfaction.

It is necessary for all to know that Confession in some cases is void, and
most be reiterated; and which these cases are. The first is want of sufficient
examination of conscience, when the poenitent uses not due diligence in
remembering of his sins, that he omitteth through negligence any mortal sin,
he must then make all his Confession over again. Secondly if wilfully he
speak any untruth in Confession in some matter of moment. Thirdly if he
conceal wilfully any mortal sin. Fourthly if he has not a firm purpose to
leave of some mortal sin, or to fly the occasion of it. Fifthly, if the
poenitent were fallen into some excommunication, and did not first procure to
be absolved from it. Sixthly, if the Confessor were deficient in knowledge
power, or jurisdiction. In all which cases the poenitent is bound not only to
Confess his sins over again; but also to Confess the sin which he
committed in so Confessing.

OF SATISFACTION.
THE third and last part of the Sacrament of Penance is Satisfaction. That is
that we accept and perform some penalty for our sins in lieu of that
punishment, which we should have suffered in the next world, if we had not here
prevented it. For the which we are to understand that every sin includes
two things: to wit the auersion of the sinner from God, and his conversion to
some creature for which he forsakes God. And on the contrary when our sins
are forgiven, and we are restored to the state of grace, there are two things;
to wit an auersion from the creature and conversion to God. The conversion to
God and restoring of the sinner to his favor again, takes away the stain
and blemish of sin, and freeth from hell; but being that his auersion from
the creature and conversion to God again is not allwais so intense and
feruerous as his conversion to the creature and auersion from God was; therefore
there remains sometimes some punishment to be suffered by reason of his cold
conversion. Now there are in every sin two evils of punishment corresponding
to the two evils aforesaid in the sin. The one is the loss of God and
separation from him, which correspondeth to the auersion of the sinner from
God: the other is a sensible punishment corresponding to our conversion to the
creature, for the sensible pleasure which we took in it. The first evil of
the loss of God is repaired by our conversion to him in confession: by which
we are restored to his favor again. But the punishment of our senses is not
allwais quite taken away; but as our auersion from God and conversion to the
creature for sensible pleasure was more earnest and intense then our conversion
is to God again; so it is fitting that some sensible pain should remain to
be sustained. These are the grounds of the Catholic doctrine of Satisfaction
and of Purgatory: of both which we will say something here, as in their propper
place.

If I said noe more in proof of this doctrine but only that the Bishop of
Rome and Pastors of his communion delivered it, I had in reason said enough:
For he being the head of the Church, as the true and lawful successor in S.
Peter's primacy (as I have showed him to be) he and the Pastors of his communion
have the lawful authority of the whole, Church, and are the whole Catholic
Church in authority: and being that we must alwais say I believe the Catholic
Church; we must allwais believe and obey the succession of that authority. But
I will say something in particular of them. That which the Catholic Church
teaches of Satisfaction is that although the conversion of a sinner to God may
be so intense and perfect sometimes, that he may obtain a full remission of
all punishment, and be as it were newborn to God in baptism; yet this does
not allwais happen. Our conversion to God is not allwais so intense and
perfect, but that there may and commonly does remain some punishment to be
suffered after it. This we show first by holy Scriptures.

When the children of Israel sinned by murmuring against God and their Pastors,
Moyset praying obtained the remission of their sin. But yet (says God) all
the men that have seen my Maicsty, Nu. 14.
etc. And have tempted me, etc. they shall not see the land for the which I
swear to their fathers. Here their sin was forgiven them; yet it was punished
afterward, those that had sinned never entering into the land of promise. Nu.
20.
Moses and Aaron sinned at the waters of contradiction: and when their sin
was forgiven there remained a penalty to be endured by them, and they endured
it, not bringing the people into the holy land David had sinned by murder, and
adultery; and Nathan being sent to reprove him, and bring him to repentance,
Reg. 2.12.
he repented, and deserved to hear from the Prophet our Lord has taken away
thy sin thou shall not die. But his sin being taken away, it was not
withstanding punished with the death of his son, the Prophet declaring the
son which is borne to thee dying shall die. And for all king David's earnest
praying, fasting and lying on the ground, he could not obtain the life of the
child. By all which we see that punishment of sin may remain to be suffered,
when the sin is forgiven.

It Was therefore the custom of the Catholic Church aunciently, as now it is,
to impose penaltys upon sinners at their repentance, as by ancient Canons does
appear. Ep 3. and 14. can. 38.
S. Basil. ep. 3. and 14. can. 38. He that has committed adultery shall not
communicate in the Sacraments for fifteen years. S. Augustine Let us seek
confession with a pure heart and perform the penance, which is given by
priests.

It is against reason that he, that comes to confession with many mortal
sins, should think to have noe more puishment then he that has but one
only, if they be disposed with equal devotion. Yet they were both alike, if
they had noe more punihment but only to confess, and that then all sin and
punishment were taken away. Sin therefore and punishment are only so far
correlatiues, that punishment allwais supposes sin to have been; but does
not require that there be then actually sin. Neither is it worth any thing
that which, haeretiks object against this. That Christ satysfyed for us;
therefore we need not to satisfy for our selves: noe more then it is to say,
Christ did good works for us: therefore we need nor to do good works for our
selves. Our good works derogate not from the good works of Christ, nor our
Satisfaction from his Satisfactions. our good works have their value from his,
and so has our satisfaction: but neither of them is hindered by him. Thus
much for Satisfaction, and for the enioyning of penance after the remiffion of
sins.

As for Purgatory it follows hence, that those who die with their sins
forgiven them; but have not that intense sorrow and perfect repentance which is
necessary for the remission of all punishment due to their sins, must have
their punishment in some place in the next world, where they must be purged
from that guilt of punishment (as also of their lesser sins before that they
can enter into heaven.) Aerius was one of the first that denied Purgatory: and
that which he got for it was to be recorded as an haeretike ever from the
times of the primitive Church, and to have his doctrine in thelist of those
whom S. Epiphanius, haer. 75. And S. Augustine haer. 83. have branded with the
mark of haeresy. Luther at first although he denied indulgences, yet was so
resolute in the mainteining of Purgatory, that in his disputation with Eckius
he would needs make public profession of it, saying I firmly believe and dare
boldly say I know there is a Purgatory whatsoever haeretiks rail against it.
Disp. lips.
But having once fallen from the Catholic Church he was constant to nothing
but inconstancy, and came in the end to deny Purgatory also. But the Catholic
Church has allwais acknowledged that there is a place for the souls of those
to be purged in, who die in venial sin, or have not made full satisfaction for
their mortal, which place therefore may aptly be called Purgatory.

That there is such a place, it appears in all those sentences of Scriptures,
where prayer for the dead is commended. Teh. 4.
For those who are in heaven, or in hell are not to be prayed for. Set thy
bread and thy wine (says holy Toby) upon the burial of a just man. Not as the
Gentiles vainly did, to delight the dead with corporal viands; but to be given
to the poor to pray for them. Hence says S. Chrysostom who lived above
twelve hundred years since came the custom of calling together the poor to
receive alms, to pray for the dead. Thus did Judas Machabaeus make a
gathering, and sent a great sum of syluar, to be bestowed in sacrifice for
the dead. Where upon the Scriptures make this inference. Match. 2.12.
It is therefore a holy and healthful cogitation to pray for the dead that they
may be loosed from sins. And if any deny these Scriptures to be canonical,
because the Jews deny them, S. L. 18. de ciu. Det.
Augustine will allege against them the authority of the Church of Christ,
and will tell them, Not the Jews but the Church holds the books of Machabees
to be canonical. And his own reason will tell him, that to deny the authority
of the Church is to deny all Scriptures, and to confound the order of the
whole world. Tertul. Tert. l. de coron militi^ c. 3. Amb. orat. pro Theod. Aug.
l. 8. de Genes. con. Manichaeos.
Oblationes pro defunctis facimus. We make offerings for the dead. S. Ambrose
in his speech of the Emperor Theodosius prays for him. Thou o Lord give rest
unto thy servant Theodosius S. August. speaking of him, that dies in sin
says, after this life he shall have either the fire of Purgatory or eternal
fire. And in Psalm. 87. In this life purge me and make me so, that I may not
need the purging fire.

The doctrine of Purgatory is so planely delivered by the ancient fathers of
the Church that, Calvin could not deny or conceal it: but l. 3. Instit. c. 5..
10. calls it a most ancient observation of the Church and says, that the
fathers, as humane, were deceived. But who can endure this saying in him? were
the ancient fathers of the Church, and both the Church which was aunciently
and which was when Calvin came into the world deceided, and Calvin not
deceived? shall Calvin take upon him to correct the ancient fathers and
present observations of the Church? And shall any hazard his soul with Calvin
against them? He asks what authority of Scriptures they had? Must the whole
Church be examined by him in the Scriptures? And shall not he be thought an
haeretike for this, and to abuse the Scriptures in condemning of the Church? S.
Augustine shall answer him. Aug. l. de cura pro mortuis.
Jn the books of the Machabees we read that sacrifice was offered for the dead:
but although in the ancient Scriptures it were not at all to be read, the
authority of the universal Church is noe small matter which is clear for this
custom, where in the prayers of the priest which to our Lord God are powered
forth at his altar, the commendation of the dead has its place. S. Augustins
argument was good, in which he proved Purgatory both hy the Scriptures, and
the Church. But if this be not enough for Calvin, to whom nothing will serve
but his own will and word. We will also produce his own words against him: l.
4. Instit. c. 2. number. 3. he says that without controversy nothing from the
beginning until that age was changed in doctrine. To wit until the times of
Tertullian, Origin and Augustine, of whom he was speaking. If therefore this were
the doctrine of the Church in those times, it was the doctrine of Christ and of
the Apostles ever from the beginning. And so Calvin is condemned by
Scriptures, fathers, Church, and by his own words; and Purgatory is proved to
be the true Catholic, Apostolic doctrine. There for pennances are rightly
enjoined, prayers may be said, alms deeds given, indulgences granted, and many
voluntary afflictions have been undergone by the Saints, and faithful of the
Catholic Church, to escape the pains of Purgatory: which although they be but
temporal: yet they are most grievous, and vehement, more then can be spoken.
And because the Catholic doctrine of Indulgences by many is not understood, I
will say something of them in this, which is also their propper place.

An Indulgence is as much as to say a favorable remission or pardoning of some
due punishment. Such are the indulgences of the Church either absolute
remissions, without exchange or imposing of any other task; or exchanges of a
greater into a lesser penalty. The power of granting indulgences, or absoluing
from punishment (which is all one) was granted by Christ unto his Apostles, and
especially to S. Peter, to whom he promised the keys of the kingdom of
heaven, Mat. 16.
and told him whatsoever thou shall loose upon earth shall be loosed in heaven.
What can be understood by the keys of heaven, and the words following but
power so to open heaven gates, as to take away all that hinders for entering
in at them: to wit sin and punishment? He gave also the like authority to the
rest of the Apostles saying whatsoever you shall loose upon earth shall be
loosed in heaven. Mat. 18.
If whatsoever they loose be loosed, then punishment loosed by them on earth,
is loosed also in the sight of God in heaven. Neither is there any good
connection in those words, if they be not understood of absoluing, as well from
punishment as from sin.

Now if any ask how it can be, that sins of which the divine justice
requires so much satisfaction, should be satisfied for with so little, as
some indulgences require; and some indulgences require nothing at all to be
done for the gaining of them:) he may understand that indulgence or pardon of
punishment is never granted; but full satisfaction is made to God for the
sin. For there is in the Church a treasury of Satisfactions so great, that
it can never be exhausted by satisfying for sins. There are in this treasury
the satisfactions of Christ infinitely more, then all the sins in the world
can require. There are also the good works of our B. Lady; that had nothing of
her own to satisfy for. There are the good works of S. John Baptist, of the
Apostles, and of many others whose works were much more satisfactory then their
own sins needed, and may be applied by the pastors of the Church to those
that stand need of them. For the Church is a body, and all the members of it
have a Communication, and participation of good works with one another, as we
profess in the Creed saying, I believe the Communion of Saints. And the
psalmist says. Ps. 118. Col. 1.
I am partaker of all that fear thee. And S. Paul. I now rejoice in suffering
for you, and do accomplish those things that want of the passions of Christ
in my flesh for his body which is the Church. He did not fulfill the passions
of Christ for any defect or want which was in them; but that by his sufferings
the passion of Christ was applied actually to the Colossians, as it is by the
suffrages and good works, which are done in the Church for others: and by them
their punishments are fully satisfied for.

If any ask why the Pope only and bishops give indulgences? I answer that
the words of Christ before alleged were spoken only to S. Peter, who was to
be the Pope, and to the Apostles who were at first the only bishops of the
Church. And the practice of the universal Church, which ought to be our rule in
all things, has been allwais for the Pope and bishops, and not for priests to
grant Indulgences. S. Augustine speaking of the observations of the Church
says, If the Church through out the World frequent any of these things to
dispute of it as not to be done is most insolent madness. Epist. 118.
To question that which the whole Church observes, or curiously to dispute of
it is full of danger and presumption: but so as to disallow of it and to
condemn it, is absolute madness, and the propper madness of heresy.

Now as you have seen the power of granting indulgences to be derived from
Christ; so you shall see the practice of it to have been in the primitive
Church. Although then they were neither so commune, nor solemn as now a
days. First because in those times of persecution christians could not so
frequently meet together. Secondly because the graces and gifts of the
Apostles and their successors were then greater, and aequiualent to the benefit
of indulgences. Thirdly the fervor and devotion of those christians was also
greater, the blood of Christ being yet warm (and as S. Hierome says boiling
in them.) That they neither stood so much need of indulgences, nor were
their punishments often remitted. Yet S. Paul exercized this power, when in the
person of Christ he gave indulgence or pardon (as he terms it) to the sinful
Corinthian, least he should have been swallowed up with sorrow at the greatness
of his punishment. Cor. 2.2.
And whom you have pardoned any thing, I also. For my self also that which I
pardoned, if I pardoned any thing for you in the person of Christ. Thus S.
Paul pardoned him: and not only in the sight of the Church, but also in the
sight of God: for otherwise this pardon had been to his hurt, and he had not
pardoned in the person of Christ, who hurts not by his pardons. Tertullian.
lib. ad martyrs. c. 1. and S. Cyprian l. 3. c. 15. and ser. de laps. affirm
that it was then the custom of bishops, at the entreaty of those who were
designed to martyrdom, to grant pardons to offenders from the penaltys of the
Church. That which S. Paul and these bishops did was the very same which the
Catholic Church now does in giving of indulgences: for they are nothing else
but the releasing of punishments in the sight of God. Diverse examples and
canons of the Church for this are to be seen in authors, which for breuity I
omit.

Indulgences upon a just cause, and for a good end may sometimes be granted
without the enioyning of any penalty. As those were which primitiuely were
granted at the intercession of martyrs; and those which are now granted to some
at their deaths, for some great deserts and good service already done to the
Church. But ordinarily some pious work is praescribed; and so a greater
punishment is changed into a less. That which is required to be done ought to
be performed with much devotion; and to gain the indulgence it must be done in
state of grace; and therefore Confession and Contrition are for the most part
expressly required in every indulgence.

Indulgences which are granted to the souls in purgatory are applied unto them
only by way of suffrage, that is by a pious offering of ours to pay their
debt, and not by applying any power or jurisdiction of the Church over them.
For the pastors of the Church have power and jurisdiction over the militant
Church only, over which they can visibly exercize their power of government.

By indulgences we are not to understand that so many years, or days of
purgatory are remitted; but that so much punishment is pardoned, as so many
years or days penance should have satisfied for, according to the pennances
of the primitive Church. A plenary indulgence is a full and total pardon of
all punishment in the sight of God. A Quarentine is as much as to say an
indulgence corresponding to the penance of forty days: which aunciently was a
time of prayer, fasting, and other austeritys in those times often used, and
was called Quadragena a Quarentin; and when it was with bread and water only,
it was called Carentia, an abstaining from meats. A Iubily is a more solemn
kind of indulgence. It is is an hedrew word signifying joy or rejoicing. The
Israelits every fiftith year had a Iubily year: which was so solemn that
they absteined from tillage in it. Lands that were sold returned to their
owner, slaves were enfranchized, banished men restored, debtors set at liberty.
All but in figure of the spiritual joy and liberty which we obtain in Christ.
And therefore we have now a year of iubily: which at first was kept every
hundredth year, then every fiftith, now every twenty fifth. The faithful being
piously invited to Rome, a place allwais frequented for indulgences, and where
Saints have so much desired to live, that S. Catherine of Siena used to say I
tread upon the blood of martyrs at Rome. There does the holy Vicar of Christ
himself entertain his people, wash their feet, make exhortations to them,
and spares nothing to promote the love and service of God in them.

Thus much as to the declaration of satisfaction; which is the third part of
the Sacrament of penance. Having Confessed our sins, and received our
penance, and absolution from the priest, we must remember well the aduises
which were given us, and purpose to keep them: and perform our penance
presently, least we should forgette it or any part of it. It is a sign of love
and reverence to God, when we go willingly and readily to pay that which we
owe him.

I have now but one word more to say of this Sacrament, and that is to exhort
all to frequent it, and to conjure him vehemently that is fallen into any
greater sin, presently to seek out a priest and to get his conscience
cleared by Confession; and if he has not then the opportunity of a priest, to
fly instantly to an act of Contrition, and to make it with all the fervor and
humility, that possibly he can, and in the mean time to slip noe occasion of
Confession. Truly I think I may say, that amongst so many good remedys, as
spiritual men have praescribed for particular sins, it is the best and most
general against all sins whatsoever to repent presently by a good Confession
of them. For as great wounds are easily cured when they are brought presently
into the surgeons hands, and by differring and not applying remedy in time,
they become incurable and without remedy: so the longer we differ our
Confession, the harder we make our Conversion, and if we stay long in sin we
harden our hearts still more and more, until we come in the end to the utter
contempt of God, and of our own souls. And therefore I exhort all from this
very instant to purpose with themselves that if they chance at any time through
frailty to fall into some great sin, they will seek presently to Confession
after it. O thou that fear not to be in mortal sin, if thou did but
understand the heinous condition in which thou art, that thou stand then
face to face at defyance with God, who with one word of his will can strike
thee down instantly into hell; and what it is to want the mediation of Christ,
of our B. Lady, thy good Angel, thy patron, and of all the Saints, and the
suffrages of the Church, thou would not remain one moment in that state. It
is a humane thing (says S. Gregory) to err; but diabolical to persevere in
it. If we fall into sin we do but like men, if we rize again, we do as the
Saints have done; but if we persevere in sin, we are like the devil, who must
remain in sin for ever.

OF EXTREME UNCTION.
THIS Sacrament has for its propper effect to give grace, and strength against
temptations at our death. For the hopes of our enemy being then at the last, he
strives all he can against us. Apoc. 12.
The devil is descended to you having great wrath knowing that he has but a
little time. Said the heavenly voice which S. John heard. Some he tempts to
presumption, others to despair, some by too much love to their friends and
family, some think of nothing but the riches which they leave, some by too
much desire of life, that they will not apprehende nor prepare themselves for
death: and generally as we draw nearer to our ends we grow more subject to
extremitys of passions: all which the devil knows how to make use of to our
hurt. But his commune temptation is to terrify sinners with grievous fear and
affrightments at their sins past. Sap. 4.
They shall come fearful in cogitation of their sins, and their iniquitys
on the contrary shall convince them. Says holy wisdom. Neither shall their
natural courage and strength then avail them any thing, though never so
bold and bragging in time of health. Great Saints have showed much fear at
their death. S. Hilarion whose perfection S. vita Hilar.
Hierome describing says that great concourse of bishops, priests, Clergymen
and monks sought to him, the temptation of christian matrons followed him,
multitudes of the common people, potentates and judges came to receive holy
bread and oil of him; and yet his mind continued fixed on solitude, yet for
all this when he came to die he was oppressed with such a fear and horror of
death, that to encourage his soul he said, Go forth what do thou fear? go
forth my soul what do thou doubt of? thou have served Christ now almost
seventy years, and do thou fear death? If Saints at their death have been
thus terrifyed, what may they expect who have committed many sins, and
perhaps but lately repented for them, and perhaps but slightly, and have but
few good works then for their comfort? Therefore our Savior has provided this
Sacrament as an armor for us against that time.

S. James, Iam. 5.
is any man sick among you let him bring in the priests of the Church, and let
them pray over him anoiling him with oil in the name of our Lord. And the
prayer of faith shall save the sick, and our Lord shall lift him up, and if he
be in sins they shall be remitted him. By which words we have the practice of
the Catholic Church well proved, and Etreme Unction declared to be a
Sacrament; that is an outward sign that sanctifyeth us. There is an outward
sign in the external rite of anoiling, and in the form of words signified by
prayer. And that this outward sign causes grace unto sanctification, the
words following do declare, in that sins are remitted, which can not be but
by grace being received. And it follows hence that Christ instituted it. For
the Apostles had not the power of instituting such signs: neither could S.
James have promised remission of sins by it, if Christ had not instituted it,
Luth. Praef. ad nou. Test.
and given it that power. It is true Luther reiects this Epistle of S. James,
denying it to be canonical, and calling it an Epistle of straw; but the
authority of the whole Church has declared it for canonical. And if the whole
Church be not sufficient for Luther, we will put Calvin into the balance
against him, an author at least of equal gravity with him; Calvin l. 3.
Instit. c. 17.
and Calvin holds it for canonical. S. Bernard in vita Malach. relates of S.
Malachy that he assisting with a sick woman, and not thinking her to be in
such danger as to require the Sacrament of Extreme Unction, departed from her
without ministering it; but she dying in his absence, he returned again full of
sorrow, and pitying that she should want the benefit of it, he fell to his
prayers, restored her to life again. And then (says S. Bern) he anoiled her
knowing that by this Sacrament sins are remitted, and that the prayer of
faith saves the sick.

The holy oil is then applied as a spiritual salve to the senses; because by
occasion of our senses we commit sin. But beside the spiritual remedy which
our souls gain by it, it has also a corporal effect of giving health to the
body, as the Apostle declares, the sick being saved and alleuiated by it. By
reason of which effect this Sacrament is not given in danger of death by war
or otherwise, but only by sickness.

OF THE SACRAMENT of Orders.
THE Sacrament of Orders is that which Priests, Deacons, Subdeacons and others
receive when they are ordained: by which they receive spiritual power for the
government of the Church. Tim. 1.4.
That it is a Sacrament it appears by the words of S. Paul to Timothy.
Neglect not the grace which is given thee by prophecy with imposition of the
hands of the priesthood. By this it has all which is contained in the nature
of a Sacrament: the imposition of hands, and the words that are said (which are
there signified by Prophecy) being an external sign, Amb. in Tim.
by which grace in given. Upon which words S. Ambrose says that Timothy, by
the imposition of the hands of priesthood was designed to the work, ard
received authority, that he durst offer sacrifice to God in our Lords steed.
The same power is expressed by the words of the bishop when heordaineth priests
saying, Receive thou authority to offer for the living and the dead in the name
of our Lord. To offer, there is to offer sacrifice, as S. Ambrose also
expresses it; and to offer sacrifice is the most propper office of priests;
priest and sacrifice going allwais together, so that there can be noe priest,
but he must have power to offer sacrifice.

The propper and peculiar effect of this Sacrament is to give grace to exercize
worthily Ecclesiastical functions. Which power and grace as it is in the Church
of Christ is most high and eminent above all dignitys. For what can be compared
to the dignity of christian priests? Both in respect of their power of Orders,
by which they consecrate the most blesed host, and also in respect of their
power of jurisdiction, by which they remitte sins? Neither of which is within
the Angels power. And therefore priesthood is not obtained in the Catholic
Church, but after diverse years preparation; the lower Orders being first
received, and after them Subdeaconship, after that Deaconship, after Deaconship
priesthood: every one of the higher Orders in several years; that the dignity
of priesthood may be ascended unto by degrees, and with sufficient time of
probation.

The lower orders are four: Porter, Lector, Exercist, Acolyt. They are called
lower or lesser orders; because they have a more remote relation to the blessed
Sacrament then the higher orders have, in which relation the dignity of all the
orders does chiefly consist, of priests in consecrating it, of Deacons and
Subdeacons in assisting about the altar at the consecration of it; and of the
lower orders concurring in their nature, though more temotely, to the decent
ministering of it. The office of the Porter is to open and shutt the doors of
the Church, to admit of the faithful, and to exclude the faithless out of
it, and to ring the bells. The office of the Lector is to read the lessons of
the old and new testament, which aunciently the bishop used to expound. The
office of the Exorcist is to expel the devil, and to hinder his power over
those who are to be, or are already baptized, and to prepare water in the
font. (of which read the second article of the Creed toward the end) This
power was given by Christ, Matt. 10.
who having called (says the Evangelist) his twelve disciples together, he
gave them power over unclean spirits that they should cast them out. And
again in the same place, Cure the sick, raise the dead, cleanse the lepers.
cast out devils. The office of the Acolyt is to carry the canstlesticks, and
cruits, and to light the candles.

The office of the Subdeacon is to serve at the altar under the Deacon, to
prepare the altar cloths, to wash the palls, and corporals, etc. and to read
the epistle. The office of the Deacon is to attend upon the bishop at all
times, but especially to guard him, and the priest at mass, and at Sermon; and
to be as it were the eye of the Bishop to observe the lives of the people, to
see that they come to divine service, and to inform him of their behavior
within, and without the Church. The office of priests is to govern the Church,
to offer sacrifice, and to remitte sins. Romans 1.
These are the orders of the Catholic Church. Those things that are of God,
are ordained. Says the Apostle, that is they are with order. And the more
order that every thing has, the more it appears to be of God. And therefore
he has ordained these orders in his Church, that our religion might appear to
be of him, and that the B. Sacrament might be worshipped with decency amongst
us.

As there are several degrees of orders, so there are several degrees of
priests. First there are ordinary priests, and then Bishops, and betwixt
priests and bishops there is noe degree of orders. Those who were aunciently
called Choriepiscopi that is to say Vicars of Bishops being sometimes only
priests, although they had priueleges above ordinary priests, as to give lower
orders, as also Rural Deanes might have: sometimes being inferior bishops and
had license to ordain with higher orders; but they were not of any order
betwixt priests and bishops; but either only priests, or true bishops. Above
Bishops are Archbishops, then Patriarks, then Cardinals, and above all the
Pope. Which is an honorable title decreed above a thousand years since to be
given to none but to the bishop of Rome, as to the most eminent father of all;
whom therefore S. Cyril in the Council of Ephesus called, The Patriarch and
father of the whole world.

As the inward acts of our mind which we offer to God are spirituals hosts or
sacrifices; so all men may be said to be spiritually priests by their holy and
feruerous affections which God sets on fire in their hearts. And therefore S.
Peter admonishes all, saying Be ye a holy priest hood to offer up spiritual
hosts. Pet. 1.2.
But although all be priests in the spiritual hosts of their mind; yet all may
not take upon them to perform the Ecclesiastical functions of priesthood. For
this they must be called of God and have authority from him, Hier. 3.
I will give Pastors (says God) who shall feed you with knowledge and
doctrine. And S. Paul speaking of priesthood says neither does any man take
the honor to himself; Heb. 5.
but he that is called of God as Aaron. It is a dignity which must not be
taken, if not given. All were not priests in the law of Moses, but only the
sons of Aaron to offer sacrifice to God. And we read in the Scriptures of
the great punishments of God upon proud and praesumptuous men who have assumed
that dignity without order to themselves. So great is the dignity of
priesthood, that S. Francis used to say, that if he should meet with a saint
from heaven, and with a priest together, he would not do reverence to the
saint, until he had kissed the priests hands. Signifying how much he was
bound to reverence those hands from which he received the body of Christ; and
for himself he could never be gotten all his life time to ascend higher then
Deaconshipp. Bonauen. in eius vita

For the greater honor of priestshood, and that priests may attend better to
the performing of that high function, the Catholic Church has all wais
annexed chastity to it, never permitting her priests to marry. And therefore
those that will be priests must be willing to undergo the obligation of a
fingle and continent life. He that rightly considers the dignity of
priesthood and the preeminence which virginity has before marriage will easily
condescende to this institution of the Church. S. Paul generally councelleth
virginity, Cor. 1.7.
and foretells to those that marry the tribulations which they shall have;
requiring of those that have wives, that they be as those that have not wives
(which is very hard for them to be) and says that he that is without wife is
careful of those things which pertain to our Lord, how to please God: but the
married man is divided betwixt the love of his wife and how he shall both serve
God, and attend to his family. By all which it is manifest that the true and
sincere meaning of the Apostle was to commend virginity. and to prefer
chastity before a married life. And as manifest it is according to his words
that the inconveniences, and distractions of marriage are least suetable to the
office of priests, who of all men ought to be most united and conversant with
God, and to follow the example of Christ their master, who was a priest, and a
virgin, borne of a virgin.

S, Aug. retract. l. 2. c. 2. and haer. 82.
Augustine calls Iouinian the haeretike a monster for making marriage equal
with virginity; and says that this haeresy was so sottish and fleshly, that
it could never deceive so much as one learned priest, but only some carnal
and simple women. As priests are above Angels in dignity, so it is fitting
that they should imitate their purity; and Angels neither marry nor are
married. Nay it is fitting that they should be as the Catholic Church has
ordained them to be, above Angels in this, that Angels are chaste by nature
only; but priests are chaste by the grace of this Sacrament, and by vow which
is better.

It was the ancient custom of the Church as now it is, for the Clergy to
wear their crowns shaven. S. Denis who lived in the Apostles times makes
mention of it, Eccl. Hierar. c. 6. S. Beda deriueth the first use of it from S.
Peter. it represents the crown of thorns, of our savior. It denotes the
dignity of priests as kings. Of whom the words of S. Peter 1.1. L. 5. hist.
Aug.c. 2^.
may cheesly be understood saying. you are an elect generation a kingly
priesthood. It signifies also that priests are to reject all vain
superfluitys of this world, and to betake themselves to the spiritual lot, and
part which they have chosen.

OF MATRIMONY.
MATRIMONY is declared by the Council of Florence to be a true and propper
Sacrament, Sess. vitim.
one of the number of the seven Sacraments of the law of Christ instituted by
him to give grace. And therefore amongst christians it is absolutely
indissoluble, which as a contract of nature only it is not. It has for its
propper effect to remedy the unlawful concupiscences of the flesh, and to give
grace to man and woman to live together in mutual love, and coniugal chastity;
and to bring up their children in the service of God. It is called by S. Ephesians.
15.
Paul a great Sacrament: to wit, in the mystery which it represents of the
marriage of Christ with his Church, to which for ever he has espoused
himself; and as a good husband allwais loves it, teaches it, defends it,
provides for it, and remains for ever the head of it. By this similitude we
have the duty of marriage well deciphered, and man and wife by it are taught
how to behave themselves to each other. Christ loves his Church with an
infinite love; the Church also loves him with a continual and never
interrupted love. Christ suffered for his Church, giving even his life to gain
her an immaculate Spouse. The Church also suffers for him in the blood of her
children that in her victorys of martyrdom she may well say to him as Sephora
did to Moses, Exodus 4.
a bloody spouse, thou art to me, when she saw the blood of her children
circumcised by him. Christ as a good husband bears with many imperfections,
and sins that are committed in the Church, and vpbraideth her not, but
pittyeth her and furthereth the amendment of them by fair means and good
words, calling her his friend, his beloved, his fair one: and the Church as a
good wife confesses her falts, and asks pardon for them, submitting herself
more humble then Sara, calling him her Lord, her master, her savior. Finally
Christ sits at the right hand of his father allwais ready to mediate for his
Church in heaven, and has provided to remain also with her in the B.
Sacrament allwais upon earth: and the Church reciprocally laboreth for him,
giving Sacraments, offering sacrifice, exhorting, commanding, reprehending, and
punishing of her people to make them honor him. Thus ought man and wife to
live together in continual love, and to bear patiently, and contentedly
together the tribulations of marriage; not vpbraiding one another with their
falts, but with wise and mild terms, to procure the amendment of them, and to
concur together in all things both to their spiritual, and temporal good.

Of this, union, love and goodness of married folks depends very much the
good of all mankind; and therefore it is often and earnestly commended in the
Scriptures. In the first marriage of man and woman in Paradise, God to to show
the love, which he would have betwixt man and wife, would frame the wife of a
true and real part of her husbands body, and not of his hands, fingars or
toes, not so intimate to him; but of a ribbe of his side near to his ^art.
And when Adam awakened out of his sleep and first saw her, he was presently
enamoured with a holy love of her, as his lawful wife: and even then presently
he began to give documents to married folks saying, Genesis 2.
For this man shall leave his father and mother, and shall cleave to his Wife,
an^ they shall be two in one fles. This Adam spoke to his posterity, whom in
the spirit of prophecy he foresaw, and would forwarne of mutual love; that as
man and wife are but one in flesh, So they might be in mind and will,
according together to take a part in all things. And therefore Adam called her
his fellow companion, as participating with him in a happy and good company,
all dissension and division betwixt them being contrary to the Sacrament, and
in it self most grievous eue^ as the dividing of living flesh, which bleedeth
and smarteth on both sides; or as the cutting of the whole body into two, which
can not be, but with excessive torment and certain death. So the division and
dissension betwixt man and wife is allwais painful on both sides, and if it
be in a matter of moment or with scandal, it is death and damnation to their
souls.

The best therefore is to reflect well upon the inconveniences of marriage
before hand, and to prevent them. Young folk many times deceive themselves, who
setting their minds too earnestly upon marriage, imagine great happiness and
nothing but content in it. But this content lasts but a while with them. For
as soon as they feel the tribulations of that state, they begin to loath
it, and by little, and little to think them intolerable, and to wish themselves
unmarried again. And this is so commune that, as the saying is, one priest
hat could vnmarry would have work enough for many priests. These resemble
little children that cry after their mothers, they will not be quiet till they
have their desire, and within a while they begin to be weary, and cry to be
back again. Marriages that are made without due consideration, and especially
with out being well commended to God, have many times the like issue: and these
are often observed to be of those who marry very young, who indeed seldom
apprehende rightly, that which they undertake. But what remedy? When they are
once married there is then none but in true virtue and a good conscience: they
must setle themselves, and be contented with the sower and the sweet, taking
one with the other as it shall please God to send them; and when any Cross
happens, with a constant and heroical mind to bear it for Gods sake, and to
accustom themselves to some good words in those occasions: as, Gods will be
done, or the like, expecting patiently and cheerfully a change when he shall
send it; and God will send a good change, if they expect his time.

But the remedy of remedys and the prime remedy for all inconveniences should
have been to have foreseen and prevented them before marriage, by considering
well, whether they were called of God, or not, to that state of life. And this
I will tell them how they shall examine it. First let them resolve that in this
business which concerns them for all their life after, they will do nothing
rashly; but will take time to consider of it, and to commend it well to God,
and having had the Council of their ghostly father and his prayers, and
confessed and communicated for that end, let them then take a time to consider
of it. First let them offer themselves upon their knees to God, firmly
purposing to serve him all their life time in whatsoever state he shall call
them to. Having made that firm purpose, let them then pray to him to enlighten
them, and to our B. Lady, their good Angel, and their particular patron to
assist them in that work, that they may know, and follow the will of God in
it. Then they may examine their natural inclinations and complexion, and other
circumstances how they suit with this or that state. And it will not be amiss
to think, that if they were then at the hour of their death what they would
wish to have chosen. Having weighed well all things, that which with most peace
and quietness offers it self as best for them, that they may resolve upon,
and follow it as the calling of God, and can have no^ just cause to repent it
afterward.

Finally I commend again much love to married folks: but it must be a
spiritual and supernatural love: such as Bishops Sales in his Introduction to a
devout life commends to them such as is betwixt Christ and the Church, Introd
par. 3. c. 37.
for Gods sake. Beasts and birds love their mates with a natural love only.
Heathens love their wives and husbands with a natural and rational love: but
Christians being contracted by a Sacrament, must have a higher love, to wit
sacramental and gracious, for the love of God, because it is his will;
otherwise it is but beastly, or at most a humane love, such as heathens have,
and will not last in them.

Those that are to marry must declare in three things. First whether they have
made any vow inconsistent with marriage. Secondly whether they be not already
contracted with some other. Thirdly whether their marriage be with their
parents consent? for they ought to have at least their interpretatiue consent,
as young Toby had when by the Angels directions he was married without the
knowledge of his parents; but not without their probable good liking of it. And
as children in this owe a duty to their parents; so it is fitting that
parents should have some respect to the affection and liking of their children,
and not to force them to marriages which they can not affect: for as marriages
without consent of parents; so forced marriages have seldom good success.

The Roman Catechism advises here to warn the married, that upon festiual
days and in times of penance they abstain from the acts of matrimony. This
is to be understood by way of Council, not of obligation. Yet it is a
Council to be noted, and followed, as rendering matrimony more honorable
betwixt them, when it is used in due circumstances.

I have said now all that I have to say of the Sacraments. You have seen in
general of them all, that they have their power and effect through the merits
of Christ, as issuing out of his blessed side upon the Cross, and as the only
means of our sanctification. With what devotion then ought we to come to them.

Think with thy self when thou go to receive any of the seven Sacraments,
that thou carriest then thy soul unto Jesus Christ to be washed in his blood;
and although it were never so sick, lame, or wounded; yet if thou come
worthily to any Sacrament he will turn unto it take it into his hands, and
cure it. Nay if the damned souls could possibly receive any Sacrament
worthily, they should be freed out of hell by it; because the merits of Christ's
Passion are infallibly applied by any Sacrament worthily received. And in this
consists the horror of the damned, that they are not in state, nor ever
shall be worthy to receive the Sacraments of the Catholic Church. And this is
our happiness in this life, that allthough our sins be never so great; yet as
long as we have time to receive the Sacraments, or only, to desire them for
the love of God, we may be freed from sin and sanctified by them. But without
them (at least in desire) we cannot be freed from mortal sin. For although
by contrition sins may be forgiven; yet that contrition includes desire of
the Sacraments. Besides that contrition is hard to be obtained. For the sinner
wounded by sin, and under the feet of his enemy, held down by his power,
and by his own evil inclinations, is easily kept in subjection, and hardly
rizeth to that perfect love of God, which contrition requires; and therefore we
have the Sacraments to help our weakness in that case, that if they have but
the fear of damnation and the love of glory, and will apply a Sacrament to
that fear and love, it contains the virtue of Christ's passion, and will so
cherish and strengthen them, that allthough they were dead it would revive them
to life. And therefore our blessed Savior breathing upon his disciples said,
receive ye the holy ghost to show the power of the Sacraments in forgiving of
sins. And at the reviving of Lazarus he weeped, groned in spirit, troubled
himself, prayed for him, and called upon him with a loud voice, to show the
horrible state of men in mortal sin signified by Lazarus that was dead; and
that so we might esteem more of the Sacraments by which they are not only
revived again, but so highly honored as to become his beloved spouses; even
as though some poor handmaid were taken out of slavery, and brought to the
kings palace to be made his wife. If thou do remember these things when thou
go to the Sacraments, that thou go then to be cleansed with the blood of
Christ, and to be made the spouse of God, thou will detest thy sins with thy
whole heart, and prepare thy self with much love and devotion to thy heavenly
spouse. And we must never come to the Sacraments until we have this
preparation in our selves.

THE SIXTH DISCOVRSE. OF THE COMMANDMENTS.
Question. Say the ten Commandments. Answ. Exodus 20.
Thou shall not have strange Gods before me. Thou shall not take the name of
the Lord thy God in vain. Remember thou sanctify the Sabbath day. Honor thy
father and thy mother. Thou shall not commit adultery. Thou shall not steal.
Thou shall not bear false witness against thy neihhbour. Thou shall not covet
thy neighbors wife. Thou shall not covet thy neighbors goods.

THE Roman Catechism having expounded the Creed and the Sacraments, gives
in the next place the exposition of the Commandments. In the Creed we have
the sum of what we are to believe: in the Sacraments we are sanctified with
divine grace: and in the Commandments we are taught how to be have ourselves
toward God and our neihhbour, so as to keep that grace which we received in
the Sacraments.

The commandments are the law of God; and to say the law or the Commandments
is the same thing. For the Commandments (says S. Augustine) are the sum
and abbreuiation of that which God has commanded; all being deduced from them,
as from the first principles of that law which by nature he had imposed upon
men. We observe them not because they were of the law of Moses: for that law
was to vanish away as a shadow, when the light of Christ came into the world;
we observe them because they are natural praecepts obliging all by an
obligation of nature, which we see by reason, and feel by experience in
ourselves. Neither were the commandments delivered to the Israelites so much
to let them know their obligation to them, as to make them remember it. And
therefore they were delivered with such dreadful signs (as I shall presently
declare) that they might reverence them the more, and fear to break them.

It is the office of priests to instruct in the Commandments, and to see that
they be kept. Gal. 6.
If a man be praeoccupated in any falt you that are spiritual instruct such an
one: These are priests who have the spiritual charge of souls, and who must
answer for the sins of the people committed to them. They have then good
reason to instruct and to reprehende; and if people will have priests to answer
for them, they must be contented to be reprehended by them, and must hear and
obey them in the Commandments of God; otherwise they shall be condemned as
disobedient to God himself: Luc. 10.
He that hears you hears me, and he that despises you, Heh. 10.
despises me. Says our savior and S. Paul says, Obey your Prelates and be
subject to them. For they watch as being to render account for your souls. The
imperfections of priests are readily noted, and every word which they speak is
put into the weighskales to be examined, but their instructions and admonitions
are not so hearkened unto; they are more observed in the breaking then in the
keeping of the Commandments. L. 2. de cons
It is true S. Hierome says that a trifeling word in the mouth of a priest is
a sacrilege. And S. Bernard calls such a word a blasphemy in them. Mal. 2.
But God says that they are his Angels when they deliver the law. The lips of
the priest shall keep knowledge, and the law they shall require from his
mouth: because he is the Angel of the Lord of hosts. Their falts indeed
become greater by the greatness of their dignity; yet for all their falts, the
law must be received of them: and good Catholics will reverence priests as
Angels, and will be glad of their admonishments as from heaven. It is my part
to instruct in the keeping of the Commandments, and yours to harken and to
learn to keep them. That we may both do our parts, we will pray to our B.
Lady for her intercession. Hail Mary, etc.

OF THE AUTHOR OF THE Commandments.
IT ought to be a great motive to us for the keeping of the Commandments, to
think who it is that commands them. It was not any potentate of the earth,
though never so great and powerful: neither was it any Angel from heaven
that imposed them upon us. God is the author of the Commandments, God that
made both men and Angels, heaven and hell, for the reward or punishment of
those that keep or break them. This consideration he would inculcate in the
very first words in which the Commandments were delivered, Exodus 20.
saying I am the Lord thy God. It is our Lord, our master, our eternal and
omnipotent God, that commands us these things. Let us fear him, and keep
his Commandments. Mal. 1.
If I be the Lord where is my fear says the Lord of hosts.

The Commandments were written by Angels in the two tables of stone, and
delivered by the Angels to Moses; but they were not commanded by Angels. God
commanded them and with his own fingar has printed them in the hearts of all
men, striking reverence unto them, and a natural fear to break them. And the
more to augment that fear and reverence in us, he delivered them after a most
maiestical and dreadful manner to the Israelits. They were to prepare
themselves for three days before, to wash their garments and to abstain from
their wives; that by that external and corporal purity their devotions might
increase, and their reverence to them. The third day being come, and the
morning appearing, behold (says the holy Scripture) thunders began to be
heard and lightenings to flash, Exodus 19.
and a very thick cloud to cover the mount, and the noise of the trumpet
sounded exceedingly. Moses brings the people toward the mountain; and such
was the reverence which God then required of them, that they were to keep of,
and under pain of death not so much as to touch the mountain on which they
were delivered. He and Aaron only were called up, and all the people when they
saw the voices and the flames, the sound of the trumpets and the mount smoking
were so terrifyed, that languishing and even like to die, they got a great way
of, and were glad to cry out unto Moses. Speak thou to us let not our Lord
speak, least perhaps we die.

All this majesty would God show to the Israelits that they might acknowledge
his power in the Commandments, and fear to break them. And it was not only
for that people that he would show this terror and majesty; but for all others
after them, that all might acknowledge his divine power, and that they keeping
the Commandments might move others by their example to keep them. Eu^d. 20.
This is your wisdom and understanding before peoples that hearing (that is
obeying) all these praecepts, may say behold a people full of wisdom and
understanding a great nation. He that considers rightly the majesty of God
commanding him, and sees himself besett on al sides, that he can by noe
means escape his power, will think it indeed his only wisdom to submit
unto him, and to obey him. But some have said that the Commandments of God are
impossible to be kept, and yet profess themselves to be christians. This is a
saying unworthy of that name; and we will show on the contrary

THAT THE COMMANDEMEN^^ of God (...).
CHRISTIANS in their christendom have received grace for the keeping of the
Commandments; and that Christian that says the Commandments are impossible
to be kept, does he not dishonor his christendom, and the merits of Christ in
which he was christened? It is a saying more propper for some profane
miscreant and atheist, that will not believe in God, then for one that
professes himself to know God, and to love him. He that knows God knows
him to be an infinite perfection, and by consequence a just God; and he that
loves him will give him that report; but what justice were there in commanding
impossible things, and in punishing for not performing such Commandments? Or
what love does he show to God in reporting this of him? That servant that
should report of his master that he commanded his servants to do things that
were impossible to be done, and punished them for not doing such things, did
he show any love to his master by speaking so of him? Or did he not rather
complain of his master as an unjust man and cruel tyrant? It were a cruelty
and injustice of God, to punish for not performing of impossible Commandments;
therefore the Commandments of God are possible to be kept.

It is indeed impossible for us by nature only, without grace to keep the
Commandments so, as to obtain supernatural glory; but by supernatural grace
it is not only possible, but easy to obtain that blessed state, by keeping of
the Commandments. God Commands us noe more, but to do our endeauours to the
fulfilling of the Commandments, he gives grace to make good our endeauours,
and to fulfill them. It is as though a loving fathers hold command his son
to cooperate with him in the doing of something which he will help to do,
and will do chiefly himself. Such a father is God to us: he commands us
nothing but that to which he himself will put his hand, and do more in it
then we do. It is as when a new scholar is brought to a master to learn to
write. The master bids him take his pen and write: and then taking him by
the hand and guiding it, behold with his masters help a fair letter is made,
and his kind master gives him a reward for that little which he did, which was
noe more but to permit himself to be guided by him. Such a master we have of
God: he requires noe more of us; but only that we will cooperate with him,
and be guided by him: the work he will do it chiefly himself; and yet he
will give us an eternal reward, for the little which we do in it with his
grace. Now if God give grace for the performing of the Commandments, it is noe
matter how hard they be in themselves; for with his grace they are easy and
light. S. John. Io. 1.5.
His Commandments are not heavy. And S. Paul who said of himself that he was
nothing; Cor. 2.12.
yet he says I can all things in him that strengthens me. And S. Augustine
de bono perseu. c. 10. Phil. 4. Cor. 1.10.
Give what thou command, and command what thou will. And upon those words
of the Apostle he that loves has fullfilled the law, he has a very fine
discourse, Romans 13.
to prove that the Commandments are not only possible but easy to be
fullfilled. For (says he) who can but love that infinite goodness, that
infinite power, infinite beauty, infinite riches, infinite liberality, and
infinite bless of all perfections? and he that loves has fullfilled the law.
Let us not then murmr at the hardness of the Commandments, nor pretend
impossibilitys in them. God is a loving father, let us bless him who will not
suffer us to be tempted above that which we are able, Cor. 1.10.
but will both help us to keep them, and reward us for keeping them.

Christ has said that the whole law and the Prophets depend on these two
Commandments: to wit to love God with our whole heart, Mat. 22.
soul, and mind, and to love our neighbor as our self. That is to say that
all, whatsoever was commanded in the law and written by the Prophets, tends
to this, that we love God for his own sake, and our neighbor for Gods sake.
Because God in himself deserves love, and our neighbor for his sake
deserves to be loved. How easy then by the grace of God are the Commandments
to be kept? They are all included in these two; and these two are reduced to
one: to wit the love of God; an easy Commandment. Thus much of the ten
Commandments in general: now in particular.

THE FIRST COMMANDMENT.
I AM the Lord thy God which brought thee forth of the land of Egypt, Exodus 20.
from the house of servitude. Thou shall not have strange Gods before me. Thou
shall not make to thee a graven thing, nor any similitude that is in heaven
above, and that is in the earth beneath, neither of those things that are in
the waters under the earth. Thou shall not adore them nor serve them. The
substance of all this is contained in those words. Thou shall not have strange
Gods before me. That which goes before are words of majesty, to begette
reverence to the Commandments of God, and to oblige the Israelits to the
keeping of them, by commemorating the benefits which they had received of him;
and especially in being so miraculously delivered out of the intolerable
bondage of Egypt. But if this were a benefit so much obliging them; how much
more obligation have we to keep the Commandments? who have been delivered out
of so great and miserable a servitude, that the other of the Israelits was but
as a figure to signify it, and a cipher which may stand for nothing in
comparison of it. Hier. 16.
Behold the days shall come says our Lord and it shall be said noe more the
Lord lives that brought forth the children of Israel out of the land of
Egypt. But the Lord lives that brought forth the children of Israel out of
the Land of the North, and out of all the Lands to the which I did cast them
out. I will bring them again into their Land which I gave to their fathers.
Behold I will send many fishers and they shall fish them. We are these
Israelits whom God has fished by the Apostles, which he sent to draw us out of
the state of idolatry; a dark, cold, and barren Land signified by the North,
and has brought us into the admirable light, and happy state of the faith of
Christ. The redemption out of Egypt is not to be any more mentioned nor named
a redemption in comparison of this. This we ought with gratitude to remember,
and to love and serve God heartily for it; because by it he has freed us from
hell. The words that follow are in declaration of the Commandment, by which
the worship of strange Gods is prohibited.

The Commandments were delivered in two tables: in the first were written the
three first, which immediately concerned the love of God. In the second the
seven last which concern not so immediately the love of God; but are with
relation to our neighbor. But some lovers of division will needs divide the
first Commandment into two, and break the connection which the doctors of the
Church have commonly acknowledged in them. They will have the first to contain
all unto the end of those words. Thou shall not have strange Gods before me;
and the second Commandment to begin at the words following, and to contain
the forbidding of images and pictures; because they think by this means to
give it more force against the ancient and Catholic doctrine, which allows
them to be worshipped, as holy things; where it has indeed noe force at all
against it (as I shall presently show.) Only observe here that it makes noe
more against images in two Commandments then in one, so that we keep the
same words and their propper translations (which not withstanding those very
men have made bold to alter.) I remember that a Protestant friend of mine once
objected to me that Catholics had taken away one of the ten Commandments
(meaning that we had put two into one) to maintain our doctrine of the worship
of images. But those that had so possessed this ignorant man, had manifestly
deceived him; for the Catholic Church has declared nothing in this, but
leaves it indifferent to be understood as one, or as two Commandments. That
which the Catholic Church teaches is that which the Holy Ghost says; Exodus
34. Deuteronomy. 4.
and that is, that the Commandments are ten in number; but to any particular
manner of dividing them the Church obliges not. Those that will divide the
first into two must take heed that they make not eleauen Commandments: and if
to remedy this they shall join the two last into one; then they fall into
another inconvenience which is to make four Commandments in the first table,
and six only in the second; which is contrary to the commune and ancient
manner of dividing them, into three of the first table belonging to God and
seven of the second table belonging to our neighbor, which S. Augustine
approoueth of, Aug. quest. 71 in Exodus
and which has in it self most co^nexion. For that there is more co^nexion
betwixt forbidding strange Gods, and forbidding of graven things to be adored
and served, then there is betwixt the desire of adultery and the desire of
theft, as is manifest; they being in two destinct kinds of sin; and therefore
with more reason shall be divided into two Commandments then the first. Thus
much for the division of the Commandments.

Thou shall not have strange Gods before me. Worship of images.
Two things are here commanded: The one positive to wit to worship the true
God: the other negative prohibiting the worship of false Gods. And although the
second be included in the first; because the worship of the true God excludes
the worship of false Gods; yet because the Israelits were a people prone to
idolatry, and to live in the midst of Idolatrous nations; that they might not
fall into that sin, as in the end they did, when Jeroboam, Achab, and other
wicked kings pretended to worship the God of Israel, when they worshipped idols
also; therefore they were not only commanded to worship God; but also expressly
forbidden to worship strange Gods. And by this we may understand the sense of
the words following thou shall not make to thee a graven thing, nor any
similitude etc. to be, that they should not make them to be adored, and served
as Gods; Sap. 13.
which the Gentil idolatours did, who have called the works of men's hands Gods:
and whom holy wisdom in the same place reprooueth, for that either the fire,
or the wind, or the swift air, or a circle of stars, or exceeding much
water, or the Sun and the moon they thought to be Gods, rulers of the world.
This was perfect idolatry: and this was that which God would here prevent in
the Israelits: and by this the worship of images with inferior only, and not
divine worship, but as holy things, is not forbidden.

But suppose that the Israelits were commanded here, not only not to worship
images and pictures with divine worship in themselves, but also not to have
them amongst them; it would make nothing against us. Many things were forbidden
them which are lawful to us: the circumstances of that imperfect law, of that
peoples weakness, of those times, and places, requiring it. They were
forbidden to eat blood; because they were of themselves a bloody people: and
in the Apostles times it was necessary to observe it as a praecept; Act. 15.
but now it is not. Certain corporal clensings were commanded them, and
certain creatures were forbidden to be eaten as unclean; and these were
neither observed in the Apostles times, nor are now. Images and pictures in
those idolatrous times might be forbidden them to have, for their pronenesse to
idolatry; but the Apostles had them, and we have them, and worship them as holy
things in the law of Christ; which was to be, and has been as we see, the
dostruction of idolatry. That which the Commandments oblige unto by obligation
of nature, that we, and all people are bound to observe; but that which they
command as propper to the Israelits only, obliges not us. He therefore, that
would make a good argument against our worship of images must prove that it is
forbidden either by some particular praecept propper to us, or by a natural
praecept commune to all; but this none can ever prove. As for any particular
praecept propper to us, there is none can or does offer to produce any praecept
by which images are forbidden to be worshipped particularly by christians. And
for any general praecept forbidding by nature the worship of images, as holy
things, it is contrary to reason, to the scriptures, to General Councels, and
to the practice of the primitive, and present Church.

Natural reason and order requires that every thing be honored according to
its natural goodness. God is to be worshipped as God with supreme and divine
worship primely in himself; and creatures with inferior worship according to
their nature, as they have more or less relation to God. We give civil honor
to one another, and especially to our superiors, as having a nearer relation to
him that is supreme; and we give religious worship to holy things, as they have
more or less relation to him. Images then having a particular relation to God
by the holy things which they represent, are to be worshipped with a holy and
religious worship: natural reason teaching that when we worship any thing, we
should worship that also which has relation unto it; because in respect of it,
and for its sake it deserves also some worship; and therefore we love all that
have relation to our friends, and worship our superiors for Gods sake, whom
they represent. We are not then forbidden by any praecept of nature to worship
images with a secondary, and relative worship: but we are taught by natural
reason, that as they have relation to the holy things which they represent,
they are to be worshipped with a holy and religious worship, though relatiuely
and secondarily only; the goodness of the thing represented being the prime
motive of that worship. And this is confirmed for that all men by nature
apprehende the iniurys done to the images of their enemies, as done to their
enemies themselves, the prototypes of those images; and therefore by the same
reason we must apprehende that the worship which we give to the images of our
friends, as to Crucifixes, holy pictures, and the like is given to the
prototype represented by them. Therefore images are to be worshipped with
secondary and relative worship for the prototypes sake, which is primely and
principally worshipped in them.

That which the Catholic Church does in this is commended all over in the
scriptures: the arc, the temple, the vessel and ornaments of it, the priests
garments, and the like, being to be worshipped with inferior religious worship
for the relation which they had to God. They prayed toward the temple in
reverence to it, the vessel of it were not to be touched with vnconscerated
hands. The ground on which Moses saw that great vision was called holy, Exodus
3.
and as such was to be honored with his bare feet when he trod on it, only
in relation to the vision that appeared to him in that place. Make then this
argument, That which has relation to holy things is holy, and to be worshipped
in that relation: images and pictures have relation to holy things; therefore
they are holy and to be worshipped in it. But it displeases the enemies of the
Catholic Church to have it called adoring of images. This ought not to
displease them; for creatures are often said in the scriptures to be adored.
Abraham being amongst the Hethaits lawfully adored before the people of the
Land. Jacob adored Esau, Genesis 23.
and Esau adored him again, Joseph adored Jacob, David adored Saul, the
Prophet Nathan adored David and we are commanded psalm. 98. to adore the
footstool of God: which must be understood of some creature in relation to
him. And if all this satisfy not, let them agree with us that images and
pictures, as they have relation to holy things, are to be honored, and for the
name, let them call it reverence, honor, worship, or the like, as they please.

The Catholic doctrine in this was aunciently questioned by haeretiks; but is
was declared by the Council of Nyce against them, and those accursed that
should deny it. The Apostles in their canons have commended the use of images
and pictures to us, and the fathers in their writings have declared them to
have been used in their times, as now they are in the Catholic Church. S.
Cont. Iul.
Basil speaking of the saints says for which cause the historys of their
images I honor and publicly adore: For this as delivered by the Apostles, is
not to be prohibited; but in all Churches we erect their historys. S.
Chrysostom in his Lyturgy, the priest coms forth carrying the gospel, with
the Clerk before him, having a light, and turning to the image of Christ he
bends his head. What more could we have desired them to say? Was it now
truly said of Calvin that for the first five hundred years after Christ,
images were not worshipped, these Saints having lived far with in that time?
Or is it true that which our enemies make their people to believe, that we
commit idolatry by it, giving divine honor to creatures?

The contrary is an ancient heresy noted in Marcyon, Manichaeus, Xenaias, and
others, who were then recorded as haeretiks for it: and the wicked Julian as he
Apostatized from the christian faith denying his christendom; so did he also
deny to worship the holy images, that represented the mysterys of that faith;
and pulling down that which the pious woman whom Christ cured of the blody
flux had erected of him, and which for some hundreds of years until his
reign had been reverenced by christians, he set up, his own insteede of it:
but the divine indignation quickly appeared against his profaneness: fire
descending from heaven, and breaking it in pieces, divided the head from the
shoulders of the image of that wicked man. Hist Trip. l. 6. c. 1.
Eusebius l. 1. c. 13. relates how that Abagatus king of the Edissens in Syria
sent unto Christ desiting him, to come and cure him; and that Christ wrote
back letting him know that himself could not then come; but that after his
death one of his disciples should cure him. And that a painter being sent by
the king to bring him at least the lively countenance of him, when he should
have drawn his picture, the brightness of his face did so dazzle the painters
eyes, that he could not go on with his work. Where upon Christ took a cloth,
and applying it to his sacred, and life giving face, printed his blessed
countenance upon it, Lib 4 hist. c. 26.
and sent it to the king. This is recorded by diverse authors, and Euagrius
mentions the miracles which were wrought by that picture. For what end now
did Christ thus draw this miraculous picture, and send it to the king? Was it
to be cut in pieces and abused as haeretiks do the pictures of him? or else to
be kept and honored for his sake? Truly as it was the picture of Christ whom
he loved and worshipped, he could not in reason but love and worship it: and if
he had done otherwise, he had not showed himself the friend of Christ. The
worship of images is not then forbidden by nature; but is grounded upon the
nature of images and of our nature, who are to worship holy hings. And such
worship is deduced as you have seen from the Scriptures, warranted by
Councels, and by practice of the primitive Church, and by miracles; and
therefore whatsoever objections that can be made against it must either be (as
they are) vain cauils, or plane forgerys of contentious and dissembling men.

Neither is the worship of relics as it is used in the Catholic Church
contrary to this Commandment, Relics.
but for the same reasons to be allowed of; for that we have noe prohibition
either in general or in particular forbidding them to us; but rather the quite
contrary as we have said of images; natural reason instructing us to worship
that as holy, which has relation to holy things: and it is deduced from the
Scriptures as before, and also by diverse miracles recorded in the Scriptures
to have been wrought by relics. The body of a dead man was restored to life
by touching the bones of Prophet Eliseus: Reg. 4.13.
and there upon it is said, Eccli. 4^.
that the dead body of Elizeus prophesied. And in the new testament the woman
that was troubled with an issue of blood came behind Christ, and touched the
hemme of his garment, saying within herself, If I shall touch only his
garment I shall be safe. Mas. 9.
And Christ turning unto her commended her, Act. 5.
and she was cured. In the acts of the Apostles we have that people put their
sick and lame folks in the streets and high ways with in the compass even of
S. Act. 19. Conc. Nyc.
Peter's shadow, that it might touch them as he passed by, and cure them of
their infirmitys: Act. 3. and 4.
and that the napkins or hand kercheifs of S. Paul being laid upon the sick,
cured them. The second Council of Nyce allows of the worship of holy
relics. The tombs of Saints were aunciently worshipped in the Catholic
Church S. Aug. l 22. de C^^. D. ^. c. ^.
Augustine relates the miracles which were done at S. Steuans tomb. S.
Hierome cont. Vigilant. we honor the relics of Martyrs that we may worship
him whose Martyrs they are. We honor the servants that the honor of the
servants may redounde unto the master, who says, the that receives you
receives me. And this is so plane in the holy fathers, that the
Magdeburgians confess their authority, but condemn them for it: which is
sufficient to condemn themselves in the opinion of all wise men: that they
starting up against their Superiors and against theauthority of the whole
Church, that was then when they began, would resist the whole world then
present, and also stand at defyance with the ancient fathers. By that which
has been said of holy images and relics the worship of Saints is also
proved lawful; for that we worship them not as God, but as his servants in
relation to him, who is their master.

That which is commanded in the first commandment is the true worhip of God,
to wit, as it is in the Catholic Church; and therefore atheism, and all false
worship of infidelity and heresy is forbidden in it. Necromancy and all kind of
witchcraft, superstitious observations and actions; such as young women do to
see him that must be their husband, or to find something that is lost. These
if they be not excused by ignorance) commit a mortal sin against the first
Commandment, in that they implicitly acknowledge supernatural power to be in
some other thing beside God; and so they worship stranges gods.

THE SECOND COMMANDMENT.
THOU shall not take the name of God in vain. By this Commandment we are not
forbidden absolutely to swear, but to take the name of God in vain. To swear
may be lawful, nay sometimes worthy of praise; but to take the name of God in
vain is allwais vain and unlawful. It is an act of divine honor and worship
to swear in due circumstances: for by such an oath we acknowledge the supreme
goodness, Deuteronomy. 6.
and first verity to be in God. Thou shall fear thy God and him only shall
thou serve and by his name thou shall swear. Ps. 61.
And king David: all shall be praised that swear by him.: Cor. 2.1.
The Apostles sometimes confirmed their sayings by oath, Apoc. 10.
The Angels are also ^ead in the Scriptures to have sworn; as the Angel that
appeared to S. John swear by him that lives for ever and ever. Nay God
himself, Genesis 22.
the Lord of Angels is read to have sworn in diverse places of the old
testament our Lord called Abraham, saying by my own self I have sworn. Psalm.
109.
And in the Psalms our Lord swear and it will not repent him. So that there
is, noe doubt but it is lawful to swear, if the conditions of a lawful oath be
observed.

As for the conditions of a lawful oath, authors commonly understand them to
be contained in the words of Hieremy; Hier. 4.
Thou shall swear our Lord lives, in truth and in judgment, and in justice.
The first condition is verity, that it be true that which we call God to be the
witness of. The second is that it must be also with judgment, and not rashly
and inconsideratly, as some do upon every frivolous occasion, abusing the holy
name and majesty of God. This is a very great irreuerence: For if it be an
irreuerence to a king or great personage to be called as witness of triuial,
and frivolous things of noe moment, as of killing of flies, or picking of
strawes, much more is it against the divine majesty to be called rashly, and
indiscretly as a witness, without necessity. The third condition is justice,
that it be just and lawful that which we promise and swear to. This condition
was wanting in Herod's oath, who having sworn to the daughter of Herodias to
grant her whatsoever she should ask, and she asking the head of S. John
Baptist, he was then either to break his oath, or to do that which was worse,
to deliver the life of a just and innocent man into the hands of a malicious
and spiteful woman. It was also wanting in those wicked Jews, who meeting
together swore that they would neither eat nor drink till they had killed S.
Paul. Act. 23.
Such oths never bind; for noe oath can make an unlawful thing to be lawful;
but the oath being past, the work is still as unlawful as before; and if he
perform it, he commits two mortal sins: one in swearing, and an other in
performing an unlawful thing.

Catholics that live in the dominions of infidels or haeretiks, must be very
wary of any oths which are tendered to them, and consider well before they take
them. If the oath entrench any way upon Religion, as praeiudicial to the
Catholic faith, Act. 5.
they must not take it for the whole world nor hearken to it, but must answer
resolutly as S. Peter did saying God must be obeyed rather then men. If it
seem not much to concern religion, the best is to take aduize of the lawful
nesse of it; and if an answer be required presently before that we can have
aduize, we may commend it briefly to God, and having first resolved with
ourselves firmly, that we will not offend our conscience, we may consider of
the grounds for the lawfullnesse of it, an we must by all means judge it
lawful before we take it. If we think that it has sufficient probability,
and that our doubt be but a timorous fear, we may judge it lawful, and then
take it; but if we find not sufficient probability that we can judge it
lawful, but that we hang in suspense and doubt of the lawfullnes of it, it is
by noe means to be taken: for he that doubts of the lawfullnes of the oath,
and yet takes it, sins and is condemned by his own conscience, as doing
of that which he could not judge to be lawful, but at least doubted to be
unlawful. That which is observed in such oths is, that there is but little
thanks afterward to those that take them. An. 464.
Baronius records of Hunnericus king of the Vandals that being himself an
haeretike, he sent an oath unto his Catholic subjects, in which they were to
swear that after his death they would admit of his son Hildericus to be
their king, and that they should have noe correspondence from beyond the seas:
promising that if they would take this oath they should have their Churches
delivered to them. The first thing which the Catholic Bishops did was to make
a resolute and unanimous profession of their faith. They sent therefore to the
king in these words We have allwais said, and now say, and will allwais say, we
are bishops, we are christians, we all hold one true and Apostolical faith. But
as for the oath, some of them were of mind to take it, having a scruple of
their Churches being otherwise detained from them; others fearing some deceit
in the business, excused themselves with the words of Christ I say to you not to
swear at all. But in fine they were all to be banished. those that would take
the oath as men of noe conscience that would swear to any thing; and those
that would not, because they loved not the king. Such is the performance of
haeretiks promises.

It is not only unlawful to take the name of God in vain; but also to swear
by his creatures. For as the power and goodness of God is resplendent in them,
he that abuses them abuses God. It is then an evil custom that which some
have of swearing by this light, by this fire, and the like oths, Mat. 5.
by which this Commandment is broken and therefore Christ I say to you not to
swear at all neither by heaven because it is the throne of God: neither by the
earth, because it is the footstool of his feet.

This Commandment is broken by vain oths, vain promises, by breaking of
vows, by profaning of Scriptures, applying them to idle and i^reuerent
purposes, by blaspheming, and cursing, etc. It is an unworthy thing to see the
irreuerence of some to this Commandment, and to the most sacred name of God,
which upon every occasion they abuse, pouring forth oths upon oths, as water
upon the face of the earth. Base minded men, who because they see the patience
of God with sinners, that presently he strikes them not, they contemn him:
and where as they flatter men and give fair words to their enemies for fear,
they rize up against God with oths curses, and blasphemys, as though they would
fight, and be revenged of him. Those that have this evil custom may be
thought to have committed a mortal sin when they first got it; and although
they can not on a sudden quite leave it of; yet they are bound under a
mortal sin to endeavor against it.

That which is propper to this sin is to harden the heart more then other
sins do, and to dispose those that use it to all other sins: for as it
has a vain and seeming bravery in the opinion of foolish men; so they take
more complacence and continuelonger in it even to the hardening of their hearts
so, that they have almost noe feeling of the offense of God. And therefore the
Holy Ghost has said Aman that swears much shall he filled with iniquity.
Eccl. 23.
L. 4. Dial. ^. 18.
And then presently he adds and plague shall not depart from his house. For
it is observed of swearing that beside the punishment of the next world it is
often exemplarly punished in this. S. Gregory relates of a child that was
visibly taken away from his father by the devils, for cursing and swearing.
Which was such an example, as perhaps the like is hardly read of in punishment
of any other sin. For that child was but five years old, and I know not
whether he were capable of sin or not. But whether he sinned or were earried
away to prevent his sin: it was a manifest plague of God upon that house for
swearing; and by this and the words alleged, we may well think that many
houses are plagued for it.

The remedy is to consider the infinite majesty of God. Romedy^ against
swearing.
The courtiers of heaven are allwais in his presence praising him, and shall I
stand before his face cursing and swearing by his blessed name? what hurt has
the Creator of the world done to me that I should so dishonor him to his
creatures? It is also a good practical remedy to get a custom when any
thing troubles us to say some good words, as God be blessed. Blessed be the
name of God, or the like: and often to use them, as readiest with us. The words
of S. Paul are very literal for this, saying, Romans 12.
bless and curse not. Job so holy a man, and so great in the world disdained
not this easy but efficacious remedy, who when all those calamitys came so
thick upon him, he broke not out into oths and curses, but had ready to say
blesse^ be the name of God, and so got victory, and a duble reward even in
this world. Let us get a custom of such words. It is a custom easy to get.

THE THIRD COMMANDMENT.
REMEMBER thou sanctify the Sabbath day. The word Sabbath signifies Rest: and
so the Sabbath day is as much as to say a day of rest, in which we are to rest
from labor. Here then we are commanded to sanctify to God a day of rest, that
absteining from corporal works, we attend unto acts of religion, and divine
worship. This is an obligation which all have by nature; that as all times were
created, and ordained for the service of God; so some days should be
particularly observed in honor of him. But we are not by nature bound to
observe any one day more then another: for that was to be determined by the
Church, which is directed by the Holy Ghost to order all according to
convenient circumstances. And so the Church of the Israelits was commanded to
observe the seventh day, on which God rested from the creation of the world:
and the Church of Christ is directed to keep the next day after it, in
remembrance of the resurrection of our savior, and of the coming of the Holy
Ghost: both which mysterys happened on the next day after the Jewish Sabbath,
and on that day which we call Sunday, and which the Scriptures call the
Dominical day, that is to say Our Lords day. Thus the Sabbath day was
transferred unto the next day by the same authority that first commanded it:
and was kept by the Apostles on the same day on which we keep it; as appears
by S. Cor. 1.16.
Paul commanding the gatherings to be made In the first of the Sabbath. That
was on the first day after their Sabbath, in which the people of Christ met
together to celebrate our Lords day. And S. John says, Apoc. 7.
J was in spirit on the Dominical day, that was on our Lords day, to
destinguish it fom the Jewish Sabbath.

By the Sabbath all holy days are here understood. In the law of Moses
diverse other solemnitys beside the Sabbath were commanded, and observed some
with more and some with less solemnity, according to the more or less
remarkable mysterys which they represented. The feast of Azyme or Pasch was the
chief, Then the feast of Pentecost. Thirdly the feast of Tabernacles in
remembrance of God praeseruing them after their coming out of Egypt for forty
years in tabernacles. Besides these, they had also diverse other lesser
feasts, as of the New moons, etc. but these were the chief, and so solemn,
that they were kept with octaues, and all the male people according to
Maldonate was to be at them. but now as shaddows their feasts are passed away,
Col 2.
and oblige not. Let noe man (says S. Paul) judge you in meat, or in drink,
or in part of a festiual day, or of the new moon or of Sabaoths: which are a
shadow of things to come. to wit of more perfect observations, and feasts that
were to come in the law of Christ. And therefore beside the Sabbath which we
celebrate every week we observe also other solemnitys of the chief mysterys
of the christian faith: as also of our B. Lady, and of the Angels and Saints;
intending allwais the supreme honor of God in them.

To sanctify holy days it is not sufficient only to abste^^e from seruil
works; but we much sanctify them by some special works of religion done on them
to the sanctifying of our souls, that they may have the Sabbath of a good
conscience and rest from sin, Reg. 1.25.
which causes sohbing and scruple of ha^t in us. For this the Church has
commanded that every one hear mass upon holy days; because it is the chief
act of religion, as the sacrifice of the law of Christ; and therefore fitting
that every one should be present to offer up to God, at least one mass every
holy day. The other prayers of the Church, as being much inferior to the
mass; and sermon which is inferior to the prayers of the Church, oblige not
all under a mortal sin to be present at them. Yet of devotion, it is sitting
that all should be present also at those holy services of God, which are to be
preferred before any private devotions of our own. Besides we show more love
by those works of supererogation, a good servant will not expect to be
commanded to every thing, but of his own accord will do that which he sees
to conduce unto his masters profit. After euensong honest and modest
recreations are not to be hindered, those that have labored hard all the week
had need of some time of recreation to refresh themselves; and honest
recreations may either lawfully be taken then, or else they can never be had.
Those that are so praecise to the contrary (as some hypocrytical spirits of
thesetimes have been) command they know not what, and impose burdens which if
themselves were to carry after a whole weeks labor, they would not touch with
their fingar. God may be honored in such recreations, and the servants of God
know how to honor him in them.

It is a great wickedness in many who insteede of sanctifying of holydaies
with good works, and absteining from sin, make them the commune days of
sin, profaning them with new and more grievous sins committed on them.
This is a circumstance at least fitting (if not absolutely necessary) to be
expressed in confession. For as it were a circumstance of higher malice for a
subject to strike at the king, and to attempt to kill him on some solemn day
in which he were rejoicing in the midst of his people, and comforting them with
his gracious and glorious aspect; so it is a great sin and heinous malice in
a christian to give himself to vice upon holidays, and as it were to commit
treason against God, when his faithful servants are gathered together to
praise and bless him.

This commandment is broken by unnecessary works; but not by ringing of bells,
adorning of altares; dressing of meat and the l^ke. Christ himself allowed
his disciples to do such works on the Sabbath day: and when the Jews murmured
at them, he justified with good reasons that which they did, saying, Ma^^. 2.
that the Sabbath was made for man and not man for the Sabbath. And when the
Pharisys murmured at his curing on the Sabbath day, Luc. 14.
he asked them which of you shall have an ass or an ox fallen into a pit
and will not incontinent draw him out on the Sabbath day? Luc. 6.
And upon the like occasion he asked them if it be lawful on the Sabbath to
do well or ill? Yet God would have this commandment to be so strictly
observed in that law, that it was not then lawful to kindle a fire, so much
as to dress meat on the Sabbath day; nor to take a journey above a mile or
two at most, according to Maldonate. A man being apprehended for gathering of
sticks on the Sabbath day, was brought unto Moses and Aaron: but they not
knowing the will of God what was to be done with him, God himself gave
sentence of death against him, Number. 15.
saying to Moses dying let t^is man die let all the multitude stone him without
the camp. And they carried him out, and stoned him to death. Nay he would
work a miracle in praeseruing the Manna for two days together rather then
they should gather it on the Sabbath day, although it were their necessary
Food, and but a small labor. How careful then ought we to be in the keeping
of this commandment in which God would be so strict? It is a great neglect in
masters to dispose noe better of their affairs, then to have their work to
do when their servants should be at rest. But in this as all other things the
custom of the Church according to places is to be reverenced,

THE FOVRTH COMMANDMENT.
HONOR thy father and thy mother, that thou mast be longliued upon earth. Here
now begin the Commandments of the second table. The three former were
contained in the first, and in them was commanded that which pertained
immediately to the love of God: These belong to the love of our neighbor. The
love of God is the root and foundation of keeping the Commandments: for those
that truly love God will willingly, and readily keep his Commandments: and
by keeping them they are more and more grounded and perfected in the love of
him. It was a high expression that of S. John, when he said God is charity and
he that abides in charity abides in God, Io. 1.4.
and God in him. by loving of God we are united unto him, we have him in our
hearts, we will that which he wills, and are as it were all one with him: that
as the Saints of heaven see all things in God who abides in them; so it is a
kind of heaven upon earth to be united unto God by love, afflictions being
sweet and confortable in the love and service of him. And to know whether we
have the love of God or not, the same Apostle gives for a sign the love of
our neighbor, saying, in the same place If we love one another God abides in
us, and his charity in us is persited. He that loves God loves all those whom
God loves; and so he loves his neighbor because God loves him, and will
have him to love him.

Every man is by nature our neighbor, and because our father and mother have
most propinquity of nature with us; therefore the Commandments of the second
table, that concern our neighbor, begin with the love of our father and
mother, that all others might be understood by them, who are our nearest
neighbors. In the first place our superiors, spiritual and temporal are
understood by parents. Heb. 13.
Of the first the Apostle says, Obey your Prelates and be subject to them. For
they watch as being to render account of your souls. Of the second S. Peter,
Be subject to every humane creature for God, Pet. 1.2.
whither it be to the king as excelling, or to rulers as sent by him, etc. for
so is the will of God.

Here we are to speak both of the duty of children, and of parents. For as
children owe a duty to their parents; so parents owe their duty to God, as
his children. Children are to love, honor, and obey their parents, and to
relieve them in their needs: and parents are to instruct and correct their
children, and to provide for their mainteinance. Children must love and
reverence their parents in their hearts, and must speak well of them, and love
to hear them well spoken of, and perform submissiuely all those filial
respects which children use to their parents. They must observe them and learn
at their good example. They must obey them willingly, and have their consent in
those things that concern their course of life; knowing that it is a mortal
sin in things lawful, and of moment, to disobey them. But if they should
command something which were unlawful; then we must hate our father and
mother that we may be worthy of Christ, and answer with S. Act. 5.
Peter God must be obeyed rather then men. Dutiful children shall have a duble
reward: a long life in this world, and an everlasting life in the next. Piety
is profitable (says the Apostle) to all things having promise of the life that
now is, and of that to come. Tim. 1.4.
And this reward consists not only in the longnesse, but in the happiness
of their present life; that they shall live prosperously and in felicity. For
in Deuteronomy where the Commandments are repeated more at large, Deuteronomy. 5.
it is honor thy father and mother etc. that thou wast live a long time etc.
and it may be well with thee. They are to relieve their parents in all; but
most of all in their spiritual necessitys to see that they want noe necessary
help for their souls.

As for the duty of parents to God, they are to love their children, not for
themselves, but for Gods sake: they are to instruct them or to see that they be
instructed in their prayers, christian doctrine, and good life: in which there
is a great negligence in some parents. The love of parents to their children
ought I say to be for Gods sake, and not as some who are so immoderate and
unwise in the love of them, that indeed they make fools of them, for want of
instruction and dew correcting of their falts. These have not the right spirit
of parents, and their father which is in heaven will not omit to punish this
falt in them. Will you see a pitiful example of this? Reg. 1.4.
Heli was a very good man, but that he is noted of too much indulgence to his
children; and therefore both he and they were examplarly punished of God with
sudden death. Israel being worsted in batle by the Philistaeans, sent for the
arc of our Lord into the camp amongst them, and received it with such showtes
and acclamations of joy, that the earth rang with the sound of their cry, and
their enemies were terrifyed to hear it. Great then were the hopes of Israel,
and their expectation of another day. The day of batle was come and Heli not
being able to be present himself at the fight, for that he was almost a
hundred years old, caused a stool to be set over against the way, and satt
him down on it to expect the newse of their good success. A messenger com's
fast enough with ill newse, and lets him know that Israel was put to flight,
a great ruin was made of the people, his two sons were slain, and that
(which was worst of all) the ark of God was taken by the enemy. With all which
the old man's heart was so surcharged, that his strength began to fail, his
spirits to faint, and by little and little quite forsaking him, he fell backwards
over and broke his neck. A pitiful spectacle to behold the most venerable
personage of all Israel, the high Priest and Prince of that people, to ly in
that posture dead with sorrow. And this imputed byauthors to noe other sin in
him, but to too much indulgence toward his children. This is a love which
beside the hurt which children receive by it, hinders much the love of God in
parents, diuerting their minds from him, and as it were turning him out of
possession, who ought to possess the center of our hearts. It is as hame for
christians to have noe better love then that of nature which is commune to
dumb beasts. The love which parents ought to have of their children ought to
be gracious and orderly for the love and honor of God; and of such love they
may have as much as they can: but to prefer the love of kindred before God is
disorderly, and unworthy of a christian. The man of the gospel, Luc. 9.
whom Christ called to follow him, excused himself for that he had his father
to bury; but this was not a good excuse; natural love being to yield and to
obey God. Christ knew what he had to do; and if he had not called him he had
done a good work in burying of his father; but Christ calling him, he ought to
have forsaken all, and to have followed him: and therefore he said let the dead
bury their dead, but go thou setforth the kingdom of God. Those that prefer
the love of any thing before God are spiritually dead, as S. Tim. 1.5.
Paul says the that is in deliciousness living is dead. But thou if thou
regardest the life of thy soul, follow me, and love me above thy kindred,
and all things. Yet parents must take heed on the other side, that they be not
so severe in correcting of their children falts, as to dull and disharten
them. Fathers (says S. Col 3.
Paul) provoke not your children to indignation, that they become not
discouraged. Let parents observe this rule, that they never seem to correct
their children in anger, but allwais for the desire of their good; and let their
children allwais see this desire in them. For such reprehensions and
corrections as they perceive to proceed only out of passion work but little
to their amendment. Parents must also provide for their children with a
moderate care; and not as some do who under pretense of proulding for them
never think themselves rich enough. These ought to consider that their
children are the children of God, and he will provide for them, if they serve
him; and the best foundation of riches and of a long and prosperous race is to
bring up their children in the knowledge and fear of him; for if God build
with them their houses will stand. Many poor children who have been left
without parents have prospered better with the blessing of God, then others
have done with large revenues left them. Finally parents must be most of all
careful that they give noe ill example to their children; this being that upon
which the good or evil of the whole world very much depends; even as the
goodness of the branches depends of the root, and bole of the tree. Otherwise
occasion is given for children to learn their parents vices, and to teach them
to their children again, and so vice goes from generation to generation by
the ill example of parents; and as the links of a chain are drawn by one
another, and fall one after another; so fathers draw their children down into
sin after them, that for many generations they come in the end to meet all
in hell I et parents and children often read the book of Toby: they have
there an example of a good father and of a good son, and God blessing them
both.

THE FIFTH COMMANDMENT.
THOU shall not kill. By which we see that this as all other places of
scripture has its propper sense. For as S. Aug. de ciu. c. 20. says, we are
not forbidden here to kill meat for our sustenance, nor to kill men in our
own defense, as in a just war, or for execution of justice upon malefactors.
Because nature allowing and requiring these things, God does not disallow of
them. Some also by particular inspiration of God have lawfully killed; as
Moses who although he were the mildest man in the world, yet when he saw an
infidel heathen beating one of the people of God, moved with a holy zeal he
killed him, and buried him in the sand. This was lawful as being by divine
inspiration in sign of future mysterys. Exodus 32.
So when he saw the people committing of idolatry he joined unto him those
that were of our Lord, the Levites, and sent them to kill the idolatrous
people: and they returning with the slaughter of about three thousand men, he
commended them saying you have consecrated your hands this day to our Lord that
blessing may begiuen to you. Phinees also moved with the like zeal, Nu. 5.
killed the two fornicators in their wicked act, and auerted the wrath of God
by it. God the author of the Commandments dispensed then in the keeping of
them, and so they were not formally broken.

That which is forbidden here is to kill upon private authority and not only
to kill; Anger.
but also all actions of anger, by which the peaceable conversation of men is
disturbed. Mat. 5.
You have heard (says Christ) how it was said of old thou shall not kill and
who so kills shall be in danger of judgment but I say to you that whosoever
is angry with his brother shall be in danger of judgment and whosoever shall
say to his brother Raca shall be in danger of Council. And whosoever shall say
thou fool shall be guilty of the hell of fire. By which we are taught the
right understanding of this Commandment to be, not only to prohibit killing,
but also to be inwardly angry, or to make outward shows, or to give words of
anger.

Of all the sins which are committed by men none are so horrible to nature
as the sins of blood: Is. 8.
and to show how great a sin it is to kill, Christ would call the devil a
mankiller from the beginning: because the malice and evil of murder could not
be better expressed then by putting it and the devil together, and making him
the author of it. Cain was the first mankiller amongst men, who inticeing his
brother into the fields, roze up against him and killed him. And presently he
was struck with such a horror at his crime, that he despaired of mercy, and
like a desperate reprobate went hanging down his head, thinking that every one
that saw him would kill him and cried: Genesis 4.
Lo now thou do cast, me out this day from the face of the earth and from
thy face I shall be hid, and I shall be a vagabonde and fugitive upon earth:
every one therefore that finds me shall kill me. And God to increase this
horror of murder in us, both in the law of nature, and of Moses prohibited
the eating of blood. Lou. 17.
Nay they were not so much as to let blood to ly open upon the ground, but to
cover it. And even dumb beasts that could not sin were to loose their lives
if they killed any man. All this was that men should abhor the sin of
murder; and not be over bloody then, when the true worship of God was
maintained rather by force, and by shedding of their enemies blood, then
propagated by patience, as now it is in the faith of Christ.

Here enter those ignominious single combats, of which the Council of Trent
has these words. That the detestable use of Duells contrived by the devil to
a bloody death of the body, and destruction of the soul, may be quite banished
out of the Christian world. In which young men, who understand not what
belongs to wisdom and true glory, meet in the field to wound, tear, and
kill one another like madd dogs. And after their miserable deaths they become
infamous to posterity, purt out of the Communion of Saints, both of the
militant and triumphant Church of God, and deprived of christian burial, to ly
like dogs in the fields. That the words of the Apocal. 22. are fully verifyed
in them. Without are dogs sorcerers and murderers. There is a book here newly
published called LA DESTRVCTION DE DVEL; in which is showed how contrary to
reason and true christian honor D^^els are: and in which is declared how that
the Marshals of France, and diverse Gentlemen of quality have protested against
them, and promised that they will never regard any challenge, nor fight a duel
upon any occasion of injury whatsoever.

An heroical and christian like mind guided by virtue and discretion, will
make iniurys honorable through patience: which is the most propper virtue and
honor of christians. Christ was borne patient, lived a patient life, and at
his death his patience was most eminently great, more then we can understand.
He founded his Church first in his own sufferings, and then in those of his
Apostles after him, and after them he enlarged it by the patience of many
martyrs, and so he still continues and preserves it. And therefore christians
ought very much to flourish and excel in this virtue, loving their neighbor,
and bearing with one another falts. Christ called his disciples brethren,
because he would have them to be as brethren in love and union of heart. And it
was the first name which christians had to be called the brethren, even before
they were called christians: for then as the Evangelist declares the multitude
of believers had one heart and one soul. Act. 4.
And so great was the love of christians in the primitive Church, that their
very enemies admiring at it, Apol. 36.
according to Tertullian used to say see how they love and are ready even to die
for one another. The peaceable and mild of heart are the temple of the Holy
Ghost, who dwells in the house of peace: the peevish and malicious of heart
are of the devils spirit; and the more their anger and malice increases the
liker they grow to him. The best is to foresee the occasions and to prevent
them.

We have many examples of the punishments of anger, and to commend patience to
us. Col. 7. c. 27.
Cassian records how that the abbot Moses was possessed by the devil, for
one small impatience by which he sinned. Sermon. 15. Quadrag.
But it was a terrible sight that which S. Bernardin as an eye witness reports
of a woman in a great press of people who by chance thrown down by a young
man, became so mad with anger that the man falling down on his knees to
ask forgiveness of her, and she denying it, in the sight of all was carried
away by the devil.

The example of the Priest Paphnutius was admirable in this, even in his youth,
Cas. coll. 18. c. 15.
who living in the wilderness in great sanctity of life, one of the brethren out
of envy to him, to blemish his good name, took occasion on the Sunday, when
all was at the Church, to go into his cell, and to leave there a book hidden;
and coming presently to the Church; as soon as service was done he complained
publicly that some had stolen his book from him. At which all being stricken
with admiration, as a strange and unusual thing amongst them; he that had
hidd it desired that before any stirred out of the Church, some faithful
persons might be sent to search in the cells of every one for it. Some of the
auncienter Monks being sent, found it in the cell of Paphnutius hidden amongst
the baskets and frailes which he made. At which the holy young man stood a long
time astonished neither daring to confess nor to deny it. But in the end he
desired them to impose what punishment they pleased upon him: and going forth
he afflicted himself with many tears, and with two weeks fast, absteining
also from holy Communion; and then prostrating himself at the threshold of the
Church he asked pardon. But it pleased God to to declare the innocence of his
servant: for his enemy was forced to bewray himself, the devil possessing and
pitifully vexing him. And when none could help him he was dispossessed by
Paphnutius his prayers. Remedys against anger.


Authors have praescribed many means for patience and remedys against anger;
but they may all be reduced unto this, that we procure in our hearts a great
love of God, and apprehension of his goodness; Io. 1.4.
for then we shall love our neighbor for his sake. If any man (says S. John)
shall say I love God, and hates his neighbor, he is a liar. When therefore we
are at any time provoked unto anger, let us presently make an act of the divine
love, and think that we see the living image of God in the face of him that
provoke us; and although he abuse that image in himself, by then provoking
us; yet God, whose image he is, is still the same, as lovely and beautiful as
before; Genesis 9.
and therefore I will not abuse his image, nor be angry at it. Whosoever shall
shed man's blood his blood shall be shed: for to the image of God man was made.
Secondly we may consider our selves as the soldiers of Christ then called out
to fight, and that the arms of his soldiers are patience; without which we
can by noe means get victory; the enemies of Christ being armed with
impatience. If we saw two companys, the one of them following of Christ for
their captain, the others urged and driven on by the devil, which side would
we take? the one armed with patience and meekenes toward the other, the other
with rage and malice against them. Behold in the one their pale faces, staring
eyes, foming mouths, and their whole bodies swelling with the devils poison; who
clappeth his hands and urges them to more and more anger. Behold on the
otherside the grave and mild countenances of the soldiers of Christ, shining
like the sun all this while on their enemies, and laboring to pacify them;
Christ as their captain exhorting them still to persevere in patience. Prou. 16.
Which of these would we rather prefer? a patient man is better (says the
holy Proverb) then a strong one, and he that over rules his mind then the
ouerthrower of cittys. Thirdly we may consider the reward and blessing which
the patient man gett's; God then presently blesses him, and opening and
enlarging his heart to receive more and more favors of him, in the end he goes
away with the crown of victory. Fourthly we may consider the good which we may
do to others by the example of our patience; our very enemy will be edifyed at
it, and although for the present he perceive not the grace of thy good example;
yet with in a while he will see it, and be sorry for his falt: and thou shall
be better satisfied with this, then if thou had spitte in his face, or taken
whatsoever revenge of him. Fifthly we may consider the many hurts which are
endangered when men are blinded with passion and want reason to guide
themselves. A man that were to run a race in a craggy place full of pitts and
praecipices, with his eyes blindfolded, were he not in manifest danger to fall
and kill himself: so are men in their passion, they go not leasurely; but
run headlong, and being blinded in their understandings, Io. 1.2.
what can be expected: but ruin to them? He that hates his brother is in
darkness (says S. John) because darkness has blinded his eyes. Many great
evils have ensued of passionate and cross answers, which might have been
prevented with a mild word spoken in time. Lastly we may consider how that all
afflictions are sent of God, and come not by chance but for our trial and
good: Tob. 12.
so the Angel comforted Toby saying, it was necessary that temptation should
prove thee; and therefore holy Job said, that God had taken his goods, and had
stricken him, and he blessed God for it. We will then be contented with them,
and make them welcome as the messengers of God.

THE SIXTH COMMANDMENT.
THOU shall not commit adultery. As there is not any thing which married
folks may challenge more justly of one another, then love and fidelity; so
there is nothing which they ought to disdain more then adultery, by which that
trust and fidelity is broken betwixt them. When they were married they
betrothed themselves to each other, promising perpetual love, and everlasting
loyalty, as two in one body, and one heart. This promise of loyalty which was
then solemnly made betwixt them, sealed by a Sacrament, and delivered into the
hands of God, is most treacherously violated by adultery. Let therefore those
that are married understand the greeuousnes of this sin, as quite opposite
to the perfection of their state, and signification there of; which is the
inseparable love and union of Christ with the Catholic Church.

In this Commandment all carnal sins are understood as forbidden by the
name of adultery. Fornication which is with a single person, Deslouring which
is with a virgin, Incest which is with ones own kindred, Sacrilege with a
sacred person. All which are of several kinds and higher malice, and therefore
to be destinguished, and particularly expressed in confession. Carnal sins
are communely called in English Beastly sins; and they may well be so
called: for by them especially, men become like unto beasts, following only
their own appetite and sensuality which is most sordid and brutish And
although these beastly sins at first be pursued with terrors and remorse of
conscience; yet if they be often committed, and not presently repented for,
they make men to become even quite Brutish without any regard of God: that the
Prophet says, fornication and drunkenness take away the heart. Ose. 4.
And therefore this sin has been most exemplarly punished. The whole tribe of
Benjamin was almost utterly destroyed in punishment of one carnal sin. Iud.
20.
Two of that tribe committing adultery with another man's wife; the rest of the
tribes conceived such a disdain at it, that they all roze up in batle to be
revenged of them. And God permitted that the tribe of Benjamin should get the
better at first, but it was to encourage them but to their own ruin; they
being overthrown in the end, and such a slaughter made of them, that of five
and twenty thousand and seven hundred valiant warriars, six hundred only were
left alive, who saved themselves in the rocks: and the remains of the city
even from men unto beasts were delivered to the sword, and all the cittys and
villages of Benjamin were consumed with fire, for this one sin.

We have the virtue of chastity by many examples commended unto us, especially
in the law of grace. First the Son of God himself taking the nature of man
would make choice of a virgin to be conceived and borne of, to be most
conversant all his life time with, would keep virginity himself, would be
baptized by S. John Baptist a virgin, would chose a virgin for his beloved
disciple, and at his death would commend his own mother to that virgin to be
as his mother, and him unto her to be as her son. His Apostles observed
chastity and commended it to their disciples to be observed by them. And we
have many examples of holy men and women that have followed them in it both in
the primitive times, and ever since, sufficient to inflame the hearts of good
Catholics with the love of it, and to prove chastity to be a virtue not so
hard to be obtained, as some unclean spirits of these latter times would
persuade the world. Diverse holy men have kept continent from their wives and
lived not as their husbands, but as their brothers; Not in sensible but
invincible by temptations of carnality, which through care and vigilance they
still overcame.

Cassianus reports of John the Abbot that a lay man entering whilst he was in
hand with a posessed person; the devil, Cass. coll. 14. c. 7.
whom he could by noe means drive out, went out of himself at the coming in
of that man. The abbot admiring how the layman should have that virtue, was
given to understand, that he having desired to enter into religion, and being
forced by his parents to marry against his will, had kept his virginity in
marriage for eleauen years: at which he then confessed that it was noe
marvel that the spirit of impurity could not endure the presence of such a
man. S. Greg l 4. Dial. c. 11.
Gregory relates of a certain married man that being made priest became such
a stranger to his wife, that upon noe occasion for any necessity whatsoever he
would permit her to come near him: and having passed forty years as it were
unacquainted with her, she came to see him at his death, and approaching with
her care toward his face, to perceive by his breathing whether there were any
life in him; although he seemed to be dead, yet he had life enough to feel her
approaching, and with all the strength that he had he cried out away with the
woman: for the fire is noe yet quite extinguished in me, S. Bernard being
tempted by a lewd woman to sin, cried out against her, as against a theife,
or a murderer. S. Thomas of Aquine seeing such another to enter into the
chamber to him, catched hold of a fire brand, and drove her away with it: and
presently betaking himself to his prayers he fell a sleep, and had a vision
in which the Angels girded him with a girdle; after which time he was never
troubled with carnal suggestions. Such is the reward which God gives to his
servants for one such combat valiantly maintained, and victory atheiued by
them. But what shall we say of that champion of chastity whom S. Hierome
mentions epist. de vita Pauli: Who having overcome many cruel torments his
enemies resolved at last to assalt him by fair means, and to attempt him by
carnal sins. They carried him into a sweet and pleasant garden, laid him
there in a bed of feathers, strowed with roses, and delicious flowers, near
unto a riuerside; where the beauty of the place, fresh air, and pleasant noise
of the river might inuit him to delight: and that he should not fly the
temptation they bound him down with soft skarfes of silk; and being thus
bound they sent unto him, a shameless harlot to tempt him. O God free thy
servant in this excess of temptation. The wicked woman beginning to allure by
such means as she knew, and by such as the devil would then suggest to her,
the young man whose will was still free to resist sin, bate of his own tongue
and spitted it out at the harlots face, that she might be terrifyed at the
sight of his blood, and he with that pain might overcome the pleasure.

How many examples have we also in the weaker sex, who by the grace of God
have been strengthened above their nature in defense of chastity? some
coniugal, some vidual, and some virginal. Dan. 13.
It is better for me (says Susanna) without the act to fall into your hands
then to sin in the sight of God Intending to loose her life: and then crying
out against the vicious old men that tempted her, God heard her cry, affrighted
them, saved her from sin, and from death afterward by a miracle. Judith
adorned with beauty, youth, and riches, kept her chastity in widdowhood, and
was therefore chozen of God to be the instrument of the peoples safety; killing
Holofernes with her own hands, and putting his mighty army to flight. So that
the Holy Ghost has left this commendation of her. Iud. 3.
Thy heart was strengthened because thou have loved chastity, and after thy
husband thou have not known another; therefore the hand of our Lord has
strengthened thee, and therefore shall thou be blessed for ever. S. Cecily
seeing that she could not avoid marriage, Sur. to. 6.
said unto her husband on the day that they were married, Valerianus I have now
a secret to tell thee, I am in the custody of an Angel, who has charge of my
virginity; take heed therefore that thou attempt nothing against me by which
thou may incur the divine wrath: and he desiring to be certifyed of the
truth, was made worthy to see the Angel that kept her, and was confirmed in
the faith of Christ by it; and became a martyr. To relate the examples of
chastity in the Saints, and the punishments of carnal sins on the contrary,
were never to make an end. Murderers, and fornicators (says God from his
throne) their part shall be in the poole burning with fire and brimstone, which
is the second death.

The roots of carnality are sloth and gluttony, especially drunkenness. And
the remedys against it are corporal austeritys, moderate pains taking, Apoe.
21.
and especially reading of good books, and studying. Love literal studyes
(says S. Hierome) and shou shall not love the vices of the flesh. But in time
of actual temptation the best is presently to fly the occasion, and to keep
out of it as long as the temptation lasts: and if it continue still, I think
it the best not to stand repeating of many acts, and purposes contrary to it;
but having once for ever detested it in our hearts, to slight it, and to think
that we will be contented with such thoughts, and will have them willingly as
long as it shall please God, without repining; and then to divert ourselves by
some good employment: and if we be by ourselves alone, or at our prayers to
stand straight up on our feet, and to keep our selves quietly in that
posture keeping our hearts firmly, Job. 31.
and earnestly fixed upon the love of God. I have made a covenant with mine
eyes that I would not so much as think of a virgin. says holy Job. Women
must be careful to give noe occasion as some do, who have but little scruple
of it. As for their attire it is well when it is with decency, and according to
their rank. That which the Apostle advises them not to adorn themselves in
plated hair or gold or precious stones or gorgeous apparel, Tim. 1.2.
is to be understood when they are used without order, and with excess, or to
an evil end.

THE SEVENTH COMMANDMENT.
THOU shall not steal. There are three kinds of temporal goods possessed by
us: Life, Honor, and riches: and these three kinds of goods are defended by
three Commandments: Thou shall not kill, thou shall not commit adultery,
thou shall not steal. In the first life, in the second honor, and in the
third our riches are defended from enemies. All kind of unlawful taking away of
our neighbors riches is forbidden in this Commandment: whether it be by
theeuery, which is a surreptitious and private taking away; or by robbery that
is by violence and force, or by sacrilege, which is when sacred things are
taken: which is the greatest sin against this Commandment, as redounding
more nearly, and immediately to God.

By the sin of stealing the virtue of justice which gives every man his own
is violated, and the grounds of all order and of humane conversation is taken
away; to wit that every one may have and enjoy his own. And therefore the
Apostle says that thieves shall not possess the kingdom of God. Cor. 1.6
Besides many evils are secondarily caused by it: hatred, enmitys, suspicions,
rash judgments, quarrels, and murders: and sometimes the innocent are condemned
for the guilty, and loose their lives, good name, and all their temporal goods
of this world, for another mansinne. Besides all this there is another burden
which lies heavy upon thieves; to wit the obligation which they have of
restitution: because it is not only unlawful to take, but also to keep our
neighbors goods from him, or to hinder his right, Ep. 54. ad Maccd.
or just profit. S Augustine the sin is not forgiven if restitution be not
made. That is if it be not made in due time. And this restitution being many
times hard and sometimes impossible to be made, and allwais against their
wills, they hardly resolve to amend, and seldom come to true repentance,
except they come to the gallows, which is a great mercy of God toward some.
This obligation of restoring was perhaps that which the Prophet would signify
in thieves, when he said, Abac. 2.
woe to him that multiplyeth things not his own, how long also does he
aggrauate against himself thick clay? as one, that is fallen into a deep
pudle, or quagmire, sinketh still deeper and deeper, and draws more and more
clay, and mire unto him, that in the end he is choked and drowned in it; so
thieves the more they steal, the more restitution they draw to themselves to
be made, that in the end they are dishartened to think of it, and so go on
and die in their sin.

This Commandment is many ways broken: for not only those that steal
themselves, but also all those that participate with them, or harbor, or
countenance them, sin against it. It is also broken by those that use any
deceit in words, or deeds, or any fraudulent means in buying, and selling, as
not to sell good wares, or not to give good weight, or good measure. A
deceitful balance is abomination before God: Prou. 11.
and an equal weight is his will says the holy proverb. Tradesmen also and
those that being hired neglect their work, and perform not a sufficient days
work, offend against this Commandment, as taking that which they have not
duly deserved. Those also are guilty of this sin that by sleights, and lies,
wrest rewards from others, and those that receive stipends for offices, which
they duly perform not.

There are also many kinds of robbery. It is an abominable robbery that which
is done by the rich against the poor by unjust extorsions, forced exactions,
or hindering any way by their awefullnes, and power, that they dare not ask or
can not get their own of them Must the poor man that has wrought hard all
day go supperlesse to bed through their covetousness? Go too now you rich
men (says S. John) weep howling in your miserys which shall come to you. Ia.
5.
Your riches are corrupt and your garments are eaten of moths. Your gold and
syluar is rusted. And their rust shall be for a testimony to you. And shall
eat your flesh as sire. You have stored to your selves wrath in the last
days. And presently he gives the cause saying, behold the hyre of the
workmen that have reaped your feilds which is defrauded by you cries: and
their cry has entered into the ears of the Lord of Sahaoth. You have made
merry upon the earth: and in riotousnes you have nourished your hearts in the
day of slaughter. You have presented and slain the just one. And he resisted
you not. Those that pay not their tithes break this Commandment. Vserers also
who by unjust exactions oppress others, spinning by little and little their very
bowels from them, by taking moneys or other profits only for loan, contrary
to the command of Christ, Luc. 6.
do good and lend hoping for nothing there by. Judges also who for bribes sell
to the rich the causes of poor men. Those also that pay not their debts, but
by prolonging defraude their creditors Of these the holy king. The sinner shall
borrow and not pay. Psalm. 36.
And those who seize presently upon their pledges, if they be not redeemed just
at the appointed time. Those also that get the sail of corn or other
commoditys into their own hands, to raize the rates of them; which is called
Monopoly. He that hides corn shall be cursed among the peoples: Prou. 11.
but blessing upon the head of those that sell. All these are a kind of
robbers, and break this Commandment.

And because robbers as well as thecues are bound to restitution, it is
necessary to declare who they are that have this obligation of restitution.
These are in the first place those that rob, or steal, and those that
command them to do so; for they are the causes and authors of their sin,
and the worst of all kinds of thieves. Secondly those who having not the power
to command, persuade others to it. Thirdly those that consent. Fourthly those
that participate of the profit (if that may be called a profit which is
unjustly gotten.) Fifthly those that might and ought to have hindered, and did
not. Sixthly those who conceal, dissembling themselves not to know of it, when
they ought to speak. Lastly those that assist, harbor, or any way protect
thieves. All these are inuolued in their sin, and are bound to restitution,
as the thieves themselves.

That which is observed of this base and contemptible sin of theeuery, is
that it takes away the truth and fidelity of those that are addicted to it;
thieves being for the most part full of lies and deceit. For by much deceiving
they get a custom to deceive, and are the most perfidious of all men,
betraying even their best friends if it serve to their purpose. So Judas was
first a thief stealing from Christ and the Apostles. And then became a
traitor to his master.

The roots of this sin are couetousuesse and idleness. Some steal of
covetousness only when they have noe need: others of idleness because they will
not work. And these for all their stealing are still needy, and in misery; and
yet will hazard their lives, and good names, to live in want when they might
follow many other honest courses in which they might live out of hazard, and in
more plenty. S. Dial. l. 3. c 26.
Gregory relates how that Menas a poor hermit having nothing but some be
hiues to lives on; there came a robber into those parts who being admonished
not to meddle with the hermits bees, nevertheless he spared them not. Esa. 33.
But God who by his Prophet has threatened woe be to thee that do rob
shall not thou also be robbed? permitted the devil to take possession of his
body and grievously to vex him for it.

The remedys against this sin are to do alms deeds, that giving something
of their own for Gods sake, they may keep their heart open to their neighbor,
and free from the desire of his goods. Let them remember the words of the
Apostle, Tim 1.6.
They that will be made rich fall into the snare of the devil. And let them
never forgette that general rule of Christ, Mat. 7.
all things whatsoever you will that men do to you, do you also to them. For
this is the law and the Prophets.

THE EIGHT COMMANDMENT.
THOU shall not bear false witness against thy neighbor. In the former
Commandments of this table the sins, that are committed by work, are
forbidden, in this we are forbidden to sin by word. But that which is chiefly
forbidden here, is to give false testimony in judgment against our neighbor,
as being most injurious and hurtful to him; in that it is avouched by an oath,
in which God stands as witness, and against which the judge can not except
but by evident proofs, or by the insufficiency of witnesses. But not only
false testimony in judgment; but also out of judgment is here forbidden: for in
the book of Leuiticus where the Commandments are repeated over again, the
words are more general You shall not ly, neither shall any man deceive his
neighbor. Leu. 19.
By which it appears that all kind of lies, detractions deceitful, and
injurious words are here forbidden.

That which was said in the former Commandment against thieves may be applied
here to detractors and liars who are thieves in their kind; in that they take
away the good name of their neighbor; and so much worse then thieves, by how
much his good name is more precious then his riches; and are therefore bound to
restitution more then thieves. The devil when he lies speaks of his own
(says Christ) because he is a liar and the father thereof who stood not in
verity; Io. 8.
but falling himself into lies, draws all he can after him, to learn to ly.
What can there be more filthy and base then, as S. James says, with the same
tongue to bliss and to curse God? we say our prayers and bless God, and
within a while we make some ly, and so curse him. Liars are by S. Paul
expressly excluded from the kingdom of heaven. Cor. 1.6.
And the psalmist asking of God Lord who shall dwell in thy tabernacle? Ps. 14.
answers presently he that speaks the truth in his heart, that has not done
guile in his tongue. Yet these are the commune diseases and plagues of the
world. Liars and detractors are as the frogs of Egypt spread all over: every
house, and chamber is full of them, bedds and tables are hanted by them, and
all conversation is pestered with this base sin of noting the imperfections,
and blemishing the good names of others: by which quarrels are bred, and false
accusations ensue amongst steinds and neighbors. Behold (says S. Ia. 5.
lames) how much fire what a great wood it^nk^^di^h. And the tongue is a fire a
whole world of iniquity An unquiet enill full of deadly poison. If any man
offend not in word this is a perfect man.

How careful have the Saints of God been in the custody of their tongues? some
of them are read to have passed whole years without once speaking to any; that
by continual silence they might learn either to speak well, or to hold their
peace. S. Thomas of Aquine when he studied in his youth, because he was of few
words, his fellow scholars used to call him the dumb ox; but in his
disputing he showed such wit that his master used to say that one day the voice
of that dumb ox would be heard alowd, and admired at in the world. And so it
is, he having now purchased the title of Angelical Doctor, Sur. to. 3.
and is esteemed the Prince and Master of all Divines. S. Romualdus founder of
the order of the Camaldulenses living solitary in the mountains by seven
years silence obtained the understanding of the psalms. In reg. Monach c. 22.
And S. Hierome writing of the institution of virgins to Eustochium, affirms
that he had met with many in the wilderness, that for seven years had never
spoken to any man. O how far were these saints from detracting, and lying, or
from flattering to please others? which is another baseness of the tongue,
commune even with those of more honor. The Prophet Michas has given us an
example how to speak when it is necessary to great personages. Reg. 3.22.
The two kings Achab and Iosaphat going out with their armies against the king
of Syria, consulted him concerning the event of the wars, and when the false
Prophets had lied and flattered them with good success, he spoke the truth
foretelling the overthrow of the Israelites, and the death of Achab in his own
hearing: and although he received a box on the ear for it by Sedechias, and
was cast into prison by Achab; yet the truth in the end made good it self; and
that which he said proouing to be true, those that had injured him were slain
in the batle, and he was set at liberty. Reg. 4.5.
Giesi the servant of Elizeus was presently struck with leprosy, for telling a
ly to his master: Act. 5.
and Ananias and Saphira were forth with struck dead for lying to S. Peter.

But although it be unlawful to ly as being contrary to the divine verity; yet
it is not a sin to conceal the truth in our speech: for we are not bound to
speak always according to the meaning of those, who have noe authority over
us, and whom we need not to acquaint with the truth of those things which are
more convenient to be concealed from them. Of this we have many examples in the
Scriptures, Genesis 20. Genesis 42.
as when Abraham said that Sara his wife was his sister for fear of a greater
hurt. And as Joseph objected to his brethren that they came as spies, and
casting them into prison swore by the health of Pharao that they should not be
set at liberty, unless they would cause their youngest brother who was at home to
be brought to him, as though to try whether they were spies or no: and yet he
set them all but one at liberty. Then again he put a silver cup into their
sacks to accuse them of theft all which was done for their greater good. Nay
our blessed Savior himself coming to Emaus with the two disciples made
semblance (says the Evangelist) to go further: Luc. 24.
although he desired to be invited in by them. It was very gracious that which
S. Ep. ad Rust.
Hierome relates of a young man. I will speak, says he that which I saw my
self in Egypt. There was in the Monastery a certain Grecian youth, who was
very much troubled with temptations of the flesh; and having conferred with his
Superior about them, when he was almost desperate of remedy, his Superior
devised how to free him from such thoughts. He commanded a certain grave
person to affront and abuse him by evil words, and as soon as he had done, to
come first, and to make his complaint against him. Witnesses also being called,
they all spoke against the young man. At which he was so much perplexed that he
never ceased to complain to himself, having none to take his part, but only
that his Superior would seem sometimes, as it is were to defend him: and
having permitted him to pass a whole year in this perplexity, and vexation of
mind he asked him then how he felt himself for carnal temptations. Father
(quoth he) I am weary of my life, and am I likely to take any pleasure in those
thoughts? Was it not now better for the Superior to use this kind of pious
fiction to divert him from carnality, then to have let him run into hell by
it? Such kind of speeches are not then lies or deceitful aequiuocations; yet
to make them lawful they must be used in necessary circumstances; that they be
required either for some good end, or to prevent some greater evil.

But slandering and rash judgments are greater sins of the tongue. Deus. 19.
The law of Moses commanded that false witnesses should undergo the
punishment due to the same crime, of which they accused others. If this were
put in practice now a days, how often should we be punished? and what
punishments should we undergo who are so ready upon all occasions to censure
falsely of others, making ourselves witnesses before we be called. Nay we can
not find in our hearts to give due praise even to that which is well done; but
either we say that it was not so well as thus or thus, or cls we set some
evil character upon it: Mat. 16.
as Judas Iscariotes who when Christ was anointed he called the ointment,
Perdition, and wast, saying, whereto is this wast? this might have have been
sold for much, and given to the poor. So these malicious censurers turn day
into night, and light into darkness. The servants of God would rather suspect,
and mistrust their own senses, in that which they heard or saw, then they
would judge evil of their neighbor by it; because they thought they could
never be certain of it. The devil using all his art to raise slanders and
detractions against others, being read to have sinned in the shapes of holy men
to defame them.

The remedys against this sin are to procure in ourselves a great love of
God: for so we shall love our neighbor, and speak well of him for God sake.
Secondly it will be good to get a custom of speaking well of others, by
taking occasion sometimes to commend, that which we see whorty of commendation
in them. Thirdly, when occasion happens that we must needs speak of our
neighbors falts to do it with an inward pity, without the desire of hurting
them, hating nothing but the sin which they committed.

THE NINTH COMMANDMENT.
THOU shall not desire thy neighbors wife. Exodus 20.
In the book of Exodus, where the substance only of the ten Commandments is
given in brief, Deuteronomy. 5.
the two last commandments are put together thus. Thou shall not covet the
house of thy neighbor: neither shall thou desire his wife, nor servant, nor
handmaid, nor ox, nor ass, nor any thing that is his. But in the book of
Deuteronomy where they are delivered more destinctly, and at large, they are
plane liar destinguished in these words, Mat 5.
Thou shall not covet thy neighbors wife, nor house, nor field, nor man
servant, nor woman servant, nor ox, nor ass, nor all things that are his.
Where we see the concupiscence of the flesh first forbidden, and then the
concupiscence of our neighbors goods: and so the Catholic Church commonly
understands the desire of our neighbors wife to be forbidden in the ninth,
and the desire of his goods to be prohibited in the tenth Commandment: so
that as the act of adultery, and the act of theft are forbidden in two destinct
commandments, to wir in the sixth and the seventh, as being two destinct
kinds of sin in act; so the desire and consent unto adultery, and the
desire and consent unto theeuery are forbidden also by two distinct
Commandments, as being two several kinds of sins, and having noe more
connection in desire, then adultery and theeuery have in act.

This Commandment therefore correspondeth to the sixth, and forbids that in
desire, which it did in act: and gives to understand, that not only evil
deeds and words; but also evil desires are unlawful. It was an error amongst
the Jews to think that the desire or consent unto sin was noe sin, so
that it were not performed in work: but this error is confuted by these two
last Commandments, and by the words of our Savior, it was said of old, Mat. 5.
thou shall not committee adultery. But I say unto you who soever shall see a
woman to lust after her has already committed adultery with her in his heart.
This is the difference betwixt divine and humane Laws, that the divine Law can
bind our interior thoughts: and humane laws can bind only our exterior
actions. Because men not seeing the intention can not judge of it; but God who
sees our thoughts can bind our intentions; because he can judge of them, and
can convince us, and condemn us for them, even by our own conscience. Man
sees those things whith appear, Reg. 1.16.
but our Lord beholds the heart. And so he can forbid, as here he does, the
desire and inward consent unto adultery.

The sins of the mind are commonly called the sins of concupiscence: and
it is necessary to declare what concupiscence is. Concupiscence is the natural
inclination and appetite which we have of pleasant and delightsome things. And
this concupiscence in itself is noe sin, but is indifferent unto good or
evil; and is actually good when it prosecuteth good and lawful deligts, and
is actually evil when it desires evil and unlawful delights. Ps. 118.
It was a good concupiscence in King David when he sang: Concupiuit anima mea
desiderare iustificationes tuas omni tempore, My soul has coueted to desire
thy iustifications at all time. It was an evil concupiscence in him, and
against this commandment, when he coueted another man's wife. It is a good
concupiscence to desire good to our neighbor; it is an evil concupiscence,
and against the next commandment to desire his goods from him. Our
concupiscence in it self, and by nature is good, but it is made evil by
desiring evil delights.

Saint Gregory has observed certain degrees, or as it were steps in the
sins of the mind First their is Suggestion. Secondly, Delectation, and
thirdly, Consent. Suggestion is when the sin is suggested and proposed to the
mind: and this is no sin, as being caused by the natural species and phancys
only, before the operation of the will Delectation is the delight which
follows of those suggestions: which if it be only natural and unwillingly,
it is noe sin; but if it be any way voluntary, as caused of purpose, or not
sufficiently resisted, then there is some sin in it; because there is some
kind of consent. Finally sin is completed in the will and consent. Every one
(says S. James) is tempted of his own concupiscence abstracted and allured.
Afterward concupiscence when it has conceived, bringethforth sin. But sin
when it is consummated generateth death. That is wear tempted by our own
appetite, and when we give way to our appetite tempting us to that which is
unlawful, we bringforth sin, and by sin we incur eternal death.

By this Commandment forbidding the desire of adultery all unlawful desires
of the flesh are understood. The remedys against them are as in the sixth
Commandment against adultery: to use corporal austerity, moderate pains,
reading of good books, and to fly the occasion of such sins; and in time of
temptation to make presently an act of detestation of them, and then to divert
ourselves by some other employment; and if for all this the temptation still
continue, to be content to have it, as long as it shall please God.

THE TENTH COMMANDMENT.
THOU shall not covet thy neighbors goods. By this Commandment we are
forbidden the desire of unlawful profit: and although by house (which is in
the words of this Commandment at large) all kind of temporal riches be
understood sometimes in the Scriptures, Exo. 1.
and all kind of wordly prosperity; as where it is said that God built the
midwiues of Egypt houses. That is prospered them with worldly blessings; yet
he would here specify some particular goods of our neighbor, the more to auert
us from coveting any of them. And because all the sins of the mind proceed
from the desire, either of unlawful pleasure, or of unlawful profit;
therefore they may all be understood as forbidden by one of these two
Commandments, in the first of which the desire of unlawful pleasure; in the
second the desire of unlawful profit is prohibited; and therefore there needed
no commandment corresponding to the fifth to forbid the desire of killing;
because it is included in one of those two Commandments.

Coueteousnes of goods is that which is forbidden here, Tim. 1.6.
which the Apostle calls the root of all evils. And in this it may be
esteemed the basest of all sins, that riches are the basest of temporal
felicitys; yet it is a marvel to see how wretchedly some are affected to this
sin; who have so set their hearts on riches, that they would live as it
seems of the very thought of them, and never use them: they pass many a
hungry day and want many things which they might have, because they will be
covetous, and have riches they know not what for: but still the more they have,
the more they would have, their avarice increasing like the thirst of one in a
dropsy, that the more they drink, the more their disease increases, and their
desire of drink. These ought to consider that riches are the creatures of God
ordained for use, and if they be not used they are abused, and the order is
perverted, which God ordained in the creation of them.

Some sin by excess in the contrary, that they will not think nor provide
how to live, but spend as long as they have any thing, and then they pass on a
slothful and careless life; choosing rather (as the common saying is) hungar
with ease, then plenty with pains taking. These must consider that God has
provided sufficiently for them, and if they will needs contemn the providence
of God and spend all, then they must use their limbs to live by: and that
every man must live of his own care and labor, in his calling: The rich have
a more careful and less painful life; the poorer as they have less care,
so they have more pains to take. And if they be able they must work, and not
think any more idly and loosely to depend of others then others think to
depend of them. These sin by too much neglect of riches, as they are good;
the covetous sin by too much love of that which is base in riches.

The remedy of covetousness is to stir up in our selves an ardent love of God,
that we love him in our riches, and them not for themselves, but for his sake;
and to do sometimes some deeds of charity for this end, that we may keep our
hearts allways free from the love of riches, and open to the love of God and of
our neighbor. O that rich men would remember those words which King David
sang, ^s. 61.
If riches abound set not your heart upon them. They might desire riches, have
riches, and keep them, if they would but keep their hearts of them, and use
them as God has ordained them to be used. David performed himself that which
in this he commended to others; who although he were guilty of some other
sins; yet he is not noted at any time to have set his heart on riches, when
they abounded with him, as a king in plenty of all things. He was a very
charitable man, gave much to the building of a temple to God; by which it
appears that he set his heart on almesdeeds, and doing works of charity, and
not upon riches: and if all rich men would do so, they might be happy and
blessed in their riches.

You have now the ten Commandments declared: the Commandments not of any king
or superior upon earth, but of God the maker of heaven and earth; and who gave
these Commandments after such a terrible manner to the Israelits, that as you
have heard, they were almost killed with fear at the receiving of them;
because they were a hard hearted people and as stubborn and peruersed children
were to be governed with the sight of the rod. But we that live in the law of
Christ, which is the law of clemency and grace, and in which we have such an
example of the love of God in the mystery of the incarnation and passion of the
son of God, we ought to be drawn by love to obey him, who entreating and
exhorting to keep his Commandments demands, If you love me keep my
Commandments. Io. 14.
And a little after he that has my Commandments, and keeps them: he it is
that loves me. We profess ourselves to be christians that is as the
disciples, servants, soldiers, and spouses of Jesus Christ to love him; and we
follow obey, sight for, and adulterate with the devil his professed enemy. O
Christian is this thy love? is this to be a Christian? the beloved disciple of
Jesus Christ says, He that says he abides in Christ ought as he walked
himself also to walk. Io. 1.2.
You would think it a horrible thing to see a christian to deny his
christendom and to become a Turk or Pagan; and yet in deeds we deny it when
we break the Commandments of God, which then we promised faithfully to keep.
Tit. 1.
They Confess that they know God: but in their works they deny says S. Paul.
This is to be a christian in name only, and not indeed; as the traitor or
rebel to the king has the name of his subject but is not subject to him: and
thus S. John Evangelist was inspired to declare, Io. 1.1.
He that says he knows him, and keeps not his Commandments is a liar, and
the truth is not in him. If therefore you will be constant to the faith of
Christ, and bear truly the name of a christian, be good christians, keep the
Commandments of God: let not the pleasure of any thing draw you from him,
give him the first place in your hearts, care not for the favor of any, so as
to loose the divine favor, contemn riches, forsake all unlawful desires,
bear afflictions, losses, iniurys, imprisonment, or any pain what soever
rather then to committee any mortal sin: power forth this life which here
you enjoy, to please God the supreme goodness better then life. How many martyrs
have given their lives not only in defense of faith, but of the Commandments
of God, to fly sin? Dun 13.
It is better for me (s^ith chaste Susanna) without the act to fall into your
hands, then to sin in the sight of our Lord. Math. 1.2.
Allthough all nations obey king Antiochus I and my sons and my brethren will
obey the law of our fathers said the holy Priest Matathias, when the kings
officers urged him against the laws of God. Death suffered for the love of God
makes a martyr: and so S. John Baptist was a martyr; because he suffered for
the good works which he did: and so S. Peter was a martyr in mind, when for
the love of Christ he said with thee I am ready to go both into prison and
unto death. Luc. 22.
And shall we for a moment of delight, that ends be it be begun, break the
Commandments of God, loose his favor, and be banished from him for ever? Let
us resist temptations courageously, and with zeal of Gods honor say from our
hearts, all though all should obey the world, the flesh, or the devil I will
obey the law of God. I will live and die in his service. Lord my God for ever
will I Confess to thee. Psalm. 29.


THE SEVENTH DISCOVRSE. OF THE PATER NOSTER.
Quest. Say the Pater Noster. Answ. Our Father which art in Heaven. Hallowed be
thy Name. Thy Kingdom come. Thy will be done in earth as it is in heaven. Give
us this day our daily bread. And forgive us our trespasses, as we forgive them
their trespasses against us. And lead us not into temptation. But deliver us
from evil. Amen.

THIS is that blessed, and most perfect prayer which Christ himself made, and
gave to his disciples, to teach them how to pray* It is necessary then that the
disciples of Christ understand it, and learn to pray by it. For this we will
implore the intercession of our Bessed Lady.

Hail Mary, etc.

Christ the best Pastor, that every was, and the form of all good Pastors
teaching his disciples all that was necessary for them to know, would not leave
them ignorant in a matter of so much importance, as prayer is; and therefore
he would not only deliver unto them some circumstances to be observed in
prayer; as to pray with humility, confidence, and the like; but would also give
them an express form of words to be used by them; that they might have it as
a pattern and perfect modele to frame all their prayers by; there being nothing
that can be asked of God, but it is contained in some of the petitions of the
Pater Noster. But before we come to declare the petitions in particular, we
will say something of prayer in general, and first

OF THE BENEFITS AND fruits of Prayer.
THE benefits and fruits of Prayer, are so many and general that we need not
name any, but say all. For there is nothing that can be good for us, or worthy
of asking, but it may be obtained by devout prayer: Io. 15.
our Blessed Savior having promised without exception, If you abide in me and
my words abide in you, you shall ask what thing soever you will, Mat. 7.
and it shall be done to you. And the more to incite us to pray, he says, Ask
and it shall be given you: seeko and you shall find, knock, and it shall be
opened to you. For every one that asks receives: and that seeks, finds:
and to him that knocks it shall be opened. And in another place the says,
Luc. 18,
it behooves allways to pray, and not to be weary. What more could be said to
commend prayer to us, and to show the force and fruit of it? it is as
necessary as our very breath: For as we can not live without continual
breathing; noe more can our souls without continual prayer: we will say then
that prayer is the breath of our souls. And although this be verifyed by
continuing in faith, hope, and charity, and in all good works, which as prayers
please God and obtain benefits of him; yet he would commend all by the name
of prayer, and bid us pray always to increase in us the esteem of it.

The servants of God have found by experience the force of prayer. Deuteronomy. 6.
What shall we say of Moses who remained diverse times forty days and forty
nights in prayer for the people, as himself witnesses: and when they were in
batle with Amalech, as long as he lifted up his hands to pray they overcame,
and when he was weary, as his arms failed, so they failed against their
enemies. In imitation of which Theodosius the Christian Emperor, being to join
batle with the tyrant Lugenius, went first up unto a high place, where he might
behold both armies, and besought God, that being that the undertaking of that
war was for his sake, he would give him victory over his enemies. His prayer
was heard, Baron. an, 394.
the two Apostles S. John and S. Philip being seen to sig^t for him, and to
turn the weapons of their enemies against themselves.

David being a King could find leisure to give praise to God seven times a
day. In imitation of which the Catholic Church commands the seven
Canonical Hours to be said every day by Ecclesiastical persons, Tob. 8.
under a mortal sin. Toby being married remained the three first nights with
his wife in prayer, before that he had knowledge of her, professing unto God,
that he married her not for fleshly lust, but for the love of posterity in
which his divine name might be honored. And she, who on the very first nights
of her former marriages, had buried seven husbands, enjoyed Toby with life and
health, the devil who had killed them having no power over him. S. Bartholomew
is recorded to have prayed a hundred times every day, and as often every night:
and diverse other Saints are read to have followed his example. Hist. trip. l.
8. c. 1.
S. Paul the Ermit is affirmed to have said every day three hundred prayers
(which he remembered by three hundred little stones) before he attended to any
other business. And Gregory Lopez a holy man who lived lately in the Kingdom of
new Spain is thought for many years at every drawing of his breath to have
said in his heart. in vitu cus
Thy will be done in earth as it is in Heaven. Amen Jesus. By all which we may
see the great esteem which the Saints have had of prayer, and the benefit
which they expected by it. But now we will speak of that which it has in
particular, as its proper and peculiar fruit.

The first is that by prayer we keep our hearts in humility and submission to
God, acknowledging by our prayers, that he is the supreme power and high
perfection from whence all benefits proceed: and that we depending of him as
his creatures, Apoc. 8.
come for succor and releife to him: and therefore S. John saw the prayers of
the Saints, as incense, which was to be offered on the Altar, and the
Catholic Church prays with the holy King saying, Ps. 440.
Let my prayer be directed as incense in thy sight. Because it is a kind of
inferior sacrifice, and has the effect of it to do homage unto God, and to
keep us in humility toward him.

The second fruit of prayer is that it pacifyeth the divine wrath provoked by
sin. For although the prayers of a sinner, as long as he is in mortal sin,
have noe proportion to the remission of his sins, or to the releasing of his
punishment; yet it is congruous and most agreeable to the infinite goodness
and liberality of God, that he should accept of the endeauours of our nature,
and should grant us his grace for such endeauours; and so sinners that are out
of the state of grace, obtain grace of congruity, by praying for it. But the
prayer of the just is so powerful that after a certain manner it forces God
as it were by violence to grant that which he desires, and holds his hands
from punishing of others. Even as strong dammes, well fortifyed with stone and
timber, resist huge inundations of waters, and suport their mighty weight, so
the prayer of the just resist the wrath of God and bear of the weight of his
indignation from sinners. This is expressed in the words of God to Moses when
Israel had adored the molten calfe, and the divine indignation was coming as a
torrent to sweep them quite away from the face of the earth the prayers of
Moses had such power to withstand it that God said Exodus 23. Suffer me that
my fury may be angry against them, as though he had held him by force from
destroying them.

Thirdly as I said before of sinners that the forgiveness of their sins and
punishments are obtained as it were by violence, when the just pray for them;
so also we may say of all others benefits; for that the goodness and liberality
of God is such that he is forced as it were to grant all, and can deny nothing
which is worthily asked of him. This he would show even in the granting of a
temporal benefit at the prayers of Iosue, when the Israelits wanting day to
pursue the victory; Iosue praying commanded the Sun and Moon to stand
still;; and they stood still till the people revenged themselves of their
enemies. And to show how powerful the prayer of the just is, the Holy Ghost
would make so remarkable an expression, as to say that God obeyed the voice of
a man, as though Iosue by his prayers had had God at obedience. And although
heaven be gained as well by all good works, as by praying; Ser. de temp. 226.
yet S. Augustine calls prayer the kea of Heaven. Let us learn then how to
pray.

OF THE PREPARATION TO PRAYER.
THAT we may pray with profit, Eccl. 18.
and reap the fruit of prayer, we must prepare ourselves duly to it. Before
prayer prepare thy soul, says the Holy Ghost. The first and most necessary
preparation is to be clear from mortal sin. For prayer which is made in
mortal sin has but little force, and noe condignity at all to the obtaining
of supernatural gifts, which must proceed from the divine grace. And therefore
he that will pray effectually, must first make clear his conscience by a good
confession; that being restored to the grace of God, his prayer may be
acceptable to him. But if he have not the opportunity of a Confessor, let him
in the mean time make an act of contrition, which may supply confession until
it can be had: and let him pray for contrition, and for a fit disposition for
prayer: as the man of the Gospel, Marc 9.
who when Christ required of him to believe, he said. I do believe Lord: help
my incredulity. So may the sinner endeavor before prayer to make an act of
contrition, and pray for that which is wanting in him. The Publican was a
sinner when he began to pray, but praying with humility and sorrow, he obtained
the remission of his sins, when standing a far of, Luc. 18.
and knocking of his breast, he prayed, God be merciful to me a sinner. By
his standing a far of his humility, by the knocking of his breast, and the
words which he spoke, his great sorrow is denored; and by so praying (although
he were at first a sinner) yet by prayer he obtained contrition, and by
contrition his sins were forgiven, Act. 10.
and he went away justified. So Cornelius the Centurion prayed and gave alms:
and although then as a Gentil, he were out of the state of grace: yet by
continual prayer (for the Evangelist commends him as allways praying to God)
he obtained the vision of an Angel, and S. Peter was sent to enlighten him
with the Faith of Christ. Those therefore that are out of the state of grace,
and have not the opportunity of confession, let them pray for contrition, and
endeavor to stir up in themselves a true and feruerous love of God. Wicked
Antiochus was grieved at his sins, or rather at his punishments, and although
he acknowledged the truth, that they came from God; yet it is said, Match 2.9.
He prayed to our Lord of whom he was not to obtain mercy: because he was not
truly penitent, nor sought the honor of God, but his own ease only by prayer.

The next preparation to prayer is to come with much humility and reverence,
considering who it is to whom we are going to speak, and who we are that are
admitted to speak. It is God to whom we speak. God the Lord of Heaven and
Earth, that made us of noe better thing then the slime of the earth, a piece of
dead clay, breathing life and giving reason to it: and that piece of earth
being thus framed of God, has rebelled against him, and abused his maker; and
even then not being quite free from sin, is permitted nevertheless to appear
in his sight and to petition him. Eccli. 35.
The prayer of him that humbles himself shall penetrate the clouds. Thus did
holy Abraham pray with humility, saying, Gen 18.
I will speak to my Lord where as I am dust and ashes.

Thirdly we must pray with much love and confidence in the goodness and bounty
of God. We may consider then that he is (as he is indeed) our father, allwais
desiring our good, and that he is infinitely liberal of all those things which
he knows to be good for us; and that we will kneel down to him, as a loving
and gracious child would do to his father, to ask blessings of him; and that
we will ask with confidence that which is necessary for us, and will obey him.
Thus the holy King prepared himself with humility, love, and confidence, and
then powered forth his prayer in the sight of God. Let us then remember to
prepare ourselves to prayer with these three things. First with a clear
conscience by confession or contrition. Secondly with humility and reverence to
God. Thirdly with love and confidence in him. Let us see now

FOR WHAT THINGS, AND FOR whom we are to pray.
THE chief thing which we are to pray for is that which is the chief good;
and that is that God be honored, his blessed name being hallowed byvs; and that
we may so serve him here, that we may enjoy him in heaven. All temporal
things as health, wealth, strength, beauty, and the like, are to be prayed for
conditionally, if they be conducing to our future happiness: but it is dangerous
to pray to excel much in them: and therefore the wise man durst not pray for
riches, but for necessarys. Prou. 30.
Beggary and riches give me not, give me only things necessary for my
sustenance. Charity, humility, patience, and all virtues may absolutely without
any condition be prayed for; because they of themselves advance the honor of
God in us, and help us to everlasting glory.

We pray for all men, because we are bound to desire the good of all as our
neighbors. But of all men we pray especially for the Catholic Church, and of
the Catholic Church we pray especially for the Popes holiness, as the head of
the Church. Then we pray for our particular prelates and pastors, and generally
for all the pastors of the Church, that they may excel with such virtues as
may illustrate it, and render it a more amiable spouse to God in the sanctity
of her subjects; which depends most upon the goodness of Church men. And
therefore as the Evangelist says prayer was made without intermission for
Peter, Act. 12.
he being then Pope and in the hands of his enemies. And S. Paul desired the
prayers of the faithful, that his service might be acceptable. We pray also
for our temporal superiors, the king, and his officers, that they may govern
according to the laws of God. Lastly we pray for all people, even our enemies,
the conversion of Infidels, Jews, Turks, and haeretiks to the Catholic faith.
And we pray not only for the living: but also for the dead (of which I have
spoken in the Sacrament of Penance) as a devotion both charitable to them, and
profitable to ourselves. It is a deed of charity to pray for them, because they
can not pray for themselves: and it is profitable to us, because beside the
reward of our own good work, we shall be sure to have their intercession both
now in purgatory, and afterward when they come to heaven. For they are not
like the cupbearer of Pharao, who prosperous things succeeding to him forgotte
his friend, of whom in prison he had received comfort. Now let us see

TO WHOM WE ARE TO PRAY.
WE pray to God, as to the supreme power and first author of all benefits:
acknowledging all goodness to proceed from him. And therefore prayer in the
Apocalypse is assimilated unto incense, and is called a sacrifice; because it
respects God as the source and first author of goodness. We pray also to our
blessed Lady, and to the Angels, and Saints, as the friends of God, for their
prayers, and intercession to him. But an haeretike will presently object that
if prayer be a kind of sacrifice, how do we pray to the Saints, all sacrifice
being to be offered to God? Our prayers indeed may be called and are a kind of
sacrifice; because we either expressly confess the supreme power of God, or
implicitly acknowledge it by all prayers. The prayers which we make immediately
to God are a kind of Sacrifice; because by them immediately and directly we
acknowledge his supreme, and divine power. The prayers which we make by the
mediation of the Saints are also sacrifices in their kind, because mediatly and
indirectly they acknowledge the same, in that finally they tend unto God, by
the Saints praying to him, as we desire. The prayers which we make to Saints
are a kind of sacrifice as they tend unto God; as they te^de unto the Saints,
they are not sacrifices, because they acknowledge not the supreme and divine
power to be in them.

It was an ancient heresy in the primitive Church to deny the invocation of
Saints, maintained by vigilantius and other haeretiks, Hier. cont. vigil.
and of purpose refuted by S. Hierome and others of the holy fathers: but time
which is the abolisher of all heresys had abolished this, and the Catholic
Church which suruiued all times, had suruiued this heresy and buried it in the
oblivion of men: until some unruly spirits of these later years, who would be
ruled by noe Church in the world, raked up this heresy out of the dirt, and set
it on foot again* But you shall see the invocation of Saints briefly made
good by scriptures, Councels, the authority of the ancient Church, and by
reason.

Turn to the 48. Chapter of Genesis, and you shall find there the Patriarch
Jacob blessing the children of Joseph, and inuoking the Angels and Saints upon
them in these words, Genesis 48.
The Angel that delivers me from all evils, bless these children: and be
my name called upon them, the names also of my fathers Abraham and Isaac. Here
this holy Patriarch after that he had twice called upon God, then inuoked his
Angel, and the Saints Abraham and Isaac, who as yet were not in perfect glory.
And if they only departing as holy men in the favor of God might be prayed
unto before that they had the perfect glory of heaven; with much more reason
the Saints of God may now be prayed unto, when they are in that perfect state.
And he that shall understand the Angel whom he there called on, to be any
other then his own Angel guardian, shall contradict the common interpretation
of the fathers, who prove by this place that we have every one an Angel
Guardian deputed to defend us; and shall show but little reverence to the holy
scriptures which he dares to delude with such vain glosses of his own head.
But to be breife I will say noe more but that S. Paul prayed to the living for
their prayers, therefore with more reason we may pray to the Saints for their
prayers, when they are in glory. But of this afterward.

The second Council of Nyce which is received by our enemies declares expressly
for the invocation of Saints. The fathers of the Council of Chalcedon cried
out to blessed Flauianus martyr act. 11. Flauianus that is dead is yet living a
martyr let him pray for us.

The practice of the primitive Church ought to be sufficient for this The
ancient lyturgys of the Church service, the Roman which S. Peter made, that
of Jerusalem which S. James made, that of the Aethiopians which S. Matthew
made, that of Milan which S. Barnaby, and S. Ambrose made, and that which S.
John Chrysostom made, all of them making a devout commemoration of our blessed
Lady, and imploring her intercession. As for the sentences of these and other
holy fathers, they are as plane as my words now are for the invocation of
Saints, and they have as earnestly defended it, as we now do. S. Athanasius
ser. de Deipara. Speaking of our B. Lady says, all the quires of Angels are
incessantly singing that glorious hymn Aue gratia plena Dominus tecum etc. And
we the terrestrial hierarchy of men salute thee, saying Hail full of grace,
pray for us O Lady, O Mistres, O Queen, O Mother of God. What more could any
Catholic have said, or desired of S. Athanasius then to hear him praise our
blessed Lady, and pray to her in the very same terms which himself now uses
in the Catholic Church? Ser. 1. de S. Steph.
S. Augustine, if Steuan were heard when he prayed for those that stoned him,
how much more shall he be heard, when he prays for those that pray devoutly
to him. If S. Athanasius and S. Augustine should appear now to the world to
decide this controversy, and should say noe more but these words over again,
who would not think that the controversy were ended, and sentence given for
the invocation of Saints? but their testimonys will not satisfy our obstinate
enemies, who confess that the ancient fathers teach invocation of Saints, but
accuse them of error for it. O haeretical pride! shall one single man disobey
all the Churches that are then in the world, and stand also at defyance with
the holy and ancient fathers? and shall any man show that contempt of his own
soul, as to follow Luther who came but in the last age or Calvin who came
after him, rather then the whole world that then was when they came, and also
rather then those learned Saints whom the christian world has held in
reverence for these many hundreds of years?

Finally this is also, manifest by natural reason; which dictateth that the
intercession of the friends and fauorits of Princes may with prudence be
desired for the obtaining of benefits of them: but the mother of God, the
Angels, and Saints, are the friends, and fauorits of God; therefore their
intercession may with prudence be desired, for the obtaining of benefits of him.

If they object that to pray to the Saints is injurious to God; for that he is
the giver of all benefies of himself infinitely liberal, and that it deregareth
from his power and goodness to ask of any but of him, and that it is to make
the Saints Gods to pray to them to interceede for us, and that the liberality
of God is such that he needs noe intercessors; all this is to noe purpose. It
is not injurious to God to honor his servants for his sake, and to desire his
fauorits to stand our friends with him; but it is rather injurious to God to
think that he will not allow of his fauorits intercession* We pray not unto
Saints as to the supreme power and author of gifts; and therefore we make them
no^ Gods; but we pray to them to obtain gifts of God for us; and by this we
vertually acknowledge, and confess the supreme power and liberality to be in
God, and that all power is subordinate to him, and all gifts proceed from him.
And allthough the liberality of God be such that he needs noe intercessors, noe
more then he needs any honor or praise from us; yet our unworthiness is
such that our prayers stand need of intercessors, and the divine liberality
is such as to hear the prayers of his best friends, and not to hinder them for
praying to him. Neither is there any thing of this objection, but it has the
same force against the aduocatship of Christ, and of the faithful that are
living; which not withstanding our enemies allow of, as nothing injurious to
God, or derogating from his liberality.

They object the words of the Apostle, there is one God, Tim. 1.2.
one also mediator of God and men, man Christ Jesus. And S. John says if any
man shall sin we have an advocate with the father Jesus Christ the just: Io.
1.2.
and he is the propitiation of our sins. Christ therefore being our mediator,
and our advocate we are not (say they) to use the mediation and aduocatship of
any other. First this argument is turned back upon themselves. If Christ be
our mediator and advocate, it is not then injurious to God nor derogating from
his liberality, to make use of a mediator and advocate (as they said before
that it was.) The words therefore alleged make nothing against the Catholic
doctrine, nor are here applied to good purpose, nor in their true sense: for
the Apostles speak there of the mediation of Christ by way of redemption; and
so Christ is our only mediator and advocate, because he only in the
propitiation of his passion redeemed us, and the Angels and Saints redeemed us
not. By him the Angels are good Angels, and by him the Saints are Saints: and
by his powerful redemption he obtained that the Angels and Saints might pray,
and be heard praying for us. This is the honor which Catholics give to the
mediation of Christ, and which Protestants deny to him. Again not only by way
of redemption, but also by way of intercession Christ is our prime mediator
and intercessour, by whom Angels and Saints interceede for us. He interceedeth
in his own name and virtue, they interceede in his name and virtue, he the
chief they inferior intercessors under him. And this is well expressed by S.
Bernard of our blessed Lady ser. qui incipit signum magnum apparuit post ser.
5. de assump. Opus est mediatore ad mediatorem Christum, nec alter nobis
vtilior quam Maria. We stand need of a mediator to Christ our mediator, and
none more profitable then Mary to us. And the same is also orderly expressed by
the Catholic Church, in the end of our prayers asking through the merits of
Christ out Lord. S. Tract. 1. in Io.
Augustine has these words in declaration of the place of S. John above
mentioned, answering this very objection of theirs. But some will say do not
the Saints then pray for us? do not bishops, prelates and pastors pray for the
people? Yes! mark the scriptures and you shall find that the Apostles prayed
for the people, and again desired the people to pray for them, and s^e the
head prays for all, and the members for one another. This is the doctrine of
the Catholic Church. Christ is our only advocate by way of intercession; our
B. Lady the Angels and Saints are inferior advocates under him, the faithful
that are living are inferior advocates under them, praying for one another,
and desiring the prayers of one another: and so the Church is a body well
united, the head helping the inferior members, and they all concurring to
help one another by their prayers.

Hence the Catholic doctrine is further confirmed. It can not be denied, but
that we may lawfully beg the prayers of one another; therefore with more
reason we may beg the intercession of the Saints For the first S. Paul often
desired the prayers of the faithful; to the Romans that you help me in your
prayers. Romans 15.
And in the same place he prays for them: and he desires the Thessalonians
brethren pray for us. These. 1.5. and 2.3.
And again in the second brethren pray for us. and to the Hebrews pray for us.
And S. James pray for one another that you may be saved. Ia. 5.
The second follows planely: for there is nothing which they have objected,
or can object against the invocation of Saints, but it has the same force
against desiring the prayers of the living: for if it be injurious to God or to
the mediation of Christ to desite the mediation of the Saints in heaven, much
more must it be to desire the intercession of sinners upon earth. But they say
that the Saints in heaven hear us not, nor know when we desire their prayers:
but this is not truly said of them. Christ says that the Angels rejoice at
the conue: Luc 15.
sion of a sinner; but how can they rejoice at it, if they know it not? Saints
whilst they lived on earth understood the secrets of men's hearts, and have
known things that have passed at far distance from them, and have foreseen
many things even before they came to pass, and shall they be less knowing
when they are in glory? Samuel told Saul what was in his heart, Reg. 1.^.
and promised to tell him all things that were in his heart: and it was noe
marvel for God had revealed them unto him. Elizeus saw in absence that which
passed betwixt his servant and the Prince of Syria, and at his return he
rebuked him for the gifts which he had received, and thought to have concealed
from him. If living in this world they knew these things by the revelation of
God, when it was necessary that they should know them: shall we think that our
prayers are hidden from them now in heaven, and that God will let us want their
intercession for want of revealing our prayers to them? Noe we shall loose
nothing by any ignotance of theirs. They see God in glory, and in that glorious
sight they see all that is good for them to see; therefore if they might pray,
and be desired by others to pray for them whilst they lived in this world,
there is nothing to hinder them for being prayed unto in the next. Hence it
appears how absurd that question of Calvin was, ^olu. l. 4. insti. nu. ^4.
when he asked how it came to pass that the Angels and Saints could hear so
far, as betwixt heaven and earth? (I give you not his words; because they are
blasphemous and to irreuerent to be repeated) but if Calvin will know how it
com's to pass, I tell him that it is by the light of glory which the Saints
have, and if he say that they have noe such glory, he shall never have it
himself, nor can in reason expect to have it.

If they object the words of Ecclesiastes to show that Saints might be prayed
unto in this life and not in the next, B^^l 9.
where it is said better is a dog living then a Lion dead. It is true in
respect of the operations of life, which then the Lion has not: and so the
Saints according to their bodies were better alive then dead; because their
bodies living had the operations of life, which dead they have not: but
according to their souls which are spirits, they are not only as perfect, but
much perfecter, and without comparison more active, lightsome, and
understanding, being then not only lightened of the burden of their bodies, but
also enlightened with the light of glory. Saint Hierome answered this very
objection to Vigilantius the haeretike about twelve hundred years since in
these words. Lib. cont. ^^g.
If Apostles and marryrs living in their bodies. could pray for others when they
might be sollicitous for themselves, how much more after their crowns
victorys, and triumphs? Moses but one man gets pardon of God for six
hundred thousand armed men. Steuan the first martyr after the example of our
Lord, prayed for his persecutors: and now when they are with Christ shall they
have less power? Paul says of himself that two hundred and seauenty souls
were granted him in the shipp at his prayers: and now that he is resolved and
with Christ, shall he have his mouth shut up, and shall he not open it for
those who all over the world have believed at his gospel? and shall
Vigilantius a living dog be better then Paula dead Lion? This of the
Ecclesiastes were indeed to some purpose, if J did believe that Paul were dead
in spirit. Thus did S. Hierome discourse as a Catholic on this point, showing
that the Saints with much more reason shall be prayed unto in heaven, then on
earth, and that there is noe comparison in those words of Ecclesiastes betwixt
the soul of man, whilst he is living and whilst he is dead; but only betwixt
a living and a dead body; and he calls Vigilantius a dog for barking
against the Saints, in denying their intercession.

We pray therefore to God as to the supreme power, to grant us that which we
want We pray to our blessed Lady, the Angels and Saints, not to grant us our
wants, but to grant us their intercession to obtain them of God for us. And in
this the Catholic Church uses an orderly destinction even in words when we
pray, destinguishing betwixt the divine majesty, as supreme, and the Saints, as
his servants. We say not to God Lord pray for us but Kyrie eleyson, Lord have
mercy upon us. Nor to Christ as he is the son of God do we say, Christ pray
for us; but Christ eleyson, Christ have mercy upon us. We do not say to our
B. Lady, or to the Angels, or Saints, have mercy upon us, but holy Mary pray
for us, all ye holy Saints of God make intercession for us. So giving unto God
that which is his due, to wit the supreme and all honor both in himself and
in his servants: and we give unto the Saints inferior honor, as the beloved
servants of God, and follow the Council of the holy psalmist who beginning his
last psalm was inspired to say praise God in his Saints. Ps. 150.
This I have said in honor of God and of his blessed Saints: and every word
that I have said I give it freely to their honor, desiring their prayers.

We pray particularly to some Saints for some particular benefits; because we
see those benefits more frequently granted by having recourse unto those Saints
and if any ask why God grants those benefits rather at the intercession of
those, then of other Saints? I answer with the Apostle, who has known the
name of our Lord, Romans 11.
or who has been his Counselor? And this is a sufficient answer to such
questions of curiosity: for so it might be asked why God would determine
particular offices to such and such Angels? Yet the reason may be given to
honor the merits of those Saints in some circumstances of their lives, or
deaths, which those benefits have relation unto. So women that have sore
breasts obtain help by the intercession of S. Agatha, whose breasts were cut
of for the faith of Christ. S. Apollonia is called upon for the tooth ache;
because her teeth were stricken out for the same cause. S. Roch is inuoked
against the pestilence, because himself was infected with it. S. Blase against
pains of the throat, because he cured a child that was like to die of a bone in
the throat. And our blessed Lady with good reason is called upon by women in
travail, because she is the joy, glory, and comfort of all women who in her
child bearing was exempted from those pains: and it pleases God that those
miracles he remembered by us. If any ask why in some places more then others we
pray for such and such benefits? I answer that there may be many reasons why
God would oblige especially the inhabitans of that place, and honor it with
miracles; and if this be not sufficient satisfaction; I ask of him why at the
Probatica pond in Jerusalem miraculous cures were obtained, rather then in
others places? and why only one was cured at a time, and no more? and why the
leprous Prince of Syria was sent to be washed in lordan, rather then in other
waters? and to be washed seven times rather then any other number. If he give
me a good reason for these, the same will I give him to his question; if he
refer me to the divine will and pleasure so will I refer him. Having
declared whom we are to pray to, we will speak

OF SOME IMPEDIMENTS that hinder us in the obtaining of our prayers.
THE first and greatest impediment that hinders the obtaining of our prayers,
is the greatest of all evils, to wit sin; and therefore before prayer we
ought to have cleared our conscience, as I have said, that our prayer may be of
more force with God. And some sins there are which hinder more then others:
these are especially those which are more opposite to charity toward our
neighbor: as hatred and rancour of heart, and hardhartednes against the poor.
How can that man pray to God to be forgiven by him when he bears in his mind
a grudge against his neighbor, and will not forgive him? he keeps in his
heart an injury as he conceiueth, yet he w^ll have God to forgette the iniurys
which he, a base worm, commits against him. O spiteful heart thou
contradictest in thy mind that which thou say in words, as though thou
would dissemble with God. Thou pretendest with thy mouth, and kneelest down
as if thou would honor him, and in thy heart thou art meditating a mischeife to
his servant. When you shall stretch forth your hads I will turn a^ay mine eyes
from you: Isa. 1.
and when you shall multiply prayer I will not hear for your hands are full of
blood, says God by his Prophet. If a wicked murderer that had killed the
servant of some Prince, should run to his master, and should hold up his
hands smoking with his servants warm blood* were he likely to obtain pardon
no certainly, he should rather move him to more horror against him, and for
his bold presumption to send him away presently to be hanged up in chains Thus
malicious spirits and reuengefull hearts come to their prayers, and hold up
their hands bloody with desire of revenge against their neighbor. It was
directly to this purpose that which S. Tim. 1.2.
Paul wrote. I will that men pray in every place: lifting up pure hands without
anger. Our blessed and most mild Savior has given us many lessons for this,
and amongst the rest when he said, Mat. 5.
If thou offer thy gift at the altar, and their thou remember that thy brother
has ought against thee leave their thy offering before the altar, and go
first to be reconciled to thy brother: and then coming thou shall offer thy
gift* When therefore we go to our prayers, if we find our selves not well
settled in charity with our neighbor, let us first in our hearts be friends with
him, and if need be, go presently and reconcile ourselves to him, and then
our prayers shall be as a sweet incense both to God, and to our own
consciences.

Hardness of heart toward the poor is another sin, Alms deeds.
which hinders much the obtaining of our prayers* How can we think to have
God liberal to us, when we deny to the poor man that which he asks for God
sake? Prou. 21.
He that stops his ear at the cry of the poor, himself also shall cry,
and shall not be heard, says the holy Proverb. Let us give with a good will
for Gods sake, and then we may ask freely of him. Luc. 6.5.
Give (says Christ) and there shall be given to you. Good measure and pressed
down and shaken together, and running over shall they give into your bosom.
For with the same measure that you do mete it shall be measured to you again.
When therefore we have any thing of moment to ask of God, let us give some
alms first for God sake. And those that have not much to give let them give a
little willingly.

The second impediment in the obtaining of our prayers may be our undue and
unworthy manner of praying, that we pray not with due reverence and attention.
For this we may consider diverse sorts of attention in prayer. First there is
attention to the words, that we miss none of them. Secondly attention to the
sense of the words, that we understand them as we pray. Both which attentions
are good; but there is a third much better then they; and that is attention to
the presence of God, and to the thing which we pray for. That we prostrate
ourselves with reverence and humility before him, and desire earnestly that
which we ask of him. This attention may be had by of those that understand
not the words of their prayers: and therefore they are not to be reprche^ded
that say their Pater noster, and other prayers in Latin, although they
understand them not For it is not the understanding but the aflection which
God regards most in prayer. Ignorant men presenting their petitions to the
King bring many words in them, which themselves understand not, and sometimes
the whole petition in a language which they have no skill of; yet they obtain
their desire: and if the King saw the inward of their hearts, as God does, and
the great reverence which they bear unto him, and their feruours and earnest
desire of obtaining, he would without doubt he much moved by it to grant their
petition. It was to this purpose that which Christ said to the Samaritan woman.
Io. 4.
The hour comes and now it is when the true adorers shall adore the Father
in spirit and verity. For the Father seeks such to adore him. That is to say
in the law of grace which comes and now is, the true adorers shall worship
God spiritually more then in the law of Moses, which consisted rather of
corporal sanctifications, and outward ceremonies then of spiritual grace which
is given in the faith of Christ. Our prayers then that are sanctified by the
law of Christ ought to be with much fervor of spirit, more cordial then
verbal: and the more cordial that they are, the more suetable they are to
that law. Therefore to pray well and efficaciously, we ought to pray with
great reverence, and attention to the presence of God and to the thing which we
pray for, desiring it with much earnestnes all the time that we pray.

Thirdly the inconvenience of the thing which we pray for is oftentimes a
hinderance to the obtaining of it; because we see not the contingencys and
circumstances of future things we ask sometimes we know not what: that which
is both inconvenient in it self, and may be hurtful to us. As when lames and
John came unto Christ, Marc. 10.
saying, Master we will that what thing soever we shall ask thou do it to us,
and then they asked to sit one on his right hand, and the other on his left in
his Kingdom. But he told them, you wott not what you ask. So the same
Apostles seeing Christ hindered to enter into a city of Samaria took such a
disdain against those that hindered him, that they were presently about
bringing of fire from heaven to consume them: Luc. 9.
but Christ rebuked them, saying, you know not of what spirit you are. They
asked that which was inconvenient. And Peter asked that which was hurtful,
when being enamoured with the glory of Christ's transfiguration he desired to
stay in that manner with him for ever. Here he knew not what he said: Marc. 9.
and when Christ was foretelling the mystery of his Passion, Peter could not
endure to hear of it; but dissuaded him from it desiring that which was
hurtful both to himself and to all mankind in the hinderance of Christ's
suffering; and therefore his master rebuked him, saying, Go after me Satan
thou art a scandal to me. God shows his love as much in denying our prayers
when they are hurtful, as in granting them when they are profitable to us; and
therefore we ought to be as well contented with the one, as with the other, and
never to repine at the not obtaining of our prayers: For if we have not our
desire we have that which is better for us. If we were hindered by a friend for
taking of countrefeit gold instead of true, or from drinking of poison instead
of good drink, had we not good reason to thank him for it? He that reflecteth
upon the passages which have happened to him, and observes diligently how he
has obtained, or not obtained his prayers, shall see without doubt, and in his
heart confess the manifest providence of God in denying himsome things which he
has prayed for. This I thank God I have often seen in my self, and found by
experience that sometimes I have prayed to be freed from some dangers, when if
I had had my desire, I had manifestly incurred far greater, which none but
God could foresee and prevent. And once in my youth by my earnest prayers
especially by the intercession of S Ignatius of Loyola, whose assistance I
particularly then implored, I was strangely freed from a very great affliction
which troubled me. But after a while it returned again unto me, and that to
my great good, as since I have perceived, and have often acknowledged the
goodness of God both in taking it away to show the power of his Saint, and in
restoring it again, it being necessary for me. The liberality of God is
infinite, and and his care never fails toward us, but he will grant our
petitions as they are convenient, and will not make use of our ignorance to
hurt us, nor always grant that which we think, but that which he knows to be
good for us.

These therefore in breife are the chief hindrances from obtaining of our
prayers. The sins which we are guilty of, hardness of heart against our enemies,
and against the poor, want of devotion and attention at our prayers, and the
inconvenience of that which we pray for. Having said thus much of prayer in
general, let us now declare the petitions of the Pater Noster.

THE FIRST PETITION.
OUR Father which art in Heaven: Hallowed be thy Name. The first words, Our
Father which art in Heaven. are an exordium of humility, reverence, and
confidence which we use to God. He is our father in many respects. First as we
have our being from our fathers: so we have it more principally from him, who
gave being both to us, and our fathers. Secondly, God is our father in his care
and providence over us. He sends us as Pilgrims, to trauail in this world,
but he commits us as his children to the Angels of his Court, to be as our
Tutors, to guard, and protect us. Holy Tobias was a good father to his son,
when sending him a dagerous journey he thought of some careful man to be his
guide: but God was a better father to him, who sent an Angel to guide him, and
to deliver him out of those dangers out of which no man could have delivered
him. This father of ours had but one only natural son and desiring to
adopte us for his children he sent that only son to redeem us, and to give
his life as the price of our ransom: Io. 1.
and so he made us his children giving us power (as saint John says) to become
the sons of God, and to be borne of him. He never forgets us, not cease
to provide for us in our needs, although we forgette our duty to him, Ps. 88.
and behave not our selves as his good children. He corrects us as a father
with pity, Job 5.
He visits in a rod our iniquitys and our sins in stripes, yet he takes
not away his mercy from us. He wounds and cures, (says holy Job) he strikes,
and his hands shall heal again. He wounds us for our good; For by those
wounds he cures us. Finally he is in all things a loving and blessed Father,
and makes his children glorious by obeying him. God is the Father of all, as
he created and provides for all; but he is especially the father of
Christians, whom he has begotten into the Faith of Christ by Baptism. ^al 5.
You are all the children of God by Faith in Christ Jesus, says the Apostle.
As long as we continue in his favor, we have the benefits of his children, and
a portion of glory is due to us: but when we loose his favor by mortal sin,
we become then of his children his ennemys, and loose all the right which we
had unto glory, and can not say as Christians ought to say our Father.

Which art in Heaven. God is in all places essentially: for his power being in
all places conseruing all things and all places, and his power being the very
same as himself; it follows that himself is by essence in all places. But
he is said to be in Heaven, because he is there after the most eminent manner
communicating himself in glory to his creatures.

Hallowed be thy Name. Authors have commonly divided the Pater Noster into
seven petitions: and the first is to desire that then a me of God be hallowed.
For this is the first and chief good, and the principal thing which we are
to desire and pray for, that God may have that honor which is due to him. We
ask in this petition that the external honor of God may increase amongst his
creatures: (for his intrinsecall honor and perfections are infinite and
increase not) and that his true worship may be known, and given him by the
enemies of the Catholic Faith, and that Catholics may live according to the
holiness of their profession. But how far are we from the performance of this
prayer? Those that in words say hallowed be thy Name, Romans 2,
and hallow it not in works, blaspheme it. By you the Name of God is blasphemed
amongst the Gentiles. They are like the soldiers of Pilate who kneeled down to
Christ, Mat. 27,
saying, Hail King of the Jews, and then spitted in his face, and struck him
about the head with a reed. So they kneel down to their prayers, and seem to
honor God in words; but rising up from them they dishonor him in work. This
is not like good children, Mat. 5.
nor according to the command of Christ when he said, So let your light shine
before men: that they may see your good works, and glorify your Father which is
in Heaven.

THE SECOND PETITION.
THY Kingdom come. Here we ask the blessed state of Heaven, which is
therefore called the Kingdom of God; because God shows himself there in
glory, as a King, reigning in the minds and hearts of his Saints, who are in
perfect love and subjection to him And supposing here that which we prayed for
before; to wit that it be for the honor of God, we may be understood to pray
that our souls may be freed out of the prison of our bodies, Phil. 1.
and come soon to that happy state; as the Apostle desired to be dissolved and
to be with Christ.

The Kingdom of Heaven is the first thing, Mat. 6.
which we ought to ask for our selves. Seek first the Kingdom of God and the
justice of him and all these things shall be given you besides, Christ said
this to his disciples after that he had delinered the Pater noster to them, in
which he taught them first to ask the honor of God, and then those things
which were good for themselves, and amongst all those things in the first place
the kingdom of heaven. Tract. 102.
This is (says saint Augustine) that full and perfect joy which we ought to
pray for, and which oll our prayers ought to aim at, as the only true joy.
Here the Roman Catechism admonishes Pastors to excite their people to the
love of that Kingdom by the sentences of holy Scriptures, which are indeed
frequent enough for it. But in order to this it ought to be sufficient, that
Christ has said in few words. Ask and you shall receive: that your joy may be
full. For what joy should we desire, but that which is full joy? and fulness
of joy is not to be had but in heaven. Every thing aspireth to that in which
its chief and full joy consists. Sensible things to that which pleases the
senses, living things to the conservation of life, and those things which have
only being and noe life delight in that which is according to their nature,
and seek to it; because there is the fulness of their joy. And shall the soul
of man which is reasonable above all these things, forsake that which is its
chief and full joy. All corporal things tend with violence thither where
their chief joys are, and rest not contented until they enjoy them The
Sun, Moon, and Planets, rejoice in their courses, the Stars in their
stations, and keep themselves in them; because there is the fullnes of their
joy. The creatures of the earth are some above the earth, some within it, and
some part within, and part without it, as trees and herbs, and will not live
otherwise; because there is the sum of their delight. The fishes of the Seas
and fresh waters seek allways to be there, and strive by violence to that
place. Light thinigs tend upwards, and heavy things to the center of the
earth; because there they have the fulnesses of their joy. The fulnesses of our
joy is nowhere but in Heaven: and why do not we then seek to it, and
abhor all that hinders us of it? We live in this world as it is were out of
our element, in a place most loathsome to our souls, a deadly prison condemned
to die continually, and in danger of eternal death. Romans 7.
What joy can we take in this condition? Unhappy that I am (says the Apostle)
who shall deliver me from the body of this death.

The Kingdom of God is diuersely understood, First it is general over all the
world, as he governs and provides for his subjects which are the multitude
of all creatures. Secondly it is more particularly over the Catholic Church,
as the people of a Kingdom gathered together to worship him, as their true
King. Thirdly, more particularly yet, his Kingdom is with the just, in whose
hearts he reigns by grace: of whom Christ the Kingdom of God is with you.
Luc. 17.
Lastly, his Kingdom is most especially over the blessed to whom at the day of
judgment he shall say; Mat. 25.
Come the blessed of my Father possess you the Kingdom prepared for you.

Here we ask that we, and all people may so live in the Communion of the
Catholic Church by Faith and good works, that in the end we may obtain the
glory of Heaven. For this Kingdom is not otherwise obtained; but by such
faith, as S. Gal. 5.
Paul requires, which works by charity, as by those who have given meat,
drink, and cloths for Gods sake; and they shall be excluded that come with the
profession only of Catholics saying, Mat. 7.
Lord, Lord open unto us, but bring not with them the light of good works. Not
every one that says Lord, Lord shall enter into the Kingdom of Heaven, but
he that does the will of my Father: of which point Saint Augustine wrote a
book de fide and operibus, in which he shows that the Epistles of S. Paul
were misconstrued by some of those times, as though he required not good works
after baptism; cap. 14.
but that faith alone did justify. And therefore (says he) the other Epistles
of Peter, James and Jude were written, to avouch vehemently that fait without
good works profits nothing.

THE THIRD PETITION.
THY will be done in Earth, as it is in Heaven. Man has not a greater enemy
then his own will, when it is not governed by the will of God. All good things
which we have come by the goodness of the divine will: and all evils that
befall us come through the malice of our own wills. The ignorance of our
understandings never hurts our souls, but when it is voluntary, and all our
sins proceed from thence, that either we will not do what we know is to be
done, or will not know what we are to do. Esa. 5.
Hence is that curse of the Prophet; Woe vnty you that call evil good and good
evil, putting darknesses light, and light darkness: putting bitter for sweet,
and sweet for bitter. This curse comes by the evil of our wills; because we
will follow our own blindness, and not the will of God, which ought to be our
rule and guide in all things. The malice of men began presently to be much
upon earth, and the cogitations of their heart, were so bent upon upon evil,
that a deluge of waters was sent to destroy them. This evil was in their
hearts, that is to say in their wills, because they followed not the will of
God, which is sweet and lightsome, but their own wills, which are dark and
bitter in effect; and so have all the evils of the world come. Therefore we are
topray and to labor with ourselves for conformity with the will of God.

Besides we not knowing what is best for us, ask that some times which is
hurtful: as sick folks in a fever desire that which hurts them: and as
children who would take poison for treacle, if they had there own wills: and
therefore sick folks and children have keepers, whose wills they must follow,
and be directed by. We are as children in our wills and understandings; both
deficient by sin. God is our keeper, we must be ruled by him, and pray for
obedience to his holy will, that we may follow it, and then all will be well
with us.

In earth as it is in Heaven. We pray not here that we may do the will of God
upon earth with that perfection with which it is done in Heaven; for that is
impossible; but that as the Saints of God perform his will according to the
perfection of their state; so that we may perform it according to the
perfection of our present state: and that as the Saints in Heaven have a most
perfect conformity with the will of God; so that we may imitate them every one
in the vocation in which he is called, following the divine pleasure in all
things, and saying willingly with holy Job: As it has pleased our Lord so is
it done. Job. 1.
The name of God be blessed.

THE FOVRTH PETITION.
GIVE us this day our daily bread. This and the petitions that follow are to be
referred to those that go before: to wit that the name of God be hallowed, and
that we may gain his blessed kingdom. For all whatsoever we prayfor is to be
ordained to the honor of God, and to the gaining of that kingdom. L. 2.
deserm. Them.
We pray (says S. Augustine) not for temporal things as our true goods but as
our necessarys: because they are in themselves imperfect; and therefore not
absolutely good; nor to be prayed for; but as they are referred to the honor of
God, and have a partial and participated goodness from him. Whether you eat or
drink, Cor. 1.10.
or do any other thing, do all things to the glory of God. Says the
Apostle to the Corinthians. And the same Apostle desired the Romans to pray for
him that he might escape the hands of his enemies, and that his service might be
acceptable. Where he refers the escaping of his enemies to the glory and
service of God.

Yet we may see by this petition that it is lawful to pray for temporal
things: for although God of his own goodness does provide sufficiently for us;
yet so, as that he will have us to ask and pray for that which we stand
need of. So the Patriarch Jacob prayed, and made a vow of some particular
devotions to be done, for the obtaining then of a prosperous ^ourney. Saying,
if God shall be with me, C^n. 28.
and shall keep me in the way by the which I walk, and shall give me bread
to eat and raiment to put on, and I shall be returned prosperously to my
fathers house, the Lord shall be my God, and this stone, which I have erected
for a title shall be called the house of God: and of all things that thou
shall give to me, I will offer tithes to thee. All this did this holy man do
that God might bless him and supply his wants in that voyage.

By bread all corporal necessarys are here understood. For food being the most
necessary of all corporal things, and bread-being the most necessary of all
foodes, it may properly signify all temporal necessarys: and therefore in the
holy scriptures bread is taken generally for any kind of meat, as in the place
above cited, where lacob prayed for bread and raiment: and Luc. 14. where it is
said that Christ entered into the house of a certain Prince of the Pharisys to
eat bread. Luc. 14.
That is to say to eat meat in general; for it was a feast which the Pharisee
then made for his friends.

Here we may conceive something of the great loss which we have incurred by
sin. Man whilst he was in paradise, and in state of grace, was well provided
for of all corporal things; the tree of life supplying him so, that he could
fear noe want. But falling into sin he fell into fear and shame, and
began to want meat and cloths, and many other things, and was glad to take
pains, and to work hard to get that which he stood need of: and for all his
pains taking is still in fear of want; and therefore we are taught here to
humble ourselves to God, and to pray to him to bless our labors, and to give
fruit to them; which otherwise are vain and fruitless: and to show this he
sends sometimes excess of heates, colds, thunders, droughts, inundations and
the like, by which he deminisheth our allowance, and takes as much as he will
from us. What a folly then is it in rich and worldly men for the love of
riches, or for any worldly respect to forsake God, and to sin against him? If
God should blast their corn burn their grass, send diseases to their goods,
fire to their houses, or some grievous lamenesse, or deformity to their
persons, what would they do then? Job was rich enough, and had honor enough
as a prince. Yet he came to loose all, and to be in great want, and such
misery, as to ly upon a dunghill, and to scrape away the putrefaction from his
body with shells, and such things as he found beside him. This would God
permit in him, to show that all our felicitys are in his hands, and that
their is none rich and prosperous but by him. And because he took all
patiently, and remained still the servant of God, he was blessed again with
temporal prosperity double to that which before he enjoyed. Antiochus was a
king far greater then Job; yet less then God, who for his pride and cruelty,
destroyed his armies and brought him to that misery, that as holy Scripture
says he that seemed to himself to rule even over the wanes of the sea and to
wey the heights of mountains in a balance, Match. 2.9.
now being humbled to the ground was carried in a portatiue seat testifying
the manifest power of God in himself: so that out of the body of the impious
man worms crawled abundantly and his live flesh fell of for pains, with his
smell also and stink the army was annoyed. Now what better was this man for
all his worldly greatness, when God would thus punish him? he was made an
example to others of the power of God, and because he made not good use of his
afflictions, as Job did; but remained still in his wickedness, he was never
restored to prosperity again, but died miserably. It is therefore a vain
thing to forsake God for temporal prosperity, seeing that all blessings
proceed from him, and cannot be had but by him. And yet that which is most
absurd of all, these very men, that go to the devil for riches, and for a
pleasant life, come to God to ask bread of him in their prayers. They serve
the world and the devil and ask their liuelyhood of God. Is not this absurd?
Servants ask their wages of the masters whom they serve; as soldiers do of
their captains and generals. Was their ever any soldier that went to the
general of the enemies camp to ask pay or provision? If then worldlings you
will serve the world, why do you ask your bread of God? or if you think that
he only can prosper you, and reward you even with temporal blessings, why do
you serve any other but him for them? Serve God and be constant to his service
according to the rules of the Catholic Church and you can want nothing that is
good for you. Holy Toby was constant to the service of God, and even in time of
great persecution he had enough both for himself, and for others; and although
he lost much, and gave much away for Gods sake; yet God allwais increased his
store. It ought to be a comfort to us to hear king David in his old age sing I
have been young, Ps. 36.
for I am old: and I have not seen the just forsaken, nor his seed seeking
bread.

This day. We are taught here to ask but for one day, and so from day to day,
that we may have confidence in God, and not set our minds too much upon
riches, and of providing without end, as some do, who never know when they
have enough. Esa. 5.
Woe to you that join house to house, and lay field to field even to the end
of the place: shall you alone dwell in the midst of the earth? Their
covetousness is with out limit; as though all had been made for them, and
theirs. Better were it for them to think how to live in an orderly and
discreet way, and to bring up their children in the fear and service of God,
with an indifferent competency.

Some authors understand here by bread the blessed Sacrament of Eucharist,
which appears as bread, and is indeed the bread of Angels, in that it
contains him, who feeds the Angels with the joy of his presence. Hence S.
Ambrose takes occasion to commend the often receiving of the blessed
Sacrament, saying, if it be our daily bread, why shall we be a year before we
receive it?

THE FIFTH PETITION.
AND forgive us our trespasses, as we forgive them their trespasses against us.
Amongst the infinite testimonys of the love of God toward us, There is none
greater then the passion of Christ: by which the maine fountain of his mercy
was opened to cleanse us from sin, that we might hope, and ask confidently,
that our trespasses might be forgiven. And as the Council of Trent has
declared there is none in this world so free from sin, Ia. 3.
but that he may say this petition. Saint James speaks in general in many
things we offend all. Eccl. 7.
And the wise man was inspired to say. There is not a just man in the earth
that does good and sins not. We all then have reason to pray for this; and
as there is not any evil in the world so great as sin; so there is nothing
which we have more reason to pray for, then the forgiveness of sins. Esa. 7.
The iniquity of the house of Jacob shall be forgiven; and this is all the
fruit that his sin be taken away. It is indeed all the fruit that a sinner
can desire, to have his sins taken away; and it is fruit enough; for so he has
the chief thing which he can wish for in this world, to wit grace by which he
has right unto heaven.

Yet as great, as this fruit is of the forgiveness of our sins, we are not
taught, so much as to ask it, but with this condition: that we will forgive to
our neighbor his trespasses against us.

Christ was a most perfect master of all virtues and nothing was there
necessary or good for us to learn, but he has taught it most perfectly, both
by word and by work; yet of all the lessons which he has given, there is
nothing so much inculcated by him, as charity and meekenes to others. First in
his own person he has given us such an example, that we cannot comprehend
the dignity of it, The very Son of God to suffer words and blows, and in the
end death it self by his wicked and cursed servants, that he might change
their curse into blessings; what shall we say or think of this? He could with
one twinkle of his eye have destroyed his enemies, and freed himself; but he
would let them go on in persecuting of him unto death, and then pray for them.
He was scoffed at and held his peace, he was accused and answered not for
himself, he was stricken and bore it patiently, he was crucified and prayed
for those that crucified him, his whole life and death was a continual
pattern of this virtue; and for his words, his paraboles and preachings, they
were allways commending it, tending continually to the love of God by the love
of our neighbor. And S. John his beloved disciple that slept in his bosom,
was so filled with the same spirit of his master; that in his first Epistle
declaring how great a connection there is betwixt the love of God, and the love
of our neighbor, he proceeds to these earnest terms. Io. 1.4.
If any man shall say that I love God, and hates his brother he is a liar. And
it is recorded of this holy Apostle, that at his death these were his last
words, little children love one another. And when he had repeated this Sentence
often over to his disciples they desiring him to speak something else to them,
he reproved them for it, telling them that it was a saying worthy of their
master. It is to be observed here that where as other virtues are asked only
in general, hallowed be thy Name, thy Kingdom come, etc. this is asked in
particular, that we be forgiven, as we forgive. Now what Christian is there,
that can profess himself a disciple of Christ, and yet stand at defyance
against his neighbor? how can he say this sovereign prayer every day, and let
his heart fester so long against any man, that the sun set before he pacify
himself?

If we read in the law of Moses of some examples in which the Saints of God
have taken revenge of their enemies, as when Elias commanded fire to come down
from Heaven to consume the two Captains of King Ochosias, and their soldiers,
it was by particular inspiration and in zeal of justice, that Kings might
learn reverence to the servants of God. Besides Christ was not then come, who
was to mollify the hardness of that law by more mildness in the law of grace;
and therefore he said, you have heard that it was said of old, Mat. 5.
Thou shall love thy neighbor and hate thy enemy. But I say to you love your
enemies, do good to them that hate you. For if you love them that love you,
what reward shall you have? do not also the Publicans this? and if you salute
you brethren only do not also the heathens this? be you perfect therefore, as
also your heavenly Father is perfect.

We have the examples of Martyrs, Confessors, and of all sorts of Saints, who
in the law of Christ have come to this perfection, as to love those that hated
them. S. Steven being apprehended, brought before the council of the Jews,
and accused by false witnesses, ceased not still to do good for evil; but made
a discourse to them to show that Christ was expected by the holy Patriarchs, to
come to redeem them? and therefore exhorted them to believe in him. And when
they were even cut in their hearts, and gnashed with their teeth against him,
and were stoning him to death, he fell down upon his knees, and prayed for
them, crying with a loud voice, Act. 7.
Lord lay not this sin unto them.

It was a fine example that which S. Gregory relates of Libertinus a Monk,
Gregor. dial. c. 1.
who having received a great blow on the face by his Superior suddenly
striking with a board at him, he went away quietly into his cell, without
showing the least sign of impatience; and coming the next day to the Abbot
that had stricken him to ask leave to go abroad; the Abbot suspected that he
would forsake the Monastery; but perceiving his occasions to be real and just,
and observing his bruised face, which with a marvelous tranquillity of mind
he endured, he fell down upon his knees, and asked pardon. And the other
again fell prostrate to his Superior, confessing his authority over him. We
have in good authors the examples even of wild beasts, who have rendered
themselves serviceable to the Saints of God, and followed them for their
mildnes.

How generous and Christianlike is this spirit of patience in bearing and
pardoning of iniurys? when the mind setleth it self for the love of God and
inwardly contented with that satisfaction, one pittyeth to see his enemy in
passion; even as one that were in a calm and safe harbor would pity to see
another on the raging sea in shippwrack; and either by some discreet word
labors to pacify him or gives him leave to pacify himself. Ps. 86.
The mild shall inherit the land and shall be delighted in the multitude of
peace. But to see some of an implaceable mind, bearing grudges in their hearts,
and never making and en of their malice; what spirit shall we call this,
unworthy of the name of a Christian? and it is a dissembling spirit with which
many are deceived, who think themselves free from it. Presently upon every
occasion they are thinking how to be revenged of their neighbor, and when they
can neither spare him with a good word nor a good look, they will tell you
that they are in charity with him, and mean him noe hurt. A peruersed, and
childish saying! If others should behave themselves in like manner to them,
they would easily see the shame of it, but in themselves they see it not, nor
consider not the hurt which they occasion by their ill example and behavior.
Which if all should imitate, there would be noe freindship nor true charity in
the world. If neither the love of God, nor any godnes of nature will move these
to amend, Let them fear some exe^plar punishment by the words of the holy
Ghost, Eccle. 28.
who says, He that will be revenged shall find revenge of our Lord, and
having spent all that chapter in speaking against that sin he draws to an
end in these words. Blessed is he that is covered from a wicked tongue, that
has not passed into the anger thereof. For the yoke of it is a yoke of iron:
and the band of it is a band of brass. The death of it is a most wicked death
and hell is more profitable then it.

To ask with more earnestnes the forgiveness of our sins, and to receive
our petition, it is necessary to stir our selves up to a great compunction of
heart, and vehement detestation of sin, as the greatest of all evils, that
can befall us. First it is the cause and origin of all evils, as it depisueth
us of God, an infinite good. Secondly by sin we are made slaves to the
devil, the hardest master and most cruel tyrant of the world, and of the
spouses and temples of God, his horrid and ugly mates, accursed of God and
given to the sorrows of an eternal destruction know you not that you are the
temple of God? Cor. 1.3.
(says the Apostle) but if any violate the temple of God, God. will destroy
him. Thirdly by sin we are at continual war and unquietness with in
ourselves. For as long as we have any sense of reason, although we be out of
the state of grace, we must be sensible of sin which is contrary to reason.
And therefore Abigail wisely dissuaded David from taking revenge of Nabal saying
this shall not be an occasion of sobbing to thee, Reg. 1.25.
and a scruple of heart. And David complaining of the sins of his former life,
says that as arrows they stacke fast in him, Ps. 37.
and that his bones had noe peace at the face of his sins. There is noe pain
nor torment in the world to compare with a guilty conscience, the vengeance of
God purseing us as our shaddows, and affrighting us with fear of punishment,
when we have sinned. And therefore the Holy Ghost in the scriptures compares
sinners to sick, lame, sore, and diseased persons. Tribulation and anguish
upon every soul that works evil: Romans 2.
but glory, and honor, and peace to every one that works good. Says the
Apostle.

This is sin and these are breisly and in general the evils of it. Which if
we will consider as we ought, we shall desire above all things in the world,
and with as much earnestnes cry unto God, to be freed from any mortal sin, as
we would to be freed from some grecuous torment. Know thou and see (says
Hieremy) that is an evil and a bitter thing for thee to have left the Lord
thy God. Hier. 2.
And those that will not see this, nor understand the evil of sin to seek
the forgiunes of it, are said in the scriptures to have a heart of stone, and of
Adamant. And such is the goodness and mercy of God unto sinners, that he never
denies the forgiveness of sins to those, that truly seek for it. King David
washed his couch with tears, S. Peter went out and wept bitterly after his
sin, S. Mary Magdalene shed many tears upon the feet of Christ. Let us
imitate them.

THE SIXTH PETITION.
AND lead us not into temptation. Having in the former petition prayed for the
forgiveness of our sins we pray now not to be led into temptation. For when
our sins are forgiven us, then we are in more danger of temptation: because
we are then the friends of God, and the professed enemies of the devil; and
therefore he strives more against us. Tobias a holy man was tempted even to the
fear of death by the vehemence of pain which in his eyes he suffered. And the
Angel when he cured him told him, Tob. 12.
because thou wast acceptable to God, it was necessary that temptation should
prove thee. Job a just and perfect, man was stricken in his goods, in his
children, and in his own body. And when the faith of Christ began first to
be planted the devil roared like a Lion, and with open mouth went against the
Apostles, even to sift them with his teeth, and made some attempts upon Christ
himself. He is a proud and daring enemy, and spares none; but he rages more
vehemently against the just, knowing that his victory is greatest over them,
and that the sins which they committee are greater by reason of their
ingratitude, Pet. 2.2.
and greater contempt of God It was better for them not to know the way of
justice then after the knowledge to turn back. And therefore we have great
reason to fear temptation and to pray against it, when we are in the state of
grace: especially seeing that holy men are often overcome by it; as David,
Solomon, the Apostles and even Peter himself; who having made a promise to his
master, Mat. 26.
saying, Though I should die with thee I will not deny thee: yet at the words of
a silly girl he denied him By all which we may see how weak we are and
easily overcome, if God assist us not: and how necessary it is that we should
have recourse to him and pray for help.

That which ought to be a comfort to us in temptations, is the means which we
have in the Catholic Church to overcome them. For although man had always
freewill to resist; yet now in the Faith of Christ we are much more
strengthened, and our enemy is so weakened by his sacred passion working ^n the
Sacraments that, he is compared in the Scriptures to a dragon bound in chains.
Apoc. 20.
I saw (says S. John) an Angel descending from Heaven having the kea of the
bottomless depth and a great chain in his hands, and he apprehended the dragon
and bound him for a thousand years. The Angel signified Christ, the dragon
was the devil, the chain with which he was bound, are the Sacraments of the
Catholic Church, the thousand years denote the time from Christ unto
Antichrist: all which time we have such helps and means to resist temptations,
that the infernal dragon is as it were bound up in chains. Ia. 4.
Resist the devil and he will flee from you.

But how is God said to lead us into temptation? The Pelagian heretics
interpreted this place of being led into humane miserys, and not into sin;
for they conceited that man of his own power without the grace of God could
resist, and overcome all temptations. And therefore Catholics urged this place
against them, where we pray for grace to overcome temptations; because we
cannot overcome them without it; as S. Hierome in his third book against the
Pelagians, and saint Augustine proves in diuerses places. But modern
haeretiks have a ready answer to this question; they make God the cause and
author of oursinne, and take away freewill from us, that we are led by force
into sin. l. 4. instit. c. 26.9.
Calvin that God not only foreseeth man's sins; but also has created him of
purpose for that end. Thus did this obstinate man blaspheme. But the Catholic
Church has never consented to any such doctrine; but has allways taught that
the good which we do is of God, and that the evil which we do is of
ourselves; as shall be declared more opportunly in the twelfth discourse of
sin, I will now only show in what sense we pray not to be led into
temptation.

There are two sorts of temptations, that is to say trials (for to tempt is the
same as to try. First when of ignorance one will take a trial, because he
knows not until be try: and thus God never needs to tempt or try any;
because he knows before hand both what we can do, and what we will do The
second kind of temptation or trial is by exercising and teaching? as when
soldiers are tried, that is trained and exercised to batle: or as thieves that
try and train up others to theeuery: and this kind of practical temptation is
good or evil, as it has relation, and is intended for a good or evil action
A Captain teaches his soldier how to defend himself, and to offend his
enemy in a just war, a thief or robber teaches his partner how to defend
himself, and offend another in an unjust action. A Master of fence teaches
his scholar the postures, and guards of his own defense, and sometimes he
hitteth him a blow to make him remember and learn the better: an enemy comes
with his weapon against him, not to teach him, but to take his life. God
allways tempts unto goodness, as a good Captain, as a loving master to teach
and enable us. Thus he tempted the Israelites that by their victorys others
might learn to overcome. Deuteronomy. 13.
Your God tempts you, that it may appear whether you love him or not. So he
tempted Abraham to immolate his son? First intending his good, then giving
him efficacious grace to obey, and lastly rewarding him. This is a most blessed
kind of temptation: he sends us against our enemy; but he puts the
victory into our hands, giving us grace to overcome if we will, and then
crowns us for ouercomming. As a master he strikes us sometimes by
afflictions, and even by those blows he teaches us and strengthens us to
overcome, and then rewards us. This is not to tempt us to sin; but to
train us up to victorys and crowns. Well might S. Ia. 5.
James say, Let noe man when he is tempted say that he is tempted of God. For
God is not a tempter of evils. Those whom God tempts he tempts for their
greater glory, he tries them, and as gold in the furnace he proves them. The
devil tempts allwais as a thief intending evil, and as an enemy to hurt,
and to kill our souls. God permits him to tempt; but he gives allways
sufficient grace for us to overcome if we will use it: and if we will not use
it, it is not his falt, nor can our sin be imputed to him, who gives grace
to hinder it; but only it may be said to be permitted of God. And so Exodus 7.
God is said to have hardened Pharao his heart; that is permitted him to harden
his own heart, as is declared in the eight chapter, and other places where not
God, but Pharao himself is said to have hardened his heart. And to think as
Calvin does that God created any of purpose that they might sin, is a thought
unworthy of a Christian, or of any man that believes God to be the supreme
good.

That therefore which we ask in this petition is that God will not permit us
to be tempted so, as to yield to temptation; but that he will give us
efficacious grace to resist, and overcome all temptations. We ask not that we
may never be tempted, for so we should never be crowned; the crown of victory
not being obtained but by batle. We pray for victory and this by the help of
God is easily obtained. Genesis 39.
Joseph the Patriarch was assalted by a wicked woman tempting him to lust: but
by the help of God, he overcame the temptation. Holy and chaste Susanna was
grievously tempted, falsely accused, and brought even to the utmost danger of
death, but God undertook her cause, and defended her. It was a glorious
victory that which Job got over the world, the flesh, and the devil, and as
gloriously rewarded of God that gave it. Let us pray to God and serve him, and
he will give grace against temptations. For this is the way: to arm ourselves
with prayer, and vigilance against them, and to keepeallwais in our hearts a
vehement detestation of all mortal sin in general; and when any particular
temptation begins in us, to resist it presently at first, by making a
contrary act to it, and then without delay to fly the occasion of that kind of
sin. Thus we shall get victory, and the glorious crown which to the
victorious is promised. For the resisting of particular temptations see the
Commandments.

THE SEVENTH PETITION.
BUT deliver us from evil. Here we repeat all which we prayed for in the
former petitions, redoubling our prayer again for them: for he that prays to
be freed from evil, prays to be freed from all that is opposite to the
honor of God, to the obtaining of his kingdom, to the performance of his
will, and from any thing that is contrary to the other petitions. And we ask
further more, the remission of the punishment due to our sins; and also to be
freed from those corporal evils, which every hour we are subject unto.

I said at first that the Pater Noster was a perfect pattern, and form of
prayer, which our blessed Savior made for our instruction. Let us then observe
dilligently the method of it, First we are taught in it, to desire above all
things the honor of God, and to direct all our prayers to that end, that the
name of God which is infinitely holy in it self, may be hallowed also
externally by us. And having asked that the name of God be hallowed, and also
all things that are positiuely good for us; then we ask to be freed from that
which is hurtful and especially to be freed from sin, as the most hurtful
of all things; and for the future that we fall not again by temptation; and
lastly to be freed from all evils in general, and in particular, which God
knows to be evil for us, and to be pardoned of the punishment for our
sins. And it is to be observed that Christ would not only teach us to pray
for ourselves, but for all others; that so we might keep ourselves in charity
with all. We say not my father, give me, forgive me, lead me not etc. but
our father, give us, forgive us, lead us not etc. And we are taught also to
forgive our enemies, and to pray for them. In fine the art and mastership of
this prayer is more then man can express or understand; much less can it be
perfectly imitated by any prayer which we can make, nor that the Angels can
devise. Yet it was not the intention of Christ to bind us to say noe other
prayer but it; for both he and the Apostles, are read to have said other
prayers: neither that we should allwais pray for all that is contained in it;
but that we should allwais pray for all, or for something that is in it, or
conformable to it; and with that order that the honor of God be first sought
for in all our prayers, and that all things be prayed for in order to it.

When therefore we pray for any temporal thing, we ought first to desire the
honor of God, and our own spiritual good by it, before that we ask for the
thing it self; and we are to resign our wills to the will of God: and first
seek to be freed from our sins before that we pray to be freed from any
other evil; and not presently when any thing troubles us to pray only for
our own ease and content: as some do who if their head, or their breast or
back ache, or are in any affliction, or danger, they complain presently where
it paineth them, and without any more ado, pray to be freed from it: but this
is not according to our pattern of prayer, in which we are taught first to
pray for the honor of God, and our own spiritual good, saying at least in our
hatts hallowed be thy name, thy kingdom come etc, in the first place of our
prayer: and allwais to be pleased with that which pleases God, not too
earnestly desiring to be freed from temporal evils; assuring ourselves that if
we have not our prayer, we have that which is better for us; such afflictions
being many times sent of God, as a special means of our salvation. We must
follow Christ our master. It is not sitting (says S Bernard ser. 5. de omnibus
sanctis) that the members should be pampered under a thorny h^ad. The holy king
sang these words for his comfort, Ps. 118.
Princes have persecuted me without cause: and my heart has been affraide of
thy words. I will rejoice at thy words: as he that finds many spoils. Let us
not therefore greiue at our afflictions, nor seek too earnestly to be freed
from them; but let us go willingly with the will of God, and follow Christ in
them.

Some add to the Pater Noster, for thine is the kingdom power and glory. But
Catholics use not to say those words, because they are not in the scriptures;
but were added to the Pater Noster, as Glory be to the father etc. Was added to
the end of the psalms. And the Pater Noster being the prayer which Christ
left, as a lesson for us to learn to pray by, we keep it entirely by it self
without adding any thing to it.

Amen is an hebrew word much frequented by our Savior. It is as much as to say
verily, Amen.
indeed, certainly etc. It is sometimes used in the beginning, and sometimes
in the end of a speech to confirm the verity and certainty of it. But in this
place we understand it not, as in the end of other prayers; as it were to
repeat and urge them with more earnestnes; but as an answer, to show that by
the virtue and efficacy of this prayer our desire is acceptable, and we are
dismissed with the grant of our petition. And therefore in the holy sacrifice of
mass at the end of the Pater Noster the Clerk answers not Amen, as at the
end of other prayers, but leaves it for the priest to say: that he as the
interpretour of God may denounce unto the people that their prayer is granted.
And for this reason, S. Hierome might well say that Amen is the seal of our
Lords prayer to declare that God does as it were set his hand to it.

You have learned now how to pray, and how to prepare your selves unto prayer
First we are to free our consciences from sin, and then to prepare ourselves
with humility, reverence, confidence, and with charity toward our neighbor,
and with much fervor and attention to the presence of God, and to the thing
which we ask of him all the time of prayer. This feruerous attention to the
presence of God and to the thing which we pray for, is that which I would
gladly commend to you: that you place your selves before God at your prayers,
as in presence of the most sovereign majesty, with great reverence to him, and
to desire earnestly all the time of prayer that, which then you are praying
for, not too earnestly desiring the thing it self but for the love of God to
please him in it. Let every one (says S. Basil) know for certain that he is
then in the presence of God, In reg. breu. q. 201.
and if he would think it an uncivil and unworthy thing to be yawning, and
as it were half a sleep when he speaks to a Prince; and a heinous
wickedness to be treating in the mean time with some about betraying him, how
much more shall we beware of these things in prayer? to cast of all
drowsinesse, to take heed of irreuerence, and to put away evil thoughts, if we
believe that we speak to God, who is present at our prayers? Remember then
that you are speaking to God, and desire earnestly that which you ask of him,
and if you perceive yourselues to fall into distractions, call back your
minds to God again, and stir up in your hearts a new and feruerous desire of
that which you pray for: and if distractions trouble you still, be not vexed
nor dismayed with them; but detesting them again in your heart, make an act of
resignation to the will of God, that you are contented to have distractions as
long as it shall please him. For by this manner of sleighting them, the best
resistance is made, and how soever you shall be sure to merit by your prayer:
the perfection of which consists not in not having, but in not yielding to
distractions. Power forth your prayer with devotion in the sight of God, and
with a desire to honor him in that which you ask, and he will honor himself
in it, and reward you.

THE EIGHT DISCOVRSE. OF THE AVE MARIA.
SAint Bernard. Woe is me for I am a man of polluted lipes. Hom. 3. super
missus est.
I would I had from the Altar above, not a cole, but a whole globe of fire to
burn the inueterated rust away from my mouth; that I might worthily declare
the gracious speeches of the Angel to the Virgin. Thus did this great servant
o^f our Blessed Lady prepare himself to speak of the Hail Mary, the subject
of which I am now to speak. As he has said, so may I say, and as he often
exhorts so will I do: that is to have recourse to her for help. Glorious
Mother of God, High Queen of Heaven, and Empress of the world! behold my
soul lies prostrate at thy feet craving thy help, before I begin to praise
thee. I desire in this to honor and serve thee, and to bring others to be thy
servants; but I know for certain that of my felfe I cannot perform this
desire; and therefore I come to thee to have thy intercession for divine grace.
See thou that I want not light to setforth thy praises, and that those that
hear me may conceive with profit that which I speak, and something more of
thee then can be spoken. They shall hear thee saluted by an Angel, and by
such a salutation as was never known to proceed from Angels mouth, they shall
see how thou art full of grace, they shall see thee become the Mother of God,
and the Son of God, as thy natural son become subject to thee, they shall
hear thee in they life time praised by Prophets, and by the Evangelist after
thy death, and after the Evangelist they shall hear the Fathers of the
primitive Church, one by one, descanting upon thy praises, and the whole
Catholic Church, as it were in a full quire crying to thee for thy prayers;
they shall see how beneficial thy prayers are to thy servants, and they shall
see by some examples the severe punishments of God upon thine enemies. Procure
thou that they may be moved to honor thee, and that the devotion of us all may
increase toward thee. For this we salute thee, saying, Hail Mary, etc.

Quest. Say the Hail Mary. Answ. Hail Mary full of grace, our Lord is with
thee. Blessed art thou among women. Blessed is the fruit of thy womb, JESUS.
Holy Mary Mother of God pray for us sinners now and in the hour of our death.
Amen.

THE whole Aue Maria, consists of words spoken by the Angel and by S.
Elizabeth, and of words added by the Church. The words of the Angel are. Hail
full of grace, our Lord is with thee, blessed art thou among women. Saint
Elizabeth said, blessed is the fruit of thy womb: and the Church adds that
which follows. Of all which we will speak in order.

HAIL FVLL OF GRACE.
THE infinite wisdom, and goodness of God, having from all eternity decreed the
redemption of mankind by the death of his Son; that he should assume humane
nature, and be borne of a Virgin to die for us: and the blessed Virgin Mary
being chosen amongst thousands, and amongst thousands of thousands, and infinite
of infinites, which God could have created to be the woman of which he would
be borne: and she being now grown up to woman's state, and perfected with such
graces, as were necessary for that dignity, the plenitude of time was then come
in which this mystery was to be accomplished. And as all the works of God are
with order and holiness, so that this work might be more orderly and holy, a
messenger was prepared from Heaven unto her, to require her consent, that this
mystery so much for the honor of God, and good of mankind might be brought to
pass in her; and words were inspired him how to speak her. How? He entering to
her presence, saluteth her first with these words, Hail full of grace. A
blessed salutation, and such an one as amongst the several manners of saluting
which Angels have sometimes used to holy men, the like to this was never heard.
It was a salutation which God had reserved for this mystery, and for her only
that was to be his mother. So Origin, Saint Ambrose, and S. Bid. At first she
was amazed at it; for not being used to hear her own praises, nor desiring to
hear them, she was astonished at the Angels words, fearing, and admiring at
them. Blessed Virgin what do thou fear? Saint Bede, She feared, because she
admired at this new form of blessing, which before is read of in no^ place,
nor any where found. This salutation was reserved for Mary; for by her only
this grace was deserved, which by none but her was ever obtained. S. Act. 2.
Peter indeed and those upon whom the holy Ghost in the feast of Pentecost
descended are said to have been replenished (that is made full) of the holy
Ghost. But it is not so much in the sense of that place to be full of the holy
Ghost, as it is to he full of grace. For there the gifts only of the holy Ghost
are understood, to wit of speaking in strange tongues, of prophecy, of casting
forth devils, curing diseases, and working other the like miracles, which gifts
were given to them: and which may, and are sometimes given to those who are
far from being full of grace, nay sometimes even to graceles men who are out
of the state of grace: as the gift of prophecy was given to Caiphas the enemy
of Christ, then sitting in judgment against him, and to Balaam an idolatour;
Mat. 7.
and as Christ himself has declared, one day Many shall say, Lord, Lord, have
not we prophesied in thy name, and in thy name cast out devils, and in thy name
wrought many miracles? and then I will confess unto them, that I never knew
you. So that it is not so much to be full of the holy Ghost, that is of the
gifts of the holy Ghost, as it is to be full of grace. Saint Steuan is said to
have been full of grace. Steuan full of grace and fortitude did great wonders
and signs amongst the people. But Saint Steuans grace was, as you see, in the
same sense, and manner, as we have said of the Apostles, for the working of
wonders and signs, But our blessed Lady was full of a higher grace, to wit of
sanctifying grace, by which she was gracious in the sight of God; as the Angel
presently interpreted his own words, when seeing her to be troubled at his
speech, he comforted her declaring what kind of grace hers was: to wit grace
with God; saying, Thou have found grace with God. Which is far more then the
grace of miracles; and was the greatest comfort that he could possible give
her. Act. 6.
For declaring that her grace was with God, she was given to understand that
she was then in state of divine grace and favor; which is the greatest comfort
that a soul can desire; and to be assured of it by an Angel from Heaven, was
a most singular and high privilege, and without doubt above all measure of
content to her. So that the grace of which the Angel spoke to our blessed Lady
was sanctifying grace, and she was saluted full of it. And if we should
understand the fullness of saint Steuans grace to have been spoken of
sanctifying grace, as our blessed Ladys was, and as his was not; yet it had
been a greater honor and privilege to her, then it had been to him; for that
it was said of him only after, his death; but it was never revealed unto him
in his life time, that we know of, that he was full of grace; much less was he
ever so saluted by an Angel. This was then such a salutation as before was
never heard. And it was good reason that it should be so in this embassage,
which was the most honorable that ever was in the world, both in respect of
the business, which it concerned, of the Incarnation of the son of God, then
presently to be fullfilled; and also in respect of our Blessed Lady, who was
the most honorable personage that ever was created, and who of all pure
creatures was to have the greatest honor, and nearest relation to this
mystery; as the natural mother of our Savior. Which dignity was so high and
eminent in her, that (as I shall show afterward, abstracting from the graces
with which her soul was endowed) it was without comparison greater then any
pure creature was ever advanced unto; and so great that there was noe grace
ever given unto any, but it was due to her for this dignity, as she was the
mother of God. And therefore this embassage required a more honorable
salutation, and higher title to be given to her.

This was in substance the same embassage that was delivered many hundreds of
veares before to the holy Patriarks; and which filled the heart of Abraham so
full of content, that he laughed for joy to hear of it: for as it was revealed
to our B. Lady that Christ should be borne of her, so was it unto them that he
should be borne of them, and it was also revealed by Angels to them. But there
is a great difference in the circumstances and manner of Christ his coming of
them, and of her. He came not immediately of their seed; but only, as our
blessed Lady came of their seed, and he from her; and therefore the Angel used
noe such respect unto them, as he did unto her. When he spoke unto Abraham he
said nothing of the grace which he had, he did not commend him as fullfilling
of Gods Commandments; but rather exhorted him to fulfill them, and spoke as
it were by authority to him, as his superior, saying in the person of God,
Genesis 17.
I am the God almighty walk before me and be perfect. But he came with much
reverence and submission to our B. Lady, not exhorting her to perfection; but
rather commending her as perfect, when he saluted her full of grace: that is to
say eminent in sanctity and persected with grace to that dignity, to which God
had designed her. Yet if it were such joyful newse to Abraham, that Christ
should come of his seed, and if it were made known by Angels to him, and to
other Patriarks as a singular privilege and honor, which God would do to
them, although after many ages and descents; how much more honorable was it to
our blessed Lady to whom the immediate Conception of Christ was revealed, as
now presently to be brought to pass in her? their embassages were but
preparations to this, and but inferior and partial honors in them, to be
completed and perfected in her. It was then noe marvel if this mystery were
delivered with much submission by the Angel to her, who had the sum of the
Patriarks praises and their perfections gathered together in her. She might
with good reason be saluted full of grace, who was prepared with sanctity, for
the chief grace and highest favor that ever God would do to the world to be
done immediately by her, as the special means and nearest instrument of it.

To understand how our B. Lady was full of grace we may destinguish three
kinds, or as it were measures of fullnes of grace; every one full in their
measure. The first and chief fullnes of grace is that which Christ had.
Secondly that which our B. Lady had. Thirdly that of the Angels and Saints.
Christ was after a more high and eminent manner full of grace above all, in
that he was the author of all grace; Io. ^^
The glory of him (says S. John) glory as it were of the father full of grace
and verity. And in respect of the union which his soul had with the divine
Word, it may be said to be infinite in grace. The fullnes of his grace was also
eminent above all, in that grace was given to him, as to the head, source, and
fountain, which was to serve us all with grace: of his fullnes (says S. John)
all we have received, noe grace being ever given to any, but as flowing from
the merits of his passion. Next unto Christ the B. Virgin had the greatest
fullnes of grace. For grace is given unto creatures with proportion, and in
order to the offices, and dignitys to which God designeth them; and so the B.
Virgin had a greater proportion of grace then any Angel or Saint had, for that
she was designed to a higher office and dignity, then any Angel or Saint was.
Her grace was to be such as might render her worthy to be the woman, whom God
would choose above all women to take flesh of, to nourish him in her womb, to
bring him forth to the world, to have the charge of his infancy and education,
and to have him subject unto her (as the Evangelist declares him to have
been.) For all which a great measure and proportion of grace was necessary;
that as her charge and dignity was eminent above all; so might her grace be
suetable unto it. In the third place is the fullnes of grace which the Angels
and Saints had to the fullfilling of those works, to which God had ordained
them. And so S. Steuan had fullnes of grace in order to the well performing of
a Deacons office, to confound the Jews, and to be the first martyr, and
encourager of others to suffer martyrdom for Christ by his example, and so to
enter into glory. So that Christ according to his humanity was most eminent in
grace, goodly of beauty above the sons of men, Ps. 44.
in that his humane nature was united to the divine word, and was the fountain
of grace to us. Our Blessed Lady was next to him, in that she had the highest
office and greatest charge, in relation to the mystery of the Incarnation. The
Angels and Saints were in a lower degree then she; yet they also had fullnes
of grace in their measures, and in proportion to their offices They all have
fullnes of grace; but in several kinds and in a different nature. The Angels
and Saints in the lowest place, our B. Lady above them, and Christ in a higher
nature transcending both them and her. And our B. Lady had not only a higher
nature of grace then the Angels and Saints had; but she had also a greater
capacity in her soul, which God created as a more ample and capable vessel
containing a greater measure of grace then they could contain, although full
also in their measure and capacity: and therefore she is compared to that huge
vessel called the Sea, Reg. 3.7.
which Solomon caused to be made for the Temple, which contained ten thousand
gallous according to Authors; and unto the maine Ocean. Chrysol. ser. 146.
Albert. sup. missus Bonau. in spec. virg. cap. 2.
But it is to be observed that our blessed Savior being not only creature
according to his humanity, but also the Creator of the world according to his
divine nature, he is not to be numbered in the number of creatures; and
therefore the Saints, and holy Fathers commonly say that our B. Lady in grace
and glory surpasses all creatures, not numbering Christ; and so we say
properly that she is above all pure creatures, that is to say only creatures.

But that we may not seem to exaggerate toward her praises more then due,
and to say any thing without good grounds, you shall see as much, and more then
we have said to be grounded upon the solidity of many bundreds of years
standing, ever from the times of the primitive Church of Christ, for the first
six hundred years, when the very enemies of the Catholic Church that now are,
confess the Christian Faith to have been most pure from error, and the Church
most flourishing; the holy and learned men of those times have setforth her
praises after the same manner, and in the very same terms, which we now use,
and have prayed unto her, calling her Mistres, Lady, Queen, Mother of God, and
the like titles, to honor her, and to increase the denotion of people unto her.

First in the first age Saint James the Apostle in in his Lyturgy which he made
for the Church service, would not omit to make a commemoration of her. But
beginning the words of the Hail Mary, as the Angel did, he repeateth them,
and calls her, most holy, undefiled, blessed above all, our Queen, Lady,
Mother of God. Saint Ignatius lived in the same age, was disciple to Saint John
Evangelist, and died a glorious Martyr in the next age after: hedeclareth how
greatly she was honored even then when she lived; that multitudes of people
came to visit her, when they were converted to Christianity. Great is the
concourse of people (says he) that goes to see the Queen of Heaven, Ign. ep.
1.
and to hear her, and again he calls her, the Mistres of the Christian
Faith. Saint Denis first Philosopher of Athens, and then the disciple of S.
Paul, in his book de diuinis nominibus cap 33. relates how that himself
after his conversion went to see her, for that she was left to be the comfort,
and joy of Christians after the Ascension of Christ: and in his Epistle to
Timothe he describes the manner of her departure out of this life; how that
all the Apostles, except S Thomas, being brought together miraculously from the
several parts of the world to be present at her death, with devout Canticles
they celebrated her funerals for three days, the Angels joining their heavenly
melody with them: and that Saint Thomas coming the third day, and desiring to
see her sacred corpse, her tomb was opened, that he might see her at least
after her death, but he saw her not, for that she was not there to be seen. A
great sweetness issued out of the Sepulcher, and the linnens in which she was
wrapped were left in it; but her sacred body was not there. Thus Saint Denis
and he concludes this narration saying, That it could not be thought, but
that as God would preserve her Virginal body free from corruption in the
Conception of her Son; so he would preserve it from corruption after her
death, and Assume it to the glory of Heaven before the general glorification
of other bodies at the day of judgment. Saint John Damascen relates this
history out of S. Denis, De dorm. deip.
whom he cites as an eye witness of it; and says that her tomb, and
linnens that were left in it, were transferred in the time of the Emperor
Marcion with great solemnity from Jerusalem to Constantinople. Saint Augustine
does not only approve of the corporal Assumption of our blessed Lady into
Heaven; but also proves it as most congruous to the dignity of the Mother of
God. Aug. de Assump. to. 8.
That (says he) the sacred body of which Christ took flesh, and united
together the divine and humane nature, should be given to the worms to eat: I
dare not say it, nor can I think it. Thus much out of saint James, saint
Denis, and saint Ignatius for the first age.

In the second age lived S. Irenaeus and Tertullian, both of them have set
forth her ample praises comparing her by contrarys to Eve, Iren. l. 5. Tertl.
l. de Incarnat. Christi.
who was our mother, that caused our fall, hurt, and loss of Heaven; but the
B. Virgin is our Mother, by whom we are raised, cured, and restored to heaven
again. And in respect of the power which her prayers have with God. S.
Irenaeus calls her the Virgin Advocate of Eve the Virgin.

In the third age lived Origin a man of such parts, to. 3. ho. 1.
and so well deserving in his former years, that he had a chair of public
lecture of divinity in the Schools of Alexandria, when he was but eighteen
years of age: he speaking of Christ and his Mother has these words. His
Mother, mother immaculate, mother incorrupted, mother untouched. His mother,
whose mother? the mother of the only begotten Son of God. O great Sacrament!
the same a virgin and the mother of our Lord, and a little after, of this only
begotten Son of God this is the mother, the Virgin Mary. The worthy of the
worthy one, the undefiled of the holy one, the friend of the only one.
Tertullian lived in this age, although he seems to have flourished most in
the former. Saint Athanasius also lived in this age, but flourished most in the
next, where I go to cite him.

In the fourth age S. Athanasius flourished, who opposing himself against the
Arian haeretiks, for forty six years in which he was Bishop, was the prime
pillar of the Catholic Church in the eastern parts of the world. In these
words he sounds the blessed Virgins praises, and prays to her. It becomes
us to call thee the regenerating mother, Mistres, and Lady, for that our King,
Lord, and God sprang forth of thee. Athan in euang. deip.
The Archangell gathered the first fruits of thy praises, when he spoke that
glorious hymn. Hail full of grace, etc. So does the first front of Thrones,
Cherubims and Seraphims, salute thee: and so does the second Hierarchy, of
Dominations, Virtues, and Powers: and so does the third of Angels: and we the
terrestrial hierarchy admonished by them, extol thee with a loud and clear
voice, saying: Hail full of grace our Lord is with thee: Pray for us o Lady, o
Mistres, o Queen, o Mother of God.

In the same age lived S. Ephrem who calls her, Holier then the Seraphims,
with out comparison more glorious then the supernall hosts. The hope of the
Fathers, the glory of the Prophets, the praise of the Apostles: Virgin before
her child bearing and after it. In this age also live Saint Hierome. S
Chrysostom, Saint Ambrose, and Saint Augustine, whom God raised as glorious
lights to illustrate his Church in those blind and obstinate times, of the
Arian herely being at the hight, And they have said so much in devotion to our
blessed Lady, that I know not where to begin their Sentences. You may read in
S. Hier. ep. de Not. Mar. ad Crom. and Heliod. to. 9.
Hierome the miraculous manner of her Conception of S. Anne an aged, and barren
woman, and how the name of MARY which in Hebrew is to say MISTRES, or LADY, was
brought for her by an Angel from Heaven. Who also foretold to Ioakim her
father, that she should be blessedamong women, and how she was consecrated to
the service of God at three years old in the Temple, and attended their being
governed by priests; Esa. 11.
and how that the Prophecy of Esaias was literally denoted in S. Ioseps rod,
which miraculously flouri^hed to assign him as a worthy husband for her. And
in another place he calls her the life, Epist. ad Paul. and Enstoc.
rule and discipline of all, and says, that as there is none Holy to compare
with God; so there is none perfect in comparison of her, Saint Chrysostom,
Truly this Virgin is the miracle of the world. Chry. in hypa. dom.
She alone surpasses in greatness both Heaven and Earth. For what is there
holier then her? not the Prophets, not the Apostles, not Martyrs, not
Patriarks, not the Angels, not the Thrones, not the Dominations, not the
Cherubims, not the Seraphims, nor any other thing is there to be found
greater, or more excellent then her, either amongst visible, or invisible
creatures. You may see in the second book which S. Ambrose wrote of Virgins,
and in S. Augustins sermons of her Nativity, and Assumption, the devotion which
they bore to her.

In the next age began Nestorius his heresy, the professed enemy of Christ
and of our blessed Lady; so far as to deny unto him one only person of God,
and by consequence to rob her of her prime title, and honor of the Mother of
God. Many holy men began then to bestirre themselves for the honor of
Christ, Cyr. cont. Nestor.
and his Mother; but Saint Cyrill of Alexandria was his prime Antagonist, and
next under God, the prime defendour of the Catholic cause; who thus expresses
his devotion to her. Praise be to thee, o Holy Trinity! to thee also be praise
Holy Mother of God. Thou art the precious pearl of the world. Thou art the
candlestike of unquenchable light, Orat. de dorm. deip.
the Crown of virginity, the Scepter of the Catholic Faith.

In the sixth age lived Andreas Hierosolymitanus Bishop of Crete, who calls
our blessed Lady, a saint holier then the Saints, the most holy treasure of all
sanctity. Eusebius Emissenus lived in the same age, who speaking of our B Lady,
was stricken with astonishme^t that he knew not what to think of the greatness
of her graces. For (says he) if she were full of grace before she conceived,
what shall we think her to have been after it. But what what then shall we
think her to have been after so many years of continual, and such intimate
conversation with Christ? she being his mother and he her master.

Thus you have the devotion of the ancient Fathers to our blessed Lady for the
fist six hundred years of the Faith of Christ, declaring a far different
spirit in them from those, who wickedly blaspheme her, or derogate from her
praises, or but any way slight them, as the modern enemies of the Catholic
Church commonly do. I might produce the Sentences of holy men in following
ages unto our days, to show the contiruance of that first and ancient
denotion to her, to have been at all times in the Catholic Church. I might
allege the words of S. Anselme, Auth. Protest. relig. l. 1. c. 6. 3.
Saint Bernard, Saint Bonauenture, Saint Thomas of Aquine, the denotion of S.
Dominike. S. Francis, and of many other Saints (some of whom are acknowledged
for holy men, and Saints even by Protestant authors.) These great servants of
God were most singularly devoted to his blessed Mother, many ways. Some of
them instituted particular devotions to her, and inuiting all to those
devotions have spared noe labor to increase her honor, and the number of her
servants. But this needs not; for that I have showed it to have been the
devotion of the Catholic Church in those times, in which her enemies confess,
and must needs confess the true faith of Christ to have flourished, if ever
it flourished. That which the Catholic Church still labors for, is to
preserve in her people the same devotion which was then given to her. And
therefore she consecrateth Churches, erecteth altares, instituteth holy days,
and omitteth nothing to setforth her worthy praises, and the power of her
intercession, which afterward I shall show.

The English Protestant Church is not yet so ancient, but that I have known
diverse who have remembered the like devotion to have been in this kingdom to
her, when the Catholic religion flourished in it. English men were then
blessedly and singularly above other nations devoted to her, rejoicing in her
patronage, and joyful solemnitys. But now that joy is turned into hatred and
contempt, and her chief solemnitys are blotted out and profaned by them; and
yet absurdly, and without consequence they will seem to honor the Saints,
comma^ding their holidays to be kept. Is it not an absurd and malicious
proceeding in them to her, to command the holidays of the Saints, and Angels,
as lawful and fitting, and to take away the chief holy days of our B. Lady?
yet this the English protestant Church has done; as may be seen in their
commune prayer book, where the Feasts of the Apostles, and of other Saints,
and of the Angels, are commanded by their Church, and not the Nativity and
Assumption of our B. Lady, which were allwais held her chief solemnitys. As
for her Annunciation and Purification, they may observe them in honor of the
Conception and Presentation of Christ, and cunningly seem as though they would
honor her; but this cunning is worth nothing to those that understand her
Nativity and Assumption to be her chief and most propper feasts, and so
ancient that S. Hierome and S. Augustine have left sermons which they made of
them; and which they taking away, keep noe day at all as propper to her. It is
the nature of malice to hate all that which is worthy of love; and of envious
persons to hate that which their enemies love, though never so good. This is
the very true cause why the beginners of this English religion would take away
her two chief holidays. They see the Catholic Church to advance her honor,
and to be (...) ^ularly devoted to her; and therefore of malice and envy to the
Church, they labor what they can to pull down her honor, and to disgrace
her. What injury had the most blessed of women, and their particular patroness
done to them? in what had she deserved this at their hands? but that they would
oppose the Catholic Church. S. Hierome speaking of the feast of the Assumption
says, If we be commanded to honor God in his Saints, how much more in this
solemnity? Ep. ad Paul. and Eustoch. to. 9.
I would all Englishmen had known these words, and remembered them when the
beginners of their new religion took away that festival day; they would not
perhaps have permitted this disgrace to have been put upon their patroness, in
whom their nation had so long been honored, as to let them take away her
Assumption, which according to S. Hierome, and to reason is much more to be
honored then the Assumptions of other Saints, which they keep. But let us go
on in honoring of her.

We will now gather together, out of the sentences of the holy fathers
alleged, a posy as it were of our B. Ladys praises, taking only the sum of
them in breife. First for her sanctity they affirm her to have excelled all
creatures, there being nothing in heaven and earth to compare with her, all but
God inferior to her. As for sin it is certain that she never committed the
least Venial sin: in so much that S. Augustine will have noe mention of
sin to be made in her: Aug. l. de not. and gra. c. 8. Sess. 6. c. 23.
and the Council of Trent does sufficiently declare it. She had the grace of
all virtues, faith, hope, charit, (...) humility, patience, chastity, meeknes,
fortitude etc. in an eminent degree above all. She was a perpetual Virgin. Con.
Ephesians. and Chalced. Syn. 6. c. 2. Mariae Virginitas ante partum, in partu and
post partum intemerabilis. Marys Virginity before her child bearing, in her
child bearing, and after her child bearing unviolated. She did not only
observe perpetual Virginity; but she observed it by vow, According to S.
Augustine l. 4. de Sancta Virginitate, and S. Gregory Naz. orat. in Sanctam
Natiuitatem: and it is inferred out of her answer to the Angel, when she said
how shall this be done? because I know not man. Luc. 2.
That is to say I can not lawfully know man: as the hebrew children said to
Nabuchodonosor we worship not thy Gods: that is we must not, and cannot
lawfully worship them. Dan. 3.
But the B. Virgin might lawfully have known man, if she had not made a vow to
the contrary. Neither is there otherwise any congruity in her answer. Dr
Kellison is of opinion that she was the first that ever vowed perpetual
Virginity: In 3. part.
for (says he) although Chastity were held in great esteem both amongst the
Jews, and Gentiles before the coming of Christ; yet they vowed it not for
ever; but only for a certain time. S. Ambrose confirms it when he calls
her the standart bearer of virginity, Amb. to. 2. de inst. Virg. c. 5. Bed. in
Luc. 1.
as going before all in the perpetual vow of it. But S. Bid says more
planely that she was the first that emancipated herself to that virtue, which
must be understood by perpetual vow; for there were diverse before her, that
vowed it for a time. So that we may number this amongst our B. Ladys praises
that she was the first foundres of the perpetual vow of Virginity, and so she
is the particular patroness of Priests, and religious persons that follow her
in that vow. She had more over a gift of God to make those to be Virgins that
conuersed with her: and so says S. Hierome that she made S. Joseph to be a
Virgin; and S. Ambros. that she made S. John Baptist to be a virgin by her
virginal conversation: that as it is written of the Cedar tree and of the
flowers of vines, Amb. de Instit. virg. c. 7.
that they drive away all venomous beasts from about them: so the blessed
Virgin had the virtue to expel all unchaste desires and carnal inclinations
from those that came about her, and and to make them virgins: and therefore
those words of the Scriptures are well applied unto her by the Church, I am
exalted as a Cedar in Libanus. Eccli. 24.
I as a vine have fructifyed sweetness of odor. Christ would be botne of a
Virgin for the honor of virginity, and to condemn Iovinian and other
licentious haeretiks that were to condemn it. And therefore he would observe
it himself, and have his mother to observe it by vow. Neither was her marriage
opposite to this vow; for as it was revealed unto her that without detriment of
her virginity she should conceive, so without doubt her integrity in marriage
(which was less) was also by divine revelation made known to her. Christ
would also be borne of a married woman for the honor of marriage, and to
refute the Encratites, and such like fantastical haeretiks, that were to
condemn it; and also to co^serue her honor that she might not be suspected
tohaue conceived unlawfully, and as such to be subject to the penalty of the
law. S. Ignat. Martyr and S. John Damascen add also a third reason: to wit to
conceal the manner of her conception from the devil; that he might not strive
to hinder in any thing the more perfect working of that mystery, which was
fullfilled in her: and therefore they seem to think that God would bind and
limit his understanding so, that seeing her to be married, he should not
attend to the manner of her conceiving; but that she conceived as a married
woman. In brief the sum of her praises out of the Sentences of the Fathers
alleged is, That she excels in dignity, sanctity, and glory all men and
Angels, even the highest Seraphims; that she is the miracle of the world that
she is our Lady, our Mistres, our Queen, the Mother of God, the Treasure of
Sanctity, that she was undefiled, and untouched with sin; that her life is
the rule and discipline of ours; that she was a perpetual Virgin and the
crown of virginity; that she is the Mistres, and Scepter of the Catholic
Faith; and that she is our Advocate. These are the praises which you have seen
given aunciently by the holy Fathers to her, and which all Catholics will
ever give her. Well might the Angel salute her full of grace, whom God had
filled with such graces. With what reverence may we think he comported
himself to her? he named her not at first hy her proper name, as we do when
we say, Hail Mary full of grace, with more hopes and confidence to require her
intercession, which the Angel required not; but afterward seeing her troubled
at his speech, to comfort her, he presently called her by her name, saying,
Fear not Mary, it being then nececessary to condescende to a more familiar
manner of speaking then at first he would use of due submission unto her? Out
of all which we may gather what obligation we have to be devoted to our blessed
Lady, and how pleasing that devotion is to God.

OUR LORD IS WITH THEE.
SVCH words are often read in the Scriptures to have been used by way of
salvation. So did the Angel salute Gedeon, Iud. 6.
saying, Dominus tecum, our Lord be with thee. So said Booz to his reapers of
corn, Ruth. 2.
Our Lord be with you. But in these places it is rather understood optatiuely,
wishing, and praying that God might be with them; then as the Angel spoke to
our blessed Lady, indicatiuely, declaring that God was then actually with her,
saying. Our Lord is with thee: and in the Greek the article is here added, to
show that God was after a singular manner with her; to wit disposing and
preparing her by a more eminent degree of grace, presently to be incarnated in
her.

BLESSED ART THOU AMONG WOMEN.
THESE words were first spoken by the Angel, and afterward by S. Elizabeth,
who when the Mother of God came to visit her was inspired to repeat them over
again, and to cry them out with a loud voice, as it were to proclaim her
blessed in that house of Prophets, where Christ our B. Lady, S. John Baptist,
saint Elizabeth, and Zachary then were altogether, reioicing in Christ and in
her blessedness; all of them either Prophets, or more then Prophets.

She is called blessed by contrarys to Eve who by her sin provoked our curse,
and our blessed Lady by her sanctity was the means of our bless: and
therefore as it was threatened to the serpent, Genesis 3.
when he seduced Eve, accursed art thou among all catle, so an Angel was sent
to the B. Virgin to say; Blessed art thou among women; and saint Elizabeth was
inspired torepeate it over again. She was indeed that blessed Mother, who by
her Son bruised the serpents head, and took away the curse of our first
mother from us. Apply here the words of the holy Ghost. Eccl. 33.
Against evil is good, and against death is life; so also against a just man a
sinner. And so look upon all the works of the highest two against two, and
one against one. Against the evil of Eve is the good of Mary, against death by
Eve life by Mary, against Eve a sinner, we have Mary a just woman without
sin. Christ and Mary against the serpent and Eve; Christ against the serpent
and Mary against Eve; and so two against two, and one against one. Eve brought
sin by yielding to the serpent, the blessed Virgin brought Christ to sight
against him, and to free us. Ever blessedmay he be, and blessed that woman by
whom we are all blessed. Let now noe haeretike dare to blaspheme against her
whom the Angel first saluted full of grace, and then styled blessed among
women, and whom S. Elizabeth also declared and proclaimed blessed. Who dare
calumniate her, whom God has so honored? We detest the rotten breasts, and
stinking mouths of those, who shall dare to detract from any of the Saints of
God, and much more from the blessed among women.

The Angel, having delivered his embassage to her, expected her answer: the
which she gave in these humble words, Behold the handmaid of our Lord be it
done to me according to thy word. Where she consents to the will of God,
giving her virginal body for his Son to be incarnated in. Presently at these
words a marriage was contracted betwixt the divine and humane nature, and they
being instantly united together, in the womb of the B. Virgin THE WORD WAS
MADE FLESH.

Let every Christians knee bend at these words, and do homage in his heart to
the Word Incarnated, and let him honor the Virgin chosen of God to be the
means of fullfilling that high mystery.

For the greater honor of which we will declare sometihing of the
circumstances of it. Angel Gabriel.
First for the Angels name that brought the message, he is called by the
Evangelist Gabriel: not that the Angels have any proper names, but that they
are assumed, or attributed to them in respect of some mystery to which those
Angels have particular relation. And so this Angel may well be called Gabiel,
which according to Authors is an much as to say, God man, or Man of God, to
signify the mystery which he came to reveal of Christ, God and man. Saint
Bernard thinks him to have been the highest of all the Angelical quires. For
as it is probable that it was the chief of the evil spirits, that seduced
Eve, and caused our destruction; so says he it was convenient that the chief
of the glorious Spirits should bring the message of our reparation. But he is
communely thought to be the chief of the Archangels quire, which is the second
quire of the third Hierarchy, who are the messengers of God designed unto
higher, and more principal mysterys, and have higher illuminations for that
purpose. The manner of his appearance is described by S. Augustine to have been
very glorious, who brings in our blessed Lady speaking these words, tom. 10.
seren. 14. de Natal. dom.
The Angel Gabriell came unto me with a bright countenance, shining garments,
in his gate admirable, in aspect terrible, as bearing reverence in his person
to the mystery which he was to declare.

As for the place where the vision happened, The house of Laureto.
it was in the city of Nazareth, in the dwelling house of Joseph and our
blessed Lady: a place which God has, and does still honor with so many
miracles, that it may be called his Treasury upon earth, or Storehouse of
miracles. Beda de locis sanctis e. 16.
Saint Bede says, that it was consecrated into a Church by the Apostles
themselves. And God to show how much he esteems of the sanctity of it, has
maruelously preserved it, transporting it by his Angels from Palestine out of
the power of insidels first into Illyrium, and from thence into that place of
Italy, where now it remains, called Lauretum: where it is visited and
honored by thousands of pious Catholics flocking unto it, and by the greatest
Princes of Christendom, who of devotion to our blessed Lady have gone or sent
thither. I do not say that all the miracles that are written of the house of
Loreto are to be believed as of faith; yet it were unreasonable to question
them all. I say first and that I am certain of, that all things are possible
to God; and so all things that are written of it are at least possible to him.
I say secondly, and that also I am sure of, that as for the Translation of that
house by Angels, God has actually, done as much for his servants: and he that
will deny this must also deny that Abacuc was carried by an Angel by the hair
of his head out of Jury into Babylon, Dau. 14.
for Daniel the servant of God his sake. Thirdly I say that the miracles which
are their done convince more assuredly for the power of God in that place, and
for the verity of them, then the Sunshine does for any thing which we see with
our corporal eyes. For he that sees for example, lame, and crooked limbs, or
rotten, and withered flesh, to become straight, sound, entire, and of perfect
bigness; or he that sees in a possessed person the devil visibly to change
shapes, or hears him to speak several tongues, Exorcismes,
which the possessed person has no skill of, and is inwardly moved wish a
pious motion of his heart to believe that which he sees to be true, is surer of
it then he is of any thing which he sees only by the sunshine, and has noe
inward pious motion of mind to believe it. Fourthly that which is recorded of
the miracles of Laureto is never published, but upon good authority, prudent
grounds, and sufficient witnesses, warily and strictly examined; and is done
sometimes in the sight of multitudes to testify it; and so in prudence cannot
be denied And to question or to deny all the miracles which are recorded of
that place, is more absurd then if one should question or deny all the whole
records of any commonwealth or Kingdom, which are delivered with much less
circumspection then the historys of Laureto are.

As for the time in which this vision appeared, and in which the mystery of the
Incarnation was fullfilled, it was according to saint Luke, in the sixth month
after the Conception of S. John Bapptist: which being on the 25. of September,
this must have been in March, and to complete six months it must have been on
the 25. of March, as the Church celebrateth it. As for the day some have
contemplated that it was upon a Friday; that as Adam was created on a Friday
and sinned on a Friday, (for he is thought to have been but seven days in
Paradise (so Christ, who was to be a second Adam to the destruction of sin,
and to the reparation of our nature, should be conceived also on a Friday. As
for the hour, it is commonly thought, to have been about midnight, according
to that of holy Wisdom, Sap, 18.
When quiet silence contained all things, and the night was in the midway of
her course thy omnipotent word sallying out of Heaven from the Royal seats,
etc. So also the the figure correspondeth better, to the thing praefigured; the
Angel at midnight killing the first borne of the Egyptians. Let us go on

BLESSED IS THE FRVITE OF THY WOMB.
THESE words were spoken by S. Elizabeth to our B. Lady after her Conception of
Christ. The blessed Virgin as she was full of grace, so also she was full of
charity; and of charity was moved to undertake a troublesome journey unto the
hilly country of Jury, with much fervor and speed to see S. Elizabeth her
cosen, whom she knew by the Angel to have conceived a son in her old age.
Luc 2.
She went (says the Evangelist) into the hilly country of Judah, and entered
into the house of Zachary, and saluted Elizabeth. And it came to pass that as
soon as ever Elizabeth heard her voice, the spirit of prophecy was given to S.
John, who leaped in her womb, and by that leap gave her to understand the
mystery which passed with our blessed Lady. Thus does Saint John Chrysostom
describe this passage. Christ (says he (therefore made his mother to salute S.
Elizabeth, that the word proceeding from the womb in which our Lord dwelled,
might by the ears of Elizabeth descend unto John, and there anoint him for a
Prophet: for presently as the words of her salutation came to her ears, the
child prophesied; not by word but by motion. What would saint John by that
motion say? It was as though he had said, Behold Mother! Behold here the
Mother of our Lord, she that has in her womb the Savior of the world, full
of grace, and blessed among woman, she is come to visit us. She understanding
this, and being replenished with the holy Ghost, cried out with a loud voice to
our blessed Lady, saying, Luc. 1.
Blessed art thou among women, and blessed is the fruit of thy womb. And
whence is this that the Mother of my Lord does come to me. And then the
blessed Virgn in the spirit of prophecy reciprocally began to sing, My soul
does magnify our Lord, and my spirit has rejoiced in God my savior, etc. all
generations shall call me blessed. Because he that is mighty has done great
things to me, etc. How great may we think the joy of Saint Joseph and Zachary
to have been, and of all that house, to see this blessed meeting and heavenly
exultation? All that was here done and said, was in honor of him, who was the
fruit of our blessed Ladys womb.

This fruit was blessed in many respects. First for that it was divine, and had
all the divine perfections, and yet was the fruit of her womb. Secondly, for
that Christ is the fountain and otigen of all our bless by his merits.
Thirdly, for that according to the same humane nature, he was in himself more
eminently blessed then any. Fourthly, for that this fruit came of a better
stock then any: to wit of the holy Ghost, and of the blessed Virgin. Fifthly,
for that this fruit was the only antidote against the forbidden fruit. In all
these respects it was most blessed. And if you would know what fruit is here
understood, it is JESUS. Blessed then is the fruit of thy womb, JESUS. Which
word is here added by the Church to specify the fruit and to honor the
blessed name of him who was as properly the fruit of our B. Ladys womb, as
other children are the fruit of their Mothers wombes; nay more properly, and
particularly then others: for where as all others come of both father and
Mother he came of her only without a father.

HOLY MARY MOTHER OF GOD.
THESE words and all that follow are added of devotion by the Church, and are
thought to have been first used by occasion of Nestorius his heresy: who as he
conceited two persons in Jesus Christ, the one divine the other humane, so he
would not have his mother to be called the Mother of God But this title was
presently allowed of by the Council of Ephesus, as due to her, and Nestorius
was condemned as an haeretike. But now after a thousand years and more, Calvin
starts up wiser then the whole world, saying that we honor her only for a
corporal respect, of propinquity in blood with Christ But Calvin says not
truly. Calu. in Io. 7.
We honor her indeed for her propinquity in blood with Christ; but not only
for that propinquity: for we honor her beside for her eminency in grace, and
for the virtues, and gifts with which her blessed soul was endowed; and
therefore it was not well nor truly said of Calvin, that we honor her only
for a corporal respect of consanguinity with Christ But if Calvin think that
propinquity of blood to be noe honor unto her, and that she is not to be
honored at all in that respect, and will stand obstinatly to defend that
conceit against the whole Church, I tell him that then we must take him for an
haeretike; and of charity to satisfy him, we will show that the scriptures, and
that Christ himself, and the whole ancient Church have honored her in that
corporal respect; and not for her virtues only; but also as she was the mother
of such a son.

The glory of children their fathers. Prou. 17.
Says the holy Proverb Why then shall not we honor the B. Virgin as she was
the Mother of such a son? and give unto the son the glory of a most holy
Mother? The holy Scripture declares that Christ honored her, and was subject
unto her. Luc. 2.
Which could not be for any other reason, but for the propinquity of nature
which she had with him, as she was his mother; to give example to all children
to be subject to their parents. And why shall not we honor that which Christ
honored in her. S. Elizabeth blessed her in that respect, to wit for the fruit
of her womb; and thought it a high and undeserved honor for her, to be
visited by the mother of our Lord. She well knew her great virtues, and eminent
sanctity; yet she was not inspired to bless her for them only; but also, and
that particularly for the fruit of her womb, and in that she was the Mother of
our Lord; as though in that she had said all, supposing her eminent sanctity by
consequence of it. The woman of the gospel seeing the spirit of Christ, and
hearing his wisdom, spoke alowde out of the multitude, saying, Luc. 2.
blessed is that womb that bare thee and the papps that thou did suck Of
which S. Bid says Great was the faith, in Luc. c. 49.
and devotion of this woman, who even when the Scribes and Pharisys blasphemed
our Lord, she with so much syncerity confessed him, that she has confounded
the calumnys of present, and perfidiousnesse of future haeretiks. She has
indeed confounded all such haeretiks as shall dishonor the B. Virgin, or
refuse to honor her for her propinquity with Christ. And although Christ (to
exhort unto holiness of life, and to show that it is the inward sanctity of our
souls, which rendereth us blessed in the sight of God) answered that they are
blessed who keep the word of God: and therefore S. Augustine says that the
Virgin Mary was more blessed in that she conceived Christ in her mind, then in
that she conceived him in her womb, and in that she carried him in her heart
spiritually, then in her flesh corporally; because she merited in that, and not
in this; which we all say: but neither Christ, nor S. Augustine deny, but that
she is to be honored also for her corporal conceiving of him; and Christ as you
have seen did honor her in that respect. She also honored herself in it, and
took it as a great blessing of God, to be chosen to that high maternity, and
meant without doubt that all generations should call her blessed in this
respect; for it is not likely that her intention was to extol her own
virtues, as blessed only for them; but for the great things which the mighty
one had done to her; to wit for the dignity with which God had honored her, in
choosing her before all others to be incarnated of her nature, and to be borne
of her; having disposed and praepared her with fit dispositions for that
dignity: and for this all generations of Catholics will call her blessed,
although Calvin will be none of that generation. The fathers of the ancient
Church gave her, as you have seen, that honorable title of the Mother of God:
and the whole Church in the Council of Ephesus decreed to give it her;
therefore it is lawful to honor her with it.

I say yet more that we may not only honor her in this corporal respect; but
we may also with reason think, that there was noe grace, nor degree of
sanctity ever given to any pure creature, but it was most decent that in this
respect, as she was the Mother of God, she should be endowed with it. This is
expressly avouched by S. Anselme It was decent (says he) that she should shine
with such purity, L. de Conceptu virg li. c. 15.
that under heaven a greater could not be devised. Other Saints say in
substance the same, when in glory and sanctity they prefer her before all
creatures; because they thought that such sanctity was most suetable and
congruous to her dignity, as she was such a Mother; and that the more that they
honored her, the more they honored God incarnated in her, and of her. There is
noe doubt (says Saint Hierome) but whatsoever is worthily attributed to the
Mother of God, Hier. ep. ad Paul. and Eusto. to. 9. Bern. ser. 4. super missus
est.
that appertains to the praises of her son, And S. Bernard. Whatsoever is
spoken of the Mothers praises that belongs to her son. Therefore in
attributing of Sanctity to her, and in honoring her we honor him: and the more
sanctity that we attribute to her, and the more that we honor her, the more we
honor him. It were a saying dishonorable to Christ to impute any heinous sin
unto his Mother, with whom S. Augustine will have noe mention of sin to be
made: and as it were a dishonor to him to make her that bore him, and had the
education of him to be a sinner; so is it most for his honor to have her a
Saint, and above all Saints. We have then out of the scriptures that Christ
honored her, that she took it as an honor to herself, and that S. Elizabeth
and the woman of the gospel honored her as she was the Mother of such a
son: and we have also that it was most decent and becoming her dignity, that
her blessed soul should be adorned with the highest grace, and sanctity, that
ever any pure creature had. I conclude this point with a lesser yet good
authority, it is of Sibylla Tiburtina praising the B. Virgin for her maternity.

O nimium foelix caeli dignissima Matter
Quae tantam sacro lactabat ab vbere prolem.
O very happy and most worthy Mother of heaven
Whose sacred breasts gave suck to such a son.
Where you see her honored, and pronounced happy, for her corporal propinquity
with Christ. Let now all christians that love Christ, love her whom he loved,
and honor her whom he honored. If he be a good son, he would make his Mother
to be worthy of honor, and if we be good servants, we will honor the Mother
of our master. And so we honor her as his Mother: not that it was the
Physical or Moral cause of her sanctity; for that was the divine grace and her
own merits by cooperating with it: but that her being the Mother of such a
son was in it self honorable.

When we say the Mother of God we mean that she was the true Mother of him,
who was true God; which all good christians believe and none but such as
Nestorian haeretiks will deny: for as we say truly that S. Elizabeth was the
Mother of a Prophet, but not as he was a Prophet, but according to the nature
which he received of her; so we say truly that our B. Lady was the Mother of
God, though not as he was God, but according to his humane nature which
proceeded from her.

PRAY FOR US SINNERS.
AS for the power and acceptance of our B. Ladys prayers, it is far greater
then we can express. What if I should say that it pleases God better that we
go to her to pray for us then that we come immediately to himself.

Certainly we may say that it pleases him better that we bring his prime
favorite to wit his Mother to pray for us; then that we come by ourselves only
without her to him, and that he delights more and grants rather at her
prayers, then at ours: which is but a small praise to her. I will say more; and
that is, that I think without doubt, there is noe devotion whatsoever that God
has approved of by so many miracles, as the devotion to our B. Lady, and
that those that are truly devoted to her need not much fear to fall from the
Catholic Church, nor continuing in that devotion to have an evil death. But
my words only are of little value, you shall hear what the Saints and learned
writers of the Church have said of her intercession. Benau. in speculo Mariae
c. 8.
First S. Bonauenture proves out of S. Augustine that she is more careful
and sollicitous for her clients then any of the Saints: and whether her power
be equal with her care, you shall hear what others say. Germanus
Constantinopolitanus a very ancient author speaks this sentence to her.
There is none saved, but by thee O most holy Virgin, Germ. in zona.
there is none delivered from evils, but by thee O most pure: there is noe gift
granted, but by thee O most chaste: there is none that has the favor to be
pittyed, but by thee O most honorable. Mark, I pray you how general these
words are? that noe good is obtained, nor evil prevented but by her means. S.
Anselme in the book which he wrote of her praises praying to her, says, that
God has so exalted her that he has made all things possible to her, and that
she can ask nothing but it is granted. But S. Peter Damian goes further to
say the same by a very high expression of eloquence. Ser. de Not. Mar.
She goes up (says he) to the golden altar of reconciliation, not to ask,
but to command, not as a handmaid, but as a mistres. Here an haeretike would
catch at his words, and think that he had something to take hold of; but he
should be deceived: for this is only a kind of Rhetorike which the Saints
would use to setforth the liberality of God at the prayers of his servants;
which is such as though his benignity nignity bound him to obey their desires.
And it is a kind of Rhetorike which the Holy Ghost has taught them, and has
warranted by his own example, himself using it. Iosue the captain of the
people of God having put his enemies to flight, and wanting day to pursue them,
made his prayer and commanded the sun and moon to stand still, until he had
taken revenge of them. Where upon holy scripture says the sun and moon
stood still our Lord obeying the voice of a man. Ios. 10.
As though holy Iosue by prayer had had God at obedience. S. Bernard was
allwais mellifluous; yet never so much, as when he had occasion to speak of
our B. Lady. Ber. ser. in vigilia Not. Dom. Ber. ser. de Assump.
He shall close up the quire of the fathers with these few words in which he
says that God will grant nothing, but it must pass through Marys hands. And
in another place he commends her so affectionatly for mercy toward her
clients, that for all the devotion that he bore to her, and for as much as he
desired that all should praise her, yet he bids him to forbear her praises,
and to speak noe more in commendation of her mercy, who can but remember, that
at any time she failed him in his necessitys, when he called upon her. As S.
Bernard has concluded for the Saints and fathers; Kellis, to. 1. in 3. par. q.
17. art. 6. dub. 1.
so shall Dr Kellison for modern authors, and for the Doctors of the
Catholic Church, to show their esteem of our B. Ladys prayers. He delivers
it for probable that as Christ is our mediator to God, so that our B. Lady,
the Angels, and Saints obtain nothing but through his merits and by him; so
our B, Lady is our mediatrix to Christ, and the Angels and Saints ask nothing
of him, but by her. S. Bernard seems to speak for this, where he brings in
our B. In Not. Mariae.
Lady praying to God, and says that Christ will not repel her, nor God him.
This opinion of D^ Kellison is very worthy of a Catholic Doctor, and of a
servant of the B. Virgin; and is to be observed as very well destinguishing the
different degrees of honor, which the Catholic Church gives to God, as
supreme, and to his servants excelling one another under him. The Saints as
inferior mediators under our B. Lady, she inferior unto Christ, he according
to his humanity the highest mediator, God the supreme and omnipotent power,
that grants by their mediation. Was it now well and truly said of Luther in
postilla Annunciationis; and of Calvin in harm. c. 12. that we honor her as
God?

But we will show by some examples how much God honoreth her, and how powerful
the intercession of the Queen of heaven is with him. S. John Damascene writes
how that the Virginity of S. Or. ad Cyp. l. 18.
Iustina Martyr was defended and preserved by having recourse to our B. Lady.
Cyprian having used many allurements to corrupt her, and finding noe means by
which he could prevail, betook himself at last to the devils power, thinking
by enchantments to have conquered her: but she betook herself to our B. Ladys
intercession, and all the power which the devils had was then too weak, and of
noe force against her. Which when Cyprian perceived and that by the devils own
confession that he could not prevail against her, he became a christian and
together with Iustina got the crown of Mar^yrdome.

S. John Damascene who relates this might speak by experience of our B. Ladys
power. He was a man of eminent sanctity and learning in his time, and a great
defendour of our B. Ladys honor. Amongst other works which he wrote, he
setforth three books of holy images: by which the Iconoclast haeretiks, that
went about destroying of images, were so incensed against him, that (as the
fashion of haeretiks is) they accused him to his Prince as a traitor, and
disturber of the public peace. Who being a Saracene, and too credulous of
their false accusations, commanded his right hand to be cut of. But the
sentence being executed, it fell out better then the haeretiks expected. For
the servant of God being very much troubled to see the want of his hand, which
he had used and thought still to have used in his service, with many tears
besought the B. Virgin, who is the comfort of the afflicted to comfort him,
promising that if his hand were restored again, he would employ it still in
defense of the divine honor, as he had done before. In that trouble of mind
he fell a sleep, and in his sleep he saw the image of our B. Lady before
which he prayed with a gracious and comfortable aspect beholding him, and heard
it say. See now your hand is sound again; he careful to employ it according
to your promise. And awaking out of his sleep he found it restored sound and
perfect. Canisius l. 9. c. 19.

In the reign of the Emperor Justinian a certain steward of a Church in
Cilicia, and as some say an Archdeacon by name Theophilus, who had lived in
great esteem, and had refused the dignity of bishop, was deprived of his
office by some that aemulated him. Which disgrace (as he accounted it) was so
grievous to him, that by pride and melancholy he became desperate to the utter
contempt of salvation, and by a Jewish sorcerer was persuaded to put his soul
into the devils power, giving him for security a bond of his own hand writing
with it. But afterward being stricken with remorse, he began to think of
the miserable state in which his soul was, and how to disenslaue it out of the
devils bondage. He happily had recourse unto our B. Lady, and going into a
Church consecrated to her, he remained there day and night, cleaving as it were
to the ground in prayer and penance to implore help of her. In the end his
feruerous prayer was heard, and his petition granted: in proof of which the
bond of his hand writing in the presence of many by the power of God was
restored unto him, and put into his hands again. Where upon afterward he
became a great servant of God, and a canonized Saint. This is related by
Canisius l. 5. c. 20. and proved by sufficient testimony of authors, and
especially by Eutichianus Patriarch of Constantinople, who says, that he was
borne in the house of the said Theophilus, and was an eye witness of this
miracle. But I will speak that which I know my self.

A Catholic woman in the Bishoppricke of Durham, being apprehended for her
religion, and committed to Durham jail, was permitted to go home against the
time of her child bearing. When her time came she had a long and very sore
labor, and was brought to that extremity, that her neighbors who were about
her lamented hopeless of her life. But she called earnestly upon our B. Lady,
and perseuering still to call upon her, behold there enters into the room a
woman of a very grave, and comely aspect; and drawing near unto her, in the
sight and hearing of all, both Catholics and Protestants that were present, she
bad her be of good cheer; and making the sign of the Cross over her whole body
from her head to her feet she departed presently leaving all that were present
astonished at her. After her departure the sick woeman began to have a
better labor, and was safely delivered of a son: who arriving unto man's
estate, became a lay brother of a religious order, in which for any thing I
know he is still living. The woman recovered very well, and in her old age
related the whole passage unto me. Which although I had heard of by a friend
before; yet I was very glad to have it from her self, who to my thinking was
one of the most matronlike and saintlike women that ever I saw.

The power of our B. Lady has appeared noe less in terror of her enemies,
then in favor of her friends. This I should not doubt to prove, if need
were, by whole armies of men, and douils defeated by her. But I will allege
noe more but the two examples of her two notorious enemies Nestorius, and
Constantinus Copronymus Nestorius was her professed enemy: for as he conceited
a humane person in Christ as man; so by consequence he robbed his Mother of
her supreme title of the Mother of God. He would have her to be called
Christotoca, or Christipara, the Mother of Christ; but not Th^otoca or Deipara,
the Mother of God. S. Cyril Patriarch of Alexandria undertook chiefly against
him, and spared noe labor to reduce him from his errors, often writing unto
him, and giving him several meetings to convince him in presence: but all
proouing in vain, a General Council was conuened at Ephesus, in which Cyril
praesided in place of S. Celestine then Pope. Thither came Nestorius with his
followers; and there he was put to such a public shame, that with six only
accomplices he went out of the Concell refusing to submit to it; and so his
opinions became haeretical and accursed. And although when he saw John
Patriarch of Constantinople, who had some what favored his cause, to forsake
him afterward, for the disastrous ends of many of his followers, he would then
seem to repent; yet he had too much haeretical pride to go thorough with his
repentance, and to submit although to the whole world: but continuing still
in his obstinate mind, he suffered condign punishment, even in this world,
wande^ing from place to place, as a vagabond, and desperate Cain, and in the
end was swallowed up by the earth alive. It being also recorded of him, that
his blasphemous tongue was eaten out with worms before his death. Pratcol.
verb. Nestorius,

The second example is of Constantin the fifth Emperor of that name, so
contemptible to posterity, that he has purchased the foul Surname of
Copronymus, for that he defiled the font in baptism. He was a very evil man,
a prophanour of holy things, even to the breaking of Crosses and Crucifixes,
and a public scoffer, especially, at the B. Virgins merits: in derision of
whom he used to hold up a purse full of money and to ask his soldiers what it
was worth? and when they had told him what they thought, he put forth the money
and held up the empty purse, asking them what it was worth then? and when they
answered that it was worth nothing, noe more said he was Mary when Christ was
out of her. But God punished his blasphemys with many and grievous punishments.
First as one sin is punished with another, so he punished him by most
horrible sins, and by a most enormious course of life, which he permitted him
to fall into, even to the denying of his christendom, and to set up altars
unto Venus, whose nightly solemnitys, he kept, and killed children to sacrifice
unto her. But in the end his pleasures forsook him, and the punishments of God
came as a deluge upon him, afflicting him by grecuous pains of feauers,
goutes, and so horrible a leprosy, that in a rage of torment he died crying
out I am burnt with everlasting fire. Prateol. verb. Constantinus. Pray for us
blessed Mother of God.

NOW AND IN THE HOUR OF OUR DEATH.
ALTHOUGH the enemy of God be allwais laboring against us, going about as a
Lion to devour our souls; yet he strives most against the hour of our
deaths, waiting then as a serpent at our heels, that is to say at the hinder
end of our lives, to supplant us; knowing that his time is then but short.
Apoc. 12.
The devil is descended to you (says the voice from heaven) having great
wrath knowing that he has but a little time. And therefore amongst many other
helps which we have then in the Catholic Church, we implore the assistance of
the Mother of God especially against that hour. The death of S. Steuanking of
Hungary is worthy of memory: in which it was a more honorable spectacle both in
the sight of God and man, to see his Peers round about him to weep tears of
devotion when he commended them and his kingdom to our B. Ladys protection,
then the sweetest hour that ever they enjoyed of his wordly majesty. He fell
sick against the feast of her Assumption, and made his prayer that he might die
on that day on which the death and Assumption of the Mother of God is
celebrated by the Church. The day being come, the Sacraments and holy rites
were administered to him, and in the presence of his Prelates and Peers having
made a speech in which he tendered his crown into her hands, he departed this
life, lea^ing them with their eyes and faces bathed in tears.

It has often been a comfort to me to think of the happy passage of a young
Gentleman with whom I assisted at his death. Who being at the last assalted
with a strong and violent agony, he constantly called upon our B. Lady, with a
loud and earnest voice often repeating Blessed Mother of God be my Advocate.
Blessed Mother of God be my Advocate. And presently casting his eyes toward
the bedfeete he seemed there to receive comfort, and putting on a sweet and
pleasant aspect with a smiling contenance he departing this world, as though
some had called him out of prison. I say noe more but that which S. Hierome
expressly says, and that is that our B Lady helps and is present with those
that die. That she helped him, Hier. ad Eusto.
I make noe question of it for his earnest prayer: but both at that time and
ever since I have thought that she was also visibly then present with him.

I have now performed what I promised in honor of the B. Virgin. You have
heard her saluted full of grace, and you have seen how this salutation was new
and reserved only for her. You have seen her become the Mother of God, and
the son of God declared to have been subject to her; you have heard her
extolled by Prophets in the house of Zachary whilst she lived, and what has
been written of her after her death; you have heard the fathers of the
primitive Church one by one singing her praises, and the whole Catholic Church
in a full quire answering after them to desire her prayers; you have seen by
some examples how beneficial her prayers are to her friends; and the judgments
of God upon her enemies. Let us honor her whom God has so honored; and let us
dedicate our selves from this very instant to her protection all our life time,
and at the hour of our death.

Amen.

THE NINTH DISCOVRSE. OF THE ROSARY.
I Intend now to declare to you the mysterys of the Rosary, or Beads: which
as it is a devotion so much frequented by all sorts of Catholics, not only
unlearned, but also even by the most learned, and holiest of the Catholic
Church; so it is fitting that all should understand it, and know how solid
and pious it is. But fist we will say our wonted Hail Mary, etc.

The devotion of the Rosary or Beads confisteth most of the Hail Mary, a
prayer which we ought to esteem of for many reasons. We may say that next
unto the Pater Noster, it is the best of all prayers. First, for the dignity of
those that made it. Christ made the Pater Noster, and the Angel Gabriel, Saint
Elizabeth and the Church made the Hail Mary, and all other prayers are made,
or allowed of only by the Church: so that the Hail Mary is in the middle
place, below the Pater Noster, and above all other prayers. Secondly, it is
very much to be esteemed of for our blessed Ladys sake, who is the most worthy
and noble personage of all creatures: and as the Pater Noster is the chief and
proper prayer of all which we say immediately to God: so the Hail Mary is the
chief and most proper prayer of our blessed Lady. Thirdly, it is most
eminently to be esteemed of for the mystery which is chiefly concerned in it:
to wit the mystery of the Incarnation, which is the chief mystery of the
Christian faith: and this we profess in the words of the Angel coming from
Heaven with the newse of it to declare to the blessed Virgin that then
presently it was to be accomplished in her, and saluting her, saying, Hail
full of grace, our Lord is wrth thee, blessed art thou among woman, etc. These
words in our Beads, we often repeat, and we have good reason often to
repeat them, to remember that mystery, to celebrate that blessed hour of the
Son of God his Incarnation. Saint Athanasius called them words of praise to
our blessed Lady. and says that the quires of Heaven are incessantly singing
that, which he calls, a most glorious and ample Hymn; In euang. deip.
and therefore we will often repeat it with the Angels. S. Hierome reports
of the Jews, that every day in their Synagogues they curse the Christians.
Hier. in c. 5. Esa.
We curse not them, but pray for their conversion; but if we curse them not
we ought at least to bless God for our selves, and often to remember our own
happiness, thankfully acknowledging the mystetys of the Chrystian faith. A Jew
would by glad to see the memory of Christ rooted out of the world; but this he
shall never see. Good Christians will allwais reverence him, keeping those
solemnitys, and practicing those ceremonys, and prayers that put us in mind of
his goodness. And therefore we often say the Hail Mary in remembrance of the
benefits which we have by him, and to honor her that bore him, and to crave
her prayers.

Saint Dominike was the first that devised the Rosary as it is now used. A man
of that sanctity of life; that Protestants themselves acknowledge him for a
holy Saint. He was a Priest of the Catholic Church: and as such he thought
himself indebted both to the wise and unwise. To discharge this debt he
devised the devotion of the Rosary; which although it were chiefly intended for
the good of the ignorant that can not read: yet it may be used also by the
learned, as now we see it is by the greatest Doctors of the Catholic Church of
devotion to our blessed Lady. Those that can read have their books to pray in;
and those that cannot read, have their Beads as books to employ themselves
in, in which they may read the chief mysterys of the life, and death of
Christ, and our B. Lady.

The Rosary was made by S. Dominike as a holy Psalter, in imitation of that
which King David made. For as it was the devotion of that holy King to compose
a Psater of devout Psalms, and those in number a hundred and fifty; (if they
were all of King David's composing) so it was the devotion of S. Dominike to
devise a Psalter of a hundred and fifty Psalms in imitation of that. And that
this Psalter might be more practiced by all, he made it not of new and
different Psalms which few would have gotten without book; but of so many
Hail Marys which all either have, or should have without book; and which are
to be repeated after such a manner, as might easily be learned of all. And as
the musical instrument which David used in the singing of his Psalms, was an
instrument of ten strings, in relation to the ten Commandments; so would Saint
Dominike divide his Psalter of Aue Marys into tennes destinguished by a Pater
Noster, to be said in the beginning of eyery ten: so that there being in all
fifteen tenns, fifteen chief mysterys of the life and death of Christ, and
of our B. Lady might be celebrated.

The fifteen mysterys corresponding to the fifteen tenns of the Rosary are
distinguished into five joyful, five sorrowful, and five glorious. Tho sieve
joyful are, The Annunciation, The Visitation, The Nativity, The Purification
of our B. Lady or Presentation of Christ, and the Finding of him in the Temple
disputing with the Doctors. The first ten is said in honor of the
Annunciation; which was when the Angel Gabriell delivered to our blessed Lady
that joyful message, announcing unto her that she should conceive in her womb
the Son of the most High The second ten is said in honor of the Visitation;
which was when the blessed Virgin having understood by the Angel that her
cosen Saint Elizabeth had conceived a son in her old age, to wit Saint John
Baptist, she made a visit unto her, to comfort her, help her, and to be as a
handmaid, to serve her the servant of God. And arriving at her house and
saluting her, Saint John Baptist leaped in his mothers womb, Saint Elizabeth
prophesied, and our blessed Lady pronounced a Canticle of joy: in remembrance
of which we offer up the second ten. The third ten is said in honor of the
Nativity of Christ which was a mystery full of joy; first unto our blessed
Lady, as more nearly concerning her in the first sight of her son: and also
to all men, according to the Angels speech. Luc. 2.
Behold I Euangelize to you great joy which shall be to all people, because
this day is borne to you a Savior. And a multitude of the Heavenly army was
suddenly with the Angel, saying, Glory in to the highest God: and in earth
peace to men of good will. The fourth ten is said in remembrance of the
Purification of our blessed Lady, and of the Presentation of Christ, which were
both solemnized together. For the law commanded that the woman, who had
conceived of the seed of man, after her delivery should come to the Temple to
be purifyed, and should present her first begotten to be sanctified to our
Lord: which laws although Christ and our blessed Lady were not subject unto
them; yet of humility they would obey them. Behold now a joyful mystery when
holy old Simeon, who had received of our Lord that he should not see death
until he had seen Christ, expecting his coming to the Temple, did not only
see him; but took him joyfully into his arms: Luc. 2.
and then blessed God, singing like the swanne before his death. Now thou do
dismiss thy servant, o Lord, according to thy word in peace. Because mine eyes
have seen thy salvation. The fifth ten is said in honor of Christ disputing in
the Temple. His parents having been at Jerusalem to solemnise the feast of the
Pasch^ returning home again, and thinking him to have been in the company that
returned with them, they came a days journey and sought him amongst their
kinsfolks: but not finding him they returned to Jerusalem to seek him there:
and after three days they found him sitting in the midst of the Doctors
astonishing all with his wisdom and answers. These are the five joyful
mysterys. The five sorrowful are these. First the Praying of Christ in the
Garden, when the very apprehension of his future Passion was so vehement that
he burst forth into a sweat of blood to think of it. The second is his
whipping at the pillar. The third is his crowning with thorns. The fourth is
the carrying of his Cross, when after that they had weakened him with many
torments, they led him or rather trailed him about the streets of Jerusalem
with his heavy Cross on his shoulders until he was so spout; that they who of
pity would not ease him of it, in the end of cruelty took it from him, to
prolong his life until they had crucified him. The fifth it his crucifying and
death. All which passages were in themselves most dolorous, and next unto
Christ were most grievous to our blessed Lady; who if she were not corporally
present at them, so as to see every one of them; yet without doubt she was
spiritually present at them all, and saw by revelation all which he suffered,
according to the prophecy of Simeon, that a sword should pierce her soul: Luc.
3.
to wit the sword of sorrow which passed through her son. In honor of these
five sorrowful mysterys we say other sine tenns.

The five glorious are first the Resurrection: when Christ rose triumphing over
death on Easter Sunday, the Angel appearing to comfort the devour women, and
to the terror of the soldiers that watched at the monument. The second is his
Ascension, at which the Apostles were ravished to behold his glory. The third
is the Coming of the holy Ghost on Whit Sunday with terrible and astonishing
glory, to strengthen the disciples of Christ in the faith of his Gospel. The
fourth is the glorious Assumption of our B^ Lady: whose soul departing from
her body in death, was presently glorified, and the third day according to
ancient Authors returning to her body to glorify it, they were both together
assumpted into Heaven: for if it be probably thought of those bodies which
arose from the dead in the Resurrection of Christ, that they ascended with him
glorious into Heaven; we can not think with reason that the sacred body of
which our Lord took flesh should corrupt in the earth, and remain so until
the day of judgment vnglorifyed. The sift is her glorious Coronation in the
Celestial Court, And although these two last mysterys, of the Assumption and
of the Coronation of our blessed Lady, may seem to some to be the same; yet
there is a great difference betwixt them; her Assumption intending only, her
state of glory in general, to wit that she was assumed body and soul into
Heaven; and her Coronation importing her particular state of glory, as she is
crowned the Queen of Heaven above all Angels and Saints. These are in breife
the fifteen mysterys of the Rosary. The sieve joyful are the Annunciation, The
Visitation, The Nativity, The Purification of our Lady and the Presentation of
Christ, The Finding of him disputing in the Temple. The sieve sorrowful are,
The Praying in the Garden, The Whipping at the pillar, The Crowning with
thorns, The carrying of the Cross, The Crucifying and death of Christ. The
five glorious are his Resurrection, his Ascension, The Coming of the holy
Ghost, The Assumption, and Coronation of our blessed Lady. When we have not
time or leisure to say all the fifteen tenns in honor of the fifteen
mysterys, we may say sieve in honor of any five of them; either of the five
joyful, or of the five dolotous, or of the five glorious as we will, allwais
concluding with the Apostles Creed in profession of our faith.

It is true all do not understand that these mysterys are thus contained in
the Rosary, nor allways remember them when they say their Beads; but the
Church of God understood and remembered them in the approouing and allowing of
that devotion. It is not necessary that every one understand all the mysterys
that are contained in his prayers; but he shall please God if he conform his
intention to the intention of the Church in them, Luc. 3.
although he understand them not. Who can understand (says Saint Augustine
all the ceremonys of the Church?) yet we please God in observing them; because
we conform our intentions to the intention of the Church, which was directed
by the holy Ghost to ordain them. It were indeed very good that all
understood the mysterys of the Rosary: and therefore we expound them. And it
were very good that all remembered them when they say their Beads: and
therefore before every ten I use to mention in particular the mystery of that
ten: as for example before the first Pat^r Noster Isay, Blessed Mother of God
by thy Annunciation, pray for me. Before the second, I say: Blessed Mother of
God by thy Visitation, pray for me, and so forth of the rest; whether I say
the whole Rosary or only five tenns of it; by which means one shall attend
better to the devotion which he is performing, and perform more expressly that
which the Church intends by it; which is to set holy objects before our eyes,
and to propose to our consideration the mysterys of our faith.

The intention therefore of the Catholic Church by the Rosary is to keep the
ignorant, especially those that can not read employed in this devout exercise,
and to propose unto all the remembrance and consideration of holy things. From
whence proceeds that coldness, loosnes, and auersion from good works, and
holy exercises which is in many, but from the want of consideration of pious
things? Hier. 12.
with desolation is all the land made desolate: (says Hieremy) because there
is none that considers in the heart. Good objects proposed are the seed of
good thoughts, and bring forth good purposes and good works. The feed must
first be sown in the senses, that by the understanding, and will, the fruit of
good works may be produced: and therefore as holy Jacob placed rodds of diverse
colors before his ewes, that they might conceive, and bringforth lambs of
diverse colors like them; so the Pastors of the Catholic Church set before
their people holy objects, that by beholding them they may conceive good
thoughts, and bringforth good works by them. Such objects are all the ceremonys
of the Church, the saying of the Rosary, the sign of the Cross often repeated,
the Au^ Mary bell and the like. And those that would take away those holy
objects from before us, would take away a great means of the good lives of
christians.

But because we have made mention of the Aut Mary bell, Of the Aue Mary bell.
we will make a little digression to declare in a word or two the meaning of it.
The Aue Mary bell ringeth thrice every day, to put us in mind of three holy
mysterys. In the morning in honor of Christ's Resurrection, which was in the
morning time: at noone in honor of his crucifying and death, which was about
noone time; at night in honor of the Incarnation which is thought to have been
fullfilled about midnight, At the ringing of this bell all Catholics where
soever they be, in their houses, in the streets, or fields, say the Angelical
Salutation, as they know, and the prayer after it, in honor of those mysterys.
In which the Catholic Church shows the care which she has over her people,
instituting this short but most profitable devotion, to call them thrice on the
day to the service of God, and to keep their hearts from time to time in a
continual tenderness toward him. Thus much for the Aue Mary bell.

There are dinerse other ways of saying the Rosary beside that which I have
declared. Sometimes we say sixty tenns and three hail Marys; that is sixty
three hail Marys in honor of the sixty three years of our B. Ladys life. S.
L. 2. virg.
Ambrose faith that her life is a pattern of all virtues: which if it be, it
is good to keep it before our eyes at our prayers.

This devotion is called a Rosary, or the Beads. It is called a Rosary;
because those prayers ascend as a sweet odor of roses to God; as when S.
Apoc. 8.
John saw the prayers of the faithful to ascend as the odor of incense. We
call it the Beads meaning the instrument which we use when we say those
prayers: and improperly we term it the saying of our beads, for the saying of
our prayers on them, or by them to remember them the better. But if the number
of those prayers be in it self lawful, the instrument which we use but for
memorys sake can not with reason be disallowed of. Sozomen relates of S. Paul
the Ermite that he used every day to say three hundred prayers, and at the end
of every one to set down a little stone for his memory sake. So we use beads,
(which signify in English any little pieces of stone, bone, wood, or other
substance) to remember our prayers by them. And here it may be observed that it
is not likely that S. Paul said every day three hundred several prayers; but
that he said some one prayer so many times over; for if they had been
different prayers they would have destinguished themselves, and he should not
have needed stones to destinguish them. Nay if we consider it rightly, we shall
find that the letting down of a beade or stone at every several prayer would
rather have hindered, and confounded his memory; for so he must both remember
to set down a stone to signify the number, and must have allwais the same
prayer corresponding to that number, and remember which prayer that was; and
therefore he would not have used stones but to remember how often he had said
the same prayer. Hier. ep. ad Fur.
S. Hierome advises his friend to select a certain number of verses out of
the scriptures, and to say them as a daily task offered up to God. Now if S.
Hierome had advised his friend to say those verses often over, and to use
pieces of stone, bone, wood, or the like, as a memorial to remember them by,
what hurt had he done? he had done that which the Catholic Church does: that
is he had advised to a pious exercise, and to a good means to help their
memory.

But the enemies of the Catholic Church have some thing to object against the
Rosary, by which the solidity of it will appear more. First they say that the
words of the Angel Hail full of grace etc. And the words of S. Elizabeth are
not prayers; for they ask nothing; therefore they are not to be used as
prayers. Here we have that the words of the Rosary are Angelical, taken our of
the holy Scriptures, and we infer therefore they are good to be used in our
prayers. The lepar said to Christ If thou will thou can make mc^ clean. Mat.
8.
In which words he formally and expressly asked nothing. Yet they were well used
of him to procure health of Christ. For although formally and expressly such
words ask not, yet vertually and effectually they are prayers: that is they
have the virtue and effect of prayers with God, who grants our desires for
the reverence and humility which we show by such words: and so the leprous man
vertually and effectually asked by those words, and obtained his desire. So
when Lazarus was sick his sistars Martha and Mary sent unto Christ, saying,
only, Lord behold he whom thou love is sick; Io. 11.
in which words they did not formally and expressly desire Christ to come to
heal him; but vertually they did, and by them they employed as much as to say,
we beseech thee to heal him. S. Augustine, They did not say come and cure him,
Tract. 49 in lo.
it was enough to say he whom thou love is sick; for of those whom thou
love thou dese^test none. They well knew that Christ was not a desertour of
his friends and therefore they expressly asked not, but only told him the
condition of his friend, and this had the effect of prayer with him. So the
words of the hail Mary, as they are terms of reverence and humility to our B.
Lady, have the effect of prayer, although expressly they ask nothing.

Secondly they object: the words of the Hail Mary are the words of the Angel
as by office; therefore he that uses them takes upon him the Angels office.
It was indeed the Angels office in the son of God his Incarnation to say
the words of the Rosary, and to say Glory in the highest to God in his
nativity, and in both sentences we reverence those mysterys and give glory to
God by rehearsing them. S. Athanasius rejoices that all the quires of the
celestial Hierarchys are iucessantly singing that glorious and ample hymn to
wit Hail full of grace; and that we the terrestrial hierarchy of men repeat
it; although the Angel Gabriel was first appointed to say it. S. Athanasius
made a good argument; but it was quite contrary to this. This was his argument.
The words of the Hail Mary are holy and mysterious words spoken by an Angel
to honor the B. Virgin; therefore it is sitting that all Angels, and men should
incessantly use them.

Thirdly they object that our B. Lady is far distant from us, and it is
absurd to salute one at such a distance. But this is noe absurdity; because
distance of place hinders not the intelligence of glorious souls. It were
indeed absurd formen here upon earth to salute one another in absence;
because in absence they understand not; but if they understood, it were
^ather absurd to hinder their communication when it were for a good end. The
blessed Virgin understands in heaven our devotions upon earth; for although
in body she be abse^t from us; yet in spirit sheis present with us: as Elizeus
was absent in body from his servant; but was present in spirit with him, and
saw all that passed betwixt him and Naaman, and told him afterward, Reg. 4.5.
Was not my heart present, when the man returned out of his chair to meet
thee? S. Paul also wrote to the Corinthians, that he was absent in body, Cor.
1.5.
but present in spirit with them. But the blessed Virgin seeeth by the light of
glory the devotion of those that pray to her, and is much more present with
them then Elizeus or S. Paul were whilst they lived upon earth, absent from
them.

Fourthly they object against the often repeating of the Hail Mary, that God
hears as well at once as at many times: but to repeat it a hundred and fifty
times, to what purpose? Yes for many good purposes First to pray with more
fervor, secondly to obtain by perseuering in prayer that, which at first is
not allwais obtained; thirdly to employ ourselves in the consideration of holy
mysterys, such as I have declared to be contained in the Rosary. Christ having
delivered to his disciples the Pater Noster, as a pattern of prayer, showed
them also how it was to be used: to wit with much earnestnes and importunity;
not presently desisting from prayer when we obtain not our desire but
perseuering still to ask. For this he immediately annexed the parabole of a
man, who asking to borrow bread, at first it was denied him; but perseuering to
ask, by his importunity he obtained as many loaves, as he needed. And he did
not only teach this by word, but also by example, praying with much fervor,
and repeating in the garden the same prayer, over, Mat. 26.
and over, and over again: as S. Matthew has noted. He was heard as well at
the first as at the last; but he would teach us to persevere in prayer, and that
God grants for our importunity: and therefore he had at last the comfort of an
Angel appearing to him, which at first it is not likely that he had. The
blind man sitting by the way, when he heard the noise of the multitude, and
understood that Jesus of Nazareth was passing by, cried out Jesus son of
David have mercy upon me. Luc. 18.
And when they rebuked him he cried much more Son of David have Mercy on me.
Christ heard him as well at the first as at the second time; yet at first he
granted not his desire; because he would have him to persevere asking, that he
might commend his faith, grant for his perseverance, and propose him as an
example to teach us how to pray. The holy Kingin the 137. psalm repeateth in
every verse the very same words over again; so that there being 27. verses
the same thing is repeated 27. times, and take up about half of the psalm An
haeretike might ask what need there was of so much repeating the same
thing? To whom I answer, that David was a holy man according to the heart of
God, and would sing the divine praises with much fervor of spirit, repeating
the same words over and over again many times; and so we repeat the praises
of the B Virgin, and double and redouble our prayers to her. Christ says it
behooves allwais to pray, Luc. 8. These. 1.5.
and not to be weary. And S. Paul bids Pray without intermission; but we can
not allwais pray new prayers. If the prayer be a good prayer, the more we
repeat it the more love we show, and more desire of obtaining; and that which
is to the honor of God cannot be asked too often until we obtain it. If it
be good to say a good prayer once every month, it is better to say it once a
week; and if it be good to say it every week, it is better to say it every
day, and better yet to say it every hour; so that we hinder not more necessary
employments. l. 4. c. 28.
Lactantius who lived about a thousand and three hundred years since, and was
master to Constantine the Great, has a discourse of purpose to commend the
often repeating of the Aue Mary.

Fifthly they object that it tastes of superstition to observe such a number of
prayers. I answer that it tastes of superstition to none, but such as are out
of taste with pious things, and with the devotions of the Catholic Church: what
superstition was it in saint Bartholomew and in saint Paul the Ermite to
observe a certain number of prayers every day? An haeretike may call it
superstition in Christ, to choose twelve Apostles corresponding to the twelve
Tribes of Israel, or to pray thrice the same prayer in the Garden; for that the
number of three is often used in the Scriptures to signify the firmness and
stability of any thing, or in a Catholic to say three Pater nosters in honor
of the three persons of the blessed Trinity, or sieve in honor of the five
wounds of our Lord. All which are as much superstitious, as to observe a
certain number of the Aue Marys in the Rosary, And much more superstitious
does it outwardly appear, for Iosue to command twelve men to take up twelve
stones out of lordan, and to lay down other twelve in their places, to signify
the twelve Tribes, then to say a hundred and fifty Aue Marys, in imitation of
David's hundred and fifty Psalms. Yet who dare say that any of these things are
superstitious? We must not go by the outtward appearance; but by the
intrinsecal to judge of the malice of things. Christ must not be judged a
sinner, because he had the outward habit of a sinner. The reason why none of
these things are superstitious is, because there is nothing done in them, but
which has conexion and proportion to a good end, for which it is intended; and
therefore to observe a certain number of prayers in relation to some holy
mystery, not any of the actions above mentioned are in the species of
superstition, nor have the malice of it; because they have proportion to a good
end: which is to stir us up to devotion by the representation of pious
things. Thus you see that the devotion of the Rosary is well grounded upon
good, and holy misterys, and that all objections against it are vain and
groundles: as all must needs be that are objected against the blessed Virgins
honor.

Blessings are given to Beads, to determinate those material things to pious
uses, which in themselves are indifferent to any: for this reason the ornaments
and vessel of the Church service were commanded to be consecrated in the law
of Moses, Exodus 40.
and are now in the law of Christ. The sodality of the Rosary is ^rected in the
order of Saint Dominike, and privileges are granted unto it to excite all unto
that devotion; and I hope our blessed Lady will graciously acknowledge me one
day, although now an unworthy Sodales of it.

Ever since the Empress of the world was assumpted into Heaven, it has been
the custom of the Catholic Church, for all the people, both rich and poor,
to beseech her gracious countenance, and to pray to her: the holy to be
strenghtned in holiness, and sinners to he freed from sin: and as we have
through out the year diverse Feasts which were aunciently by the holy Saints,
and are now by us observed in her honor; so to commend unto all the devotion
of the Rosary Pope Gregory the XIII. of holy memory, appointed the first Sunday
of October to be kept in honor of it. For in the year of our Lord 1571 when
the Catholic Church appeared destitute of humane help, and leaned only on
the arms and strength of her divine Spouse; the Northern parts of Europe
being then lately fallen into heresys, and the Turk coming on the otherside
with a formidable navy to assalt her; it pleased God to defend the Catholic
cause, and to cover our enemies in the sea, by a glorious victory which we got
over the Turk surpassing us in number and force, but inferior by the divine
protection over us, and by the power of our B, Lady then particularly called
upon. For the victory was gained on that day on which the Sodality of the
Rosary was called together to implore especially her assistance: and therefore
the holiness of the foresaid Pope dedicated it as solemn to the Rosary:
showing in two things his wise and pious mind. First in giving the victory not
unto humane power, but to the divine protection, and especially in those
circumstances to our blessed Ladys prayers: and secondly by instituting a
continual memorial in thanksgiving for it: that as in S. Dominiks days when
the devotion of the Rosary was first begun by him, our blessed Lady appeared
in Earl Monforts army sighting against the Albigenses haeretiks, who in mighty
numbers wasted the Kingdom of France; so it was the will of God that her power
should be acknowledged, and the mysterys of the Rosary honored in that late
batle against the enemies of Christ. And as when Queen Ester pecitioning the
King, obtained the lives of the Israeliticall people, a day was set a part for
the solemnity of it; and as the victory of Judith had also a day of solemnity
afterward; so might this day of the Rosary be glorious in our victory when
the Procession of Saint Dominiks order shall sing, Aue maris Stella, to the
triumph of our Lady, and the whole Catholic Church shall answer in their
hearts. Iudit. 15.
Thou art the glory of Jerusalem, thou the joy of Israel, thou the honor of
our people; because thou have done manfully, thou shall be blessed for ever,
etc.

THE TENTH DISCOVRSE. OF THE MASS.
I Am now to speak of the high glory and bright Sun of all devotions: I
mean the Holy Sacrifice of Mass. Which as it is a Sacrifice, it is the
supreme, and highest of all worships, proper only to God: and as such a
Sacrifice of the Body of our Lord, it is more eminent and perfect then all the
Sacrifices that ever were, or ever can be offered. Fist I will speak of the
Mass as it is a Sacrifice. Secondly, of the particular parts and ceremonys of
the Mass. And lastly something of its fruits, and benefits. Let us say the
Hail Mary, for our blessed Ladys intercession. Hail Mary, etc. First

OF THE MASS AS IT IS A SACRIFICE.
Quest. What is the Mass? Answ. The Mass is the continual Sacrifice of the
law of Christ in which his true body and blood is offered under the signs of
bread and wine.

THERE are several kinds of Sacrifices. Diverse kinds of Sacrifice.
First there are spiritual sacrifices, to wit our inward thoughts and good
purposes. And so King David says that an humbled spirit and contrite heart
(that is to say an act of humility and Contrition) is a Sacrifice to God. And
S. Peter writing unto all the faithful requires of them, that they be a holy
Priesthood by this kind of Sacrisice. Pet. 1.2.
Be ye a holy priesthood to offer up spiritual hosts. There are also diverse
sorts of corporal Sacrifices. First such as vocal prayer, kneeling, adoring,
offering of gifts and the like. which as they are corporal worships, they may
be called Sacrifices in a large sense: and S. Augustine says that every good
work is a true Sacrifice: nor that it has truly the nature of a Sacrifice;
but that it is an offering with fruit and good effect to our souls; and not a
false Sacrifice without fruit: as Christ said of himself that he was a true
vine, that was to say a good vine that brings fruit; and not an ill vine
which falsifyeth the hopes of it. But nene of these, neither spiritual nor
corporal are properly Sacrifices, but only in an vnpropper and large sense; in
that they are good works offered up to God; but they are not offered as the
highest worship propper only to him; but may be, and are in their kind given
to men; as when we worship our friends both in our hearts, and with our bodies;
and when we offer gifts to our superiors; as the Kings did to Christ their
superior even as man; but propper Sacrifices are offered to none but God. A
Sacrifice therefore properly speaking is the offering up of some corporal and
sensible thing, as the supreme and propper worship of God. The Mass then is a
Sacrifice in its true and propper sense: that is to say the offering up of some
corporal thing, as an act of highest worship, special and propper only to
God, to acknowledge divine power in him. And thus a Sacrifice may be
understood two ways: either for the action of offering and Sacrifizing; or
else for the thing that is offered and Scrifized: as the word Offering is
sometimes taken for the action of offering; as when we say he was long or
short, gracious or tedious in his offering: and is sometimes taken for the
thing that is offered, as when we say it was a rich or poor offering. So the
Mass is a Sacrifice understanding the action of Sacrifizing. (And so all the
prayers and caeremonys of Mass are parts of it, belonging to its integrity as
it is such a manner of Sacrisizing and offering:) and for the thing offered it
is the true body and blood of our Lord under the sign of bread and wine. So
that both the Mass is a Sacrifice and the body and blood of our Lord is a
Sacrifice. The Mass is a Sacrifice that is the action of Sacrifizing; the body
and blood of our Lord is a Sacrifice, that is the thing which is Sacrifized,
or offered at Mass.

The worship of Sacrifice has been esteemed at all times, and by all religions
so necessary to be given to God, that there never was any religion in the
world (according to Turseline) before the Turks so Barbarous; but as they
allwais worshipped some God, so they offered some kind of Sacrifice to him: in
so much that Plutarch could say that it was easier to find cittys without
temples, Plut. a^ uers. Color.
and coins of moneys without inscriptions. Then temples without altares. To
wit to Sacrifice upon. For the same natural reason that teaches all people to
defend themselves, and to honor their superiors teaches them also to worship
God with some high and sovereign worship above all, propper only to him. And
therefore it was a good expression of this author to declare by the foresaid
similitudes the nature and necessity of Sacrifice: for as cittys are defended
by walls, and principalitys destinguished and acknowledged by the impressions
of their coins; so the worship of God is maintained, and his supreme
principality destinguished, and acknowledged by the worship of Sacrifice, as
due and propper only to him. L. 10. de Ciu. Dei.
Quis enim Sacrificandum censuit (says S. Augustine) nisi ei quem Deum aut
sciuit, aut putauit, aut finixit? for who ever deemed that Sacrifice was to be
offered to any, but to him whom he either knew or thought or feigned to be God?
And therefore (says he) the devil has labored so much to have Sacrifice
offered by Infidels unto him; because it is the highest, and properly divine
worship. And therefore shall Antichrist strive so much to take away the daily
Sacrifice of Mass (as Daniel figuratively Prophesied in wicked Antiochus)
because it is the highest external act of religion. We offer up to God the
acts of our mind as spiritual Sacrifices; and we offer up also some corporal
thing to him, to acknowledge him the author both of our body and soul, and
of all spiritual and corporal things. In the Law of nature Sacrifices were
offered to God; and in the Law of Moses, which was more perfect then that,
Sacrifices also were offered to him: and shall he want his supreme worship in
the Law of Christ, which they did but praesigure, as to be perfected by it. Noe
The shall have a much more perfect Sacrifice, and that is the sacred body and
blood of our Lord offered every day to him. This is our Sacrifice the very same
that was offered on the Cross, the most noble and precious of all corporal
things; and therefore most worthy to be the Sacrifice of that Law and Religion,
which the son of God in his own person was to institute amongst us.

ALL TRVE SACRIFICES BEfore Christ were but Types and Emblemes of honor, to
setforth the dignity of our Sacrifice.
THE Sacrifices of the Law of Nature, and of the Law of Moses were good and
holy Sacrifices: yet as those Laws, did but signify the more perfect Law of
Christ which was to come; so their Sacrifices, which were the chief things of
those Laws, were but figures of ours. Their Sacrifices of Beeues, Calves,
Rams, Lambs, Turtles, and the like, were killed and their blood was shed
upon the Altar to signify the Lamb of God, whose blood was to be shed upon
the Altar of the Cross. There were in the Law of Moses three kinds of
Sacrifices: the Holocaust, the Placable host, and the Peaceable host. The
Holocaust is as much as to say all burnt. For it was not offered for any
particular end or intention, but only to give supreme honor to God; and
therefore it was all totally consumed in honor of him. The Placable host was
to appease the divine wrath when by some sin they had offended him: and it
was divided, part of it being consumed to God, and part given to the Priest; to
signify that the remission of sins proceeds chiefly from God, as the
principal cause; and secondarily from Priests, as the instruments and means,
by which his poweris applied to us. The Pacifique or Peaceable host was offered
for the obtaining of some benefit which they desired, or in thanksgiving for
some which they had obtained: and it was divided into three parts: the one of
which was consumed to God, another was given to the Priest, and another
remained to the party that offered it: to signify that all benefits proceed
from God by the help of Priests, and by our own endeauours concurring with
them.

All these Sacrifices were fullfilled in ours: to wit in the sacred Body of
Christ our Savior. He was our Holocaust quite consumed in his death upon the
Cross: he was our Placable host that appeased the wrath of God against us: he
our Peaceable host by whom we have all benefits. Their bloody Sacrifices more
expressly signified his body as it is was offered on the Cross: and their
unbloody Sacrifices of first fruits, corn, flower, bread, and the like,
represented more particularly the same body, as it is offered after an unbloody
manner upon the holy Altar at Mass. But the Planest figure of the Sacrifice
of Mass was a Lamb with Bread and Wine, offered every day in the Law of
Moses, to signify the Lamb of God offered under the signs of bread and wine,
as the daily and continual Sacrifice of the Law of Christ, then to come. Our
Sacrifice then is the substance of those shadows, and the glorious mystery
which they were to signify. This S. Andrew the Apostle of Christ professed as
the Priests of Achaia in his Martyrdom rehearse, when being urged by Aegeas to
offer Sacrifice to Idols, he had this answer ready for him. I offer every day
upon the Altar an immaculate Lamb, whose flesh when all the people have
eaten, the Lamb that was sacrifyzed remains whole and alive. Thus did he
glory in our immaculate Lamb, which every day as a Priest he offered, and
which the people then used every day to receive. And in these words he planely
intimates that the sacrifices of the Law of Nature, and of Moses, and
especially that of the daily Lamb were but sigures to dicipher, shaddows to
denote, and emblemes of honor to setforth the dignity of ours, that was then
to come, a Sacrifice like them, but infinitely more perfect And those Sacrifices
being shadows of ours then to come, they were to vanish away and to be
offered noe more when it once came: because then they lost their nature, which
was to signify ours as future. But the holy Sacrifice of Mass representing noe
other future Sacrifice, and being the most perfect of all Sacrifices can never
be made void by any, nor shall ever have an end, until the end of the world.
But we will show

THAT THE SACRED BODY OF our Lord, as it is offered at Mass, is a true
Sacrifice.
THE modern enemies of the Catholic Church reject the holy Sacrifice of the
Eucharist at Mass; so that granting that which was offered on the Cross,
they deny for ever after all Sacrifice to the Law of Christ. They grant in this
that which is true indeed, that the Law of Christ was founded upon the
sacrifice of the Cross as offered for our redemption; but denying any sacrifice
to continue afterward in that Law, they deny the continuance of the supreme
worship of God in it, which nations have ever understood by Sacrifice. They
do in this, as though some people should choose a king, and should promise
unto him a glorious reign amongst them, and then should honor him with Royal
and Sovereign worship, but for one day or one hour only; so they profess
themselves Christians and promise a glorious Kingdom of God among them; and
then they give him the supreme homage of Sacrifice but once only, to wit for
that day and hour on which Christ suffered death. It had been the part of good
Christians (that being a Sacrifice, was to be some corporal thing offered to
God as his chief and highest homage) to have been thinking, which of all
corporal things in the world was most perfect, and to have thought it most
worthy to be the continual Sacrifice of the Law of Christ, rather then to have
denied a continual Sacrifice at all to it. This was the Son of God from all
eternity thinking, and contriuing to effect; and he effected it; when he
instituted his own sacred Body to be contained in the Eucharist, and so to
continue unto the consummation of the world with us, that we might allwais have
a most mysterious, miraculous, and glorious Sacrifice, the most perfect of all
corporal things, worthy of his divine Law, to be daily offered in it. And so
he provided a Sacrifice for his people more perfect then ever any people had
before, the most perfect which any can have, and which in some sense may be
said to be infinitely perfect. This had been a thought worthy of a Christian,
and not to deny a Sacrifice in which the supreme worship of God consists, to
continue allwaies in the Faith of Christ; and to join with the Turks only,
who have a Law without a continual Sacrifice. But we will show by the
Scriptures, Church, and Fathers, that the Eucharisticall Sacrifice of Mass is
a true Sacrifice.

The holy King and Prophet misteriously describes it in these words. Our Lord
swear, and it shall not repent him: Ps. 109.
thou art a Priest for ever according to the order of Melchisedech. Who has
sworn? our Lord God. It must be true then that which is sworn. What has he
sworn? that Christ is a Priest. For how long? for ever, offering by the hands
of Priests. What kind of Priest was Christ and his Priests to be? they were to
be of the order of Melchisedech. What order was that? what kind of Sacrifice
did Melchisedech offer? Read the 14. of Genesis, and you shall find that
Melchisedechs Sacrifice was in bread and wine. So that the Sacrifice of
Christian Priests was to be according to it. Let now the enemies of the
Catholic Church show any action of the life of Christ, or any mystery in his
Church, if they can, that accords with Melchisedechs Sacrifice, except it
were at his last supper, that he then offered the Eucharist as a Sacrisice, and
left it as a Sacrifice to be offered afterward at all times, by his Priests in
the Catholic Church. Take away that Sacrifice, and we have none at all left
according to Melchisedechs, nor noe Priests according to his order. The
Eucharist therefore is the sacrifice which the Prophet was inspired to describe
after this mysterious manner, as to be according to the order of Melchisedech
in the Priests that offered it. a lib. 4. strom.
Clem. Alex. b ep. 63. ad Cecil. lib. 5.
Saint Cyprian. c demostr.
Eusebius. Caesat. d Comment. in Ps. 109
Basil. e de Abra ham Patriarc. l. 3.
Saint Ambrose, f in ps. 109
Saint Chrysostom. g ep. ad Euagr. lib. 16. de Cin. Dei.
S. Herome h S. Augustine H. and others commonly cited by authors have thus
understood this place.

The Prophet Malachy speaking of the reiection of the Jewish Sacrifices, and of
the acceptable Sacrifice which the Gentiles should offer in the Law of Christ,
has th^se words. I have no will in you says the Lord of hosts; and gift I
will not receive of your hand. Mal. 1.
For from the rising of the Sun to the going down great is my Name amongst
the Gentiles, and in every place there is sacrifyzing, and there is offered to
my Name a clean oblation. It is not possible by this to conceive, but that the
Law of Christ for the conservation of the divine worship was to have a
Sacrifice to be offered all over, and at all times in it. He speaks not there
of any improper Sacrifice, as of good works, etc. but of a true and proper
Sacrifice, as those of the Jews were to which he there compares, and
perferreth it. Neither does he speak of the Sacrifice of the Cross; for that
was not offered in every place, but only on Mont Caluary. The ancient holy
Fathers have commonly urged the Jews, and other enemies of the Catholic
Church with this place understanding by it a daily Sacrifice to be offered all
over in the Church of Christ. So saint Justinius a Dial. cum Triphon.
Martyr, b lib. 4. cont. haer. 32.33.34.
saint Irenaeus, c l. 3. cont. Marcion.
Tertullian, saint d l. 1. c. 18.
Cyprian, e Aduers. Iud. and in Ps. 95.
saint Chrysostom, f l. 8. c. 35. de ciu. dei.
saint Augustine, saint g 4. de orthoxa side c. 14.
John Damascene and others,

It appears also even by the manner of instituting the Eucharist, that it was
to be offered as a Sacrifice; for where as Cor. 1.11. we read, This is my Body
which shall be delivered for you, and Luc, 22. This is the Chalice, etc. which
shall be shed for you. Saint Luke has in the Latin text and all the
Evangelists, and saint Paul in the Greek text have which is given, and which
is shed, in the present: and to be given, and shed can have no other sense
there, but to be offered as a Sacrifice. So that it was not only for the
future to be offered; but even then was offered as a Sacrifice; and it was
afterward to be offered as then. But that which is to be observed, as most
manifestly conuincing against our Protestants of England is, that we being
commanded to do it for a commemoration of him; that is to say of his being
offered on the Cross at his death, and he being then also according to our
enemies offered as a Sacrifice: what commemoration of that offering do they
make in the Eucharist, who make it no Sacrifice, nor offering at all? Catholics
say that as the true Body of our Lord was truly offered as a Sacrifice on the
Cross. So in the Eucharist it is truly offered as a Sacrifice at Mass:
Protestants say that his true Body is neither truly offered as a Sacrifice at
Mass, nor is the Eucharist any Sacrifice at all, nor yet is he so much as
present in it. What commeration do they make according to this doctrine of his
death on the Cross, where he was both truly present and a true Sacrifice? The
truth is that they laboring to pull down the Mass, as the chief and highest
worship of God which the Catholic Church had, regarded not to take away all
commemoration of Christ's Passion, and to leave the world for ever after without
any Sacrifice at all.

We have in the acts of the Apostles, Act. 13.
where they are said, to have been ministering to our Lord. Which planely
denotes that they were offering of Sacrifice: for if they had been preaching
or administering the Sacraments only, then they had ministered to the people;
but to minister to God can have noe other propper signification, but to offer
something to God. In the Greek text it is expressly they being offering of
Sacrifice: and Erasmus himself Translateth it so, expounding the word lyturgy
(which the Greeks took from thence to signify the Church service) Missa the
Mass. So that the Apostles had Sacrifice, and Mass.

The Church has declared this verity in several General Counsels. The first
Council of Nyce Can. 13. and more planely in another Canon which Doctor
Kellison mentions out of Surius, and out of the Reverend Lord Cuthbert
Tunstall the last Cathol ke Bishop of Durham, (of whose consanguinity I very
much glory, as a glorious Confessor of the Catholic Church) The same after
many General Counsels is lastly declared by the Council of Trent in which it
is defined that a true and propper Sacrifice is offered to God at Mass. Sess.
22. c. 1. and 2.


Holy and ancient fathers have spoken planely of a Sacrifice in the Church,
and have called it by the word Missa the Mass. Can. 3.
So the Apostles in their canons, requiring that those who are present at the
Church service, when they have heard the Scriptures of the Apostles, and the
gospel, they remain until Mass be done. Clem. ep. 3.
S. Clement who lived in the Apostles times admonishes the Clergy, that they
do nothing without the license of the Bishop; and in particular that noe
Priest say Mass with out it. Eccl. hier. c. 3. Amb. in Luc. 1. Aug. l. 10. de
ciu. Dei. c. 19. and 20. Ser. 13. de verb. Apost. L. 3. de bap. c. 19. Bed. l.
4. c. 12.
S. Denis the Disciple of S. Paul calls the Sacrifice of the Church the
quickening holy Sacrifice, the unbloody host, and victime. S. Ambrose says
that there is noe doubt but that the Angels do assist when Christ is
immolated. S. Augustine elegantly describes the destinction of our inward, and
outward Sacrifice, declaring how that Christ according to his humanity is the
Sacrifice, and according to his divinity receives it: and calls it the
Sacrifice of our mediator, the Sacrifice of our price, the Sacrifice of the
New Testament, the Sacrifice of the Church. And in another place he styles it
the only inconsumptible victime without which there were noe religion. S. Bid
who lived after them, although about a thousand years since, relates a
notable histoty to setforth the power of the Mass. The sum of which is, that
a Gentleman who served the King of Northumberland in his wars being sore
wounded in batle, was taken by the enemy and recovering of his wounds, was sold
unto a merchant of London. His brother who was a Priest, thinking him to have
been killed, said every day Mass for him: and to show the power, and essicacy
of the Mass in loosing of the soul from punishments in the next world, it
pleased God that allwais at that time of day in which his brother said Mass
for him the fetters with which he was bound, of their own accord, were loosed
from him: in so much that is patron observing it, and acknowledging some
mystery in it, gave leave to his bondsman to go amongst his friends to procure
his ransom. It is a story worthy to be read at large in S. Bid, who ends
the narration of it in these words: this because I know it to be true; I would
insert it into my Ecclesiastical History. And if it be true, as S. Bid says
he knew it to be, it must manifestly conclude for the dignity, power and
efficacy of the Mass, according as it is used in the Catholic Church, and
that it is a Sacrifice, as we believe it to be. Finally the Mass is so
ancient, and so planely testified by the primitive fathers of the Church of
Christ, that a Protestant author Confesses that noe beginning there of after
the Apostles times can be shown. Ascham. apol. pro Coena Do. Calu. in Heb. 9.
Which when Calvin saw to be true, he could not contain himself, but broke
forth into these irreuerent words, that the destinction of a bloody, and
unbloody Sacrifice is a Scholastical and frivolous innention, (adding another
far worse term which I will not repeat) and concludes nil moror, quod
veteres scriptores sic loquantur. I care not for ancient writers saying so.
Noe! Calvin cared not for ancient writers sayings; but good Catholics care
for them. It shall allwais be a comfort to us to have our doctrine confirmed by
the sanctity, learning, and antiquity of such writers, as I have produced in
testimony of the Mass, and by such miracles as S. Bid has related; which I
needed not to have mentioned over again, but for Caluins rash words. We show
by such writers that it was the doctrine of the ancient Catholics, and we
believe it to be true; because the whole Catholic Church does so believe. And
this whole Church was contradicted by Calvin, when he began his doctrine in
opposition, and disobedience to all the Churches of the world.

And for this I will add further the words of the Apostle we have an altar,
Heb. 13.
where of they have not power to cate that serve the tabernacle He speaks
there to some, who being converted from Iudaisme to the faith of Christ, were
still inclining to the Jewish Sacrifices; and to dissuade them from this, he
compares together their altar and ours, and prefers ours. By which it is
manifest that we had a Sacrifice in the Apostles times: for what are altares
for, but to offer Sacrifice on? and the Apostle comparing these two altares
together, must suppose and understand their Sacrifices by them: for the
altares are not eaten, but the Sacrifices which are offered on them; and
therefore as the Jewish altar had a Sacrifice which was eaten; so had the
altar of the Apostles; or else there is noe comparison betwixt the two altares,
nor connection in the Apostles speech.

To the former authoritys I add this reason. The worship of Sacrifice has
allwais been understood as the chief and highest worship of God: but the true
Church of Christ must have at all times the chief and highest worship of God;
therefore the true Church of Christ must have at all times the worship of
Sacrifice. Neither can there any good answer be made to this argument. For if
they say that Christ as he was once offered on the Cross, is the Christian
Sacrifice sufficient for us; and therefore we need none after it: it is not a
good answer, nor satisfyeth any more, then if one should say Christ worshipped
God for us; therefore we need not to worship God after him: or Christ fasted,
prayed and suffered for us; therefore we need not to fast, or to pray, or to
do any good works; but only to believe in him, and we shall be saved: and so
we should banish the worship of God, and all good works out of the world, and
set up a sole and only justifying faith, as they do grounding themselves upon
such vain and frivolous inferences of their own brain, which they will
maintain against all the authority of the whole world. Christ saved us by the
Sacrifice of the Cross; that is by the merits of that Sacrifice he procured
means for our salvation: and these means are faith and good works; and the
best of all works and most honorable to God is the offering of a Sacrifice. And
as Christ's worship, and good works do not hinder and cuacuate ours, noe more
did his Sacrifice hinder and cuacuate all Sacrifice for ever after: but he
would institute a sacrifice for his people, that by it they might apply the
merits of his sacrifice to themselves? and that it might be the most worthy of
all sacrifices, he ordained it to be in his own sacred body, mysteriously, yet
really offered in the Eucharist. Which as it was the most perfect of all
corporal things, was indeed the most convenient sacrifice for the Law of
Christ; yet if we did not offer that body as then truly and really present
with us; but offered it in our hearts only, as it was present on the Cross,
and as it is now in Heaven, it were not the offering of some present corporal
thing, as all people have ever understood a sacrifice to be,

Hence it appears how vainly they object the wordsof the Apostle calling
Christour High Priest, Heb. 7.9.10.
who by one oblation has consummated for ever those that are sanctified.
Therefore (say they) all other oblation is needless, and derogateth from that
of Christ, as though it were not sufficient. To which it is answered that the
words of the Apostle are most holy and true. Christ is our high Priest, and our
only high Priest; for the highest of all others Priests is but the Vicar of
Christ our Highest Priest. He consummated by way of redemption the
sanctification of all those that are sanctified, and by one only oblation he
saved all that are saved, in that by it only he redeemed us. What then?
Therefore there needdeth no more sacrifice for our redemption. It is true.
Therefore all other sacrifice for our redemption derogateth from that. It is
also true. And this is all that the Apostle says, Where is now their
argument? Therefore there needs noe continual sacrifice to conserve the
worship of God, and to give supreme and due homage to him. It is false, and no
better consequence, then as I said before, Christ worshipped God for us;
therefore we need not to worship him. The chief worship of God is by
sacrifice, and this worship was given him by Christ for us, is it now good
consequence? Therefore we need not to give that chief worship to God. Christ
offered sacrifice for our redemption; but to receive the benefit of it, we must
do our parts, and that is as I have said to receive the Sacraments, offer
sacrifice, and do other works, which he has ordained to be done by us in the
Catholic Church, for the honor of God, and the sanctifying of our souls: and
therefore saint John attributes our sanctification to our selves. Io. 1.3.
Every one that has this hope (says he) sanctifyeth himself: that is by
cooperating with God, Cor. 1.3.
and the Passion of Christ; and therefore saint Paul says, we are Gods
coadiutors: for that we concur with him to the good works which we do; and
so by offering of sacrifice we concur with Christ's sacrifice, and oblation,
consummating ours by being once offered for our redemption; by which he gives
virtue to all our good works. And this is all that the Apostle would say, as is
manifest both by the circumstances of his speech, and also by his words: for he
spoke then to those of the Circumcision, that they should not look back to
the sacrifices of their former law, for that they being but shadows of that
of our redemption, and figures to praefigure it as then future, and which is
now fullfilled; to continue them after the Passion of Christ, was as much as to
say, that our redemption was not fullfilled, and that Christ by one oblation
had not perfectly redeemed us, but that he were to suffer again; or else they
were false figures in signifying that as future which were past: and therefore
in the Epistle he says that if Christ had not offered one host for sins he
ought to have suffered often. Hebr. 9.
The Apostle therefore speaks of the jewish sacrifices; that they were not to
be continued; for that the sacrifice of our redemption, which they signified as
future, was but one and that already offered. And those that allege his
words against a continual sacrifice, abuse their hears, and the word of God.

But they say that the Eucharist is but a commemoration of the sacrifice of the
Cross, representing it; therefore noe true sacrifice; and much less the same,
that was then offered. It is necessary therefore to declare how

THE MASS IS A COMMEMOratiue, or representative sacrifice, yet a true
Sacrifice of the same Body, that was offered on the Cross.
CHRIST at the last supper took bread into his hands, and gave to his
disciples, saying, Cor. 1.11.
This is my body which shall be delivered for you. This do ye for the
commemoration of mes, In like manner also the Chalice saying. This Chalice is
the now Testament in my Blood. This do ye as often as you shall drink, for
the commemoration of me. And saint Luke has, Luc. ^.2.
This is my B^dy which is given for you, do this for a commemoration of me.
And this is the Chalice the ne^ Testament in my Blood, which shall be shed for
you. By which we believe that Christ then offered his true body in sacrifice,
under the forms of bread and wine, and commanded his Apostles to do the same.
They did so; and the Catholic Church has done so ever since, in commemoration
of his Passion, which he then commemorated, both in the consecration of the
bread, and of the wine, expressly mentioning it in words: and signifying it also
in action, consecrating under two destinct forms, to represent the separation
of his Body and Blood in his Passion.

This although it be a commemoratiue and representative sacrifice representing
and co^memorating hisbeing offered on the Cross; yet that bindereth not but it
is a true Sacrifice, as that was, and of the very same thing after a different
manner offered. For if the figurative sacrifices of the law of Moses were true
sacrifices, which represented this not as yet come, but when it was to come
after many hundreds of years; how much more may that of the last supper be a
true sacrifice, which represented it as immediately to be offered? and how much
more may ours be a true sacrifice which represents it, as all ready offered?
Those were representations of a true sacrifice, yet themselves also true
sacrifices: therefore it is not contrary to the nature of a sacrifice, to be
the representation of a sacrifice. But they say that the sacrifices before
Christ were true and real creatures representing a future sacrifice different
from them; but we say that we offer up the same thing that is represented in
it; how can it be the same, and yet a representation of it? Yes! we offer up
the same Body, that was offered on the Cross, and represent the same body
offered in a different manner. The same thing in a different state and
condition may represent it self, as it was before, or shall be bereafter in
another manner and state. If a champion that had overcome his enemy, should
represent afterward the manner of his encounter, then he should represent
himself in a different state, and that which represented should be the same,
as the thing which it did represent. If David for his greater glory had in his
own person exhibited to the people his victory over the Philisthaean Giant,
then he had been both a representation of David, and true David representing
the victory which himself had gotten: so the Body of our Lord, as it is
offered at Mass, represents it self, as it was offered on the Cross, and
is the same in a different manner and state: on the Cross it was after a
cruel and bloody manner, as fighting; on the Altar it is after an unbloody
manner, as in peace after the victory. Thus also the same sacred Body of our
Lord in his glorious Transfiguration represented it self, as it was to be in
the state of glory afterward. So that the same thing may represent it self;
and the Mass may be a representative and commemoratiue sacrifice of that of
the Cross, and yet offer the same thing that was then offered. Nay by how much
more union that which represents has to that which it does represent, the
more lively and natural is the representation of it; as it were a more lively
and natural representation of David's victory represented by himself, then by
another; because it had more connection and relation to the former action.

The being therefore a commemoratiue, and representative sacrifice does not
hinder the Mass for being a true sacrifice, of the same thing which is
represented in it. It represents the oblation of the Cross, and in all
places wheresoever Mass is said, there the death of our Redeemer is
commemorated, and the same thing is offered all over, and the very same that
was offered on the Cross. The words of S. Chrysostom shall declare this point
of the Christian doctrine. What do we? (says he) do not we offer every day?
we do offer indeed, Hom. in 7. ad hob.
and that in commemoration of his death. And this is but one host and not many;
because he was but once offered: and this Sacrifice is an example of that. We
offer still the same thing, not to day one Lamb and to morrow another, but
allways the very same. Because it is offered in many places, are there
therefore many Christ's? No! but the same Christ. Here he is entirely, and there
entirely the same body. This is enough in confirmation of the Catholic verity,
and we will dispute no more of it, but bless God for it. Attend then, o
Christian, and consider the divine love to thee, and how much thou art honored
in this mystery. Thou by thy sins had lost the favor of God, and were
condemned for ever to be banished from him: he to redeem thee out of that
state sent his only son to suffer doath for thee: who having given his life,
to restore thee to the state of grace, would not leave thee so: but would
remain allwais with thee, and be offered every day for thee, to keep thee in
that happy state. With what love and reverence then ought we to be present at
Mass; Having said thus much of the Mass as it is a Sacrifice. Let us now come
to

THE PARTS, AND CHREMONYS OF MASS.
BEFORE that I speak of the parts, and ceremonys of the Mass in particular, I
will say something of the nature of ceremonys in general. The use of ceremonys
in the service of God is grounded upon the condition of our nature: for man
being a corporal creature must honor God according to his nature, after a
corporal manner Angels only by intellectual, and and spiritual acts honor
God; because they are only Spirits; but men being both spiritual and
corporal, both spiritually and corporally according to there nature must
honor him: spiritually with inward acts of mind, and corporally with outward
actions of the body: and therefore we pray not only by spiritual and mental
prayer, as the Angels do; but also with vocal words, and use ceremonys to
signify outwardly our inward reverence to the mysterys which are signified by
them. So that ceremonys are in virtue and effect words, being altogether as
proper signs. and indeed more natural to express our affections, then words
are. The Son of God having assumed the nature of man by humane actions
glorified his Father; not only spiritually with his mind; but also corporally
with his body, by words, and ceremonys when he prayed: sometimes lifting up his
hands, sometimes his eyes, sometimes kneeling, and prostrating himself: and he
justified the like ceremonys in his disciples; as when in that glorious
solemnity, in which they and the Hebrew children conducted him solemnly into
Jerusalem, they used both words and ceremonys to express their affection, and
joy in him. They cried out, Luc. 19. Mat. 21.
Blessed is he that comes King in the Name of our Lord, Peace in Heaven and
glory on the High. And they carried boughs, and spread their garments for him to
tread upon: and when the Pharisys desired him to rebuke them, they were
rebuked themselves for desiring it The Magdalene coming to be cleansed at the
fountain of life, spoke not with words, but by many ceremonys her earnest
repentance: weeping, washing, and wipeing our Saviors feet, kissing his
sacred Body, and anointing his head: and when the Pharisy murmured at it,
Christ justified those actions in her, and gave him to understand, that if he
also had done the like they should have pleased him, saying, Water to my feet
thou did not give. Luc. 7.
Kiss thou gave me not; with oil thou did not anoint my head. These
devout ceremonys were testimonys of the much love of God, which was in her, and
had the effect of words to obtain the remission of many sins, So the
ceremonys of the Church are testimonys of our affection to God, and dutys of
nature, which we owe to him: and those that have relation to some particular
mystery; as the sign of the Cross, and those of the Mass have to the Passion
of Christ, move us to a devout remembrance of that which they represent. For as
lacob set rods of diverse colors before his sheep that beholding them they
might bringforth lambs of diverse colourslike them; so the Church of God by
those ceremonys sets good and holy objects before our eyes, that we may
produce thoughts and affections like them. I have spoken of ceremonys in the
fifth discourse treating of Baptism, and I need not now to repeat the same
things over again. If therefore the ceremonys of Mass represent pious and
holy mysterys they are pious and to be allowed of. There remains then only
to expound the ceremonys of Mass, and to show that they signify holy mysterys.

Before Mass the Priest changes his habit for two reasons. The Priests
habit.
First, to signify the expoliation of the old man; that is the putting of of
his former sins, and the putting on of the new man in newness of life and
virtues, the ornaments of our souls. Secondly, his outward ornaments are also
in honor and reverence to the mysterys which he handles; that he may appear
with comeliness, beauty, and glory in the divine service: and therefore God
commanded Moses to make vestures of precious matter to Aaron, Exodus 28.
and his sons, adorned richly with gold and jewels, for glory and beauty to
exercise their functions of Priesthood in. Their Priesthood was but the shadow
of ours: our sacrifice is infinitely more perfect; and therefore deserves more
beauty, and glory in the Priests that offer it.

The ornaments which God appointed for them signified many moral virtues,
commended especially to Priests by them: and so do ours as may be seen in
Authors, who have moralized on them. But that which is most to be observed is
the relation which they have to the Passion of Christ: for the Church intending
to do that mystery in commemoration of his death uses such vestments, as may
put us in mind of it. The Amict
The Amict, which he puts first over his head about his neck, signifies
the cloth with which our Savior was blindfolded, when they striking him bad
him guess, who it was that struck him. The Priest crosses it over his
breast, to six at it were in his heart a love and reverence to the Cross of
Christ. And also to show the prompt obedience, and willingness of heart with
which he underwent the sorrows of his Passion even straitened with the desire
of that painful baptism. The Albe.
The Albe signifies the long white garment, which Herod and his court scorned
him in. For they desiring to see some miracles wrought by him; Pilate sent him
to them: but he not answering to their curious desire, nor showing any miracles
then to the^, they scoffed at him, and whit a long white garment that trailed
under his feet, they sent himback as a spectacle of derision; the King of
glory being vested as a fool. The Girdle.
The Girdle signifies the ropes with which he was bound in the garden, when
they apprehended him, as a malefactor to be tried for life. The Manicle.
The Manicle signifies the cords with which his hands were fastened to a
pillar, that they might have his whole body better to hitt, and to wound at
their pleasure. The Stole.
The Stole signifies his carrying of the Cross, when they led him, or rather
pulled him through the streets of Jerusalem with his Cross on his shoulders.
The Vestment.
The Vestment or upper garment signifies the purple which in scorn they putt
about him. For the Jews having obtained their desire of Pilate, to wit, that
Christ should be delivered to their pleasure; to clear themselves as though
saklesse of his death, they delivered him to the Pagane soldiers guard, to be
abused and executed by them: who carrying him into an outward court, they
fastened unto his head a crown of thorns, put a reed into his hand, a purple
coat about him, and then in mockery they kneeled down, and said all hail
King of the I was, spitting in his face, and beating him about the head with
canes.

The Priest being thus vested with the memorials of Christ's Passion com'sforth
as an Angel of God to declare the divine mysterys; but in better terms then
any Angel can declare them: for that which he says are the words of the Holy
Ghost delivered to him by the Church; and that which he does is more then any
Angel can do. He comes to the altar as to the Cross of Christ to offer him
up on it. The Altar.
The altar is of stone to signify that Christ is the rooke upon which our
salvation is builded, Oil.
and the corner stone by which all that will, both Jews and Gentiles are united
unto salvation. It is consecrated with oil to signify the spiritual unction
of the holy ghost anointing, and curing us with the oil of grace. And
therefore oil is often used in the consecrating of holy things, to signify the
divine grace, which as a precious and sovereign oil is powered into our hearts,
tendering them to the love and service of God, by the devout usage of those
things. Genesis 28.
Thus Jacob awakening out of his mysterious sleep, erected a stone as a holy
altar, powered oil upon it, and vowed a vow to God. Exodus 29.
And in the Law of Moses Priests were commanded to be consecrated with oil,
Exodus 40
as also the tabernacle and the vessel theirof. The altar of holocaust and
all the vessel their of, the lauer, with the foot thereof; all shall thou
consecrate with the oil of unction, that they may be most holy. Altars toward
the east.
Altares used aunciently to stand at the east end of the Church, to signify
(says S. Augustine) the glory of God, to whom we pray, by the superior, and
more glorious nature of the sun rising out of the east: also to putt us in
mind of the celestial Pararadise by the terrestrial, which was in the east.
We pray also eastward as beholding Christ on the Cross, who is thought to have
been Crucified toward, the West.

The Palls or linnens upon the altar signify the syndon in which the Corpse of
our Savior were wrapped. The Pals, Chalice, and Patene.
For S. Mark records that when Christ had expired upon the Cross, Joseph a
noble Senator having obtained his body of Pilate bought Syndon and taking him
down, Mar. 15.
wrapped him in the Syndon, and laid him in a moument that was hewed out of a
rock. And rolled a stone to the door of the monument. The Palls or linnens
signify the Syndon, the Chalice the monument in which he was laid, the Patene
the stone that was rolled to the door And therefore there must be at least two
palls or linen cloths upon the altar to signify the wrapping of Christ: and
for the same signification the Corporal or upper Pall used aunciently to be
joined to the vndermore, and coming from under the Chalice, to turn over it
again: Cruifix. c wax Candles.
but now for more conuenience it is divided into the corporal under the
Chalice, and the Pall above it. A Crucifixe or Cross is set upon the altar in
remembrance of Christ's Passion Wax candles are lighted to signify him who is
the true light illuminating all men, They are of wax in token of his purity,
who was a Virgin of a Virgin Mother. All things being prepared then Mass
begins.

The Mass may be divided into three parts. The first is from the beginning to
the Offertory, The division of the Mass.
which is as it were a preparation and introduction to the chief parts of
Mass. The second and principal part is from the Offertory to the
Postcommunion. The third is from the Post communion to the end: which is a
thanksgiving for the mysterys celebrated. The whole Mass is in relation to the
chief passages of the life and death of Christ. From the beginning to Gloria
in excelsis, the time before his coming is represented, and the great desire
which the holy Patriarks and Prophets had of him before he came. From Gloria in
excelsis to the Gospel his coming is celebrated, and his life until his
preaching. From the Gospel to the Offertory his preaching is denoted. From
the Offertory to the Postcommunion the chief passages, which have relation to
his persecution, Passion, and death are signified. From the Post-communion to
the end his Resurrection is commemorated, and the time until his Ascension,
all being concluded with thanks giving to God.

First the Priest comes down before the altar, and doing reverence to it,
The beginning of the Mass.
as to a holy thing, (and if the blessed Sacrament be there kneeling down to
it,) he begins with the sign of the Cross, saying, In the name of the
Father, and of the Son and of the Holy Ghost, to profess his faith in the
blessed Trinity, and in the Incarnation, and to implore grace to the worthy
celebrating of those holy mysterys, which he is then going about; to wit to
offer Sacrifice to all mighty God, to offer the same Sacrifice which Christ
himself offered, to handle his very natural body, to represent himself
offered then as at his death, for, and in the name of all the Church; the whole
blessed Trinity with quires of Angels being present as spectators of what he
does. Having armed himself with the sign of the Cross, and with these
considerations, he says the Antiphone and Psalm Introibo ad altar Dei etc.
Introibo. Psalm. 42.
which Antiphone (as all others) are as it were devout vndersongs said before,
and after the Psalm in relation to it. Consiteor.
Then he says the Consiteor acknowledging humbly in the sight of God, and of
the whole caelestiall court, and of the people there present his sins by
thought, word, and work; desiring the blessed Virgin Mary, the Angels and
Saints, and people that are present to pray for him. Then the Clerk who
represents the people prays for him saying, Misereatur tui etc. And having
by devout versicles, and answers mutually commended each other to God in their
prayers, he goes up praying in private for the remission of his sins, and
that he may worthily ascend unto the altar.

The altar as I have said signifies the Cross on which Christ was offered: The
kiss of the Altar.
it signifies also the Church compacted of many living stones: and in both
respects the Priest often kisseth it, to show how willingly Christ accepted of
his Cross for us, and how much he loves the Catholic Church. The right hand of
the altar where the book is first laid signifies the Jews, to whom he goes
first; because they had the faith of Christ first preached to them. The left
side of the altar signifies the Gentiles, who at the coming of Christ were in
the darkness of infidelity: and he kisseth the altar in the midst to signify
the reconciling of both Jews, and Gentiles, in the Faith of Christ, by whom the
way of salvation is laid open unto all.

Then he goes to the book and reads the Introit, The Introit.
which is taken out of King David's Psalms, or of some of the Prophets having
relation to the solemnity of that Mass, and signifies the great joy which the
Patriarchs, and Prophets had in the foreseeing of Christ: to excite us to more
reverence, attention, and devotion to his life and death then represented.

Then he goes into the midst of the Altar, The Kyrie eleison^
and says the Kyrie eleysons, which are first said thrice in honor of the
Father; then Christ eleyson thrice in honor of the Son; then Kyrie eleyson
thrice in honor of the holy Ghost. The often repeating of them signifies the
manifold sighs, and earnest desire of the holy Fathers, and of all the just
souls that where in Limbus: whose seionrning was prolonged, that they could
not have the perfect and complete joys of Heaven. until the coming of
Christ, who was to open Heaven gates for them. And therefore they prayed
earnestly and continually for it; Psalm 39.
as the holy King signifies, saying, Expecting I expected our Lord, and he
has attended to me, etc. Thou art my help, Psalm. 112.
and my protection: my God be not slack. And in another place; Esa. 16.
Unto thee I have lifted up mine eyes, from whence help shall come to me. And
the Prophet Esaias Send forth, o Lord the Lamb the Dominatour of the earth.

The Priest having prepared himself to celebrate the mysterys of Christ's life
and death, Gloria in excelsis Deo.
and represented the state of the world before his coming, and the desires and
prayers of the just for it, now declares the grant of their desires
celebrating his coming, with a loud and joyful voice, pronouncing, Gloria in
excelsis Deo, etc. Glory in the Highest, Luc. 2.
which are the words with which the Angels praised God, at the coming of
Christ, singing in his birth, Glory in the Highest to God, and in earth peace
to men of good will. An Angel was then sent to say to the Sheepheards. Behold
I euangelize to you great joy that shall be to all people: because this day is
borne to you a Savior which is Christ our Lord in the city of David. A Star
was sent to illuminate the three Kings unto Bethleem, Simon was sent to
welcome Christ into the Temple to receive him in his arms, and full of toy to
bless him; Anne a Prophetess was then also sent unto the Temple, to speak of
him to all that expected the redemption of Israel: and the Priest to represent
this great joy spreads his arms, prayseth, blesses, adoreth, glorifyeth,
and gives thanks to God for it.

Then he turns about to the people: Dominus vobiscum.
and he turns to the right hand, both for more decency and also because it is
more mysterious: the right hand in the Scriptures signifying power, glory, and
dignity: and the left hand on the contrary signifying imperfection, weakness
and ignobility. Psalm. 117.
The right hand of our Lord has wrought strength, (says the Psalmist) the
right hand of God has exalied me: and the Apostle says, On the right hand,
and on the left, by honor and dishonor. At Orate fratres, he turns round
about on the left hand to the Altar, in token of his sins, and
imperfections, for which he desires the people to pray. Then he says, Dominus
vobiscum, our Lord be with you. Which is both a prayer that God will eleuate
their spirits to him, and a salutation inciting them to eleuate their spirits
to God by a seruerous attention tothose misterys. So the Angel saluted Gedeon,
Iud 6. Ru^h.
Our Lord be ^ith thee, o most valiant of men. So Booz saluted his harvest men,
praying for them and inciting them to work, as we do when we say, God be with
you, or God speed your work; and therefore the Priest turns often to the
people with those words. They answer, and cum spiritu tuo, praying also for
him that God may be with his Spirit.

Then he turns to the Altar again, The Collect.
and going to the book he says Oremus, Let us pray; because he prays in
the name of all, and gathers together the prayers of all, all praying with
him: and therefore the prayer is called a Collect as the prayer of many, to wit
of the whole Church: he lifts up his hands at prayer to signify the elevation
of the heart, Exodus 16.
It is likely that our Savior prayed so on Mount Oliuet; for it was the
custom of holy men so to pray. Moses prayed so lifting up his hands whilst
the Israelits fought; and as long as he lifted up his hands they prevailed;
Reg. 3.8.
but his hands failing their enemies prevailed against them. So also Solomon
prayed, lifting up his hands, and blessing the people with much devotion. And
these two were the especial figures of our Savior: Moses as the Redeemer of
the Israelits, and Solomon by his infused wisdom, I will (says the Apostle)
that men pray in ewery place lifting up pure hands, Tim. 1.2.
he prays with his hands open, as requiring of benefits. At the end of the
prayer he joins them to show the unity of nature in the blessed Trinity, to
whom we pray, as to one divine power; and also to signify the union of our
hearts, and of the Catholic Church. All prayers are concluded through our Lord
Jesus Christ; because all benefits are granted through him, Io. 16.
who said, If you ask the Father any thing in my name he will give it you. The
people answer Amen, Amen.
to join prayer with the Priest: as when Gabelus at the sight of young Toby
wept for joy, kissed him, and prayed heartily for him, all that were present
answered Amen.

After the Collects the Epistle is read, The Epistle.
which is taken out of the Apostles Epistles, or of some of the Prophets; and
signifies the preaching, and writings of the Prophets, and of S. John Baptist
before the Gospel of Christ, and that by the Apostles labors we receive the
light of the Ghospel. After the Epistle follows the Gradual or Responsory;
Graduall.
which is a devout Canticle corresponding to the Epistle, as the last
preparation, or stepp to the Gospel, and therefore it is called the Gradual;
and signifies the preaching of Saint John Baptist, as the last stepp, or
degree of preparation to the Gospel of Christ. And because Saint John
preached penance to the people, saying, Do penance, for the kingdom of
Heaven is at hand. Therefore the Gradual which intimates lamentation, and
mourning of penance is not said in the days of Pentecost which is a time of
joy. We are admonished by it, that as by the Prophet from time to time
succeeding one another, and lastly by Saint John Baptist the world was prepared
for the coming of Christ; so we may ascend from virtue to vettue and attain
to the perfection of good Christians. Alleluya, Alleluyn.
is added to signify, that after the mourning of penance comes joy, and
glory: for Alleluya, The tract.
is a word of rejoicing as much as to say, Praise our Lord. The Tract which is
a grave and dolesull mourning, is said in times of sorrow and austerity.
Gospel.


Then the Gospel is read the book being turned to the left hand, to signify
the receiving of the Gospel by the Gentiles who are denoted by the left side
of the Altar, as being in insidelity until the light of Christ's Gospel
shined to them. Act. 13.
To you (said S. Paul and S. Barnaby speaking ^o the Jews) it behooved us first
to speak the word of God: but because you repel it, and judge yourselues
unworthy of eternal lise; ^^hold we turn to the Gentiles: and therefore the
book of the Gospel is turned from the right hand which signifies the Jews
to the left, which signifies the Gentiles. The people stand at the Gospel,
as also at the Creed, to signify the hearing of the Faith of Christ then
preached. When Verbum caro factum est, or Homo factus est is said, we kneel
down in reverence to the mystery of the Incarnation. The sign of the Cross
is made upon the Ghospel, because the doctrine of our Redemption is contained
in it. And the Priest signeth his forhead, mouth, and heart, with that fig^^ of
our Redemption, that his thoughts, words and deeds may always redounde to the
honor of Christ crucified. He kisseth the book in the end, as the book of
life, and of all happiness to us. Then the people answer, The Creed.
laus tibi Christ, giving praise to Christ. The Creed is said alowd, to show
that we must not be afraid; but boldly and cheerfully make profession of our
Faith when need requires: for if we be ashamed of Christ now, he will be
ashamed of us afterward, and with shame we shall be damned. The Creed being
said, the first part of Mass is ended: then Ite missa est used to be sung, to
dismiss the Catechumeni; who not being yet Christians by Baptism, where not
to be present at the Christian Sacrifice; but were to depart now that the
chief parts of Mass began; and therefore this part of Mass until the
Offertory, was commonly called, Missa Catcchumenorum. The Mass of the
Cathecumens.

At the Offertory begins the second part in which the chief and essential
parts of Mass are contained. Oslertory.
The Offertory is a praise giving to God after the preaching of the Gospel;
thatas faith comes by hearing, and is received in the heart; so praise also
may be given by the mouth. It is a devout and ancient custom to offer gifts
at the Offortory; by which the people concurring then with the Priest, and
consenting to that which he does say as it were. I beleeut and profess that
which is here professed, and I consent unto and combine with the Priest to
offer that which he offers to God. These offerings are justified by our
Savior himself, Mat. 5.
saying, If thou offer thy gift at the Altar, etc. go first and be reconciled
to thy brother, and then coming thou shall offer thy gift. And God expressly
commanded in the law of Moses, Deuteronomy. 16.
that when they came to the solemnitys of the Temple, There shall not appear
before our Lord any empty: but every one shall offer according to that he has,
according to the blessing of our Lord his God which he shall give him.

Then the Host and the Chalice are prepared and offered. The bread is then
called an immaculate host, not for that it is then an host, but in respect of
the future: for that it is to be a most immaculate Host, and perfect Sacrifice:
as the tree of Paradise was called the tree of the knowledge of good and cuill,
in respect of the future; for that we were to have the knowledge of evil by
it. This offering before consecration, signifies the voluntary oblation by
which Christ offered himself in mind before the oblation of the Cross. A
little water is mixed to the wine, Chrysostom. in Missa.
according to the custom of the ancient Church, to signify the issuing out of
blood, and water from the side of Christ, when one of the soldiers blindly but
mysteriously opened it with a lance.

The Host and the Chalice being devoutly prepared the Priest turns about to
the people and says, Orate fratres to desire their prayers, Orare fratres.
that the host may be pleasing to God and profitable to them and to the whole
Church; and they pray accordingly. Then the Priest prays in secret, Secr. t^
praycrs.
to represent the time of Christ's retirement. For the Priests of the Jews, and
Pharisys, seeing the force of his doctrine and miracles, and that by no means
they could prevail against them, procured an edict to be setforth to
apprehende him, and laid in wait to have killed him. But what are the counsels
of man to contest with God? sometimes he disappeared out of their sight, and
past unseen through the midst of them, Joan. 7.
some time she rerired himself, and kept out of their hands, because his time
was not yet come.

But the Feast of the Pasch drawing near he returned from beyond the seas of
Galily into Jury again: Prasa^ion.
for he chose for his Passion the Paschall time, when greatest refort of all
nations might he at Jerusalem, as spectators and witnesses of his sufferings.
Then he preached publikly amongst them, and with that applause of the people,
that for all the power and malice of his enemies, they slocked nevertheless by
multitudes unto him, and with great honor, and acclamations of joy, conducted
him solemnly into Jerusalem; as the Church celebrateth in the office of Palm
Sunday, and is now celebrated at the Praefation; and therefore the Priest
spreads his hands intoken of joy, and inuiteth all the Angelical quires to
praise God with him, repeating the words which the people then cried, saying;
Mat. 21.
Blessed is he that comes in the name of our Lord. Hosanna in the Highest,
and the words of the Seraphims who cried, Sanctus, Sanctus. Sanctus, Holy,
Holy, Holy, in the presence of God; Esa. 6.
and he makes the sign of the Cross before him to show how little Christ
regarsted the glory of this world, that in all that prompe, he had nothing
before his eyes, but the good of souls, weeping then for the sins, and
desolation of that people. This part of the Mass is called the Praefation or
Praeface, as an introduction to the Passion of Christ, which is represented at
the consecration. His birth was celebrated at the Gloria in excelsis, his life
until he began to preach is signified in that which follows unto the
gospel, his preaching in the gospel, and Creed, the beginning of his
persecution in the secret prayers, his glorious entrance into Hie^tsalem in the
Praeface, his last supper and death is commemorated in the consecration.

After the Praeface follows the Canon: Canon.
that is to say the rule and order Which Christ, the Apostles, and their
successors have instituted for the devout, and worthy offering of this
Sacrifice. The Priest prays for his superiors spiritual and temporal, and
for his benefactors and friends that are living, and for whom or whatsoever he
intends to pray; professing all our hopes and confidence to be in this
blessed Sacrifice: he prays in secret to signify the dolorous time of Christ's
Passion: he makes then a commemoration of our B. Lady, and of the Saints,
mentioning none but martyrs, as witnesses of Christ's Passion in their blood.
For although our B. Lady did not actually suffer death for Christ, yet she was
a Martyr in that she actually suffered the pains of death; that is to say
pains sufficient to have deprived her of life; according to the Prophecy of
Simeon, that a sword should pierce her soul.

The time of consecration drawing near, the Church prostrateth herself with
all humility in prayer to God, Consecration.
beseeching him that as there never was, nor ever can be any thing so dear,
and pleasing to him, as Jesus Christ his only son, and as the works which he
did, and ordinances which he ordained; and as of all the ordinances which he
left to the Church, this is the chief, and sum of all, in which he would
bequeath his own body to remain for our continual Sacrifice amongst us; so
he will vouchsafe to accept of that Sacrifice, and the love of him to be so
grounded in us, that in all temptations and aduersitys of this world, we may
cleave to him, and in the end be admitted into his blessed company in heaven.
He takes then the host into his hands, and blesses it with the sign of the
Cross. S. Augustine, Ser. 181. de temp.
with the sign of the Cross we consecratethe body of our Lord, and whatsoever
is consecrated in the name of Christ, is consecrated with this sign. The host
is then consecrated; that manner of consecration being exactly observed which
Christ commanded at the last supper.

After consecration he kneeleth down to the blessed Sacrament, Elevation
and never touches it, or uncovers the Chalice without kneeling down of
reverence to it: for if the Apostle requires that every knee bow of the
calestials terrestrials and insernals at the name of Jesus, Phil. 2.
how much more shall they bow unto himself? In like manner the Chalice is
consecrated, and elevated, that all may adore our Savior in it. And after the
consecration, that the Priest has touched the sacred host, he opens not his
singars to touch any other thing, until after the consummation that he
purifyeth them. The sons of Caath, who were also clergy men of the tribe of
Leui, and were to carry the arc altar, and vessel theirof, at the removing
of the camp, were not to touch them least they die. Nu. 4.
With what reverence then ought we to touch our sacred host, insinitly more
perfect then any thing which they had. The reverence which God commanded them
was but in figure to command more to us. The consecration is the chief part
of Mass, and contains indeed the essence of the whole Mass: for the death
of Christ being then represented, the host is offered, and consummated also
representatiuely; and so it has even then the nature of a perfect
representative, or commemoratiue Sacrifice, and is a true Sacrifice as I have
showed.

After consecration he makes a commemoration for the dead. Memento frr the
dead. Lib. de cura pro mortuis.
Which is an institution of the Church highly commended by S. Augustine as most
profitable for the souls of many poor people, who not having means to get
themselves prayed for, nor friends to procure prayers to be said in particular
for them, are not only partakers of all the suffrages of the Church, but also
of charity prayed for in every Mass.

The Pater Noster is said to profess that all our petitions are asked, hoped
for, Pater Noster.
and obtained through the merits of Christ's Passion, who commanded his
Apostles, Mat. 2.
ask and it shall be given you. It is not meet (says S. Gregory) that at
Mass when so many devout prayers are said which holy men have made, the Pater
Noster should be omitted which Christ himself made, as the best of all
prayers. The sacred host is divided to signify the separation of the body, and
soul of our Savior at his death. A particle of it is put into the chalice, to
signify their meeting and reunion again at his Resurrection. For although both
the body and soul of our Lord be really contained in the Chalice, as well as
in the host; yet because the form of wine represents the blood of our
Savior, therefore it may more properly signify his soul; the Philosopher
affirming, Agnus Dei.
that the blood is the seat of the soul.

Then Agnus Dei is said that is lamb of God that take away the sins of the
world, have mercy on us. To remember the patience, and mildnes of Christ, who
went as a lamb to the slaughter without resisting, or opening of his mouth;
but permitted himself to be bound by his enemies, and if they would to nail
him to the Cross and in the end as a lamb bowing his head he gave up the ghost?
Io. 19. Esa. 16. Io. 1. Apoc. 5. Pax.
And therefore in the Scriptures he is often called a lamb, and S. John Baptist
seeing him coming toward him said, behold the lamb of God. Behold him that
takes away the sins of the world. The Priest kisseth the Pax, and then the
people kiss it, to commend charity, peace, and concord to Christians as the
Disciples of Christ. I know not what other kiss the Apostle could mean when
he admonished the Corinthians, Cor. 2.13.
salute one another in the holy kiss; but to mutual charity by some such holy
kiss as this, which was then used in the Catholic Church.

Then the Priest prepares himself with devour prayers to receive the
Communion, Domine non sum dignus.
and humbling himself with profound reverence before the sacred host, he
says, Domine non sum dignus etc. Lord I am not worthy etc. Professing
himself unworthy to eat of that Sacrifice, in which our Lord and Savior is
received; as the humble Centurion who requiring of Christ that he would cure
his servant, when he answered that he would come and cure him; he thought it
too great an honor for him, to receive Christ into his house, and said Lord I
am not worthy that thou should enter under my roof: Mat. 8.
but only say the word and my boy shall be healed. So the Priest going to
receive Christ in the B. Sacrament says Lord I am not worthy that thou
should enter under my roose but only say the word and my soul shall be
healed. Which words may be said by the people also when they are going to
receive that divine guest. And they are commended also by S. John Chrysostom
in his Mass, as propper for that time.

After Communion the Chalice being purifyed and all things decently composed
about the altar, the book is turned to the right side again, Post-communion.
to show that in the end of the world after Antichrists persecution the
gospel of Christ shall be received by the Jews. Then follows the
Postcommunion which is the third part of the Mass; and contains a devout
thanksgiving to God for the mysterys that are celebrated; and represents the
time after the death of Christ, of his resurrection, until his Ascension. Then
the Priest comes into the midst of the altar and kisseth it is as it were in
congratulation of both Jews, and Gentiles receiving the faith of Christ, and
turning again to the book he concludes the last prayers: which being ended
he turns to the people, and dismisseth them saying Ite missa est. The word
Missa which signifies the Mass is an hebrew word, signifying a voluntary
oblation, Deuteronomy. 16.
as Deuteronomy. 16. thou shall celebrate the festival day etc. A voluntary oblation
of thy hand which thou thalt offer. Wherefor voluntary oblation the hebrew word
is Missah. Hence may the Latin word Missa be probably derived, rather then
from Mitto to send, which has but little connection with the Mass, as it is a
Sacrifice. And therefore it is most likely that the word Misia the Mass was
brought first by S. Peter, and the other Apostles to the Latins, and that they
received the use of it from them. Ite missa est is (...) toward the people;
because it is spoken to them ^^nedicamus Domino is said toward the Altar;
because it is a praising of God; as also Requiescant in pace is said toward
the Altar as a prayer to him. The people answer Deo gratias as giving
thanks, or Amen, as joining prayer with the Priest.

Lastly with profound humility and reverence he boweth down before the Altar
to God, beseeching him that he will accept of his service, and the Sacrifice
which he has offered. Then turning to the people he blesses them with the
sign of the Cross: by which we are put in mind of the blessing which Christ
gave to his Disciples at his departure from them; who according to the
Evangelist lifting up his hands, he blessed them, and was carried into heaven.
Luc. 24.
And it is most likely that he then blessed them with the sign of the Cross:
for now that the mystery of the Cross was accomplished, it was a most
convenient form of blessing; Ezech. 9.
and was used also by the Apostles in their benedictions; as Saint Denis has
recorded who lived with them: and it shall be set, as a mark of Gods blessing,
in the foreheads of his elect in latter times. Lastly Saint John's Gospel is
said as the Planest, and highest expression of the mystery of the Incarnation.
Thus much for the ceremonys commonly used in the Church.

Christ was the first that said Mass. To wit at the last supper, when he
consecrated and offered his sacred body as our continual Sacrifice;
instituting the same manner of consecration and offering to be used afterward
by the Apostles. They said the very same Mass, that is to say, offered the
very same Sacrifice, which he then offered, adding the Pater Noster, and other
holy prayers, and rites of reverence to it: which are not of the substance, and
essence of the Mass; but were left to the Church to be ordained, and practiced
according to convenient circumstances; and are therefore to be observed
diligently, and minded at Mass, as the memorials of holy mysterys, Saint James
Bishop of Jerusalem, commonly called the brother of our Lord, said Mass
adding many things of devotion to it, so did Saint Peter say Mass at Rome,
Saint Matthew in Aethiopia, Saint Barnaby at Milan, adding also more prayers,
and holy ceremonys to it; and other holy Saints, as Saint Basil, Saint Ambrose,
Saint John Chrysostom composed certain devout forms of prayer, and rites
which were used at Mass with approbatio^ of the Church: and now the Church of
God says the same Mass which Christ, and they said, with such prayers, rites,
and ceremonys, as you have seen declared; in which the mystery of the
Incarnation, and the whole life and death of Christ is devoutly and decently
represented,

We ought therefore with great reverence, Meditations upon the Mass
and devotion to be present at Mass, and to attend diligently and to meditate
upon those mysterys, as though we were (as we are indeed) in the presence of
Christ himself, and that we saw him visibly in all those passages, which are
then celebrated: that we may be astonished with admiration, and burn with the
love of him, who did and suffered those things for us. Until the Gloria in
excelsis we will imagine that we saw the Saints who were before Christ
rejoicing in the hopes of him, and that we heard their cries and prayers for
his coming. At the Gloria in excelsis, we will awaken our selves with the
Angels voices to a higher joy imagining that we heard the Angel tell the newse
of his birth to the Sheepheards, and the multitude of the celestial army
singing those words with the Priest, and we will offer our selves then to
Christ, to be his servants all the days of our life. Until the Gospel we
will think that we were following him, and our blessed Lady, behauing our
selves as his servants, ravished with the sanctity of his conversation. At the
Gospel and Creed we will imagine that we heard him preach, and saw the power
of God drawing the hearts of others to him. At the Praeface that we were at his
glorious entrance into Jerusalem, and we will sing with his disciples, and
with the people, Blessed is he that comes in the name of our Lord. Hosanna in
the Highest. Before the elevation we will consider his praying in the Garden
sweating that violent and strange sweat of blood and water for us, and how he
was presently apprehended, and carried to his Passion, what bitter reproaches,
and stinging blows they gave him, what shame and pain they devised to putt
him to more then can he imagined. At the consecration and elevation, we will
think that we were present at his death, heard the cry which he gave, and saw
him hang down his head and die: and that we heard the top of the temple and
rooks about Jerusalem to rent in pieces, and perceived the earthquake and the
rising of dead bodies, a formidable darkness then covering all things, and we may
think how grievous our sins were, that were the cause of all this. After the
consecration we will make acts of the love of God and purposes to serve him,
and to mende our life, and some greater falts in particular. And we will
prepare our selves to receive the blessed Sacrament if not corporally, at least
spiritually by an ardent desire of it. At the Postcommunion we will give thanks
with the Priest, and calling to mind the resurrection of Christ, we will rise
with alacrity to a better life. At the ite Missa est, and the Priests
benediction, we will imagine our selves present at Christ's Ascension, and
having with his disciples received his blessing, that we saw him ascend in
glory to give us a scantling, and little sight of our future happiness, to
animate us with that sight to the exercize of virtues, to suffer for Christ,
and to contemn the pleasures and glory of this world.

It is an ancient custom of the Catholic Church above a thousand and four
hundred years standing, Holy Water.
to hallow water mixed with salt: Which is commonly done on Sundays before
Mass, to sanctify holy things to expel the power of our ghostly enemy, and to
purge from venial sins, (as every good work does which increases the divine
grace in us.) The declaration of the Church is sufficient for the lawfullnes of
it. Yet as I have said of ceremonys, man being a corporal creature must honor
God according to his nature, and use corporal creatures in his divine worship:
and although God regards most the inward worship of our hearts, and the acts
of our minds, he will have us notwithstanding to use corporal things to our
sanctification; Ia. 5.
as the water in Baptism, and the oil in Extreme Unction, which according to
saint James is used to the remission of sins: and he has commanded diverse
corporal things unto supernatural ends and effects; Exodus 12.
as the blood of a Lamb to be sprinkled on the door posts of the Israelits,
Nu. 19.
to save them from the destroying plague; as the ashes of a red cow mixed with
water to be sprinkled, for the purging of legal uncleanness; Tob. 8.
as young Toby was commanded to use the liver of a fish to expel the devil, as
Elisaeus used salt with waters, Reg. 4.2.
to give them spiritually sweetness and fruitfullnesse: by all which we see
that corporal things may be used for spiritual effects. And if any object
that God can command those things, but the Church can not. I answer first
that it is true, God only appoints the Sacraments which we are to use; But
the Church can ordain holy ceremonys, rites and devout observations which are
noe Sacraments. God inspireth the Church in the use of this, as he did unto
them the use of the former, and so they are both of God, (see disc 4. art. 9.
and disc. 11. of the authority of the Church.) The Church uses such like
observations and rites, not as Sacraments, to restore us to the divine grace,
when we have lost it; but as holy actions to advance us further in the divine
grace which we have; (and consequently to remitte lesser sins, which are
compatible with grace) sanctifying us more in the sight of God, Holy bread.
or disposing us to more sanctity. So the Catechumens in the primitive Church,
that received not the blessed Sacrament, received the holy bread: of which
Saint Augustine, That which the Catechumens receive, although it be not the
body of Christ, yet it is a holy thing and holier then other meats: which we
eat. Theodorit, who lived about 1300. years since, Theod. cap. 21.
relates a passage admirable to this purpose. Marcellus Bishop of Apamaea,
having in that city a temple of Jupiter much offensive to the honor of God,
used all means possible to demolish it; but the structure of it was so^
strong, and firmly compacted with stone and iron, that two Captains who
passed that way with their soldiers, about two thousand in number, could not
all dissolve it. At last a simple and ignorant man promises to effect what he
desired if that he will; but allow him the assistance of two only; which being
granted, they undermined the pillars, and applying timber, and fuel to the
foundation of them set fire on it. But there appeared a black and terrible
fiend, that put out the fire as fast as they enkindled it. Then Marcellus
hallowing water with the sign of the Cross, and throwing it into the fire, it
made it to burn and flame as though oil had been thrown into it. One would
think it strange that water should increase the flame of fire; but it is not
strange that holy water should suppress the devils power, Thus much by the
way of holy water. Now let us see

WHY THE MASS IS SAID in Latin.
THE Mass is said in Latin for diverse reasons. First, for that the Church is
Catholic, that is to say universal, not of one nation, but of all; and
therefore it is most convenient that she should praise God, and have her
service in a language which is most general, and universally understood, and
esteemed of by all nations: and this is the Latin tongue. An English Catholic
may go into Italy, France, Spain, or into any place of the Catholic world
even into the furthest Indys; and as he is united in the same faith and
doctrine, and obeys the same authority of the Church with them; Genesis 11.
so he shall see the very self same service of God, and hear the very same
words which he hears in his own country, and understand them, if he
understands the Latin tongue. This is the comfort of Catholics, that they
are the people of one tongue, and one speech; not only in faith and doctrine,
but also in manner of utterance, as near as can be. Neither was it ever the
practice of the Church to have her service in the vulgar languages of every
nation. In the eastern parts of the world Mass was aunciently said in Greek;
because the Greek tongue was most universally understood, and esteemed of in
those parts; although the common sort of people in all those places generally
understood it not. In the Western parts of the world it was said in Latin,
as Saint Augustine says that the Scriptures were used in Africa in Latin;
Bed. 1. hist. Ang. cap. 1.
and Saint Bede says that there being in England in S. Augustines time four
several languages, by his preaching, and saying service in the Latin tongue,
it came commune to them all. For this reason the Mass is said all over in
Latin, except perhaps in some places of Greece, or where the Latin tongue is
but little studied.

Secondly a higher and more esteemed language gives more majesty, and
reverence to the misterys of God, then a vulgar tongue; and therefore the holy
Ghost speaking by the Scriptures, would use a most high and maiesticall manner
of speech, for the most part above vulgar capacitys: and the Catholic Church
speaking in the person of the holy Ghost, it is meet, that she should use his
manner of speech,

Thirdly, if the Church service were to be said in every vulgar tongue, it
would be subject to continual misconstructions abused by the proud and
contentious, who being for the most part of the ignorant sort, as regarding
more the show of knowledge, then the substance and good use of it, would
pretend to understand all things, and contend without end. As now we see in
England, where every old wife (to use S. Hieromes words) presumes to teach
that which she never learned, and thinks that she has brains enough to
look down into that great depth of the Scriptures, which the Doctors of the
Church have so much admired, and which S. Augustine was so afraid to look
into, Confess. l. 12. c. 14.
that he cried out; O wonderful profoundnesse of thy words: wondefull
prof^undnesse my God, wonderful profoundnesse, it makes a man quake to look
into it. Handy craft men, and silly women amongst the Protestants of Eagland
have none of this fear: they can understand and interpret the holy
Scriptures, they can correct their common prayer, and controling their
Ministers, when they list they will step up into the pulpit before them. The
Protestants Miuisters may now see and I know where some of them have confessed
the original cause of this confusion amongst them, to have been the
vnlimitated reading of the Scriptures, and the having of their common service
in the vulgar tongue, and that it was an error in their predecessors to put
such knives into childrens hands, that could not use them, The Catholic Church
as a careful mother her self carueth for her children, instructing them in
that which is necessary for them, not trusting them to their own caruings and
misconstructions. S. Dion. eccl. hier. cap. 1. Basil. de Spirit. S. cap. 27.
Denis and S. Basil therefore declare that the sacred mysterys in their times
were kept of purpose from the vulgar.

Fourthly, if the Church Lyturgy were to be said in every vulgar tongue few
Priests could exercise their functions out of their countries. An Italian
Priest could not say Mass in Spain, nor a Spaniard in Italy. And this is the
reason why so few Protestant Ministers ever travail out of their countries,
Although it be thither where their own Religion, as they prerende is
professed: for their service being in a different language, which that people
understands not, they must either be silent abroad or stay at home, If they
will say service. Where as Catholic Priests may serve God after the same
manner in all places, and all people may serve God by them.

Fifthly, if the public service of the Church were said in every vulgar tongue,
it must of necessity be subject to all those alterations, and corruptions,
which all vulgar tongues are subject unto; and which the Latin tongue was
subject unto, as long as it was vulgarly spoken, until in the end it banished
it self quite out of the world, and was left as the common speech of noe
place: and then was kept in its integrity, and ancient purity by being kept
from the vulgar, and chiefly as we may well think, by having the Mass so
continually said in Laaine.

Where as our aduersarys object the authority of S. Paul, Cor. 1.14 who seems
as they pretend to require that the Church service be in every commune tongue,
that all the people understanding it may answer Amen; the Apostle never so
much as mentions the Church service in that place, nor medleth with the
language of it; but speaks there of quite another thing; to wit the gift of
strange tongues, and of the interpreting of them: which interpretation was a
different gift and which the speaker himself sometimes had not. These and
other like graces being given to some in those times, the people met together
to hear them exercised. But by little and little they began to be abused, and
fell into disorders: in so much that some would speak, that which could be
interpreted by none; so that it had noe sense that could require Amen to be
answered to; but was as not spoken at all, none being inspired to interpret
it. Now what connection has this with the public service of the Church? which
is without any disorder at all, and in noe such strange tongue, but in a known
and the most honored of all tongues, which is intelligible in it self, and
most universally understood and interpreted by thousands, and which has not
only the authority of the Church allowing of it; but also commanding it; and
therefore with all reason shall be answered with Amen. Which the other being
fallen into disorders could not in reason be answered with; it being to the
edification of none, as being understood by none; when the miracle should have
consisted in understanding, and interpreting of it.

I have heard of some who have been so bold, as to say, that the Priest
praying in a tongue which the people understand not, may curse them for any
thing they know, as well as bless them But this is a bold and irreuerent
speech. For if it were an irreuerence to the Law, and to lawyers to talk of
their cursing of their ignorant clients, when they plead for them in terms
which they understand not; much more is it an irreuerence to the Law of God,
and to Priests that have the keeping of it, to talk of their cursing of the
people when they pray for them in the language of the Church Besides it is a
very weak speech, and unworthy of a wise man: for it is impossible to
accommodate every word to the understanding of all men. And what should they
say when they understood not? and what should deaf men say that heard nor? it
were to banish all order quite out of the world, and the being of a Church to
make it subject to every particular man's censure The Priest if he change
nothing, but says what the Church commands, can enrse none: and we cannot
in reason and charity suspect him of changing any thing, except he be such an
one as Luther or Calvin that durst take upon them to change what they listed in
the Church, and to begin new Churches. Besi^^^s, it is not such a rare thing
in Catholic countries, as it is here for lay people to understand Latin. I
remember that I have met with a plowman holding his plow, who directed me in
my way describing it in very elegant Latin, and with poor beggars who have
been very ready in the Latin tongue. Mechanike men, in some places understand
it so frequently, that Mass can hardly be said amongst an indifferent number
of people; but some that are present will understand Latin.

Finally experience will answer all objections, in that the Mass being, as it
is, in a high and honorable language, and with those devout caeremonys, is full
of edification and much more moving to devotion then any thing which our
enemies have. This those that are converted to the Catholic faith do presently
find in themselves; and those that are perverted from it commonly show in the
loosnesse of their lives, that there is noe comparison betwixt the devotion and
edification of the Mass, and the prayers of Protestants, but only such as is
betwixt true and painted fire: the one of which warmeth indeed, the other
warmeth not at all, but rather cools; as one should grow colder by holding
his hands to a painted fire. Now it is fitting that we speak a word or two

OF THE FRVITS, AND BENEFITS, which are gained by the denout hearing of Mass.
THERE is not any means in the world, so efficacious for the obtaining of
benefits at the hands of God, as the Mass is; both as it is a Sacrifice, the
highest act of worship that can be given to God; and also as it is a Sacrifice
so eminent, and excelling all other Sacrifices, that the dignity, efficacy,
and value of it can not be expressed: all benefits being infinitely more worthy
to be granted for it, then for any thing that we can do.

But to speak more in particular, first our faith is confirmed, and our minds
are elevated to a feruerous zeal of that, which all Christians profess, when
we commemorate the Passion of Christ in that devout, and mysterious manner, as
by the principal, and most express commemoration, which the Church has of
it. And we are excited to a firm and constant belief of that sacred verity,
which the Catholic Church has allwais believed, of the true, real, and
substantial presence of the sacred body, and blood of our Lord, and of his
whole humane nature united to the divine word in the B. Sacrament of Eucharist.
Which as it is a mystery above the understanding of man, and not effected by
any power of nature, but by the omnipotency of God; so by it we yield our
understandings captius, as we ought unto the divine power, to the word of God,
and to the doctrine of the Church. And by hearing of Mass we are not only
confirmed in this mystery, but in all other points of the Christian faith. For
what is the whole Mass, but a daily exercizing, and training up of christians
in the mysterys of Christ, and in all those things which he did and suffered
for us? there is nothing there to be seen or heard, but the chief mysterys of
our faith represented, the divine praises celebrated, his benefits
acknowledged, and his goodness and mercy devoutly implored: all with relation to
some passage of his life or death.

Secondly at Mass we are comforted and encouraged to hope confiding in God
that having left unto the world so dear a pledge, as his only Son he will
grant us the remission of our sins, and will give us in the end his blessed
and glorious sight, we purposing to use those means, which he has procured
for our obtaining of it.

Thirdly at Mass we are inflamed unto acts of charity, and vehement love of
God, having before our eyes such a testimony of his love toward us; that he
would send his beloved son to take upon him the imperfections of our nature,
and to be so unworthily treated and killed to redeem us that killed him. This
should make the heart of a Christian to melt with the love of God: and without
doubt it would do so, if we could rightly consider, and apprehende it: and
the whole scope of the Mass tends to this, to imprint in our minds a lively
apprehension of our Saviors Passion. We then praise, and extol in the highest
manner that we can his sacred merits: we set him in the sight of God, and
propose him as our mediator before his eternal father, beseeching him that he
will not look upon our sins, but upon his own dear Son, so handled for
the love of us, to obtain our pardon, and to reconcile us to him.

Fourthly the Mass is a thanks giving to God for the infinite and immense
benefits which he bestows allwais upon us, and especially for the mystery of
the Incarnation. If we give but a little alms, or do never so small a curtesy
to our neighbor, we expect at least to hatie thanks returned presently for it.
Why then shall not we be as thankful to God, as we would have our neighbor
to be to us? and we having nothing of our own with which we could worthily
gratify the benefits of God; therefore Christ would leave to us the Sacrifice of
his own body, that in it we might have a worthy offering, and a rich and
precious gift by which our gratitude might be acceptable to him.

Fifthly by being present at Mass we are disposed to repentance for our mortal
sins, and to come to the state of grace by a good Confession. For as the
Israelits that were stung by the fiery serpents were cured by beholding the
brazen serpent erected; so we by meditating upon the Passion of our Savior,
and by beholding him elevated on the Cross, are cuted of the wounds of the fiery
serpents of hell: and those that hear Mass in the state of grace obtain a
plentiful remission of their venial sins, much more then by any other good
work.

Sixthly the Mass is not only beneficial to the living, but also to the dead,
and the most efficacious work of charity which can be done for them, by the
general commemoration which is then made for the souls of purgatory; and they
when they are released are not forgetful of those that helped them in misery.

Seauenthly those that are present at Mass may receive the B. Sacrament with
more devotion, at least spiritually in heart and mind, uniting themselves with
an ardent desire to the life giving flesh of our Savior; and noe doubt but
shall carry away the effect of that sacred food in their hearts. For as it were
not fitting that those who wait at the tables of Princes, or at great feasts,
should go away hungry for want of meat; so those that attend at this
blessed feast shall not depart vnsatiated with it; but even as one that enters
into a wine cellar of strong and precious wines is comforted, and strengthened
with the strength, and smell of them, although he taste them not; so those that
are present at this sacred banquet ate spiritually refreshed, comforted, and
filled with the virtue and strength of the B. Sacrament, although corporally
they receive it not.

Finally not only the Priest that says Mass, but all that are present
offering up that Mass with him, teceiue spiritual distributions at the hands
of God, who gives something to every one of them, for the offering which they
gave to him. And not only spiritual, but also temporal benefits are obtained
by the Mass: because as it is a Sacrifice it may be offered up for the
obtaining of any good, or the avoiding of any evil whatsoever. Jacob offered
Sacrifice for the good success of his journey. Melchisedech offered Sacrifice
in thanksgiving for his victory. Noe in thanksgiving for his preservation in
the deluge. Job for his children. Sacrifices were offered for women before
their delivery, and after their delivery for their purification, Chrysostom. ho. 21.
in act, Aug. l. 22 cap. 1. de ciu. Dei.
and for bodily health, and cleansing from leprosy, and other impuritys. Saint
Chrysostom mentions how that Sacrifice was offered in his time for the
fruits of the earth, and for temperatnes of air. Saint Augustine relates how
that himself caused it to be offered in houses hanted with evil spirits, and
that they were expelled by it. Saint Bede (as you have heard) of a gentleman
that was miraculously delivered out of captivity by having Mass said for him.
And Saint Anthony Archbishop of Florence, commonly called Saint Anthonine,
relates of the men, the one of which, who had not heard Mass on a holy day,
was suddenly struck dead with thunder, and the other was saved by miracle for
that he had heard Mass. By all which we may see that there is no kind of
benefit, but it may be obtained by the Mass; and that there is nothing so
efficacious for the obtaining of benefits as to procure Masses to be said for
that end. And therefore it is a devotion very acceptable to God that which many
pious people have of hearing Mass every day: and (a devotion which Saint
Augustine has commended in his mother Saint Monica, that she let no day pass
without being present at the Sacrifice of the Church.) For as parents are
pleased to see their children come every day to acknowledge their superiority,
and to do their filial duty to them, so it is a thing very pleasing to God,
to see us his children come every day as it were to ask his blessing by the
holy Sacrifice as the worship due and proper to him from us: and as parents are
moved with tenderness toward their children to pardon their falts, and to
cherish and bestow gifts on them, when they see them continue this daily
submission and duty to them; so the love and mercy of God must needs be moved
toward us, to pardon our sins, and to bestow graces upon us, when he sees
us every day at Mass. We ought then to conceive a very great devotion to this
holy Sacrifice, and with all modesty, silence and reverence, to be present at
it. Allways when we are going to Mass let us think, that we are then going to
present our selves before the divine Majesty to offer to him a very rich and
precious offering, the greatest that is in the world: that which astonished
heaven and earth, when it was offered on the Cross: and we may imagine that we
were going to Mount Caluary, to see the very crucifying of Christ; and that
joining our selves to the company of our blessed Lady, and of Saint John
Evangelist, we will mind their behavior and learn of them how to behave our
selves at Mass. And it were good to get a custom allways when we hear
Mass, to make a purpose of amending some particular falt, or imperfection,
which we know in ourselves, and to remember that purpose at the beginning, and
at the end of every Mass, which we hear.

THE ELEAVENTH DISCOVRSE. OF THE PRAECEPTS OF THE CHVRCH.
I Intend now to declare the Praecepts of the Church; but first we will crave
our blessed Ladys intercession.

Hail Mary, etc.

Quest. Say the five chief Praecepts of the Church. Answer. To fast fasting
days. To keep holy days. To confess our sins to our ordinary Pastor, or
to another with his leave ot least once a year. To receive the Eucharist at
Easter time. To pay tithes.

There are diverse other Praecepts of the Church: as the prohibiting to
celebrate marriage from the beginning of Aduent until after Twelfth day, and
from the beginning of Lent until after Low Sunday. Also many things in
several general counsels commanded: some in respect of the Clergy, and some
of the lai^y ^or of particular states and conditions of men; which we omit
as not of this place; and declare only the five above mentioned, which Authors
commonly deliver as the chief and most necessary for the people to be
instructed in. But before wce come to their particular declaration we will say
something

OF THE AVTHORITY OF THE Church, and of the obligation of her Praecepts.
Quest. How do the Praeceps of the Church oblige? Ans. The Praecepts of the
Church oblige under a mortal sin.

The authority of the Church is declared in many places of holy Scriptures.
Apoc. 1.
Saint John saw in a vision the Church descending down from Heaven like to a
glorious bride setforth with all her ornaments, to meet her bridegroom; God
is the Bridegroom, the Church is the bride, the Praecepts of the Church are
her ornaments: for by the keeping of them the souls of the faithful are
adorned graciously in the sight of God; and in the end become glorious in
Heaven; and those that break the Praecepts of the Church, break, tear, and
abuse the ornaments of the celestial bride; and therefore commit a mortal
sin.

Christ has compared the disobedient to the Church to Heathens, Mat. 18
and Publicans, saying; If he will not hear the Church let him be to thee as
the Heathen and the Publican: but the eternal word of God, and his infinite
wisdom, neither would nor could have so compared them, as to put them in the
rank of the most odious, and infamous of all men, if they had not been guilty
of mortal sin.

Nay the authority of God in many places of the Scriptures is in plain words
attributed to the Church. A question arising concerning the necessity of
Circumcision, Saint Peter with some others met at Jerusalem about it: and
having decided the controversy they imposed some praecepts to be observed by
the Church; and that in the name and authority of the Holy Ghost; saying, Act.
15.
it has seemed good to the Holy Ghost and to us to lay noe further burden
upon you, then these necessary things etc. And S. Paul, who had been an earnest
aemulatour of the law of Moses, went up to Jerusalem to them, and without any
murmuring at all was contented with that, which was there decreed, and which S.
Peter then declared, submitting willingly all those rites which he had been
brought up in, and which he had aemulated before, to the censure, Laws, and
Praecepts of the Church of Christ: and not only himself obeyed them; but also
(as in the same chapter is declared) He walked through Syria and Cilicia
confirming the Churches: and commanding them to keep the Praecepts of the
Apostles and Ancients. Ananias sold a piece of land, and defrauded of the
price of it, bringing only part of it to the feet of the Apostles. Saint Peter,
who by revelation understood his deceit, rebuked him, saying, Act. 5.
Ananias why has satan tempted thy heart that thou should ly to the holy
Ghost, etc. Thou have not lied to men but to God. And it cost him his life,
forth with falling down dead in the place. And his wife Saphira who was privy
to his fraud coming in about three hours after, and mainteining her husbands
ly, Behold (said Saint Peter) their seete that have buried thy husband at the
door, and they shall bear thee forth. And she fell down presently, and dying
was carried out of doors, and buried with her husband. See here the divine
authority attributed to the Church, Saint Peter declaring that Ananias then
lied to the holy Ghost; and not to men, but to God, in that he lied to those
who as the Praelats of the Church had the authority of God: and a terrible
example of the divine Justice ensuing to teach us reverence, and obedience to
that authority. Our blessed Savior speaking to his Apostles said, Luc. 10.
He that hears you hears me, and he that despises you despises me, and
Saint Paul writing to the Thessalonians concerning the Praecepts, which he had
delivered to them, These. 14.
says, He that despises these things, despises not man, but God, who also
has given his holy Spirit in us. By all which places we see that the Church
has divine authority, that to hear it is to hear God, and to be vnheare to
it is to be vnheare to him; to dissemble with the Prelates of the Church, is to
dissemble with God, and to despise them is to despise him.

The reason of this is; Order.
because the Superiors of the Church being ordained of God to govern the
world in his divine service, their authority is to be obeyed, as the ordinance
of God, and as the supreme authority upon earth above all temporal power: in
that immediately and directly it tends not the temporal, but to spiritual
peace, and order; and therefore those that deny obedience to it and resist it,
resist the divine ordinance, and the supreme authority that is amongst men. If
a father should set a School Master over his children, and command them to
obey him; they denying obedience to him, and refusing to be taught by him,
disobey their father, as well as their master. God sets the Pastors of the
Church as Masters over us, to instruct and command us in the divine worship,
Mal. 2.
The lips of the Priest shall preserve knowledge, and the law thou shall
require from his mouth: and the Apostle says, Heb. 13.
Obey your Prelates and be subject to them: for they watch as being to render
account for your souls. The greatest Duke, King, or Emperor, if he has a
soul to be saved, he has a Priest, and a Prelate to obey, as well as the
meanest of his subjects: he is his master in spiritual things; and if he
disobey him in the doctrine, and Praecepts of the Church, he disobeyeth God
who ordained him in that authority, he does contrary to the divine word,
breaks his laws, and takes away all order, and government quite out of the
world: for all order includes subordination, that is to say subjection of
inferiors to superior powers; but take once away the authority of the Church,
and absolve men in conscience from the obedience of it, to begin new
doctrines, believing, teaching, and doing what they list themselves, and you
take away all subordination of inferiors to superiors in the divine worship;
therefore take away obedience to the Church, and you take away all order and
government in Religion, quite out of the world, by making men subject to no
authority; and consequently you destroy the world which without order in
Religion can not consist. The ground therefore foundation, and first principle
of all order is the divine authority of the continual Church, to believe as
the Church teaches, and to obey it. The Apostles have commanded obedience to
temporal superiors, who then were infidels, and could have no authority in
spiritual affairs. Petr. 1.2.
Let every soul be subject to higher powers for there is noe power but of God.
Romans 13.
Therefore he that resists the po^er resists the ordinance of God. If
infidel masters, Magistrates and Powers be to be obeyed in temporal things,
as ordained of God, how much more are we to obey the higher powers of the
Catholic Church? God has ordained the Superiors of the Church to govern the
world in his divine service; therefore they have the authority of God, Aug.
co^t. adu. leg. lib. 1. c. 17.
and their Praecepts oblige under a mortal sin. There is no chain of iron,
or adamant, says S. Augustine, that can bind so hard as the Praecepts of the
Church.

The like may be said of Ecclesiastical customs which by long continuance
have obtained the force of laws. Ecclesiastical customs.
Therefore S. Paul commends the Corinthians for keeping the Praecepts which he
had given them and alleging the custom of the Church, he thought it
sufficient to stop the mouths of the contentious, to say we have noe such
custom nor the Church of God. Cor. 1.11.
And if those customs of the Church could gain that authority so soon within
twenty or thirty years that Christ founded it, certainly they shall have as
much now, when it has the addition of about sixteen hundreds of years. S.
Augustine has these words for customs. In those things of which the
scriptures determine nothing for certain, Aug. ad Ca^ulan.
the custom of the people is the custom of God, and the institutions of our
ancestors are to be kept as laws: and as praeuaricators against divine laws;
so the infringers of Ecclesiastical customs are to be restrained; because
the Church seeing those customs, and not forbidding them, by silence
consents and allows of them; and God declares by the practice of the
Church that in those times, and places such customs oblige, as necessary then
to be kept. Now let us declare the Praecepts of the Church in particular.

THE FIRST PRAECEPT.
TO fast fasting days. So great is the benefit of fasting, that the Catholic
Church would have none of her people to be deprived of it, and therefore would
oblige all to diverse fasts, which I shall presently declare; but first we will
say something of fasting in general.

Fasting is commended first in the old Testament; sometimes by examples of the
Prophets and holy men, and sometimes by the admirable effects of it. Fasting
was the first Praecept that was commanded to man, and all our miserys began
first by the unhappy breaking of that Praecept. God might have chosen any other
Commandment to have exercized our obedience in; but he would commend fasting
to us. After that, in the Law of nature it was commanded again, some meats
being then prohibited to be eaten, as unclean. Nu. 6. Iud. 13. Hiere. 35.
In the Law of Moses he himself fasted at the receiving of it. The Nazareits
and Rechabeits, who were particularly dedicated to the service of God, were
strict and austere in fasting. Holy Judith armed with fasting went forth
against all the Assyrian forces accompanied only with one maid servant; and
full of zeal, and heavenly fortitude with her own hands slew their Prince,
and put them all to slight. The sentence of death was given against all the
Israelits, and a day appointed for their general massacre; Esther the Queen
must venture her life for them, by going to the King to ask their pardon. She
fasted and the people fasted for her good success, and she became so
beautiful and gracious, that the heart of the King being enamoured with her,
the lives of thousands were granted at her request. The Niniuers for their
sins had deserved destruction, and God sent his Prophet to declare against
them, and to cry as yet forty days and Niniue shall be subverted. Ion. 3.
The King hearing of it, commanded a solemn fast, and the city observing it,
God was pacifyed, the sentence was suspended, and Niniue stood firm, repaired
by the force of fasting. The three children armed with this virtue entered into
the furnace of Babylon, and walked in the raging fire, as in a pleasant fresh
air. Daniel by fasting was too strong for Lions, and greedy hungar urging them
to devour, God stopped their mouths that they did him noe hurt. Grave
Eleazarus contemned death, to defend that fast which God had then commanded in
the Church. And the seven brethren in the Machabees, with their Mother above
measure marvelous, passed through cruel torments in defense of the same fast.
In the New Testament we have fasting much more commended unto us by the example
of Christ himself, who blessedly began the Law of grace with his own fast
of forty days. We have also that Anne the Prophetisse fasted, that S. John
Baptist fasted, that the Apostles fasted, and that Christ did not only
commend fasting by his example, but in plane words and by miracle. He would
have a possessed person to be brought to the Apostles, that they laboring in
vain to despossesse him, he might perform it himself, and then declare for
fasting: saying, this kind can go out by nothing but by prayer and fasting.
Marc. 9.


Is it not now a shame for the enemies of the Catholic Church to pretend
Scriptures, and yet to stand against the whole current both of tho old and new
Testament for some aequivocall sentence which they pick out to object against
fasting? Christ to reprove the hypocrysy of the Pharisys, who used often to
fast, and to wash themselves that they might seem holy before men, said, Mat.
15.
not that which enters into the mouth defiles a man: meaning that the end,
intention, and circumstances of eating, and not the corporal meat was either
good or hurtful to the soul of man: and they object this saying against
fasting in general, or against the fasts of the Church, Gal. 4.
and call them the observations of men and not of God. What more could an
haeretike say to deny the doctrine of the whole world? and what more could
thieves, robbers and all wicked malefactors desire, to exempt themselves from
all humane laws, and obligation of conscience then to deny all observations as
of the authority of man, and to refer all to the tribunal of God, which they
know that they can not escape, but must stand to whether they will or not? You
may see what reverence is here to the word of God, and how easily that sacred
word is abused by those that will stand against the whole Church. First
therefore I tell them that they cannot but see those words to have the same
force against fasting in general, which commonly they allow of, as against the
fasts of the Church, which now they reject; but that is indeed noe force at
all, the circumstances being altered in which Christ spoke them, to reprove
the fasts of vain, and hypocryticall men, who fasted without order and
humility, for show only. Secondly I tell them that the authority of the Church
is the authority of God, as I have sufficiently proved; and therefore the
Praecepts of the Church are not only the observations of men, but the
Commandments of God. Thirdly I tell them that God by his Church commanded
fasting in the Law of Moses, and in the Law of grace, even in the Apostles
times, the Council of Jerusalem prohibiting some meats, Act. 15.
as is specifyed in the fifteenth of the acts. Fourthly I tell them that
fasting as it is a Praecept of the Church is used, as a corporal affliction to
subdue the evil inclinations of our flesh; and corporal afflictions used with
order, as the Church praescribeth them, are pleasing to God; therefore fasting
as it is a Praecept of the Church is pleasing to God. Cor. 1.9.
S. Paul says I chastize my body, and bring it into servitude least perhaps
when. I have preached to others my self become reprobate. Fifthly I tell them
that Aerius was condemned as an haeretike many hundreds of years since, Haer.
53.
and S. Augustine has taken the pains to put him into his catalogue of
haeretiks, for this very doctrine, for that allowing of fasting in general, he
disallowed of it as a Praecept of the Church, and would have none to fast, but
as they liked themselves.

He that should read the second book of S. Hierome against Iouinian the
haeretike, that denied fasting, should find there much more then I have said,
or can say in commendation of it. And it is admirable to read the sentences of
Scriptures, and the erudition which this holy Doctor has drawn there
together for this purpose, showing by several authors how much this virtue was
esteemed of even by heathens in the best ages of the world; who saw by reason,
and found by experience the force of fasting, in the tempering of our bodies,
in refreshing and quickening of our understandings, and by consequence in
disposing us unto Moral virtues And writing to the Virgin Demetrias he has
this high expression that fasting is not only in it self a perfect virtue,
but the foundation, sanctification, purity, and Prudence of the rest; without
which none shall see God.

Now for the particular fasts or abstinences which the holy Church commands.
There are the forty days fast of Lent, the fast of Ember days, of Rogation
days, of Vigils, of Frydayes of S. Mark, Lent.
and of Saturdayes We have for the forty days fast of Lent the examples of
Moses, of Elias, and of Christ himself. Moses fasted forty days, and
received the Law enjoying in that time the familiar conversation of God. Elias
fasted forty days, and then wrought miracles, reviving the dead. Christ fasted
forty days in the beginning of his miraculous preaching, so preparing
himself to deliver his gospel, and to redeem the world. And although we can
not fast so strictly and perfectly as our blessed Savior did, eating nothing
all that time; yet it is fitting that we should do our endeavor in honor and
imitation of him. And it is not unlikely that Christ commended the fast of Lent
as well by word and express command, as by example to his Apostles in those
forty days space betwixt his Resurrection and Ascension, in which he often
appeared to them, and taught them concerning the Church; and therefore the
ancient and holy fathers commonly call it the institution of the Apostles by
the Commandment of Christ. S. Ambrose that it was not invented by any earthly
cogitation but commanded by the heavenly majesty. Amb. de quadrag. ser. 36.
Igna. ep. 5. Aug. ser. 69. de temp.
S. Ignatius who was the Disciple of S. John Evangelist says contemn not
Lent: for it contains the imitation of our Lords conversation and S.
Augustine says that by the due observation their of the wicked are separated
from the good, Infidels from Christians, haeretiks from faithful Catholics.
He then that honoreth the name of a Catholic and Christian, will honor Lent,
and observe it. It is instituted to be kept against the Passion of Christ, that
we, who profess ourselves his servants, and soldiers, may in some sort suffer
with our master, and captain. It were a preposterous mirth and absurd in a
servant to laugh, and make merry, when he saw his master full of pain; or for
a soldier to take his ease in bed, when his captain were enduring hardness
in the field. Good Vrias coming out of the camp to the court, the King badd
him to go home and rest himself; but he refused to do so, Reg. 2.11.
saying the ark of God etc. And my Lord Ioah abide upon the face of the earth
and shall I enter into my house to eat and drink? I will not do this thing.
Neither did he it; but went out and slept before the gates of the Kings house
with the other servants of his Lord; because he would not pamper himself and
ly within doors, when the arc, and his Lord laid without. Our blessed Lord
the King of heaven and earth, the Savior of the world is suffering many
blows, he is bleeding upon the Cross, his meat, and drink is vinagre, and
gall, and is it then a time for us to make merry, and to feast our selves? is
this like a servant and soldier of Christ? or is it not rather most
unseasonable, preposterous, and spirefull, unworthy of the name and profession
of a Christian? how preposterous then is the malice of those who choose the
time of Lent of all the times of the year, and Good Friday of all the days in
lent to make their feasts on? is this a good preparation to receive the benefit
of Christ's Passion and Resurrection? if they were Jews or professed enemies of
Christ they might do so indeed in despite of him; but being Christians they
should be ashamed of it. Saint Augustine commends the fast of Lent, as a
preparation for Easter, and says as you have heard, that the breaking of it is
wicked, and proper to Infidels, and Haeretiks. This they may gloss with some
pretense, and find some thing to say for it, as may be done for any absurdity
whatsoever; but the commune sense? and the first apprehension of all men
conceiueth it most natural to sorrow with the sorrowful, and abhors the
contrary as a disdain and affront: and Christ will disdain those that
disdain him, and despise those that despise his Church. Baronius relates of
Saint Elphegus Bishop of Winchester how that exhorting of the people to observe
Lent, a certain man derided him; but the Bishop foretold that he should die
that night, and so it happened. Lent then is observed in imitation of our Lords
fast, in honor of his Passion, and as a preparation for Easter. The Sundays
in Lent are not of the number of the forty days fast, although we keep
abstinence on them also; that the forty days may continue in some kind of
fasting all together, and not be quite broken by eating of flesh within that
time. Ember days.


Ember days were fasted as a preparation for holy Orders, which at those times
used to be given Saint Hierome writing to Marcella says that the Ember days,
as well as lent were instituted by the Apostles. Act. 13.
And it may be gathered out of their acts where it is said that fasting and
praying they imposed hands, that is gave orders: and from this of the Apostles
came the practice of the Church of fasting Ember days for the more worthy
receiving of holy Orders, Leo ser. 7
as saint Leo declares, who therefore calls it an Apostolical tradition.
They are observed in the beginning, of the four quarters of the year, of
Spring, Summer, Autumn and Winter, to offer up to God as it were the first
fruits of all times: the orders of the Church being then received. Rogations
days.


Rogation days are fasted for the fruits of the earth. Procession is made that
the whole Church both Clergy and Laity may be represented as present to
acknowledge the goodness of God, and his providence over us, and to pray for
the continuance of it toward us. Vigils.


Vigils are fasted inhonour of the day following, that it being a holy day
dedicated to prayer, fasting and prayer may go both togother for the greater
honor of God. They are called Vigils which is to say watchings; because
aunciently the faithful used to watch all that night, attending in the Church
to the Ecclesiastical office; but many inconveniences in process of time
appearing in those watchings, they were laid aside. Fridays fast or
abstinence, Friday.
according to custom of places, is in honor of our blessed Saviors Passion.

The feast and solemnity of Saint Mark was first instituted by occasion of a
great pestilence, S. Mark
which reigned so violently in Italy, and especially about Rome, that people
suddenly fell down dead, as they sneized or yawned. And from thence says
Durandus came the custom of saying; God bless you, to those that sneize, as
being then in danger of death. Saint Pelagius who was then Pope instituted the
solemnity of Saint Mark against it, and himself died of it, as he was going
in the Procession. Saint Gregory who succeeded him commanded it to be kept all
over, and therefore it is called the great Letany, that is to say a greater
supplication, (for Letany is as much as to say a supplication, or petitioning
of God) and so the abstinence, Procession, and the whole solemnity may be
understood as a supplication thus instituted. The solemnity of Rogation days
is called the lesser Letany, because they were first begun more privately, and
by a lesser authority; to wit of the Bishop of Vienna: Thus Durand.

Saturdays abstinence is kept in honor of our blessed Lady, in remembrance of
that Saturday, Saturday
on which the sacred body of our Lord remained in the Sepulcher; for the Faith
of Christ was then preserved especially by her, the Apostles at that time
wavering in the belief of his Resurrection.

This as all other Praecepts of the Church obliges according to the intention
of the Church commanding it. How we are to fast
For he that makes laws is to interpret his meaning in them; who as he could
give them power to oblige; so is he to determine the circumstances of their
obligation. Hence it follows first that sick folks, children, and youths
before they come to a sufficient settled growth, aged and decayed persons, poor
people that must eat often, as not having sufficient at once for an entire
maile, and those that labor much in body or mind, are not bound to fasting.
Because the Praecepts of the Church are to be understood unto edification and
not unto destruction: that is to say they are intended to raise the honor of
God, by increasing of peoples devotion; but they should pull it down and
lessen it, if they obliged with any notable hurt. And therefore fasting and all
such corporal afflictions are to be used with discretion, and moderation, and
oblige not unto our hurt or notable damage. Saint Paul was a great lover of
such afflictions, and no doubt but he was glad to see his disciple Timothy to
follow him in them; yet when he saw that it was with excess, and to the
impairing of his health, Tim. 1.5.
he advised him, saying; Drink not yet water, but use a little wine for thy
stomach, and thy often infirmitys. Secondly, it follows that our fast is
broken with meat only, and not with drink; which the Church might also have
forbidden, but did not: and therefore it is lawful to drink betwixt mailes,
either wine, beer, water, or any thing which is used as drink. Milk betwixt
mailes breaks the fast; because it is rather meat then drink; and therefore
we commonly call it, as the Scripture also does, te cate milk.

The Praecept of fasting includes two things, Two things in fasting.
to wit to abstain from unlawful meats, and to eat but one maile of lawful
meats The first binds all that are subject to the Pr^cepts of the Church:
that is all that are capable of reason. The second obliges only those that are
of perfect strength, and sufficient ability, and not such as are mentioned
above, who may eat more mailes then one so that they abstain from meats
prohibited. It is a custom in some places to eat bread and drink on fasting
days in the morning: which in servants, and others that are not bound to fast
is allowable and very good; because their fasting is a voluntary obsequy in
them, who not being able nor bound to oblerue strictly the fast of the Church,
it is to be understood that of devotion they will abstain from a complete
breakfast, and content them selves with only bread and drink; but in those
that are bound to fast, I know not how to allow of it. It proceeds also as I
suppose out of ignorance in some, that they eat aples, and fruit out of maile
time on fasting days. I tell th^se once again that they may drink on fasting
days our of maile time, and take some thing to quench their thirst, because
the Church has not forbidden to drink; but it has forbidden to eat all kind
of meat; and therefore aple^ and fruit are not to be eaten out of mailes.

Fasting days begin at twelve a clock in the morning, and end at twelve a
clock at night, containing four and twenty hours. Aunciently they fasted
from supper time on the day before; till supper time again, on the next day,
without eating of any thing: but men's complexions growing weaker, and weaker,
and perhaps their devotions also, they began to take their suppers sooner on
fasting days, until by little and little, they brought supper to noone time:
and custom has now prevailed to take a little collation at night, as is
observed in the Church. So that the maile which we have on fasting days is not
properly a dinner, but a supper; and therefore it may lawfully be differred as
late as we will; but it may not be taken before the time allowed of by custom.
Which is at soonest about noone time.

Finally, Scandal.
for the manner of fasting, the customs of places are to be obscrued, and we
must be very careful that we give noe scandal to others, especially to the
enemies of the Catholic Church, who make allways the worst of our actions: and
therefore many things which are lawful are not allways expedient to be done*
It was in it self lawful for saint Paul to eat flesh, and of that flesh
which was immolated to Idols; for the flesh was no worse; yet he would rather
never eat flesh at all, Cor. 1.^.
then scandalize any by ^ating of it. If meal (says he) scandalize my
brother, It ill never eat flesh, least I scandalize my brother.

THE SECOND PRAECEPT.
TO keep Holy days. In the Law of Moses diverse holy days were commanded to
be kept, Joan. 10.
and were then observed by praecept of the Church; Apoc. 1.
and our blessed Savior has allowed of them, hono^ing their solemnitys by his
own presence at them; as he did the feast of the Dedication of the Temple
instituted by the Church in the time of Judas Machabaeus. The Scriptures make
mention of the Dom^nicall day; that is to say, our Lords day, or our Sunday to
have been kept in the Apostles times. The Church then took away the Saturday
Sabbath which God first commanded in remembrance of the creation of the world,
and instituted Sundays Sabbath: or rather transferred Saturdays Sab^oth unto
Sundays Sabbath in honor of the Redemption of the world, as a greater
mystery: and I do not hear of any Heretics now in the world that refuse to
keep Sunday for Sabbath: with what consequence then can they refuse to keep
the other holy days, or any other praecept of the Church, they all having the
same authority that Sundayihath, and the same obligation? Yet Protestants allow
the obligation of Sundays solemnity, and durst never attempt to alter it, or
to deny the obligation of it, having no other warrant for it, but the authority
of the Church which then governed the Christian world; and having the same for
other holy days they reject them. The truth is that they have forsaken the
Church that was allayes in the world, to begin a Church which then was not at
all in the world; and therefore the holy Ghost has forsaken them, and left
them to such inconsequences of their own wits. Clem. l. 8. Apost. constit.
Saint Clement who lived in the Apostles times, and was disciple unto Saint
Peter, and Coadiutor to Saint Paul, and who wrote as an eyewitness of those
things which were then observed in the Catholic Church, delivers that the
Apostles gave order for the observing of the Feasts of their fellow Apostles:
and in particular of Saint Steven, as also of some other Martyrs. Epiph. haer.
75.
Saint Epiphanius denounces Aerius for an Haeretike, in that he rejected the
holy days of the Church. By all which it appears how weak that objection of
Protestants is, which Aerius also objected out of the Apostles words, Gal. 4.
You observe days, months, times, and years. Where the Apostle speaks
against the superstitious observations of Heathens, from which young Christians
at their first conuersions were hardly weaned in those times; and therefore he
rebukes them; but I have said enough for this, and all other Praecepts of the
Church, when I showed that they are the Precepts of God, and have divine
authority.

This Praecept includes two things: to wit to abstain from seruil works, and
to heat Mass: for it is not sufficient not to work corporal works on holy
days; but we must also sanctify them with some special good works, as days
particularly dedicated to the service, and honor of God: and Mass being the
chief, highest, and most eminent worship, which can be given to him, as his
only true Sacrifice; therefore the Church has commanded that every one be
present to offer up at least one Mass every holy day. And this is as great an
obligation, as to observe Lent or any other Praecept of the Church obliging
under a mortal sin. S. 2. Par. Chron. tit. 9. c. 10. 2.
Anthony Archbishop of Florence relates of two men who going out to foul upon
a holy day, they heard a voice that cried strike him, strike him: and the one
of them that had not heard Mass was presently struck dead with a thunder
bolt: and his astonished companion hearing the voice to continue still, was
comforted with another, which answered I can not strike him for that he has
heard Verbum caro factum est, intimating that he had heard an entire Mass to
the end.

Amongst Holidays those are observed as most solemn in the Church that have
more immediate relation to God himself. We keep also the feasts of our
blessed Lady, and of the Angels, and Saints, to honor God by them; that as
they help us, and rejoice at our good; so we may praise their virtues, and
rejoice in their glory. Besides by celebrating their feasts we are incited to
the imitation of their lives, and to aspire to that state of bless which they
enjoy.

THE THIRD PRAECEPT.
TO Confess our sins to our ordinary Pastor or to another with his leave at
least once a year. By Praecept of the Church we are boundnoe oftener to
confession, then once in the year; but many circumstances may occur in which
by divine Praecept we are bound to confess oftener. First in all dangers of
life, as when we are dangerously si^ke, and as those that are condemned to die.
Soldiers also, tradesmen, and trauelers, when they are to go upon any
dangerous attempt or iourneys; finally in all perils of life we are bound to
prepare our selves for death, and if ^e be conscious of any mortal sin, in
such dangers we are bound to go to confession, as the ordinary means which
God has instituted for the remission of sins We are bound also to go to
confession allwais before we receive any of theseauen Sacraments, if we be
guilty of mortal sin; because mortal sin is as opposite to the divine
grace as poison, wounds, and sickness are to health, and as darkness is to
light, which can not be both together; and therefore he that knows himself to
be in mortal sin, and cleereth not his conscience before he receives any
Sacrament, does as a sick man that should desire health, and yet wilfully
keep poison at his heart, or as one that should shut up the windows to let in
light: and does not only hinder the effect and fruit of the Sacrament which he
receives, but commits also a new mortal sin in so receiving; and there,
for we are bound to clear ourselves by a good confession from mortal sin,
before we receive either the Eucharist, Extreme Unction, Holy Orders, or any
other Sacrament (baptism only excepted; because by it we must be made
christians before we can receive any of the christian Sacraments) if we did but
consider the benefits which we get by the Sacrament of Penance, we should
not need to be commanded to it. First we ^ette the forgiveness of our sins,
by which we are as it were in a moment freed from the most painful, and
loathsome sickness that can be. We get the divine grace: the least degree of
which is better then all this visible world, we get pardon from a horrible and
everlasting ^ame for the future we get ourselves admitted into the Communion
of Saints, and to the fellowship of the blessed, so as to have then a
condignity through the merits of Christ to their everlasting reward. Lastly we
exhilarate and make glad the whole court of heaven, and we contristate, and
make sad the spirits of hell with our conversion to God.

We are commanded to confess to our ordinary Pastor: and that with good
reason, that our Pastors, who have the particular charge of us may have a more
destinct, and particular knowledge of the state of our consciences. And this is
intimated in the words of Christ, when he said that the good Pastor calls
his sheep by name, and leads them forth, that is knows them all in
particular and has a care of every one of them. Besides Pastors and people are
thu^ ^ngaged to each other to be good Pastors and good people. But because
Pastors in their parishes have many employments, and can not allwais attend to
hearing of confessions; therefore the Church licenceth other Priests, and
religious men who are not ordinary Pastors to hear confessions: and to such we
may lawfully confess; because our Pastors license is supposed to confess to
them.

THE FOVRTH PRAECEPT.
TO receive the Eucharist at Easter time. I have showed in its propper place
how oftne of devotion we may receive this, the most blessed of all Sacraments.
But that none may be deprived of the benefits, and graces of it, the Catholic
Church has commanded that all should receive once every year; and that about
Easter time: because it was then instituted, and bequeathed as a legacy to the
Apostles, to be delivered by them to the christian world, and to remain as an
everlasting testimony of the love of Christ toward us, and as a memorial of
the work of our redemption. And therefore it is sitting that every christian
should commemorate the mystery of it about that time, by humbly and thankefully
receiving it. We are bound also to receive it against our deaths; because it
is the most comfortable Vyande and strengthening bread, which God has provided
against that last, and irreuocable voyage. Of which we have a figure in the
third book of Kings. When Iesabel persecuted the Church, and killed so many
Prophets that Elias in Israel was as it were left alone; and he also was
threatened by a messenger that the next day his soul should follow them, he
fledd into the desert, committing himself to the divine providence in that
barren and solitary place. And God who never fails to provide for his
friends, provided for him, sending him bread by an Angel; who badde him eat,
for that he had a great way to go. Reg. 3.19
And eating of the Angels bread he walked in the strength of that meat forty
days and forty nights unto the mount of God Horeb. The Angels bread was the
blessed Sacrament in mystery, the Angel that brought it signifies the Priest,
tho great way which Elias had to go, is the journey of death which all have to
go, Horeb the mount of God represents heaven, and thither we artaine by
virtue, and strength of this comfortable bread. We are bound then to receive
the Eucharist at Easter time, and at our deaths.

THE FIFTH PRAECEPT.
TO pay tithes. This Praecept obliges partly by Law of nature, and partly by
the authority of the Church. By the Law of nature we are bound to allow a
maintenance for our spiritual Pastors, and the Church has determined that
this allowance should be the tithes. In the holy Law of Moses God chose to
himself the tribe of Leui, to attend upon his s^ruice, and to labor for the
spiritual good of the people: and being so employed in that charge, that they
could not attend to tilling of Land, nor to work for their own maintenance,
he ordained that the people, whom they sustained spiritually, should sustain
them corporally, and should pay to them the rithes of the fruits of the earth,
as a competent allowance for them. By the same ^ty of God, and of nature we are
bound as they were to maintain our spiritual Pastors: and Christ not having
specifyed any allowance in particular, but having left it to the determination
of the Church, what could the Church of Christ more reasonably determine, then
that which God had determined before in the same case? to wit the tithes a^ a
competent maintenance for Pastors.

Saint Paul indeed would receive nothing of the Corinthians, but would work
with his hands on the night time to maintain his labor on the day, rather
then he would be burder some to them: But although he would do this with the
Corinthians, yet with others he did not so; but received a liuelyhood of those
to whom he preached; and of the Corinthians also he challenged it as due;
although for some reasons he would take nothing of them. Luc. 10.
Our Savior instructed his Apostles to take their maintenance of the people,
and declared it as due to them, as wages are to workmen. For the workman
(says he) is worthy of his hyre. Tim. 1.5.
And Saint Paul alleging this sentence to that purpose, has assured us of
the sense of it, and of the authority of Christ in that sense. The same Apostle
speaking of it, says; Whoeuer plays the soldier at his own charges? in the
law of Moses those that served the Altar participated of the Altar. And so
also our Lord ordained (in the Law of grace) for them that preach the Gospel
to live of the Gospel. Thus does S. Paul discourse upon the By all which it
does appear that the tithes being appointed by the Church for the labors of
the Clergy, they are as due to them as wages are to workmen. And we may speak
by experience to them that know not the truth, that our labor is without
comparison greater then the labor of day tale workmen.

I have no more to say of the Praecepts of the Church. You have seen first the
authority of the Church to be divine, and her Praecepts to oblige under
amortall sin. Secondly, you have in particular the declaration of them. Let us
keep them with devotion, and zeal of the honor of the Church that commands
them. She is the immaculate spouse, and glorious Bride of God. She is our
mother: and never was there any mother so disirous of her childre^s good, nor
so efficaciously procuring their true preferme^t, as the Catholic Church does
ours. The mother of the Zebedoes was sollicitous for her sons with Christ,
asking to have them near him in his Kingdom; but she knew not what she asked.
The Catholic Church asks nothing for her children, but that which God will
have her to ask, and which he inspireth her how to procure, and which they if
they will obey her are sure to obtain* and that is the highest honor, and
greatest felicity of all honors and felicitys; to be made indeed the
courtiers and fauorits of Christ in his everlasting Kingdom. Let us then obey
her. Eccli. 3.
As he that gathers treasure, so he that honoreth his mother. And then a
little after he is cursed of God that does exasperate his mother. How much
then, ought we to honor the whole Catholic Church, and with what reverence to
receive her Precepts.

THE TWELFTH DISCOVRSE. OF SIN.
I Have now a most hidous, and fearful monster to set before your eyes; I
mean to describe unto you the evil of sin; which is indeed the most
hideous monster of the world: so deformed that neither men nor Angels can
comprehend the deformity of it: none but God can rightly understand it; and
he understanding it is moved with infinite detestation, and auersion from it,
as from that which is most opposite of all things to his goodness, and most
hurtful to his creatures. I would stire up in your hearts a vehement abhorring
and utter renouncing of sin. This is all the fruit (says the Prophet) that
sin be taken away, Esa. 27.
and this is all the fruit which I desire, and labor for in you, and which you
ought to labor for in your selves, to have your sins taken away: fot this we
preach, catechize and exhort, that we may detest all sin, and fly it as the
most dreadful monster in the world. We may conceive something of the power
and malice of sin by the vision which Saint John had in the twelfth of the
Apocalipse. Apoc. 12.
First, he saw a very glorious woman; so glorious that she was clothed with
the Sun, and had the Moon under her feet, and upon her head a crown of
twelve stars. Then there appeared another sign in the Heavens, a great
dragon with seven heads and ten horns, and seven diademes on his head. And
this dragon was so strong and powerful, that he drew down from Heaven the
third part of the stars, and cast them to the earth; and assalting the
glorious woman, for all her glory he put her to flight, and although she had
given her the wings of an Eagle to fly into the desert; yet the dragon sending
forth of his mouth a flood of waters, ouertooke her with them, and had
swallowed her up, if she had not gotten help. By this dragon we may
understand something of the power and malice of sin. Sin is the enemy of
all glory: it ascended into the Heavens, and threw down from thence the
celestial Angels, and made them who were as the stars of Heaven in natural
beauty, to wander now upon the earth and under it, full of shame and pain. The
Church far more glorious in the sanctity of souls then the Sun is in
corporal brightness, and which may well be signified by the glorious woman,
i^ sometimes so persecuted by the sins of Infidels, and evil Catholics, that
although the true worship of God be never quite banished out of the world, yet
in some places it is so obscured, that the Church in those places is driven
into corners, as it were, into the desert. Sin is that monster which brought
the flood of all humane miserys, and a real flood of waters upon the Church in
the deluge, and had quite, swallowed her up, if God had not miraculously saved
her. Sin has brought plagues upon houses, citys, and Kingdoms, and taged in
the end so violently destroying of souls, that the Son of God was incarnated
to destroy it. It made the Sun to be eclipsed with a horrible darkness, the
roof of the Temple of Jerusalem, and the rocks there abouts to be rent in
pieces, the ground to tremble, graves to open, and dead bodies to rise again at
the destruction of it. It made our Savior to weep upon Jerusalem, and it
made Jerusalem within a while to be as a stinking grave, that swelled up to an
incredible hight, with the multitude of dead carcases, which were in it. It
made thousands of that people to languish away with famine, and hundreds of
thousands to come into their enemies hands, and to become subject to their
slavery and torments Sin has brought haeresys into the Church of Christ, and
by them cruel blood ^hed amongst Christians. It is the cause of all
dissentions; and all the evils that ever were, were caused by sin. It makes
the proud to be contemned, the envious to be enuyed, the contentious to be
killed, the covetous to be full of perplexity, the luxurious to despair, and
all sinners to detest that in the end, which once they loved, and to be full of
horror when they come to die. Wise and holy men have lived hard, and austere
lives to keep themselves clear from sin, and have chosen to submit
themselves rather to the cruellest deaths that sinners could devise to inflict,
then to be sinners with them. These are the effects of sin: what monster
could ever do the like? if those tall and strong men that terrifyed the
Israelites were called monsters for their extraordinary strength and tallnesse;
why may not we call sin a monster which has such power? Number. 13.
and if excess, or defects, or disorders of members, make monsters, How
monstrous is sin that is the original cause of all the excesses, defects,
and disorders that ever were? it peruerteth the order of all our actions, it
corrupts our nature, and even as poison put into wine intoxicateth it quite,
and changes it all into poison; so sin corrupts all that is good in our
souls, and all our good works being poisoned with one mortal sin, go
down with it into hell. What reason then have we to abhor and to fly from
sin. If we looked behind us and saw a Lion, Beer, or terrible Serpent
pursueing us at our heels, our hearts would faint presently, our whole bodies
would tremble with fear, and our legs would scarce be able to bear us; and
if we had any strength left we should employ it all in crying out, and in
making haist to get away from it. So let us fear and fly from sin. Son
have thou sinned? Eccli. 21.
do see noe more, as from the face of a serpent flee from sins. The teeth of
a lion the teeth thereof killing the souls of men.

But let us keep order. First we will speak of the nature and malice of
sin. Secondly of the author and cause of sin. Thirdly of the several
kinds of sin. But first of all we will salute the blessed Mother of God, and
pray for her intercession Hail Mary etc.

OF THE NATVRE, AND MALICE OF SIN.
Quest. What is sin? Ans. Sin is that by which we depart from the divine
Law, and are separated from God.

THE Law of God is the line and rule by which all our actions are to be ruled:
sin is the forsaking of that rule; and we forsaking it are presently
separated from God so, that we are then cast out of his favor, and in the
number of the graceless, and wicked souls that are to be damned.

S. Augustine defines sin to be a thought, Aug. l. ^2 cont. Faust. c. 17.
word, or work contrary to the divine Law: and Divines commonly call it the
deformity of a reasonable creature displeasing to God. All which is in
substance the same: to wi^ that sin is a deformity of thought, word, or
work, by which we depart from the divine Law, and are divided and put away
from the grace, and glory of God. Hence it follows first that sin is
voluntary, Free will.
and that if we had not free will we could not sin. For God is not displeased
without reason, and he had noe reason to be displeased at our sins, if they
were of necessity and naturally in us, and not of malice. The malice therefore
of sin is the malice of the will; as it proceeds from the malicious will of
him, that will not abstain from that which he knows, o^ ought to know to be
a sin. But of this we shall speak afterward. Secondly it follows that
those things which are done ignorantly are noe sins: except it be a culpable
ignorance of that which we should, and might have known, but did not; for
otherwise there is noe malice in such actions. Sins against conscience.
Thirdly it follows that those things which are done against conscience are
allwais sins. For our conscience is the judgment which we make of every
particular action which we do: which judgment being given us of God as a guide
to direct us in his divine Law, we are bound to follow it and to be directed
by it. And if we err in our actions, when we follow our conscience we err not
in that we follow them; for that we ought to do; but we err and offend in
that we blindly resolve upon such actions before that we have informed our
selves sufficiently of the lawfullnesse of them, and in that we depose not, and
lay aside not first the error of conscience which we have. Counsel.
It is good therefore not to be too wise in our own eyes, and conceited of our
own knowledge; but to ask of those that are to direct us: and if we chance to
be taken on a sudden tha^ we have not time and opportunity to inform our
selves, let us commend it bre^fly to God, and then act resolutly according to
our conscience; all wais judging that to be lawful which we intend to do;
least thinking or doubting it to be unlawful, we be condemned by our own
conscience, and at the tribunal of God, for nor following the guide, which he
gave us. Sin therefore is a voluntary act of the will, by which we depart from
the divine Law, and are separated from God.

Hence we may gather the first evil of sin, The first evil of sin.
and that it is an incomprehe^sible and infinite evil, in that it is contrary
to God, and separating from him, an incomprehensible and infinite good. For
what is God? but an infinite power, an infinite wisdom, an infinite goodness,
beauty, and glory? nor can we say any thing of God, but by infinites. Then
what is sin, as it is contrary to God, but an infinite of all evils contrary
to that infinite good? he that could lay what God were and could declare the
goodness of God, might say what sin were and declare the evil of it: but this
none at all can do; and therefore the evils of sin are unspeakable, and as
the goodness of God so are they incomprehensible, in that they separate us from
him. Think with your selves sometimes of that supreme goodness, contemplate God
and bless him whom you can neither speak not think. Hiero. l. 2. inc. 2.
abac. ^as. ho. 13. ex varijs qua est de side. Aug. l. de Spiritu and anima
tract. 4.
Moses (says S. Hierome) called himself alogos and irrationalis without
speech and without reason when he was to speak of God, and of divine things;
and David (says he) called himself iumentum a dumb ^reature in that respect.
S. Basil. It is natural for all to love God, but to speak rightly of him is
above the nature of men. Say, (says S. Augustine) say my soul to God: who art
thou O. Lord, and whom shall I conceive thee to be? truly thou only are what
then art, and who thou art. That is to say that then which there is nothing to
be thought, that is greater, or better, or more delightsome: the chief good.
Ser. 1. de verb. Apost. to. 1.
And in another place If thou desire greatness he is greater, if beauty, he is
more beautiful, if sweetness he is sweeter, if brightness he is brighter; if
justice he is iuster, if strength he is stronger, if piety he is more clement:
for it is written he that made strong things himself is stronger, Sap. 13.
and he that made the beautiful is more beautiful himself. What would S.
Augustine say by this? for God to be the greatest, the sweetest, the most
beautiful of all things, we easily understand it: but to be greater then
greatness, sweeter then sweetness etc. We understand it not. That which S.
Augustine said in this was, that God is a greatness, a sweetness, a glory, a
goodness, which can not be understood. I tasted and became hungry, Aug. l. 10.
Confess. c. 27.
and thirsty, thou touchedst me and I burned with the love of thy peace. Says
he. God is a joy which none can understand, but which all do love, and hungar
and thirst after by nature. A joy which is above all joys, and which
contains all joys, and is still desired by those that enjoy him. All that
can be said of God is in breife but this, that he is the supreme goodness, and
that infinite. How evil then is sin that separateth from him? A sort of
robbers enter into Michas his house, and amongst other things they carry away
his God: he follows lamenting after them, and when they asked him what ailed
him, My Gods (says he) which I made you have taken away, and do you say what
aileth thee? Thaul. l. de vit. and pas. Christi.
and yet the God which they took from him was not God, but an Idol only which
could not bless, and protect him. Let us think sometimes of the goodness of
God which we loose by sin, and detest vehemently the evil and deformity of
it which (says Thaulerus) is so great, that if a man could rightly apprehende
it, he would presently fall down dead with horror. Fr. Luis de Granada
relates out of Saint John Climacus of a certain Religious man, who having
fallen into a great sin, became so penitent and afflicted at it, that
procuring of his Superior to be cast into the prison of the Convent, within
eight days with very grief he died. Saint Thomas of Aquin admireth how that a
sinner can laugh, as long as he is in sin. Saint Luis King of France used to
say that he would rather die then committee sin. S. Edmunde that he would
rather be thrown into a burning furnace. Saint Anselme that he would rather
suffer the pains of hell. There was not any thing in the world which the
Saints of God have feared so much, nor indeed any other thing which they
feared but sin. The Ambassadors of Eudoxia seeing that by noe threats they
could obtain of Saint John Chrysostom some things which the Empress demanded
obstinatly of him, returned with this answer to her, that Chrysostom was a
man that feared none but God. The Emperor Theodosius being excommunicated by
S. Ambrose, Ruffinus Prefect of the soldiery to comfort him, told him that he
would effect that Ambrose of his own accord should take of the
excommunication; no, no, replied the Emperor I know that will not be; Ambrose
by no means will be brought to offend God. These were wise, and holy men, they
esteemed of God as the supreme good, and they would loose their lives before
they would loose him, knowing that by sin they were quite separated from him.
Esa, 59.
Your iniquitys have divided between you, and your God, says the Prophet? O
that we could understand how terrible this division is! a branch is divided
from the tree and presently it dies: our singar, or hand is cut of from the
body, and not communicating with the heart, it dies presently and corrupts:
God is the heart, and root of our life, and if we are cut of from him, we die
and corrupt without remedy. Think but that if thy hand, arm, or leg were to
be cut of, how grievous would the very thought of it be to thee? we cannot but
abhor to thinket hat a knife, or saw, or such like instrument should enter
into this skin of ours, and divide betwixt flesh and flesh, and cut the
sinews, and bone quite of, and leave it a deadhand, or arm: but farte more
horrible ought we to conceive our division from God in whom all goodness
consists, and to be separated from him on whom is grounded all true pleasure,
and the profitable use of all our members. How greenous is the parting of dear
friends? We read in the Scriptures of some who have presently fallen down
dead at the loss of their friends: but much more gr^euous ought it to be to
us, to loose the sweet and comfortable freindship of God. Hier. 2.
Know thou and see that it is an evil and bitter thing, for thee to leave thy
Lord thy God. And then God forsaking us, our blessed Lady, our good Angel, the
Saint our Patron, and all the Angels and Saints of God forsake us with him;
that in all dangers we are left destitute of all heavenly comfort, and have
none to help us. For such is their freindship, and union with God, that they
can love none but those whom he loyeth, and cannot but hate those that hate
him. The Angels for the sins of Jerusalem forsook it their voices being
heard in the air, Joseph. de bello Iu^. l. 7. c. 18.
as Josephus records, to say, let us part from hence; and presently such a
desolation came upon it as the like is never read of. What then can they expect
but desolation, who forsake and are forsaken of God?

The second evil of sin is that it brings us into the devils power, and
the pains of hell; For God, our B. Lady and all the Court of Heaven forsaking
us, the devils then take possession of our souls. Even as a Hair, or Dear
forsaking her shelter, is pursued by the greedy hounds, and having no refuge to
fly unto, is seized on and torn in pieces with their bloody mouths; so the
soul when it forsakes God is void of all comfort, and having no shelter to
fly unto, is seized on by the devils, and becomes as it were all bloody in
their hands. Ps. 70.
They that watched my soul consulted together, saying: God has forsaken him,
^pursue, and take him because there is none to deliver. The^e are the devils
who having overcome he sinner by temptation, become then his masters, and seize
upon him as their captive and slave: and according to the baseness and cruelty
of such masters; so base and lamentable is the slavery of sinners in their
power. It was the desolate condition of a soul in this captivity which God
would have us to apprehende bosh by the captivity of Jerusalem; and by the
words of the Prophet deploring it. Tren. 1. and 2.
How does the city full of people sit solita^y? how is the Lady of Gentiles
become as a widow? The Princess of Provinces is made tributary: weeping s^e
has wept in the night and her tears are on her checkes: there is none to
comforther of all her d^ere ones: all her friends have despised her, and are
become her enemies, and from the daughter of Syon all her beauty is devarted.
How has our Lord in his fury covered the daughter of Sion with darkness. Thus
would God inspire his Prophet figuratively to lament the stare of sinners, Romans
6.
as in a pitiful slavery And Saint Paul says, An nescitis quoniam cui
exhibetis vos seruos ad obediendum, serui estis cius cui obeditis? Know you not
that to whom you exhibit your selves s^ruants to obey, you are the servants of
him whom y^u obey. And the word Seruus, a servant in Latin is as much as to
say a bond slave, that is bought, and sold. The Apostle then to show the
miserable condition of sinnets would term them bondslaues to wit of sin and
of the devils. Now what shall we say of that heavy bondage? there is no
greater misery to be endured in this life, then for a man to fall into the
slavery of a cruel, and hard hatted master, that can have no pity on him: and
what master is there so cruel as the devil? When we read of the slavery of
the Israelits in Egypt, we cannot but pity, to see them laden with huge
burdens, toiling in mire and dirt, and performing every day a wearisome and
almost impossible task of bricks; being forced unto it by the cruel
Egyptians without any help or ease at all, only that straw was provided to
their hands; and this also in the end was taken from them, that they must both
spate men to go up and down Egypt to seek straw, and must perform their
task too, or else they must be scourged. They complain to Pharao, Exodus 5.
straw is not given us and bricks are commanded us: behold we thy scruants are
beaten with whippes? but what remedy? all that they got of him was, You are
idle, go and work straw shall not be given you: there shall not a whit be
deminished of the bricks for every day. This wa^ their remedy. Poor slaves!
they must work and be beaten But this was nothing to compare with the devils
slavery. Pharao although cruel, yet he was a man, the devil is a devil of a
higher nature of cruelty, and malice, which by our nature is not rightly
conceived; yet we have in the Scriptures all kinds of miserys and torments
threatened to make us conceive more lively of it: that as those who are made
slaves by the Turks are put unto base, and slavish offices, of carrying heavy
loades, grinding in mills, and the like; and when their masters will, they must
he called to be beaten without remedy, or muttering a word; so would the holy
Ghost describe the state of sinners. Come down sit in the dust, Esa. 47.
o virgin daughter of Babylon. sit on in the ground. Take a mill and grind
meal. I will take vengeance and no man shall resist me. Sit holding thy
peace, and enter into darkness, o daughter of the Chaldees. O Christians
think of these words before you sin, and think that it is God himself that
speaks them to you. Imagine that you heard him threaten, and think that this
is not only an imagination of your own; or exaggeration of ours, but the
real words of God in the Scriptures. We amplify nothing, we speak noe
allegorys but such as God himself has spoken, to terrify men from sin.
Heavy burdens, and rods of iron are threatened to the devils slaves; and more
then so without comparison, Esa. 28.
when it is said, We have stricken a league with death, and with hell we have
made a covenant. There is no more can be said of miserys then death and hell.
Death the greatest of temporal, and hell an eternal horror. By death we
loose all the pleasures of this world, and by hell we loose the pleasures of
Heaven, and begin an euerlassing punishment of ragious pain: that look
whatsoever we could have wished for in Heaven, we should have had it, and
whatsoever we detest and abhor that shall be forced upon us in hell, and we
shall never be pittyed nor freed from it. Time shall begin, and end in this
world, and begin and end again, as long as any time shall last, and after
that their eternity is still, in which they are settled in that cursed state of
continual roaring, rage, and struggling with pain, which shall never cease nor
deminish: that as every thing is settled in its own nature and kind; Angels to
be Angels; men to be men, and Lions to be Lions, and cannot change into another
kind; so the damned souls are settled in that kind of being, and state of
torments without hopes of any change from it, or easement for ever. And besides
the eternity of these torments, the intension and vehemence of them is such,
that all the pain which we can imagine, is but as a fly biteing as it were to
compare with it. We read in the lives of the fathers of a certain holy man
who being tempted to sin by an impudent woman burnt his fingars one after
another, In vit. pat. l. 3.. 107.
bidding her to try how she could endure the fire of hell: and dying that night
the holy man by his prayers teuiued her to life again, hist. angl. l. 3. c. 19.
in which she lived a more chaste and happy life, Saint Bede relates of Saint
Furseus that having seen one time in a vision the torments of hell, that sight
was so terrtible allafterwards to him, that even in the midst of wintour,
allthough he wore but one single garment, he would drop down with sweat when
he thought of it. How great then may we imagine the pain it self to be, when
the thought of it only was of such force with him? to show this, God, although
his mercys be so great, and much commended in the Scriptures; yet nevertheless
he is said to be in a fury against the damned souls: and therefore King David
Prayed; Lord rebuke me not in thy fury. Psalm. 6.
That is with the pains of hell: for as a man in his fury puts all his
strength against those whom he is angry at; so God seems as it were to
exhaust all his power and strength, against those whom he condemns to hell.
And as a master though never so merciful; yet when noe warning, nor correction
will mende his servant, he is incensed with just fury, and forgetting his mercy
he thrusts him out of doors for ever, and delivers him to the tormenters,
as the ungracious servants of the Gospel was; Mat. 18.
so God although in himself he be infinitely pittyfull; yet when it comes to
the pains of hell, he is justly ince^sed against the damned souls, and
delivers them without any pity at all to the devils to be tormented, Behold
(says the Prophet) the name of our Lord comes from far, Es. 30.
his burning fury heavy to bear, his lips are filled with indignation, and
his tongue as a devouring fire: his spirit as a torrent ouerflowing even to the
midst of the neck. He shall dash to pieces in whirle wind, and in hailestone.
Tophet is prepared since yesterday (that is to say hell was prepared of God in
the day of his eternity before all days of time) prepared of the king deep
and wide: the nourishments their of fire, and much wood. The breath of our Lord
as a torrent of brimstone kindling it. Thus was the Prophet inspired to
describe God in a fury against the damned, which next to the loss which they
suffer of God himself, is the greatest of all evils.

Thirdly by sin we incur many temporal afflictions in this world: which
although they be neither in duration of time, nor in intentions, and violence
of pain to compare with those of the soul, which are spiritual and eternal;
yet in reason it should be a great motive, especially to wordly men, who seek
after temporal felicitys to fly sin, which is the loss and hinderance of
them. A man commits some great sin, and within a while he is stricken with
sickness, greifes, or hurts, by which he remains wounded, lame, and
miscrable, perhaps for many weeks, and months, and perhaps for all his life
time: another sins, and is punished with the death of wife or children:
another receives some affront, and pineth away with grief, and malice that he
can not revenge himself: another has his house burned, or robbed: another
has his croppe wasted, and destroyed. Another has diseases, and losses in his
cattle: and a thousand kinds of temporal punishments are justly inflicted
upon men for their sins, and come not by chance, as some would persuade
themselves. For God seeeth the malice of all our actions; and because he will
not publish them until the day of judgment, he punishes them with such
afflictions, as are commune to all, to bring us to repentance. This doctrine is
proved by that which Christ said to the man, whom he cured of eight and thirty
years infirmity. Io. 5.
Behold thou art made whole, sin noe more least some worse thing chance to
thee. In which we see two things. First that sin is punished with temporal
afflictions as corporal infirmitys; and secondly that if they mende not with
those, but sin again, they may expect some worse thing, even temporally.
And what is that? a sudden and miserable death. For we are never so much in
danger of our lives as when we are in mortal sin. Because the devil having
then the possession of our souls, brings us as much as he can, upon perils
of death, to secure his possession. And therefore Balaam that wicked Prophet
counseled King Balac to draw the Israelits into sin that he might more
easily oue come, Ortg. ho. 20. in 25. nu.
and kill them: as though he had said (says Origin) This is a people which
sighteth not by their own strength, but by the favor of their God: make them
to offend him and the victory is thine own: and for this thou shall endeavor
to overthrow their chastity. Fight not with them by force of arms, bring not
men to assalt and resist them. Bring women to tempt them to sin sin will
dull their weapons, weaken their strength, and ^ill them. A company of
Madianite women are brought for that purpose; they draw the Israelits to
fornicate with them, and after that to adore their idols; then God forsakes
them, and they are overthrown in their sin. Thus does Origin describe that
passage. And in an other place he has these words, Orig. in c. 31. nu,
The Israelits when they came against Madian were numbered six hundred thousands
of sighting men: yet all these when they were in sin were overcome by the
Madianites: and the Madianites again who had overcome six hundred thousands of
Israelites when they were in sin, were overcome themselves by twelve thousand
of them, when they were free from sin. It was to this purpose all that which
Achior said to Holofernes, who leading an army with intention to subdu^ the
whole world, and passing without resistance through many peoples, to the
borders of Israel: where as others at his approaching had presently sent
messengers to yield to him, he seeeth the Israelits to make preparations of
war, and to fortify places against him; and calling his captains together,
to inform himself of the nature and strength of that people. Achior captain
of the Ammonites declared unto him the beginning and progress of the
Israelits; what strange victorys they had gotten by the help of God, and how
easily they had been defeated when they were in sin. And although he
counseled not as Balaam did to draw them into sin; yet he advised him at
least to inform himself well whether they were in sin or not, before he
assalted them. Judith 5.
Now therefore my Lord search if there be any iniquity of theires in the sight
of their God: and let us, go up to them, because their God will deliver them
to thee: but if there be noe offense of this people before their God we can not
resist them* because God will defend them. And it cost Holofernes his life,
and the overthrow of his whole army; because he would not follow his counsel.
For the Israelits crying humbly to God and pleasing him, he fought himself so
for them, that Holofernes was killed, and his huge army put to flight by one
woman only To what purpose now shall the Potentates of this world build upon
humane pollicys and strength to raise great Monarchys to themselves, and their
children, when all their power is so easily confounded? They give themselves
to sin and to neglect of their charge, and then God who supported them
lets them fall, and they being dashed to pieces, he raises another to
stand as long as it pleases him. Esni. 14.
I will destroy the name of Babylon and the remains and bu^de, and progeny.
An^ I will make it the possession of the hedge ^^gg. And I will sweep it with
a beesome wearing it says the Lord of hosts. Upon which place S. Hierome has
these words. Hiero. in c. 14. Esa.
Babylon was by the description of authors a city builded on a plane f^wers
quare in form, and had from corner to corner sixteen miles; so that in
compass it contained threescore and four miles. The tower or Capitol theirof
is said to have been four miles in hight. And for the marble temples, golden
statuas, and streets shining with gold and precious stone, it is almost
incredible that which is recorded of it. All this I say to show the wrath of
God against sin. For now we see the ruins only left, and those become the
possession of the hedgehogg; the words of the Prophet being truly fullfilled I
will sweep it with a beesome wearing it. It is the goodness of God to ight
against his enemies, and to defend his friends; and it is the malice of sin
to destroy those that commit it, and of the devil to seeks the death and
destruction of those that serve him. Prosperity, Victory, and glory, are the
rewards of virtue; adversity and death are the stipends of sin. And this is
so certain and general in it self, that the holy Church says, noe adversity
shall hurt where noe iniquity reigns.

The fourth evil of sin is, that it brings miserys, not only upon the
sinners themselves; but also upon their kindred and friends. It happens
sometimes that a man, having committed some grievous sin; rests himself
with out punishment, living in prosperity perhaps all his life time; and after
his death when he is in hell, then his children or alliance are stricken with
temporal punishments, and become miserable in their bodies or goods, which
prosper not with them through his sin. Thus many are punished here in their
bodies with temporal afflictions directly for the sins of others, and
indirectly also in their souls, for that they follow their evil footstepps,
and commit sin by their example? I am the Lord thy God mighty, ielous,
Exodus 20.
visiting the iniquity of fathers upon the children, upon the third and fourth
generation of those that hate me. Cham seeing the nakedness of his father
Noe, when he was a sleep, derided him to his brethren: and his father
awakening and by the will of God understanding is, said not a word to Cham
himself, but falls upon his son, and curses him. Genesis 3.
Cursed be Canaan a servant of servants shall he be to his brethren. What
means it (says S. Greg. l. 22. moral. c. 18.
Gregory) that Cham sinning his son Canaan bore the sentence of revenge; but
to teach that the sins of the reprobate prosper here, and are punished
afterward? Cham laughed (says S. Hierome) at his fathers nakedness, and
Canaan bore the sentence; that thou may know that sins are punished in the
branches, and not in the root. It has happened sometimes that many thousands
have lost their lives, for the sin of only one, or two persons. Iud. 20.
Two of the tribe of Benjamin sinning with another man's wife caused the ruin
of thousands of their brethren. For the rest of the tribes rising up in revenge
against them, overthrew them in batle, their city was taken and stricken with
the sword from men even to beasts; and all the cittys and villages of Benjamin
were consumed with fire for the sin of two only Nay the whole people of
Israel, after so many testimonys of the power of God protecting them, were
brought into fear of utter ruin, by the sin of one only man. Achan had
taken of the spo^les of Jericho which God had forbidden, and presently three
thousand choice men of Israel are put to flight, and some slain by a
contemptible enemy. By which the people were so amazed that as the Scripture
says their hearts melted like water. Ios. 7.
And Iosue and the ancients prostrating themselves on the ground, and covering
their heads with dust, in the end were given to understand that God punished
them for the sin of one man, and imputed his sin to all Israel saying
Israel has sinned, and transgressed my covenant: and taken of the anathema,
and stolen, and lied, when Achan only had done so. Seeing therefore that sin
is punished not only in ourselves, but in many others of our kindred and
alliance, and in successions of children for many generations afterward, we
ought to have some respect unto them: and not for a moment of pleasure to do
that for which they shall be miserable, and shall curse us, when we are dead
and gone.

Fifthly the very pleasure of sin is a false and deceitful pleasure; not
worthy of that name. And in this sinners are miserably deceived, that they take
the way of virtue to be hard and painful, and the way of sin to be the soft
and sweet way; where as indeed it is quite contrary by the general consent of
all wisemen. For although our corrupted nature abhors restraint, and like
the wild ass runs after liberty by which it corrupts more and more; but
if we consider the help of the divine grace which is denied to none, and the
comfort which God sends to his servants, their yoke is truly sweet, and their
burden light and joyful; and we shall flude that their is noe comparison
betwixt the pleasures of sinners, and the inward satisfaction which the just
enjoy; and therefore the hard and stony way is expressly declared by holy
Scripture to be the way of sin and not of virtue. Eccl. 21.
The way of sinners is paued with stones, and in their end darkness and
pains: And therefore the divine wisdom describes them as tired, and afflicted
trauelers, crying out, We are weried in the way of iniquity, Sap. 5.
and perdition, and we have walked hard ways, but the way of our Lord we have
not known. The true difference betwixt these two ways is, that the one of
them seems broad and easy at first, and therefore many walk in it; but in the
end it is hard and intolerable; the other seems hard in the beginning, but
if we endeavor with ourselves, and make but a little resistance at the first,
we sinde case and comfort presently in it. This the wicked have not known, nor
think upon: they say they will have pleasures for the present, and complain
of God that his reward is long in coming: but they are deceived, the servants
of God stay not for their wages, they are allwais receiving comfort in his
service. He promises for the future an eternal reward in Heaven, and to show
the truth of his promise, and to encourage to it, he sends such comfort after
every good work, as though he would give them now a scantling of those
heavenly joys. And that comfort is so great and full to them, that they would
not change it for all that the world can give. What sinner ever enjoyed the
like joy to that which S. Hierome describes himself to have had after a
violent conflict in which costantly resisting he got the victory. Ad Eustoch.
ep. 22.
I call God to witness, says he, when after many tears, that my eyes stood
settled and fixed up to heaven, I seemed then to be even amidst the troops of
Angels, and joyfully to sing, We will run after thee in the odor of thy
ointme^ts. Cant. 1.
This is the reward which God bestows out of hand upon his servants; and not
only upon those whom we call great Saints, but in some measure upon all his
servants presently after every good work, in a full satisfaction of
conscience, which sinners in their pleasures never have.

Again the pleasure of sin is so short in duration, that although it were
never so great, it were nothing to compare with eternity, which is lost by it.
For being that there is noe constant pleasure, but in him who is the supreme
good without any mixture of evil; therefore if one had all the power, honor,
and wealth of this world, yet he should not allwais have content in them,
except he allwais used them to the honor of God. Job. 21.
They lead their days in wealth, and in a moment (says Job) they go down to
hell. Sinners may perhaps lead many days, and perhaps all their life time in
wealth and riches, but not in pleasures: they shall scarce over enjoy one whole
hour together of continual joy: but some vexation or other shall cross their
delight, either for something which they want, and would have, or for something
which they have, and would want: and many times they go down to hell for not
one half quarter of an hours pleasure. Lysimachus King of Macedonia waging
war against the Scythians, was brought unto that extreme thirst, that for a
cup of cold water he sold his Kingdom: and when he had drunk it of, he is
recorded to have cried out; O God! for how short a pleasure have I lost a
Kingdom? The pleasure of sin is not alwais indeed so short as this was,
although sometimes shorter; as when we curse, or swear, or blaspheme the name
of God, and by many other sins in consent, and in word, and in many sinful
acts, which last as it were but for a moment; but the kingdom which we loose
by them is without comparison more to be valued then his was; and therefore are
we much more to be blamed. Besides that which he did was partly constrained,
perhaps to save his life, but we have noe need of the sins which we commit,
the pleasure which we take does us noe good: but much hurt; it saves not our
lives, but depriueth us of a far sweeter life, then this is. Job. 20.
The praise of the impious is short, and the joy of the hypocrite as it were
for a moment. It is also a base and contemptible delight bringing shame and
reproach even in this world: and therefore we see sinners to devise sleights
and shifts, to conceal their sins and to hide them from others Every one
that does evil hates the light, Joan. 3.
says Christ King David having filthily adulterated with Vtias his wife, as
soon as he perceived her to be with child in the absence of her husband, he
sends presently for him to come home that he might father it: and he coming
out of the camp to him, he wished him to go to his house and to rest
himself; but the goodman (although he suspected nothing of his wifes
disloyalty) refused to go home but as a soldier would ly before the Kings
gates. Then the King made him drunk, that he might desire more the company of
his wife: and when he saw that by noe means he could get him to go to her,
he dispatched him away with letters to the general, in which he commanded him
to be put into some place of danger; that the husband being killed he might
marry the adulteress to legitimate the child. All these shifts did King David
use to hide his sinne^, which then shamed and troubled him: and when he could
not hide it, to lessen it in the sight of the world. Adam clothed with
innocence, although naked, was ashamed of nothing; for then he had no cause of
shame* but falling into sin he fell into shame, and had reason to be ashamed;
and to hide his nakedness he covered himself with the leaves of a tree By
which we may see how base and ungrateful we are to God, that as deceitful,
short, and sordid as the pleasure of sin is, we prefer it notwithstanding
before his divine goodness, and forsake him, to choose it. This the holy Ghost
complained of in sinners, when he said; They violated me to my people for a
handful of barley: Ezec. 13
that is to say for a thing of noe worth.

The sixth evil of sin is, that it brings remorse, and terrors of
conscience, and must cause at the best the sorrow of repentance, before that it
can be forgiven; and this remorse and terror of conscience cannot be avoided
by sinners: for as long as men are reasonable creatures they must hate that,
which is contrary to reason, and have a natural feeling and fear of God; and
when they have offended him, presently without disputing of it, they condemn
themselves, as guilty of punishment; and not knowing how, nor when their
punishment shall be, they are allways in fear; that the Scripture says; Leu.
26.
The sound of a flying leaf shall terrify them. So when Cain had slain his
brother, he ran away out of the company of men, and went hanging down his
head, like a desperate vagabond, thinking that every man whom he met with
would murder him, and cried out to God; Genesis 4.
Lo now thou do cast me out this day from the face of the earth, and from
thy face I shall be hid and I shall be a vagabond and fugitive on the earth.
Every one therefore that finds me shall kill me. A secure mind (says the
holy Proverb) is as it were a continual feast. Prou. 15.
And we may say on the contrary that a guilty conscience is a continual worm,
and thorn at the heart, or as a poisoned arrow that sticks in the flesh,
vexing with pain and fear of death. Psalm. 37.
Thy arrows are fast sticked in me; there is no health in my flesh at the
face of thy wrath: My bones have no peace at the face of my sins: because
mine iniquitys have gone over my head, and as a heavy burden are become heavy
upon me. says King David: And so great was the sorrow which he conceived for
his sins, that he says his jaws were made hoarse with crying. As a man that
were fallen from some high precipice lies wounded, and cries our with all his
force for some to come to him; so David fallen into sin doubled and redoubled
his cries to God for pardon: and the words of the Prophet were true in him,
Prou. 5.
The lips of an harlot as a honny comb distilling, but her later ends are
bitter as worm wood, and sharp as a two edged sword: and so are all the
pleasures of sin, sweet for a moment, but in the end bitter, and sharp: that
we find it by experience to be true in all sins, Laughter shall be mingled
with sorrow, Prou. 14.
and mourning occupeth the latter ends of joy.

And that man, that shall purpose with himself to put away this remorse of
conscience and thought of repentance, The ^. evil of sin.
is in the most desperate condition of all men, as being least sensible of the
danger which he is in. And this is the last evil which I will mention of
sin; that every sin containing so many, and great evils as it does, one
sin is the cause of another, and draws on to another worse then it self in
punishment of it: and the last and greatest punishment of sin in this world is,
when a sinner by much sinning has his heart so hardened against God, and
against his own salvation, that he contemns all, and resolves to live like
a beast without regard of conscience or future life. Sin (says Saint
Gregory) by its own weight draws into another sin; Super Ezech.
if it be not presently blotted out with repentance. This is the depth and
contour of all evils, and the extreme evil of sin, that as heavy weights
draw downwards, and the lower they go, the more force they have, and draw
more; so sin draws on from sin to sin, and the deeper that we descend
into sin, with more inclination and violence we are drawn into it; until we
come in the end to an absolute contempt of all goodness. And therefore the
Prophet Zachary calls sin, talentum plumbi, Zac. 5.
a talent that is a huge weight of lead. Thus the Heathen Philosophers
according to Saint Paul were replenished with all iniquity, because they
wilfully blinded themselves, and would not seek after true knowledge (which
is the case of many amongst us) as they liked not (says he) to have God in
knowledge; God delivered them to a reprobate sense, Romans 1.
to do those things that are not convenient: replenished with all iniquity.
And therefore (says S. Chrysostom) some are said to have had their hearts
hardened in this world; because continuing in sin without repentance, they
fell still into more and more sins until at last their consciences were as
it were seared up, and heardened against God, and even as it were quite dead.
As one in an apoplexy, or stricken with some violent passion becomes pale,
void of sense, and suddenly dies; that if you take him up and turn him from
side to side, or call upon him all is in vain, he is dead, and gone; and his
body is then noe better then the body of a dead dog, or swine; so great
sinners having hardoned themselves against God they hear not his callings, nor
feel his inspirations, but are quite senseless and void of spiritual life,
living only as beasts, that had no soul to be saved. This I say again is the
depth and centour of all eu^^^s, when a man will resolve to continue still in
sin, and laboreth against himself to blotte out the remorse and auersion
from it, which he has by nature; that so he may sin without fear, Prou. 18.
and with contempt of God. The impious when he comes to the depth of sins
contemns, says the holy Proverb. This is indeed as deep as a sinner can
go in this world; for it is to bring a hell upon earth, and for men to become
little devils: something less then devils, in that they are not so obfirmed in
sin as the devils are, that are settled in an eternal duration of malice and
pain; which sinners in this world can not be; but are in state of repentance:
but they come as near as man can come to a diabolical obstinacy, resolving
with themselves to sin against the Holy Ghost by final impenitency.

These then in sum are the evils of sin. To separate us from God and from
all celestial comfort, to put us into the devils power, and into the state of
the damned in hell, to bring miserys and aduersitys even in this life; and
those not only upon the sinners themselves, but also upon their kindred and
friends after them, to yield but a false, short and base pleasure, and then
affrightments of conscience, and sorrows; and finally to harden our hearts to
the utter contempt of God, and of our own souls.

Now what can the sinner answer to all this? why will he for the base pleasure
of sin forsake God and incur all these evils? Against presumption.
he presumes perhaps upon the divine mercy, and says that in the end God will
pardon him: but this is a most vain presumption; as though one should resolve
upon a wicked course of life, to perpetrate all the mischeifes that he could
devise, presuming of mercy, that in the end the King would pardon him. It were
to destroy all orders and to make God the cause of disordering the whole world,
if men might do what they would in hopes of pardon. It is true the mercy of
God is above all his works, and more then his justice in this, that he shows
it more, pardoning often, before he once condemn: but his justice also shall
be fullfilled. His mercys are commended to make us to seek for pardon; but not
to bring us into presumption. How many examples have we of the terrible
judgments of God against sin. First, upon all mankind for the sin of one.
Secondly, upon all but eight persons drowned in the deluge. Thirdly, upon
Kingdoms as the astonishing plagues that came upon Egypt, and the swallowing
up of their King, and his whole army in the sea. Fourthly, upon citys, as
Sodom and Gomorra. Fifthly, upon particular houses and familys as Dathan And
Abyron, who with their wines and familys were suddenly devoured up by the
earth. And upon particular persons without number. What an example was that in
Ananias who for dissembling and lying to S. Peter, and the Apostles, was
presently struck dead? and his wife coming in a little after, and mainteining
her husbands ly. Behold (says S. Act. 5.
Peter) there feet that have buried thy husband at the door and they shall
bear thee forth. Forth with she fell before his feet and gave up the ghost.
And sometimes for that, which to us would seem noe great sin. What great
offense should we think it to have been in Lotts wife to look back to see
Sodom, and Gomorra on fire; yet presently it cost her her life. What an
example of the justice of God was that upon Moses so holy a man, and of all
men that ever were the special figure of Christ our Redeemer; yet for an
offense so small, that authors hardly destinguish in what it consisted he was
deprived of that which above all things in this world, he had most reason to
desire: to wit to see the Land of promise in the possession of the Israelites,
and the true worship of God flourishing in it; even as good Catholics commonly
desire to see the conversion of England to the Catholic faith, and God truly
worshipped in it; but that as his zeal was greater then ours, so was the
desire: which he had of that, greater then ours is of this: yet he never
obtained it; but even then when it seemed to be so near, that he had brought
the people unto the borders of the Land, and as it were to the very last step
into it, they were drawn back again, and he must never have the happiness
to see them in it. When (says S. Basil) I behold Moses so great a man that
it was said unto him, Thou have found grace before me, Bas. proe. in lib. eth.
to. 2. Exodus 33.
and thy self I have known by name; yet because he said can we out of this
rock bring you forth water? it was presently denounced against him that he
should not bring the Israelites into the Land of promise. And when I see him
so often praying, and still praying in vain; and when I consider that all
those great works which he did could not avail to procure his pardon, for so
short a word. Then I begin to think of that rigid severity of God, of which
the Apostle speaks, and how true the words of S. Peter are, that if the just
man shall scarce be saved, where shall the impious and wicked appear? Now who
shall dare to presume upon Gods mercy?

But he says that he intends to repent presently after sin. That is a good
intention indeed, and God forbid but he should have that intention. But how
does he know that he shall perform it, seeing that he can not assure himself
of a moment of life after sin to repent in? How many chances is this life of
ours subject unto, slender and easily broken, as a spiders web? how many die
suddenly, and (if they be in sin) without repentance? some by sudden
diseases, some murdered, some drowned, some killed accidentally by chances,
which we hear of every day. And how many especially in England have desired at
their deaths the assistance of a Priest, and could not obtain it? All these
hazards does the sinner undergo, and one greater then them all, to wit that
suppose he has time of repentance granted, whether he shall make good use of
it or nee? and if he repent for that time, whether he shall not fall again
into the same sin? for one sin disposes to another, and if it be forgiven
the first time, we are not sure of pardon the second or third time which we
commit it. One sin damned all mankind to death, and to loose the glory of
God for ever. The devil told Eve that she should not die if she sinned; but it
was a delusion of the devil, and so it proved. God had said in what day
soever thou shall eat thou shall dy^ and eating she sinned, Genesis 2.
and died It is a delusion of the devil to take from us the fear of death
after sin, and for any man to think that he shall not die before he repent;
he being then subject every moment to death S. Hom. 22. in 2. ad Cor. c. 10.
John Chrysostom, they say to themselves God has granted the benefit of
repentance to some, even in their last old age. What thou (says he) shall thou
also have it? perhaps I shall (says the sinner.) O why do thou say perhaps I
shall? Say rather perhaps I shall not: and then what will become of me? I
shall be damned Think that it is thy soul which thou do deliberate on. If
thou were to go to the wars, would thou say I will not dispose of my
affairs first, perhaps I shall return again, many have done so. Or if thou
were thinking to marty, would thou say I will marry a poor woman; perhaps I
shall grow rich: many have done so. Or if thou were to build a house would
thou lay rotten foundations, and say perhaps my house will stand? why will thou then upon rotten and uncertain grounds build the salvation of thy soul?
all these are vncertaintys, and so is thy life and thy repentance. Death
comes as a thelfe; and we know not at what hour the theife will come. The
rich man was glorying in his riches, and presently he heard a voice from God
saying, Luc. 12.
this night they require thy soul of thee. Absalom was domineering with a
glorious army of rebels; and presently his army is lost, and himself riding
away is hung by the hair in a tree; and there comes loab with three lances,
and sticks them all in his heart. Our lives are as the turn of a die, subject
to many vncertaintys, and so is our repentance. If we are truly wise we will
take the safest way; and that is to fly sin and to be allwais prepared for
death. He that were to pass through a dangerous wilderness, in which many had
been killed, would he not choose the safest way that he could? The way of
virtue is a safe way, the way of sin is full of danger; thousands have
perished in it, and none can perish but in it: some indeed have turned back,
and forsaken that way again, but that is a hazard. Fly grom drunkenness, Amb.
exhort. ad poenit.
(says S. Ambrose) from concupiscence, and from evil talk. Man ought not
only after his sin to refrain these things, but also when he is sound and
in good health: because he knows not whether he shall repent and Confess his
sin to God and to the Priest, There are two things: either he shall repent
or he shall not. Which of them shall come to pass I know not; but that which I
counsel is to leave the uncertain and to choose the certain. All that can
be said is, that he may repent, but this is vn^^rtaine. Certain it is that if
he has sinned, he has deserved hell; and that if he repent not, he shall be
damned. Let not the sinner then flatter himself with presumption of the divine
mercy, and of repentance. It is a flattery of the devil to delude and to draw
him into hell. Consider sin as it is in it self, and the evils that of
themselves follow it. Behold it as a monster that comes to kill thee, and to
deliver thee into the devils power. Think the most horrible spectacle that
thou can devise to think, and know that thy soul in sin is more horrible,
and deformed then it. Our souls (says S. Chrysostom) in possession of the
devil is in worse state then our bodies possessed by him. For although sinners,
says he, foame not at the mouth, roar not with their voices, nor writh their
heads, and eyes, as possessed persons do; yet they are much more deformed
inwardly, and in the sight of God. And in another place declaring how all
things are confounded by sin. He affirms that it makes men in some
respects worse then devils: for the devils (says he) hurt not those of their
own kind, but men by sin care not what hurt they do to one another; and of
malice will kill even their nearest friends and kindred. Thus much of the
malice of sin. Now,

OF THE AUTHOR OF SIN.
SVCH being the malice of sin as is declared; so contrary to reason and to
the goodness of God; it cannot stand with his divine goodness to impute the
malice of it to him, and to make not him the author of it. Some things there
are so manifest in themselves, that even at the first apprehension without
disputing, we assent unto them: and although strong and difficult arguments may
seem sometimes to arize against them (as they may against all veritys
whatsoever;) yet they are allwais to be granted, and to be kept as firm and
undeniable principles. Now if there be any thing manifest in it self, and to
be kept as a firm and certain principle, it is that God is infinite in
goodness, infinitely hating sin; and therefore can not be the author of the
evil which it conteines: but it must proceed from some cause, which is quite
opposite to the goodness of God. And although some arguments might be objected
against this; yet it is an extreme boldness, and profaneness in any man to
question the truth of it: but even as all Philosophers agree to the Axiom,
that the whole is greater then any of its parts, although arguments are often
objected against it; so ought we allwais to agree, and much more firmly to
ground ourselves upon this verity, that all goodness is of God, and that the
evil which we do is of ourselves: according to that of the Prophet, Perdition
is thine O Israel: Ose. 13.
only in me thy help.

But heretics contemning all authority, and denying the principles which the
whole Catholic world receives, to follow their own fancys and conceits, make
the mysterys of faith to be more uncertain; then the principles of Philosophy.
They would be ashamed to be brought to deny that, which all Philosophers had
settled; and are ashamed to deny that which Christ, and the Holy Ghost, and all
the Doctors of the Catholic Church have taught and established in faith: but
one arch haeretike will co^tradict them all, and get followers to maintain
his singularity against them. Thus did Simon Magus begin first to teach that
God is the author of sin: not that he was the immediate causer of it; but in
that he had given us such a nature, as that we sinned of necessity, and could
not but sin. Which comes to be the same as to deny freewill. Cerdon and
Cerinthus followed him in this blasphemy, that God is the author of sin. Yet
it had so ill a sound in their ears to impute sin unto God, who is
infinitely good; that they would imagine another God, whom they called the evil
God; and to him they imputed the evil of sin. The like doctrine has been
avouched by latter haeretiks, who amongst other old h^^^ys have renewed this,
(as may be seen in Catholic authors who have confuted them) but we will
ground ourselves upon this firm and easy principle established by the Church,
that God is good and infinitely hating the way of iniquity, and infinitely just,
that he could not punish us for sin, if he himself were the cause of it;
therefore God is not the cause, and author of sin.

The inordinate affection of creatures is the cause of sin, and men are the
authors of the sins which they commit. God has ordained all creatures to a
good end, and to reasonable creatures he has given reason, and offers grace,
to order their actions according to it; they abusing the gift of God, and
breaking his ordinance commit sin. God permits his Law to be broken; but
is so far from breaking it himself, or being the cause of breaking it, that
he allwais uses sufficient means to hinder the breaking of it: he calls us
back from sin before we commit it, inspiring and exciting us to the
contrary, and gives grace to resist temptations, and to abstain from sin if
we will. And when we have sinned he rewards it not; but punishes it, and
rewards the contrary; and therefore by noe means can be said to be the cause
of sin. He uses sin to a good end, manifesting his goodness in rewarding
the good, and punishing the wicked, who of their own wills commit it, being
noe way moved by him to it. S. Aug. l. de Genesis ad lit. to. 31.
Augustine expresses this by a very fit similitude. As ^ests in music
(says he) which are noe music, and as discords of notes which are contrary
to music, are so placed by skillfull musicians, and composed with concords,
that they make a more sweet and grateful harmony: and as dark colors are
intermingled with lightsome, to give more beauty, and grace to pictures; sic
vitiorum nostrorum non est author Deus, sed tamen ordinat, and ea perpeti cogit
quae maerentur. So God is not the author of our vices, but he ordains and
forces that which they deserve. And as the notes of discord are not discord
but concord in effect, as the musician orders them, making of their discord
a perfect harmony; soc sins are not evil as God permits them, or as he
creates creatures that commit them, of as they are ordained to a good end by
him; but they are in themselves acts of discord from the Divine Law, and are
put into order, and concord by him. And as we cannot say that the musician
causes discord, or is the author of discord, for using of discord to
perfect his harmony; because he makes concord with it; so we cannot say that
God is the cause or author of sin; because it has noe evil, but good as he
orders and uses it. And therefore good Divines say that God is the cause of
the material of the act of sin, but not of the malice or evil of sin; as
the musician puts together notes of discord, but makes noe sound of
discord by them. Those that impute their sins to God (says S. Hierome) have
that shield of heart which the Prophet speaks of saying, Thren. 3.
thou shall give them a shield of heart thy labor. They stand as it were face
to face against God, and retort their sins upon him; as though he were to
blame in permitting them to sin, and not they in sinning.

Hence it follows that we have freewill to sin or to abstain from it.
Freewill.
For otherwise sin proceeding naturally, and necessarily from us, the evil
and malice of it could not be imputed to us, but to God the author of our
nature. Neither is that destinction which some would make, to any purpose,
saying, that we have free will to do evil, but not to do good. For to be
free is to have power to the act, or to the contrary, and if the act be evil
the contrary is good. It is true we have noe power to do good of ourselves
without Gods grace; but we can concur or not concur with it. It is a thing
so manifest (says S. Aug. ep. 11. l. de duab. animabus.
Augustine) that man has freewill, and that he is not to be punished for that
which is not in his power, that shepherds sing it on the mountains, poets on
stages, the unlearned in circles, the learned in librarys, masters in schools,
bishops in sacred places, and mankind through out the world. Yet this which is
so manifest was denied by the Manichaeans the disciples of Manes, who
sometimes feigning himself to be the Holy Ghost, and sometimes to be Christ,
chose twelve disciples to follow him, and went up and down Africa preaching
against freewill, and deceiving many with such absurditys; as are almost
incredible to have been believed. After a thousand years and more, the same
doctrine was revived again by Luther, and is still maintained by his
followers, and by other sects that have sprung out of him. Pelagius an ancient
and very learned author but a proud and obstinate haeretike, was so far
contrary to this doctrine, that where as they deny free power to man to do
good works with Gods grace, he affirmed that we have not only free power to
do good with Gods grace; but also of ourselves without it. But S. Augustine
has briefly confuted them both in these words. If there be noe free will, Aug.
ep. 46.
how does God judge the world? and if there be not divine grace, how does he
save the world? how can God judge men to rewards or punishments, if they have
not freewill? and how does he save us but by his grace strengthening, and
eleuating us to good works? So that we have free will to do good contrary to
Luther; but not to do good of our own freewill only, but by the divine
grace: which is contrary to Pelagius. The Manichaeans, Lutherans, and those
that deny freewill make void the seventh article of the Creed, that Christ
is our judge, and the Pelagions make him noe Savior.

The Catholic Church has allwais taught that man has freewill to do well by
cooperating with Gods grace; or to do ill by rejecting it. And so our good
works are cheefely attributed to God, as proceeding chiefly from his grace: and
secondarily, and instrumentally, to our selves, because we freely cooperate
with it. For as God would make use of Moses his rod to the working of
miracles saying, Exodus 4.
What is it that thou hold in thy hand, and then began to work miracles
by it: and as Elizeus asked the widow what have that in thy house? Reg. 4.4.
and used her oil to the enriching of her: Io. 1.
and as Christ would use water to the procuring of wine; so God uses us as
instruments to the effecting of good works; and therefore in the Scriptures they
are attributed sometimes to God, and sometimes to ourselves. To God as to the
principal and chief cause, to us as to an inferior and isntrumental cause.
Exodus 31.
As I am the Lord that sanctify you. To wit chiefly and principally: and man
also is said to sanctify himself as in S. Io. 1.
John every one that has this hope sanctifyeth himself. That is
instrumentally and after an inferior manner, by cooperating with Gods grace.
Ezech 36 Ezech 8 Cor. 1.5.
So also Ezech. I will give you a new heart. And in another place, make to your
selves a new heart. And therefore S. Paul says we are Gods Coadiutors but if we
had not freewill, the goodness of the work were by noe means to be attributed
to us: and we could not be said to sanctify ourselves nor to make to ourselves
new hearts Furthermore we see that we can deliberate, and consult of our
actions: but we can deliberate and co^sult of nothing but that which we have
freedom to do, or not to do; therefore our actions are free in us. When an
enemy pursues us we deliberate not whether we shall fly in the air or not;
because it is not in our freedom Laws are commanded us, rewards and
punishments are proposed to us, we exhort to good works, and praise, and honor
those that do well: which we would not do if they did so of necessity, and
had not freedom to the contrary. Clem. Alex. l. 1. strom. Neither praise, nor
dispraise, nor honors, nor punishments were just, if man had not freewill.

And this which is so manifest to reason is as planely declared in the
Scriptures. Eccli. 15.
God from the beginning made man and left him in the hands of his own
counsel. Holy Iosue at his death exhorting the Israelites, and drawing near
to the end of his speech, to engage them the more to the service of God, he
bids them to choose what they would do. Ios. 24.
Now therefore fear our Lord and serve him with a perfect and very true heart.
But if it like you not to serve our Lord choice is given you. Choose this day
that which pleases you So that it is in our choice to do well or ill. But I
end this and all controuersys of religion in this book with the authority of
the Church. This was the doctrine of the Catholic Church above a thousand and
four hundred years since, when Manes began to oppose it, and he was then,
and has ever since been esteemed an haeretike for opposing it; there being
then noe Church of Christians in all the world that denied it; therefore this is
the true Catholic doctrine. This was the doctrine of the Church a few years
since when Luther began to oppose it; Ses. 7. c. 16. can. 14.
and the Council of Trent of above two hundred and fifty prelates with the
authority of the supreme pastor, that then was of the Church declared for this
doctrine; therefore this is the true Catholic doctrine. Let now the enemies of
the Catholic Church object what they can, either out of Scriptures or reason
against it, all is in vain: the Church is to judge of the sense of Scriptures,
and of reason, and not every private man to understand them as he will, and to
get followers to himself against the Church. Whatsoever is objected contrary
to the authority of the universal Church allthough it seem never so plane,
is wrong and falsely applied, and we must take them for haeretikes that will
stand obstinate in any such doctrine. S. Augustine must that which is clear
be denied, Aug. l. de not. and great. c. 38
because that which is done can not be understood? and what is so clear as
that which is once declared by all the Doctors of the Catholic Church. We may
dispute about the sense of Scriptures, or any point of doctrine until the
Church have declared concerning it: as Lawyers dispute about applying the sense
of the Law to particular cases, until the judge give sentence in it; but when
that is done, then all argument must cease; because then it is clear, and so
clear that it can be noe cleerer, then to be declared viua voce with the
lively voice of the judge who has lawful authority. So that which the Church
has once declared is so clear that it can be noe cleerer, because it is
declared by the lively voice of all the Pastors of the Church: all who must
either have lawful authority to decide all controuersys concerning Scriptures,
and all other points of faith, or else there is noe lawful authority in the
world to decide them; but every man might hold and teach what he listed; which
were to destroy the world. Therefore we need noe more for the proof of
freewill but the authority of the Church; and all arguments that can be
objected against it are but delusions. Yet the true sense of those places which
they object may be understood by that which has been said. I know Lord that
man's way is not his own; Ier. 10.
neither is it in a man to walk and to direct his stepps. It is not in man by
himself without the grace of God; But with it it is. Io. 6.
Noe man can come to me unless the father that sent me draw him. God draws
not by force necessitating whether we will or not; but as the spouse said draw
me, Can. 1.
we will run after thee in the odor of thine ointments; that is sweetly, and
by fair means, moving and exciting our wills. Nay although he had said unless
my father compel them, we might have understood it of a sweet kind of
violence, by which God inuiteth us to him: as the master in the gospel seeing
the slownes of those that were invited in coming to him, sent to bid others
saying Compel them to enter which was noe more, Luc. 14.
but earnestly to entreat and inuit them. Such is the love of God to us, and
his desire of our salvation, and so powerful is the grace by which he
inuiteth, and exciteth us to virtue, that he may very well be said to draw us
as a very loving father does his children unto goodness. Will you see this
planely? Apoc. 3.
Behold I stand at the door and knock. If any man shall hear my voice and
open the gate I will en^er into him, and suppe with him and he with me. See
here O Christian the love of God toward thee; what he does for thy salvation,
and what he requires to be done by thee. He stands at the door of thy heart,
and desiring to enter he knocks, enlightening thy understanding, and
inspiring thy will to open to him, that is to consent to the good work, to the
which he moves thee; and if thou will open it, he enters with his sanctifying
grace, and blesses thee. But he does not enter whether thou will or not; he
craves entrance and gives thee power to open unto him; and if thou will not
open thy heart, and have blessing, blame none but thy self. Say Peccaui I have
sinned. So did David, Manasses, Job, and all true repenters ever say, and
never said Peccasti, thou have sinned to God: but if thou make God the
author of thy sin, and not thy own freewill, thou blamest him, and say
Peccasti, thou have sinned to him. Which were noe humility in thy self, nor
repentance at all: noe man repenting but for his own sins. There remains
now to speak

OF THE SEVERAL KINDS OF SIN.
Quest. How many kinds of sin are there? Ans. There are two kinds of sin:
Original sin and Actual sin.

Quest What is the difference betwixt Original and Actual sin? Ans. Original
sin is that Which we are borne in: Actual sin is that which we commit.

THE first division of sin may be into Original and Actual. And although
Original sin were Actual as it was acted, and committed by Adam: and were
Mortal in that it brought death both to him, and us: yet for more cleerenes we
will destinguish first Original, and Actual; and then Mortal, and Venial
sin.

Original sin is that which we contract from Adam our Origin, and which we
commit not ourselves; but bring into the world with us. Adam was placed in
paradise, his soul endowed with Original justice, and in his body he was
immortal. He had the command of all earthly creatures, enjoying freely the
pleasures of them; and without dying should have been transferred after a time
to the pleasures of heaven. These gifts were given to him and his posterity;
and they successively had obtained them, if they had not sinned: but he
sinning, we are deprived of that original justice, and other gifts: and the
wart and privation of them is called Original sin in us.

We have noe wrong done us in this that we are borne deprived of our fathers
gifts; because they were given to him, and his posterity only upon condition
that they sinned not. As though a King of his own freewill should bestow some
place of honor, and benefit, upon a subject, for himself, and his posterity
to enjoy after him, upon condition that they allwais kept themselves obedient,
and loyal to him; but if he or any of them should be found guilty of treason,
then they should loose that place and benefit. Now he or some of them breaking
the condition by disobeying the King, they are justly deprived of that place.
So the gifts and graces which God gave to Adam for himself, and for us, were
noe way due, but of the goodness, and liberality of God, and granted
conditionally, if we remained loyal to him; we committing treason are justly
deprived of those gifts, which he had, and are borne without them. The reason
of this is, because the father and children in this case are as it were all one
man, and have as it were all one will: and as that which is done by one only
part of man, to wit by his will is attributed to the whole man, and punished in
all the rest of his parts; so the sin which was committed by Adam is justly
punished in all men; because all men were his children, and as it were one man
in him. A spend thrift father wastes his estate not only from himself, but
also from his children; because they are supposed, and are indeed in riches
one body, and one mind with him, and can blame none but him who consumed those
riches which they should have had. So all men in Adam were one man, his will
was the will of all, he consumed the riches which we should have had, and we
are justly deprived of them.

Actual sin is that which we commit: Actual sin.
and is therefore called Actual, because we act it ourselves, and bring it not
originally into the world with us. And so the sin which Adam committed and
which is original in us, was Actual in him; because he acted it, and had it
not by infection from another, as we have from him.

Quest. How many kinds of Actual sin are there? Ans. There are two kinds
of Actual sin. Mortal sin, and Venial sin.

Quest. What is the difference betwixt Mortal and venial sin? Ans. Mortal
sin quite depriueth us of Gods grace. Venial sin only lesseneth and
diminishes the fervor of the love of God in us.

MORTAL sin is as much as to say Deadly sin. It is a mortal, and deadly
wound bringing death to our souls, in that it takes quite away the divine
grace from them, which is their spiritual life. Romans 6.
The stipends of sin (says the Apostle) are death. That is the reward of
mortal sin. This is the sin which is allwais understood when we read or
name sin in general, and speak of the malice of it. A monster so deformed
that if we could see the deformity of it we should think truly; that all the
torments of this world were rather to be suffered then one mortal sin to be
committed* It divides us from God, it puts us into the devils power, it
brings eternal punishments, and temporal; to the ruin of Kingdoms,
cittys, and many noble familys: it causes fears and terrors of conscience,
and leaves our souls hateful and most horrible in the sight of God. We can
not express nor conceive with sufficient horror the state of our souls, when
they are in mortal sin. Our bodies when they are dead become pale, cold and
ghastly, but much more our souls in deadly sin. We behold with horror the
body of one that had killed, drowned, or hanged himself: and it is not a
horror to kill our own souls. If any of this company should now suddenly
fall down, and die before us, we should all be terrifyed and affrighted at it:
then how should we fear to fall into mortal sin, by which we are instantly
killed and dead? Ber. ad Eug. l 4. c. 6. Esa. 57.
An ass falls and there is allwais some to help her up again. A soul
perishes and none regards it. Says S. Bernard. so the Prophet, the just
perishes and there is none that considers in his heart. If our head, our
breast, or any other part pain us, we complane and cry O my head, my breast
etc. And we wound our souls unto death, and never think, nor say, O my soul.

How greatly have the Saints of God detested mortal sin? how greatly have
they bewailed it in themselves, and in others? what penance have they
undergone to satisfy for it? what pains have they taken to draw others out of
it? It is the doctrine of Catholic Divines that all the evils of this world,
noe not the eternal torments of all the damned spirits put together, is
aequall to the evil of one mortal sin. I will rather be sent into hell.
Match. 2.6.
says Elcazarus when they persuaded him to dissemble against his conscience.
For although at this present time I be delivered from the punishments of men,
yet neither alive nor dead shall I escape the hand of the almighty. Greg. h^.
34. in Euang.
Victorinus whilst he lived in the wilderness being drawn into the sin of
fornication by a wicked delusion of the devil, was so vexed in conscience
afterward, that fastening his hands into a piece of cloven wood, he lived
three years with only raw herbs and water. After that he wrought miracles,
became a bishop and at last a glorious martyr. The Magdalen moved to repentance
came presently into the Pharisys house, Luc. 7.
and was not ashamed to weep in public so many tears, that she washed the
feet of Christ with them. S. Peter after his sin went out presently and wept
bitterly. And so great was his sorrow ever after, that he is recorded by S.
Clement, who lived with him, Clem. in recognit.
to have carried allwais in his hand a little linen napkin to dry his face from
tears. But the example of our Savior weeping for the sins of others should
move us more, then these who wept for their own sins. Christ as he came
down Mount Oliuet having before his eyes a full view of the city of
Jerusalem, was stricken with such an apprehension of the sins of that
people, that beginning to speak he was interrupted with tears, and could not
go on for weeping. And he wept also for Lazarus long dead and putrifyed, that
was to signify the sinner dead and putrifyed in long continued sins, that we
might see how much he loved our souls; and how he lamenteth at their
spiritual death. Mat. 16.
What does it profit a man if he gain the whole world and sustain the damage
of his soul. My soul is all the world to me, and when I come to die I shall
find it so. Grant us O Lord that we may save our souls, the whole world
beside we will loose it willingly. And this is the effect of mortal sin,
that he that commits but one, and dies in it, is as sure to suffer
shippwracke of his soul, and to be damned into hell, as though he were guilty
of all the mortal sins in the world, Ia. 5.
according to that of S James whosoever but offends in one is made guilty of
all. To wit so far as to the guilt and punishment of hell.

I have been desired by some to give them some such destinction betwixt Mortal
and Venial sin, as that they might allwais know by it, when the sin which
they commit is mortal. But this is impossible; for that the circumstances
are infinite which may aggrauate, or lessen the malice of sin so, that little
sins may become great, and great sins little ones, and sometimes noe sins
at all. Besides God will not have us to know for certain whether we be in
state of grace or not: according to that of Ecclesiastes, Man knows not
whether he be worthy of love or hatred and Job, allthough I shall be simple,
Eccl. 9. Job. 9.
the same shall my soul be ignorant of. Yet thus much may be said for their
satisfaction; that sins against any of the ten Commandments, or against
any of the Praecepts of the Church, when they come to a notable degree of
malice or deformity; or if they be intended, thought, or doubted to be so;
they are Mortal.

Venial is as much as to say easily pardonable: and so a Venial sin is a
sin which easily obtains pardon. A little sin which diminishes the
fervor of divine grace in us; but takes not the grace of God from us so as
to put us in state of damnation. It makes us to grow colder, and colder in
devotion, and disposes by little and little to some mortal sin, and then by
that we loose quite the divine grace, and are in state of damnation. So that
Mortal sin is quite opposite and incompatible with the divine grace: Venial
sin is compatible and may stand with it. Authors commonly declare this by
the similitude of a traueler going out of his way. He may either go a quite
contrary way, or he may go wrong, yet not quite contrary to the right way. By
Mortal sin we go the quite contrary way from heaven, to wit to hell: by
Venial sin we go not to hell, yet we go wrong and out of the way to
heaven. S. Augustine compares Venial sins to scabbs that deforme and
disfigure the body, but kill it not; so Venial sin deformeth and
deminisheth the beauty of our souls; but leaves them still with spiritual
life. And declaring some Venial sins in particular, he says that it is a
Venial sin to laugh immoderately, Aug. l. de Not and gra.c 38.
to jest too much, to desire something intemperately, to pluck fruit over
greedily and the like Finally whatsoever we think that we do not well in, we
may accuse ourselves of it, as at least of a Venial sin.

That all sins are not damnable to hell; but that there are some such lesser
sins which we call Venial, it is manifest by diverse places of the holy
Scriptures. Prou. 24.
Seven times shall the just fall, and shall rise again: but the impious shall
fall into evil. Where we see that a man may fall into some sins and yet be
just. He that contemns small things shall fall by little and little. Eccl. 19.
By which we see that one may sin by small things, and by little and little,
before that he fall from the divine grace. Ia 3.
S. James says that in many things we offend all. And he cannot be thought to
speak of mortal sins. S. John having declared that by the blood of Christ
we are cleansed from sin, add h presently. Io. 1.1.
If we shall say that we have noe sin we seduce ourselves, and the truth is
not in us. By which it appears that we may be so purged from sin, as to be
in state of grace by the merits of Christ's Passion, and yet to have some
sins. This is also most congruous to reason, and agreeable with the divine
goodness and mercy. For if it be an unreasonable severity for Kings and Common
wealths to punish every little falt with the sentence of death; far must it be
from the mercy of God to punish every little excess, or defect, every little
anger, neglect, distraction in our prayers, and the like, with the eternal
death of hell.

Mortal sins are never taken away but by the Sacraments, in deed, or in
desire: Venial sins are blotted out by every good work which we do. For as
every Venial sin deminisheth the fervor of the love of God in us, and
subiecteth us as liable to some punishment; so every good work which we do
in the state of grace aduanceth us in the divine grace, and takes away some of
our due punishment.

But allthough Venial sins deprive us no^ of the divine grace, nor make us
as the enemies of God guilty of eternal damnation; yet we ought to beware of
them, and to be careful especially that we get noe evil habit, nor
affection to any Venial sin: for that is very dangerous; and if we get not
also a habit of repenting presently for it, it will without doubt draw us in
the end into some Mortal sin. And in this sense we may say of Venial sins
that they deprive us of Gods grace, and even kill our souls dispositiuely:
that is they dispose us to Mortal sins, b^ which our souls are immediately
killed; even as a little hole, or leck in a ship neglected causes a greater
breach, by which she is suddenly over charged and sinketh down to the bottom;
so little falts neglected bring great sins, and are sometimes bewailed with
everlasting tears in hell. And therefore to prevent great sins we must have an
eye over our lesser falts to mende them by times. Besides a good and loving
servant will fear to offend in any thing, least by committing that by which
his masters affection should bellessened toward him, he might come in the end
quite to loose his favor. This is that (says S. Hiero to. 7. instrue^s amicum
quemdam.
Hierome) which the Apocalypse reprooueth in the bishop of Ephesus, who is
called an Angel, for that he had in his conscience the merits of many good
works, much labor, and sufferings for Christ's sake. But because the edge of
his former piety was something dulled, and the heat of his love began to
abate, he is called and stirred up to repentance. Apoc. 2.
I know thy works, and labor, and patience, that thou can not bear evil
men, and have tried them that say themselves to be Apostles and are not, and
have found them liars. And thou have borne for my name and have not sainted.
But I have against thee a few things, because thou have left thy first charity.
Be mindful therefore from whence thou art fallen and do penance. And what
penance may we read that the Saints of God have done even for little Venia^^
sins? because they knew that by all such sins the grace of God was
endangered, and that the least degree of his grace was better to them, and in
it self more precious, then all this world: S. Theresa conceived so greatly
against the least o^ her sins, that she spoke of them as heinous offenses:
and if it happened that in singing in the quire she missed in any thing,
presently in the sigh^ of all she prostrated her self to the ground, with such
true shame, and sorrow, that the rest of the Nuns were interrupted from
singing, and could not go on for tears. Grant us O Lord by the merits of thy
Passion, and by the prayers of thy blessed Mother, and of the whole court of
heaven that we may never loose thy grace by mortal sin, and may allwais
fear to offend by venial.

I have done now my dear Reader that which I intended in this book: I have
given thee for thy instruction a breife Sum of the whole Christian Doctrine
in a few short answers to be gotten without book, and the declaration of them
at large in their propper places. I have set before thee in the Apostles
Creed one supreme, eternal, and omnipotent Power, God the beginner and
conseruer of all creatures, to be worshipped by thee. And for thy comfort and
Confirmation in the Catholic faith, I have showed that there is noe true
worship of God; but in the Catholic Church of Christ. The Catholic Church
reaches that an eternal retribution ofteward, or punishment remains
according to our works, good or evil. Good works by Gods grace are in our own
hands if we will. What now remains but to excite our wills? This also I have
done according to my ability, exhorting thee to virtue, and holiness of life.
And now at last I entreat and conjure thee by the omnipotent power and
infinite goodness of God that made thee, by his justice and mercy which one
day thou must try, by the torments of the damned and joys of the blessed
souls, by all which thou can imagine to be feared or desired, that thou
fear (...) love him. Look down to hell, and fear him in that horrible
eternity: Look up to heaven; and love him, seek him, and enjoy him in that
happy state. Resolve from this very instant upon a virtuous life. Begin now a
new, and persevere to the gaining of that everlasting life, which is the end of
the Creed and of all Instruction. Live sweet Jesus King of eternal glory.
Live, Live, and reign in our souls; here and in heaven for ever, and ever.
Amen.

Laus Deo and Dei genitrici, Virgini Maria.
A TABLE.
A
ACTVALL sin. 715 Altar. 603. Altares toward the east. 603. Alms deeds.
473 Amen. 505 Angel Gabriel. 510. 532. The time and place of the Angel
Gabriel his apparition to the blessed Virgin. 533. etc. Anger. 415. Remedys
against anger. 420 The Apostles preaching. 137 The Ascension of our Savior.
164 Atheism and Atheists. 78. 79. 80. etc. Attributes of the divine Persons in
the Blessed Trinity. 142
B
Baptism. The necessity of Baptism. 283. Baptism a Sacrament. 284 The effect
of Baptism. 285. The Baptism of S. John 286. The caeremonys of Baptism. 287
Beads. 555. blessings of Beads. 572 Aue Mary Bell. 564 Bloody sins horrible
to nature. 416
C
Carnal sins. 412. severely punished of God. 422. the causes and roots of
Carnality. 428. Remedys against Carnal sins. 428 The Catholic Church
proved by induction from all other religions that are in the world. 250.
Catholics according to their grounds can not with reason seek unto any other
Church, not doubt of their faith; but all other Churches even according to
their own grounds ought to doubt allwais, and can never be satisfied till they
come to the Catholic Church. 35. Character. Vide Sacraments. 275 Charity
toward God and our neighbor. 409.491. amongst the primitive Christians. 418
Ceremonys. 287.598. Two kinds of Ceremonys. 290. Childrens education. 1 Christ.
109. The faith of Christ ever from the beginning of the world. 113. Christ the
Messiah was to be true God. 120. Jesus Christ our Savior was the true Messiah
foretold by the Prophets. 122. Christianity demonstrated by holy Scriptures and
miracles. 113. unto 140. Christ was more sensible of pain then others. 151.
Christ prophesied of his Passion. 153. Christ's Passion was voluntary. 154.
Christ the anointed as he was Prophet Priest and King. 112. Christmas day. 148
Church. The Church must try the private spirits of all men. 24.184.641. Noe
order in religion but by the authority of the Church ibid. The Church can not
err. 35. The authority of the Church. 184.641. The Church is holy 177. It is
Catholic. 178. It is One. 180. The honorable titles of the Church. 181. The
Church Triumphant and Militant. 181. The government of the Church. 195. S.
Peter was the head of the Church by the institution of Christ. 196. etc. The
true Catholic Church is destinguished from all false Churches. 214. The
beginning of all false Churches. 215.235. The Church proposes pious objects to
our minds to move us to pious considerations. 564. The Church must decide all
controuersys in religion. 184.641.711. Commandments. The ten Commandments
oblige by the Law of nature. 379. God the author of the ten Commandments.
381. Priests must see that the Commandments be kept. 379. The Commandments
possible to be kept 383. How the Commandments are to be divided. 387 Communion
of Saints. 182. Of devout Communion. 308. Under one kind. 316. Communion at
Easter time. 664 Concupiscence. 441. Degrees of Concupiscence. 442. Confession.
253.322. and 662. of entire confessions 337. Cleerenes in confession. 344.
Confession once a year and in diverse circumstances is of obligation, 662. The
benefits of confession. 663 Confirmation. 296. The ceremonys of Confirmation.
297. The effect of Confirmation. 297 Conscience. Sins against Conscience.
674. Remorse and terror of Conscience. 695. Examine of Conscience. 329. etc.
Continuance in sin. 359. 696 Contrition. 329 Covetousness. 443. Remedys
against Covetousness. 445. Counsels. General Counsels. 205. General
Counsels consist of bishops. 209 Counsel. Good to ask Counsel. 674
Creed. The authority of the Apostles Creed. 76 Cross. The sign of the Cross.
49. How the sign of the Cross is to be made. 4^. What is signified in the sign
of the Cross. 51. The Cross is to be honored and worshipped by Christians. 60.
The power and virtue of the Cross. 63 Crowns shaven. 368 Curiosity in points of
faith is dangerous and groundless. 10.16.17.18. etc. Customs of the Church.
64^
D
DEtraction. 434. Remedys against Detraction 439 Devil. The devil is bound
in the Law of Christ. 498 Distractions in prayer. 473.506 Doctrine. Obligation
to learn the christian Doctrine. 7 Duel, 417
E.
EAst. Altares toward the East. 603 Education of children. 1 Ember days. 654
Eucharist. 298. 664. The Eucharist excels all the Sacraments. 299. What is
contained in the Eucharist. ^00. etc, The Eucharist a Sacrament. 305. The
effects of the Eucharist. 321 Examine of conscience. 329 Exorcismes.
139.293.364.534 Extreme Unction. 360. Extreme Unction a Sacrament. 361. The
effect of Extreme Unction, 361.
F
FAith is supernatural: and therefore not to be sought into by natural reason.
12.13. etc. 19. Faith accords with reason. 21. Faith is allwais with
obedience to the Church. 25. How the true faith in the obedience to the true
Church is to be prayed for. 34. etc. Faith alone iustifyeth not. 482 Fasting
commended in the Scriptures. 646. Fasting includes two things 657. Fasting
days are to be observed according to the intention of the Church. 656 Father
vide Parents. God a Father. 77.477 Font consecrated. 291 Freewill. 673.708
Frydayes fast. 655
G
GHost. The Holy Ghost. 56.142.173 Glory. The state of glory. 259. and 480.481
God a Father. 77.477. Plenty to the servants of God. 487. Angels and men give
testimony of God. 84. Natural feeling of God. 91. Natural reason does
demonstrate the supreme power of God. 96. Creatures sometimes called Gods in
the Scriptures. 108. God in all places but especially in heaven. 479. God not
the author of sin. 704. God the supreme and principal, we the inferior and
isntrumental causes of our own good. 710. God a spiritual substance infinite
in perfection. 105.108.675. God fathers. 3.292 Government of the Church. 195
Grace. What Grace is. 268
H
Heaven. Vide Glory. Hell. 160.682. etc. Head. The Head of the Church. 196.215.
etc. Noe Secular Prince as such is the head of the Church of Christ. 234 Hail
Mary etc. 508. The Hail Mary next unto the Pater Noster is the best of all
prayers. 555 Hardness of heart by much sinning. 696. etc. Heresy leads to
atheism. 79.80.81. etc. Heresy is a peruersednes and obstinacy of mind by
which one will maintain some doctrine contrary to the whole Church. 216. etc.
Heretics make the grounds of divine faith to be as uncertain, as the grounds
of Philosophy. 705 Holidays. 404.659 Holy bread. 656.625 Holy Ghost.
56.142.173 Holy water. 624 Honor. The Honor of God first to be sought, and
prayed for. 479.503. The honor of this world is vain and uncertain, lost by
sin. 687.690.
I
JESUS. 111 Ignorance invincible. 674 Images to be worshipped. 389. etc.
Immortality of the soul, and the Resurrection of the body understood
sometimes as the same thing. 257 Incarnation. 57.142.532.556. The mystery of
the Incarnation often commemorated in the Catholic Church. 150 Iniurys to be
pardoned. 420.490. etc. Invocation of Saints. 460. etc. Iudaisme, and Turcisme
rejected. 112.113. etc. 250 Judgment. 169
K
Kingdom of heaven. 480. vid. Glory. The Kingdom of God diversely understood.
482. Knowledge. Too much desire of knowledge 10.53 Knowledge of the christian
doctrine necessary to be had by all. 7
L
LAdy. The Angelical Salutation of our blessed Lady. 509. etc Our blessed ^ady
was full of grace 510.515. The promises made unto the Patriarks of Christ's
coming of their seed were fullfilled in our blessed Lady. 513. The ancient
fathers of the Catholic Church sing the praises of out blessed Lady. 517.
Protestants dishonor our blessed Lady. 524. The Assumption of our blessed
Lady. 518. The sum of our blessed Ladys praises out of the fathers. 529. Our
blessed Lady blessed among women. 530.531. Our blessed Lady the Mother of God,
and to be honored as such. 538. etc. It was meet and convenient that our
blessed Lady should excel all creatures in sanctity. 541. The power of our
blessed Lady in favor of her friends. 544. etc. and against her enemies. 548.
Our blessed Lady present at our deaths. 553 Latin tongue used in the Church
service. 627 Lent. 651 Luxury vid. Carnal.
M
Mark. S. Marks solemnity. 655 Mary vid. Lady. Mass. 575. The Mass is the
Christian Sacrifice. 576. etc. 582. The Sacrifice of Mass continues for ever.
584. Mass a commemoratiue sacrifice, yet a true sacrifice. 594. The caeremonys
of the Mass. 598. The division of the Mass. 604. Meditations upon the Mass.
622. The author of the Mass. 621. Mass in Latin 626. The fruits and
benefits of the Mass. 633. And those not only spiritual but also temporal.
637. A commendable devotion to hear Mass every day 638. All are bound to
hear Mass on holidays. 660 Matter. the Matter and form of the Sacraments,
and intention of him that administreth them. 27^. Matrimony a Sacrament. 369.
The love and duty of married folks. 369. etc. The tribulations of marriage
must be considered before hand. 373. etc. Those that marry must declare
concerning three things. 374 The use of matrimony not convenient at all times.
375. Marriage forbidden to be celebrated in some times. 640. Merits. The Merits
of Christ must be applied unto us by ourselves. 155.156. etc. 593 Messiah. 111
Christ the Messiah true God. 116.121 etc. Jesus Christ the true Messiah. 122.
etc. Miracles prove obedience to that Church in which they are wrought. 28.
The faith of Christ confirmed by miracles. 130 Moderate affection of parents
toward their children. 411 Mortal sin. 717
N
NAme. The Name of God. 398. Fantastical Names reproved in baptism. 295
Neighbor. Who is our Neighbor. 409. Charity toward our Neighbor. v.
Charity.
O
Oil used in the consecration of holy things. 291.603. Order. 30.79.644.609.
Orders a Sacrament. 663 Several degrees of orders in the Church. 364 Original
sin. 715 Oths require three conditions to be lawful. 398 Oths imposed upon
Catholics by Haereticks, or any Infidels are allwais to be suspected. 399
P
Paganism refuted. 117. The Pagan Philosophers confounded themselves. 15. They
were replenished with sin. 697 Parents to be honored and obeyed. 409. Parents
must love their children, and provide for them; yet with discretion and
moderation. 411. etc. Superiors are Parents. 410. The good example of parents
to their children. 414. Parents have a double obligation to instruct their
children. 2 Pastor. The Pastors of the Church gathered together have the
authority of the whole Church, and all false Churches begin by disobedience
to them. 205.215 Patience the proper virtue of Christians. 418 Penance a
Sacrament. 322. The essential parts of Penance. 328. The effect of Penance.
328 Pleasure in sin is false, base, and short. 690 Poor. The Poor to be
relieved. 473 Prayer. The fruit and force of prayer. 450. Preparation to
prayer. 455. What we are to pray for. 457. Prayer to Saints. 459. etc. Prayer
to particular Saints for particular benefits. 470. Hindrances of obtaining our
prayers. 471. Attention in prayer. 473. Prayer and good life must go together.
479. Sentences of holy Scriptures vertually Prayers. 567. Perseverance in
Prayer. 569 Praecepts of the Church. 640. They oblige under a mortal sin.
641 Praesumption of Gods mercy. 699 Pretenses. All Pretenses of haeretiks
obstructed. 247. etc. Priests must be called of God. 210.367. Several degrees
of Priests. 366. Chastity annexed to Priesthood, 367. Priests Judges. 254. And
they do not only declare sins to be forgiven, but do truly forgive
sins. 324. Priests must be able to give satisfaction to the people in things
necessary for them to know. 54. The office of Priests to instruct, and to see
that the Commandments of God be kept. 378 Purgatory. 349. etc.
R
REcreation. Lawful and modest Recreations are to be allowed of in seasonable
times. 406. Relics and holy things to be worshipped. 396 Remission of sins
in confession. 253.323. etc. Remorse of conscience. 495.695 Restitution.
430.432. Resurrection of Christ. 131. etc. 162. The Resurrection of the body,
and the immortality of the soul were aunciently understood as the same. 257
Reverence to the Sacraments. 277. to holy things vide Images. Rogation days.
654 Roman. The Roman Church proved by induction from all other religions in
the world. 250 Rosary. vid. Beads.
S
Sabbath. vide Holidays. Sacrament. What a Sacrament is. 266. The difference
betwixt our Sacraments in the Law of grace, and all former Sacraments. 267. The
necessity of Sacraments. 271. The author of the Sacraments. 272. The Matter
and form of the Sacraments. 272. The minister of the Sacraments. 274. The
Character of the Sacraments. 275. Reverence to the Sacraments. 277 The number
of the Sacraments. 280 Sacrifice. v. Mass. Saints to be prayed unto. 459. etc.
Saints are present in spirit at our prayers. 467.568 Satisfaction. 346
Scandal. 658 Sin. The evils of sin. 495.675. etc. None free from sin.
490. Sin a monster. 669. Sins by ignorance, and sins against conscience
674. The miserable condition of sinners, as slaves. 679. Sin the cause of
temporal afflictions. 684. Sin punished in the friends, and alliance of
sinners. 688. The author and cause of sin. 704. Diverse kinds of sin.
715. Sin by thought. 441 Scruples in faith proceed from the weakness of our
reason. 20 Soul two powers: Superior and Inferior. 152 Spirit. The Spirit of
God inspiring to the true faith is allwais with obedience to the Church. 24.25.
etc. Not every spirit is to be believed. 25.26.27 etc. Not every one that
prays has the true spirit. 31. How the good spirit is to be prayed for.
34.35. etc. 40 Superstition. Noe Superstition to observe a certain number of
prayers in relation to some pious mystery. 571 Swear. vid. Oath.
T
Temporal prosperity proceeds from God and is lost by sin. 414.684
Temptations commune to all. 497. How God is said to Tempt. 498 Theft. Diverse
kinds of Theft. 430 Thought. Sin by Thought. 441 Traditions. 73.74. etc.
Transubstantiation. 305 Trinity. The blessed Trinity. 53.142.174 The B. Trinity
has appeared in corporal shapes 144.
V
Venial sin. 721 Virtue yields satiety of true pleasures, and of temporal
felicitys. 480 Some prayers ask nothing expressly; but they ask Vertually, and
in effect. 567 Vigils. 654 Vyande, or Voyage bread, the Eucharist. 664
W
WAges. 4^1 Will. Our own Wills are our greatest enemies. 483. Conformity to
the Will of God. 484 Witness. False Witness. 434 Worldly care in excess.
444.

