POPVLAR ERRORS, IN General Points concerning the knowledge of RELIGION:
Having Relation to their causes, and reduced into diverse observations.

By Jean D'Espaigne, Minister of the Holy Gospel.

LONDON, Printed for THO. WHITTAKER, at the sign of the Kings arms in Paul's
Churchyard, 1648.

depiction of crowned double rose depiction of crowned thistle depiction of
crowned celtic harp

To the most Illustrious CHARLES, Monarch of great Britain, etc. Defender of
the Faith.
THe deceased King, Father of your Majesty, was pleased to command the
impression of a Manuscript which was the first fruits of my Pen, on which he
daigned to cast his eyes; where in his Royal goodness had more respect to my
zeal, then to the work. This which I offer at your Majesty's feet, carries
its denial on the front. But that the clemency of him who was pleased to cast
his eye upon the Hysop, as well as upon the Cedars of Lebanon, makes me hope
for a favorable Aspect. I beseech the Lord God to accept your oblations, and
make your Crown flourish, and establish your Throne as the Sun it self.

To the Reader.
THis Treatise is nothing but a heap of observations very differing there,
more especially where they are joined; they are for the most part distant in
respect of the subject. This is the reason wherefore I have only sought to
range them in their proper places, and pass from the one unto the other,
without giving them any other connection, or closing them with other cimment. I
shall mark in the first place the nature and differencie of spirits,
principally of the common people in matters concerning Religion; Secondly, the
matters which are of the knowledge thereof. Thirdly, the form and manner of
this knowledge, and finally the means to obtain it. In all these four heads
(which I have placed in as many sections) we shall show diverse popular errors
which serve for the subject of this Treatise.

If this work be trivial, it corresponds to its title, which promises
nothing but popular matters, if defective, it is for having omitted that which
many have often repeated; if clownish, this stuff is not capable of a more
artificial web, nor of the polisure of a more elegant style; if rash, as
shocking so many maxims held as Oracles among the people, and partly approved
by the silence of the learned; weighing them in the balance of the Sanctuary,
we shall find that in matter of Religion, nothing ought to be more suspected
then vulgar opinions; some think to understand very well their religion that
will find themselves not only in a dark ignorance, but also in a den of Errors.

The first Section.
CHAPTER I. The first Error which arose amongst Christians.
THe report which was spread among the Disciples of the Lord, a few days
before his Ascension, that St. John the Evangelist should not die, was the
first Error that sprang up amongst the Christians. This opinion contradicted
not any article of the Faith: and nevertheless the Spirit of truth would have
the censure thereof to remain till the end of days, as a Pillar of Salt to
season our conceptions. Each Error in things indifferent, is unworthy of a
Christian. Time has refuted many, if antiquity should again arise she would be
ashamed to have marked with Heresy, those who believed the Antipodes, and the
Scholasticks who took Zona torrida for the flaming sword which made the
earthly Paradise unaccessible, they would find at this day these imaginations
were more specious then veritable.

But I will lay aside all matters of this quality, we contest not here the
common opinion which marks the nativity of our Savior to be in the season of
the winter Solstice, nor the oracles attributed to the Sybills, which if we
must believe all that they say, have spoken of Jesus Christ more clearly upon
the Tripos of Idols then the true Prophets upon the seat of Truth. Nor the
histories which contain so many particularities of Simon Magus which are for
the most part fables. Nor the interpretation which takes the four living
creatures described in Daniel for the four Evangelists. Nor the form which
they attribute to the cross, which many say to have been of another fashion
then they represent at this day. Nor the belief that Adam and the men of the
ancient world were of giant-like stature, these are problems we ^ouch not, much
less will I speak of opinions of which you may put amongst the dorages of old
women's tales, or that the Hebrew or any other tongue be natural, or that there
has been men ingeudeed by devils, or whether witches can transform themselves
into wolves or any other species. There is none but simple Idiots who believe
Luciser to be the name of the devil. And many say the tree of the cross
without thinking on the superstition, which has produced this fashion of
speech, imagining that the cros^ on which our Savior suffered was made o^ the
wood of the tree of life. The opinions which I undertake to refuse are of far
greater consequence, they concern the true intelligence of Religion, in stead
of which many embrace an ignorance reduced into art sustained by maxims, which
under appearance of follid piety do infold diverse capital errors, transforming
men into stones, making superfluous the greatest part of the Scripture, and
instead of Cherubins engrave upon the walls the figure of many unclean creeping
things; of these maxims some are avowed by an express profession, others
tacitly authorized by the common practice, not only among the dregs of the
people, but yet amongst many which are not separated from ignorants, but by the
wainscot of a pulpit.

CHAP. II. Of the efficacy and differencie of humors upon the intelligency of
Religion and of the strange opinions they produce.
I Hold there are very few men altogether exempt from popular errors; the
spirits the most pure have still a touch in some point of this contagion. The
reason is, that man naturally seeks to conceive the truth of things, the
nearest to the form of his own inclination, as he that would turn the course of
his boul, turns his head on that side, to this contributes education, old
customs, and the multitude of voices, which stupifies the strongest brains. Now
as the inclinations are different, the truth which is unick in it self appears
in diverse forms, according to the quality of the spirits, which conceives it,
like the Aethiopians representing the ugliness of the devil, have a custom
contrary to other people, they paint him white; so after this manner the
diversity of humors produces diversity of conceptions and difference of
opinions upon the same subject.

These humors some times carries away men's spirits to make them seek to be
more perfect then God himself, some cannot persuade themselves that God is so
severe as he says himself to be, and being touched with an humor more
pitiful, have found wherewithal to extinguish the eternal fire, teaching
that the damned, nay more, that the devils after some time of suffering, in
the end shall be freed from their torments; this so favorable an opinion has
gotten them the title of merciful Doctors, but there is others who being of a
more choleric religion, would be more rigorous toward sinners then God
himself. For if some man through humane frailty have fallen under the burden of
Persecution, and since raised from his fall, required the peace of the church,
these would refuse it him, although he had sought it with tears of blood; as if
they had had more interest in the offense, then God himself, or Jesus Christ
who dyed for that sinner. Our Lord has said, if you are persecuted in one
place fly into another, some superabounding in zeal have judged the practice
of this command to be unworthy a Christian generosity, nay more, a base
cowardlinesse equivolent to a dissertion of the faith, one of the chief writers
of the Primitive Church has set out a Treatise expressly in favor of this
Paradox. The melancholy humor so far predominates in many, that their piety
consists in sadness taking the wrinkles of the forehead for marks of Religion,
and scarce will they believe him to be a good Christian that is not
Hypocondriacall: Men the most pious have always been different in their
fashion of life: some sociable and Politic, others loving a retired life with
fasting and austerity, to these two sorts of humors, which are the most
general (God himself by a wise indulgence) would defer something, to the
end, to draw all sorts of people to his Gospel; making them see two different
Moddels, The one in John Baptist, a man of great abstinencie and austeritie, as
well in life as in clothing; the other in Jesus Christ, whose life was
popular, and disdained not the table, nor conversation of the greatest sinners.
But this could not universally please all men. The spotts which appear in the
writings of the clearest authors show oft-times the humor in which they dipped
their Pen, which you may perceive among many others in S. Jerome. Now these
irregular impressions which nature forms in their spirits, goes not always to
so remarkable an excess. But although a man be exempt from all gross, and
notable errors; nevertheless those truths which are lodged in his spirit have
some taint of his own humor; And there is very few men but that give unto
religion some face or color, or some posture according to their particular
inclination. And if one might look into their brains, you should see as many
several Ideas as you do of faces.

CHAP. III. Natural humors taken for Christian virtues: and the particular
spirit, for the Spirit of the holy Ghost: The devil falsely accused of all our
evil thoughts: why it is hard for a man to know the time when he was
regenerated, why certain articles of our faith are more easy to our belief
then others: why divine Revelations were communicated to men in their sleep.
THese natural qualities oft-times deceive the clearest sights: the moderation
which you see in many, proceeds rather from the heaviness of their phlegm,
then from a virtuous habitude; many are ardent in religion, and believe they
have the Zeal of God, who if entireing into themselves, would find that the
fire which hears them, proceeds from a natural choler, far different from
true zeal; many take the combat of the conscience, for that of the spirit
against the flesh, and security for the Peace of conscience. Many also are
religious through a fearful humor, proceeding either from the weakness of
the sex, or the imbecility of a scrupulous spirit, in things the most
indifferent, making as much esteem of an article of Discipline, as of an
article of Faith, and flying superstition, through a superstitious fear.

There are some found, that are so adicted to meditation, that they almost fall
into an ecstasy, so fervent and assiduall in prayers, that they disdain to
descend from the Mountain with Moses, or from the third Heaven with S. Paul,
for to return to converse with men: some assure themselves of their constancy
in the faith, upon a natural generosity, the experience whereof discovers its
weakness, making the most resolute co^^ages to abjure at the voice of a Maid,
and teaches us that martyrdom is a thing that man cannot promise to God; In
general a Christian ought to keep himself from being deceived by these
natural qualities; like the Comets which have the form and appearance of
Stars, but yet are not fixed in the firmament.

There reigns two false opinions amongst those which are ignorant, upon this
subject; that all the ill thoughts and wicked and blasphemous imaginations
which pass through their brains against their will, proceeds from another
spirit then their own, and accuse the devil thereof; which ought to be true in
part, but I believe oftentimes they do him wrong, for although there should
have been no devils, the spirit of man is sufficiently fruitful in monstrous
absurdities for to produce such fancies, without the suggestion of evil
angels; and it is not to be believed that Satan has leave to enter so freely
into all houses, or to enter into our Chambers and Cabinets whenever he
pleases, much less into our thoughts.

There is another familiar error belonging to many which take their
inclinations, who have some moral goodness for an infallible mark of the
Spirit of grace; of all those who have some light feeling of religion there is
not one but does believe, that he is already regenerated. Almost all because
they cannot remember the time in which they have perceived so notable a motion,
they presuppose they have been regenerated in their infancy, not having any
other memory thereof. And indeed it is very difficult for a man to discern
the true moment of his conversion, in punctually noting the hour or the day.
We perceive not how it is made in us in its first moment, nor have we any hand
therein, no more then in our natural production: If a dead man should arise he
could not tell how he recovered life. Nay more, this regeneration is not
wrought by a violent and remarkable motion, except in some one, as it was in
Paul, as in those who in the same hour from tormentors became Martyrs, and as
without doubt it comes to pass in some whom God regenerates at the brinke of
the sepulcher. Ordinarily the Spirit of God leads men insensibly to the first
point of Sanctification, by many turnings and preceding dispositions, which in
their beginnings are not to be perceived, but many make themselves believe they
have been regenerated from their cradle, which are as yet far from the state of
grace.

Nay, those, namely who have been a long time regenerated, and have gotten a
sollid experience in spiritual things, find themselves oft-times deceived by
their particular spirit, which counterfeits the voice of the Spirit of God.
These two spirits intermingle themselves in many actions. It was by the Spirit
of God that Isaac blessed Jacob, but in this, that he believed that he blessed
Esau, and such was his intention, it was the error of his particular spirit.
It was by the Spirit of God that certain Prophets told Paul, that bonds did
attend him at Jerusalem, but the counsel they gave him not to go thither, was
a motion of their own particular spirit, proceeding from their humane
affection. All the dreams which came to the Prophets were not prophetical,
they had marks by which they discerned the celestial visions from natural
impressions, to which they were subject as well as other men; In the same
manner as the divine providence of God has separated that which was writ by
their particular motion, from that which was transmitted unto us by divine
inspiration; The Spirit which dictated the letter of David, written with the
blood of poor Uria, was quite contrary to that which indicted the Psalms.
Nathan counselling the building of the Temple, seemed, speaking like a godly
man, but the consequence shows he spoke not like a Prophet.

It is most true, that neither sagacity nor humane affections reduced into a
just temper are not incompatible with spiritual wisdom, contrarily they serve
for a help to our weakness: All the articles of our faith are equally true,
but our belief embraces them not with equal facility. We have less trouble
to believe a divine Essence, then a Trinity of Persons: the immortality of the
soul, then the resurrection of the body; The reason is, that in the one we
have nothing but a supernatural revelation for the ground of our belief; and
in the other we are moreover sustained by humane reason, which strengthens this
faith: So our obedience is more voluntary in things to which we have, besides
the commandment of God, some natural or personal inclination, then in those
which are repugnant to our affections: I doubt not but Abraham obeyed more
joyfully, when it was bidden him not to lay his hand upon Isaac; then when he
was commanded to slay him. But in this concurrence, namely of the Spirit of God
with our spirits, we must mark these two principalls, the one of which is
always regular, and the other has still some spice of obliquity.

A man addicted to his sense, and that adores his own opinions will very
hardly give place to the Spirit of God. Ordinarily Prophecies and Revelations
came unto men then, when they were asleep; where God sent them those ecstasies,
whilst they lasted they were as if deprived of all sense, which was because the
soul is then dis-intangled from many functions, and freed from an infinity of
thoughts and of objects which possessed it waking; being then less glued to
their natural judgment, and so more susceptible of the influencie of heaven,
and more capable to receive the impression thereof.

CHAP. IIII. Concerning the Senses: and of the imaginations: vulgar
meditations: matters which seem better in Painting, then in the words of the
holy Scripture. Why the corporal figure of our Savior is not delineated in
the Gospel: Why the sight of the places (esteemed holy) takes away the
admiration thereof.
REligion contains diverse matters which for a simple historical knowledge are
intelligible to the external senses: The star which appeared to the wise
men: the manger at Bethlehem, the crown of Thorns, the punishment of the
Cross, the Sepulcher of Christ, and his coming out thereof; the scarres of
his Wounds, his Ascension to Heaven, are objects perceptible to the
imagination: Nay, we cannot conceive the truth of the natural body of Christ,
but under an imaginable and sensible form. But the internal form of all
these theological truths which is as it were the soul of Religion, is not
apprehensible but to the intellect. The divinity resident in Christ; the
personal union of the two Natures, the merits of his Death, the efficacy of
his Intercession, the interest of the justice of God in this satisfaction; The
eternal Election, the interior Vocation, Justification, the essence of the
Faith, the regeneration, are matters purely intellectual. In every narration,
principally in each article of faith which lies in the History, there is ever
two things requisite to the intelligence thereof; 1. The action with its
circumstances; Secondly, the causes and the consequences thereof. Now the first
point is better studied, and more sought into by the common people, as being
more delectable to the imagination, and far easier to be conceived then the
other, which touches not the senses, and requires a more spiritual, and more
laborious exercise of the understanding; from whence it comes to pass, that
the science, the conception, the proofs and meditations of the vulgar are more
imaginative then intellectual. A Deaths head, the spectacle of a carcass, or
of a dying man will represent our humane fragility more lively then can do all
the sentences of the Bible. But the supernatural causes of this corruption,
and the consequences thereof from whence results the true intelligence of our
mortality, they are not read in such characters: A picture may give knowledge
of an action, but the reasons and the motives in which lies the importance of
the story asks another Pensill. A Crucifix tells us not why Jesus Christ died.
Never man was yet converted by the sight of a picture. If that were, Painters
and Sculptors would be the greatest Theologians. After the same manner the
sufferings of Christ reduced into a Tragedy, and elevated by the highest
colors of Eloquence, what tears soever it may draw from the auditors, will
never suffice for a saving knowledge.

If the true pourtraict of Jesus Christ representing his natural face, were to
be found in the world, I would never blame the curiosity of those who would
seek the possession, and who (all superstition set apart) would preserve it as
one of the most precious jewels that the eye of man can behold. Many have
thought, that they have the original, in an Epistle of Lentulus to the Senate
of Rome, of which I will say no more, but that it is no Roman style; Some
others have drawn the Copy from the Monument of a fabulous history which
speaks of a Statue erected in memory of our Savior.

Howsoever it comes to pass, it is a strange thing that the Scripture which
paints forth the stature of Saul, the hair of Absalom, the color and visage
of David, expresses not any figure of our Savior. We find not therein the
least Idea, nor any lineament, neither of his face, color, aspect, stature, or
yet of his voice. But that by which he was discernable from other men,
consisted not in his visible form, or in any extraordinary difference of
Lineaments, otherwise Judas had not needed a sign to make him to be known; so
that the representation of him at this day to the eye of flesh, would make him
contemptible to him that would not conceive a divine Majesty under a common and
indifferent appearance. Or it would be a Patron of Idolatry, which would not
fail to multiply under so favorable a pretext. Our humane vanity would have
added there to some frivolous and impertinent speculations of Phisiognomie. Or
superstition would cast its sight upon each man who should have some seeming
resemblance of such a Picture. Or certainly the greatest part of Christians in
stead of knowing Christ in spirit, and adoring him spiritually, would always
have his imagination tied to the corporal object, and his spirit disturbed
with the fancy thereof.

Of thousands of men who return from Jerusalem, or from mount Sina, or from
the river of Jordan, and many other famous places mentioned in the Scripture,
scarce can you find one which brings back the admiration, which he had
conceived before he had seen them. The spirit of man has always a more
reverent opinion of things which are ancient, then of Modern: of those which
are farthest off, then of those which are near. The objects, the most
excellent and sacred become contemptible by the facility and proximity of
access: but those who go out of a devout affection to visit Palestine or
Arabia, carry with them for the most part exorbitant imaginations which
sometimes pass to an excess impossible in nature, thinking to find the third
heaven in a cave, not considering that the innobling of those places, proceeds
not from any quality which renders them either more holy, or more full of
majesty then the other parts of the earth, but from the sole reputation of the
wonders past under that climate, so that the sight takes away the esteem
thereof, because it answers not to the imaginations with which they were
preoccupied.

CHAP. V. Of the difference and capacity of spirits: Of the faculties of the
soul: Of those who promise themselves to believe, so that they have proof,
and do assure themselves they should have believed in Christ, if they had
seen his Miracles; Of those who limit God, according to their own wisdom, or
believe the truth, because it is conformable to their own opinion.
TO dispute whether there be Spirits more capable of Theology then others, or
whether the faculties of the soul are prevalent in this study, are questions
remore from our intention; without controversy the intellect is the true place
of this science, although the vulgar imagine that there is more trouble to
retain a point of Religion, then to conceive it, and wish rather the gift of
memory, then that of the understanding.

The knowledge of salvation is an effect of grace only. A single, historical,
and speculative culative knowledge proceeds from a particular favor of God.
But this grace destroys neither the natural difference nor essence of
spirits. God employes for our instruction, the objects, the senses, and the
other faculties of the soul. Jesus Christ himself as he was man became more
knowing by experience; a man which has the sense of hearing, from whence comes
faith, has a manifest advantage for the understanding of preaching, above that
man whom God has stricken with deafness; so there is no doubt but a good
natural understanding (presupposing the light of grace) knows better how to
conceive a matter of religion, and to weigh the importance thereof, and search
into the causes, and to discover the consequences, then a spirit naturally
stupid, and blockish; the greatest brains are ordinarily more slow to believe,
then those which have but mean ones, as the highest Planets have the slowest
motions, but their belief is more sollid, when once they have known the truth;
For God employes the same faculties for to produce an effect for which they had
nothing but a natural repugnancie: so that the most violent persecutors become
oft-times the greatest zelots of the faith: whether the faculty of those who
believe more promptly be more worthy of praise, it is a point we will not as yet
touch. The vulgar presuppose that the Science of religion requires nothing but
a single apprehension or reception of truths presupposed without any mixtion of
the discursive faculty, and without any act of the judgment: many make scruple
of reasoning upon the doctrines o^ faith, because that reason is nothing but a
natural faculty. But this maxim in the sense they give unto it is in effect
contrary to all reason: by the same consequence they ought not to bring to
Church, neither their ears nor common sense for to discern the voice and
accents of the Word which is preached unto them, no^ their memory to retain
the impression for these faculties, as well as reason ar^ purely natural. I
will leave what is to be spoken upon this subject to come to some remarkes.
Scarce can a man be found doubting of some point of religion, but he promises
himself firmly to believe the truth, so that he may see manifest and
concluding proof, there is nothing so common as this voice. If I see the
proof, I will believe it: But they promise that which is not in their power:
for every historical faith it self is a gift of God: and saving faith
proceeds from a particular favor of heaven. In the mean time they attribute
unto themselves the power, thinking that the matters of the faith may as easily
be insinuated into our belief as philosophical propositions, which have no
need but of a moral persuasions, or of the evidence of the senses for to
introduce them into our spirit: Whereas theological truths, the most clear
and palpable, are always obscure unto us without a particular illumination.

With a like vanity many assure themselves, that if they had seen the miracles
that God wrought in Egypt, or that Jesus Christ did in Judea, they would not
have failed to believe in him. They wonder at the stupidity of the Jews, and
think that if such wonders had been presented to their eyes they should have
been far from being incredulous: But certainly if a man should see all the
rivers converted into blood, the Seas cleave in sunder, the Heaven open his
gates, the Mountains to remove themselves, the Sun stand still, the Dead to
come forth of their graves, the Rocks to melt into water, when he himself
should have been in Heaven, or should have returned from Hell, he would not
have returned better if God gave him not another understanding capable of this
faith.

Now the Idolatry which forms God after the resemblance of man, consists not
always in Statues or material pictures, neither in the gross conception of
Idiots who never think of God, but in imagining some figure apprehensible to
the sense, and place in Heaven a fantasme for the object of their
contemplation. But there is one far more subtle, which indeed considers God as
a Spirit, but bounds him by the law of Nature, or restraines him to the same
laws which serve for bounds to the humane spirit, or confines his wisdom to
the maxims of moral and intellectual virtues.

Two things amongst all others, have seemed most absurd in the true religion,
the one under the Ancient testament, to wit, the Circumcision, the other under
the New, to wit, the Cross of Christ, the one ordained for a Sacrament, the
other for the foundation properly of the Alliance both of them shameful in
themselves, ridiculous in the quality the Scripture gives them. For God would
oblige the wisest to search their salvation by a way that should be scandalous
to natural prudence, to the end that their wisdom should not undertake to
control his, which nevertheless happens without thinking thereon to the most
religious spirits. The ancient Christians in their ordinary prayers demanded of
God the retarding of the last day. This request was founded upon the coming of
Antichrist, which they knew ought to preceed that day, which would bring with
it many calamities, which they sought to keep from them by their prasers upon
this, that the Assembling of the Elect, and the calling of so many people,
would require a long space of time, and upon other reasons which was known
unto them, but they took not heed that the holy Ghost, whose foresight
surpasses that of man, commanded them to say, Come Lord Jesus, come.

For a close, we shall mark that in diverse matters of religion many submit
their belief to the testimony of the Scripture, because that they find therein
some reason or circumstance, which seems to agree with their natural
judgment. They persuade themselves of the truth of an history, or the equity
of a law, or the excellency of a mystery, or the importance of a Sacrament, or
the justice of a rigorous execution, for as much as they meet therein a
certain shadow, or an appearance conformable to the thoughts which are the
most prevalent in their spirits, the faith proceeding thereof is vain: as we
shall declare hereafter in its proper place.

CHAP. VI. Some say Knowledge produces Atheism, all here says have not
proceeded from learned men. The abuses of humane learning in religion.
THe common people reproaches Athiesme to the learned, and their scorning of all
religion. An accusation, but too true in respect of many. Some do so enclose
themselves within the thoughts of a Science, or particular faculty, that their
spirit cannot admit any principal higher then that of their own art, from
whence it comes to pass, that they know no other divinity then the matter and
the form, or the temperature of the body, or the virtue of herbs; or the law
of nature, or nature it self. Others although most speculative in the higher
causes attain not to the first.

But certainly we must impute this crime to their ignorance, not to their
knowledge; for to say the truth, there was never Atheist, but was ignorant:
never a perfect Philosopher, but acknowledged a God, the most specious
arguments that impiety ever displayed for to sight against this fundamental
point of religion, if we look nearly unto it, are nothing but popular reasons.
And it is impossible to an Atheist to sustain his cause without disavowing some
principalls of natural reason. If Atheism were grounded upon knowledge, the
persuasion would be the stronger in stead that its weakness is subject to a
thousand doubts, which wearies those which are most obstinate; As I have seen
in a learned man famous in his profession, who having called my self to
comfort him in his sickness, assured me upon the (silence he exacted of me)
that his health depended upon the resolution of a point which he never could
believe, and asked the proof thereof, which was, if there were a God, a
question so criminal, that cannot proceed but from a spirit full of Egyptian
darkness, what learning soever he has in other matters. Again, the vulgar
charge the learn^d to have been the authors of all the heresies which have
troubled the Church; complaining that all the errors have had the original
from their subtilties, who have seduced the common people, and which cannot
proceed but from learned men. But we find two sorts of heresies. Some more
artificial and subtle, which cannot proceed but from the invention of learned
men, of this rank, are those who have fallen upon the attributes, and the
divine decrees. The predestination, the Trinity, the Union of the two Natures
in Christ, and such like points. The others more gross and stupid, as that of
the Anthropomorphites. And these proceeds from imaginations of the vulgar. In
general Idolatry has always began by idiots.

Nay, the greatest part of popery, ^he invocation of Saints, the adoration of
their reliqnes, the worship of Images, the prayers for the dead have never
drawn their original, but from the superstition of the vulgar. In heresies
the most subtle, the learned conduct the multitude; but in those whose stuff
is more gross, as in the exterior practice and Ceremonies of religion, the
people lead the skillful who carried by a multitude, as by a crowd or a torrent
suffer themselves to be lead to the very melting of the Calfe of gold. Nay,
what is more shameful, one has seen learned and able men most grossly
deceived by the imposture of idiots not only simple in matter of action, but
moreover in things purely dogmaticall, without speaking of the gravity of
Tertullian miserably seduced by the dotages of Montanus, nor so many spirits
abused by Priscilla, and Maximilla pretended prophetesses. The learned who have
believed something of Purgatory has been brought to this belief by the
revelation of silly devotious women, by the apparition of souls, that good
people said they had seen with their eyes, by the Enthusiasmes of some
melancholy men, and by the recite of some Miracles, which oft-times were but
effects of nature, as the nocturnall fires which often appear in Churchyards.
The errors of the first sort are known for the most part by the names of some
chief Heretics, which has produced them. Thus the blasphemies of the
Sabellians, Arrians, Euticheans, Nestorians, are marked with the name of their
authors famous for having been Patriarchs of so many several bands of
heretics, but the errors of the second sort have not so certain a Genealogy,
its not so easy to name the inventors of the offerings for the dead of the
adorations of Saints, or of the service of Images, or the noting the time of
their original, because these abuses have bin generated from the confused
medly of the common people, so that the true father of them is unknown. But a
man may take notice of a familiar abuse in those who make use of humane
learning; for in many religion takes some taint of their humors, so very often
they give it the bent, or a form set set out according to the rules of the art
which they exercise, or of some other Science with which they are endued.

In the greatest part of the Fathers we find always, either in matter or
phrase something which smells of Platonisme, a Philosophy which they had
drank in with their studies.

Afterward that of Aristotle came into favor, the Theologians have imitated
his language, his countenance and his gate. The excess to which this disguise
obtained, was never so put off, but many endeavored to set it again on foot
So we have seen many Lawyers and Physicians who accommodate Theology to the
maxims of their profession, not only in the terms, or in the method (as when
the one makes it personal, real and active, the others Patholotick and
Therapenti^ke) which is not of so great importance: but in the essence it self,
and in the right conception of the truth thereof. So some measure the sin of
Adam, the justice of his punishment the quality of grace, the satisfaction of
Christ, the damnation of infidells by the Laws and rules of Civil right, or
by natural equity, having as slight a foundation as popular spirits, who
conceive always some point of their religion under maxims of their art or of
the condition they profess, employing them, not as simple comparisons for to
inlighten, but as demonstrative proofs.

CHAP. 7. Why learned men receive the truth with more difficulty then other
men, and if the promptitude of belief is always most praise worthy.
TThe same which we have written of the most piercing spirits happens also to
men of eminent knowledge; which is, that they are for the most part slower of
belief in a point of Religion then ordinary men; and there must be more
powerful operations, and a longer time for to draw them to the terms of an
entire persuasion, on which I will only say the most prompt belief is not
always the most firm. The faith of a man who receives the Gospel with a
precipitated and easy approbation ought to be suspected of nullity, it is to
be feared its rather credulity then sollid faith; surely our Lord spoke of
certain auditors, who easily received the word with gladness but left it with
the same facility which they had brought to its reception, the truth is always
open and never hides her face to the end that he who receives her may see what
manner of guest he is to receive. So when a man begins to be illuminated in the
first acts of this faith, he meets with an infinity of objections which hinder
his resolution to an entire belief. But he which finds no obstacles therein
never considers thereof in good earnest, far from having conceived the faith; a
man who will sound the depth of Religion and know the bottom as far as man can
discover, he who will learn all the measures of the Tabernacle and know the
dimensions and the proportions, and weigh all the reasons which forbids the
entrance, and those which invite him thereto; his pace will not be very fast,
and will not come very soon to the altar. But if once he be enlightened by the
light of the Sanctuary the slownes thereof redounds to his advantage. for
belief is far more clear being received upon solid grounds more sound; As
lodging in a spirit refined from all that surcharged it, and more solid as
having prevented by a ripe deliberation whatsoever might come to shake it.

In this trial of religion the learned have always helps which facilitates
their understanding, and where they know to make use thereof they understand
better the importance of a point of the law, or of the Gospel, the enormity of
sin, or the excellency of redem prion, far better then the common people.
That as they have more trouble to be persuaded, so they have more objections to
be resolved then those which see not the difficulty thereof, but the persuasion
being formed in them, possesses all those advantages which I have related. And
notwithstanding it is not altogether universally true, that the learned are the
more difficult to believe the truth, the conversion of an idiot proves
oftentimes more painful and troublesome. A gross ignorance incapable to
comprehend the easiest matter, is the mother of stubbornness; nay more, of
presumption the enemy of all knowledge: Many refuse instruction because they
believe they have knowledge enough. So that under the shadow of Christian
liberty, an artificer censures what he understands not.

CHAP. 8. Why the learned are subject to more doubts then the simple people.
WE find an infinite number of persons among the common people, who never doubt
of any point of faith, nor of any other matter approved by the orthodoxall
Church, whereas that ordinarily the most knowing men are full of doubts. Now
its true, that believing and doubting are acts formally contrary: for distrust
(although many teach it) is not of the essence of faith, no more then vice is
not essential to virtue, and every sort of doubt is a testimony of our
weakness, and a mark of ignorance. But it is easy to judge from whence it
comes that popular spirits are not subject to so many doubts as the great
Theologians: For as their sight extends not it self so far, so they see not
all the difficulties which the other discover in the study of Religion; as for
those who have never doubted of any point, it is of necessity that this great
security of spirit proceeds from one of those two causes either of a perfect
and transcendent faith, incompatible with all species of doubt, or from an
extreme stupidity, which never comprehended the importance of a doctrine, nor
ever sounded the depth thereof. A man who has always had an absolute and
unvariable persuasion of all points of Religion without any contradicting
thought, must necessarily be either An anges or a beast. This stupid,
confidence deceives an infinity of souls, especially in the personal
application of their belief. Many hold themselves so assured of their
salvation, that their spirit is incapable of doubting; but not through the
excellency of faith, which requires a more exact trial but through an excess
of self love; from hence it comes to pass they willingly believe whatsoever
makes for their advantage. But if they have no pertinent reasons, it is a most
gross presumption.

CHAP. 9 Of common proverbs in general and of certain maxims in favor of
ignorance.
THE vulgar people govern themselves by certain maxims esteemed for oracles,
but which are indeed as many approved errors.

The proverbs which belong to Oeconomie, exterior policy, and to natural
prudence in the conduct of our lives, are nothing to our purpose, there are
some which touch Religion, that are held for assured principalls which have
nothing but an abusive and fraudulent appearance; whosoever would make the
inventory should discover a thousand absurdities. For all the proverbiall
sentences which are at this day in use, have not been dictated by the mouth of
the wise or from reason common to all men or from universal experience.

Ignorance has brought forth many which are authorized only by the credit of
the multitude. And every man who desires to understand very well his Religion,
ought to take of these prejudicated proverbs, which at this time have course,
such are the following maxims, to wit, That there is no sin but with the will,
which is false. Original sin in little children, omissions proceeding from
forgetfulness, the first motions which are not in the power of man,
extravagant dreams, wandering and idle thoughts, doubtless, which trouble the
spirit, are not voluntary, and notwithstanding are still sins. Idiots imagine
that sin resides not but in the will, not considering that it has its place
in the Intellect it self, but this is to justify that opinion which some hold
that Ignorance is no sin, but when it is voluntary. But the Law, the rule of
our conceptions, obliges ignorance namely that which is not voluntary to come
under the expiation and purgation of sacrifices: which presupposes a fault,
Jesus Christ died as well for our ignorance as for our other sins. The holy
language when it speaks of a sinner uses a term, which fignifieth an
ignorant, the high priest prayed for the ignorants, that is he prayed for the
sinners. The eye to wit, the understanding; is called evil although its
malignity consists in nothing but in error.

That it is better to have piety then knowledge, But knowledge is the best part
of piety: the new man is renewed in knowledge: whatsoever any man may say, an
ignorant man can never be a good Christian, all his virtues are none. Nay more,
there is nothing so dangerous as an ignorant Zelot.

That we have knowledge enough, and that nothing is wanting but the practice,
but if any one believe he knows enough, as yet he knows nothing, seeing that he
is ignorant of his own ignorance: if any one should ask that man which is so
perfect in the knowledge of his Religion, from whence it proceeds that they
fail so much in their practice; they allege the corruption of their nature
presupposing that it lodges only in the affections or in the will, as if the
intellect were altogether exempt: Nevertheless if the eye of the soul, which
is the understanding, if this eye were pure, all its actions would be full of
light. It is true that the greatest part of those that commit evil know that
it is unlawful, but they believe to find their good therein which is a capital
error. A man who kills himself believes that death is better to him then life;
the highest mover to sin will be always found in, the falsenesse of the
judgment, and in the unjust persuasions of the spirit, or because we do not
understand God rightly, but only cursorily under some general notions,
without descending to the species and circumstances; or we understand without
believing it. Or we believe it but with so weak a faith, that it is easily
turned aside; It is true that we have knowledge enough, to make us inexcusable,
but never too much to make us better.

That works of Charity are the most visible marks of a Christian. This maxim
is repugnant to experience; we cannot discern a Christian from a Jew by alms or
actions of benificency, which the one may exercise as well as the other, the
first mark which makes a Christian to be known is the confession of his faith,
there is not a sect how desperate soever, but can furnish some examples of
probity, temperance and of all virtues, whatsoever. Many heretics, have
covered the foulnes of their errors by the splend our of their charitable
life, if we must among so many congregations differing in doctrine dispute
which is the most innocent in respect of manners, the Anabaptist would carry
away the prise. We never yet granted to the Roman Catholics that holiness of
life was a mark of the true Church, and we do affirm that the impurity of their
manners had been no lawful cause of our separation. That a Christian is not
obliged to learn any thing, but in as much as it conduces to his salvation.
This bold assertion carries not the mark of final obedience. Many believe
themselves to be very pious, because they have a great desire to be happy, and
the reason why they hearken to the Scripture is because it may make them happy.
Now it is most true that God has made his word the conduit pipe of our
salvation, but we ought not only for this respect to hearken to it, but in as
much as it is the word of God to which we owe our attention although it were
against our own profit. Those whose practice is otherwise, are more amorous of
their own salvation then of their Savior, and that their devotion proves but
mercenary; But this maxim serves as a pretext to another error; None dares
absolutely say that the Scripture contains any thing but that it serves to
salvation. Nevertheless besides an infinite number of histories, all the
genealogies, chronologies, etimologies of proper names description of
countries, and of buildings; ceremonial ordinances, prophetical emblemes, the
inwreathing of mysteries, and diverse other pieces of Scripture are superfluous
in the judgment of the Communalty, because they see not to what use it serves
toward their salvation; He that would raze out all that ignorant men hold to
be unprofitable must reduce the Bible to the fourth part of what it contains,
where as the Romish Church believes they ought to add thereto.

That a Christian ought to content himself with that which is simply necessary
to salvation, which is as much to say that a man ought to know no more of
Religion but just as much as will serve him to be saved, as if it were a
dangerous thing to understand too well his salvation, for to have too many
Torches to conduct him to heaven under color that a little spark or a smoking
snuff may give him sufficient light, I believe for certain that God has had
mercy upon many Idiots, who never knew of what tribe our Lord descended
according to the flesh, nor of what family was the virgin Mary, nor whether
Abraham preceded Moses. But this ignorance is not pardoned to all. A certain
measure of knowledge will be sufficient to save one, which will not suffice for
the salvation of another; More belongs to a Doctor in Theology then to a lay
man; to him that sits in the chair of the Prophets, then him that sits at
their footstool, to a man that has lived forty years in the Church, then to an
American or another proselyte who never heard speak of Jesus Christ, but at the
hour of his death.

That a Christian has not need of much knowledge for to be saved. It is a
favorable prejudication to those who are negligent but most dangerous in
matters of such consequence; If man knew how difficult it were to be saved he
would never think the gate of heaven so large that the blind might pass
through without knowing of it, if there be any thing in which agility,
dexterity, skill, knowledge are requisite it is in this point. It belongs to
none but those which are wise to obtain the kingdom of heaven.

It is true the goodness of God saves an infinity of simple Idiots enlightened
only with some glimmering of his knowledge, but it is most sure that many of
them receive it in a greater measure in the last moment of their lives; for
this light may come at once, as a lightning which passes from the East to the
West, and discovers in a wink both the length, and the largeness, and the
depth of many doctrines which he could never have so well comprehended, though
he should have studied 30 years. One only night at the foot of Jacobs ladder
will make him see more miseries then a multitude of clear and bright shining
days in a well furnished library. The thief learnt more Theology hanging by
Jesus in a quarter of an hour then many great Doctors have gotten all their
life. I stop not at those speculations which they allege upon this question
from whence it proceeds, that sometimes one has seen ignorants being on their
bed of death with deliberate judgment discourse of the highest points of faith
with as much depth and in as good terms as the most accomplished Theologians;
Whether it be that the soul being as it were half loosed from the body, begins
as then to soar aloft, and to discover that it never saw before, or that it
being illuminated with a greater light, it perceives what it had never before
learned; I leave the decision thereof. But this grace is not common, nor does
it authorize a voluntary ignorance nor the practice of the common people, whose
knowledge is at this day reduced to the only rudiments of faith. Nor the
carelessness, nor the insufficiency of many preachers who never give any thing
but milk to their auditors under pretext that it is the word of God, for to
keep them in perpetual infaney and far from perfection.

The second Section.
CHAPTER 1. Divinity reduced into a verbal science abundance of terms, as
well scholastic as Oratorian: A difference in this respect amongst the
Sciences: an objection touching the style of the Scripture.
IN these times a man is held for learned, although he knows many words,
although in effect he knows very little of the substance; the knowledge of many
which are reputed for learned, consists rather in terms then in reality; A
collection of words heaped up in the brain to the bigness of a mountain,
contains often times but an atome, the production whereof is ridiculous: they are
so multiplied, by a labor full of vanity, that there is more time spent in
learning the terms then the thing it self, and in the end of our studies its
found: we know a quantity of words, but scarce: any substantial matters, if
one should gather all the terms which are naturalised in Theology and the
diverse senses of each one of them; he would make a dictionary whose volume
would surpass four Bibles. If there be any thing in which our knowledge is
straightened in narrow bounds it is the mystery of the Trinity, all which men
can say insubstance is reduced into very few words. Nevertheless besides the
terms of Essential, Personal, Consubstantiall and others whose introduction
has been made necessary by the importunity of heresies we hear spoken of,
Active and Passive Generation, likewise of Active and Passive Spiration, and
Procession of emperichorisie of absolute properties, and relative properties,
of Agenesia, or ingenerability of works, external, and of works internal, of
divided and undivided operations of real and modall distinctions, of a
distinction Characteristicall of the supposed suppositive and Apotesmes,
suppositions, The principles attributes substantial and Oeconomicall
attributes, the Endiathetick, and the word Prophoric, reflexively, a production
by the way of the intellect, and by the way of the will, a production Physical
and Metaphysicall, and Hyperphysicall, Notionall acts; the abstract and the
Concret. The Mission taken Actively, and the Mission taken Passively; the
communication of Idiomes, and an infinity of other words many of which are not
altogether unprofitable, but the multitude of them shows our knowledge to be
more verbal then Real. One of the highest points of our knowledge consists in
distinctions; Now it is most certain, that there is more distinction of terms,
then of things themselves, the only word of faith is taken in so many
differing significations that it requires a great deal of study. This knowledge
is necessary to a Theologian, but considering it in it self, it gives at no
other quality but the knowledge of distinguishing of syllables, like those who
know all the differences, names of a plant, and yet are ignorant of the virtues
thereof. In the mean while we see some who will display a conception as a rare
and misterious doctrine which in the depth contains no other skill, but the
clearing of an ambiguous word, the surplusage being nothing, but some trivial
matter.

Now besides the multitude of terms already received, and as yet remain, in
case they each day invent new ones, so that the language of Canaan has the
least part in Religion: and if Saint Paul should again return into the world
scarce would he be capable to be received Doctor in Theology for want of having
studied Thomas Aquinas, for the points of Religion have other names then those
by which they were called in his time, and for one name that they then had
there, they give them a hundred at this day, besides those which they have
given to new matters, which all the Apostles never knew.

The Common people think that knowledge consists in the abundance of words,
although that twenty different words signify but the same thing, an ignorant
fellow thinks he knows much because he knows many synonimies; This error ought
to be attribured either to the ignorance or to the negligence of many Preachers
and composers of books, fertile in words, barren in substance, whose
instructions are more verbal then doctrinall. The art to amplify a discourse,
through a diversity of words and phrases equivolent in sense and gilded over
sometimes with interrogations sometimes with Allegories, sometimes with
Apostrophes, with Prosopoeia's; these circumlocutions would not be impertinent
if they always brought along with them some new reality, which should not
only augment the discourse, but also the Subject and matter thereof, otherwise
to produce one only conception stretched out in words as if it were new matter
under color that they represent it in diverse vestes and different postures, it
is a cunning more fit for a stage then a Pulpit.

These Retoricall amplifications are admitted into some certain sciences, in
others they are altogether unprofitable. Physic has nothing to do therewith,
neither in respect of the Theory, nor of the practice. The Mathematics suffer
it not; it would be ridiculous to demonstrate the proportion of the diameter,
to the circumference, or the Roots of the numbers, in Panegyricks, and
Rethoricall declamations; The Theologian and the Lawyer only employ them, the
reasons is that the end of these two professions is not only to instruct and
to inform the judgment of the auditors, but also to move their affections to
what else serves the ornament, and the copiousnesse of a language; but Theology
is not only to move the affections (as ignorant men suppose) The first virtue
of a Christian consists in the knowledge of God and of his works. Knowledge
which cannot be but only in the intellect which is instructed by proofs, and
real and direct demonstrations not by the windings and turnings of words, or
exaggerating of things, which oftener clouds the truth, more then it
enlighteneth, it enlightens it*

But one may object that the Scripture it self is not every where logical in
all it parts, for it not only teaches by axiom or universal rules, by
concise distinction or simple Propositions, but also by promises and
threatenings, by examples extended to the length by ordinary similitude by
diversity of paraphrases and frequen^ repetitions: to which we answer the
Scripture ought to be explained, and not to be made more intricate, that the
amplifications, metaphors and comparisons in which the Scripture extends it
self, nay the very repetitions, and that which is most verbal in it, are full
of realities of which we shall give some examples.

CHAP. 2. The matters of the Scripture made verbal by the ignorant, the
solidity of its style, mysteries turned into Retoricall figures.
TO say the same thing in diverse terms, and in a multitude of words is a
repetition which may serve to refresh the memory, or to move the affections,
but brings no new thing to the intellect. The ignorant deceive themselves, if
they believe that the repetitions which are in the Scripture are of no other
quality but Grammatical or Retoricall; when the Scripture repeats any point,
this repetition declares something else more then it had said the first time.
In one and the same passage the repetition of the same word is not always a
Pleonasme, for to give an Emphasis to the discourse, or to inculcate that which
had already been spoken, to the end that it should be the better remembered. The
repetitions of the Scripture always bring some addition, and terms which seem
Synonimies have sometimes different significations. The twelve Patriarks are
called to the Testament of their father in these terms, Come together ye
children of Jacob, hearken to Israel your father. These words contain in
appearance a superfluous tautologie. For it seems it was enough to have called
them children of Jacob without adding that Israel was their father, seeing that
Jacob and Israel was one and the same person. But as one of these two names was
a majestic title that God had conferred upon his person, and the other was
rather a mark of reproach. The Patriarks are called children of Jacob to the
end they should remember their low extraction, and to take notice that their
father spak to them in quality of Israel, A Prince with God, whose words were
nothing but oracles. These two names having been transmitted to the entire body
of his posterity are very often joined together for to denoate on, and the same
people. They shall teach (said Moses) thy judgments to Jacob and thy law to
Israel, that is they shall teach the people weak in faith, comprehended under
the name of Jacob and the most eminent represented under the title of Israel,
in the same sort as Christ recommended unto Peter, the feeding not only of his
lambs, but also of his sheep. The vulgar people know no difference between
Laws, Ordinances, and Judgments, betwixt Commandments and Statutes, terms
which are often times joined in one and the same passage, but are very different
in their signification which the ignorant ordinarily confound; the two dreams
of Pharaoh were but one and the same, and it seems as if the second were
superflous, seeing that it said nothing in substance which had not been spoken
in the first. But besides the diversity of figures produced in these two dreams
which teaches diversity of circumstances under this differency of shapes, he
who was the interpreter marks this repetition, as devoting something more, then
as if the dream had come but once. It imports much to know how often one thing
has been repeated in the same place of the Scripture without disputing if
these words of Hieremy, Say not the temple of the Lord, the temple of the Lord,
the temple of the Lord advertised the Jews not to hope for a third temple. It
is certain that the number of reiterations is often entimes misterious. If S.
Peter had remembered that he had denied his Master, thrice he would have wondered
why our Lord said unto him thrice love thou me. In Ezekiel 28. God said to
the King of Tire. All the precious stones covered thee, The Carbuncle, the
Topaz, the Diamond the Berill, the Sardonix, the Jasper, the Sapphir, the
Chrisolite, and the Emeraud thou walk amongst the precious stones: Many do
not see in this discourse any thing but a rethoricall description, enlarged by
the amplification of magnificent words, when one word seemingly means nothing
else but that this Prince was rich, and opulent. But whosoever will remember
that all these precious stones had place in the breastplate of the High Priest,
that each one of them carried the name of a Tribe, that one of the Predecessors
of this King of Tire had had part in the glory of these Tribes, by the honor
that God did him to accept his materials, and his workmen for the fabric of
the Temple. Whosoever say, I will fixedly regard these precious stones, will
find that they contain far greater lights then the Luster of a verbal
amplification, and some reason may be given, why that two or three, of these
tribes are omitted in this description of Ezechiel. If this sense be obscure in
this passage certainly it is evident in the foundations of the celestial
Jerusalem, painted out in the 21 of the Apocalips, which being represented in
diverse sorts of precious stones, differing in their species distinguished by
their names, placed each one in his proper rank and reduced to a certain number
which neither suffers Addition, nor subtraction cannot be taken only for a
heaping together of words of amplification, the allusion of them to the twelve
stones in the pectorall is altogether manifest, and the ranging of them
altogether different from the order which Moses gave them produces a mystical
reflection of many high mysteries, both in the one, and the other Testament; we
might make an infinite of passages to this purpose. But although in many of
them we find not always the true substance of the fruit the Scripture hides
under this abundance of flowers, it is there notwithstanding and testifies the
sottish vanity of so many commentators which think they have dived to the
bottom of the Ark; when after a curious search they find there an Emphasis of
the Grammar or an Epistrophe, as if a figure of Rethorick were a mystery of
Theology.

CHAP. 3. The essence of Christianity annihilated by the maxims of the vulgar,
who reduce Religion into morality, which is the most excellent and most
necessary doctrine of Religion. A difference between the method of Philosophers
and the order that Theology sets forth in the instruction of manners.
THE common people holds that all Religion consists in practice or in works;
that all Christianity lies in the doctrine of good works, or at least that this
doctrine of good manners is the principal part and the foundation of Religion.
These maxims are very pleasing, whereupon they represent faith, the tongues
knowledge, prophecy, as unprofitable qualities without Charity. The greatest
idiots are greatest Orators in this point and set forth excellently the praise
of good works which indeed cannot be too much commended: But yet it is a
greater error then think of, to imagine Religion to be only a doctrine of
manners, whereupon we must mark these following positions.

1 The doctrine of Religion has two parts, the first shows what God has done
for man, the other teaches what man ought to do for God, the first
comprehends, after the consideration of the essence of God and of his
perfections the entire Economy of his works in nature, in grace, and in glory.
The second delineates all Christian virtues, as well intellectual as Moral.

2 This first part is the true and principal Character which distinguishes
christians from all others: For there is no false Religion whatsoever, but
teaches many excellent morallities; but to teach what God has done for us
especially in the work of our redemption is a doctrine which is not to be
found, but in the Christian Religion.

3 The true essence of Christianity, lies in this part, for all other
Religions teach salvation by the work of man toward God but ours teaches this
salvation as a work of God toward man.

4 Ignorant men think that Religion is nothing but a Law, and so confound the
difference between the Law and the Gospel and so annihilate Christianity it
self.

5 The greatest corruption which ever came into the Church began by those
maxims, which commended moral doctrine, as being the whole substance of
religion, for so it came to pass, that finally Christianity was reduced into
morality; if one will mark the consequences of many opinions newly introduced,
he will find they all shoot at this mark.

6 Its an impiety to affirm that the doctrine of works is the foundation of
Religion, or at least it is spoken very inconsiderately. For salvation which is
the true subject of Religion, is grounded upon that good which God does to us,
not upon the good which we do, from whence this result does proceed, that the
fundamental doctrine of Christianity is not that which teaches us good
manners, but to the contrary, that part which we call morrall has his
foundation upon the first.

7 Then it is but a rash assertion to maintain that that doctrine which speaks
of manners, is the most excellent part of Religion. For if the nobleness of a
science depends upon the excellency of a subject without dispute that part
which concerns God and his works, is more sublime and elevated then that which
handles the works of man; nay more this second part cannot have any place, but
as a consequence of the other; all Christian virtues are effects of
sanctification which is a work of God.

8 But they do allege that Moral doctrine is most necessary, and that they
ought more to insist upon that, then upon the first. To which we answer, that
the first part is that which gives the essence to the other, and is the source
and primum mobile to all virtue. It Is it which furnishes us with lights,
without which all our morality would be dark and heathenish. And though this
should not be, it would be a great error to believe that it were enough for a
good Christian to be a good moralist; to the instruction of Christians Religion
hold a contrary method to that which is used in Philosophy; for it is all one
to Philosophers, whether they teach the practical sciences before the
contemplative, forasmuch as that morality or polliticks do not borrow their
principalls from Mathematics, or Physic. But in Religion, Theologick virtues
which rule all others, cannot be extended without a foreknowledge of their
object. Now this object which is God himself is not known but by his works, so
that a Christian ought to know what God has done for him, before he can
understa^d what he ought to do for God. The Law it self in the frontispice of
the Decalogue before that it speaks of our duty toward God teaches us what he
is, and what he has done for us. Finally it is to be considered that the most
necessary part of religion is that which handles the causes of our salvation,
as is the peron and office of Christ our justification, and Now these points
are not morrall doctrines.

CHAP. IV. Why common people loves not rather to be instructed in manners, then
in any other point of religion. Everyone has a natural opinion to be saved by
his works.
THis part of Religion which we call moral, is more pleasing to the common
people, and a better ear given thereto then the other. The reason is, because
the general rules of good manners, and the principalls of virtue, are
naturally known to the most blockish. From thence it comes to pass, that this
kind of doctrine pleases them, as being in part natural, and because of its
facility; For an Idcot has no great pain to comprehend that he ought to
render to each one what belongs unto him; and that one ought to have compassion
of the afflicted, and other precepts which nature makes intelligible. But the
other matters because they are for the most part supernatural and misterious,
find not so favorable an attention in the Auditors; Behold yet more which we
have to mark; which is a natural prejudicate opinion in man, when one speaks
of the obtaining of salvation, they think incontinently on works, as the true
cause which ought produce that effect; The Jews taking it for granted, asks
not our Lord, but upon the quality of works, John 6.28. All the men of the
world except Christians build upon their works, they not being able to imagine
any other merit for to be saved.

Now this principal is natural, as having been ingraffed in the heart of man
ever since his creation, to wit, that he should have eternal life by his
works; Which was true in the estate of innocence, for Works would have
produced this effect if man had not lost his forces. Now he leaves as yet on
this principal, the impression whereof he has retained, although that his
fall having broken all his bones, shows him that his pretensions are but
vain. From this fountain proceeds not only the opinions which attribute the
efficacy of salvation to works, but also the maxims of the common people, who
acknowledging the impuissance of works in this regard; nevertheless so highly
elevates the dignity of them, that he thinks that the preaching modesty in
clothes is a more excellent doctrine, then to teach them all the mysteries of
the Gospel.

CHAP. V. The Scripture made absurd by vulgar, and by those Preachers who turn
it into morality. Popular virtues.
WHat the common people seeks principally in the Scripture is some morrall
instruction, certainly necessary beyond what is spoken. But many believing that
the Scripture ought not to contain any other thing, reduce it all into
morality, namely the Histories in which they consider no other subject, but the
examples either of vice, or of virtue. This ignorance which turns the most
elevated mysteries into simple moral precepts introduces a thousand
absurdities in the Scripture, in which we meet with diverse narrations, which if
taken only morrally, would be found very impertinent. The bargain made between
Lea and Rachel, Genesis 30.14. the contention between Sara and Hagar, the
childish strife betwixt Isaac and Ismael, if we bring no other conceptions then
those of the vulgar, these matters would be both frivolous and ridiculous;
certainly, these histories carry a deeper sense. And S. Paul, Gal. 4.24.)
finding in these two last the Image of the most important truths which are in
religion which shows that the intention of the holy Ghost was clear otherwise
then only to paint forth simple moralities.

More faulty is as yet the style of an infinite number of Preachers, who
believe they handle the Scripture very well, so that they disguise all in
Tropes. If they handle the miraculous healing of the leprous, all their
discourse will be of the spiritual Leprosy; If of the resurrection of one
dead, they will speak only of regeneration; turning these histories out of
their natural sense, and omitting in the mean time the considerations which
they furnish us to the true understanding of the place; Truly, its permitted to
draw an instruction for manners from an article of the faith; but it is a great
folly to lay hold of the concommitant of a subject, in stead of the principal,
and make the body of their discourse thereof. When any will expressly handle a
moral doctrine the Scripture abounds in formal passages for such matters,
otherwise he should both mock them, and his auditors to preach the decalogue
in interpreting the Symbol. But it is easier for the ignorant to preach
morality, then to handle a point more misterious, only for to bring it forth
after their ordinary fashion in gross equipage, and under trivial reasons;
For to handle worthily a doctrine of manners one ought to have provision of
rare matters and conceptions, elevated above the common, which belongs not but
to a profound Theologian. The vulgar knows the virtues by their habits, then
in their essence. Popular piety abounds so in certain acts that it neglects
the others, namely, all charity at this day is reduced into alms; Many love
rather to nourish a poor man, then to convert an Idolater, although it be a
greater work of charity to save one soul, then to feed a hundred thousand
bellies. Otherwise a man who had founded Hospitalls, should have done a far
more excellent work then all the labors of the Apostles.

CHAP. VI. Touching curiosities, Rash questions of those which are returned
from the dead: Of the Devil who exhorted to repentance: Of the knowledge of
evil.
MAn never saw the creation of any thing: when God would form Eve, he made
Adam sleep; So likewise he has reserved to himself the judgment of three
points; 1. of his counsels; 2. of Scripture, 3. of consciences. To inquire of
the Son, proceeds of the Father, as of the Intellect, and the holy Ghost as of
the will. What had been the posterity of Adam, if he had not fallen, and if in
this case the Son of God would have clothed himself with our flesh; or if
the sacred body of Jesus Christ was perfectly organified from the first moment
of his conception, if God could not have saved man by any other means, then by
the death of his Son. And whether Jesus Christ by his sufferances has
merited his proper exaltation besides our salvation; are most rash curiosities.

If any one should rise again from the dead, our curiosity would ask him a
thousand questions, but I mark that of all those who ever rise again, not one
(except our Lord) is introduced, speaking in the Scripture, except we put into
this rank, Moses and Elias in the transfiguration, which nevertheless spoke
not but of the death of Jesus Christ. Though a man should come from heaven, he
could not name the things which he had seen or understood, because that it
never having mounted into the thought of man, they could not impose names
thereto. So that those things could not be declared but in terms, the sense
whereof would be unknown unto us, they are words uneffable, which man cannot
pronounce, and ought not to affect. If the dead ought to be our instructors,
the spirit of error would easily counterfeit them, and under this pretext would
authorize his impostures. The Scripture of all the damned names, but only
Judas, and would not express the name, the evil rich. But many spirits which
they pretend to be returned from the other world particularise by names and
surnames the souls they have seen in hell. For the vulgar presuppose that they
know one another, and that the Devil knows all that are within his bottomless
pit. Upon this imagination the Exorcists believing they have the power to make
him tell nothing but truth, and inquire of curious things, taking pleasure to
make him talk; whereas Jesus Christ never made him speak but once, imposing
silence upon them in all other deliverance of those, out of whom he had cast
the Devils. Namely, it is not long since the Devil preached repentance by the
mouth of some, which were possessed, his words have been gathered and published
in a gross volume by men bearing the title of approved theologians which have
alleged them for a very persuasive argument of amendment of life, showing that
the Devil who took upon him this office was sent by God to convert men, seeing
that the other ways were unprofitable, far from repulsing the impudency of
this adversary, who speaks not of piety but by mockery, or for to render it
suspected because of which when he would have spoken in favor of the truth,
our Lord made him always hold his peace.

All unlawful curiosities have relation unto two heads, whose inquisition is
forbidden us, to wit the hight of heaven and the depth of hell.

The Scripture praises those who have not known the depths of Satan. A too
exact knowledge of evil offends the spirit, and a man well skilled in malice
although that it but in Theory will ever now and then give a taste thereof; The
diligence of Casuists to examine all the species of sins namely those whose
only name strikes a horror to our ears has been a perniious labor, more
capable to destroy good manners, then to instruct the consciences.

CHAP. 7. Wherefore Scholastic Theology was invented and how it was
established: with a contrary success.
THree things have made Scholasticall Theology to be cried down, setting aside
the impurity, des dogmes of their opinions, with which it is stuffed.

1 The multitude of Philosophical matters. 2 The vain curiosity of questions.
3 the barbarousnesse of the language; the intention of those who built it was
to keep the key of knowledge among themselves, and to hinder the common people
from entering therein, and to take from them the knowledge of Theology, to
this effect they stopped the gap with thorns, and made the passage difficult.
First mingling Philophy therewith, nay all the most subtle speculations of
Metaphysics, then reducing the whole Christian doctrine into high and ticklish
questions, which the vulgar neither durst nor could approach, and finally
inventing a certain canting of strange and unexplicable words as the Physicians
having their terms and Characters not to be understood, but only by those of
the same profession.

Now this Theology begins to be introduced amongst us, the principal matters
which they handle at this time, are the divine decrees, with all their
consequences. There be those which find the depth of the highest secrets of
God; nothing is unknown unto them neither in heaven nor hell, and their mouths
bring forth words uneffable which themselves understand not: For these new
stuffes still have new names, and it is to be feared in the end least all the
doctrine of Religion should again turn Scholastic. But this Metamorphosis has
not the same success which it had in times past for the ancient Scolastick
theology being invented for to keep the people in a stupid silence held it self
in the compass of the cloisters, and of the universities; but the Modern have
leapt into the Pulpit of the Churches, from thence to the market places, to the
shops to the tables, and into the brains of the common people, to fill them
with scruples, cries, and contentious disputes, and to make them fight for a
subject which for the most part they understand not.

CHAP. 8. The boldness of the vulgar, the last Christians ought to know more
then the first. The modern Church ought to be called ancient.
THAT which we have spoken justifies not the temerity of ignorant men, who
presently condemn all matters or questions which surpass their capacity. The
vulgar are wonderfully bold to reject as curious each doctrine which they
understand not or they judge it unprofitable, under color that they do not
comprehend the importance thereof, or they accuse it of novelty, because they
never heard of it: before we give examples thereof we shall produce some
observations. Our age is reputed worse then the precedent. If this complaint be
as true as it is common, let those judge who will compare the ancient and the
modern occurrences. Certainly in one point our age surpasses others, and in
the same respect posterity will surpass our selves, especially in the
knowledge of many things unknown to the ages past, a knowledge which
facilitates the Scriptures in diverse matters which our forefathers fifteen ages
past could never find the intelligence of setting aside the discovery of the
new world, and a thousand other wonders which have happened since them, many
Prophesiess have been dark unto them, which at this day are as clear as the
sun: for their accomplishment has dissipated the obscurity and knowledge has
multiplied from time to time according to the measure that the lamb has opened
the seals of his oracles.

The name of antiquiry has abused many, the Church which was then and which is
at this day are but one universal Church in respect of time, the difference of
ages makes us to distinguish into two, calling it the ancient and the new, but
by transposition of names, for we call it ancient, considering it in the first
ages, in which it was young and new, and to the contrary, we qualify it new, in
this time in which it ought to be called ancient, as having obtained to a
greater age; notwithstanding taking Antiquity in the ordinary sense, it may
teach us very much, principally for history, and matters which consist in
action. But as by this means we may know that which our forefathers have
known, we have moreover this advantage, that we know many things which were
unknown to them.

CHAP. IX. Concerning that Maxim; That we cannot say any thing but what has
been already spoken.
THis popular opinion serves for a pretext of ignorance, and of carelessness to
many men. They would be much troubled if one should ask them if this maxim
had been always true ever since the beginning of the world, for then it would
follow, that whatsoever came since the first man should have been spoken
before, and so of necessity that Adam had spoken of David, of Moses, and
Solomon, of Pilate, and of the Romans of Constantine the great, and of
Charlemaine. If this axiom has not been always true in what time began it
then to be; when all things has been made an end to be spoken who made up the
closure; but certainly the assertion has not been always true, not in
Philosophy to whom nature and experience have discovered from time to time
many things unknown to antiquity. Not in Physic, which has seen new diseases
produced, and has found out new remedies; Not in the Political science to
whom occurrences have suggested laws unthought of by the Ancients. Not in
Mathematics, which have produced new inventions unknown to our Fathers. Not in
History which each day is enlarged, and will never fail to find new subjects.
Not in Mechannick arts, many of which have been invented in this last time, and
the others still produce some new artifice Ecclesiasts, which they allege to
the contrary, speaks only of the ordinary course of nature, and of actions,
common to all ages, and to all men. For the production and corruption of
sublunarie bodies, life and death, laughter and tears, prosperity and
adversity, are nothing new under the Sun. But they may object, that Theology is
a complete Science, having all its principalls, and all its materials in the
Scripture, to which nothing may be added. It is most true, but all that which
is in the Scripture has not as yet been understood; so then, all that which
may be spoken upon the Scripture has not as yet been spoken. There is an
infinite number of points in History, in the Prophets, in the Moral laws, in
the Ceremonies of the ancient Testament, and in the mysteries of Faith, whose
sense as yet has never been entirely dived into. Setting all curiosities
apart, it is a blockish rashness to believe that Theology cannot furnish a
subject to many excellent considerations as yet never conceived nor understood,
nor will I speak of the diverse Prophesies, whose accomplishment we still
expect; and it is not possible to speak thereof with so much sufficiency, as
those that shall see the issue, so that all is not spoken which may belong to
this matter; Finally, there is many assertions which cannot be pronounced in
true terms, but in their proper time, as that which our Lord said (All is
fulfilled) could nor be spoken before. One day it will be said the resurrection
is past, which has not as yet been spoken but by some heretics, but we must
pass to another head.

CHAP. X. Of Paradoxes, or matters which are strange to the vulgar.
Whatsoever is contrary to the common opinion or natural sense of men is
ordinarily rejected as monstrous. Many cannot believe that Moses requiring to
be blotted out of the book of life, or St. Paul wishing to be made Anathema,
spoke in good earnest, for all the condition they proposed to this demand, or
for what favor soever they could pretend to receive in respect of their
salvation; Much less will they receive that paradoxe grounded upon these
examples; which is, That each man ought to prefer the glory of God before his
own proper salvation. Our weakness cannot conceive any thing more feelingly
then the particular interest of our soul, nor have any passion so strong as
for this subject. Nevertheless the theory is not less true, although the
practice be impossible, either in the effect, or in our will; We have seen some
scandalized for having heard that it is not permitted to curse the devil;
Which was spoken to show by a strong reason, that man might not curse man, were
he the most desperate villain of all the earth; And all the maledictions which
a man can pronounce against the divill, as many do in virtue of their
pretended charge of exorcists which can be nothing else but a frivolous action;
nay more, which is an high attempt against the jurisdiction of God, which
Michael the Archangell striving for the body of Moses, durst never undertake;
But popular spirits are offended with whatsoever is repugnant to their
prejudicate opinions. And nevertheless the Christian religion, if the depths
thereof were sounded full of paradoxes as admirable to those who understand
them as strange to the ignorance of the vulgar.

CHAP. XI. Of Problemes, and of their difference, and of moral Problemes in
particular.
THere are many points in Theology, and also in other Sciences of which we
find no decision. These points, because they are not of the essence of Faith,
and remain problematicall, are ordinarily rejected by the vulgar, as vain and
unprofitable. But certainly the Scripture which produces nothing superfluous
suggests thereby many things unto us; it is well known that all the
difficulties which are found therein, have not as yet been surmounted* diverse
matters remain undecided, and God will have us to exercise our spirits therein;
the leaves namely of the tree of Life have their medicine in them. These
questions which the Scripture covertly moves, tells us our ignorance, and
ought to be examined for to teach us that our judgment is incapable for to
give the solution.

But indeed there are diverse Problemes which may be put into the rank of
curiosities; As the inquiry what is the language of the Angels, and how they
speak, seeing they have neither tongue nor lungs; Or if in Heaven we shall
speak the language of the Hebrews; Or whether the fire of Hell be material;
or if a man dying a few years since, as Lazarus should rise from the dead,
whether or no he should have reason to require what belonged to him at that
time he died, or whether he had left the right, as well as the possession. It
may be some thought of the last question, because of ancient Heretics, who
blame the second marriages in taking a pretext, that the first marriage did as
yet subsist betwixt the dead man and the living wife, fearing peradventure the
dead should arise and dispute the place with his new successor, although that
the Scripture, namely in express terms has condemned this folly Romans 7.
But the questions which are moved for to know; What was the sin of the evil
angels, for which they were banished from heaven: how long the first man
remained in the state of Innonocence; If in the eternal life we shall know
those we have seen in this world; If there be a difference of glory amongst the
blessed. and in what place the soul is lodged in the body, either in the
heart, or in the brain, it may be are not so vain; laying aside those which
are of this nature. Its a curiosity worthy of a Christian to ask what things
were the Vrim and Thummim in the breast plate of the high Priest, if Jephta
sacrificed his Daughter, if Saint Paul be the author of the Epistle to the
Hebrews? How many years our Lord remained upon the earth from his Nativity to
his Ascension? Whether faith has its seat in the intellect, or resides in the
will?

But above all the necessity and profit of moral Problemes is evident. I speak
not of those which the Casuists have founded upon actions, either impossible or
frivoous, but of questions which concerns our inordinary and important
occasions; It is not sufficient to say, that we have our general principles
clear, and out of dispute, which rules the conscience in all sorts of actions;
For it is true, that these universal maxims are like to fixed stars, and
have their regular motion; but when we come to hypotheses and particular
occurrences, then they descend as in the region of elements wherein all things
are various and turbulent, and where one finds a perpetual conflict of
reasons, like to waves drawn by contrary winds; Nor is it sufficient for a man
to allege the suspention of his action, when as he doubts the justice
thereof, for fear of corrupting goodness by a scrupulous conscience; For
there is sometimes occasions in which surceasing, is more criminal then an
actual fault, and whilst they delay for information sake, for what they ought
to do, they fall into irreparable omission; Christian wisdom ought to prevent
these perplexities: a man who has given an oath to his Country to put fire to
the powder, and make himself leap into the air, rather then to render himself
to the enemy; has need to instruct his conscience, before he imbarque himself
in such a design: but I leave this question, and an infinity of the like
nature.

CHAP. 12. Of certain cases of Conscience which are not as yet resolved.
NOR is it sufficient to reply, that there is certain problemes in diverse
cases, which look unto the practick, which are not as yet resolved by the most
learned, they put the case that a man falling into the hands of thieves is
constrained for redemption of his life, to swear a perpetual silence, and to
assure them as much as lies in him, of impunity. Whether this promise may be
accomplished without offense or infringed without crime, it is a point which
has not yet been resolved the reasons are so prevalent on either side. Also
they dispute, whether a Christian being imprisoned for the faith of the Gospel
may in conscience seek means to escape and come out of the dungeon by breaking
of the doors, or by using some other subtilty. Many maintain the negative, and
qualify this evasion, shameful to the Christian profession, and repugnant to
the order of justice. Others esteem it lawful, and hold that the means
conducing to our deliverance cannot be despised without tempting God. It has
happened that two being of a contrary Religion, and the Orthodoxall party
constrained to abandon his dwelling place, his idolatrous wife refuses to
follow her Christian husband, who asking permission to marry another, the
Theologians were divided and of different opinions in this respect. If there be
any thing which ought heretofore to be resolved, it is this case of conscience.

The lending of money upon interest a question which concerns one of the
ordinary points of particular commerce amongst men; and notwithstanding it is
as yet undecided. For some put no difference betwixt a light interest, and that
which the Jews call biting, it being interdicted by the Law, and others admit
it as lawful in the proportions of equity, as the same Law recommends but the
difficulty of a solution takes not away the necessity and the impossibility of
it in some points takes not away from us the searching after others.

CHAP 13. Of certain questions which are indifferent in which the one ought the
rather to be delivered then the other.
THere be disputable matters, which are not so indifferent or so well balla^ced
but that the weight of the one will turn the scales. Its a disputable point,
whether the terrestrial Paradise be as yet subsistent. The negative has more
appearance. Its a question not necessary, whether the Arch of the alliance was
burnt when the Babylonians fired the temple. the affirmative is the most
certain, namely we do employ it to convince of falsenesse the history of the
Macchabees, which relates that this Arch was sound at the return from the
Captivity. Behold here one more important, to wit, whether the spirits, and
namely the soul of man, are purely immateriall essences. Certain ancient
Theologians followed also by some modern Divines, deny it, and give it a
substance as that of the air subtle and imperceptible, but notwithstanding in
some sort material: to which it is very hard to subscribe. This is the most
considerable of all, whether the humane soul be immediately produced from God,
and by him infused into the body, or whether it draws its effence from his
Progenitors, who transmit it to their children by natural propagation, the
first of these two opinions is without doubt the more receiveable and the most
worthy of a Christian. I set aside the disputes touching the salvation of Adam
and Solomon, in which the most favorable opinion, is also most certain.

CHAP. 14. Indifferent questions sometimes become necessary. Many things are
held for problematicall which are not so in effect. Problematicall points ought
not to be believed with the same faith, as the articles necessary to salvation.
IF there be any matters which are of small importance they are these
following. What age had Terah when Abraham was born unto him, Genesis 11.12.
how many years the Hebrews were in Egypt, Exodus 12. Gal. 3.17. How many
persons descended thither with Jacob. Genesis 46.27. Acts 7.14. These points and
many other, which we might quote have some difficulty. An ignorant will not
trouble himself therewith, but an Atheist will find wherewithal to calumniate
the whole Bible and the Jews from thence have drawn objections against us,
crying out the new Testament to be false, which they pretended to be contrary
to the history of Moses A Christian is obliged to seek instruction as well in
these things as also in an infinite of others, to the end that Religion be not
blasphemed through our ignorance.

On which occasion you may mark a number of matters, which are Problematicall,
rather in opinion, then in effect; I believe that many questions which we hold
for disputable, the solution thereof is contained in the Scripture, although we
find it not therein. Our ignorance is the cause that they remain Problematicall
which would not be if the Scripture were perfectly understood; certainly there
is some which are not therein decided; we ought not to beso bold as the
Scholasticks who have disputed if the ravishing of S. Paul into the third
heaven was in body or in spirit only. They might be assured nor to find the
solution thereof. But on the other side it is a great temerity to hold all for
undecided in the Scripture, because we cannot resolve it.

In the mean time there is no reason for us to embrace with an equal
stablenesse of belief, the points which are as yet Problematicall unto us, as
those of which we have a full assurance.

It is most worthy to be believed that the Virgin never had any other children
then he for whom all ages call her blessed. But this point is not of the same
quality as those whose demonstration is clear undubitable and necessary.

CHAP. 15. Of those who will know nothing but what is found in the Scripture.
WIthout derogating from the Scripture the perfect rule of faith as well as of
manners, we say there is diverse matters not contained therein, whose ignorance
would be shameful and unfitting to a Christian capable of instruction. I speak
not here of many natural principles which the Scripture expresses not, as not
to know that two contradictions cannot be true, or that the whole is greater,
then a part under color that the Scriptures speaks not of it, should be a
criminal brutality. The Scripture teaches not natural Notions, but
presupposes them as manifest, because it speaks to men, not to stones. I leave
diverse histories and prophesies, as are the works of Daniel, the drying up of
the river Euphrates in the Apocalips and a number of others which is impossible
to understand without the knowledge of many things which the Scripture teaches
not. The Passage of the Israelites through the red sea. The darkness happening
at the death of our Lord are acknowledged to be miraculous, because they came
in a time that they could not be produced by natural causes, which was the
reason that the Scripture passes it under silence. All the predictions which
have come to pass since the closing of the new Testament show not their
accomplishment but in humane histories: Nay all these prophesies are finally
reduced into histories, which are not found in the Scripture.

But I will only touch one point or two which consist not but only in act. He
who would believe the temple of Jerusalem is as yet standing? that the Jews
sacrifice therein? and that the other legal ceremonies are practiced as if
their Republic as yet subsisted would be culpable of a very gross error, and
notwithstanding the history of the cessation of sacrifices is not to be read in
the Scripture, it teaches us that the Leviticall sacrifices were abolished by
right but as then in act. Nevertheless this actual abolition came since so
advantageously for the Christians, that one cannot be ignorant thereof without
manifest carelessness. Also we do not learn in the Scripture, that there be as
yet* Jews in the world: and nevertheless it would b a blockish stupidity to be
ignorant of the subsistence of that nation, whose misery verifies the
threatenings of our savior upon them, and whose conversion we do as yet expect.
But above all it would be an ignorance worthy of reproach to put in
indifferency how many ages we ought to count since the birth of Christ. A man
who should not know whether there were more then two hundred years since Jesus
Christ was borne, should be unworthy the name of a Christian, although that the
supputation be a matter of Chronology, which is not deduced in the Scripture,
but increases day by day.

CHAP. XVI. Of those which study nothing but controversies, what sort of
controversies may teach us most doctrine: What points of doctrine are the most
difficult amongst Christians. What expedient may weak ones take in the highest
questions. A rule which is not to be found, but in the reformed Religion. Of
Miracles. Of Martyrs. Concerning the question where was the Church before the
Reformation.
SOme seek no other instruction but that of controversies; a study truly which
is necessary for to furnish Antidotes in places, or in times infected with
heresies: But yet it is incapable to give unto the soul a full reflection. He
should truly be a fool, who would take no other nourishment, but from the
Treacle or the Rubarbe. Controversies shows not the whole body of Religion,
but the parts thereof which are in dispute. And this is but by accident: For
our faith is affirmative, not negative. And our knowledge has for its object
the evidence of truths, not the disguising of errors. Who would come by this
way to a more universal knowledge of religion, he must study not only all
whatsoever we dispute with the Roman Catholics, but also whatsoever the
Christian Church debates against an infinite of Sects, who rob her of her
title; nay more, all the differencies which we have to decide with the Jews.
Mahometans, Indians, and other Pagans, and that which is worse with a multitude
of Atheists.

If there be a controversy in which a Christian armed to the proof against
blasphemies, may learn rare and excellent things, it is in that which we have
with the Jews, I understand for to have an exact knowledge, and not to
consider only the trunk, but also all the branches; the juice and the marrow
from the lowest of the roots, to the highest of the leaves. To see the depth
of this controversy, is more painful then all the others. It has but very
few Philosophical arguments; All therein is drawn from the deep fountains of
the ancient testament, and you must lift all the curtains of the Tabernacle,
and pass through many vailes, before that one can see the holiest of holies.
This was the exercise of the first Christians. For their first disputes began
by the Jews, and excepting necessity which obliges us to turn head to other
adversaries, this controversy would be more fruitful then any other.

There are two sorts of matter in which lies the hardest controversies which be
amongst Christians, and the most difficult to manage; 1. Those which touch the
decrees of God, as the Prevision or Prescience, Prudence, Predestination,
Reprobation, etc. Secondly, Those which concerns the qualities of the soul,
be it in Nature, or be it in Grace, Free Will, certainty of Faith, etc. The
reason why these two points are more difficult then the others, is evident in
respect of the first.

Divine decrees are infinitely distant from our sight, as being elevated above
all times and enclosed in a volume of which we see nothing but a few characters
hard to be discerned at so great a distance. Many who think they read there
distinctly, draw most dangerous constructions. But it is a wonder in the other
point, that so many difficulties are found, seeing that the subject is so near
our eyes, nay, that it is within our selves. Our intellect is in trouble to
know whether our intellect and the will are faculties really different. Whether
granting the judgment of the Intellect, the will must necessary follow: or if
it remains in Balance, and in power to suspend its action. If our faith be
placed in the Intellect, or in our will: Our soul so little knows thereof,
that she knows not where to find her self, being ignorant whether she resides
in the blood, or in any other particular part of the body, or whether she be
universally diffused through all the parts thereof. The proximitie it self of
the subject, is the cause of this difficulty. The soul no more then the eye
cannot see it self, except it be by a very obscure reflection, and that false
to, for the most part, which we call indirect knowledge; For to disturb the
spirits of the common people, ye need but to set them on these two points,
which many have chosen expressly, as being full of Labirinths.

He who has not been acquainted with these slights, ought to remember that in
each controversy truth lodges in a center, to which ought to bend all matters
which are in dispute. In these differences which concern the will of God
toward man, or the will of man toward God (for all the controversies of
Election, of universal grace, of free will, of perseverance, and such like,
may have relation to these two things) these maxims ought to be the center, to
wit, that the glory of all good belongs to God. That whatsoever is ill proceeds
from man. We must not attribute to God the ill that proceeds from man. Nor to
man the good which proceeds from God. One cannot take from God the smallest
part of his glory without ravishing it entirely, because that it is indivisible
as a point that admits no parting. Commutative justice cannot happen to be in
God. The creature attributing unto God all the good which is in her, cannot
fail in excess, nor incur any danger thereby, but in attributing some
portion thereof to himself, he may run some hazard. In these principles
which are as undoubtable as familiar, as they may easily resolve all the
subrilties, will they, or nill they, which may be produced on the one side, or
the other; And the weakest Christian taking heed to the lines which end not in
this center, or fall aside, will easily judge that they are irregular.

This constant and universal rule may be applied to all fo(...) ^octrine, John
7.18 and I dare say, that of all religions which are in the world, there is
none but the reformed which attributes to God the glory of all good, especially
in the salvation of man. And certainly, there is not one of the others, but
makes profession to attribute to God this glory; but examining them nearly, you
shall not find any but that take away some part, to make thereof a present to
man what they avow in general, they steal by retaile, or deny it by their
consequences to hinder God from possessing of it in effect: As to the rest the
common people ought to distinguish the certain and the infallible propositions
from prejudicate opinions, which may be disputable. It Is a common opinion, that
there are no miracles wrought in the world, and that there shall be never more.
This negative is uncertain, and the proof neither assured or necessary. When
all the miracles which the Jesuits do attest to have bin wrought in the midst
of the Indies should be true, they would not conclude the least of their
errors, no more then the annual miracle at the poole of Shiloa gave authority
to Pharisaisme. Much less can they draw any consequence from the martyrdom
which some of them have suffered by the hands of Indian Idolaters. Their
Martyrs will never go peer with ours. When a man suffers death under an
opinion that it will be meritorious, I am afraid he is a Martyr of his own
merit, rather then that of Christ's, the punishment gives him no higher a title
then that of his belief, or of his profession.

There is as yet one point more which we may as yet remarke. To the question
where the Church was before the last Reformation, we ordinarily answer that it
was in Popery, as if Popery were all the world, whereas it holds but one
little corner. As if the Church could not be in Africa, or in Asia, where
Popery was not. In effect we deprive our selves of a very easy answer, and do
a great injury to an infinity of Grecian, Arminian, and Abissin Churches, and
others in which the Church of God resided; Churches who confess the Trinity
of Persons, the Verity of the two Natures in Christ, and all the points of
Mediation. Churches which seek their justification by faith in the
righteousness of Jesus Christ only: Churches which practice the same
Sacraments with us, and admit no other eating of the body of Christ but that
which is spiritual: Churches, in which nothing is wanting that is essential to
the faith, but if corruptions have made them deformed it is not so exorbitant
but that the Church might as well subsist therein as in the Roman which held
nothing but on part of the West.

CHAP. 17. The conversion of a Roman Catholic is now more difficult then in
the beginning of the Reformation.
THE Reformed Church had in times past, enough to open the door to Empires,
and to whole nations, who presented themselves in crowds to enter in, at this
day it is a wonder to hear of any one Proselyte. Men's judgments vary upon the
causes of so great a difference, That novelty provoked the spirits to harken to
this Religion, so full of admirable Paradoxes, whereas now use has brought in
the disgust. That the Reformation came when the Vatican insolently tyrannised
the Potentates, and the people glad to shake off the yoke, and that the
behavior of the first reformed had a luster which rendered his Religion
amiable. That their zeal which let this Religion at so high a prise, alighted
in many a violent passion to seek this treasure. That persecution whose
antiperistasis redoubled their zeal, has more augmented the Church, then
prosperity the most triumphant. Like the Ark, which did more miracles whilst
that it wandered in the wilderness under a pavilion of goats hair, more then
after when it was, placed under the wainscot of Cedar laid over with plaites of
Gold. That the miraculous subsisting of the Church among so many powerful
opposirions ravished the eyes of all the world, seeing a burning bush, and yet
remain unconsumed. That the voice of the Martyrs shook the prisons, and the
tribunalls, the fires in which they were sacrificed served for lights to show
many the way to heaven. And finally God which makes the winds blow in such
places and seasons as seems good to him has bounded the course of his grace,
and forbidden his word to pass further. But to this one may add that the
prudence of the Roman Clergy has choked diverse abuses, and sent to the
Assise many blasphemies which made the most stupid to abhor them. And above
all, time has furnished them with many sleights (unknown to their forefathers
being buried in ignorance of learning) for to shun the most manifest truths,
and give a color to opinions the most absurd, suspending the judgments of the
clearest sighted, between the miracles of Moses, and the cunning of the
inchanters. Finally they had many principalls, and interpretations which they
have left, acknowledging that they were contrary to themselves: in times past
they were content to make the Scripture their judge; at this day they accuse it
of incompetency and decline its juridiction. This principal being rejected it
is more difficult to reduce a Roman Catholic to the Orthodox Religion.

CHAP. 18. Why the conversion of a Jew at this day, then it was at the
beginning of Christian Religion.
THese reasons are also those in part of the pertinacity of the Jews if ever
this nation ought to render it self to the obedience of the faith, it is at
this day that it ought to be a dispersion of more then 1500 years, far longer
then all precedent calamities, and in which they have neither had temple nor
sacrifice to expiate their sins. The vain expectation of their pretended
Messiah so oftentimes frustrated, since the prefixed term of his coming; of
which they know not what to think. The confusion happened in their genealogies,
so great that namely, when their Messiah should come, they cannot know him, not
being able to mark any family that is desended from David. These testimonies I
say of their foolish hope ought to make them leave their stubbornnes more then
ever. And notwithstanding their obstinacy was never so great. Nay it is now
harder to convert a Jew, then in times past before so long a lapse of time
which as yet makes them requoil farther from their pretensions. The weakness
of their cause has made them ingenious to strengthen themselves therein. Since
the subversion of their Republic some years after the ascension of our Lord,
perceiving that the time belied their hope, and being ashamed not to see some
glimpse which might promise them the effect; on the other side seeing that
Christianity spread it self far and near principal under the Empire of
Constantine the great, they sought all the means they could imagine to retain
their nation still in their blindness Now in as much as that they were
condemned in their own Maxims, and namely by the interpretation of their
Rabbis. They took counsel how to abrogate them, and to substitute ohers of a
contrary opinion to them so then, so that where a passage of the ancient
Testament speaking of the Messiah, was taken in its true sense by the ancient
Jews, the Modern have changed the exposition. Our Lord for to prove Christ to
be more then man alleges that David called him Lord, alleging to this
purpose Psalm 110. this passage was not then in dispute. For the Jews then of
that time confessed that those terms could not have relation but to the
Messiah. But those at this day overthrow this interpretarion which their
forefathers did agree unto without reply, so that upon all those passages which
the Apostle cited in favor of Christ, the Jews disputed the application rather
then the explication but now they contest both, having charged their
principalls. There is another trick which they use to make Christian religion
to be suspected both to their nation, and also to all others has been to seek
out all the passages of the new Testament which seems to differ from the
ancient in some historical circumstances, as in the date of years, in the
names of places, in the numbering of persons, and such like, pretending by this
difference to convince the Apostolical writings of falsehood, and so by
consequence to annihilate C ristianity.

CHAP. 19. Why the opinions the most erroneous are maintained with greater
obstinacy, then those which are less absurd. The plea of these which burnt
their children. Pretexts for transubstantiation.
THe more monstrous is the error the more pertinacious is the belief when once
it has taken place in the spirit; the reason is because the falsehoods the most
enormous are made important by the highest pretexts of truth and are not
authorized but by the most undoubted maxims of religion under the color of
this sovereign power^, they make men renounce their judgment of reason, nay
more disavow their own proper senses. If ever there were an error incapable it
was the impiety of the Israelites who burnt their own children as a sacrifice
pleasing to God. Nevertheless neither nature which cried out against those
horrors, nor the threatenings from heaven which condemned them could not hinder
their practice. But it needs must be that some violent passion which brake in
sunder the strongest chains of natural affections was moved with some
powerful engine, cloaked over with some very specious pretext. Their apology
might be that the chiefest good of man consists in the remission of his sins;
that this remission could not be without the effusion of blood. That it were a
folly to go about to appease God by the blood of beasts, and therefore some
humane sacrifice must be offered. That this sacrifice ought to be innocent; and
that a greater innocence could not be found, then in a little infant. That to
be of the proper substance of the man which did present it, and so it was
necessary that his offering should be offered in expiation. But if the
sacrifice ought to be but Eucharisticall, then it were but to mock God, to
present him a calf or a pigeon, his Majesty requiring more noble offerings; nay
more demanding our own bowels, and that they knew not how to offer him a more
precious present then the life of their own children. Under this pretext and
such like, this abomination passed for the most ardent piety which a man may
show to God, equallising or rather surpassing all which the Scripture extolls
in Abraham for an action of this quality: So that the excess of error
augments the persuasion.

The article of transubstantiation is produced under the name of the most
excellent and most dreadful mystery of all religion, bearing upon its front
the express words of the son of God, whose presence is fearful to the
Angels, arming it self with the power of his omnipotency, enclosing within its
titles, all the Majesty of heaven, and the salvation of the whole world. By how
much the representation of this opinion is prodigious, by so much the more it
makes them believe it misterious.

From thence it comes that that belief is maintained with more pertinacity then
any error whose absurdity is less apparent. Also the believing hereof is
esteemed so much the more meritorious, by how much less the object is to be
believed, as indeed that man who firmly believes this transubstantiation should
have (were it true) more faith then ever had all the Patriarks and Apostles
together.

The third Section.
CHAPTER 1. What manner of knowledge or instruction is most natural to the
vulgar.
TWO men may know one and the same truth, but in diverse manners. A Country man
may know that an Eclypse ought to happen on such a day, having read it in an
Almanac; but that is not called Science as an Astronomer who knows by
demonstration foreseeing the Eclypse in his causes. He is not learned in
religion who knows all the matters, but he that knows them in the manner, they
ought to be known; on which many faults are to be observed.

There are two traditions or ways of instruction, on which the vulgar repose
themselves. Sentences and general propositions. 2 Histories, in these two
consists almost all the knowledge of the common people. As for the first head
the ignorant content themselves to know the generalities, because the
intelligence of particular points requires a sharper sight and a more fixed
contemplation. Its easier to an Idiot to say These Things, then to restrain
this generality to its species, to know how to give each one of them its proper
name. To the other the instruction which is given them by history pleases them
because of its facility, for it consists in actions and circumstances
perceptible to the imagination; so that all their knowledge lodges either in
copious generalities or in the single individuums: but the points which are as
it were mediums between these two wearies more the spirit obliging them to
reason, and to take the measure, weight and number, and the names of all
things. This is the cause the vulgar cast it off. In the mean time many are
Orthodoxall in the generality of a point, who err grossly in the particulars
thereof; witness the article of providence upon which the common people will
give a clear opinion in respect of the generality of this doctrine; but in the
particular points imagine a world of absurdities.

CHAP. 2. Of the superficial knowledge of each point of Of religion. Of their
definitions, and of their exact Knowledge. An example in the doctrine of the
Eucharist.
THE ignorance of general as well as particular points proceed from this, that
popular spirits learn an infinity of descriptions, but very few definitions; I
speak not in favor of subtle and artificial definitions of which every one is
not capable. But certainly it is impossible to have the true knowledge of a
point without knowing how to mark and define the essence, if not exactly, yet
at least, very near the truth.

When a man can say sin is the poison of the soul, and knows how to give it
a hundred epithites of this sort, yet has he not learnt what sin is, this
ignorance is entertained by a multitude of Preachers who are content to declaim
by descriptions and abundance of metahpots never showing but the superficies of
matters in stead of setting forth the dimensions. I leave the points which are
elevated above all definition. The imagination of Idiots who not understanding
what is properly that eternity, although they know that God has neither
beginning nor end, believe him nevertheless to have more age then he had four
thousand years since. This point and many others are not the mark at which we
shoot. I could show that the greatest part of our differencies proceed from the
ignorance of definitions. If the Romish Church comprehended intercession to be
a sacerdotall act, and that Christ prays in quality of a sovereign Priest dead
for us; and this function consists in the comparition of his person, etc. She
would never transport to others the title of intercessor. But to make you see
how many excellent matters the exact intelligence of one point furnishes in
respect of a superficial knowledge, we will produce only one example. In the
words of the Lord in the Eucharist, the most ignorant understand sufficiently,
that the flesh of Christ therein is presented unto us as meat, and not only in
this respect, but as meat of sacrifice, for it is properly in this quality that
it is offered unto us. And the terms of our Lord carry a manifest allusion to
the flesh of sacrifices which they gave to eat to those for whom it had been
sacrificed. A meat which the Jews because of its importancy preferred before
all other aliments. But you must know they did not participate but of the
Eucharisticall sacrifices: for the people eat not the flesh of the sacrifices
of expiation although that they were offered for them, the sacrificers only
did participate thereof. Nay more, a sacrificer when he offered for his own
sins had no part in the sacrifice, but was to burn it entirely. And which is
more, in the solemn expiation, in which the blood of beasts was carried into
the tabernacle for the universal remission of sins, no man might taste of the
flesh of the sacrifice, the law commanding that it should be carried out of the
camp far from the people, and there consumed in fire. In brief, it was a maxim
in the law, that none of those for whom the sacrifice of expiation was offered
should eat thereof. But our Lord by a disposition new, and unknown to the law,
presents us to eat of the flesh of the sacrifice of expiation, the body which
has been delivered for our sins. For the law forbidding those which were
culpable to participate of the expiations showed the nullity of them; and
taught that those sacrifices were unprofitable, seeing that those in whose
favor they were offered had no nourishment by them: But Jesus Christ shows
that his sacrifice is fruitful, seeing that sinners participate thereof,
marking in evident terms the difference which we see between the blood of the
new alliance given for drink, and the blood of Legal sacrifices whose
participation was rigorously forbidden; the law forbidding to drink any blood
gives this reason, that the blood was shed for the expiation of sins, and so
ought not to be employed for nourishment; to the contrary, our Lord invites us
to drink his blood, because that it is shed for the remission of sins;
Employing (for to oblige us to the participation of blood) the same reason for
which it was interdicted in the law. This consideration may furnish many others
whereby to comprehend the subject of the Eucharist.

CHAP. III. Of the distinction, conjunction, and Aranging of points of religion.
THe beasts which divide not the hoose are unclean by the Law; The religion of
a man which knows not how to distinguish the points thereof cannot be pure.
Distinctions which consist in vain subtilties, in divisions, and foolish
subdivisions, to the cleaving of a hair, who under color of narrowly sifting
them, reduce the most solid matters into dust and atoms, which in stead of
clearing the sight, gathers up nothing but dust to cast into the eyes of the
simple; overturning the soundest propositions, under color of upholding them,
which under pretext of directing the spirit, shows it so many different paths,
that it knows not which to resolve on; these distinctions tend not to our end.
On the other side the vulgar scorns many distinctions, the ignorance of which
is subject to a thousand errors. An idiot which knows little or nothing of the
difference between Faith and Charity cannot understand the point of
Justification, for if Faith and Charity are but one selfsame thing, we are
then justified by Charity, which is a pernicious consequence.

But if one should ask why Charity cannot justify as well as Faith, the
reason is manifest to him who knows how Faith and Charity are distinguished.
The property of Faith is to receive. The property of Charity is to give. By
Faith we receive God, giving himself to us with all his benefits. By Charity
we offer our selves unto him, and all that is in us. Now God would not have us
justified by giving to him, for then grace would be no more grace (and man's
boasting should not be excluded) but by the only receiving and acceptance of
the righteousness which he presents us; and this receiving is an act of Faith,
of which Charity is incapable. The common people also confound the legal
righteousness with the Evangelical, sanctification with justification, not
taking heed that in the contexture of the same passage there is found a word of
the Law, and a word of the Gospel chained together, but which ought to be
carefully distinguished; As in these words of Jesus Christ, If thou will enter
into life, keep the commandments; this was the Law which spoke, and not the
Gospel, nay, the promises of the Law are mortal to whomsoever accepts the
condition.

He who transgresses one point of the Law, transgresses the whole Law; As he
which strikes the heart only, or the lungs only, or the brains only, does for
all that give a mortal attaint to the body. So all the parts of faith make but
one undivided body, and he which is ignorant only of one, is ignorant of all
the others. In the mean time, he who would examine the popular spirits should
find few who know their religion entirely; few there be whose knowledge is not
deficient in some point: but the knowledge it self of all the parts of
religion does not as yet serve to a true intelligence thereof, if one knows
not their conjunctions, their relations and their correspondencies. All the
points of religion are relatives. Sometimes a point considered in the
conjunction of another carries asence contrary to that which it had being
separated. The Law contemplated apart is a letter which kills: joined with the
Gospel is a Restaurative to the soul. Faith in its absolute essence is a part
of Sanctification, and in this quality justifies not a sinner: in its relation
to Christ, it is the instrument of our Justification. Besides the relation
which the parts of Religion have the one to the other, each one of them, and
altogether have relation to one Total, as members to a body, whose structure
results from their composition, proportions, ligaments and order. But many know
all the parts of religion, who understand nothing in the total, because they
see all the pieces thereof only in detaile, but not in their conjunction.

A man who should know the number of all the kinds of creatures the essential
form of each one of them, their proper causes, the particular end, and the
effect to which they serve, the rank, and place which they hold in the world,
would read as in a book, for each creature is as a character, having its
form, and its distinct propriety, and altogether being ranged in diverse places
produce such a frame of words which are intelligible by us, if our ignorance
confound them not. He that knows the points of Religion, but is ignorant in
what order he ought to rank them, resembles an idiot who understands the
found of every Letter of the Alphabet, without knowing how to join them to make
entire words thereof. Religion as it is in the knowledge of many, consists in
the multitude of matters confusedly heaped together in the mind, without
symmetry, or proportion, without any form either of building or body, the head
and feet being confounded. Some of our controversies concern the same order,
and rank of points. The Roman Catholics coming to contend with us, begin
voluntarily with the question of the Church, giving it the highest place, to
the end they may make it pass as a rule, and principle of faith. But the
Article of the Church holds not the first rank in the Creed.

CHAP. IIII. Of those which believe the truth, by virtue of a false principle,
or of some passage of Scripture which touches not the question.
MAny believe the truth by a false faith. The Turk believes God, the creation,
providence, the immortality of the soul, Christ born of a virgin, a great
Prophet, and the word of God, because the Alchoran says it. These points are
true in themselves: but the belief which he has thereby cannot be formally
true, because it depends on a false principle. Truth may not be believed for a
lies sake.

One may not commend them which endeavor to amplify the Oracles of the
Sybills, to the end they may make them speak more advantagiously in favor of
the Christian Religion. Nor the pious frauds of them which under color of
proving the immortality of the soul, have supposed fabulous apparitions. It
imports not only what we believe, but also why we believe it. A man which
believes there is a God, because Philosophy, or natural reason teaches him
so, has not a Theologick faith, although the belief which he has touching
God, be true in it self, and in its principles.

He that believes all the Articles of Christianity, because great Doctors
believe them, or only because the Church holds them for true, has built his
faith upon man's testimony. It Is a complaint of a person eminent in humane
learning, that being Orthodox in the Article of Christ's Divinity,
notwithstanding in his interpretation, and Paraprases upon the new Testament,
he did enervate, or allude, as much as was possible for him, all the most
manifest passages which authorize the belief of this point. But on the other
side, the world is full of people which upon every sort of matter allege a
multitude of Texts, though often times the twentieth part suit not to the
subject. They which believe a truth, but ground it upon a passage of Scripture,
which makes not to the purpose, believe the truth falsely. That which they
believe is very true: but that by virtue whereof they believe it, is not so.
For the Scripture ill applied is no more Scripture, but a perverting thereof:
although it be alleged to prove the truth which it teaches in other
passages. And 'twere to be wished that many would bring hither as much fear
and discretion, as they abound in impertinent quotations. But the vulgar often
suffer themselves to be led more by passages which come by the by, then by
those which lead straight to the mark. I have seen a man which could never be
brought from the Invocation of Saints, for any Text alleged unto him, unless
when one quoted to him the passage of Esaias 63. ver. 16. which notwithstanding
is not the most concluding of all those which are made use of in this
controversy. A Rabbin converted to the faith, and who had writ against those
of his nation, found the Trinity and the two natures of Christ in the four
Hebrew letters of the word Jehovah; And made almost more esteem of this
Cabbalistick proof, then of all the passages of the old Testament, infinitely
more clear, and express upon this subject. That which remains to be said
requires another Parenthesis.

CHAP. V. Every point of Religion has its peculiar reasons, examples, and
considerations to this purpose.
ALL the points of Religion, and all the lesser branches of them, have every
one their particular reason.

And the Scripture says not only that it is so, but also how and why it is so.

It gives us not simple positions, but teaches by demonstration, and
arguments, even to the resolving of objections which may be moved to the
contrary. This is not then sufficient, when a man knows all his Religion by
Propositions or Maxims, though conceived in proper Scripture terms, if he
know not also the particular reason of every one of them. And to render a
reason of our faith, is not only to allege the Scripture, which affirms such
or such points, but also to show why these points which the Scripture affirms
are such, and that they are the causes of every one of them in particular.
Divinity is all full of demonstrative arguments. They which have but a naked
knowledge of conclusions, see well the face and external shape of Religion:
But the beating of its arteries, the spirit which moves it, and the faculties
which stir within it, are visible to them who know the reasons wherewith it is
animated.

It is not to the purpose to allege, that one ought not to demand a reason
what God says, and that it is enough to believe what the Scripture pronounces
is true. This objection is of value as touching points the search whereof is
forbidden us; as Why God shows mercy more to one then to another, and for
other matters which we may call transcendent, which God has bounded with
praecipices, and environed with high barricadoes which hinder us from entering
in thereat. But in those whereof the Scripture teaches us the reasons, it is a
foolish modesty to reason against his command which obliges us to learn them.
Nay this is a manifest arrogance, to will the ignorance of those reasons the
Scripture gives us thereof, under pretense of believing the Scripture simply.
For the Scripture it self teaches us to reason upon many points infinitely
raised above us. When it is asked Why God permitted that sin should enter
into the world, though it were in his power to hinder it? Many reasons of this
permission may be found, full of excellent doctrine; and saving the matters we
have excepted, there is not any point of Religion, nay any particle, whereof
one may not find some reason, either expressed in the Scripture, or duly averred
by lawful consequences, or resulting from the property of the subject. If
there be any thing which seems to be out of all enquiry they are the
principles of nature. As for example, The prohibitio^ of marriage between
brother and sister, is the voice of nature, which has no need to be propped
with reasons, since it is reason it self. And though one may always say that
the Scripture would oblige men to search the alliance of the remotest races, to
the end that the affections, and correspondencies of humane society might be
multiplied: which would not be, if marriages should be always contracted within
the same family. Which would by this shame restrain the license which might
grow from the facility of their conversation. That so many natural relations
met in one man, which might have brought the title of father and uncle
together, would have brought a thousand confusions in the world. That the same
proximity being disputed amongst them which are of the same blood, would have
produced diverse strifes in families, for the reason as that of the straight
line, which oblige the brother to marry his half sister: that the woman who in
case of injury, or dissertion might find a refuge with their brothers, had lost
his refuge if the brotherhood had been confounded in the marriage. And other
reasons which one might allege for this law.

CHAP VI. Of the exercise of the mind in every point of Religion. The default
of the vulgar, and of preachers herein. The Scripture speaks by proofs.
GOd would that our knowledge should be discursive in part; and that this
faculty of the soul, which passes from one subject to another, for to discern
them, compare them together, and give judgment thereof, might also be
sanctified by this exercise in matters of Religion. But because it is more
difficult to reason upon a point, then to conceive it nakedly and barely; the
common people is contented to hear that such a thing is true, or good, or
just, without searching why or how it is such. The ignorant love only to hear
a thing affirmed, or denied: insomuch that to the understanding of a
proposition or assertion thus naked, there is need of but a bare apprehension,
or understanding of words, without other trouble of mind. Whereupon they are
delighted in maxims, and proverbs, because it is not needful to conceive the
sense thereof, easy to whosoever understands the words. For it is to be
presupposed they are grounded on reason, and it is enough to hold them for true,
without any other form of enquiry. This same facility is the cause we have more
talkers then preachers.

Provided they stretch out a point by a long train of equivalent terms, that
they delate a text into Paraphrases, that they heap together a great mass of
sentences of Scripture, they think they have worthily handled, and the vulgar
abide therewith satisfied. But the interpretation thereof requires much more
then this. Certainly Jesus Christ himself, and the most excellent instruments
which have spok by his spirit, have not contented themselves to pronounce the
affirmative, or negative upon any point, but besides have showed the reasons
thereof. If they teach that the worship of God ought to be spiritual; they
give this proof thereof, to wit that God is a spirit. If the allege to make
the Jews see that the Messiah ought to die, and rise again, the words of the
Psalmest, thou shall not suffer thy holy one to see corruption: they frame
thereof an argument which imports that this Oracle cannot relate but to David,
or to Christ, that the body of David had notoriously felt the same corruption
which death brings to other men* So that this prophecy could not belong but to
Christ. If they say that man is not justified by the Law. they prove it by the
end of the Law, which is to manifest sin. If they declare that Circumcision
does not justify; they show it by the example of Abraham, who was justified
before he was circumcised: So that his circumcision being after his
justification could not have produced it. If they affirm that there was a Law
before that of Moses, they argue that where there is no law, there is no sin:
Now we read that there was sin before Moses: this is proved, because that death
which is the wages of sin reigned from Adam to Moses. If they maintain free
Election; they produce the decree given before the infants had none either good
or evil. If they maintain that the Covenant of grace could not be disanulled by
the Law; they make it clear that it did precede the Law four hundred and
thirty years. If they publish that Christ is greater then the Angels; they
prove it by his titles which were never conferred upon them. If they preach the
weakness of the Jewish priesthood, they take it from this, that the Scripture
has substituted for it another, of anorder altogether different to it, after
the order of Melchisedech: for if perfection had been in the Leviticall
Priesthood, what need had there been that anothe Priest should arise, which was
according to the order of Aron? If they teach that Jesus Christ ought to die,
they note, that where there is a Testament, there the death of the Testatour
ought to intervene, before the heirs can have benefit thereof. In brief if
they speak of the resurrection, or of other points of faith, their discourse
never consists in bare assertions, but in reasons, and demonstrative proofs.

CHAP VII. Of Popular reasons, as well in the Roman Religion, as amongst the
vulgar of the Orthodox Churches. The difference betwixt the maxims of faith,
and those of charity.
THose which among the vulgar reason upon matters of Religion, are accustomed
to conceive them as reasons one may call popular. These reasons are taken from
the superficies, not from the very substance of truth. This is the reason why
often times they are found false: although their facility render them plausible
to the ignorant. If it were needful one might show that the Roman Religion is
for the most part propt up by popular reasons. Popular is the comparison of
Intercessours, which are employed toward the Grandees of this world, brought
for the Invocation of Saints. Popular is the question whether we ought to
condemn our ancestors, and so many souls, which hold the faith we at this day
disallow. Popular are the marks, under which they represent the Church: For the
antiquity, multitude, local succession, are not essential properties thereof.
Popular are the austerities, fastings, scourgings, and external mortification
of the Monks profession. Popular are the images and the title which is given
them, that they are the book of Idiots.

The most ordinary reason which authoriseth the reason of the common people is
that of charity. Prayers for the dead have been covered under this pretense;
and many sometime have extended even to hell, praying even for the damned, not
to deliver them wholly from pain (knowing that is impossible) but for to
procure for them some diminution thereof: whereunto charity carries them. The
maxims of charity are more persuasive, and efficacious amongst the common
people, then the maxims of faith. The reason thereof is, because that those of
faith are more removed from the appearance, and have not so much relation with
reason and natural affection as those of charity, which are more intelligible,
and more agreeing with the common notion of men. Notwithstanding to say truth,
every act of Religion which is undertaken without faith, is also without
charity. And the charity of the ignorant, is a strange fire which is not
acceptable at the altar.

But our discourse properly concerns them who being orthodox in points of
Religion, prop not up the belief of them but upon popular reasons, such as are
similitudes and arguments of this kind. Those which are found in Scripture are
not of this rank, for the authority thereof makes them become demonstrations,
and undoubted proofs. But all others have no other virtue the^ to clear being
besides incapable to prove; notwithstanding the vulgar will sooner believe for
one bare comparison, which makes no proof, then for a reason well concluding.
This is it that similitudes, particular examples, and the like arguments have
an appearance manifest to the sense, and therefore move beyond essential
reasons, which are not perceiveable but by the understanding. Notwithstanding
this faith is not more solid. The man which conceives a point under the sole
resemblance of truth, and not in the proper essence thereof, understands it
not as he ought. This is to have a true opinion, but not a true knowledge. And
more deceive themselves by this means, presuming they have the knowledge of a
point, instead whereof they have but the opinion. It suffices not to say their
opinion is conformable to the truth: For truth is not known by opinion.
Whosoever desires the knowledge thereof ought to endeavor the understanding
rather of one concluding and formal reason, then ten thousand Arguments which
have but a bare resemblance of truth.

CHAP. VIII. Of whose who persuade themselves of the truth by false reasons. Of
those which falsely accuse themselves.
IT comes to pass that many believe a truth which is grounded on Scripture,
but conceive it under a false reason. He believes the truth which holds we are
justified by faith, and not by works. But if he believe that faith has a
prerogative, because it is more excellent then works, this reason is false. For
though faith be more excellent then works, the excellency thereof is not the
true cause why it justifies rather then works. All the vulgar spirits know how
to maintain a truth in express terms of Scripture. But in that which the
Scripture says, they often imagine a reason either false or impertinent. So
the friends of Job did maintain Gods cause, his power, prudence, wisdom, and
justice: but by false presupposition. And scarcely could one have said that
they erred, if God himself had not interposed his judgment in the dispute. So
some to exalt the grace of God, toward them, accuse themselves to be the
greatest sinners in the world: imitating the Apostle S. Paul, who speaks of
himself in this manner, although that Judas, and those that had crucified the
Prince of glory were (without doubt) more guilty. Now Saint Paul ranketh not
himself simply amongst the greatest sinners, but amongst them which had not
sinned but through ignorance. It Is true that Original sin is equal naturally
in all men, and it is the grace of God which restrains many therein. But that to
amplify this grace, a man should accuse himself of actual sins which he
never committed, this is a foolish sort of falsehood. The water of sprinkling
which purified the unclean, did defile those which were clean. If we would
exalt the mercy of God, we have enough true arguments without searching imaginary
for it. If we would justify his severity, we find enough true crimes in our life,
without imposing false ones upon us. Whosoever will speak of God ought to speak
according unto God, that is to say, according to the truth, otherwise it is to
speak against God. To maintain truth with false reasons, is to imitate the
proceeding of Rebecca, who to the end the Oracle might be found true, had
recourse to an abusive means, using a fraudulent superstition. There is nothing
wherein one ought to be so circumspect, as in speaking for the truth. He that
undertakes to maintain it, is subject to a grievous censure, if he acquits not
himself thereof pertinently.

CHAP. IX. Of points whereof one ought to know the causes. Many matters of
Religion are ridiculous without their causes. The understanding whereof decides
many questions. From whence come the greatest part of errors.
THe matters of Religion are known principally either by their causes, or by
their effects. The Deity, as being the highest cause of all, is not
demonstrable but by its effects. Whose decrees ought also to be sought rather
in their effects, then in their causes. But the other points which are
subordinate are represented to us with their causes: which teach us the true
reasons of every one of them. And in this the learned differ from the common
people: For the vulgar sees not the quality or truth of a point, but in the
effects and streams. But to comprehend it well, it behooves to see it in the
spring.

Many matters of Religion are ridiculous without their causes. All the
ceremonial law, if one knows not the reasons thereof, is nothing but a heap of
unprofitable burdens: The Temple but a shambles, and the priesthood but a vain
occupation. In lieu thereof considering them in their causes, every thing there
is important even to the least circumstances. Whosoever shall remember that
Jesus Christ suffered out of the City of Jerusalem, will admire the providence
of this Law, which ordained that the sacrifices of oblations, whereof the blood
ought to be carried into the holy place, should be consumed out of the compass
of the Camp, or of the City.

We know that our Lord in the days of his flesh, was environed with sorrow and
fear: But if we know not the cause thereof, we make him inferior to many
martyrs who bare a smiling face amidst their punishments. The Jew understands
nothing in the Ceremonial Laws: for although he knows the number thereof,
all their particular forms, he is ignorant of the cause thereof, not knowing
that they were given to serve only till the coming of Christ. The true means
to well understand a point, is to learn the causes thereof; and the
understanding of them is a sovereign eye salve to clear ones self of many
difficulties. Saint Paul shows by the final cause of the Law, that it is
incapable to justify men: for (says he) the Law came because of
transgressions, to wit to discover not to cover them. And indeed they which
think to be justified by the works of the Law, know not why it was given. The
Law was never given to justify, Gal. 3.21. on the contrary its office is to
condemn men.

A great part of errors which wast Religion, and likewise of them which
trouble it at this day, proceeds from this, that the cause is taken for the
effect, or the effect is taken for the cause. Instead that the Sabbath is made
for man, Pharisaisme concluded that man was made for the Sabbath. Instead that
meats were not unclean, but because they were forbidden, superstition, believed
them to be forbidden because they were unclean. Instead than the alter
sanctified the offering they would by their Maxims, that the offering did
sanctify the alter. Instead that the Scripture sanctifies the Church, it is
maintained that the Church, sanctifies the Scripture. Instead that
justification produces works, they hold that works produce justification. And
it is likewise disputed whether faith depend on election or election depend on
faith. This turning topsie turvy is ordinary amongst the ignorant, who believe
that the person is acceptable for his works, instead that the works are
acceptable for the person.

CHAP. X. Of the ignorance of the vulgar, who believe that one ought not to
search nor give any other reason of the points of Religion, then the will of
God.
IF twere not the will of God that we should know why, and how he works, we
could not know how our Lord could be born of a Virgin, yet notwithstanding this
is one of the prime Articles of our faith. He has not said why instead of
causing the Hebrews to pass when they came out of Egypt by the Philistines
country, which was the straight way to enter into Canaan, he led them by a
great circuit full of wanderings and inconveniences. Nor why having given to
Abraham the land of the Amorites, his posterity ought not to have possessed it
but at the end of 400 years, Genesis 15. Nor why the bill of divorce was
permitted the Jews. Nor why he disapproved David's design touching the
building of the Temple. And a thousand other effects of his providence, whereof
he would have us know the causes.

Many think they know enough thereof, when they refer all things simply to
the will of God, which they say suffices for all reason: and that in every
point, be it historical, or dogmaticall, when one asks why it is so, one ought
to content himself with saying that God would have it so, or has so ordained.
This Maxim teaches ignorance under the shadow of modesty. By this means
there is no question but may be avoided in two words: and the veriest idiot
shall be capable to give a solution thereof. It Is true the will of God is the
sovereign cause of all things, and the only reason of a great part thereof.
But this answer suffiseth not for all questions, nay in many matters it is
impertinent. When one asks how Abraham was justified, this would be an
absurdity to answer that he was justified by the will of God, instead of saying
it was by faith. An absurdity to show the first cause when the second is
demanded. An absurdity to produce the will of God, when the question is of the
formal or isntrumental cause. An absurdity to name the Architect instead of
the matter. This is to annihilate the dispensation which God has established
in his works, and to break down those steps by which he would have us climb
up unto him. To think to leap over all at one leap, is extreme folly. A man
that alleges nothing but the will of God upon a Subject proposed, understands
not what this will of God is. For to understand it, it is necessary to know
wherein it consists, and how it concerns the matter in question. Now the
understanding of this point presupposes the knowledge of second causes, by
which the will of God works. He that alleges the second causes, and gives
reasons thereof, alleges the will of God: For God has willed that such
things should be so for such reasons, and these reasons are one part of his
will. When the Disciples asked why they could not deliver the man possessed,
the vulgar answer would import, because it pleased not God. But our Lord notes
their incredulity, as a cause of this inability, and shows fasting and prayer
as the means necessary to the expulsion of the Devil. When Saint Paul was
buffeted by Satan he did not simply understand that such was the will of God:
but that his power was accomplished in weakness.

When we search the causes of our salvation, This would be a dangerous
proceeding to desire to mount up to Election without passing by the middle
means. The will of God is the first reason, but the last answer one ought to
give to a question.

CHAP XI. Objections of the vulgar touching the reasons Scripture expresses
not, and how we may know them.
THe Scripture is full of Laws and mysteries, whereof we know not the reasons.
We read of diverse ceremonies, diverse points of history and doctrine, the
particular reasons whereof are not yet found out. But often times we abuse our
selves, by believing that the Scripture discovers not the reason thereof, under
color that our ignorance hinders us from seeing them. This is a common
objection in the mouth of the vulgar, when they hear men reason upon any
matter, to allege that this reason is not at all expressed in Scripture.
Certainly the Scripture expresses not why the Law permitted Homicides confined
within the Cities of Refuge, to return to their houses after the death of the
high Priest. And notwithstanding, besides politic reasons which may be given
for this Law, It is impudence to deny that it meant to represent the efficacy
of Christ's death. But to produce an example more formal to this purpose, the
reason for which our Lord was put in a new sepulcher, wherein never any one was
buried, is notwithstanding less expressed: Yet notwithstanding we say that the
wisdom of God would prevent the malice of the Jews, who not able to deny the
truth of his resurrection, might have disputed the cause thereof, pretending
that he had recovered life by touching the bones of some Prophet, as he that
was raised in the grave of Elisha. This reason is not grounded but upon
conjecture, but of so great appearance, that it were a shame to reject it. In
many things the very effect shows its cause If any man ask why Jesus Christ
trusted Judas with the bag, whose covetousnes he knew, rather then another of
his disciples; the reason thereof is evident to him that considers that the
convenience of this office rendered his treason so much the more inexcusable.
When the Scripture tells not at all why God permitted sin, why he would
harden Pharaoh, why he suffers the vessels of wrath; the effects which proceed
thence, show that sin is the cause thereof.

CHAP. XII. Of the prudence that is requisite in the examination of points
where the cause is uncertain Of a Ly. Whether Satan made Pilates wife speak
for the innocence of Jesus Christ.
IT is true that one ought carefully to take heed of those causes, and reasons
which are not plain unto us, but by a conjecturall appearance: for the
consequences thereof may be foolish and dangerous. Some have thought that Jacob
in all the proceedings he made to gain his fathers blessing, was inspired by
the spirit of God; But the consequence thereof sounds very ill. For then it
must be, that the Holy Ghost had dictated the deceitful words which came from
Jacobs mouth. Now God is an enemy of lies. He may command to kill, but not to
pronounce a falsehood: although a barely be not so bad as manslaughter. The
reason thereof is, that man slaughter may be sometimes an act of Justice; but a
ly can never be truth. And therefore God himself may kill, but he can never ly.
On the other side many have believed, that the dream which came to Pilates
wife, proceeded from Satan, who foreseeing his own ruin in the death of
Christ, assaied to hinder the sentence. If speculations might be received, I
could say that Satan might be in doubt of the quality of Jesus Christ, seeing
in him so great wonders as constrained them to call him the son of God, and
then again an extreme annihilation which seemed incompatible with his
divinity: so that he thought to overwhelm him with torments, as he got his
desire on the first Adam by flatteries. That although he knew that the future
death of Christ was foretold by the Prophets, by the sacrifices and other
figures, and by the faith of the ancient fathers: notwithstanding he might
imagine, that as Isaac upon the point he was to be sacrifised by the express
command of God, was exempted from death, some such like thing might befall
Jesus Christ. I might also say, that Satan having the day before procured the
death of Christ, and employed Judas to this purpose, it is very incredible that
he changed his mind in so short a time. But to come nearer unto the business,
this dream which happened to Pilates wife is inserted in the history as
proceeding from an extraordinary cause. If this cause be uncertain, yet it is
dangerous to attribute to the power of, Satan, that which might proceed from
the inspiration of God. By the same reason before alleged we may conclude,
that Pilate as well as his wife, was induced by Satan to pronounce Christ
innocent. But certainly I had rather take the Testimony of his innocence, for
the voice of God then for a subtilty of the Devil.

CHAP. XIII. Of hidden reasons of some impertinent opinions on this subject.
According to the vulgar, all public calamities, or particular, are but
punishments of sin, or corrections, or trialls. But they ought to be referred
to many other causes which are to us unknown. We see not the providence of God
but in parcells. If we could see his works in their total, and join all ages
together, we might perceive in their linking together an order of causes, and
justice, which cannot be observed in retaile. Some hold that the personal sins
of the fathers are not punished in their children, unless when they are made
partakers thereof with them; And notwithstanding many children, never having
committed any evil, have been borne with notable infirmities, which their
fathers sins have drawn upon them. The piety of Josias hindered not that God
should visit in his own person, the idolatry of Manasses, although with such a
temper as turned this punishment into mercy. In the contentions of these times,
touching Gods foreknowledge, reprobation, and such like points, every man
attempts to produce such an opinion that God may be found just. To this purpose
all the distinctions, and reasons are sought out, which may be conceived. But
if God himself should hear out of the midst of a whirlwind; that man which
thinks he well pleads the cause of God, will be found to have maintianed it
with bad arguments; And without doubt, we shall hear of reasons whereof man
never thought upon.

CHAP. XIIII. Of points resulting from others, and of the multitude of
consequences.
THere is nothing wherein the vulgar is more subject to fail, then in the
deduction of consequences, when one point is drawn from another. This is
principally seen when one comes from a gene^all point to a particular: for
general Max^mes are easy to the common people; But ^rant of knowing their
exceptions, they ^re easily deceived, when they will apply them to some
particular subject. The same ^ncongruity is often found, when they make a
general rule of a particular exam^le. It is true that in some matters, an
ex^mple alone is sufficient to make up an universal proposition; if we could
produce only one man which has been justified ^r saved by works, it would
universally f^l^ow that the justification of all others ought to be attributed
to works: The reason whereof is evident; such as is the justification of one,
such is the justification of all others. On the other side, if we show but one
which was justified without works; this is an universal Maxim for all. And
the only example of Abraham produced by Saint Paul, is as strong as a
demonstration: but one cannot make a Maxim of this that David never saw the
children of the righteous brought to beggerie. The policy which God set up in
Israel, impeded this calamity, whereunto many such as Lazarus might be
subject. Deuteronomy. 15.4. Psalm. 37. and 25.

Many think they do enough, when they draw a consequence from a principle, and
then another, and finally an entire chain of conclusions; but the more a
consequence is removed from its principle the more feeble and weak it is. Those
which are immediately tied to their foundation, are strongest: as in a
building, the part which is nearest to the foundation, is also the firmest.
Others, in what proportion they are removed therefrom, lose their force, and
the last often ends in points, and spiders webbes, more subtle then solid.

The fourth Section.
CHAP. I. General considerations on the Scripture. Of matters which seem
vulgar and of easy understanding.
GOD would not that the Scripture should be very short, to the end we might
abound in knowledge; nor over large, that our time might suffice to learn it.
There was a King that read it forty times. Method is requisite thereunto. They
who read it only in retail, and in confusion, cannot comprehend the harmony
and contexture thereof.

The vulgar ought to know that the distinction thereof into Chapters and
verses, having been made by godly men, but subject to err, is found oftentimes
irregular, separating that which ought to follow in a continued thread, and
confounding that which ought to be distinguished. As for the rest, it is true
that no man can promise himself a perfect understanding thereof. There are more
then a thousand passages which no man ever yet understood. The Argument of
Saint Paul concerning those which are baptized for the dead; the fire which
must prove every man's work; the Prison wherein S. Peter lodges the spirits of
all men; the thousand years of the Revelations, from whence the Millenaries
have taken their names; are to us as sealed letters, nor to speak of an
infinite number of questions in history, in Chronology, in the names of
places, plants, precious stones, instruments of music, and other subjects, the
knowledge whereof is reserved for heaven. But on the other side the clearest
passages are often times made obscure by prejudices, which cover as a veil the
eyes of many readers. The true cause which renders the Scripture dark to them,
^s this, because they search that which is ^ot there. We will represent
something upon this point.

Many matters of Scripture seem trivial. It says, that the sun shines as well
on the on just, as the just; that we brought nothing into the world, and shall
carry nothing therefrom: a thing which experience sufficiently teaches. That
concord is good amongst brethren; that we ought to render to every one what
belongs unto him; that we ought not to do to others what we would not have done
to us; and the like propositions which the law of nature teaches the most
barbarous; that he that is invited to a feast, choose not the highest place;
that he which ought, should agree with his Creditor, to shun the Prison; And
other instructions of prudence, of well being, and administration which every
man knows without Scripture. God gave a commission to the Prophet to publish an
Oracle, the tenor whereof was, that all flesh is as grass, and the glory
thereof as grass: which seems to be sufficiently known of it self, without
extraordinary revelation. The 49. Psalm. calls all the inhabitants of the earth
to hear things rare and excellent, which it promises to discover unto them;
the sum whereof is this, that every man is mortal, that the wise man dies
as well as the fool, that riches exempts no man from the grave; and other
sentences which the veriest idiots sufficiently know, though they never had
been written: from hence it comes that the ignorant admireth not the
Scripture, because they believe it tells them nothing new; and in truth if the
words thereof contained nothing but what appears manifest, these matters would
be purely vulgar: But this is that which deceives the greatest part of readers,
or rather their ignorance deceives them, in that they think these propositions
of scripture have no other sense, then that which is common and natural to the
grossest persons. These are, as for the terms, the same sentences which are
dictated unto us either by nature, or by reason, or by experience, or by the
universal voice of mankind: But the sense which they have in scripture,
reaches much further. That which seems there to be trivial is full of
rarities, which are not perceivable to all sorts of spirits. If there be
question of a passage which speaks of death, the world is full of preachers
which will give a description thereof, which will declaim in a pathetick
manner, and will say all that which the simple know well enough: But this is
but to touch the superficies of scripture. Sometimes it pronounces proverbs
taken from the mouth of common people, nay of Pagan authors; but it heightneth
the sense thereof, and referres to an end far more noble. Many Philosophers
might have conceived the same moral precepts, nay in the same terms with
scrcipture, but not to animate them with a sense so high, and so complete. This
is the admirable art of the Holy Ghost, to hide the rarest mysteries under the
appearance of the most common matters. We reserve the examples hereof to
another discourse.

The ignorant who believe that all the substance of a passage consists in that
which is therein vulgar, the understanding whereof is easy, imagine they
understand it very well, and think they comprehend all the sense thereof. The
opinion they have of this easiness abuses them. When one finds a passage
which seems so easy, one may assure himself, that there is some notable
difficulty in it. Those which seem most clear, are very often most obscure. If
there be any thing which seems to be clear and intelligible, such are
similitudes taken from common and sensible things, as of a sower; of a net cast
into the sea; of agrain of mustard seed; of leaven put in meal, etc. Those
co^parisons because they are familiar are even contemptible to the veriest
ideors; and there is none of them which attributes not to himself the
understanding thereof; notwithstanding, it may be there are sew men that
comprehend the full sense thereof: not to speak in the similitude of the
Potter, that of the wild olive used by Saint Paul upon the subject of the
calling of the Gentiles, has diverse branches marvelously high, whereunto all
cannot attain.

One may refer hither diverse subjects which seem to be within the cognizance
of humane arts and sciences, As the Pleiades and other Celestial signs
mentioned in Job, for Astrology. The remedy applied upon the Carbuncle of
Ezekiah, and the third day observed for the most painful, in the wound of the
Sichemites, for Physic. The statue of Nebuchadnezzar, for burial. The temple,
and royal houses of Solomon, for Architecture; and an infiniteness of points
which belong to Natural Philosophy. In effect there is no doubt but the
Scripture contains in it many admirable secrets of this quality: but this is
but the bark of a marrow more substantial and wholesome.

CHAP. 2. Of matters which seem unprofitable in Scripture. Considerations upon
Chronology, upon the Genealogies, Proper names, Ceremonial Laws, Rules,
Particularities little considerable in appearance, and histories of enormous
Acts.
TO understand the Scripture it is not enough to know what it says; It Is
necessary also to know why it says it. For the discourse thereof tends
oftentimes to abut the words express not. There is nothing so clear as the
Moral law; the precepts thereof are evident; there is no man so brutish, which
understands not very well when it speaks of honoring father and mother, of
absteining from homicide, from false witness, etc. Notwithstanding Saint Paul
says, this law was covered with a veil, and that the Jews could not see Moses
face. They did comprehend well the sense thereof; but saw not the aim thereof,
which seemed to contradict eve the language and the appearance of it. For the
law promised life to him that fulfilled it; and yet notwithstanding this was
not the intention of the Law to induce us to search for life by the fulfilling
thereof. Our Lord said, If thou will enter into life, keep the commandments:
and notwithstanding this proposition tended to an end quite different, to wit
that we should not hope for salvation by observation of the commandments. The
same ought to be observed in diverse other passages.

The Scripture is full of an infinity of matters, which considered in
themselves, seem to be wholly unprofitable, or at least of very little
importance, if one take not heed at what they aim at. It is true that some are
either more profitable, or more considerable then others; our Lord himself
distinguishes the greater commandments from the lesser. Without doubt the
history of Christ's passion is more necessary then that of Sampson, or the
victories of David, or the description of Solomon's Palace. If it be so that the
Scripture contains nothing superfluous, there is neither a tache, nor a goats
hair in all the Tabernacle, which serves not to the perfection of it.

To this purpose are the accounts of the years, which the Scriptures observe
so punctually. It were a very great brutishness to be ignorant, whether the
world harh continued a long time, and how. The days of the ancient Fathers,
and the measure of the following ages, which the holy history calculates so
exactly, give us their chronology. The 430 years which expired the very night
the Hebrews came out of Egypt, published the immutable truth of God, whose
promise failed not to be effected at the named day. The thirtieth year of Jesus
Christ, wherein he began to exercise the Office of a redeemer, was the age in
which the Priests entered into their charge. The periods which are observed from
the creation to the flood, from the flood to the promise, from the promise to
the Law, from the Law, to the building of the Temple, from thence to the
captivity, and from the captivity to Christ; their extent, their number, their
relation and proportion are all full of wonders. Seven years were employed to
the conquest of Canaan, Seven years to build the Temple, seventie years it
was in raising, seven times seven years they were hindered from rebuilding it,
and seven times seventy years in the whole, (which are the weeks of Daniel) it
stood till the second destruction; which happened the tenth of August, which
was the very day wherein it had been ruined the first time, more then five
hundred fifty years before. The life of Moses is found equally divided into
three, forty years he was a Courtier in Egypt; forty years a shepherd in
Madian; forty years a conducter of the people in the wilderness.

The same harmony we observe in times, is seen in generations. Moses the
Lawgiver, was the seventh man after Abraham, to whom God gave the promises;
Abraham the seventh from Heber, of whom the Hebrews are descended; Heber the
seventh from Enoch, the first that was caught up to heaven; Enoch the seventh
from Adam. Ten generations from the Creation to the flood; ten generations from
the flood to the promise. From Abraham to David fourteen generations, from
David to the captivity fourteen generations, from the captivity to Christ
fourteen generations, which make in all, forty two, and answer the forty two
journeys of the Israelites, from their departure from Egypt to the land of
Canaan. But moreover, these Genealogies serve to show us, besides the original
of every nation, that which brought forth to us the Son of God; for it was a
matter of importance that his people, his tribe, and his family, whereof he
was to be born, should be exactly marked out. Hereunto serves the catalogue of
so many persons, the number whereof is found in Scripture.

But besides this list of names in Genealogies, we read there are an
infiniteness of others, the knowledge whereof seems not to be of great fruit;
yet notwitstanding we can show their importance in diverse examples. It
sufficieth me to note by the by, that which may be without much dispute, how we
ought to understand the rehearsal of our Lord, touching Lazarus, and the
wicked rich man, to wit, whether in terms of history, or in form of a
parable; whether it may be thought that Lazarus by changing of the dialect, is
the proper name of Eleazar the servant of Abraham. Thus Jesus Christ places
Lazarus in the bosom, or at the table of this Patriarch, whose household
servant he had been. It may be there is a secret Antithesis between the quality
of this wicked rich man, who is represented, as being of the blood of Abraham,
whose son he is called, and that quality of the other who was but a servant.
That Maxim which imports that every narration wherein is expressed the proper
name of some one, ought to be taken for history, is not always to be received.

I will not stay long to show what use there is at this day of the Ceremonial
Laws of the Old Testament. This subject requires a longer discourse, I will
only say that this is one of the richest cabbinets of Divinity, full of
inestimable Jewels; but one ought to be very expert, to know the kinds, the
properties, the use, and the value of every one of them. Jesus Christ is there
painted out unto us, in diverse tables, which serve us to convince the
blindness of the Jews. The numbering up of diverse sins, for which this Law
ordained sacrifices, is an assurace to them that are guilty thereof, that they
may obtain pardon. Such a one as being fallen into perjury, believes he has
committed a sin which the Scripture pronounces unpardonable, has found a
remedy against despair, hearing the Ceremonial Law, which prescribes a sin
Offering altogether express in favor of wilful perjury, which it would not
do, were this crime unpardonable.

We find also in the Old Testament many rules, and narrations, which serve in
show, neither for faith, nor manners, nor for our comfort. This is seen
principally in the books of Moses, that the most important matters are touched
but in few words, And on the contrary, diverse mean things, and less
considerable, are there represented at length. The redemption by the Messiah
which God promised Man, immediately after his fall; the calling of the Gentiles
foretold to Abraham; the Priesthood of Melchisedech, the most illustrious
figure of Christ; and many other points of sovereign doctrine, are set down
there but very briefly. Whereas the birth of Ismael, the contract of Isaacs
marriage, and the like histories, are there delivered largely, even to the
smallest particulars. I give hereof this reason, that the Church being in the
age of infancy her instruction ought to consist more in rudiments, then in high
and hard lessons, for she was not then capable thereof. But it may be demanded
what use may be made by reading them at this day? It is all full of mysteries.
The only history of Agar and Ismael, interpreted by Saint Paul, even to the
meanest circumstances, shows what we may judge of all other histories of the
Old Testament, although we see not what they aim at. God would teach us great
things by small. Diverse particulars of small consequence, which the Scriptures
declare very largely, serve to make us see how many admirable effects have
proceeded from frivolous occasions: witness Jacobs primogeniture. The law
forbidding to take the old, and the young birds, to wit in their nests, to
unmuzle the ox that treades out the corn, and the like laws extend further
then they seem. The New Testament mentions the parchments. and cloak of Saint
Paul; the council he gives Timothy, to use a little wine for the weakness of
his stomach; the burying of the wicked rich man, where that of Lazarus is
omitted; and in diverse histories many circumstances which the vulgar hold to be
unprofitable for want of knowing their causes. The act of Jesus Christ
stretching forth the hand to touch the leper appeared not considerable but to
them who knew the Law by which this touching was declared a defilement. The
same Law forbad the high Priest, who represented Jesus Christ, to enter into
any house wherein ^here was any dead: yet notwithstanding our Lord himself
touched the bier, nay the dead body, to wit the daughter of Jairus.

We may find in these particulars an incomparable richness of doctrine.

It Is not enough to know the general intention of a passage; each of them has
a particular end. There is one meaning of the burning bush, another of the
living creatures painted out in the vision of Ezekiel. The Psalmist speaking of
the food which God provides for beasts, makes mention of young ravens, rather
then of other fouls of the air, for a special reason. The Revelation
represents not Christ to all the Churches, under the same figure. To one it
shows the stars, and the golden Candlesticks; to another, it makes it see the
two edged sword; to another flaming eyes, and the feet as of brass. His titles
are diverse according to the diversity of subjects. Many know in general, that
the ceremonies figure out Christ, but know not how, and in what quality each of
them represent him. There is none of them which has not, besides the general
intention of the Law, their particular aim and reason, for want of
understanding them distinctly, makes the reading of them contemptible, and
envied by the common people.

Many also not knowing at what the Scripture aims, are astonished at the
recital of diverse enormous things which it particulariseth so carefully. I put
not in this rank those which are symbolical; as the commandment made to Hosea,
that he should get unto him a whore, this is but a parable. But the incest of
Judas with his sons wife seems fitter to have been buried with him, then to be
inserted in the holy history, even with so many shameful and horrid
circumstances: yet notwithstanding if one heed the arrogance of the Jews, which
insolently glory of their extraction, who ground even their election and divine
alliance on the virtues of their Patriarks; One shall find this error cannot be
better refuted, nor this pride better taken down, then by making them see the
proceedings of their father, guilty of a thousand filthy acts.

CHAP. III. Of the method which seems defective in many discourses of
Scripture. Of the style thereof. Of superfluous words. Of strange similitudes.
Of the imitation of Scripture language. Of mysterious omissions.
THere are found many discourses in the Scripture which seem to be without
order, and without connection, built with pieces ill joined, nay (in the
judgment of the ignorant) extravagant, and from the purpose.

The Lamentations of Jeremy, a number of Psalms, diverse Sermons of our Lord,
some Epistles of the Apostles, keep not in appearance any regular method. Many
subjects seem ranked confusedly in history, unless one see their subjects, the
connection, and their aim, as in the Apology of Saint Stephen, and other
places. One may take notice of censures made as it seems out of season, nay,
which is more, diverse answers which concern not the queries, and in no ways
touch the question proposed. The vulgar interpreters are much troubled when
they must expound such passages, and show themselves ridiculous, endeavoring
to reduce them to the ordinary rules of their Logic: By this means they give
them a contrary and forced sense. What may be said upon this subject cannot be
comprehended in this abridgement: I will touch but one point thereof for
example of all the rest.

Sometimes it is said in the Gospel, that Jesus answered, where
notwithstanding it appears not by any circumstance of Scripture that any had
spoke unto him. Some are astonished then, why it is said he answered, when none
had asked him. I take this term not for a bare Hebraisme, but indeed for a
proposal relative to another. Now many which opened not their mouth in the
presence of Jesus Christ, ceased not to speak in the secret of their heart,
but their thoughts being known to him, he answered the subject of their
thoughts.

We ought also to observe, that where the Scripture oft-times breaks off that
which seems should have followed, in the thread of the same discourse, and
inserts a subject quite different, whereof the hearers never thought; If the
construction thereof be not always Grammatical, it is real; consisting more
in the coherence of mysteries then in the form of words.

In that which the Scripture says one ought even to consider why it speaks in
such terms; for when it expresses the same thing by diverse names, this
diversity of words represents always some diversity of quality in the
same subject. Such a thing is called by one name in one passage, which is
otherwise named in another, and this for a notable cause. Moses ( Exodus 3.)
asked what was the name of God, that is to say, in what quality he should
speak; whether as Elohim, or as Jehovah, or as Shadai, or Adma, or according to
some other name by which he is called. It is to be noted, that the title of
Jehovah, which is translated Lord, was not given him in all the Scripture
touching the Creation, but only after the making of man. In one place the
Scripture says, that Jesus Christ sits on the right hand of God; In
another, that he stands at the right hand of God. I have before spoken of the
redundants which seem to be in Scripture. When it says that such a man lived
so many years, and then died; These two last words seem to be superfluous,
which contain notwithstanding a substantial addition. It gives this Epitaph
but to the Patriarchs which lived before the flood; Of all those which died
after Noah, it says barely, such a man lived so many years, without adding
that he died; Which thing is considerable. It is to be observed also, whether
the Scripture it self speaks, or whether some body else speak in it. The
similitude which compares God to a man that was dead asleep with too much
drink, is but an echo, or an Ironicall repetition of the idolaters language,
who spoke of God in those jolly terms. It is to be noted also, that the
Scripture sometime expresses a thing by its contrary; As when one is accused
to have blessed God, to denote the most horrible impiety that may be; These
observations require many others, which we omit.

I will speak only one word of a question that may be made, to wit, whether
we may not accustom our selves to write, and speak the same style with the
Scripture. There are found some that affect its language, and assay to
counterfeit its voice to authorize their dreams, and make them pass for
Oracles; But they are barbarisms in divinity have made those dreams be
accounted for strange. It were therefore to be wished, that those that speak
according to the truth of Scripture, had also the phrase, and language thereof.
A Sermon woven not with superfluous, or impertinent quotations, but with
terms, and speeches of the Holy Ghost, joined, and ranked in their proper
places, nips off the luster of the most eloquent pieces. A collection which
might be made upon all sorts of subjects, continual reading, a method fit for
this purpose, are a memory ready, and present to occurrences, a judicious
spirit, and long experience might frame the habit thereof. But we must observe,
that as the Scripture often hides an extraordinary sense under a common
phrase, we may well have the same words of it, though not always in so lofty
a sense. There is for example, sometimes a reproof, or a doctrine, al whose
words imply some prophecy which concerns not at all the present time, or any
prediction whereof the accomplishment is to us unknown. We may truly pronounce
the same words as the Scripture, but in our mouth they are not Prophetical.

To close this Chapter, we are not only to consider what the Scripture says,
but also very often why it conceales certain things, for in many places it
speaks even by silence; and its silence is significative. That which I would
say concerns not those matters whereupon the least curious may raise
questions, as upon the day of Christ's Nativity; his actions from his infancy to
his twelfth year, and from that time to his age of thirty years; and other
points whereof the holy history speaks not. It may be disputed also why the
tribe of Dan is omitted. Revel. 7. in a Catalogue where all others are so
expressly named. But the sole omission of Melchisedechs Genealogy, of his
birth, and death, show that the very silence of Scripture is mysterious,
including the image of Christ's eternity. I doubt not but it contains many
other examples of this kind, though our eye cannot see them all.

CHAP. IIII. Of infused knowledge. Of Apostleship. Of those that know nothing
but by books.
I Lay aside the question whether the gifts of prophecy have wholly ceased. We
call a Prophet not him which foretells what is to come, as the vulgar
understand, but him which has graces extraordinarily infused, for the
understanding, and interpretation of the divine mysteries. These lights are not
given at this day in so eminent a degree as heretofore; but it may be they are
not wholly extinguished, though they are rare, and communicated to very few
persons. It Is not enough to object, that there may be found some sublime divine,
whose knowledge proceeds not from study, so much as other men's. The heavenly
influences may descend as well into a library, as into a wilderness; Daniel
studied on Jeremy when the Angel came to speak unto him. St. Paul amidst the
ordinary inspirations of Gods spirit, even after he had bin in the third
heaven, desired that Timothy should send him the books. It Is true when a man at
this day has so much spiritual wisdom, as the chief Apostles, if he has
nor the same authority, nor the Prerogatives which were to them personal, and
cannot be transmitted by any title of succession. No man can be qualified as an
Apostle, unless he had seen Jesus Christ raised from the dead, to the end he
might speak as an eye witness. This served as a pretense to St. Paul's
enemies, to dispure his Apostleship, alleging that he being converted only
after the ascension of our Lord, he could not have seen him. But he had seen
him in heaven; and in this very thing he had a very great advantage above the
other Apostles, which saw him not but upon the earth. To come to our mark;
although that divine knowledge is no more communicated but by ordinary means,
and above all, by the reading of diverse authors, I cannot hold them for great
divines, whose knowledge consists but in a bare remembrance of what they have
read. Much reading, and a good memory make not a knowing man. They that cannot
say but what they have read have not the true gift of Prophecy; yet less,
those poor ignorants which learn by heart oother men's Sermons. Such shoulders
are not capable to bear the ark of God.

CHAP. V. Of eloquence. The principal part thereof is unknown by the greatest
part of Preachers. Of vulgar matters in Sermons. The excuse and deceit of
ignorant Preachers. Whether the word of God be in like luster in the mouths of
all.
THe first, and principal quality required in a Bishop, is to be didactick, to
be capable to teach excellent matters, and to handle them powerfully, and
properly. I stand not on them who under color of the simplicity of the
Scripture condemn absolutely the use of eloquence in the interpretation
thereof. Certainly ^n effeminate discourse woven with flow^rs, variagated with
colors, and wantonly a^orned, is suitable to the vulgar, as a pop^et to little
children, is incompetible with ^^e Majesty of the Gospel. But a masculine, and
vigorous eloquence clothed with ^umptuous ornaments, and always more natural
then artificial, is not only con^enient but also necessary for a Minister.
Nay he is unworthy to speak in the Church, which cannot speak eloquent^y.
They that are herein defective, are ac^ustomed to blame in an other that which
^hey themselves see does well. For there is no man sobrutish who desires not,
when ^e speaks in public, to express himself in the best terms he can.
Furthermore ^he vulgar give oftentimes the reputation of eloquence to many
which have not the very shadow of it. So a man heaps togegether abundance of
words, with a fine style, though he has not any true Rhetoric, he shall
pass in the esteem of the ignorant for a great Orator. But that which is
more considerable, the principal piece of eloquence consists not ^n figures,
and other ornaments of language; It lies in that which is called invention, and
in the choice of matter which is the stuff of a discourse. A weak
understanding is moved with representations, and tragical descriptions, with
exclamations, gestures, and other passionate actions: But a man of
understanding will be instructed with reasons. And this is folly to move the
affections without instructing the understanding; a proceeding contrary to the
natural order which God has established amongst the faculties of the Soul,
and the disposition which the Holy Ghost keeps in our sanctification. The
devotion which such discourses kindle in the hearers, is a fire of chafe,
which lasts but during the Sermon; But the true instruction which must be given
to the understanding, consists not in vulgar matters. When a Preacher has
said that we must believe in God, that every man is a sinner, that Jesus Christ
is come into the world, and shall turn and widen this discourse ^ith many
words, without producing upon such points any thing, but which is al^ady common
and known to his au^^tors, I do not think that he has in^^tucted them. This
is not to teach a man, ^hen he is taught but that which he ^nowes already,
though one tell it him in ^ivers words, and different phrases. The ^ost
familiar, and most notable points for Christians, such as are the Precepts of
the Decalogue, and the Articles of the Creed, ^nclude an infinite number of
rare mat^ers, so that a scribe that is knowing in that which concerns the
Kingdom of Heaven, may always draw thence new things. The Psalmist who prayed
that he might ^e clear sighted to discover the wonders of the law, knew that
it contained much more then moralities naturally known ^o men. They which
treat of the points of religion so lightly, present you with the ^ascall lamb
boiled in water, nay even altogether raw, contrary to Gods ordi^ance. The
ordinary excuse of such Preachers, which they put in the ears, and mouth of
the common people is this, that they Preach the word of God, and that therefore
one ought to content himself with their doctrine, though it be trivial, and
one ought not to be troubled with their frequent repetitions, nor disdain
their gross style, and other defects which are found in their discourses.
Whereunto I shall only say, that it is an abuse of the people to say, that a
man's Sermon is the word of God. It is but the interpretation thereof; which if
it be defective, or confused, or dark, or foolish, or extravagant, does injure
more the word of God then it receives authority therefrom. This color they
give their ignorance, serves to foment that of the people, the greater part
whereof content themselves with that they know of religion, and even make a
scruple to learn more. One of the deceipts by which many Preachers are
accustomed to hide this defect is this, to take ^ text of three words, upon
which they enlarge themselves in digressions, mixing all the old and new
Testament, reducing all divinity into one Sermon, and there is no matter so
remote from the subject, which either by hook or by crook they force not to
their purpose. So that once a valiant expositor of Scripture employed forty
years in interpreting the Prophet Esaias. The prolixity whereby they affect to
appear as Giants who need a whole Acre of ground to stretch themselves upon,
is of no great fruict. A succinct, and nervous discourse, nay one sole reason
very pertinent, or one rare, or extraordinary conception couched in few words,
shall rather convert a soul, or shall grave thereon more lively impressions,
then these vast discourses shall do, more fruictfull in words then matter. We
have many Sermons of Jesus Christ, and some of his Apostles: But the longest of
them may be pronounced in the space of half an hour. Finally not to touch on
the repetitions, wherewith many fill their auditoryes, we shall find them which
will be exact to the dividing of a grain of sand, by so small distinctions,
and divisions, that they themselves can scarce discern them. If in lieu of the
vulgar method, which under color of desiring to say all that concerns a text,
yet teaches nothing but things common and a thousand times repeated, if a
Preacher could find only three, or four observations which are rare, and but
little known, his auditors might say they had learned that which they knew
not, And one such Sermon were worth a hundred others: and although the ignorant
think that this does much advantage to have a multitude of Sermons, at the end
whereof they are as knowing as they were at the beginning. Many also have a
superstitious opinion touching Preachers, that one ought not to be more sought
after, or more willingly heard then an other, because all Preach the word of
God, and that it is of the same weight, and same virtue in the mouths of all.
Now it is true that all make profession to carry the same sword of truth, but all
do not manage it with the same skill, nor with the like force of arm. From
whence it comes to pass that it cutteth not equally in all hands, nay in many
it is, as a plate of lead. Of a thousand which handle the same passage of
Scripture, it is impossible to find two amongst them which are wholly alike in
conceptions, in the order and frame of discourse. In so much that representing
the same subject, they give it so diverse faces, that even they themselves are
different in shape. But those which keep the resemblance thereof nearer the
life, are to be preferred before others, which show but the draughts of it
grossly delineated.

CHAP. VI. That the words of Scripture had more Emphasis in the mouth of Jesus
Christ, and his first Disciples, then they have in ours. The reason of this
difference.
ITs true that all those to whom Jesus Christ himself Preached when he was
conversant upon earth were not converted. The most eminent Apostles complained
that few persons received their Preaching; yet nevertheless it is certain that
the word of God had greater efficacy in their mouths, then now it has in
ours. If it converted not all them who heard it, it made it self felt by the
most hardened, as a burning cautery even within the very entrails. But besides,
the progress thereof was altogether different. One only exhortation of St.
Peter brought in one day three thousand Jews to the Church; And by an other
Sermon he gained five thousand souls. If at this day we pronounce the same
Sermon word by word in an assembly of Jews, it will not have the same
success. Although we sound the same discourse, nay the proper express, and
formal words, as Jesus Christ, or some of his Apostles have sometimes, uttered
them, they have not such virtue as they had when they themselves pronounced
them viva voce. When the Son of God speak, there was felt an extraordinary
working and force that never was upon the lips of mortal man. The Apostles
whom he had animated with his own virtue, spoke also as out of thunder, and as
cherubins of glory. The sound of their wings was as the noise of great waters,
and as the voice of God Almighty when he speaks. If we would know from whence
proceeds such virtue, it may be some will say it consisted rather in their
morals then in their words; And that their supernatural works which were seen
to be done by them were the only cause that rendered their discourse more
efficacious, then that of other men; but it appears to the contrary, by the
testimony of them to whom Jesus Christ spoke in the way to Emaus, For although
they knew him not, so far were they short of seeing any miracle, their heart
burned within them, as he expounded to them the Scriptures. These reasons may
be given hereof; that the Son of God, who knew all the thoughts of his hearers,
struck directly within them; and they could not but be moved, when they heard
a voice which surprised their most secret thoughts. That the same spirit which
spoke in his Disciples, touched with his words that which men thought was
closely hid within their hearts: an example in Ananias, and Zaphira, whereunto
may be referred that we read in the first to the Corinthes 14.24. and 25. that
their breast was full of flames, and the words which came from them lighted as
at a furnace, did burn as live sparks, nay as burning brans. And finally, that
their tongues were touched immediately with the finger of God, having wholly an
other force then ours, which are not touched therewith, but at a distance, and
by he interposition of many judgments, nay seeble, and light.

CHAP. VII. What men are most hardly saved. Of the vulgar error which imports
that the Pastors manners edify as much as his doctrine.
AN ancient father said of his time, that in his opinion there were not many
Churchmen, or Pastors that were saved. This may seem strange. But if we may
say there are men for whom it is difficult to be saved, they are those which
have the charge of souls. For to save themselves, they ought to save many
others. For whom it suffices not to have piety, and other virtues which are
common to all other Christians. Their is need of knowledge, and eloquence. The
want of moral virtues (which always render it more criminal) repugneth not
the essence of his office, nor abateth the dignity of the Sacraments, nor the
efficacy of the word which he administreth. Ignorance is the most formal crime
of him who ought to instruct others. A good man may be a bad Pastor. The vulgar
hold for a maxim, That the good life of a Preacher edifieth as much, or more
then his doctrine. This error is truly popular, and more foolish then can be
imagined. Its true that works ought to accompany words, and woe to that man
who practices not his own doctrine. But this is impiety to think that the
actions of a Pastor are more considerable, more perfect, or of greater
edification then his doctrine which is the rule; which is more essential to
his charge, more fruictfull in instruction, more necessary to salvation, either
the seeing of his example, or the hearing his word? Is the example of a man of
greater weight them the Ordinance of God? Is it from the Pastors example that
we receive the faith, or from his Preaching? Are his good works the power of
God to salvation? Do they contain the remission of our sins? Shall we be
saved by them or by his doctrine? He which finds more efficacy in a man's
example then in the word of Jesus Christ is not worthy to be his Disciple.

CHAP. VIII. That it is more profitable for us to be taught by men then by
Angels. Why the world values not prophets, but after their death.
MAny could wish they might be taught by Angels, thinking that their
instructions will be more profitable, and their word more efficacious. Wherein
they are deceived. For there are diverse points whereof the Angels cannot speak
with so great feeling, nor with a knowledge so particular as men. The diseases
of the body, and other kinds of the cross, the burden of sin, the terrors
of conscience, the horrors of death, the combat of the flesh against the
spirit, repentance it self, and regeneration, are things whereof they have no
experience, and therefore cannot be touched with such compassion toward
sinners, as men who feel the same infirmities. This is a reason why the son
of God would take upon him our infirmities, to the end he might have the more
compassion, and speak with greater efficacy; furthermore that Angel which
appeared to Cornelius the Centurion, would not undertake to instruct him, but
sent him for this purpose to a sinful mortal man. This is the custom of the
world, and examples thereof are frequent in all ages, to undervalue, or even
persecute Prophets while they live, and to adore them after death. The reason
is, that the eye of the flesh sees in them the same visage as in other men,
the same natural infirmities, and a contemptible appearance; especially if he
be in his own country, or amidst his familiars. Saul asked Samuel, whether he
was a man of God, not knowing that he was so, because he saw nothing
extraordinary in his person. The bald head of Elishai served as an object of
mockery to the little children. Many that looked on St. Paul as absent, said
that his presence had not so much force as his writings. On the other side, the
most eminent servants of God, are they against whom Satan has prepared most
ambushes. The liberty of their censures renders them odious. He that reverenced
yesterday John the Baptist, willingly procured his imprisonment, or death; but
after that God had taken them into his rest, and that there was nothing
remaining but the sound of their voice, which seems to echo still in their
graves, the world regretts at what it has lost, and endeavors to expiate its
ingratitude with excessive honors. Chrysostom was accused of adultery,
condemned, chased out of his Church, and confined in banishment, where finally
he dyed. The children of them which had driven him away fell down on their
knees before the dead body, and desired pardon of it for their parents. Such
also have builded rich tombs in memory of the just, who had persecuted them in
their lives. Great were the advantages of them who were conversant with the
son of God, who might hear him speaking with open mouth, propose unto him
the most difficult doubts, and questions, and learn from his mouth an infinite
number of sublime, and unheard of doctrines. But they paid him with outrages;
and many honor him at this day, who would have helped to have crucified him,
if they had bin in his time.

CHAP. IX. The want of particular instructions.
ALL the instruction which is sought for at this day from the mouth of
Preachers, is reduced to Sermons. The most excellent amongst them, out of the
pulpit, is no more then a private man in the judgment of the vulgar. The
common people believe that public instructions are sufficient for them; and
as for the rest every Christian may order his actions according as they conform
to them. There is none so sottishly ignorant who does not think himself
capable to direct his own conscience. Notwithstanding man's life is full of
occurrents, wherein the wisest are subject to deceive themselves; and the most
conscientious, by trusting over much to their own judgment, commit notable
faults in the conduct of their affairs, of household government, or trading, of
judicature, of public policy, and other vocations. Witness David's
heedlesnesse, in causing the Arc to be carried upon his own Chariot.
Moreover public instructions cannot express so many circumstances which
often change the quality of actions. And which is more, not only the points
which lie in practice, but also those which concern merely belief, being
composed in public, frame not always in the mind of the hearers so exact an
impression, as particular instruction; auricular confession, if it had not
passed into superstition, was an exercise of great profit.

CHAP. X. Of books of religion, and of the time employed in them to the
prejudice of Scripture. Of the multitude, vanity, kinds and reformation of them.
AMongst the abuses which keep up the ignorance of the vulgar, we account
also the reading of so many religious books, whereunto the common people give
their time, and thoughts, as to an exercise of great edification, although the
books of a good divine contain in substance the same matters which are in
Scripture. Whosoever shall read in Origin, or Nazianzene, the sacrifice of
Abraham curiously painted out with all its circumstances, with a representation
as patheticke as Rhetoric can furnish it with, shall never be so lively
touched therewith as by the simple recital of Moses. A paraphrase of the new
Testament, is but a dead Letter, in comparison of the vivacity of the Text. All
this is said without derogating from the merit of so many learned pens, ancient
and modern, which have traveled to set us at ease. Their works have converted
many souls; the writing of a man powerful in spirit, preach, as well as his
voice. But this eulogie appertains not to all them who undertake to write; And
all the authors, even those which are worth the reading, are not for the
vulgar. Besides the books which may serve to instruct the common people, are
made hurtful by their quantity. The number is become so exorbitant, and still
multiplied daily in such abundance, that the greater part of Christians imploye
ten times as much time in this reading, as in that of the Bible. That famous
Doctor Luther had in hatred his own books, and wished that they were buried,
for fear the readers should spend that time in them they ought in the
Scripture. I am not of their opinion who regret the loss of so many books of
the ancient fathers, and other writings which time has caused to vanish. On
the contrary, I think that this loss is a great gain to us, and a discharge
of many unprofitable burdens. The natural history dictated by Solomon, and
diverse other writings mentioned in Scripture it self, were never lost without
the particular providence of God, which would not that his Church should be
overcharged with so many volumes. Of all the Apostles there are but six whose
writings have bin preserved; and yet it is certain that the other Apostles
were no less careful to write to their flocks: Nay it is credible that those
whose Epistles we have writ, many others, which the wisdom of God has
suppressed. Jesus Christ himself, writ not, nor would that all his miracles
should be comprised in the history, lest their prolixity should exceed the
measure of our life, and the capacity of our memory.

The reading the fathers is not a task of the vulgar. To understand them, you
must know the history of their times. There occur in this field an infinite
number of particulars, and matters which serve for no use at this day, and even
many which are full of thorns, which the common people cannot handle without
pricking themselves to the blood. If the fruicts which are found scattered in
this vast extension of the fathers were collected a part, and heaped together
in one volume, this abridgement would be of great profit. But we are to speak
of modern Writers, the multitude whereof is prodigious.

Many books are reputed learned, which are more filld with word then matter. If
from all the books in divinity which go up and down the world, there be taken
away the repetitions, the amplifications, the superfluous allegations, and a
million of entire volumes great and small which declare nothing, but what so
many others have said before, the residue will be very few. One may say of the
greatest part of them, that whosoever has read one, has read them all. There
are always the same conceptions, the same reasons; saving that the words are
different. That which one calls dirt, the other names dung. Where they differ
only in the order, transposing what others have said, and disguising it with
other transisions, conjunctions, or with some pleasing point. All this with a
new title makes men think that this book is altogether new. The world is full
of writers, and there is not a pedant which will not be one. For so that a man
fill up much paper, this is enough to get a great reputation. I know one that
to attain to this, used the following method, which is common to him with many
others. To make a treatise, of controversy, or commentary (which is at this
day as a bridge for asses) he had upon the table five or six diverse authors,
took one line from one, and another from an other, and beating all together,
then adding thereto some Hebrew word transcribed out of the Dictionary, and a
long third of passages out of the fathers, made a composition, upon which he
wrote his name; And the ignorant said behold the Commentaryes of N. upon the
Psalms, or upon some of the smaller Prophets. It were a great good for the
public that none should write, but he that had very rare conceptions, or so
little common that they might be held for new. One only extraordinary
observation comprehended in ten or twelve lines, is more worth then all the
great tomes out of which nothing that is new can be learned.

All the books that can be written in divinity, are either doctrinall, or
moral, or historical, or of prophecy, or of controversy, or mixed and
composed of all these together, or of many of them. The form whereof is
diverse; Commentaryes, common places, meditations, forms of prayer, homilyes,
discourses of virtues, and vices, and the like particular treatise. As for
controversies I have thereof said my opinion. Also for commentaryes, two or
three for the most part suffice, taken from amongst the rest, who for the most
part have more of Grammar then divinity, and sound of nothing but repetitions.
The same choice is necessary amongst authors which handle all Religion heaped
together in a body. Amongst so many books of meditations, there are scarce two
which contain any rarity. There are seen many words set out to say that which
the world knows already well enough. There is likewise a great multitude of
Sermons which run from hand to hand. The vulgar often admire Preachers, who
putting what they say in writing, you shall find that they have said nothing
extraordinary. We have seen Homilies dictated by great personages, in whom
beside the wide, and rampant style, you meet with even childish discourses;
but the world will be deceived. The expositions upon the decalogue, the Creed,
and Lords Prayer, are the subject of infinite treatyes wherein you shall
scarcely find any thing, but repetitions from some other, and matters very
common. As for forms of prayer fitted to particulars, although their aim be
rather to frame a Christians practice in this exercise, then to give him
instruction, if it appertains not to all to give their conceptions for rules,
and prescribe the form, and words an other ought to use in speaking to God.
But furthermore, they which spend all their time in this kind of reading, shall
abide always in an ignorant devotion.

This would be an inestimable good, if instead of so many volumes which steal
away the greatest part of our life, we had a collection of the rarest secrets
in Religion, separated from all vulgar matters, and freed from all these masses
of words. Such a work would teach us more in one day, then so many others
could do in an age. I shall willingly subscribe to their advise who have said
that this would be the richest piece that has bin put out since the Apostles
time. Its true that those have not observed the true field from whence these
matters must be taken, but it is easy to be found.

CHAP. XI. Great knowledge lies not in the quantity of matters, but in their
quality. The title of great divines given fasly to many.
BY the common voice, that man is held for a great divine, who knows the
languages necessary to this profession; who understands Philosophy, who has
read the fathers, and can relate what they thought upon every point of
religion; who is versed in Ecclesiastical History; who is ready in
controversies, in school distinctions and subtilities, besides the exact
knowledge of common places which are in use, bordured with texts of Scripture,
and stuffed with other allegations. But all these qualities together cannot make
a great Divine but in reputation. This is truly a great advantage to hear the
Prophets, and God himself in the same language wherein they spoke. It Is
certain that the Scripture is pure, and more emphaticke in its original
tongues, then in any translation. But the only knowledge of tongues supplies
but a Grammatical understanding, wherein many Jews and Greeks may excel,
without deserving the title of Divines. Good store of Philosophy suffices
not; though a good Divine ought to be a good Philosopher. To know what Tertull.
said, or what was St. Austins opinion, is not of the very essence of Divinity;
so much does it come short of being the higest degree thereof. Many that lived
before all these fathers were in the world, ceased not to be as great Divines
as they which have employed at this day thirty years in this reading of the
fathers. The same is of History. Before the subject thereof was in the world,
Divinity was complete. A man endowed with memory, who can tell what beresies
have reigned, what orders were made in such councels, what disputes or
diversities have arose in Church Policy, etc. may be held knowing in History;
But this is folly to hold him in this respect, for an eminent Divine. The
knowledge of controversies, is accidental, and embraces not all the dimensions
of Religion. The knowledge of the most subtle points of Divinity reduced to
the form of art, a promptuary of ordinary passages, and arguments upon all
kinds of subjects, are not sufficient neither to give us a great Divine. The
idea thereof belongs to another discourse; whence we may learn That
extraordinary knowledge consists not so much in the multitude of matters, as
in the rarity of them.

I will now conclude this treatise of Popular Errors, that I may pass to a
higher subject, and assay after this offering of goats hair, to present you
with scarlet for the ornament of the Sanctuary. Amen.

FINIS.

